Project Gutenberg's Nights With Uncle Remus, by Joel Chandler Harris

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Nights With Uncle Remus

Author: Joel Chandler Harris

Illustrator: Milo Winter

Release Date: January 26, 2008 [EBook #24430]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NIGHTS WITH UNCLE REMUS ***




Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Jacqueline Jeremy and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









    NIGHTS WITH
    UNCLE REMUS

    BY

    JOEL CHANDLER HARRIS

    WITH ILLUSTRATIONS BY MILO WINTER

    [Illustration]

    BOSTON AND NEW YORK
    HOUGHTON MIFFLIN COMPANY
    The Riverside Press Cambridge
    1917


    COPYRIGHT, 1851, 1853, 1909, AND 1911, BY THE CENTURY CO.
    COPYRIGHT, 1885, BY JOEL CHANDLER HARRIS
    COPYRIGHT, 1911, BY ESTHER LA ROSE HARRIS
    COPYRIGHT, 1917, BY HOUGHTON MIFFLIN COMPANY

    ALL RIGHTS RESERVED

    _Published October 1917_




PUBLISHERS' NOTE


Nights With Uncle Remus is a story-book dearly loved by children.
Besides that, it is an important contribution to the study of
Afro-American folk-lore, and through many years of popularity it
has carried a long and learned Introduction, of great interest to
students but rather forbidding in aspect to youthful readers. In
this new edition, which has been prepared especially for children,
and illustrated in colors by an artist who knows how to please them
as well as their elders, the Introduction has been omitted, but the
stories and their charming setting have been left intact.

_June, 1917_




CONTENTS


      I. MR. FOX AND MISS GOOSE                                3

     II. FOX CATCHES MR. HORSE                                 7

    III. BRER RABBIT AND THE LITTLE GIRL                      11

     IV. BRER FOX COPIES BRER RABBIT                          14

      V. BRER RABBIT'S ASTONISHING PRANK                      18

     VI. BRER RABBIT SECURES A MANSION                        22

    VII. MR. LION HUNTS FOR MR. MAN                           27

   VIII. THE STORY OF THE PIGS                                31

     IX. MR. BENJAMIN RAM AND HIS WONDERFUL FIDDLE            35

      X. BRER RABBIT'S RIDDLE                                 41

     XI. HOW MR. ROOSTER LOST HIS DINNER                      49

    XII. BRER RABBIT BREAKS UP A PARTY                        53

   XIII. BRER FOX, BRER RABBIT, AND KING DEER'S DAUGHTER      58

    XIV. BRER TERRAPIN DECEIVES BRER BUZZARD                  62

     XV. BRER FOX COVETS THE QUILLS                           66

    XVI. HOW BRER FOX FAILED TO GET HIS GRAPES                70

   XVII. BRER FOX FIGURES AS AN INCENDIARY                    75

  XVIII. A DREAM AND A STORY                                  79

    XIX. THE MOON IN THE MILL-POND                            83

     XX. BRER RABBIT TAKES SOME EXERCISE                      89

    XXI. WHY BRER BEAR HAS NO TAIL                            97

   XXII. HOW BRER RABBIT FRIGHTENED HIS NEIGHBORS            100

  XXIII. MR. MAN HAS SOME MEAT                               105

   XXIV. HOW BRER RABBIT GOT THE MEAT                        108

    XXV. AFRICAN JACK                                        112

   XXVI. WHY THE ALLIGATOR'S BACK IS ROUGH                   119

  XXVII. BRER WOLF SAYS GRACE                                123

 XXVIII. SPIRITS, SEEN AND UNSEEN                            129

   XXIX. A GHOST STORY                                       134

    XXX. BRER RABBIT AND HIS FAMOUS FOOT                     141

   XXXI. "IN SOME LADY'S GARDEN"                             149

  XXXII. BRER 'POSSUM GETS IN TROUBLE                        156

 XXXIII. WHY THE GUINEA-FOWLS ARE SPECKLED                   162

  XXXIV. BRER RABBIT'S LOVE-CHARM                            166

   XXXV. BRER RABBIT SUBMITS TO A TEST                       170

  XXXVI. BRER WOLF FALLS A VICTIM                            174

 XXXVII. BRER RABBIT AND THE MOSQUITOES                      179

XXXVIII. THE PIMMERLY PLUM                                   185

  XXXIX. BRER RABBIT GETS THE PROVISIONS                     195

     XL. "CUTTA CORD-LA!"                                    200

    XLI. AUNT TEMPY'S STORY                                  204

   XLII. THE FIRE-TEST                                       209

  XLIII. THE CUNNING SNAKE                                   214

   XLIV. HOW BRER FOX WAS TOO SMART                          218

    XLV. BRER WOLF GETS IN A WARM PLACE                      225

   XLVI. BRER WOLF STILL IN TROUBLE                          229

  XLVII. BRER RABBIT LAYS IN HIS BEEF SUPPLY                 234

 XLVIII. BRER RABBIT AND MR. WILDCAT                         238

   XLIX. MR. BENJAMIN RAM DEFENDS HIMSELF                    245

      L. BRER RABBIT PRETENDS TO BE POISONED                 249

     LI. MORE TROUBLE FOR BRER WOLF                          253

    LII. BRER RABBIT OUTDOES MR. MAN                         256

   LIII. BRER RABBIT TAKES A WALK                            260

    LIV. OLD GRINNY-GRANNY WOLF                              263

     LV. HOW WATTLE WEASEL WAS CAUGHT                        267

    LVI. BRER RABBIT TIES MR. LION                           272

   LVII. MR. LION'S SAD PREDICAMENT                          276

  LVIII. THE ORIGIN OF THE OCEAN                             279

    LIX. BRER RABBIT GETS BRER FOX'S DINNER                  283

     LX. HOW THE BEAR NURSED THE LITTLE ALLIGATORS           291

    LXI. WHY MR. DOG RUNS BRER RABBIT                        295

   LXII. BRER WOLF AND THE HORNED CATTLE                     298

  LXIII. BRER FOX AND THE WHITE MUSCADINES                   302

   LXIV. MR. HAWK AND BRER BUZZARD                           306

    LXV. MR. HAWK AND BRER RABBIT                            309

   LXVI. THE WISE BIRD AND THE FOOLISH BIRD                  312

  LXVII. OLD BRER TERRAPIN GETS SOME FISH                    315

 LXVIII. BRER FOX MAKES A NARROW ESCAPE                      318

   LXIX. BRER FOX'S FISH TRAP                                321

    LXX. BRER RABBIT RESCUES BRER TERRAPIN                   325

   LXXI. THE NIGHT BEFORE CHRISTMAS                          333




ILLUSTRATIONS


UNCLE REMUS AND THE LITTLE BOY                            _Frontispiece_

"HE TO' DOWN A WHOLE PANEL ER FENCE GITTIN' 'WAY FUM DAR"             20

"BRER RABBIT TURNT 'ER ALOOSE, EN DOWN SHE COME--_KER-SWOSH!_"        44

"'BRER TARRYPIN, PLEASE LEMME GO!'"                                   68

"'_AH-YI!_ YOU OUGHTER AX ME DAT FUS', BRER COON'"                    92

"BRER RABBIT FOTCH A WIGGLE, HE DID, EN LIT ON HE FOOTS"             128

"'EF YOU GIT ANY MO' SENSE, SON RILEY, YOU'LL BE DE RUINATION EV
DE WHOLE SETTLEMENT'"                                                174

"DE LITTLE RABS, DEY PROMISE DAT DEY WON'T OPEN DE DO' FER NOBODY"   212

"EN, BLESS GRACIOUS! DEM AR CREETURS RACKED OFF FUM DAR EN LEF'
OLE BRER WOLF UND' DAT AR ROCK"                                      232

"HE SORTER HUNCH BRER POSSUM IN DE SHORT RIBS, EN AX 'IM HOW HE
COME ON"                                                             268

"'I DUNNER W'EN I BIN SO SORRY 'BOUT ANYTHING EZ I IS 'BOUT BRER
FOX NICE LONG TAIL'"                                                 286

"HE GIT DE FINEST MESS ER FISH YOU MOS' EVER LAID YO' EYES ON"       324




[Illustration: MR. FOX AND MISS GOOSE]

NIGHTS WITH UNCLE REMUS

I

MR. FOX AND MISS GOOSE


It had been raining all day so that Uncle Remus found it impossible to
go out. The storm had begun, the old man declared, just as the chickens
were crowing for day, and it had continued almost without intermission.
The dark gray clouds had blotted out the sun, and the leafless limbs of
the tall oaks surrendered themselves drearily to the fantastic gusts
that drove the drizzle fitfully before them. The lady to whom Uncle
Remus belonged had been thoughtful of the old man, and 'Tildy, the
house-girl, had been commissioned to carry him his meals. This
arrangement came to the knowledge of the little boy at supper time, and
he lost no time in obtaining permission to accompany 'Tildy.

Uncle Remus made a great demonstration over the thoughtful kindness of
his "Miss Sally."

"Ef she ain't one blessid w'ite 'oman," he said, in his simple, fervent
way, "den dey ain't none un um 'roun' in deze parts."

With that he addressed himself to the supper, while the little boy sat
by and eyed him with that familiar curiosity common to children. Finally
the youngster disturbed the old man with an inquiry:--

"Uncle Remus, do geese stand on one leg all night, or do they sit down
to sleep?"

"Tooby sho' dey does, honey; dey sets down same ez you does. Co'se, dey
don't cross der legs," he added, cautiously, "kase dey sets down right
flat-footed."

"Well, I saw one the other day, and he was standing on one foot, and I
watched him and watched him, and he kept on standing there."

"Ez ter dat," responded Uncle Remus, "dey mought stan' on one foot en
drap off ter sleep en fergit deyse'f. Deze yer gooses," he continued,
wiping the crumbs from his beard with his coat-tail, "is mighty kuse
fowls; deyer mighty kuse. In ole times dey wuz 'mongs de big-bugs, en in
dem days, w'en ole Miss Goose gun a-dinin', all de quality wuz dere.
Likewise, en needer wuz dey stuck-up, kase wid all der kyar'n's on, Miss
Goose wer'n't too proud fer ter take in washin' fer de neighborhoods, en
she make money, en get slick en fat lak Sis Tempy.

"Dis de way marters stan' w'en one day Brer Fox en Brer Rabbit, dey wuz
settin' up at de cotton-patch, one on one side de fence, en t'er one on
t'er side, gwine on wid one er n'er, w'en fus' news dey know, dey year
sump'n--_blim_, _blim_, _blim_!

"Brer Fox, he ax w'at dat fuss is, en Brer Rabbit, he up'n 'spon' dat
it's ole Miss Goose down at de spring. Den Brer Fox, he up'n ax w'at she
doin', en Brer Rabbit, he say, sezee, dat she battlin' cloze."

"Battling clothes, Uncle Remus?" said the little boy.

"Dat w'at dey call it dem days, honey. Deze times, dey rubs cloze on
deze yer bodes w'at got furrers in um, but dem days dey des tuck'n tuck
de cloze en lay um out on a bench, en ketch holt er de battlin'-stick en
natally paddle de fillin' outen um.

"W'en Brer Fox year dat ole Miss Goose wuz down dar dabblin' in soapsuds
en washin' cloze, he sorter lick he chops, en 'low dat some er dese
odd-come-shorts he gwine ter call en pay he 'specks. De minnit he say
dat, Brer Rabbit, he know sump'n' 'uz up, en he 'low ter hisse'f dat he
'speck he better whirl in en have some fun w'iles it gwine on. Bimeby
Brer Fox up'n say ter Brer Rabbit dat he bleedzd ter be movin' 'long
todes home, en wid dat dey bofe say good-bye.

"Brer Fox, he put out ter whar his fambly wuz, but Brer Rabbit, he slip
'roun', he did, en call on ole Miss Goose. Ole Miss Goose she wuz down
at de spring, washin', en b'ilin', en battlin' cloze; but Brer Rabbit he
march up en ax her howdy, en den she tuck'n ax Brer Rabbit howdy.

"'I'd shake han's 'long wid you, Brer Rabbit,' sez she, 'but dey er all
full er suds,' sez she.

"'No marter 'bout dat, Miss Goose,' sez Brer Rabbit, sezee, 'so long ez
yo' will's good,' sezee."

"A goose with hands, Uncle Remus!" the little boy exclaimed.

"How you know goose ain't got han's?" Uncle Remus inquired, with a
frown. "Is you been sleepin' longer ole man Know-All? Little mo' en
you'll up'n stan' me down dat snakes ain't got no foots, and yit you
take en lay a snake down yer 'fo' de fier, en his foots 'll come out
right 'fo' yo' eyes."

Uncle Remus paused here, but presently continued:--

"Atter ole Miss Goose en Brer Rabbit done pass de time er day wid one er
n'er, Brer Rabbit, he ax 'er, he did, how she come on deze days, en Miss
Goose say, mighty po'ly.

"'I'm gittin' stiff en I'm gittin' clumpsy,' sez she, 'en mo'n dat I'm
gittin' bline,' sez she. 'Des 'fo' you happen 'long, Brer Rabbit, I drap
my specks in de tub yer, en ef you'd 'a' come 'long 'bout dat time,' sez
ole Miss Goose, sez she, 'I lay I'd er tuck you for dat nasty, owdashus
Brer Fox, en it ud er bin a born blessin' ef I had n't er scald you wid
er pan er b'ilin' suds,' sez she. 'I'm dat glad I foun' my specks I
dunner w'at ter do,' sez ole Miss Goose, sez she.

"Den Brer Rabbit, he up'n say dat bein's how Sis Goose done fotch up
Brer Fox name, he got sump'n' fer ter tell 'er, en den he let out 'bout
Brer Fox gwine ter call on 'er.

"He comin' sez Brer Rabbit, sezee; 'he comin' sho', en w'en he come hit
'll be des 'fo' day,' sezee.

"Wid dat, ole Miss Goose wipe 'er han's on 'er apun, en put 'er specks
up on 'er forrerd, en look lak she done got trouble in 'er mine.

"'Laws-a-massy!' sez she, 'spozen he come, Brer Rabbit! W'at I gwine do?
En dey ain't a man 'bout de house, n'er,' sez she.

"Den Brer Rabbit, he shot one eye, en he say, sezee:--

"'Sis Goose, de time done come w'en you bleedzd ter roos' high. You look
lak you got de dropsy,' sezee, 'but don't mine dat, kase ef you don't
roos' high, youer goner,' sezee.

"Den ole Miss Goose ax Brer Rabbit w'at she gwine do, en Brer Rabbit he
up en tell Miss Goose dat she mus' go home en tie up a bundle er de
w'ite folks' cloze, en put um on de bed, en den she mus' fly up on a
rafter, en let Brer Fox grab de cloze en run off wid um.

"Ole Miss Goose say she much 'blige, en she tuck'n tuck her things en
waddle off home, en dat night she do lak Brer Rabbit say wid de bundle
er cloze, en den she sont wud ter Mr. Dog, en Mr. Dog he come down, en
say he'd sorter set up wid 'er.

"Des 'fo' day, yer come Brer Fox creepin' up, en he went en push on de
do' easy, en de do' open, en he see sump'n' w'ite on de bed w'ich he
took fer Miss Goose, en he grab it en run. 'Bout dat time Mr. Dog sail
out fum und' de house, he did, en ef Brer Fox had n't er drapt de cloze,
he'd er got kotch. Fum dat, wud went 'roun' dat Brer Fox bin tryin' ter
steal Miss Goose cloze, en he come mighty nigh losin' his stannin' at
Miss Meadows. Down ter dis day," Uncle Remus continued, preparing to
fill his pipe, "Brer Fox b'leeve dat Brer Rabbit wuz de 'casion er Mr.
Dog bein' in de neighborhoods at dat time er night, en Brer Rabbit ain't
'spute it. De bad feelin' 'twix' Brer Fox en Mr. Dog start right dar, en
hits bin agwine on twel now dey ain't git in smellin' distuns er one er
n'er widout dey's a row."




II

BRER FOX CATCHES MR. HORSE


There was a pause after the story of old Miss Goose. The culmination was
hardly sensational enough to win the hearty applause of the little boy,
and this fact appeared to have a depressing influence upon Uncle Remus.
As he leaned slightly forward, gazing into the depths of the great
fireplace, his attitude was one of pensiveness.

"I 'speck I done wo' out my welcome up at de big house," he said, after
a while. "I mos' knows I is," he continued, setting himself resignedly
in his deep-bottomed chair. "Kase de las' time I uz up dar, I had my eye
on Miss Sally mighty nigh de whole blessid time, en w'en you see Miss
Sally rustlin' 'roun' makin' lak she fixin' things up dar on de
mantle-shelf, en bouncin' de cheers 'roun', en breshin' dus' whar dey
ain't no dus', en flyin' 'roun' singin' sorter louder dan common, den I
des knows sump'n' done gone en rile 'er."

"Why, Uncle Remus!" exclaimed the little boy; "Mamma was just glad
because I was feeling so good."

"Mought er bin," the old man remarked, in a tone that was far from
implying conviction. "Ef 't wa'n't dat, den she wuz gittin' tired er
seem' me lounjun' 'roun' up dar night atter night, en ef 't wa'n't dat,
den she wuz watchin' a chance fer ter preach ter yo' pa. Oh, I done bin
know Miss Sally long fo' yo' pa is!" exclaimed Uncle Remus, in response
to the astonishment depicted upon the child's face. "I bin knowin' 'er
sence she wuz so high, en endurin' er all dat time I ain't seed no mo'
