
Round it went Osric and his men: but into it they could not break. For
the Danes hewed the ash shafts of the spears, and near them no horse
might live, for their axes would shear through man and horse alike.

Then Ealhstan shouted to Osric, bidding us stand. And right glad were we
to do this, while ever the Danes shrank away from us.

"Trapped they are, Sheriff," said Ealhstan, when Osric rode up to him,
bearing still a headless spear. "Let them bide till Eanulf comes. None
can reach the ships."

"He is hard behind me with all the levy," said Osric. "Let us finish
this without him."

But Ealhstan shook his head, pointing to our men. And when he looked
more coolly, he saw that barely half of us were left, and those worn
out. So must we stand and wait; but we had done what we went to do, and
had trapped the heathen when the tide was low. Yet the Danes went
steadily back towards their ships, having yet half a mile to cover, but
they left a line of wounded men to mark where they had gone, as one
after another dropped.

Now were we who were left safe, and knew we had done a deed which would
he told and sung till other tales of victory blotted out its remembrance
if they might.

Then Ealhstan bade us sit down, for our horsemen were between us and the
foe, and thereon he raised his voice, and with one accord his lay
brethren and his own housecarles joined in singing a psalm of victory.
And it was just at the matin time--yet that psalm ended not as it was
wont, for ere the last verses were sung, it was drowned in a great and
thundering war song of Wessex, old as the days of Ceawlin or beyond him.
And if I mistake not, in that song bishop and lay brethren joined,
leaving the chant for their own native and well-loved tongue, else would
they have been the only men of all the host unstirred thereby and silent.

Now, from that war song came a strange thing. It caused two great Danes
to go berserk in their rage, and back they flew on us, their shields
cast aside, and their broad axes overhead, howling and foaming as they
came.

One of Osric's men tried to stop them. But he and his horse fell, for (I
say truth) one leapt high above the horse, smiting downwards with his
axe, so that the man was swept in twain under that blow, and the berserk
Dane came on unhindered, straight for the standard, for his comrade had
hewed off the horse's head.

Now I rested, by the standard, a long spear's length in front of our
line. But by this I had leapt to my feet; and it was time, for he was
almost on me. Spear had I none; so I dragged out the standard shaft from
the ground where I had struck it, and levelled that sharp butt end full
at his chest. Overhead was his axe again, and I had no shield to stop
the blow; but I must leap aside from it.

He paid no heed to the spear-ended shaft, but rushed straight on it,
spitting himself through and through, while his axe fell; but I had
wrenched myself and the shaft at once to one side, and he fell over,
burying the axe head in the ground but an inch from the collier's foot.
Yet had he not done with me, for, leaving the axe, he clawed the ashen
shaft and dragged himself up along it, howling, not with the pain, but
with madness, and I must needs smite him with my sword, for his dagger
was already at my throat.

Then looked I round for the other, but at first could not see him, for
he was dead also, pinned to the ground by another of the horsemen, from
behind. And all our men were on their feet, and the ring of Danes were
shouting, and cheering their two mad men, yet keeping close order.

This seems long in telling; but it was all done in a flash, as it were,
for the first I knew of the coming of these men was by the wheeling of
the horse and the leaping of the berserk above it.

Then my men came and rid the standard of its burden, not easily, while
Ealhstan stood with his arm on my shoulder, looking white and scared:
for that had been the greatest danger he had seen that day, as he told
me, which, indeed, it must have been, for else he had never changed
countenance.

"Gratias Domino," he said, "verily into these heathen evil spirits
enter, driving them to death. Now have you fought the evil one, both
spiritually and bodily, my son, and have won the victory!"

Even as he spoke, the men, being sure of no more of such comings, began
to crowd round me, shouting and cheering as though I had done some great
deed. Which, if it were such, it seems to me that great deeds are forced
on men at times; for what else I could have done I know not, unless, as
Wislac says, I had run away, even as he was minded to do. But I had no
time for that, nor do I believe his saying concerning himself.

When the Danes were nigh their ships Ealhstan bade us tend our wounded.
And the first man tended was myself, for Wulfhere came to me, looking me
over, and at last binding a wound on my left shoulder, of which I knew
not, saying that my good mail had surely saved me. He himself had a gash
across his face, and Wislac one on the leg, but none of us was much hurt.

Then Wislac sought Aldhelm, whom he found sitting up, dazed, from a blow
across the helm that had stunned him, but he was soon able to walk,
though dizzy and sick. But Guthlac was slain outright, and two others of
the brethren.

Well, so might I go on, for of all our two hundred men there were left
but ninety fit to go on with the fight, the rest being slain or sore
wounded by the Danish axes. Ealhstan was unhurt; for, save that once
when he had broken the ring to reach us when we were hemmed in, his men
had kept before him.

Now what befell after that will not bear telling; for it was not long
before Eanulf and all the Somerset and the rest of the Dorset levy came
down and fell on the Danes as they fought their last fight as brave men
should, with a quarter mile of deep mud between them and their ships.

Into that fight none of us bishop's men went, for we had done our part.
But we lay and saw the Danes charge again and again against odds, their
line growing thinner each time, until our men swept the last of them
from the bank into the ooze, and there was an end.

Yet a few managed, I know not how, to reach the ships, and there they
were safe; but thence they constantly shot their arrows into our men,
harmless enough, but yet showing their mettle.

So was a full end made of that host, for none but those few were left
alive from Stert field, and Somerset and Dorset had taken their fill of
vengeance.

But, for all the victory, down sat Ealhstan the Bishop, and hiding his
face in his hands wept that such things could be, and must be till war
is no more.



CHAPTER XVI. AT GLASTONBURY.


On that hard-won field we lay all that day, for we knew not if more
Danes were left up country, or if by chance the ships might fall into
our hands with the rising tide. And I think we might have taken them had
not our men, in their fury, broken the boats which lay along the bank;
so that we could not put off to them. Therefore, as the tide rose again
and they floated, the men on board hauled out, and setting sail with
much labour, for there were very few in each ship, stood off into mid
channel. Out of Severn they could not get, for the wind was westerly,
and the tide setting eastward, so at last they brought up in the lee of
the two holms, and there furled sail and lay at anchor.

Very stiff and sore were we when we had rested for a little, and there
fell a sadness on the levy, now that the joy of battle had gone, and the
cost of victory must be counted. And that was heavy, for so manfully and
steadily had the vikings fought that they had accounted for man to man
as nearly as one might count, either slain or maimed.

Now on this matter I heard Wislac speak to Aldhelm, who sat facing him,
and holding his aching head with both hands.

"So, friend," quoth Wislac, "as touching that matter of dispute we had.
How stands the account?"

"I know not, nor care," said Aldhelm. "All I wot is that my head is like
to split."

"Nay, that will it not, having stood such a stout blow," said Wislac,
laughing. "Cheer up, and count our score of heads."

"I can count but one head, and that my own. Let it bide."

"So, that is better," said Wislac. "I should surely have been slain five
times by my own count, but it seems I am wrong. Wherefore I must have
escaped somehow. And that is all I know about it."

Then he turned to me, and asked if I had noted any doings at all.

And when I thought, all I could remember plainly were the fall of the
tall chief I slew, and the coming of Ealhstan, and the attack of the
berserk, and no more; all the rest was confused, and like a dream. So I
said that it seemed to me that we had had no time to do more than mind
ourselves, but that withal my shield wall had kept the standard. And
that kept, there need be no question as to who had done best.

Then Wislac nodded, after his wont, and said that if Aldhelm was content
so was he.

Whereupon Aldhelm held out his hand, and said that Wislac was wise and
he foolish. And Wislac, grasping it, answered that it was a lucky
foolishness that had brought so stout a comrade to his side, for had it
not been for Aldhelm putting his thick head betwixt him and an axe,
slain he would have been.

"Aye, brother," he said, "deny it not, for I saw you thrust yourself
forward and save me by yourself, which doubtless is your way of settling
a grudge, brother, and a good one."

So those two were sworn friends from that day forward, as were many
another couple who met on that field for the first time, fighting side
by side for Wessex.

Thus wore away the day and the next night, and with the morning those
ships were yet under the holms, swinging at their anchors, for the
westerly breeze held.

Then said Eanulf: "Let them be; harm can they do none, being so few.
They will go with the shift of wind."

But the shift of wind came not for days and days, and there they lay,
never putting out from shelter. And they are out of my story, so that I
will say what befell them.

One night it freshened up to a gale, and in the morning there were five
ships where six had been. One had sunk at her moorings. Then men said
that the Danes had made a hut on the flat holm, plain to be seen from
the nearest shore. And at last a shift of wind came, and they put not out.

So certain fishers dared to sail across and spy what was amiss, and
finding no man in the ships, nor seeing any about the hut, went ashore,
none hindering them.

Ships and hut and shore were but the resting place of the dead, for
after a while they had no food left, and were too few and weak even to
man one ship and go.

Many a long year it was before the king of their land, Norse or Dane,
whichever he was, learned what had befallen his host, and how their
bones lay on the Wessex shore and islands, for not one of all that had
sailed that spring returned to give the news, or to tell how his
comrades died on Stert fighting to the last, and on the island wishing
they had fallen with the slain.

Now must I tell how we went back to Glastonbury town, marching proudly
as became conquerors, while on every side was shouting of men, and at
the same time weeping of women for those who had fallen.

When we came to the great square there stood Tatwine the Abbot and all
his monks; but I had no eyes for them. For there, with abbess and nuns,
stood Alswythe, smiling on me through tears of joy, and though her
cheeks were thinner and paler by reason of fasting and prayer for us
all, looking most beautiful, and to me like a vision of some saint.

That was all I could see of her then, for we must kneel, while a great
Te Deum was sung, and then crowd into the abbey to hear mass once more.

Then after that was over, there was a great feast in the wide hall of
the abbey, where Ealhstan and Eanulf sat side by side in the high seats,
and on their right, Osric and myself, and on the left, Wulfhere and
Wislac, none grudging those chief places to the men who had kept the
standard and broken the Danish ring.

When the feasting was done, then came the telling of great deeds over
the ale cup, and that lasted long, and many were the brave men praised;
nor were the deeds of the vikings, as brave foes, forgotten, for men
praised them also. Moreover, the gleemen sang of the fight, and in those
songs my name came so often, as needs it must, seeing that I bore the
standard, that I will not set them down. Nor is there need, for the
housecarles sing them even yet.

Now before we went to rest, Eanulf bade me wait on him early in the
morning, and so, being refreshed by a long, quiet night, I went to him
as he had bidden me.

There he thanked me as man to man for that crossing of Parret, and for
staying the going of the Danes, saying that a greater man than he should
add to the thanks. For needs must that one took word of all that had
befallen to Ethelwulf the King, and that to be such a messenger was most
honourable. Therefore should I myself bear the news, taking with me my
two friends and such men as I chose, and should bear, written down, the
reports of both Osric and Ealhstan, besides his own.

"Else," said he, "there are perhaps some to whom credit is due whose
names may pass unmentioned."

And thanking him, I said that that was likely, for I knew few in the
levy, which came from far and wide.

Whereat he laughed, saying that I was either very modest or very simple.
So I knew that he spoke of myself, and thanked him again.

"Nay," he said, "small thanks to me, for if I did you not justice the
men would."

Then all of a sudden he asked me about the business of my trial, and
what I thought of it, bidding me tell him as a friend, thinking naught
of the judge.

And that I was able to do now without passion, so far off and small a
thing it seemed after all these stirring doings. And I knew that but for
it I had been only a foolish thane, and slain maybe over my feasting in
my own hall, or on Combwich hill, with my back to the foe, beside Matelgar.

Now when I had ended my tale and my thoughts concerning it, he told me
that he had found out much of late, as he and the thanes spoke together
here while waiting for the levy, and that word should go to the king of
the whole matter, so that without waiting for the Moot, he should inlaw
me again.

Then I knew not enough to say; but he clapped me on the shoulder, saying
that he had been an unjust judge for once, and that I must be heedful if
ever I sat in his place, and so bid me go and find my friends--and get
ready to ride to Salisbury, where the king lay, having moved from
Winchester nearer to us.

That went I to do with a light heart, and only sorry that I might not
see Alswythe before I went.

And this I told Wislac, who looked oddly at me, and then laughed, saying
that he believed I feared an old nun more than a wild berserk. And true
it was that I was afraid of that stately abbess, though not in the same
way as one fears a raging madman flying on one.

"Pluck up courage," said he, "and go and ask the old dame to let you
have speech with your lady; and if she grants it not, I am mistaken, for
the lady is not one of her nuns, and there is a guest chamber for such
folk as bishop's right-hand men, surely!"

That was good counsel, and so I went to the nunnery, trembling first
because I was afraid, and next lest I might not see Alswythe.

Now that wondrous silver mail of mine was too easily known, and so soon
as I got out into the street, the beggar men began to shout and crawl
towards me. And then others looked, and ran, and then more, till there
was a crowd of men of the levy pressing round me, stretching hands to
pat me and the like.

Then one stood in front of me, hands on hips, and stared at me, and all
at once he shouted: "Ho, comrades, this is the saint of Cannington hill!
I saw him there, and soundly did he rate me for running, even as I
deserved."

And at that there was a mighty shouting and crowding, so that I could in
no wise go on my way, and I began to wax wroth.

My back was to the abbey gates, which were closed after me by the
porter, and just then I saw some of the men look up over my head and
point, and laugh; so I turned round, and there were Eanulf and Osric on
the gateway battlements, looking on, as drawn thither by the noise. And
just then Eanulf, laughing, made some sign or speech which I could not
hear, to the men, who cheered; and soon they brought a great shield and
on that set me, in spite of myself, raising me up shoulder high and
saluting me as the man who had gained all the honour and victory. There
must I lie still, lest I should fall and be made to look more foolish
yet, and when I sat up, crosslegged thereon, they stopped shouting and
stared at me.

"Let me down, ye pigs!" said I, very cross, and unmindful of the honour
they would do me.

"Speak to us, Thane; speak to us," they cried; and one--he who knew me
at Cannington after the first fight--added:

"Aye, Thane, you made us strong again on the hill the other day--
blaming us rightly. Praise us now if that may be."

Then I cast about for what to say, not being a great hand at speaking,
though maybe, when real occasion is, the words have come fast enough.
Howbeit, this was in coolness. But I knew that they were worthy of
praise, so I said:

"Well have ye done, every man of you, even as I knew ye would when once
ye turned to bay. And if the Danes come again, as I think they will not
speedily, fight as ye fought at Stert, and there will be victory again."

Then they cheered and shouted again, louder than before; and I made to
leap down, but they would not suffer me.

Then said I: "Let me go, for I have an errand."

Whereupon the men who held the shield, and could hear me amid the
slackening uproar, asked where I would go, and being dazed by the noise
and tumult, like an owl in daylight, I must needs answer, without
thinking; "To the great nunnery."

And the end of that foolishness was that they bore me thither, for it
was not far, with a great crowd of all sorts following and shouting. And
there must I stand with all that tail after me while they beat on the
gates in such sort that the poor nuns must have thought the Danes at
their doorstep.

But I held up my hand for silence, not thinking it would come; but as it
were by nature longing for it. And instantly all the crowd was hushed,
and that surprised me, though when I told Wulfhere thereof he said it
was no wonder.
