The Project Gutenberg EBook of Blind Man's Lantern, by Allen Kim Lang

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Blind Man's Lantern

Author: Allen Kim Lang

Illustrator: Schelling

Release Date: February 10, 2008 [EBook #24567]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BLIND MAN'S LANTERN ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Geetu Melwani and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









       *       *       *       *       *

Transcriber's note.

This etext was produced from Analog December 1962.
Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the
U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.

       *       *       *       *       *




Blind Man's Lantern

by

Allen Kim Lang

     Successful colonies among the stars require interstellar ships--but
     they require, also, a very special kind of man. A kind you might
     not think to look for....


Illustrated by Schelling

[Illustration]


     _Walking home in the dark from an evening spent in mischief, a
     young man spied coming toward him down the road a person with
     a lamp. When the wayfarers drew abreast, the play-boy saw that
     the other traveler was the Blind Man from his village. "Blind
     Man," the youngster shouted across the road, "what a fool you
     be! Why, old No-Eyes, do you bear a lantern, you whose midnight
     is no darker than his noonday?" The Blind Man lifted his lamp.
     "It is not as a light for myself that I carry this, Boy," he
     said, "it is to warn off you fools with eyes."_

     --_Hausa proverb_



The Captain shook hands with the black-hatted Amishman while the woman
stood aside, not concerning herself with men's business. "It's been a
pleasure to have you and _Fraa_ Stoltzfoos aboard, Aaron," the Captain
said. "Ship's stores are yours, my friend; if there's anything you need,
take it and welcome. You're a long way from the corner grocery."

"My Martha and I have all that's needful," Aaron Stoltzfoos said. "We
have our plow, our seed, our land. Captain, please tell your men, who
treated us strangers as honored guests, we thank them from our hearts.
We'll not soon forget their kindness."

"I'll tell them," the Captain promised. Stoltzfoos hoisted himself to
the wagon seat and reached a hand down to boost his wife up beside him.
Martha Stoltzfoos sat, blushing a bit for having displayed an accidental
inch of black stocking before the ship's officers. She smoothed down her
black skirts and apron, patted the candle-snuffer _Kapp_ into place over
her prayer-covering, and tucked the wool cape around her arms and
shoulders. The world outside, her husband said, was a cold one.

Now in the Stoltzfoos wagon was the final lot of homestead goods with
which these two Amishers would battle the world of Murna. There was the
plow and bags of seed, two crates of nervous chickens; a huge, round
tabletop; an alcohol-burning laboratory incubator, bottles of
agar-powder, and a pressure cooker that could can vegetables as readily
as it could autoclave culture-media. There was a microscope designed to
work by lamplight, as the worldly vanity of electric light would ill
suit an Old Order bacteriologist like Martha Stoltzfoos. Walled in by
all this gear was another passenger due to debark on Murna, snuffling
and grunting with impatience. "_Sei schtill_, Wutzchen," Stoltzfoos
crooned. "You'll be in your home pen soon enough."

The Captain raised his hand. The Engineer punched a button to tongue the
landing ramp out to Murnan earth. Cold air rammed in from the outside
winter. The four horses stomped their hoofs on the floor-plates, their
breath spikes of steam. Wutzchen squealed dismay as the chill hit his
nose.

"We're _reddi far geh_, Captain," Stoltzfoos said. "My woman and I
invite you and your men to feast at our table when you're back in these
parts, five years hence. We'll stuff you fat as sausages with onion
soup and Pannhaas, Knepp and Ebbelkuche, shoo-fly pie and _scharifer_
cider, if the folk here grow apples fit for squeezing."

"You'll have to set up planks outdoors to feed the lot I'll be bringing,
Aaron," the Captain said. "Come five-years' springtime, when I bring
your Amish neighbors out, I'll not forget to have in my pockets a toot
of candy for the little Stoltzes I'll expect to see underfoot." Martha,
whose English was rusty, blushed none the less. Aaron grinned as he
slapped the reins over the rumps of his team. "Giddap!" The cart rumbled
across the deck and down the ramp, onto the soil of Murna. Yonnie, the
Ayrshire bull, tossed his head and sat as the rope tightened on his
noseband. He skidded stubbornly down the ramp till he felt cold earth
against his rear. Accepting fate, Yonnie scrambled up and plodded after
the wagon. As the Stoltzfooses and the last of their off-worldly goods
topped a hillock, they both turned to wave at the ship's officers. Then,
veiled by the dusty fall of snow, they disappeared.

       *       *       *       *       *

"I don't envy them," the Engineer said, staring out into the wintery
world.

"Hymie, were you born in a barn?" the Exec bellowed.

"Sorry, sir." The Engineer raised the landing ramp. Heaters hummed to
thaw the hold's air. "I was thinking about how alone those two folks are
now."

"Hardly alone," the Captain said. "There are four million Murnans,
friendly people who consider a white skin no more than a personal
idiosyncrasy. Aaron's what his folks call a _Chentelmaan_, too. He'll
get along."

"Chentelmaan-schmentelmaan," the Engineer said. "Why'd he come half
across Creation to scratch out a living with a horse-drawn plow?"

"He came out here for dirt," the Captain said. "Soil is more than
seed-bed to the Amish. It feeds the Old Order they're born to. Aaron
and Martha Stoltzfoos would rather have built their barns beside the
Susquehanna, but all the land there's taken. Aaron could have taken a
job in Lancaster, too; he could have shaved off his beard, bought a
Chevie and moved to the suburbs, and settled down to read an
English-language Bible in a steepled church. Instead, he signed a
homestead-contract for a hundred acres eighty light-years from home; and
set out to plow the land like his grandpop did. He'll sweat hard for his
piece of Murna, but the Amish always pay well for their land."

"And what do we, the government, I mean, get from the deal?" the Exec
wanted to know. "This wagon of ours doesn't run on hay, like Aaron's
does."

"Cultures skid backwards when they're transplanted," the Captain said.
"Murnan culture was lifted from Kano, a modern city by the standards of
the time; but, without tools and with a population too small to support
technology, the West African apostates from Islam who landed here four
hundred years ago slid back to the ways of their grandparents. We want
them to get up to date again. We want Murna to become a market. That's
Aaron's job. Our Amishman has got to start this planet back toward the
machine age."

