But you are aware, Captain Waverley, that the disarming act,
passed about twenty years ago, prevents their being in the
complete state of preparation as in former times; and I keep no
more of my clan under arms than may defend my own or my friends'
property, when the country is troubled with such men as your last
night's landlord; and government, which has removed other means of
defence, must connive at our protecting ourselves.'

'But, with your force, you might soon destroy or put down such
gangs as that of Donald Bean Lean.'

'Yes, doubtless; and my reward would be a summons to deliver up to
General Blakeney, at Stirling, the few broadswords they have left
us; there were little policy in that, methinks. But come, captain,
the sound of the pipes informs me that dinner is prepared. Let me
have the honour to show you into my rude mansion.'





CHAPTER XX

A HIGHLAND FEAST


Ere Waverley entered the banqueting hall, he was offered the
patriarchal refreshment of a bath for the feet, which the sultry
weather, and the morasses he had traversed, rendered highly
acceptable. He was not, indeed, so luxuriously attended upon this
occasion as the heroic travellers in the Odyssey; the task of
ablution and abstersion being performed, not by a beautiful
damsel, trained

    To chafe the limb, and pour the fragrant oil,

but by a smoke-dried skinny old Highland woman, who did not seem
to think herself much honoured by the duty imposed upon her, but
muttered between her teeth, 'Our fathers' herds did not feed so
near together that I should do you this service.' A small
donation, however, amply reconciled this ancient handmaiden to the
supposed degradation; and, as Edward proceeded to the hall, she
gave him her blessing in the Gaelic proverb, 'May the open hand be
filled the fullest.'

The hall, in which the feast was prepared, occupied all the first
story of lan nan Chaistel's original erection, and a huge oaken
table extended through its whole length. The apparatus for dinner
was simple, even to rudeness, and the company numerous, even to
crowding. At the head of the table was the Chief himself, with
Edward, and two or three Highland visitors of neighbouring clans;
the elders of his own tribe, wadsetters and tacksmen, as they were
called, who occupied portions of his estate as mortgagers or
lessees, sat next in rank; beneath them, their sons and nephews
and foster-brethren; then the officers of the Chief's household,
according to their order; and lowest of all, the tenants who
actually cultivated the ground. Even beyond this long perspective,
Edward might see upon the green, to which a huge pair of folding
doors opened, a multitude of Highlanders of a yet inferior
description, who, nevertheless, were considered as guests, and had
their share both of the countenance of the entertainer and of the
cheer of the day. In the distance, and fluctuating round this
extreme verge of the banquet, was a changeful group of women,
ragged boys and girls, beggars, young and old, large greyhounds,
and terriers, and pointers, and curs of low degree; all of whom
took some interest, more or less immediate, in the main action of
the piece.

This hospitality, apparently unbounded, had yet its line of
economy. Some pains had been bestowed in dressing the dishes of
fish, game, etc., which were at the upper end of the table, and
immediately under the eye of the English stranger. Lower down
stood immense clumsy joints of mutton and beef, which, but for the
absence of pork, [Footnote: See Note 21.] abhorred in the
Highlands, resembled the rude festivity of the banquet of
Penelope's suitors. But the central dish was a yearling lamb,
called 'a hog in har'st,' roasted whole. It was set upon its legs,
with a bunch of parsley in its mouth, and was probably exhibited
in that form to gratify the pride of the cook, who piqued himself
more on the plenty than the elegance of his master's table. The
sides of this poor animal were fiercely attacked by the clansmen,
some with dirks, others with the knives which were usually in the
same sheath with the dagger, so that it was soon rendered a
mangled and rueful spectacle. Lower down still, the victuals
seemed of yet coarser quality, though sufficiently abundant.
Broth, onions, cheese, and the fragments of the feast regaled the
sons of Ivor who feasted in the open air.

The liquor was supplied in the same proportion, and under similar
regulations. Excellent claret and champagne were liberally
distributed among the Chief's immediate neighbours; whisky, plain
or diluted, and strong beer refreshed those who sat near the lower
end. Nor did this inequality of distribution appear to give the
least offence. Every one present understood that his taste was to
be formed according to the rank which he held at table; and,
consequently, the tacksmen and their dependants always professed
the wine was too cold for their stomachs, and called, apparently
out of choice, for the liquor which was assigned to them from
economy. [Footnote: See Note 22.] The bag-pipers, three in number,
screamed, during the whole time of dinner, a tremendous war-tune;
and the echoing of the vaulted roof, and clang of the Celtic
tongue, produced such a Babel of noises that Waverley dreaded his
ears would never recover it. Mac-Ivor, indeed, apologised for the
confusion occasioned by so large a party, and pleaded the
necessity of his situation, on which unlimited hospitality was
imposed as a paramount duty. 'These stout idle kinsmen of mine,'
he said, 'account my estate as held in trust for their support;
and I must find them beef and ale, while the rogues will do
nothing for themselves but practise the broadsword, or wander
about the hills, shooting, fishing, hunting, drinking, and making
love to the lasses of the strath. But what can I do, Captain
Waverley? everything will keep after its kind, whether it be a
hawk or a Highlander.' Edward made the expected answer, in a
compliment upon his possessing so many bold and attached
followers.

'Why, yes,' replied the Chief, 'were I disposed, like my father,
to put myself in the way of getting one blow on the head, or two
on the neck, I believe the loons would stand by me. But who thinks
of that in the present day, when the maxim is, "Better an old
woman with a purse in her hand than three men with belted
brands"?' Then, turning to the company, he proposed the 'Health of
Captain Waverley, a worthy friend of his kind neighbour and ally,
the Baron of Bradwardine.'

'He is welcome hither,' said one of the elders, 'if he come from
Cosmo Comyne Bradwardine.'

'I say nay to that,' said an old man, who apparently did not mean
to pledge the toast; 'I say nay to that. While there is a green
leaf in the forest, there will be fraud in a Comyne.

'There is nothing but honour in the Baron of Bradwardine,'
answered another ancient; 'and the guest that comes hither from
him should be welcome, though he came with blood on his hand,
unless it were blood of the race of Ivor.'

The old man whose cup remained full replied, 'There has been blood
enough of the race of Ivor on the hand of Bradwardine.'

'Ah! Ballenkeiroch,' replied the first, 'you think rather of the
flash of the carbine at the mains of Tully-Veolan than the glance
of the sword that fought for the cause at Preston.'

'And well I may,' answered Ballenkeiroch; 'the flash of the gun
cost me a fair-haired son, and the glance of the sword has done
but little for King James.'

The Chieftain, in two words of French, explained to Waverley that
the Baron had shot this old man's son in a fray near Tully-Veolan,
about seven years before; and then hastened to remove
Ballenkeiroch's prejudice, by informing him that Waverley was an
Englishman, unconnected by birth or alliance with the family of
Bradwardine; upon which the old gentleman raised the hitherto-
untasted cup and courteously drank to his health. This ceremony
being requited in kind, the Chieftain made a signal for the pipes
to cease, and said aloud, 'Where is the song hidden, my friends,
that Mac-Murrough cannot find it?'

Mac-Murrough, the family bhairdh, an aged man, immediately took
the hint, and began to chant, with low and rapid utterance, a
profusion of Celtic verses, which were received by the audience
with all the applause of enthusiasm. As he advanced in his
declamation, his ardour seemed to increase. He had at first spoken
with his eyes fixed on the ground; he now cast them around as if
beseeching, and anon as if commanding, attention, and his tones
rose into wild and impassioned notes, accompanied with appropriate
gestures. He seemed to Edward, who attended to him with much
interest, to recite many proper names, to lament the dead, to
apostrophise the absent, to exhort, and entreat, and animate those
who were present. Waverley thought he even discerned his own name,
and was convinced his conjecture was right from the eyes of the
company being at that moment turned towards him simultaneously.
The ardour of the poet appeared to communicate itself to the
audience. Their wild and sun-burnt countenances assumed a fiercer
and more animated expression; all bent forward towards the
reciter, many sprung up and waved their arms in ecstasy, and some
laid their hands on their swords. When the song ceased, there was
a deep pause, while the aroused feelings of the poet and of the
hearers gradually subsided into their usual channel.

The Chieftain, who, during this scene had appeared rather to watch
the emotions which were excited than to partake their high tone of
enthusiasm, filled with claret a small silver cup which stood by
him. 'Give this,' he said to an attendant, 'to Mac-Murrough nan
Fonn (i.e. of the songs), and when he has drank the juice, bid him
keep, for the sake of Vich Ian Vohr, the shell of the gourd which
contained it.' The gift was received by Mac-Murrough with profound
gratitude; he drank the wine, and, kissing the cup, shrouded it
with reverence in the plaid which was folded on his bosom. He then
burst forth into what Edward justly supposed to be an
extemporaneous effusion of thanks and praises of his Chief. It was
received with applause, but did not produce the effect of his
first poem. It was obvious, however, that the clan regarded the
generosity of their Chieftain with high approbation. Many approved
Gaelic toasts were then proposed, of some of which the Chieftain
gave his guest the following versions:--

'To him that will not turn his back on friend or foe.' 'To him
that never forsook a comrade.' 'To him that never bought or sold
justice.' 'Hospitality to the exile, and broken bones to the
tyrant.' 'The lads with the kilts.' 'Highlanders, shoulder to
shoulder,'--with many other pithy sentiments of the like nature.

Edward was particularly solicitous to know the meaning of that
song which appeared to produce such effect upon the passions of
the company, and hinted his curiosity to his host. 'As I observe,'
said the Chieftain, 'that you have passed the bottle during the
last three rounds, I was about to propose to you to retire to my
sister's tea-table, who can explain these things to you better
than I can. Although I cannot stint my clan in the usual current
of their festivity, yet I neither am addicted myself to exceed in
its amount, nor do I,' added he, smiling, 'keep a Bear to devour
the intellects of such as can make good use of them.'

Edward readily assented to this proposal, and the Chieftain,
saying a few words to those around him, left the table, followed
by Waverley. As the door closed behind them, Edward heard Vich Ian
Vohr's health invoked with a wild and animated cheer, that
expressed the satisfaction of the guests and the depth of their
devotion to his service.





CHAPTER XXI

THE CHIEFTAIN'S SISTER


The drawing-room of Flora Mac-Ivor was furnished in the plainest
and most simple manner; for at Glennaquoich every other sort of
expenditure was retrenched as much as possible, for the purpose of
maintaining, in its full dignity, the hospitality of the
Chieftain, and retaining and multiplying the number of his
dependants and adherents. But there was no appearance of this
parsimony in the dress of the lady herself, which was in texture
elegant, and even rich, and arranged in a manner which partook
partly of the Parisian fashion and partly of the more simple dress
of the Highlands, blended together with great taste. Her hair was
not disfigured by the art of the friseur, but fell in jetty
ringlets on her neck, confined only by a circlet, richly set with
diamonds. This peculiarity she adopted in compliance with the
Highland prejudices, which could not endure that a woman's head
should be covered before wedlock.

Flora Mac-Ivor bore a most striking resemblance to her brother
Fergus; so much so that they might have played Viola and Sebastian
with the same exquisite effect produced by the appearance of Mrs.
Henry Siddons and her brother, Mr. William Murray, in these
characters. They had the same antique and regular correctness of
profile; the same dark eyes, eye-lashes, and eye-brows; the same
clearness of complexion, excepting that Fergus's was embrowned by
exercise and Flora's possessed the utmost feminine delicacy. But
the haughty and somewhat stern regularity of Fergus's features was
beautifully softened in those of Flora. Their voices were also
similar in tone, though differing in the key. That of Fergus,
especially while issuing orders to his followers during their
military exercise, reminded Edward of a favourite passage in the
description of Emetrius:

    --whose voice was heard around,
    Loud as a trumpet with a silver sound.

That of Flora, on the contrary, was soft and sweet--'an excellent
thing in woman'; yet, in urging any favourite topic, which she
often pursued with natural eloquence, it possessed as well the
tones which impress awe and conviction as those of persuasive
insinuation. The eager glance of the keen black eye, which, in the
Chieftain, seemed impatient even of the material obstacles it
encountered, had in his sister acquired a gentle pensiveness. His
looks seemed to seek glory, power, all that could exalt him above
others in the race of humanity; while those of his sister, as if
she were already conscious of mental superiority, seemed to pity,
rather than envy, those who were struggling for any farther
distinction. Her sentiments corresponded with the expression of
her countenance. Early education had impressed upon her mind, as
well as on that of the Chieftain, the most devoted attachment to
the exiled family of Stuart. She believed it the duty of her
brother, of his clan, of every man in Britain, at whatever
personal hazard, to contribute to that restoration which the
partisans of the Chevalier St. George had not ceased to hope for.
For this she was prepared to do all, to suffer all, to sacrifice
all. But her loyalty, as it exceeded her brother's in fanaticism,
excelled it also in purity. Accustomed to petty intrigue, and
necessarily involved in a thousand paltry and selfish discussions,
ambitious also by nature, his political faith was tinctured, at
least, if not tainted, by the views of interest and advancement so
easily combined with it; and at the moment he should unsheathe his
claymore, it might be difficult to say whether it would be most
with the view of making James Stuart a king or Fergus Mac-Ivor an
earl. This, indeed, was a mixture of feeling which he did not avow
even to himself, but it existed, nevertheless, in a powerful
degree.

In Flora's bosom, on the contrary, the zeal of loyalty burnt pure
and unmixed with any selfish feeling; she would have as soon made
religion the mask of ambitious and interested views as have
shrouded them under the opinions which she had been taught to
think patriotism. Such instances of devotion were not uncommon
among the followers of the unhappy race of Stuart, of which many
memorable proofs will recur to the minds of most of my readers.
But peculiar attention on the part of the Chevalier de St. George
and his princess to the parents of Fergus and his sister, and to
themselves when orphans, had riveted their faith. Fergus, upon the
death of his parents, had been for some time a page of honour in
the train of the Chevalier's lady, and, from his beauty and
sprightly temper, was uniformly treated by her with the utmost
distinction. This was also extended to Flora, who was maintained
for some time at a convent of the first order at the princess's
expense, and removed from thence into her own family, where she
spent nearly two years. Both brother and sister retained the
deepest and most grateful sense of her kindness.

Having thus touched upon the leading principle of Flora's
character, I may dismiss the rest more slightly. She was highly
accomplished, and had acquired those elegant manners to be
expected from one who, in early youth, had been the companion of a
princess; yet she had not learned to substitute the gloss of
politeness for the reality of feeling. When settled in the lonely
regions of Glennaquoich, she found that her resources in French,
English, and Italian literature were likely to be few and
interrupted; and, in order to fill up the vacant time, she
bestowed a part of it upon the music and poetical traditions of
the Highlanders, and began really to feel the pleasure in the
pursuit which her brother, whose perceptions of literary merit
were more blunt, rather affected for the sake of popularity than
actually experienced. Her resolution was strengthened in these
researches by the extreme delight which her inquiries seemed to
afford those to whom she resorted for information.

Her love of her clan, an attachment which was almost hereditary in
her bosom, was, like her loyalty, a more pure passion than that of
her brother. He was too thorough a politician, regarded his
patriarchal influence too much as the means of accomplishing his
own aggrandisement, that we should term him the model of a
Highland Chieftain. Flora felt the same anxiety for cherishing and
extending their patriarchal sway, but it was with the generous
desire of vindicating from poverty, or at least from want and
foreign oppression, those whom her brother was by birth, according
to the notions of the time and country, entitled to govern. The
savings of her income, for she had a small pension from the
Princess Sobieski, were dedicated, not to add to the comforts of
the peasantry, for that was a word which they neither knew nor
apparently wished to know, but to relieve their absolute
necessities when in sickness or extreme old age. At every other
period they rather toiled to procure something which they might
share with the Chief, as a proof of their attachment, than
expected other assistance from him save what was afforded by the
rude hospitality of his castle, and the general division and
subdivision of his estate among them. Flora was so much beloved by
them that, when Mac-Murrough composed a song in which he
enumerated all the principal beauties of the district, and
intimated her superiority by concluding, that 'the fairest apple
hung on the highest bough,' he received, in donatives from the
individuals of the clan, more seed-barley than would have sowed
his Highland Parnassus, the bard's croft, as it was called, ten
times over.

From situation as well as choice, Miss Mac-Ivor's society was
extremely limited. Her most intimate friend had been Rose
Bradwardine, to whom she was much attached; and when seen
together, they would have afforded an artist two admirable
subjects for the gay and the melancholy muse. Indeed Rose was so
tenderly watched by her father, and her circle of wishes was so
limited, that none arose but what he was willing to gratify, and
scarce any which did not come within the compass of his power.
With Flora it was otherwise. While almost a girl she had undergone
the most complete change of scene, from gaiety and splendour to
absolute solitude and comparative poverty; and the ideas and
wishes which she chiefly fostered respected great national events,
and changes not to be brought round without both hazard and
bloodshed, and therefore not to be thought of with levity. Her
manner, consequently, was grave, though she readily contributed
her talents to the amusement of society, and stood very high in
the opinion of the old Baron, who used to sing along with her such
French duets of Lindor and Cloris, etc., as were in fashion about
the end of the reign of old Louis le Grand.

It was generally believed, though no one durst have hinted it to
the Baron of Bradwardine, that Flora's entreaties had no small
share in allaying the wrath of Fergus upon occasion of their
quarrel. She took her brother on the assailable side, by dwelling
first upon the Baron's age, and then representing the injury which
the cause might sustain, and the damage which must arise to his
own character in point of prudence--so necessary to a political
agent, if he persisted in carrying it to extremity. Otherwise it
is probable it would have terminated in a duel, both because the
Baron had, on a former occasion, shed blood of the clan, though
the matter had been timely accommodated, and on account of his
high reputation for address at his weapon, which Fergus almost
condescended to envy. For the same reason she had urged their
reconciliation, which the Chieftain the more readily agreed to as
it favoured some ulterior projects of his own.

To this young lady, now presiding at the female empire of the tea-
table, Fergus introduced Captain Waverley, whom she received with
the usual forms of politeness.





CHAPTER XXII

HIGHLAND MINSTRELSY


When the first salutations had passed, Fergus said to his sister,
'My dear Flora, before I return to the barbarous ritual of our
forefathers, I must tell you that Captain Waverley is a worshipper
of the Celtic muse, not the less so perhaps that he does not
understand a word of her language. I have told him you are eminent
as a translator of Highland poetry, and that Mac-Murrough admires
your version of his songs upon the same principle that Captain
Waverley admires the original,--because he does not comprehend
them. Will you have the goodness to read or recite to our guest in
English the extraordinary string of names which Mac-Murrough has
tacked together in Gaelic? My life to a moor-fowl's feather, you
are provided with a version; for I know you are in all the bard's
councils, and acquainted with his songs long before he rehearses
them in the hall.'

'How can you say so, Fergus? You know how little these verses can
possibly interest an English stranger, even if I could translate
them as you pretend.'

'Not less than they interest me, lady fair. To-day your joint
composition, for I insist you had a share in it, has cost me the
last silver cup in the castle, and I suppose will cost me
something else next time I hold cour pleniere, if the muse
descends on Mac-Murrough; for you know our proverb,--"When the
hand of the chief ceases to bestow, the breath of the bard is
frozen in the utterance."--Well, I would it were even so: there
are three things that are useless to a modern Highlander,--a
sword which he must not draw, a bard to sing of deeds which he
dare not imitate, and a large goat-skin purse without a louis-d'or
to put into it.'

'Well, brother, since you betray my secrets, you cannot expect me
to keep yours. I assure you, Captain Waverley, that Fergus is too
proud to exchange his broadsword for a marechal's baton, that he
esteems Mac-Murrough a far greater poet than Homer, and would not
give up his goat-skin purse for all the louis-d'or which it could
