deliver you, the Lord can wholly heal you. He can take away your
appetite and cleanse you thoroughly_. He has done it for many others. He
can do it for you. Realize that your own strength can not do it. Forget
not that it is only in answer to your own prayer. Those who want this
good gift must _pray for it_. Deliverance may be instantaneous or
gradual, but do not cease your prayer. Seek in the Bible for those
promises which show that he can _deliver from all evil_, and plead them
and then trust in Him and his strength to fulfill them.

"Forget not also to ask others to pray for you, and remember that the
answer is sure to come if you add to your prayer these true thoughts of
your heart, '_Deliver me and I give myself to thee forever_.'

"If you expect so great a gift from the Lord, he asks of you, '_What are
you willing to do for me_?'"


HELP AT THE VERY LAST MOMENT. FAITH REWARDED.


A clergyman in the State of New York, through the influence of a
disaffected member, was unfairly and precipitately deprived of his
pulpit, which involved a large family in necessity. At supper the good
man had the pain of beholding the last morsel of bread placed upon the
table without the least means or prospect of a supply for his children's
breakfast. His wife, full of grief with her children, retired to her
bed. The minister chose to sit up and employ his dark hours in prayer,
and reading the promises of God. Some secret hope of supply pervaded his
breast, but when, whence, or by whom, he knew not. He retired to rest,
and in the morning appeared with his family, and offered family prayer.
It being the depth of Winter, and a little fire on the hearth, he
desired his wife to hang on the kettle, and spread the cloth upon the
table. The kettle boiled, the children cried for bread; the afflicted
father, standing before the fire, felt those deep emotions of heart over
his helplessness and impending starvation which those reared in
affluence never know.

While in this painful state some one knocked at the door, entered, and
delivered a letter into the minister's hand. When the gentleman was gone
the letter was opened, and to the minister's astonishment it contained a
few bank bills, with a desire for acceptance. So manifest an answer to
prayer from Divine Goodness could not but be received with gratitude and
joy, and fulfills to the very letter these promises: "Verily thou shalt
be fed." Psalm 37:3. "I will never leave thee nor forsake thee." Heb.
13:5.

To ascertain how this occurrence came to take place, this remarkable
coincidence of relief at the identical moment of time when there was the
last appeal to God, the incident was communicated to the editor of a
religious journal. Having an intimacy with the gentleman said to be the
one whose hand had offered the seasonable relief, he determined the next
time he made him a visit to introduce the subject, and, if possible, to
know the reason that induced the generous action. The story was told
with a modest blush which evinced the tenderness of his heart. On
interrogation, he said "he had frequently heard that minister. On a
certain morning he was disposed for a walk; thought in the severity of
the winter season a trifle might be of service, as fuel was high; felt a
kind of necessity to enclose the money in a letter; went to the house,
found the family, delivered the paper and retired, but knew not the
extreme necessity of the minister and his family, either at that time
nor till this very moment when his friend introduced the subject. Thus
it is seen none but God knew the want or moved the hand that gave the
supply, and brought them to meet at the right time.


SPINAL DISEASE CURED.


"There was a little girl in this place that had the
cerebro-spinal-meningitis; several had died with this disease, and the
physician had given her up to die. The weekly prayer-meeting met in town
that night, and her parents wrote a note and sent it by their little
son, requesting prayer that their little daughter might live and not
die, signed with the names of both parents. From that time she began to
recover, and to-day she is a bright little girl, with full use of every
faculty, and not deformed as most persons are from this terrible
disease. I cannot view it in any other light than a direct answer to
prayer."


AN OLD MAN'S PRAYER.


"I feel also like mentioning another instance. I knew an old father in
Israel, a minister of the gospel, who once in speaking with a brother
minister, after a revival of religion in which five of his grandchildren
had professed their faith in Christ, among others with whom he had
labored; said if he could only live to see his one remaining
granddaughter brought into the fold, and the two Presbyterian churches,
then, called the Old and New school, united, he could say, like Simeon
of old, 'Lord, now lettest thou thy servant depart in peace, for mine
eyes have seen thy salvation.' About three years after, the two
Presbyteries met near this place in Germantown, Mo., and he seemed as if
he could not contain himself till the time came for the meeting, so
anxious was he for this great desire of his heart to be fulfilled. On
the day of meeting he took sick and could not be present at any of the
sessions, but many of his brethren were with him, among whom was this
one he had been conversing with. The sessions lasted three days, and
upon the last evening his wishes were gratified, the two Presbyteries
merged into one, singing 'Blest be the tie that binds;' and his youngest
granddaughter united with the church, and after the meeting adjourned
this brother came to watch with the aged servant of God. He was
permitted to convey the glad news to him, and see a heavenly smile light
up his countenance as he passed away with his earnest prayer gratified."


THE MYSTERIOUS LEADINGS OF PROVIDENCE.


The following incidents are contributed to the book by a prominent
clergyman:

"A period, ever memorable in the life of the writer, occurred in the
Autumn of 1832, while attending a protracted meeting of more than
ordinary interest and power, held under the auspices of the Baptist
church in the city of Schenectady, under the then pastoral charge of
Rev. Abraham D. Gillette, this being his first settlement. It was in one
of the meetings that the Holy Spirit impressed my mind of its sinfulness
and the need of a Savior, not only to cleanse my soul of sin and sinful
stains, but to save me. These impressions caused me to humble myself at
the feet of sovereign mercy; and in the midst of my pleadings, God
answered my prayer, and opened to me new views, views of the heavenly
kingdom, which so electrified my soul, that with a full heart I could
say, 'Blessed be the Lord who has shown me marvelous works in this
lonely place beneath the star-lit sky.'

"This great change was, and is, to me the most wonderful interposition
of God in my behalf in answer to prayer. This answer to prayer the
promised result of faith in Him."

"Again, in the year 1836, the writer in the year mentioned was employed
by a transportation company, in the city of Troy, in the character of an
employee having direction of a portion of the business of the company
which brought me into close relation with the many boatmen connected
with the company. Association with the boatmen was painful to my
religious nature, compelled, as I was, to hear all manner of offensive
talk. The latter led me to indulge a wish that I might free myself from
such company, in order to form associations with persons of my own
religious turn of mind. But God willed otherwise, as will be learned
from the recital of God's dealings with me on an occasion of a journey
alone in a carriage from Troy to Schenectady. It was on the occasion
alluded to that most of the time was occupied in prayer, and the burden
of my prayer was 'that God would open up a way for me wherein I could
find more congenial company, where in fact my religious feelings would
not meet with the trials incident to my present associations.' But He
who knew my needs better, came to my relief in words seemingly distinct
enough to be heard. This was the answer: 'I have placed you just where I
want you.' Instantly my prayer for a change of location or separation
from my business and its connections ceased, and since, instead of
looking for easy positions, wherein the principles of the faith which is
in me may be undisturbed, I deem it suited to my growth in grace and
increase in devotion to my Master's cause, to covet the association of
men whose only tendency is to evil continually. I have found by
experience in the latter direction, that although many tongues are loose
in the habit of profanity, I am roused more and more by grace to impart
words of counsel. I know that efforts at consistency in Christian
conduct and converse will stop the mouth of profaners of the name of our
Redeemer, God."

Another instance of the presence of God with his children is clearly
manifest in the following sketch of a meeting of two brethren, of whom
the writer was one, held in the conference room of the First Baptist
church in Troy, N.Y., of which church he was a member. The meeting
alluded to occurred in the early spring of 1840 or '41. We were
accustomed to meet almost every day for the purpose of arranging the
Sunday school library, but would occupy a portion of the time, usually
at noon, in prayer for such persons or objects as were presented to the
mind. On the particular occasion we propose to mention, it was mutually
agreed that we pray for one of the brethren, whose gifts were of a high
order, and his usefulness hindered by a lack of spirituality. We
mutually bowed in prayer for this brother, and while thus engaged the
door of the room was opened, and a person entered and knelt between us,
but who he was, or the purpose of his visit we knew not until we had
ended our prayer, at which time the person spoke and requested us to
continue praying for him.

At the conclusion of the service, the question was mooted how he came
there. His reply was in substance as follows: "When standing on a stoop
on the corner of Fourth and Congress streets, cogitating which way I
should go, I was impressed by a voice within which directed my course to
the Conference Room. I debated with the impression, taking the position
that it being noon no meeting was then in progress. Still the impression
remained, and could not be removed. Noticing this, I gave way to the
voice and here I am." Neither of the three thus brought together could
doubt for a moment that our prayer for this brother was answered. His
joy was great in view of being thus called from his delinquency to share
in the fullness of his Savior's love.

"Another instance in the experience of the writer very clearly shows the
power and worth of prayer. About the year 1840, in the Autumn thereof,
he experienced a lack of vital, spiritual energy. This had been of
months' continuance, but to his joy, culminated after retiring to rest.
After this manner, before sleep overcame him, he was impressed to
present his case before the mercy-seat. To do so he arose from his bed,
retired to a quiet part of his home and bowed in prayer, seeking to
occupy the entire night if need be in prayer for the bestowal of the
Holy Spirit, and the consequent revival influences of other days. This
season of prayer was of short continuance; but not by reason of
disrelish for the exercise, but because my prayer was answered and a
complete breaking away of the previous hindrances to my spiritual
enjoyment. Since the event alluded to, now more than thirty-six years, I
have not been afflicted by doubts, and counsel brethren and sisters not
to allow themselves to be made unhappy by this evil to our spiritual
progress."


LIFE SPARED FOR TWO WEEKS.


"On the 8th of January, last, I was called upon to visit a dying man in
Jersey City, whom the doctors had said could not live but a few hours. I
found him in severe bodily sufferings and a terrible agony of mind. He
had lived a moral and upright life in the eyes of the world, but
careless and neglectful of all religious duties, and now with eternity
before him he felt his life a failure and his imperative need of help.

"In his agony he would cry out, 'Lord, help me,' and perhaps the next
moment blaspheme the name of God. I sought to show him his great sin in
having so long neglected God and his salvation, and at the same time
assured him that Jesus was a great Savior, 'able to save to the
uttermost all who would come unto Him.' I went from his bedside to the
union prayer-meeting, held in our city during the week of prayer, where
I presented his case and asked the brethren to pray that God would save
this poor man even at the eleventh hour, and spare him to give good
evidence of his conversion. His case seemed to reach the hearts of all
present, and most earnest prayers were offered in his behalf; so strong
was the faith that many came to me at the close of the meeting and said
that young man will certainly be saved before he is taken from this
world.

"In answer to prayer he was spared nearly two weeks, and for some six or
seven days before his death, gave much clearer evidence of being truly
converted than could have been expected of one in his condition."


A MISSIONARY'S EXPERIENCE IN MEXICO.


"While laboring with my wife as a missionary in Northern Mexico, we
supported ourselves for nearly four years by teaching and such other
ways as the Lord opened up to us.

"But our schools being decidedly Protestant, and I preaching regularly,
the opposition from Romanists was very strong; this, together with the
extreme poverty of the people, made our income very small. Frequently
the opposition would rise to that pitch that only the children of the
poorest would be permitted to come, but we never turned these away,
though they could pay no tuition, trusting that God would provide for us
in some other way.

"Early in the year 1869, we were much exercised to know the will of the
Lord concerning us, whether he would have us continue or not. We brought
our case before the Lord and prayed him to make known his will and
provide for our necessary wants. In about three weeks we received a
check for eighty dollars, sent us, as we felt, truly by the Lord in
answer to our prayer through a friend in New York, who knew nothing of
our circumstances or prayer.

"In August the same year, our condition became such that it seemed as if
in a few days we would be wholly without the necessaries of life. We
laid our case before the Lord, and as he did not appear to open up any
way for us to leave the field, we went forward with our work as
faithfully as we knew how, believing that the Lord would provide in his
own time and way, when one evening, just after family worship, a rap
came to the door. I opened it, there came in quite a company of persons,
all bearing something, and just exactly the things we needed most, and
to the amount of over fifty dollars' worth, and about a sixth of it was,
as we learned, given by Romanists who had opposed us very strongly all
the time we had been there. Truly the Lord answers prayer and turns the
hearts of men to do his will."


THE GREATEST OF PHYSICIANS.


Miss X. of Brooklyn, had suffered long and severely from a distressing
tumor. One physician after another had plied his skill, but to no
purpose; even the celebrated Doctor Simms of New York, corroborated
their verdict, that there was no help for her but in the knife. She
finally consented to that terrific method, but was in no condition of
strength to bear the operation. It was decided to postpone it till the
22d of June. Twelve doctors were invited to be present. Meanwhile a diet
nurse sent from New York, remained with her, to prepare her system for
the ordeal.

Three days preceding the one appointed for the operation, she was
attacked by severe nausea, which lasted two days, and so weakened her
that again the doctors were all notified by the attending one, that a
further postponement was imperative, and a certain date fixed in
November.

All this time her own prayers were unceasing, those of her friends added
to her own; and many a remembrance in the Fulton Street meeting, cheered
and encouraged her.

_By November, the tumor had totally disappeared!_ That was two years
ago. She is still well, strong; able to walk three miles any time.

She is as certain that the whole cure was performed by the Lord in
answer to all those fervent prayers, as she is certain she lives and
moves.


HOW THE LORD PAID BACK THE $5.


Mr. H., missionary, was appealed to by a poor man who seemed almost
distracted. He had a wife and five children; one of them ill; had been
sick himself for three months, and owed rent for the whole of that time.
The landlord had served him with a writ of ejectment, and he could get
no other tenement, unless he could pay five dollars on the rent. He had
applied to a well-known society in Brooklyn; but they were entirely out
of funds and gave him a note to the missionary, hoping he might have or
find the desired help. But missionaries' pockets are more often
depleted, than those of benevolent organizations, and the one in
question was fain to take the applicant to a friend, whom we shall call
Q.

The poor man told his story, asked the five dollars only as a loan, and,
having an order for the painting of two signs, said he should be paid
for them when done, and could return the loan the next Saturday, one
week from that time.

Mr. Q. saw, at once, that the utter destitution of the family, and the
need of _everything_, would prevent the man returning the money, however
much he might wish to, and so refused to lend it. The case was urged,
but without avail; and the missionary sent the man away, promising to
see him again that night or on Monday. After his departure, the
following conversation passed between the gentlemen:

Q.--"Now, H., I don't take any stock in that man. Can you not see that
his paying that money back, is a simple impossibility?"

H.--"Well, perhaps so; but the question with me in such cases, is this:
What is duty? Admit that he cannot pay it, or even that he will not try;
is it not better to relieve his desperate need, than to have him perhaps
turn criminal and prey upon society? He _must_ leave the house he is in;
he _cannot_ get another without the money, and he is desperate; feels
that five dollars he must have, by fair means or foul. Moreover, think
of his wife and children, leaving him out of the question. Now let us
open this little Bible, and see what meets our eye first."

Q.--"Oh, pshaw! You know I do not believe in that kind of thing! Do you
go to the Bible for everything?"

H.--"Why not? Can we have any better guide?"

Q.--"Oh! well, I don't work that way. Now about that man and his money.
I will toss up a penny with you, whether I lend or not."

H.--"No you won't! You know I don't believe in chance, but in the Lord.
And would you sooner rest your decision on a gambler's test, than on
God's promise? Now just let us open the book."

Q.--"Well; what do you see?"

H.--"'The wicked borroweth, and payeth not again; but the righteous
sheweth mercy, and lendeth.'" 37th Psalm, 21st verse.

As there was no hunting up of passages, nor leaves turned down to open
easily, the coincidence was impressive, as well as amusing, and H.,
following it up, said, "Lend him the money, and if he does not pay you
next Saturday night, I will."

It was so agreed upon, and, when the man called on the missionary on
Monday morning, he was sent to Q. for the relief.

The week passed on, as they all pass, weighted and freighted with human
ills; some capable of alleviation, some not; but of the former, a full
share had come under the notice and care of the missionary, and Saturday
found him stepping into the Fulton street prayer-meeting, N.Y., for
fresh encouragement and benediction on his labors.

At its close, a gentleman said to him, "Mr. H., I have known you by
sight for years; know your work; but have never given you anything; and
I promised myself the next time I saw you, I would do so. Have you any
special need of five dollars now? If so, and you will step to the bank
with me, you shall have it." Instantly it flashed through the mind of H.
that this was the day when, either the borrower or he, must pay his
friend. It may be supposed that he went to the bank with alacrity. Going
back to B. and meeting the friend, he learned that neither man nor money
had appeared, and at once tendered the five dollars, telling the story
of the Lord's care in the matter.

Q. was so interested in this manner of obtaining supplies, that he
refused to take the money, and instructed H. to use it in the Lord's
work.


PRAYING FOR MONEY FOR A JOURNEY.


A lady, Miss E., residing in New Bedford, received a letter telling of
the serious illness of her mother, in New York. Sick herself, from
unremitted care of an invalid during eight years, poor as Elijah when
his only grocers were the ravens, too old for new ambitions, too well
acquainted with the gray mists of life to hope for many rifts through
which the sunshine might enter, she had no sum of money at all
approaching the cost of the trip between the two places.

"He shall cover thee with his feathers, and under his wings shalt thou
trust," is a text bound over her daily life, as a phylactery was bound
between the eyes of an ancient Hebrew. She lives literally, _only one
day at a time_, and walks literally by faith and not by sight. So then
as ever, the Lord was her committee of ways and means; but for three
days the answer was delayed. Then, an old lady called to express her
indebtedness for Miss E.'s services three years before, and ask her
acceptance of ten dollars therefor, "no sort of equivalent for days and
days of writing and searching law papers, but only a little token that
the service was not forgotten."

There was the answer to her prayer; there the redemption of the pledge:
"As the mountains are round about Jerusalem, so the Lord is round about
his people from henceforth, even forever."


EMPLOYMENT FOUND.


A man and wife were out of employment, and in very great trouble. Mr. H.
(missionary) had added his efforts to theirs, and sedulously sought
among the families he knew, for positions for them. After two weeks'
fruitless endeavor, he said to the man, "Well, John, let us go into the
Fulton street meeting and leave it with the Lord." They did so; the
request was read and remembered.

The very next day, Mr. H. received a note from one of the families to
whom he had already applied, and without success, requesting him to send
the man and wife of whom he had spoken. Very joyfully he did so, and
they were both engaged! Mr. H. considered it a very marked answer to
prayer, inasmuch as it was quite difficult to find a family who wanted a
man as well as woman servant; and that particular family was, of all
others, the least likely to make such an arrangement!


A BARREL OF FLOUR.


For the "Faith Home for Incurables" Mr. H. received, one day, five
dollars. A barrel of flour was terribly needed. He went to a large house
in New York, hoping the Lord would incline the proprietor to sell him a
barrel for that sum. He felt too poor, was not willing; and with a heavy
heart, Mr. H. returned, asking the Lord what next he should do. He
called at the store of a friend, where the following conversation took
place. "Well, did you get the flour?" "I did not; they feel too poor,
and I am terribly disappointed. It is almost dark now; I have lost my
time going over there, and at this hour, the flour merchants here are
closed." "Well, Mr. ---- called here, and I told him you were in, and on
what errand you had gone to New York. He said he would send a barrel to
my store if I would send it up to the Home; and I did so, about an hour
ago."


WONDERFUL WAYS OF THE LORD IN GUIDING HIS PEOPLE.

