prevented the commission of the crime. O, I shall never forgive myself
that I did not follow him when he parted from me yesterday!"

"Let me hear how that occurred, maiden?" asked Sir Thomas.

"It chanced in this way, Sir. I have already described my father's state
of mind, and the distempered view he has been accustomed to take of all
things. Yesterday, May-day sports were held in the village of Tottenham,
where we dwelt; and as such things are an abomination in his sight, he
took upon him to reprove the actors in the pastimes. They who witnessed
his conduct on that occasion would hardly hold him to be under the due
control of reason. Amongst the spectators was the son of an old friend,
whose name having accidentally reached my father, he invited him into
the house, and a misunderstanding having arisen between them, the latter
suddenly left--dismissed almost with rudeness. On his departure, my
father was greatly disturbed--more so than I have ever seen him. After
awhile, he withdrew to his own chamber, as was his habit, to pray, and I
hoped would become tranquillized; but the very reverse happened, for
when he reappeared, I saw at once that a fearful change had taken place
in him. His eye blazed with preternatural light, his gestures were wild
and alarming, and his language full of menace and denunciation. He again
spoke of his mission from Heaven, and said that its execution could no
longer be delayed."

"This should have been a warning to you," observed Sir Thomas, knitting
his brows.

"It should, honourable Sir. But I did not profit by it. I knew and felt
that he was no longer under the dominion of reason--that he was
labouring under some terrible delusion that approached its crisis; but I
did not check him. I yielded passive obedience to his injunction, that I
should depart instantly with an old servant to London; and I agreed to
tarry at a house, which he mentioned, till I heard from him. I had sad
forebodings that I should never hear from him again--or if I _did_, that
the tidings would be worse than none at all; but I obeyed. I could not,
indeed, resist his will. I set forth with my attendant, and my father
parted with us at the door. He placed money in my hand, and bade me
farewell! but in such a tone, and with such a look, that I felt his
senses were gone, and I would have stayed him, but it was then too late.
Breaking from my embrace, he sprang upon his horse, which was ready
saddled, and rode off, taking the direction of Edmonton; while I, with a
heart full of distress and misgiving, pursued my way to London. Ere
midnight, my sad presentiments were verified. A messenger traced me out,
bringing intelligence of the direful event that had happened, and
informing me that my father was a prisoner at Theobalds. As soon as I
could procure means of reaching the palace, I set forth, and arrived
here about an hour ago, when, failing in my efforts to obtain an
interview with my father, who is closely confined, and none suffered to
come near him save with authority from the Secretary of State, I sought
an audience of you, honourable Sir, in the hope that you would grant me
permission to see him."

"If I do grant it, the interview must take place in the presence of the
officer to whom his custody has been committed," replied Sir Thomas.
"With this restriction, I am willing to sign an order for you."

"Be it as you please, honourable Sir; and take my heartfelt gratitude
for the grace."

Sir Thomas struck a small bell upon the table, and the usher appeared at
the summons.

"Bid the officer in charge of Hugh Calveley attend me," he said.

The man bowed, and departed.

Sir Thomas Lake then turned to the paper which he had just opened before
Aveline's appearance, and was soon so much engrossed by it that he
seemed quite unconscious of her presence. His countenance became
gloomier and more austere as he read on, and an expression of
pain--almost a groan--escaped him. He appeared then to feel sensible
that he had committed an indiscretion, for he laid down the paper, and,
as if forcibly diverting himself from its contents, addressed Aveline.

"What you have said respecting your father's condition of mind," he
observed, "by no means convinces me that it is so unsound as to render
him irresponsible for his actions. It were to put a charitable
construction upon his conduct to say that no one but a madman could be
capable of it; but there was too much consistency in what he has said
and done to admit of such an inference. But for the interposition of
another person he owned that he would have killed the King; and the
disappointment he exhibited, and the language he used, prove such to
have been his fixed intention. His mind may have been disturbed; but
what of that? All who meditate great crimes, it is to be hoped, are not
entirely masters of themselves. Yet for that reason they are not to be
exempt from punishment. He who is sane enough to conceive an act of
wickedness, to plan its execution, and to attempt to perpetrate it,
although he may be in other respects of unsettled mind, is equally
amenable to the law, and ought equally to suffer for his criminality
with him who has a wiser and sounder head upon his shoulders."

Aveline attempted no reply, but the tears sprang to her eyes.

At this moment the door was thrown open by the usher to admit Sir
Jocelyn Mounchensey.

The emotion displayed by the young couple when thus brought together
passed unnoticed by the Secretary of State, as he was occupied at the
moment in writing the authority for Aveline, and did not raise his eyes
towards them.

"Are you the officer to whom my father's custody has been entrusted?"
exclaimed Aveline, as soon as she could give utterance to her surprise.

"Why do you ask that question, mistress?" demanded Sir Thomas, looking
up. "What can it signify to you who hath custody of your father,
provided good care be taken of him? There is a Latin maxim which his
Majesty cited at the banquet last night--_Etiam aconito inest
remedium_--and which may be freely rendered by our homely saying, that
'It is an ill wind that bloweth nobody good luck;' and this hath proved
true with Sir Jocelyn Mounchensey--for the gust that hath wrecked your
father hath driven him into port, where he now rides securely in the
sunshine of the King's favour. Nor is this to be wondered at, since it
was by Sir Jocelyn that his Majesty's life was preserved."

"The King preserved by him!" exclaimed Aveline, in bewilderment.

"Ay, marry and indeed, young mistress," rejoined Sir Thomas. "He
arrested the fell traitor; was knighted on the spot for the service, by
the King; was invited afterwards to the grand banquet in the evening,
and received with more distinction than any other guest; and he is now,
as you find, entrusted with the custody of the prisoner. Thus, if your
father has done little good to himself, he hath done much to Sir
Jocelyn."

Aveline could not repress an exclamation of anguish.

"No more of this, I entreat, Sir Thomas," cried Sir Jocelyn.

"It is right she should hear the truth," replied the Secretary of State.
"Here is her authority for admittance to her father," he continued,
giving it to him. "It must take place in your presence, Sir Jocelyn. And
you will pay strict attention to what they say," he added in a low tone,
"for you will have to report all that passes between them to the
council. Something may arise to implicate the girl herself, so let
naught escape you. Be vigilant in your office, as is needful. I mention
this as you are new to it. If the prisoner continues obstinate, as he
hath hitherto shown himself, threaten him with the torture. The rack
will certainly be applied when he reaches the Tower. I need not give you
further instructions I think, Sir Jocelyn. Be pleased to return to me
when the interview is over."

Upon this, he bowed gravely, and sounded the bell for the usher. Unable
to offer any remonstrance, Sir Jocelyn approached Aveline, who could
scarcely support herself, with the intention of offering her assistance;
but she shrank from him, and again muffling her face, went forth, while
he slowly followed her.




CHAPTER XXVI.

The forged Confession.


Some little time had elapsed since Aveline's departure on her sorrowful
errand, and Sir Thomas Lake was still alone, and once more deeply
engrossed in the consideration of the document, which, it will be
recollected, had occasioned him so much disquietude; and the feeling by
no means diminished when the usher entered and announced Lady Lake.
Severe and inflexible as we have described him, the Secretary of State
was generally yielding enough towards his lady, of whom he stood in
great awe, and whom he treated with the utmost deference; but on this
occasion, contrary to habitude, he received her very coldly, and without
rising motioned her to a seat beside him. Disregarding the want of
attention, which, under other circumstances, she would have resented,
Lady Lake took the seat indicated without remark, and continued silent
till the usher had retired. Then turning quickly towards her husband,
and fixing an inquiring look upon him, she said in a low voice--

"What think you of this document, Sir Thomas?"

"This forgery?" he rejoined in the same tone, but without raising his
eyes towards her.

"Ay, this forgery, if you choose to call it so," she returned. "Let me
have your opinion upon it? Is it as it should be? Are its expressions
such as would be used by a guilty woman, like the Countess, imploring
pity, and seeking to shield herself from disgrace? Do you find fault
with it? Can it be amended in any particular?"

"I find such grave fault with it," replied the Secretary of State, still
without looking up, "that I would amend it by casting it into the
flames. Lady Lake, it is my duty to warn you. This is a fearful crime
you would commit, and severely punishable by the law. You may excuse it
to yourself, because you have an end in view which seems to justify the
means; but the excuse will not avail you with others. You have said that
in a conflict with one so cunning and unscrupulous as our noble
son-in-law, you are compelled to fight him with his own weapons--to meet
trick with trick, manoevre with manoeuvre; but take my word for it, you
would more easily defeat him by straight-forward means. Be ruled by me
in this one instance. Abandon a scheme which must inevitably lead to
consequences I shudder to contemplate; and let this fabricated
confession be destroyed."

"Give it me," she cried, snatching the paper from him. "You were ever
timid, Sir Thomas; and if you had not lacked courage, this expedient
would not have been necessary. Odious and dangerous as it is, the
measure is forced upon me, and I shall not shrink from it. But you
shall not be called upon to play any part in the transaction. I alone
will do it. I alone will be responsible for all that may ensue."

"We shall all be responsible!" he rejoined. "You will not only ruin
yourself, but all your family, if this fearful step be taken. Hitherto
we have had right on our side, but henceforth we shall be more culpable
than the others."

"I am resolved upon the course," cried Lady Lake; "and all your
arguments--all your warnings will not dissuade me from it, so you may
spare your breath, Sir Thomas. As you see, I have omitted the charge of
witchcraft, and have only made the Countess confess her criminality with
Lord Roos, and of this we have had abundant proofs; nay, we should have
them still, if those condemnatory letters of hers, which had come into
our possession, had not been stolen. That mischance necessitates the
present measure. Having managed to deprive us of our weapons, Lord Roos
thinks himself secure. But he will find his mistake when this document
is produced to confound him."

"I tremble at the thought," groaned the Secretary of State.

"These fears are worse than womanish," exclaimed his lady. "Shake them
off, and be yourself. Who is to prove that the confession proceeds not
from the Countess? Not she herself; since no one will believe her. Not
Lord Roos; for he will be equally discredited. Not Diego; for his
testimony would be valueless. The Countess's hand-writing has been so
skilfully imitated, that the falsification cannot be detected. Compare
it with this note written by herself to Lady Roos, and which, though it
proves nothing, has so far answered my purpose. Compare, I say, the
writing of the confession and the signature with this note, and declare
if you can discern any difference between them. As to the signatures of
Lord Roos and Diego affixed to the document, they are equally well
simulated."

"That the forgery is skilfully executed, I do not deny," replied the
Secretary of State; "and that circumstance, though it does not lessen
the crime, may lessen the chance of detection. Since nothing I can urge
will turn you from your design, and you are determined to employ this
dangerous instrument, at least be cautious in its use. Terrify Lord Roos
with it, if you choose. Threaten to lay it before the Earl of
Exeter--before the King himself--in case of our son-in-law's
non-compliance with your demands. But beware how you proceed further. Do
not part with it for a moment; so that, if need be, you may destroy it.
Do you heed me, my lady?"

"I do, Sir Thomas," she replied. "Be assured I will act with due
caution.--I am glad to find you are coming round to my views, and are
disposed to countenance the measure."

"I countenance it!" exclaimed the Secretary of State, in alarm. "No such
thing. I disapprove of it entirely, and cannot sufficiently reprehend
it. But, as I well know, when you have once made up your mind, the fiend
himself cannot turn you from your purpose, I give you the best counsel I
can under the circumstances. I wash my hands of it altogether. Would to
Heaven I had never been consulted upon it--never even been made
acquainted with the project. However, as you have gone so far with me
you may go a step further, and let me know what story you mean to attach
to this confession? How will you feign to have obtained it?"

"The statement I shall make will be this, and it will be borne out by so
many corroborative circumstances that it will be impossible to
contradict it. You observe that the document is dated on the 10th of
April last. It is not without reason that it is so dated. On that day I
and our daughter, Lady Roos, attended by her maid, Sarah Swarton,
proceeded to the Earl of Exeter's residence at Wimbledon, for the
purpose of having an interview with the Countess, and we then saw her in
the presence of Lord Roos and his servant Diego."

"But you gained nothing by the journey?" remarked her husband.

"Your pardon, Sir Thomas," she rejoined; "I gained this confession. On
the way back I reflected upon what had occurred, and I thought how
flushed with triumph I should have been if, instead of meeting with
discomfiture, I had gained my point--if I had brought the haughty
Countess to her knees--had compelled her to write out and sign a full
avowal of her guilt, coupled with supplications for forgiveness from my
injured daughter and myself--and as a refinement of revenge, had forced
Lord Roos and his servant to attest by their signatures the truth of the
confession! I thought of this--and incensed that I had not done it,
resolved it _should_ be done."

"An ill resolve!" muttered her husband.

"In Luke Hatton, our apothecary, I had the man for my purpose," pursued
Lady Lake. "Aware of his marvellous talent for imitating any writing he
pleased--aware, also, that I could entirely rely upon him, I resolved to
call in his aid."

"Imprudent woman! You have placed yourself wholly in his power," groaned
Sir Thomas. "Suppose he should betray the terrible trust you have
reposed in him?"

"He will not betray it," replied Lady Lake. "He is too deeply implicated
in the matter not to keep silence for his own sake. But to proceed. The
document, such as you see it, was drawn out by myself and transcribed by
Luke Hatton, and the writing so admirably counterfeited that Lady
Exeter herself may well doubt if it be not her own. Then, as to the
circumstances, they will all bear me out. We were known to have been at
Wimbledon on the day in question. We were known to have had an interview
with Lady Exeter, at which Lord Roos and Diego were present. The
interview was private, and therefore no one can tell what took place at
it; but the probabilities are that what I shall assert really did
occur."

Sir Thomas signified his assent, and she went on.

"The plot is well contrived, and, with prudent management, cannot fail
of success. We have the time of the supposed occurrence--the actors in
it--and the scene--for I shall describe the particular room in which the
interview really did take place, and I shall further bring forward Sarah
Swarton, who will declare that she was concealed behind the hangings,
and heard the Countess read over the confession before she signed it."

"Another party to the affair--and a woman!" ejaculated Sir Thomas. "The
dangers of discovery are multiplied a hundredfold."

"The danger exists only in your imagination," said his Lady. "Come,
admit, Sir Thomas, that the scheme is well contrived, and that they must
be cunning indeed if they escape from the meshes I have woven for them."

"You have displayed ingenuity enough, I am free to own, if it had been
directed to a better end; but in the best contrived scheme some flaw is
ever found, which is sure to mar it."

"You can detect no flaw in this I am persuaded, Sir Thomas. If you can,
let me know it?"

"Nay, it is only when too late that such things are found out. The
supposed armour of proof is then found wanting at some vital point.
However, I will say no more," he observed, perceiving her impatience.
"What is done cannot be undone. Have you prepared our daughter? Will she
consent to aid you?"

"She will," replied Lady Lake. "I had some difficulty with her at first,
but I found means to overrule her scruples, and she consented at last to
act as I desired, provided all other means failed of accomplishing the
object in view. And they _have_ failed since we have lost those letters,
for though I have one other proof left which might perhaps be adduced, I
do not attach much importance to it."

"What is it?" inquired Sir Thomas, quickly.

"You shall know anon," she answered. "Suffice it, I have done all I
could to avoid having recourse to the present measure; and have
delayed--its execution to the last moment."

"But that proof of which you were speaking?" cried Sir Thomas. "Let me
hear it? Perhaps it may obviate the necessity of this dangerous
proceeding?"

"I do not think so. But you shall judge. Last night, our daughter and
myself obtained secret admittance to Lord Roos's chamber, and we found
the Countess there, and fainting in his arms."

"Why that is enough to convict them. You want nothing more."

"Hear me to an end, and you will change your opinion. Placing the
inanimate Countess on a couch, and covering her face with a
handkerchief, Lord Roos had the effrontery to assert that we were
mistaken; insisting that it was not Lady Exeter we beheld--but her
hand-maiden, Gillian Greenford; and he appealed to the perfidious knave,
Diego, in confirmation of his assertion."

"But you did not leave without satisfying yourselves of the truth?"
demanded Sir Thomas.

"His lordship took care we should have no means of doing so," she
answered. "He caused Diego to convey her away by a secret staircase."

"'Sdeath! that was unlucky. You have no proof then that it was the
Countess you beheld?"

"Nothing beyond a lock of her hair, which was secured by Lady Roos as
the man was removing her."

"That may be enough," cried the Secretary of State; "and prevent the
necessity of resorting to this frightful expedient. We must see the
girl, and interrogate her. Gillian Greenford you say she is called. She
shall be brought hither at once."

"It is possible she may be without," returned Lady Lake. "Before I came
here, I summoned her in your name."

"We will see," cried Sir Thomas, striking upon the bell. And the usher,
appearing to the summons, informed him that in effect the damsel in
question was in attendance. "She seems much alarmed, Sir Thomas," said
the usher, "and has with her a young man, who appears to take a tender
interest in her, and wishes to be present at the investigation."

"Let him come in with her," said the Secretary of State. And seeing the
usher pause, he inquired if he had anything further to say.

"His Excellency the Spanish Ambassador and my Lord Roos are without, and
desire admittance," replied the man.

Sir Thomas consulted his lady by a look; and as she made no objection,
he signified his pleasure that they should be admitted, and accordingly
the door was thrown open for the entrance of all the persons mentioned.

Gillian came first, and seemed much embarrassed by the situation in
which she found herself. She had been well tutored for the part she had
to play; but the instructions she had received entirely fled from her
mind as she found herself in the presence of two such awful personages
as Sir Thomas Lake and his lady, both of whom fixed keen glances upon
her. Feeling ready to drop with fright, she looked at Dick Taverner, as
if imploring his support. But this Dick declined to afford. His jealousy
having been roused by what he had heard, he determined to be governed in
his conduct towards her by the result of the investigation. Accordingly,
