
"Your mother?  No.  Why?"

"On'y she's a-missin', that's all; but there, she allers turns up, she
does, and wipes me to-rights, too."

"She was nearly killing you the night we saw you," said I.

"'Taint no concern of yourn.  Shine 'e boots, sir? 'ere yer are, sir.
Not that bloke, sir.  Do yer 'ear?  Shine 'e boots, mister?"

This last spirited call was addressed to an elderly gentleman who was
passing.  He yielded eventually to the youth's solicitation, and I
therefore resumed my walk to the office with a good deal more to think
of than I had when I started.

If I had desired to make a sensation at Hawk Street, I could hardly have
done better than turn up that morning as usual.  It was a picture to see
the fellows' faces of alarm, bewilderment, astonishment, and finally of
merriment.

They had all heard that I was laid up with smallpox, which, as my friend
Smith was also ill of the same malady, they all considered as natural on
my part, and highly proper.  They had, in fact, faced the prospect of
getting on without me, and were quite prepared to exist accordingly.
The partners, too, had talked the matter over, and come to the decision
of advertising again without delay for a new clerk to take my place, and
that very morning were intending to draw up the advertisement and send
it to the papers.

Under these circumstances I appeared unexpectedly and just as usual on
the Hawk Street horizon.  No, not just as usual.  Had I appeared just as
usual, it might have been easier for the company generally to believe
that I was really sound, but when my face presented a brilliant
combination of most of the colours of the rainbow, the effect was rather
sensational.

"Why, if it's not Batchelor," exclaimed Doubleday; not, however,
advancing open-armed to meet me, but edging towards the far end of the
desk, and dexterously insinuating Crow and Wallop between me and his
precious person.  "Why, we heard you had smallpox."

"So we thought yesterday," said I, gravely, half aggravated still that I
had been defrauded of that distinction.

"Oh, you did, did you?" said Doubleday, gradually working back to his
own seat.  "Well, you _have_ got something on your face to show for it;
hasn't he, Wallop?"

"Looks as if he'd been painting up for the South Sea Islands," observed
Wallop.

"That's rather a showy tint of yellow down his left cheek," said Crow.
"Very fashionable colour just now."

"Did you lay it on yourself?" said Doubleday, "or did you get any one to
help you?"

"Oh," I said, in as off-hand a manner as I could, "I was having a little
box with Whipcord up at the Field-marshal's.  You weren't there, by the
way, Doubleday.  Whipcord's rather a good hand."

"Is he?" said Doubleday, laughing exuberantly, with Wallop and Crow as
chorus.  "I would never have supposed that by your face, now; would you,
you fellows?  It strikes me you got a big box instead of smallpox, eh?
Ha, ha!"

"I wonder at Whipcord standing up to you," said Crow.  "He's such a
quiet fellow, and doesn't know in the least what to do with his hands."

"He had the best of me," I said.

"Well, I don't know.  It doesn't do to trust to appearances.  If it did
one might suppose he had--rather.  I hope you'll ask me up when you have
the return match."

I didn't see much fun in those witticisms, which, however, appeared to
afford great merriment to the company generally, so much so that when
Mr Barnacle presently opened the door he caught the whole counting-
house laughing.

"What tomfoolery is this?" he demanded, looking angrily round.  "You
seem to forget, all of you, that you come here to work, and not to play.
If you want to play you can go somewhere else.  There!"  So saying he
passed into his private room, slamming the door ill-temperedly behind
him.

This was not encouraging for me, who, of course, had to report myself,
and contradict the rumours regarding my illness.

I gave him a quartet of an hour or so to quiet down, partly in the hope
that Mr Merrett might meanwhile arrive.  But as that event did not
happen, and as Doubleday informed me that the advertisements for a new
clerk were to be sent out that morning, I made up my mind there was
nothing to be gained by further delay, and therefore made the venture.

I found myself anything but comfortable as I stood before Mr Barnacle's
desk, and stammeringly began my statement.

"Please, sir--"

"Why, what is this, sir?" demanded Mr Barnacle, sternly.  "We were told
yesterday you were ill."

"So I was, sir, and I believed I was going to have smallpox, but the
doctor says I'm not."

"And does that account for your face being in that state, pray?"

"No, sir, I got that boxing--that is fighting."

"Most discreditable conduct!  Is that all you have to say?"

"Yes, sir.  I'm sorry I was away yesterday."

"Well, now, listen to what I have to say," said Mr Barnacle, laying
down his pen, and leaning forward in his chair.  "You've not been doing
well lately, Batchelor.  I've watched you and I've watched your work,
and I don't like it.  I was mistaken in you, sir.  You're idle, sir, and
unless you improve I sha'n't keep you another week, mind that."

"Indeed, sir--" I began.

"Hold your tongue, sir," said Mr Barnacle.  "We've no room in this
office for boys of your kind, and unless you change you must go
somewhere else.  You've played the fool quite enough here."

I would fain have replied to justify myself, but in the junior partner's
present temper the attempt would have been hazardous.

So I said nothing and returned to my work, determined for my own credit,
as well as in my own interest, to show Mr Barnacle that he had judged
me harshly.

How I worked that week!  I refused invitation after invitation, and
stayed late after every one else had gone to get ahead with my work.
During office hours I steadily abstracted myself from what was going on
all round, and determined that nothing should draw me from my tasks.  I
even volunteered for and undertook work not strictly my own, greatly to
the amazement of everybody, especially Wallop, who began to think there
really must be something in the rumour that I was not well.  And all the
while I most assiduously doctored my face, which gradually came to
resume its normal complexion.

I could see that this burst of industry was having its due effect in
high quarters.  Mr Barnacle, who after his lecture had treated me
gruffly and abruptly for some days, began again to treat me civilly, and
Mr Merrett bestowed once or twice a special commendation on my
industry.

In due time, so far from feeling myself a repentant idler, I had grown
to consider myself one of the most virtuous, industrious, and well-
principled clerks in London, and in proportion as this conviction got
hold of me my application to work relaxed.  One event especially
completed my self-satisfaction.  About three weeks after my interview
with Mr Barnacle I was summoned into the partners' room, and there
informed that, having now been eight months in their service, and
proving myself useful in my situation, my salary would henceforth be
twelve shillings a week!

I could hardly believe my ears!  Why, it was just half as much again as
what I had been receiving.  On eight shillings a week I had lived
economically, but not so badly.  And now, what might I not do with
twelve shillings a week?

Doubleday insisted on my coming up to his lodgings that evening to
celebrate the joyful event with a quiet supper.  This invitation I
accepted, the first for nearly a month, and in view of the occasion
spent my first extra four shillings in anticipation on a coloured
Oxford-shirt, which I grandly requested, with the air of a moneyed man,
to be put down to my account.  I found myself quite the hero of the
party that evening.  Every one was there.  I had an affecting
reconciliation with Whipcord, and forgot all about Flanagan's desertion
and Daly's indifference in my hour of tribulation; I discoursed
condescendingly with the Field-Marshal about his hopeless attachment,
and promised to go for a row up the river one Saturday with the twins.
And all the time of supper I was mentally calculating the cost of
Doubleday's entertainment, and wondering whether I could venture to give
a party myself!

In fact, I was so much taken up with my own good fortune and my new rise
in life, that I could think of nothing else.  I forgot my former
warnings and humiliations.  I forgot that even with twelve shillings a
week I had barely enough to clothe me respectably; I forgot that every
one of these fellows was in the habit of laughing at me behind my back,
and I forgot all my good resolutions to live steadily till Jack came
back.

And I forgot all about poor Jack--(now, so the letters had told me),
convalescent and slowly recovering health, but still lying lonely and
weary in the Packworth Hospital.  Indeed, that evening his name only
twice crossed my mind--once when Doubleday and Crow were laughing over
the prospect of "Bull's-eye" turning up with a face deeply marked with
his late disease; and once when, walking back to Beadle Square, full of
my new plans of extravagance, I chanced to pass a small boy, curled up
on a doorstep, with his head resting on a shoeblack box, and the light
of a neighbouring lamp shining full on his sleeping face.  Then I
remembered how, not very long ago, I had seen that same head lying side
by side with Jack's head on the pillow at Mrs Nash's.  And as I stood
for a moment to look, I could almost have believed that the sleeping
figure there, with all his vulgarity and dishonesty, had as good a title
to call himself Jack Smith's friend as I had.



CHAPTER SEVENTEEN.

HOW I GAVE A LITTLE SUPPER TO SOME OF MY FRIENDS.

The idea of giving a party of my own to my new friends, in return for
their hospitality to me, was not by any means a new one.  It had been
simmering in my mind for some weeks past.  Indeed, ever since I began to
be invited out, the thought that I could not return the compliment had
always been a drawback to my pleasure.

But there had always been two obstacles in the way of carrying out my
wish.  The first was lack of funds, the second was Mrs Nash.  On eight
shillings a week I had come to the conclusion it was out of the question
to dream of giving a party to eight persons.  By the most modest
calculation I couldn't possibly do the thing decently under a shilling a
head.  It was true I had my uncle's half-sovereign in my pocket still.
I might, I reflected, borrow that, and pay it back by weekly
instalments.  But somehow I didn't like the idea quite, and never
brought myself to the point of carrying it into effect.  Now, however,
with the sudden rise in my fortunes recorded in the last chapter, the
financial obstacle to my hospitality was quite swept away.  I had only
to take the extra four shillings a week for two weeks--and the thing was
done!

So the idea no longer simmered in my mind--it boiled; and I was
determined for once in a way to astonish my friends.

But though one obstacle had vanished, the other remained.  What would
Mrs Nash say?  For, much as I disliked it, I was forced to face the
fact that my party, if I gave it, would have to come off in Beadle
Square.  I had half thought of borrowing Flanagan's room for the
occasion, but didn't like to ask him; besides, if I did, it would have
to be half his party and half mine, which wasn't at all my idea.  Then
it occurred to me, should I take lodgings for a week and give it there?
No, it would cost too much even for twelve shillings a week; and my
uncle, if he heard of it, might stop my keep at Mrs Nash's.  Suppose I
hired a room at an hotel for the evening, and asked the fellows there?
It wasn't a bad idea, and would probably only cost me half a week's
wages.  But the worst of it is, if you ask fellows to dine with you at
an hotel, they are sure to come expecting a grand turn out; and I
doubted my talents to provide anything grand; besides, the hotel people
would be sure to want to supply the things themselves, and ask for the
money in advance.  Or if I didn't humour them they would to a certainty
turn crusty and critical, and spoil my party for me.

No, the only thing was to make the best of Beadle Square, and to that
end I determined to tackle Mrs Nash at once.

You may fancy the good woman's surprise and scorn when I propounded to
her my ambitious scheme.

"You give a party!  Fiddlesticks!  You'll do nothing of the sort."

"Please, Mrs Nash," pleaded I, "it will be a very quiet one, I
promise."

"And where do you expect to have it, I wonder?" said she.  "In the coal-
cellar, I suppose?  That's the only spot in the house that ain't
occupied."

"Oh," replied I, thinking it judicious to laugh at this facetious
suggestion, "I'd like the parlour for that evening, if you could manage
it, Mrs Nash."

"What! are you going to ask all the fellows here to your party, then?"

"Oh, no.  Couldn't you let them know the parlour's engaged for that
evening?--just for once?  You know I'd pay you something--"

"I dare say you would!--you'd pay anything, you would!  And what are you
going to give them all to eat, eh?"

"Oh, I'll see to that," said I.

This was an unfortunate reply of mine.  Mrs Nash, as it happened, was
inclined to enter into my scheme, and, had I only known it, would have
offered to take some trouble to help me.  But this answer of mine
offended her sorely.

"Oh, very well," said she, loftily; "you don't want me, I can see, and
I'm just as glad."

In vain I protested, and implored her not to be vexed.  I hadn't meant
it at all.  I couldn't possibly do without her.  I was a beast to say
what I had, and so on.  The most I could get out of her was a vague
promise that I might have the room on the evening in question.  As for
the entertainment, she washed her hands of the whole affair.

I was inclined to give it up.  Not that I had ever imagined she would
help me; but to have her downright unfriendly at such a time would, I
knew, ruin the thing totally.

For some days she would listen to nothing at all on the subject.

"It's your look-out," she said to every appeal.  "Let's see what sort of
a hand you'll make of it, my beauty."

I was in despair.  I longed to issue my invitations, but till Mrs Nash
was "squared" it was out of the question to name the happy day.  It was
evidently useless to argue the matter.  The best thing I could do was to
let it alone, and allow her to imagine the scheme had been abandoned.

In this calculation I was correct.  Some days afterwards, happening to
be in the parlour with her after breakfast, she said, "And when's your
grand party, as you call it, coming off, Mr Batchelor?"

I started up in rapture at the question.

"Then you _will_ help me, Mrs Nash?"  I cried, running up to her, and
taking it all for granted.

She first looked amazed, then angry, and finally she smiled.

"I never said so.  You're a sight too independent for my taste, you are.
_I_ ain't a-goin' to put my fingers into where I ain't wanted."

"But you _are_ wanted, and you will be a brick, I know!" cried I, almost
hugging her in my eagerness.

The battle was won, and that morning I went down to the office
positively jubilant.  My party was fixed for Thursday!

I felt particularly important when the time came for inviting Doubleday
and Crow to the festive assembly.  I had rehearsed as I walked along the
very words and tones I would use.  On no account must they suppose the
giving of a party was the momentous event it really proved itself.

"By the way, Doubleday," said I, in as off-hand a manner as I could
assume, after some preliminary talk on different matters--"by the way,
could you come up to supper on Thursday?  Just the usual lot, you know."

I could have kicked myself for the way I blushed and stammered as I was
delivering this short oration.

Doubleday gazed at me half curiously, half perplexed.

"Eh--supper?  Oh, rather!  Where's it to be?  Mansion House or
Guildhall?"

I didn't like this.  It wasn't what I had expected.

"Oh, up at my place, you know--Beadle Square," I said.

At this Doubleday fairly laughed.

"Supper at your place at Black Beadle Square?  Oh, rather!  I'll come.
You'll come too, Crow, eh?  The young un's got a supper on on Thursday.
Oh, rather.  Put me down for that, old man."

Could anything have been more mortifying?  Most invitations are received
politely and graciously.  What there was to laugh at about mine I
couldn't understand.

"Oh, yes, Crow's coming," I said, meekly.  "At least I hope so."

"Oh, rather!" said Crow, beaming.  "I wouldn't miss it for a lot.  Is it
evening dress or what?"

I was too much disconcerted and crestfallen to answer the question, and
avoided my two prospective guests for the rest of the day.

Already I was half repenting my venture.  But there was no drawing back
now.  Letters or messages came from the rest of the "usual lot"--the
Twins, Flanagan, the Field-Marshal, Daly, and Whipcord, every one of
them saying they'd be there.  Yes, there was nothing left but to go
through with it.

The next two days were two of the most anxious days I ever spent.  I was
running about all one afternoon (when I ought to have been delivering
bills of lading), inquiring the prices of lobsters, pork-pies, oranges,
and other delicacies, arranging for the hire of cups and saucers,
ordering butter and eggs, and jam, and other such arduous and delicate
duties.  Then I spent the evening in discussing with myself the
momentous questions whether I should lay in tea-cakes or penny buns,
whether I need have brown bread as well as white, whether Mrs Nash's
tea would be good enough, whether I should help my great dish--the eel-
pie--myself, or trust it to one of the company to do.

These and similar momentous matters engaged my thoughts.  And it began
to dawn on me further that my financial estimates had been greatly out,
and that my supper would cost me nearer a pound than ten shillings.
Never mind.  After all, was I not worth twelve shillings a week?  I
needn't trouble about the expense.  Besides, the pastrycook had agreed
to give me credit, so that really I should have comparatively little to
pay down.

A far more serious anxiety was Mrs Nash.  It required constant and most
assiduous attention to keep her in good temper.  And the nearer the time
came the more touchy she got.  If I suggested anything, she took it as a
personal slight to herself; if I was bold enough to differ from her, she
was mortally offended; if I ventured to express the slightest
impatience, she turned crusty and threatened to let me shift for myself.
The affair, too, naturally got wind amongst my fellow-lodgers, who one
and all avowed that they would not give up their right to the parlour,
and indulged in all manner of witticisms at my cost and the cost of my
party.  I pacified them as best I could by promising them the reversion
of the feast, and took meekly all their gibes and jests when they begged
to be allowed to come in to dessert and hear the speeches, or
volunteered to come and hand round the champagne, or clear away the
"turtle-soup," and so on.

But the nearer the fatal day came the more dejected and nervous I got.
Mrs Nash's parlour was really a disreputable sort of room, and after
all I had had no experience of suppers, and was positive I should not
know what to do when the time came.  I had neither the flow of
conversation of Doubleday, nor the store of stories of Daly, nor
Whipcord's sporting gossip, nor the Twins' self-possessed humour.  And
if my guests should turn critical I was a lost man; that I knew.  How I
wished I were safe on the other side of that awful Thursday!

The day came at last, and I hurried home as hard as I could after
business to make my final preparations.  The eel-pie was arriving as I
got there, and my heart was comforted by the sight.  Something, at
least, was ready.  But my joy was short-lived, for Mrs Nash was in a
temper.  The fact is, I had unconsciously neglected a piece of advice of
hers in the matter of this very eel-pie.  She had said, have it hot.  I
had told the pastrycook to deliver it cold.  Therefore Mrs Nash, just
at the critical moment, deserted me!

With a feeling of desperation I laid my own tablecloth--not a very good
one--and arranged as best I could the plates and dishes.  Time was
getting short, and it was no use wasting time on my crabby landlady.
Yet what could I do without her?  Who was to lend me a kettle, or a
saucepan for the eggs, or a toasting-fork, or, for the matter of that,
any of the material of war?  It was clear I must at all hazards regain
Mrs Nash, and the next half-hour was spent in frantic appeals to every
emotion she possessed, to the drawing of abject pictures of my own
helplessness, to profuse apologies, and compliments and coaxings.  I
never worked so hard in my life as I did that half-hour.

Happily it was not all in vain.  She consented, at any rate, to look
after one or two of the matters in which I was most helpless, and I was
duly and infinitely thankful.

In due time all was ready, and the hour arrived.  All my terrors
returned.  I felt tempted to bolt from the house and leave my guests to
entertain themselves.  I _hated_ Beadle Square.  And there, of course,
just when I should have liked things to be at their best, there were
three or four cats setting up a most hideous concert in the yard, and
the chimney in the parlour beginning to smoke.  I could have torn my
hair with rage and vexation.

I seized the tongs, and was kneeling down and vigorously pushing them up
the chimney, to ascertain the cause of this last misfortune, when a loud
double-knock at the door startled me nearly out of my senses.  I had
never realised what I was in for till now!

Horror of horrors!  Who was to open the door, Mrs Nash, or I?  We had
never settled that.  And while I stood trembling amid my smoke and eel-
pie and half-boiled eggs, the knock was repeated--this time so long and
loud that it must have been heard all over the square.  I could hear
voices and laughter outside.  Some one asked, "Is this the shop?" and
another voice said, "Don't see his name on the door."

Then, terrified lest they should perpetrate another solo on the knocker,
I rushed out and opened the door myself, just as Mrs Nash, with her
face scarlet and her sleeves tucked up above the elbows, also appeared
in the passage.

They were all there; they had come down in a body.  Oh, how shabby I
felt as I saw them there with their fine clothes and free-and-easy
manners!

"Hullo! here you are!" said Doubleday.  "Found you out, then, at last.
Haven't been this way for an age, but knew it at once by the cats.
Hullo, is this your mother?  How do, Mrs Batchelor.  Glad to see you.
Allow me to introduce--"

"It's not my mother!"  I cried, with a suppressed groan, pulling his
arm.

"Eh, not your mother?--your aunt, perhaps?  How do you--"

"No, no," I whispered; "no relation."

"Not?  That's a pity!  She's a tidy-looking old body, too.  I say, where
do you stick your hats, eh?  I bag the door-handle; you hang yours on
the key, Crow.  Come on in, you fellows.  Here's a spree!"

Could anything be more distressing or humiliating?  Mrs Nash, too
indignant for words, had vanished to her own kitchen, shutting the door
behind her with an ominous slam, and here was the hall chock-full of
staring, giggling fellows, with not a place to hang their hats, and
Doubleday already the self-constituted master of the ceremonies!

I mildly suggested they had better bring their hats inside, but they
insisted on "stacking" them, as the Field-marshal called it, in pyramid
form on the hall floor; and I let them have their way.

"Come in," I faltered presently, when this little diversion appeared to
be ended.  As I led the way into the parlour my heart was in my boots
and no mistake.

They entered, all coughing very much at the smoke.  What a seedy,
disreputable hole Mrs Nash's parlour appeared at that moment!

"I'm sorry the chimney's smoking," I said, "a--a--won't you sit down?"

This invitation, I don't know why, seemed only to add to the amusement
of the party.  Daly proceeded to sit down on the floor, no chair being
near, and the Twins solemnly established themselves on the top of him.
The others sat down all round the room in silence.  What could I do?  In
my cool moments I had thought of one or two topics of conversation, but
of course they ah deserted me now.  All except the weather.

"Turned rather cold," I observed to Whipcord.

"Who?" exclaimed that worthy, with an alarmed face.

"I mean the weather's turned rather cold."

"Poor chap, pity he don't wear a top-coat."

"I say," said Doubleday, who had, to my great discomfort, been making a
tour of discovery round the room, "rather nice pictures some of these,
this one of Peace and Plenty's not half bad, is it, Whip?"

"Why you old ass, that's not Peace and Plenty, it's a Storm at Sea."

"Well, I don't care who it is, it's rattling good likenesses of them.
Hullo, Twins, don't you be going to sleep, do you hear?"

This was addressed to the two brothers, from under whom, at that moment,
Daly contrived suddenly to remove himself, leaving them to fall all of a
heap.

In the midst of the confusion caused by this accident, it occurred to me
we might as well begin supper; so I called the company to attention.

"We may as well begin," I said, "there's no one else to wait for.  Will
you take that end, Doubleday?"

"I'm game," said Doubleday.  "Now then, you fellows, tumble into your
seats, do you hear?  We're jist a-going to begin, as the conjurer says.
I can tell you all I'm pretty peckish, too."

"So am I, rather," said Crow, winking at the company generally, who all
laughed.

Awful thought!  Suppose there's not enough for them to eat after all!

I began to pour out the coffee wildly, hardly venturing to look round.
At last, however, I recollected my duties.

"That's an eel-pie in front of you, Doubleday," I said.

Now at all the parties I had been to I had never before seen an eel-pie.
I therefore flattered myself I had a novelty to offer to my guests.

"Eel-pie, eh?" said Doubleday; "do you catch them about here, then?
Eel-pie, who says eel-pie?  Don't all speak at once.  Bring forth the
hot plates, my boy, and we'll lead off."

"It's cold," I faltered.

"Oh, goodness gracious!  _Cold_ eel-pie, gentlemen.  You really must
_not_ all speak at once.  Who says cold eel-pie?  The Field-Marshal
does!"

"No, he doesn't," replied the Field-Marshal, laughing.

"Flanagan does, then?"

"No, thank you," said Flanagan.

"Well, you Twins; you with the cut on your chin.  I wish one of you'd
always cut your chin shaving, one would know you from the other.  Any
cold eel-pie?"

"Rather not," said the Twin addressed.

"Have some lobster?"  I said, despairingly.  If no one was going to take
eel-pie, it was certain my other provisions would not last round.  Why
