
"Our people--" the ten-foot, cylinder-bodied robot grated, when Rod
Rankin interrupted him.

"I don't care about your fool people," said Rankin. He squinted at the
cloud of dust getting bigger and closer beyond the wall of _kesh_ trees
that surrounded the rolling acres of his plantation. "That damned new
neighbor of mine is coming over here again."

He gestured widely, taking in the dozens of robots with their shiny,
cylindrical bodies and pipestem arms and legs laboring in his fields.
"Get all your people together and go hide in the wood, fast."

"It is not right," said the robot. "We were made to serve all."

"Well, there are only a hundred of you, and I'm not sharing you with
anybody," said Rankin.

"It is not right," the robot repeated.

"Don't talk to me about what's right," said Rankin. "You're built to
follow orders, nothing else. I know a thing or two about how you robots
work. You've got one law, to follow orders, and until that neighbor of
mine sees you to give you orders, you work for me. Now get into those
woods and hide till he goes away."

"We will go to greet those who visit us today," said the robot.

"Alright, alright, scram," said Rankin.

The robots in the fields and the one whom Rankin had been talking to
formed a column and marched off into the trackless forests behind his
plantation.

A battered old ground-car drove up a few minutes later. A tall,
broad-shouldered man with a deep tan got out and walked up the path to
Rankin's verandah.

"Hi, Barrows," said Rankin.

"Hello," said Barrows. "See your crop's coming along pretty well. Can't
figure how you do it. You've got acres and acres to tend, far's I can
see, and I'm having a hell of a time with one little piece of ground. I
swear you must know something about this planet that I don't know."

"Just scientific farming," said Rankin carelessly. "Look, you come over
here for something, or just to gab? I got a lot of work to do."

Barrows looked weary and worried. "Them brown beetles is at my crop
again," he said. "Thought you might know some way of getting rid of
them."

"Sure," said Rankin. "Pick them off, one by one. That's how I get rid of
them."

"Why, man," said Barrows, "you can't walk all over these miles and miles
of farm and pick off every one of them beetles. You must know another
