Project Gutenberg's The Machinery of the Universe, by Amos Emerson Dolbear

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Machinery of the Universe
       Mechanical Conceptions of Physical Phenomena

Author: Amos Emerson Dolbear

Release Date: July 18, 2009 [EBook #29444]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MACHINERY OF THE UNIVERSE ***




Produced by Chris Curnow, Andrew D. Hwang, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)









_THE ROMANCE OF SCIENCE_


THE MACHINERY OF THE UNIVERSE

MECHANICAL CONCEPTIONS OF
PHYSICAL PHENOMENA


BY
A. E. DOLBEAR, A.B., A.M., M.E., PH.D.

PROFESSOR OF PHYSICS AND ASTRONOMY, TUFTS COLLEGE, MASS.


PUBLISHED UNDER GENERAL LITERATURE COMMITTEE.


LONDON:
SOCIETY FOR PROMOTING CHRISTIAN KNOWLEDGE,
NORTHUMBERLAND AVENUE, W.C.;
43, QUEEN VICTORIA STREET, E.C.

BRIGHTON: 129, NORTH STREET.

NEW YORK: E. & J. B. YOUNG & CO.

1897.




PREFACE


For thirty years or more the expressions "Correlation of the Physical
Forces" and "The Conservation of Energy" have been common, yet few
persons have taken the necessary pains to think out clearly what
mechanical changes take place when one form of energy is transformed
into another.

Since Tyndall gave us his book called _Heat as a Mode of Motion_ neither
lecturers nor text-books have attempted to explain how all phenomena are
the necessary outcome of the various forms of motion. In general,
phenomena have been attributed to _forces_--a metaphysical term, which
explains nothing and is merely a stop-gap, and is really not at all
needful in these days, seeing that transformable modes of motion, easily
perceived and understood, may be substituted in all cases for forces.

In December 1895 the author gave a lecture before the Franklin Institute
of Philadelphia, on "Mechanical Conceptions of Electrical Phenomena," in
which he undertook to make clear what happens when electrical phenomena
appear. The publication of this lecture in _The Journal of the Franklin
Institute_ and in _Nature_ brought an urgent request that it should be
enlarged somewhat and published in a form more convenient for the
public. The enlargement consists in the addition of a chapter on the
"_Contrasted Properties of Matter and the Ether_," a chapter containing
something which the author believes to be of philosophical importance in
these days when electricity is so generally described as a phenomenon of
the ether.

A. E. DOLBEAR.




TABLE OF CONTENTS


CHAPTER I

Ideas of phenomena ancient and modern, metaphysical and
    mechanical--Imponderables--Forces, invented and
    discarded--Explanations--Energy, its factors, Kinetic
    and Potential--Motions, kinds and transformations
    of--Mechanical, molecular, and atomic--Invention of
    Ethers, Faraday's conceptions                            p. 7


CHAPTER II

Properties of Matter and Ether compared--Discontinuity
    _versus_ Continuity--Size of atoms--Astronomical
    distances--Number of atoms in the universe--Ether
    unlimited--Kinds of Matter, permanent qualities
    of--Atomic structure; vortex-rings, their
    properties--Ether structureless--Matter
    gravitative, Ether not--Friction in Matter, Ether
    frictionless--Chemical properties--Energy in
    Matter and in Ether--Matter as a transformer
    of Energy--Elasticity--Vibratory rates and
    waves--Density--Heat--Indestructibility of
    Matter--Inertia in Matter and in Ether--Matter
    not inert--Magnetism and Ether waves--States
    of Matter--Cohesion and chemism affected by
    temperature--Shearing stress in Solids and in
    Ether--Ether pressure--Sensation dependent upon
    Matter--Nervous system not affected by Ether
    states--Other stresses in Ether--Transformations
    of Motion--Terminology                                  p. 24


CHAPTER III

Antecedents of Electricity--Nature of what is
    transformed--Series of transformations for the
    production of light--Positive and negative
    Electricity--Positive and negative twists--Rotations
    about a wire--Rotation of an arc--Ether a
    non-conductor--Electro-magnetic waves--Induction
    and inductive action--Ether stress and atomic
    position--Nature of an electric current--Electricity
    a condition, not an entity                              p. 94




CHAPTER I

Ideas of phenomena ancient and modern, metaphysical and
    mechanical--Imponderables--Forces, invented and
    discarded--Explanations--Energy, its factors, Kinetic
    and Potential--Motions, kinds and transformations
    of--Mechanical, molecular, and atomic--Invention of
    Ethers, Faraday's conceptions.

'And now we might add something concerning a most subtle spirit
    which pervades and lies hid in all gross bodies, by the force
    and action of which spirit the particles of bodies attract
    each other at near distances, and cohere if contiguous, and
    electric bodies operate at greater distances, as well repelling
    as attracting neighbouring corpuscles, and light is emitted,
    reflected, inflected, and heats bodies, and all sensation is
    excited, and members of animal bodies move at the command of
    the will.'--NEWTON, _Principia_.


In Newton's day the whole field of nature was practically lying fallow.
No fundamental principles were known until the law of gravitation was
discovered. This law was behind all the work of Copernicus, Kepler, and
Galileo, and what they had done needed interpretation. It was quite
natural that the most obvious and mechanical phenomena should first be
reduced, and so the _Principia_ was concerned with mechanical principles
applied to astronomical problems. To us, who have grown up familiar with
the principles and conceptions underlying them, all varieties of
mechanical phenomena seem so obvious, that it is difficult for us to
understand how any one could be obtuse to them; but the records of
Newton's time, and immediately after this, show that they were not so
easy of apprehension. It may be remembered that they were not adopted in
France till long after Newton's day. In spite of what is thought to be
reasonable, it really requires something more than complete
demonstration to convince most of us of the truth of an idea, should the
truth happen to be of a kind not familiar, or should it chance to be
opposed to our more or less well-defined notions of what it is or ought
to be. If those who labour for and attain what they think to be the
truth about any matter, were a little better informed concerning mental
processes and the conditions under which ideas grow and displace others,
they would be more patient with mankind; teachers of every rank might
then discover that what is often called stupidity may be nothing else
than mental inertia, which can no more be made active by simply willing
than can the movement of a cannon ball by a like effort. We _grow_ into
our beliefs and opinions upon all matters, and scientific ideas are no
exceptions.

Whewell, in his _History of the Inductive Sciences_, says that the
Greeks made no headway in physical science because they lacked
appropriate ideas. The evidence is overwhelming that they were as
observing, as acute, as reasonable as any who live to-day. With this
view, it would appear that the great discoverers must have been men who
started out with appropriate ideas: were looking for what they found.
If, then, one reflects upon the exceeding great difficulty there is in
discovering one new truth, and the immense amount of work needed to
disentangle it, it would appear as if even the most successful have but
indistinct ideas of what is really appropriate, and that their
mechanical conceptions become clarified by doing their work. This is not
always the fact. In the statement of Newton quoted at the head of this
chapter, he speaks of a spirit which lies hid in all gross bodies, etc.,
by means of which all kinds of phenomena are to be explained; but he
deliberately abandons that idea when he comes to the study of light, for
he assumes the existence and activity of light corpuscles, for which he
has no experimental evidence; and the probability is that he did this
because the latter conception was one which he could handle
mathematically, while he saw no way for thus dealing with the other. His
mechanical instincts were more to be trusted than his carefully
calculated results; for, as all know, what he called "spirits," is what
to-day we call the ether, and the corpuscular theory of light has now no
more than a historic interest. The corpuscular theory was a mechanical
conception, but each such corpuscle was ideally endowed with qualities
which were out of all relation with the ordinary matter with which it
was classed.

Until the middle of the present century the reigning physical philosophy
held to the existence of what were called imponderables. The phenomena
of heat were explained as due to an imponderable substance called
"caloric," which ordinary matter could absorb and emit. A hot body was
one which had absorbed an imponderable substance. It was, therefore, no
heavier than before, but it possessed ability to do work proportional to
the amount absorbed. Carnot's ideal engine was described by him in terms
that imply the materiality of heat. Light was another imponderable
substance, the existence of which was maintained by Sir David Brewster
as long as he lived. Electricity and magnetism were imponderable fluids,
which, when allied with ordinary matter, endowed the latter with their
peculiar qualities. The conceptions in each case were properly
mechanical ones _part_ (but not all) _of the time_; for when the
immaterial substances were dissociated from matter, where they had
manifested themselves, no one concerned himself to inquire as to their
whereabouts. They were simply off duty, but could be summoned, like the
genii in the story of Aladdin's Lamp. Now, a mechanical conception of
any phenomenon, or a mechanical explanation of any kind of action, must
be mechanical all the time, in the antecedents as well as the
consequents. Nothing else will do except a miracle.

During the fifty years, from about 1820 to 1870, a somewhat different
kind of explanation of physical events grew up. The interest that was
aroused by the discoveries in all the fields of physical science--in
heat, electricity, magnetism and chemistry--by Faraday, Joule,
Helmholtz, and others, compelled a change of conceptions; for it was
noticed that each special kind of phenomenon was preceded by some other
definite and known kind; as, for instance, that chemical action preceded
electrical currents, that mechanical or electrical activity resulted
from changing magnetism, and so on. As each kind of action was believed
to be due to a special force, there were invented such terms as
mechanical force, electrical force, magnetic, chemical and vital forces,
and these were discovered to be convertible into one another, and the
"doctrine of the correlation of the physical forces" became a common
expression in philosophies of all sorts. By "convertible into one
another," was meant, that whenever any given force appeared, it was at
the expense of some other force; thus, in a battery chemical force was
changed into electrical force; in a magnet, electrical force was changed
into magnetic force, and so on. The idea here was the _transformation of
forces_, and _forces_ were not so clearly defined that one could have a
mechanical idea of just what had happened. That part of the philosophy
was no clearer than that of the imponderables, which had largely dropped
out of mind. The terminology represented an advance in knowledge, but
was lacking in lucidity, for no one knew what a force of any kind was.

The first to discover this and to repudiate the prevailing terminology
were the physiologists, who early announced their disbelief in a vital
force, and their belief that all physiological activities were of purely
physical and chemical origin, and that there was no need to assume any
such thing as a vital force. Then came the discovery that chemical
force, or affinity, had only an adventitious existence, and that, at
absolute zero, there was no such activity. The discovery of, or rather
the appreciation of, what is implied by the term _absolute zero_, and
especially of the nature of heat itself, as expressed in the statement
that heat is a mode of motion, dismissed another of the so-called forces
as being a metaphysical agency having no real existence, though standing
for phenomena needing further attention and explanation; and by
explanation is meant _the presentation of the mechanical antecedents for
a phenomenon, in so complete a way that no supplementary or unknown
factors are necessary_. The train moves because the engine pulls it; the
engine pulls because the steam pushes it. There is no more necessity for
assuming a steam force between the steam and the engine, than for
assuming an engine force between the engine and the train. All the
processes are mechanical, and have to do only with ordinary matter and
its conditions, from the coal-pile to the moving freight, though there
are many transformations of the forms of motion and of energy between
the two extremes.

During the past thirty years there has come into common use another
term, unknown in any technical sense before that time, namely, _energy_.
What was once called the conservation of force is now called the
conservation of energy, and we now often hear of forms of energy. Thus,
heat is said to be a form of energy, and the forms of energy are
convertible into one another, as the so-called forces were formerly
supposed to be transformable into one another. We are asked to consider
gravitative energy, heat energy, mechanical energy, chemical energy, and
electrical energy. When we inquire what is meant by energy, we are
informed that it means ability to do work, and that work is measurable
as a pressure into a distance, and is specified as foot-pounds. A mass
of matter moves because energy has been spent upon it, and has acquired
energy equal to the work done on it, and this is believed to hold true,
no matter what the kind of energy was that moved it. If a body moves, it
moves because another body has exerted pressure upon it, and its energy
is called _kinetic energy_; but a body may be subject to pressure and
not move appreciably, and then the body is said to possess potential
energy. Thus, a bent spring and a raised weight are said to possess
potential energy. In either case, _an energized body receives its energy
by pressure, and has ability to produce pressure on another body_.
Whether or not it does work on another body depends on the rigidity of
the body it acts upon. In any case, it is simply a mechanical
action--body A pushes upon body B (Fig. 1). There is no need to assume
anything more mysterious than mechanical action. Whether body B moves
this way or that depends upon the direction of the push, the point of
its application. Whether the body be a mass as large as the earth or as
small as a molecule, makes no difference in that particular. Suppose,
then, that _a_ (Fig. 2) spends its energy on _b_, _b_ on _c_, _c_ on
