that it was impossible not to feel pleased with him. Mrs. Staunton's
eyes quite beamed as she glanced at her eldest son.

"Now, mother, I am going to sit near you," he said. He drew his chair
close to his mother, and began to talk to her in a low tone.

Effie and Lawson exchanged a few words over hospital work. He would make
an enthusiastic doctor some day! he loved the profession and thought it
the noblest in the world. He reminded Effie a little of her father.

The quick hours flew all too fast. Effie's time was up. She went back to
the hospital with a curious sense of uneasiness, but equally also of
rest and refreshment. It was nice to think that George had such a good
friend as Fred Lawson.




CHAPTER XVI.


Two months passed away without any special incident. Effie's month of
trial being over, she was now established at St. Joseph's as a regular
probationer. Her salary of twelve pounds a year began from the day her
second month commenced. All those qualities which Dorothy was quite sure
that Effie possessed were coming abundantly to the fore. She had tact,
she had courage, she had nerve. She was also absolutely unselfish. Self
was not in the foreground with her; the work which she had to do, the
work which she meant to carry through in the best possible manner, in
the bravest spirit, with the most conscientious sense of duty, ever
filled her mental horizon. Sister Kate began to trust Effie. She began
to smile at her now and then, and to give her not quite so much
floor-scrubbing and grate-polishing, and a little more work to do for
the patients themselves.

The patients liked to call Effie to smooth their sheets, to turn their
pillows, to give them their drinks. One or two of them, when they had an
odd moment, began to make little confidences to her. She learned their
histories almost at a glance. She also studied their fancies; she began
to find out the exact way Mrs. Robinson liked her gruel flavored, and
how Mrs. Guiers liked her pillows arranged. Effie made no fuss over the
patients,--fuss and favoritism were strongly against the rules,--but
notwithstanding, she was a favorite herself.

More than one pair of tired eyes looked at her with longing and
refreshment as she passed, and more than one pair of wearied lips smiled
when she came near.

Two months went by in this fashion--very, very quickly, as such busy
months must. It was found impossible to allow Effie to go home every
Sunday, but she went, as a rule, every second one.

Things seemed to be going fairly straight at home. The extravagance she
had noticed on her first Sunday was not repeated to the same extent.
Mrs. Staunton seemed decidedly better, and Effie gave herself up with a
thankful heart to her work.

It was now the middle of winter, close upon Christmas-time. The weather
outside was bitterly cold, although, in the ward, Effie scarcely felt
this. She wore her neat lilac print dress just the same in winter as in
summer.

One day, about a week before Christmas, when a thick yellow fog was
shutting out all the view from the high ward windows, Effie was doing
something for No. 47, a poor, tired-looking woman of the name of Martin,
when Lawson, the young medical student, came suddenly into the ward. He
had been sent by the house physician to take notes on a certain case.
This case happened to be the very one which Effie was attending. When he
saw Effie a peculiar expression passed over his face. It was against the
strictest of all rules for the medical students ever to address a word
to the probationers; even the necessary duties required of them had to
be conveyed through a Sister or a ward nurse. Effie was helping poor No.
47 to drink a little milk and soda water. As she put the glass back in
its place, Lawson came close to her. He said abruptly:

"I am very anxious to have a conversation with you about George."

She colored crimson when he addressed her.

"Yes," she said.

"Nurse!" exclaimed Sister Kate's voice at that moment, in a harsh, sharp
tone, "go at once and make up the fire at the other end of the room."

Effie went off, trembling and disturbed.

The fact of Lawson having specially addressed her passed out of her mind
immediately, but the mention of George's name filled her with fear.

It was the first time in her hospital life that she absolutely forgot
the rules laid down for her conduct. Sister Kate, who had the eyes of a
hawk, noticed when Lawson bent over to speak to the pretty little
probationer. It was her duty to correct the faintest attempt at flirting
on the part of the probationers and medical students. She felt shocked
at Effie, who was fast becoming a favorite of hers, permitting such a
thing for a moment, and, when next Effie had anything to do for her,
quite resumed her icy manner toward her.

No. 47 required some special attention again that evening--she was
feverish, and not going on well. She called Effie to her side in an
eager voice.

"You might turn my pillow again for me, dear," she said. "You know how
to hitch it right under the small of my back, better than any of those
other nurses. There now, that's better. Stoop your head a bit, love. I
believe if you go downstairs into the hall near the surgery, you are
safe to see that young doctor; he is sure to be in the dispensary about
this time, and you might catch him when he is going out."

"Hush!" said Effie. "I know you mean kindly, but you ought not to talk
like that."

"Oh, my love, I know, I know," said the woman, with a wink. "We was all
young once--I am three-and-forty, and have never had a mate. I missed my
chance when I was young. Don't you miss yours, nurse."

Effie turned pale with indignation; but then, seeing that the woman
meant kindly, she tried to smile.

"I am very much obliged to you," she said, "but things aren't a bit the
way you think." She then went off to perform her other duties.

Sister Kate spoke to her sharply.

"Nurse," she said, "I hope you remember the rule which forbids
favoritism--I noticed that you stayed longer than was necessary with No.
47."

"She complained a good deal of her back, Sister, and I was arranging her
pillows for her."

"Don't try to deceive me," said Sister Kate. "You know perfectly well
that you did not spend all that time arranging a pillow. Now, go and
help to bring up the teas."

Effie turned to her duties with a tingling sensation in her eyes.

It was the first time since her arrival at St. Joseph's that her work
seemed almost impossible to her. Her heart quite ached with longing to
know what Lawson had meant. What had he to tell her about George? As she
thought, her fears grew greater and her memory of the hospital rules
less and less.

She determined at any risk to try and see Lawson that evening. It would
be impossible for her to venture down into the central hall of the
hospital, but she knew for certain that he would come into the ward
again late that evening.

Sister Kate would be off duty at nine o'clock, and Sister Alice, the
night superintendent, was not nearly so strict. Effie hovered about near
the door; she knew she was disobeying rules, for she ought to have gone
to bed soon after nine o'clock. No one noticed her, however. The night
nurses were all busy taking up their different duties, and Sister Alice
was talking to the house physician at the farther end of the ward.

Suddenly Effie, standing near one of the doors, saw Lawson coming
upstairs; she ran to him without a moment's hesitation. "What have you
to tell me about George?" she said.

He colored, and looked almost annoyed when she spoke to him.

"I cannot tell you here," he said in a hasty voice. "Are you going home
next Sunday?"

"No; it's my Sunday in--unless I could get one of the other probationers
to change with me."

"I wish you would manage to do that; I really want to see you very
badly. If you'll go home on Sunday, I'll call in the course of the
afternoon, and then I can walk back with you to the hospital. Now, go at
once--you must not be seen talking to me."

Effie flew down the corridor to her own little room.

That night she could scarcely sleep; she felt oppressed with all kinds
of forebodings. The idea of her having broken one of the rules, and, in
fact, laid herself open to dismissal, never once entered into her head.

She was still the faithful nurse--the earnest-minded, gentle, good girl,
who would give up her whole life to the alleviation of the sufferings of
others. The fact of Effie having a dual life, of having a nature which
could not forget the old home ties, was not likely, however, to be
recognized in the hospital.

The next morning at breakfast she noticed that one or two of the
probationers giggled a little when they saw her. She sat down in her
usual seat, and one of the girls nudged her elbow.

"Well," she said, "you're no better than the rest of us."

"What in the world do you mean?" said Effie, coloring scarlet.

"Oh, don't be so sly!" said the girl, with a poke which she intended to
make playful. "He is a very good-looking young fellow, too; only, if you
don't want to get into mischief, don't let Sister Kate see it."

"I know what you mean," said Effie in a steady voice; "but you are
altogether mistaken. I scarcely know Mr. Lawson; he only spoke to me
yesterday because he happened to be a great friend of my brother's."

"Oh, the usual thing," laughed the girl. "It's so very convenient to
have brothers; is it not, Lucy?"

The girl addressed as Lucy grinned, and Effie felt very uncomfortable.

At dinner that day, it suddenly passed through her mind that she must,
by hook or by crook, induce one of the probationers to change Sundays
with her. Lucy was usually a good-natured girl. Her people did not live
in town; as a rule she spent her Sundays out with her aunt-in-law.
Effie went up to her when she had a moment to spare.

"Lucy," she said, "I wish you would do something for me."

"To be sure I will, Effie," she replied--"anything in my power."

"I want to go home very badly next Sunday; do you think it would be
possible for me to change with you?"

"Heigh-ho!" said Lucy, "You want to meet Mr. Lawson; I know your sly
little ways."

"No, indeed, it is not true," began Effie; but then she stopped, for she
knew it was true. She would meet him. "Oh, how little Lucy knows the
burden that is pressing on me!" thought the poor girl.

Tears suddenly rose to her pretty brown eyes.

"I cannot explain things to you," she said; "I would if I could. You
must believe in me and trust me. I have a great deal of anxiety. Oh, it
has nothing to do with the hospital; it is about my home life. There is
a great burden laid upon me. I want very much to go home on Sunday.
Indeed, Mr. Lawson has little to do with the real burden, only I believe
he can tell me something."

"I know you are a good girl," began Lucy, who became grave on the spot.
"Of course you shall take my turn if Sister Kate will allow it."




CHAPTER XVII.


Sister Kate made no objection, and Effie hurried home in a state of
excitement which she could scarcely restrain. Mrs. Staunton did not
expect her, and the poor girl felt her heart sink low in her breast when
she saw that her unexpected arrival scarcely gave satisfaction. There
was a nice white cloth on the table, and a large bunch of flowers in a
pretty cut-glass jug stood in the center. An attempt at dessert again
graced the board, and Effie noticed that a bottle of sherry and a bottle
of port stood on the little sideboard.

She felt a sense of dismay.

"Even mother is beginning to keep things from me," she said to herself.
"It is all George, of course! They did not expect me home to-day, so
they are having a particularly good dinner. Is it possible that even
mother would try to deceive me? Oh, dear, dear! how changed all our life
is, now that father is no longer here!"

There had never been the faintest shadow of concealment about the honest
doctor, and while with her husband Mrs. Staunton was the most
straightforward woman imaginable; but, alas! her character was a weak
one--she was now completely under George's influence, and George had
learned to walk in those crooked paths which those who begin to do wrong
are always tempted to follow.

He came in presently, looking particularly handsome and manly. He had on
a nice new coat; and his beautifully got-up collar showed off his fresh
young face to the best possible advantage.

Mrs. Staunton called him up at once for Effie to criticise.

"Doesn't he look well in a white silk tie?" she said. "I like white ties
better than colored ones for him, and they are not so expensive either,
for I can wash them myself."

"I wonder all that washing does not fag you, mother," said Effie.

Before Mrs. Staunton could reply, Mrs. Robinson appeared with the
dinner, and the family sat down to an excellent meal.

Effie saw quite plainly that it would be useless for her to attempt to
expostulate. Mrs. Staunton, after her first start of unconcealed dismay,
was very affectionate to her daughter. She told Effie that she thought
she looked a little pale, and wondered whether all that nursing was not
too much for her.

"No, mother, I love the work," said Effie.

"But that is not the question, my love," said Mrs. Staunton, shaking her
head. "The question is this: is it undermining your health?"

"Well, in any case I should have to earn my living," said Effie. "I
could not possibly afford to do nothing at home. As well earn it as a
nurse as in any other way, and I love nursing beyond anything else in
the world."

"You always were an obstinate dear little girl, was she not, George?
But, after all, Effie----" Here Mrs. Staunton paused and looked at her
son. "I think I might tell Effie?" she said, giving him a bright nod.

"Oh, I don't suppose there is anything to make a fuss over," replied
George. He colored as he spoke, and looked out of the window. He could
easily hoodwink his mother, but it was difficult to meet Effie's clear
eyes and not to feel sure that she was reading him through, and seeing
him as he really was.

Agnes jumped up, saying it was full time to go to Sunday school; she
carried off the children with her, and George, his mother, and Effie
were alone.

"Sit down in your usual chair, George," said his mother. He did so,
bringing up the port wine as he spoke, and pouring out a glass, which he
insisted on his mother drinking. He tossed off one or two glasses
himself, after which his eyes grew bright and steady, and a color came
into his cheeks.

"Yes, tell Effie," he said.

"I think you might do so, George; I am so proud of you."

"No, mother. I like to hear you describing me; you make me feel such an
awfully fine fellow."

George laughed as he spoke.

"Well, then, Effie," said his mother, "you will in future learn to
appreciate our dear George as he deserves. The fact is this: he has just
got a rise in his salary of a whole hundred a year. George is now
earning two hundred a year; and he has arranged, dear fellow, to give me
one hundred a year, in order that I may have those little comforts which
he thinks I require."

"Is that really true?" said Effie, coloring. "Oh, what splendid news!"
She looked eagerly at George as she spoke. She longed to jump up, throw
her arms round his neck, and kiss him.

"Is this true?" she repeated. "Oh, I am so glad! We do want the money so
badly."

George stooped to flick off a speck of dust which had settled on his
immaculate shirt-cuff; his eyes would not meet Effie's.

"Of course it is true," he said in a bravado sort of voice. "You don't
suppose I would tell mother a lie, do you?"

"Oh, Effie! how could you doubt him?" said Mrs. Staunton, almost crying.

"No, mother, I don't doubt him," Effie replied. She walked to the
window. Her momentary pleasure was over; she knew, just as well as if
George had told her, that the whole thing was a fabrication. If he had
more money, he was not getting it in his situation. His look, his
attitude, joined to the few words Lawson had said to her, made Effie
