
If such a woman came to life in Hercules' arms would you like the job of
stopping him from sending the world crashing? Would you care to try?

Don't you see? Larsen was closer to us than breathing and as necessary
as food and drink and our dreams of a brighter tomorrow. Don't think we
didn't hate him at times. Don't think we didn't curse and revile him.
You may glorify a legend from here to eternity, but the luster never
remains completely untarnished.

Larsen wouldn't have seemed completely real to us if we hadn't given him
muscles that could tire and eyes that could blink shut in weariness.
Larsen had to sleep, just as we did. He'd disappear for days.

We'd wink and say, "Larsen's getting a good long rest this time. But
he'll be back with something new up his sleeve, don't you worry!"

We could joke about it, sure. When Larsen stole or cheated we could
pretend we were playing a game with loaded dice--not really a deadly
game, but a game full of sound and fury with a great rousing outburst of
merriment at the end of it.

But there are deadlier games by far. I lay motionless, my arms locked
across my chest, sweating from every pore. I stared at Harry. We'd been
working all night digging a well, and in a few days water would be
bubbling up sweet and cool and we wouldn't have to go to the canal to
fill our cooking utensils. Harry was blinking and stirring and I could
tell just by looking at him that he was uneasy too. I looked beyond him
at the circle of shacks.

Most of us were sleeping in the open, but there were a few youngsters in
the shacks and women too worn out with drudgery to care much whether
they slept in smothering darkness or under the clear cold light of the
stars.

I got slowly to my knees, scooped up a handful of sand, and let it
dribble slowly through my fingers. Harry looked straight at me and his
eyes widened in alarm. It must have been the look on my face. He arose
and crossed to where I was sitting, his mouth twitching slightly. There
was nothing very reassuring about Harry. Life had not been kind to him
and he had resigned himself to accepting the slings and arrows of
outrageous fortune without protest. He had one of those emaciated,
almost skull-like faces which terrify children, and make women want to
cry.

"You don't look well, Tom," he said. "You've been driving yourself too
hard."

I looked away quickly. I had to tell him, but anything terrifying could
demoralize Harry and make him throw his arm before his face in blind
panic. But I couldn't keep it locked up inside me an instant longer.

"Sit down, Harry," I whispered. "I want to talk to you. No sense in
waking the others."

"Oh," he said.

He squatted beside me on the sand, his eyes searching my face. "What is
it, Tom?"

"I heard a scream," I said. "It was pretty awful. Somebody has been
hurt--bad. It woke me up, and that takes some doing."

Harry nodded. "You sleep like a log," he said.

"I just lay still and listened," I said, "with my eyes wide open.
Something moved out from the well--a two-legged something. It didn't
make a sound. It was big, Harry, and it seemed to melt into the shadows.
I don't know what kept me from leaping up and going after it. It had
something to do with the way I felt. All frozen up inside."

Harry appeared to understand. He nodded, his eyes darting toward the
well. "How long ago was that?"

"Ten--fifteen minutes."

"You just waited for me to wake up?"

"That's right," I said. "There was something about the scream that made
me want to put off finding out. Two's company--and when you're alone
with something like that it's best to talk it over before you act."

I could see that Harry was pleased. Unnerved too, and horribly shaken.
But he was pleased that I had turned to him as a friend I could trust.
When you can't depend on life for anything else it's good to know you
have a friend.

I brushed sand from my trousers and got up. "Come on," I said. "We'll
take a look."

It was an ordeal for him. His face twitched and his eyes wavered. He
knew I hadn't lied about the scream. If a single scream could unnerve me
that much it had to be bad.

We walked to the well in complete silence. There were shadows
everywhere, chill and forbidding. Almost like people they seemed,
whispering together, huddling close in ominous gossipy silence, aware of
what we would find.

It was a sixty-foot walk from the fire to the well. A walk in the sun--a
walk in the bright hot sun of Mars, with utter horror perhaps at the end
of it.

The horror was there. Harry made a little choking noise deep in his
throat, and my heart started pounding like a bass drum.


II

The man on the sand had no top to his head. His skull had been crushed
and flattened so hideously that he seemed like a wooden figure resting
there--an anatomical dummy with its skull-case lifted off.

We looked around for the skull-case, hoping we'd find it, hoping we'd
made a mistake and stumbled by accident into an open-air dissecting
laboratory and were looking at ghastly props made of plastic and
glittering metal instead of bone and muscle and flesh.

But the man on the sand had a name. We'd known him for weeks and talked
to him. He wasn't a medical dummy, but a corpse. His limbs were
hideously convulsed, his eyes wide and staring. The sand beneath his
head was clotted with dried blood. We looked for the weapon which had
crushed his skull but couldn't find it.

We looked for the weapon before we saw the footprints in the sand. Big
they were--incredibly large and massive. A man with a size-twelve shoe
might have left such prints if the leather had become a little soggy and
spread out around the soles.

"The poor guy," Harry whispered.

I knew how he felt. We had all liked Ned. A harmless little guy with a
