nothing was in sight. It was like a beautiful summer's day, save for the
strange lights, shifting and changing. But the travelers had become
somewhat used to them by this time.

The professor turned the valve that allowed the gas to enter the holder.
There was a hissing sound and a sort of trembling throughout the entire
ship. The dynamos were whizzing away and the negative gravity machine
was all ready to start.

For several minutes the travelers waited until the big lifting tank was
filled with the strong vapor. They watched the gages which indicated the
pressure to be several hundred pounds.

"I think we can chance it now," remarked Mr. Henderson, as he threw over
several levers. "We'll try, at any rate."

With a tremor the _Mermaid_ left the surface of the inner earth and went
sailing upward toward the--well it wasn't exactly the sky, but it was
what corresponded to it in the new world, though there were no clouds
and no blue depths such as the boys were used to. At all events the
_Mermaid_ was flying again, and, as the adventurers felt themselves
being lifted up they gave a spontaneous cheer at the success which had
crowned their efforts.

The ship went up several hundred feet, and then, the professor, having
brought her to a stop, sent her ahead at a slow pace. He wanted to be
sure all the apparatus was in good working order before he tried any
speed.

The _Mermaid_ responded readily. Straight as an arrow through the air
she flew.

"Well, this is almost as good as being on the regular earth!" exclaimed
Jack.

"It's better," put in Mark. "We haven't seen half the wonders yet. Let's
open the floor shutter, and see how it looks down below."

He and Jack went to the room where there was an opening in the floor of
the ship, covered by heavy glass. They slid back the steel shutter and
there, down below them, was the strange new world they had come to,
stretched out like some big map.

They could see mountains, forests, plains, and rivers, the water
sparkling in the colored light. Over green fields they flew, then across
some stretches where only sand and rocks were to be seen. Faster and
faster the ship went, as the professor found the machinery was once more
in perfect order. Jack was idly watching the play of tinted lights over
the surface of the ground.

"I wonder what makes it," he said.

"I have tried to account for it in several ways," said the professor,
who had called Washington to the conning tower and come to join the
boys. "I have had first one theory and then another, but the one I am
almost sure is correct is that hidden volcanic fires cause the
illumination.

"I think they flare up and die away, and have become so regular that
they produce the same effect as night and day with us. Probably the
fires go out for lack of fuel, and when it is supplied they start up
again. Perhaps it is a sort of gas that they burn."

"Well, it's queer enough, whatever it is," Jack remarked. "What strikes
me as funny, though, is that we haven't seen a single person since we
came here. Surely this place must be inhabited."

Mark thought of the strange shadow he had seen, but said nothing.

"I believe it is," the professor answered. "We will probably come upon
the inhabitants soon. I only hope they are a people who will do us no
harm."

"If they tried any of their tricks we could mount up in our ship and
escape them," said Andy.

"Provided they gave us the chance," Mr. Henderson put in. "Well, we'll
not worry about that now."

For several hours the ship traveled on, until it had come to a different
sort of country. It was wilder and not so level, and there were a number
of streams and small lakes to be seen.

"Are you going to sail all night?" asked Jack.

"No," replied the professor. "I think we'll descend very soon now, and
camp out for a while. That lake just ahead seems to offer a good place,"
and he pointed to a large sheet of water that sparkled in the distance,
for by this time they had all gone back to the conning tower.

The lake was in the midst of a wood that extended for some distance on
all sides, and was down in a sort of valley. The ship headed toward it,
and in a short time a landing was made close to shore.

"Maybe we can have some fresh fish for supper," exclaimed Jack as he ran
from the ship as soon as the sliding door in the side was opened. "Looks
as if that lake had some in it. It is not thick water like in that
stream we stopped at," he added.

"I believe you're right," old Andy put in, as he turned back to look for
some lines and hooks among his traps. He soon found what he wanted, and
gave them to the boys, taking his trusty gun along for himself.

While the professor, Washington, Tom and Bill remained behind to make
some adjustments to the machinery, and to get things in shape for the
night, which, they calculated would soon be upon them, Jack, Mark and
Andy went down to the shore of the lake. The boys cut some poles from
the trees, and baiting the hooks with some fat worms found under the
bark, threw in.

"Let's see who'll get the first bite," spoke Jack. "I'm pretty generally
lucky at fishing."

"Well, while you're waiting to decide that there contest, I think I'll
take a stroll along shore and see if I can see anything to shoot," Andy
remarked.

For several minutes the boys sat in silence on the bank of the lake,
watching the play of the vari-colored lights on the water. Suddenly Jack
felt a quiver on his line, and his pole began to shake.

"I've got something!" he cried. Then his pole bent almost double and he
began to pull for all he was worth. "It's a whopper!" he cried. "Come
and help me, Mark!"

Mark ran to his friend's aid. Whatever was on the other end of the line
was strong enough to tax the muscles of both boys. They could hear the
pole beginning to break. But for the excellent quality of Andy's line
that would have parted some time before.

All at once there came a sudden slacking of the pull from whatever was
in the water. And so quickly did it cease that both boys went over
backward in a heap.

"He's got away!" cried Jack, getting up and brushing some of the dirt
from his clothes.

"There's something that didn't get away!" cried Mark, who had risen to
his knees, and was pointing at the lake. Jack looked and what he saw
made him almost believe he was dreaming.

For, emerging from the water, dragging the pole and line the boys had
dropped along with it, was a most curious creature. It was a big fish,
but a fish with four short legs on which it was walking, or rather
waddling along as much as a duck, with a double supply of feet, might
do.

"Say, do I see that or is there something the matter with my eyes?" sung
out Jack, making ready to run away.

"It's there all right!" exclaimed Mark. "Hi! Andy! Here's something to
shoot!" he yelled, for indeed the creature was big enough to warrant
attack with a gun. It was about five feet long and two feet through.

On and on it came, straight at the boys, as if to have revenge for the
pain the fish hook must have caused it, for the barb could be seen
dangling from its lip. On and on it came, waddling forward, the water
dripping from it at every step. It had the body and general shape of a
fish, save that the tail was rather large in proportion. As it came
nearer the boys noted that the feet were webbed, like those of a water
fowl.

"Come on!" cried Jack. "It may attack us!"

At that moment the creature opened its mouth, showing a triple row of
formidable teeth, and gave utterance to a sort of groan and grunt
combined.

This was enough to send Jack and Mark off on a run up the bank, and did
they stop until they heard Andy's voice hailing them.

"What's the matter, boys?"

"Come here! Quick!" answered Jack.

The fish-animal had halted and seemed to be taking an observation. To do
this, as it could not turn its neck, it had to shift its whole body. Old
Andy came up on the run, his gun held in readiness.

"Where is it?" he asked, and the boys pointed silently.

The hunter could not repress a start of astonishment as he saw the
strange creature. But he did not hesitate a second. There was a crack of
the rifle, and the thing, whatever it was, toppled over, dead.

Andy hurried up to it, to get a closer view.

"Well, this is the limit!" he exclaimed. "First we have grasshoppers
that can roll peaches as big as hogsheads, and now we come across fish
that walk. I wonder what we will see next."

"I don't want to go fishing in this lake any more," spoke Jack, as he
looked at the repulsive creature. "I never want to eat fish any more."

"Same here," agreed Mark, and old Andy was of the opinion that the thing
killed would not make a wholesome dish for the table.

"There don't seem to be any game in this section," he remarked. "Not a
sign could I see, nor have I since we have been here, unless you count
those grasshoppers. But the fruit is good, I'll say that."

"Come on, we'd better be getting back," Mark said, as he noticed it was
getting dark. "I'm hungry."




                              CHAPTER XXII

                             THE SNAKE-TREE


They managed to make a good meal of the food supplies they had brought
along, and as a dessert Washington made some peach short-cake from the
slices of the giant fruit they had found the day before. Just as they
finished supper it got very dark, but, in about an hour, the moonbeams,
as the travelers called them, came up, and illuminated the lake with a
weird light.

As the machinery of the _Mermaid_ was now in working order there was no
further alarm because of the darkness. The ship rested on a level keel
about a hundred yards back from the lake, and, seeing that all was snug,
and the fastenings secure, the travelers went to bed.

Though they had to forego fish for breakfast the travelers made a good
meal. After seeing that the ship was in readiness for a quick start, the
professor suggested they take a walk around and see what sort of country
they might be in now.

They tramped on for several miles, meeting with no adventures, and
seeing nothing out of the ordinary. It was a pleasant day, just warm
enough to be comfortable, and a little wind was blowing through the
trees.

"It would be almost like home if it wasn't for the strange lights, and
the memory of the queer things here," said Jack. "I feel fine. Let's see
if you can hit that dead tree over there, Mark."

Jack stooped to grab up a stone, but no sooner had his fingers touched
it than he called out:

"There! I forgot all about the stones here being heavier than lead.
Guess we can't throw any of 'em. But come on. I'll race you to the dead
tree!"

Mark was willing, so the two boys set off at a fast pace.

"Look out where you're going!" the professor called after them. "No
telling what may be in those woods," for the boys were approaching a
little glade, on the edge of which the dead tree stood.

Jack reached the goal first, and stood leaning against the trunk,
waiting for Mark.

"You'd better practice sprinting!" exclaimed the victor.

Mark was about to excuse himself for his poor showing, on the plea of
having eaten too much breakfast, when to his horror he saw what seemed
to be a long thin snake spring out from the branches of a near-by tree
and twine itself about Jack.

"Help me! Save me!" cried the unfortunate boy, as he was lifted high
into the air and pulled within the shadow of the wood.

For an instant Mark was too horror-stricken to move. Then with a shout
that alarmed the others, who were coming along more slowly, he made a
dash for the place he had last seen Jack.

Had old Andy not been on the watch, with those keen eyes of his, there
might have been a double tragedy. He had seen from afar the sudden
snatching up of Jack, and noted Mark's rush to save his chum.

"Stand still! Don't go in there for your life!" yelled the hunter, at
the same time running forward with gun ready.

His example was followed by the professor, Washington and the other two
men.

"A snake has Jack!" called Mark, when Andy was at his side.

"No! It's not a snake!" replied the hunter. "It's worse. It's the
snake-tree!"

"What's that?" asked Mr. Henderson, hurrying up.

"The snake-tree has Jack," the hunter went on. "It is a plant, half
animal, half-vegetable. It has long branches, not unlike a snake in
shape. They can move about and grab things."

"One of them got a grip on Jack as he leaned against the dead tree
trunk. I just caught a glimpse of it, and called to prevent Mark from
running into danger."

"Can't we save him?" asked Mr. Henderson.

"I'm going to try!" replied Andy. "Quick! Gather up some pieces of dry
wood. I have some paper, and my pipe lighter. We must fight the
snake-tree with fire!"




                             CHAPTER XXIII

                          THE DESERTED VILLAGE


Jack's cries were growing fainter and fainter. Peering in through the
branches of the dead tree the professor could see the whip-like limbs
winding closer and closer about the boy.

"I am afraid we will be too late!" he said.

Andy had twisted some paper into a rude torch. He set fire to it with
his pocket lighter, and, when Bill and Mark brought him some little
pieces of dead wood the old hunter added them to his bundle, which was
now blazing brightly.

"How are you going to do it?" asked the professor.

"I'll show you," replied Andy. He bound the sticks and paper together
with wisps of grass and then, when it was so hot he could hardly hold it
longer, he ran as close as he dared to the snake-tree and tossed the
torch at the foot of it.

The blazing bundle fell among some damp leaves and grass, as Andy had
intended it should, and soon a dense smoke arose, pouring straight up
through the branches of the animal-tree, the limbs of which were
gathered in a knot about the half-unconscious form of the boy.

For a few minutes they all waited anxiously. Would Andy's trick succeed?
Had the terrible tree not already squeezed the life from Jack?

But, while they watched, there seemed to come a change over the tree.
The snake-like arms waved less and less. They seemed to straighten out,
as though deprived of power by the smoke which was now so dense as to
hide Jack from sight. Then the arms suddenly relaxed and something
rolled from them and fell to the ground. With a quick movement Andy
darted in, crawling on his hands and knees beneath the limbs, and
brought Jack out. The boy was white and his eyes were closed.

"Get some water!" cried the old hunter.

Mark ran toward a stream a little distance away. He brought some of the
curiously thick liquid in his hat, and while Andy held the boy the
professor sprinkled some of the drops on his face, and forced some
between his lips. In a little while Jack's eyes slowly opened.

