"I am no outsider.  I've known your mother for years.  I might
have married her, instead of your father doing so, if he hadn't
played an underhanded trick which--"

"Stop, Sir. You shall not say a word against my father."

"Good for Dora!" thought Dick.  "She's the right kind."

"Your mother is quite willing to marry me, and as a dutiful
daughter you should bow to her wishes."

"Mother is not herself, Mr. Crabtree.  Ever since father died she
has been upset by business matters, and you have pestered the life
out of her.  If you would only go away for a month or so and give
her time to think it over, I am sure she would end this matter
between you."

"Tut, tut, child, you do not know what you are talking about!
Your mother has given me her word, and you ought to bow to the
inevitable."

"She has not yet married you, Sir, and until she is actually bound
to you there will still be hope for her."

"This is--is outrageous!" cried Josiah Crabtree wrathfully.  "Do
you think I will allow a mere slip of a girl to stand between me
and my plans?  Just wait until I am your father--"

"You shall never take the place of my dear dead father, Mr.
Crabtree--never!" and now Dora's eyes filled with tears.  "He was
ten thousand times better than you can ever be!"

"I must admit I can't see it.  He had not half the education I
possess," answered Josiah Crabtree conceitedly.

"Perhaps not, but he had an honest, warm heart, and that counts
for more than a mere book education.  I fancy many men are
smarter, even in book learning, than Mr. Josiah Crabtree; who
tried last week for an opening at Columbia College and failed to
meet the requirements."

"Ha! who told you that?"

"Mother told me."

"She is foolish to take you into her confidence.  It was not my
fault that I failed of the opening--merely the pig-headedness of
those having the matter in charge.  However, I do not care much.
As soon as your mother and I are married, I shall make some
changes here, put up a fine brick building, and open a rival
school to Putnam Hall."

"Gracious, here is news!" thought Dick.  "Wonder what Captain
Putnam will say to that?"

"Will you?" ejaculated Dora.  "And who will give you permission to
make alterations here?"

"Mrs. Crabtree--that is soon to be."

"Do you know that she holds this property in a trust for me, Mr.
Crabtree?  It will be hers only if I die before I become of age.
Her own shares of papa's estate is situated further up the lake,
at Berryport."

At this announcement Josiah Crabtree started back.  "You--you
are not telling the truth," he faltered.

"I am."

"But your mother is the executrix of your father's will."

"Yes."

"Exactly.  Consequently she has full control of all the property
until you are twenty-one."

"She has--but certain changes suggested by you or her would be
subject to the approval of the court or the surrogate, so I have
been told," answered Dora quietly.

Josiah Crabtree glared at the girl, and then began to pace the
floor impatiently.  "Dora, see here," he said finally.  "Let us
come to terms."

"What terms?"

"Your mother and I are bound to get married.  Remove your
opposition to this, and I will promise not to interfere with you
in the least.  You can do as you please and go where you please,
and you shall have all the spending money from time to time that
the estate can afford."

At this the girl's lip curled proudly. "I do not thank you for
your offer, Mr. Crabtree.  The whole difficulty is just here--I
do not like you; and my mother shall never marry you so long as I
can prevent it."

"You--you saucy minx!" he snarled and leaping around the table caught
her by the wrist again. "I'll tame you before I am done with you, mark
my words! If you dare to talk to your mother again--Hullo, who is
this?"

"Dick Rover!" cried Dora in amazement and in delight.

For Dick had suddenly thrown up the window sash, which was
unlocked, and leaped straight into the sitting room.

"Let her go, Josiah Crabtree!" ordered the young cadet.  "Don't
you dare to strike her, or I'll knock you flat!"

"One of the Rover boys!" muttered the ex-teacher.  "What business
have you here at this hour of the evening?  Have you run away from
the Hall?"

"Since you have been discharged, I do not feel called upon to
answer your question," answered Dick.  "But you must let Dora
alone, or there will be a broken head around here, I can tell you
that!"

At Dick's plain words Josiah Crabtree greatly paled.  He had
dropped the girl's wrist and now he fell back several steps.

"I was not harming the girl, only trying to reason with her."

"Oh, I know you well enough.  I've heard you were the most
pigheaded teacher they ever had at Putnam Hall," rejoined Dick
warmly.  "I shall take pains to let Mrs. Stanhope know what they
think of you, too."

"Was he discharged?" asked Dora.  "He told mamma that he had left
of his own accord."

"He was discharged," answered Dick, who had got word through Peleg
Snuggers.

"It is not true!" stormed Josiah Crabtree.  "This is a--a plot
to injure me in the eyes of Mrs. Stanhope, and you shall pay
dearly for it, boy!" and he shook his fist in Dick's face.

"Don't do that again, Mr. Crabtree, or we may have a set-to right
here--begging Dora's pardon," answered Dick, his eyes flashing
fire.

"That's all right--don't give in an inch to him, Dick,"
whispered Dora.  "I hate him--oh, more than words can tell!" and
she caught the youth's arm.

"I am not afraid of you, boy!" was the short return, but now the
ex-teacher turned to the hallway.  "I was on the point of leaving,
and now I will go, Dora.  But I will be back in a day or two," and
he strode from the room.  A moment later he had secured his hat
and overcoat and taken his departure.

"Oh, what a dreadful man!" sobbed Dora, when he was gone.  "Dick
Rover, what shall I do?"  and she looked at him pleadingly.

"It's a puzzle to me, Dora--worse than an example in cube root
in algebra!" He smiled sadly.  "But if I was you I'd hold out and
never let him marry my mother."

"Oh, I will never consent to that--never!  But he may marry her
anyway."

"If he does, you can apply to the courts for another guardian--if
Crabtree doesn't treat you fairly."

"But I do not wish to separate from my mother."

"Well, the only thing to do is to keep fighting him off.  In the
meantime I'll try to get some folks who know Crabtree well to tell
your mother just what a mean, crabbed fellow he is.  Undoubtedly
he is after the money your father left."

"So I always supposed--but mother does not think so."

"How is your mother?"

"She is doing nicely, and may be out in a week or two.  I am
keeping her in as long as possible, so that Josiah Crabtree cannot
argue her into going off and getting married."

"You certainly have your hands full, Dora," answered the young
cadet.  "I wish I could take this burden off your shoulders,
indeed I do!" and impulsively he caught up her plump, hand and
kissed it.

"Oh!"  She snatched the hand away and blushed prettily, but was not
angry.  "I--I--;  it's something to know one has a friend,
Dick," she said softly.  "Can I come to you if I--that is if I
want something done?"

"To be sure, Dora--I'll do anything in the wide world for you
there!" and he kissed her hand again.

At that moment an elderly lady who had been hired to wait on Mrs.
Stanhope came in, and the conversation was changed.  Dora asked
about life at the Hall, and Dick told of the football game and of
the parts Tom and Sam had played in it.

"You are a great set of boys!" Dora smiled.

"I wish I had a couple of sisters."

"You have your two cousins, Nellie and Grace."

"Yes, but they are not as intimate as sisters would be--although
they are the best of cousins."

"What does Mr. Laning say of Crabtree?" Dick whispered, as the
nurse left the room for a moment.

"Uncle does not like him, but he says the whole matter is none of
his affair--and mother must do as she thinks best."

It was now growing late, and Dick took his departure, kissing
Dora's hand a third time as they stood in the darkness of the
porch.  "You're terrible!" she murmured, but it is doubtful if she
meant anything by it.  Girls and boys are about the same the world
over and Dick's regard for Dora was of the manly sort that is
creditable to anybody.




CHAPTER XVIII

WINTER SPORTS


"Hurrah, boys, the ice is forming just as fast as it can!  We'll
have skating in twenty-four hours!"

It was Sam who came rushing into the gymnasium with the news.  The
place was crowded at the time, for it was too cold to play on the
grounds outside.

"Skating!" cried Tom.  "That just suits me.  I wonder if I brought
my skates along?"

"You didn't," answered Sam.  "Neither did I."

"I have my skates," said Fred Garrison.  "Brand new pair."

"My skates were old," said Tom.  "I must strike Captain Putnam for
a couple of dollars of my allowance and buy a new pair."

"So must I!" put in Sam.  "Dick, I know, has his skates."

It was early in December, and it had been growing colder steadily.
There had been one fall of snow, but it had amounted to but
little.

The next day skating in the cove of the lake near Putnam Hall was
excellent, the ice being from three to four inches thick.  At once
Sam and Tom went to Captain Putnam.

"Want to buy some skates?" said the captain.  "Well, the money I
am keeping is your own, and I presume every boy likes to skate.
Here are two dollars for each of you.  Show me your purchases when
you get back."

"We will," replied the lads, and hurried off, for time was
precious, with the smooth ice waiting for them.  They knew that a
certain hardware dealer in Cedarville had a good quantity of
skates on hand, and started to walk to the village without delay.

"Baxter is going to buy a pair of skates, too," said Sam, on the
way.  "I heard him telling Mumps about it."

"Well, we don't want Baxter for company," answered Tom.  "He can
go alone."

It did not take the lads long to reach Cedarville, but once at the
hardware store considerable time was lost in getting just the
skates desired.

"It's queer Baxter hasn't shown up," said Tom, when they were
ready to leave.

"Perhaps he went elsewhere for his skates," suggested Sam.

The hardware shop was at the end of the village street, and as
they passed a number of places of business Tom suddenly caught his
brother by the arm.

"There is Baxter now--just entering that tavern!" he exclaimed
in a low voice.

"The tavern!" repeated Sam.  "Why, it's against the regulations to
enter a drinking place!"

"I don't care--I saw Baxter go in," returned Tom.  "He was with
a tall man."

"If Captain Putnam hears of this, Baxter will be sent away, or at
least punished."

"Perhaps, Sam; but I shan't tell him."

"No; we're no tale-bearers.  Let us go up to the side windows of
the tavern and see if we can see them."

This was agreed to, and the two boys hurried up to first one
window and then another.

"They are not in the saloon part, that's certain," said Tom
blankly.  "But I saw Baxter go in, and the tall man with him."

"Here is a side room," answered Sam.

"And there they are, at a corner table.  The man is giving Baxter
some money!"

Tom peeped into the window over his brother's shoulder.  "My
gracious!"

"What's up now, Tom?"

"That tall man is the same fellow I met in the woods.  The man
that was with the tramp who stole the watch!"

"You don't mean it!"

"But I do!  See the scar on his chin?"

"Yes."

"He is that thief's pal, as they call it."

"And he just gave Baxter some bank bills!  What does it mean?"

"I give it up.  But I know one thing--that man ought to be
arrested!"

"That's true.  Oh! they have seen us!  If they--hi! what do you
mean by that?"

For a burly bartender had suddenly come up behind both of the boys
and hurled them backward.

"No spying around this place!" cried the dispenser of liquors
roughly.  "Take yourselves off!"

"There is a man inside I want to see," said Tom.

"Why don't you come in, then?"

"I will--as soon as I can find a policeman or a constable."

"What! going to have a gent arrested?"

"The man inside knows all about a stolen watch."

"You must be mistaken."

"No, I am not.  Where can I find a policeman?"

"Down at the steamboat landing, most likely."

"All right.  Sam, you stay here and see that that fellow don't
make tracks," and Tom prepared to move away.

"See here, we don't want any trouble in our place," said the
barkeeper.  "We run a respectable house, we do."

"Then you ought to help me bag the pal of a thief," retorted Tom.

"Hold on, Tom!" came from Sam.  "They're gone!  They slipped
through a back door!"

Tom ran up to the window again.  It was true Baxter and the man
with a scar had disappeared.

"Come on back!" he cried to his brother, and both ran to the rear
of the tavern. Here there was a yard, at the end of which stood a
barn and a long, low carriage shed.  Only a negro hostler was in
sight.

"Perhaps they haven't come out yet," began Sam, when he caught
sight of a buggy on a road behind the barn.  It was going at a
furious rate, the scarred man driving, and lashing his mettlesome
horse at the same time.

"There goes the man!"

"That's so. Where is Baxter?"

"I don't know."

They ran after the buggy, but soon gave up the chase, as man and
turnout disappeared around a bend leading to the woods back of
Cedarville.
