certain Compositous and Umbelliferous plants, is due to the pressure to which
the inner florets are subjected; but this conclusion is doubtful.

The facts just given do not relate to domesticated productions, and therefore
do not strictly concern us. But here is a more appropriate case: H. Muller
(26/12. "Ueber fotale Rachites" 'Wurzburger Medicin. Zeitschrift' 1860 b. 1 s.
265.) has shown that in shortfaced races of the dog some of the molar teeth
are placed in a slightly different position to that which they occupy in other
dogs, especially in those having elongated muzzles; and as he remarks, any
inherited change in the arrangement of the teeth deserves notice, considering
their classificatory importance. This difference in position is due to the
shortening of certain facial bones and the consequent want of space; and the
shortening results from a peculiar and abnormal state of the embryonal
cartilages of the bones.

[RELATIVE POSITION OF FLOWERS WITH RESPECT TO THE AXIS, AND OF SEEDS IN THE
OVARY, AS INDUCING VARIATION.

In the thirteenth chapter various peloric flowers were described, and their
production was shown to be due either to arrested development, or to reversion
to a primordial condition. Moquin-Tandon has remarked that the flowers which
stand on the summit of the main stem or of a lateral branch are more liable to
become peloric than those on the sides (26/13. 'Teratologie Veg.' page 192.);
and he adduces, amongst other instances, that of Teucrium campanulatum. In
another Labiate plant grown by me, viz., the Galeobdolon luteum, the peloric
flowers were always produced on the summit of the stem, where flowers are not
usually borne. In Pelargonium, a SINGLE flower in the truss is frequently
peloric, and when this occurs I have during several years invariably observed
it to be the central flower. This is of such frequent occurrence that one
observer (26/14. 'Journal of Horticulture' July 2, 1861 page 253.) gives the
names of ten varieties flowering at the same time, in every one of which the
central flower was peloric. Occasionally more than one flower in the truss is
peloric, and then of course the additional ones must be lateral. These flowers
are interesting as showing how the whole structure is correlated. In the
common Pelargonium the upper sepal is produced into a nectary which coheres
with the flower-peduncle; the two upper petals differ a little in shape from
the three lower ones, and are marked with dark shades of colour; the stamens
are graduated in length and upturned. In the peloric flowers, the nectary
aborts; all the petals become alike both in shape and colour; the stamens are
generally reduced in number and become straight, so that the whole flower
resembles that of the allied genus Erodium. The correlation between these
changes is well shown when one of the two upper petals alone loses its dark
mark, for in this case the nectary does not entirely abort, but is usually
much reduced in length. (26/15. It would be worth trial to fertilise with the
same pollen the central and lateral flowers of the pelargonium, or of other
highly cultivated plants, protecting them of course from insects: then to sow
the seed separately, and observe whether the one or the other lot of seedlings
varied the most.)

Morren has described (26/16. Quoted in 'Journal of Horticulture' February 24,
1863 page 152.) a marvellous flask-shaped flower of the Calceolaria, nearly
four inches in length, which was almost completely peloric; it grew on the
summit of the plant, with a normal flower on each side; Prof. Westwood also
has described (26/17. 'Gardener's Chronicle' 1866 page 612. For the
Phalaenopsis see ibid 1867 page 211.) three similar peloric flowers, which all
occupied a central position on the flower-branches. In the Orchideous genus,
Phalaenopsis, the terminal flower has been seen to become peloric.

In a Laburnum-tree I observed that about a fourth part of the racemes produced
terminal flowers which had lost their papilionaceous structure. These were
produced after almost all the other flowers on the same racemes had withered.
The most perfectly pelorised examples had six petals, each marked with black
striae like those on the standard-petal. The keel seemed to resist the change
more than the other petals. Dutrochet has described (26/18. 'Memoires...des
Vegetaux' 1837 tome 2 page 170.) an exactly similar case in France, and I
believe these are the only two instances of pelorism in the laburnum which
have been recorded. Dutrochet remarks that the racemes on this tree do not
properly produce a terminal flower, so that (as in the case of the
Galeobdolon) their position as well as structure are both anomalies, which no
doubt are in some manner related. Dr. Masters has briefly described another
leguminous plant (26/19. 'Journal of Horticulture' July 23, 1861 page 311.),
namely, a species of clover, in which the uppermost and central flowers were
regular or had lost their papilionaceous structure. In some of these plants
the flower-heads were also proliferous.

Lastly, Linaria produces two kinds of peloric flowers, one having simple
petals, and the other having them all spurred. The two forms, as Naudin
remarks (26/20. 'Nouvelles Archives du Museum' tome 1 page 137.), not rarely
occur on the same plant, but in this case the spurred form almost invariably
stands on the summit of the spike.

The tendency in the terminal or central flower to become peloric more
frequently than the other flowers, probably results from "the bud which stands
on the end of a shoot receiving the most sap; it grows out into a stronger
shoot than those situated lower down." (26/21. Hugo von Mohl 'The Vegetable
Cell' English translation 1852 page 76.) I have discussed the connection
between pelorism and a central position, partly because some few plants are
known normally to produce a terminal flower different in structure from the
lateral ones; but chiefly on account of the following case, in which we see a
tendency to variability or to reversion connected with the same position. A
great judge of Auriculas (26/22. The Rev. H.H. Dombrain in 'Journal of
Horticulture' 1861 June 4 page 174; and June 25 page 234; 1862 April 29 page
83.) states that when one throws up a side bloom it is pretty sure to keep its
character; but that if it grows from the centre or heart of the plant,
whatever the colour of the edging ought to be, "it is just as likely to come
in any other class as in the one to which it properly belongs." This is so
notorious a fact, that some florists regularly pinch off the central trusses
of flowers. Whether in the highly improved varieties the departure of the
central trusses from their proper type is due to reversion, I do not know. Mr.
Dombrain insists that, whatever may be the commonest kind of imperfection in
each variety, this is generally exaggerated in the central truss. Thus one
variety "sometimes has the fault of producing a little green floret in the
centre of the flower," and in central blooms these become excessive in size.
In some central blooms, sent to me by Mr. Dombrain, all the organs of the
flower were rudimentary in structure, of minute size, and of a green colour,
so that by a little further change all would have been converted into small
leaves. In this case we clearly see a tendency to prolification--a term which
I may explain, for those who have never attended to botany, to mean the
production of a branch or flower, or head of flowers, out of another flower.
Now Dr. Masters (26/23. 'Transact. Linn. Soc.' volume 23 1861 page 360.)
states that the central or uppermost flower on a plant is generally the most
liable to prolification. Thus, in the varieties of the Auricula, the loss of
their proper character and a tendency to prolification, also a tendency to
prolification with pelorism, are all connected together, and are due either to
arrested development, or to reversion to a former condition.

The following is a more interesting case; Metzger (26/24. 'Die Getreidearten'
1845 s. 208, 209.) cultivated in Germany several kinds of maize brought from
the hotter parts of America, and he found, as previously described, that in
two or three generations the grains became greatly changed in form, size, and
colour; and with respect to two races he expressly states that in the first
generation, whilst the lower grains on each head retained their proper
character, the uppermost grains already began to assume that character which
in the third generation all the grains acquired. As we do not know the
aboriginal parent of the maize, we cannot tell whether these changes are in
any way connected with reversion.

In the two following cases, reversion comes into play and is determined by the
position of the seed in the capsule. The Blue Imperial pea is the offspring of
the Blue Prussian, and has larger seed and broader pods than its parent. Now
Mr. Masters, of Canterbury, a careful observer and a raiser of new varieties
of the pea, states (26/25. 'Gardener's Chronicle' 1850 page 198.) that the
Blue Imperial always has a strong tendency to revert to its parent-stock, and
the reversion "occurs in this manner: the last (or uppermost) pea in the pod
is frequently much smaller than the rest; and if these small peas are
carefully collected and sown separately, very many more, in proportion, will
revert to their origin, than those taken from the other parts of the pod."
Again, M. Chate (26/26. Quoted in 'Gardener's Chronicle' 1866 page 74.) says
that in raising seedling stocks he succeeds in getting eighty per cent to bear
double flowers, by leaving only a few of the secondary branches to seed; but
in addition to this, "at the time of extracting the seeds, the upper portion
of the pod is separated and placed aside, because it has been ascertained that
the plants coming from the seeds situated in this portion of the pod, give
eighty per cent of single flowers." Now the production of single-flowering
plants from the seed of double-flowering plants is clearly a case of
reversion. These latter facts, as well as the connection between a central
position and pelorism and prolification, show in an interesting manner how
small a difference--namely, a little greater or less freedom in the flow of
sap towards one part of the plant--determines important changes of structure.]

ANALOGOUS OR PARALLEL VARIATION.

By this term I mean that similar characters occasionally make their appearance
in the several varieties or races descended from the same species, and more
rarely in the offspring of widely distinct species. We are here concerned, not
as hitherto with the causes of variation, but with the results; but this
discussion could not have been more conveniently introduced elsewhere. The
cases of analogous variation, as far as their origin is concerned, may be
grouped, disregarding minor subdivisions, under two main heads; firstly, those
due to unknown causes acting on similarly constituted organisms, and which
consequently have varied in a similar manner; and secondly, those due to the
reappearance of characters which were possessed by a more or less remote
progenitor. But these two main divisions can often be separated only
conjecturally, and graduate, as we shall presently see, into each other.

[Under the first head of analogous variations, not due to reversion, we have
the many cases of trees belonging to quite different orders which have
produced pendulous and fastigiate varieties. The beech, hazel, and barberry
have given rise to purple-leaved varieties; and, as Bernhardi remarks (26/27.
'Ueber den Begriff der Pflanzenart' 1834 s. 14.), a multitude of plants, as
distinct as possible, have yielded varieties with deeply-cut or laciniated
leaves. Varieties descended from three distinct species of Brassica have their
stems, or so-called roots, enlarged into globular masses. The nectarine is the
offspring of the peach; and the varieties of peaches and nectarines offer a
remarkable parallelism in the fruit being white, red, or yellow fleshed--in
being clingstones or freestones--in the flowers being large or small--in the
leaves being serrated or crenated, furnished with globose or reniform glands,
or quite destitute of glands. It should be remarked that each variety of the
nectarine has not derived its character from a corresponding variety of the
peach. The several varieties also of a closely allied genus, namely the
apricot, differ from one another in nearly the same parallel manner. There is
no reason to believe that any of these varieties have merely reacquired long-
lost characters; and in most of them this certainly is not the case.

Three species of Cucurbita have yielded a multitude of races which correspond
so closely in character that, as Naudin insists, they may be arranged in
almost strictly parallel series. Several varieties of the melon are
interesting from resembling, in important characters, other species, either of
the same genus or of allied genera; thus, one variety has fruit so like, both
externally and internally, the fruit of a perfectly distinct species, namely,
the cucumber, as hardly to be distinguished from it; another has long
cylindrical fruit twisting about like a serpent; in another the seeds adhere
to portions of the pulp; in another the fruit, when ripe, suddenly cracks and
falls into pieces; and all these highly remarkable peculiarities are
characteristic of species belonging to allied genera. We can hardly account
for the appearance of so many unusual characters by reversion to a single
ancient form; but we must believe that all the members of the family have
inherited a nearly similar constitution from an early progenitor. Our cereal
and many other plants offer similar cases.

With animals we have fewer cases of analogous variation, independently of
direct reversion. We see something of the kind in the resemblance between the
short-muzzled races of the dog, such as the pug and bull-dog; in feather-
footed races of the fowl, pigeon, and canary-bird; in horses of the most
different races presenting the same range of colour; in all black-and-tan dogs
having tan-coloured eye-spots and feet, but in this latter case reversion may
possibly have played a part. Low has remarked (26/28. 'Domesticated Animals'
1845 page 351.) that several breeds of cattle are "sheeted,"--that is, have a
broad band of white passing round their bodies like a sheet; this character is
strongly inherited, and sometimes originates from a cross; it may be the first
step in reversion to an early type, for, as was shown in the third chapter,
white cattle with dark ears, dark feet and tip of tail, formerly existed, and
now exist in feral or semi-feral condition in several quarters of the world.

Under our second main division, namely, of analogous variations due to
reversion, the best cases are afforded by pigeons. In all the most distinct
breeds, sub-varieties occasionally appear coloured exactly like the parent
rock-pigeon, with black wing-bars, white loins, banded tail, etc.; and no one
can doubt that these characters are due to reversion. So with minor details;
turbits properly have white tails, but occasionally a bird is born with a
dark-coloured and banded tail; pouters properly have their primary wing-
feathers white, but not rarely a "sword-flighted" bird appears, that is, one
with the few first primaries dark-coloured; and in these cases we have
characters proper to the rock-pigeon, but new to the breed, evidently
appearing from reversion. In some domestic varieties the wing-bars, instead of
being simply black, as in the rock-pigeon, are beautifully edged with
different zones of colour, and they then present a striking analogy with the
wing-bars in certain natural species of the same family, such as Phaps
chalcoptera; and this may probably be accounted for by all the species of the
family being descended from the same remote progenitor and having a tendency
to vary in the same manner. Thus, also, we can perhaps understand the fact of
some Laugher-pigeons cooing almost like turtle-doves, and for several races
having peculiarities in their flight, since certain natural species (viz., C.
torquatrix and palumbus), display singular vagaries in this respect. In other
cases a race, instead of imitating a distinct species, resembles some other
race; thus, certain runts tremble and slightly elevate their tails, like
fantails; and turbits inflate the upper part of their oesophagus, like pouter-
pigeons.

It is a common circumstance to find certain coloured marks persistently
characterising all the species of a genus, but differing much in tint; and the
same thing occurs with the varieties of the pigeon: thus, instead of the
general plumage being blue, with the wing-bars black, there are snow-white
varieties with red bars, and black varieties with white bars; in other
varieties the wing-bars, as we have seen, are elegantly zoned with different
tints. The Spot pigeon is characterised by the whole plumage being white,
excepting a spot on the forehead and the tail; but these parts may be red,
yellow, or black. In the rock-pigeon and in many varieties the tail is blue,
with the outer edges of the outer feathers white; but in the sub-variety of
the monk-pigeon we have a reversed style of coloration, for the tail is white,
except the outer edges of the outer feathers, which are black. (26/29.
Bechstein 'Naturgeschichte Deutschlands' b. 4 1795 s. 31.)

With some species of birds, for instance with gulls, certain coloured parts
appear as if almost washed out, and I have observed exactly the same
appearance in the terminal dark tail-bar in certain pigeons, and in the whole
plumage of certain varieties of the duck. Analogous facts in the vegetable
kingdom could be given.

Many sub-varieties of the pigeon have reversed and somewhat lengthened
feathers on the back part of their heads, and this is certainly not due to
reversion to the parent-species, which shows no trace of such structure: but
when we remember that sub-varieties of the fowl, turkey, canary-bird, duck,
and goose, all have either topknots or reversed feathers on their heads; and
when we remember that scarcely a single large natural group of birds can be
named, in which some members have not a tuft of feathers on their heads, we
may suspect that reversion to some extremely remote form has come into action.

Several breeds of the fowl have either spangled or pencilled feathers; and
these cannot be derived from the parent-species, the Gallus bankiva; though of
course it is possible that one early progenitor of this species may have been
spangled, and another pencilled. But, as many gallinaceous birds are either
spangled or pencilled, it is a more probable view that the several domestic
breeds of the fowl have acquired this kind of plumage from all the members of
the family inheriting a tendency to vary in a like manner. The same principle
may account for the ewes in certain breeds of sheep being hornless, like the
females of some other hollow-horned ruminants; it may account for certain
domestic cats having slightly-tufted ears, like those of the lynx; and for the
skulls of domestic rabbits often differing from one another in the same
characters by which the skulls of the various species of the genus Lepus
differ.

I will only allude to one other case, already discussed. Now that we know that
the wild parent of the ass commonly has striped legs, we may feel confident
that the occasional appearance of stripes on the legs of the domestic ass is
due to reversion; but this will not account for the lower end of the shoulder-
stripe being sometimes angularly bent or slightly forked. So, again, when we
see dun and other coloured horses with stripes on the spine, shoulders, and
legs, we are led, from reasons formerly given, to believe that they reappear
through reversion to the wild parent-horse. But when horses have two or three
shoulder-stripes, with one of them occasionally forked at the lower end, or
when they have stripes on their faces, or are faintly striped as foals over
nearly their whole bodies, with the stripes angularly bent one under the other
on the forehead, or irregularly branched in other parts, it would be rash to
attribute such diversified characters to the reappearance of those proper to
the aboriginal wild horse. As three African species of the genus are much
striped, and as we have seen that the crossing of the unstriped species often
leads to the hybrid offspring being conspicuously striped--bearing also in
mind that the act of crossing certainly causes the reappearance of long-lost
characters--it is a more probable view that the above-specified stripes are
due to reversion, not to the immediate wild parent-horse, but to the striped
progenitor of the whole genus.]

I have discussed this subject of analogous variation at considerable length,
because it is well known that the varieties of one species frequently resemble
distinct species--a fact in perfect harmony with the foregoing cases, and
explicable on the theory of descent. Secondly, because these facts are
important from showing, as remarked in a former chapter, that each trifling
variation is governed by law, and is determined in a much higher degree by the
nature of the organisation, than by the nature of the conditions to which the
varying being has been exposed. Thirdly, because these facts are to a certain
extent related to a more general law, namely, that which Mr. B.D. Walsh
(26/30. 'Proc. Entomolog. Soc. of Philadelphia' October 1863 page 213.) has
called the "Law of EQUABLE VARIABILITY," or, as he explains it, "if any given
character is very variable in one species of a group, it will tend to be
variable in allied species; and if any given character is perfectly constant
in one species of a group, it will tend to be constant in allied species."

This leads me to recall a discussion in the chapter on Selection, in which it
was shown that with domestic races, which are now undergoing rapid
improvement, those parts or characters vary the most, which are the most
valued. This naturally follows from recently selected characters continually
tending to revert to their former less improved standard, and from their being
still acted on by the same agencies, whatever these may be, which first caused
the characters in question to vary. The same principle is applicable to
natural species, for, as stated in my 'Origin of Species' generic characters
are less variable than specific characters; and the latter are those which
have been modified by variation and natural selection, since the period when
all the species belonging to the genus branched off from a common progenitor,
whilst generic characters are those which have remained unaltered from a much
more remote epoch, and accordingly are now less variable. This statement makes
a near approach to Mr. Walsh's law of Equable Variability. Secondary sexual
characters, it may be added, rarely serve to characterise distinct genera, for
they usually differ much in the species of the same genus, and they are highly
variable in the individuals of the same species; we have also seen in the
earlier chapters of this work how variable secondary sexual characters become
under domestication.

SUMMARY OF THE THREE PREVIOUS CHAPTERS ON THE LAWS OF VARIATION.

In the twenty-third chapter we saw that changed conditions occasionally, or
even often, act in a definite manner on the organisation, so that all, or
nearly all, the individuals thus exposed become modified in the same manner.
But a far more frequent result of changed conditions, whether acting directly
on the organisation or indirectly through the reproductive system, is
indefinite and fluctuating variability. In the three last chapters, some of
the laws by which such variability is regulated have been discussed.

Increased use adds to the size of muscles, together with the blood-vessels,
nerves, ligaments, the crests of bone and the whole bones, to which they are
attached. Increased functional activity increases the size of various glands,
and strengthens the sense-organs. Increased and intermittent pressure thickens
the epidermis. A change in the nature of the food sometimes modifies the coats
of the stomach, and augments or decreases the length of the intestines.
Continued disuse, on the other hand, weakens and diminishes all parts of the
organisation. Animals which during many generations have taken but little
exercise, have their lungs reduced in size, and as a consequence the bony
fabric of the chest and the whole form of the body become modified. With our
anciently domesticated birds, the wings have been little used, and they are
slightly reduced; with their decrease, the crest of the sternum, the scapulae,
coracoids, and furculum, have all been reduced.

With domesticated animals, the reduction of a part from disuse is never
carried so far that a mere rudiment is left; whereas we have reason to believe
that this has often occurred under nature; the effects of disuse in this
latter case being aided by economy of growth, together with the intercrossing
of many varying individuals. The cause of this difference between organisms in
a state of nature, and under domestication, probably is that in the latter
case there has not been time sufficient for any very great change, and that
the principle of economy of growth does not come into action. On the contrary,
structures which are rudimentary in the parent-species, sometimes become
partially redeveloped in our domesticated productions. Such rudiments as
occasionally make their appearance under domestication, seem always to be the
result of a sudden arrest of development; nevertheless they are of interest,
as showing that rudiments are the relics of organs once perfectly developed.

Corporeal, periodical, and mental habits, though the latter have been almost
passed over in this work, become changed under domestication, and the changes
are often inherited. Such changed habits in an organic being, especially when
living a free life, would often lead to the augmented or diminished use of
various organs, and consequently to their modification. From long-continued
habit, and more especially from the occasional birth of individuals with a
slightly different constitution, domestic animals and cultivated plants become
to a certain extent acclimatised or adapted to a climate different from that
proper to the parent-species.

Through the principle of correlated variability, taken in its widest sense,
when one part varies other parts vary, either simultaneously, or one after the
other. Thus, an organ modified during an early embryonic period affects other
parts subsequently developed. When an organ, such as the beak, increases or
decreases in length, adjoining or correlated parts, as the tongue and the
orifice of the nostrils, tend to vary in the same manner. When the whole body
increases or decreases in size, various parts become modified; thus, with
pigeons the ribs increase or decrease in number and breadth. Homologous parts
which are identical during their early development and are exposed to similar
conditions, tend to vary in the same or in some connected manner,--as in the
case of the right and left sides of the body, and of the front and hind limbs.
So it is with the organs of sight and hearing; for instance, white cats with
blue eyes are almost always deaf. There is a manifest relation throughout the
body between the skin and various dermal appendages, such as hair, feathers,
hoofs, horns, and teeth. In Paraguay, horses with curly hair have hoofs like
those of a mule; the wool and the horns of sheep often vary together; hairless
dogs are deficient in their teeth; men with redundant hair have abnormal
teeth, either by deficiency or excess. Birds with long wing-feathers usually
have long tail-feathers. When long feathers grow from the outside of the legs
and toes of pigeons, the two outer toes are connected by membrane; for the
whole leg tends to assume the structure of the wing. There is a manifest
relation between a crest of feathers on the head and a marvellous amount of
change in the skull of various fowls; and in a lesser degree, between the
greatly elongated, lopping ears of rabbits and the structure of their skulls.
With plants, the leaves, various parts of the flower, and the fruit, often
vary together to a correlated manner.

In some cases we find correlation without being able even to conjecture what
is the nature of the connection, as with various monstrosities and diseases.
This is likewise the case with the colour of the adult pigeon, in connection
with the presence of down on the young bird. Numerous curious instances have
been given of peculiarities of constitution, in correlation with colour, as
shown by the immunity of individuals of one colour from certain diseases, from
the attacks of parasites and from the action of certain vegetable poisons.

Correlation is an important subject; for with species, and in a lesser degree
with domestic races, we continually find that certain parts have been greatly
modified to serve some useful purpose; but we almost invariably find that
other parts have likewise been more or less modified, without our being able
to discover any advantage in the change. No doubt great caution is necessary
with respect to this latter point, for it is difficult to overrate our
ignorance on the use of various parts of the organisation; but from what we
have seen, we may believe that many modifications are of no direct service,
having arisen in correlation with other and useful changes.

Homologous parts during their early development often become fused together.
Multiple and homologous organs are especially liable to vary in number and
probably in form. As the supply of organised matter is not unlimited, the
principle of compensation sometimes comes into action; so that, when one part
is greatly developed, adjoining parts are apt to be reduced; but this
principle is probably of much less importance than the more general one of the
economy of growth. Through mere mechanical pressure hard parts occasionally
affect adjoining parts. With plants the position of the flowers on the axis,
and of the seeds in the ovary, sometimes leads, through a more or less free
flow of sap, to changes of structure; but such changes are often due to
reversion. Modifications, in whatever manner caused, will be to a certain
extent regulated by that co-ordinating power, or so-called nisus formativus,
which is in fact a remnant of that simple form of reproduction, displayed by
many lowly organised beings in their power of fissiparous generation and
budding. Finally, the effects of the laws which directly or indirectly govern
variability, may be largely regulated by man's selection, and will so far be
determined by natural selection that changes advantageous to any race will be
favoured, and disadvantageous changes will be checked.

Domestic races descended from the same species, or from two or more allied
species, are liable to revert to characters derived from their common
progenitor; and, as they inherit a somewhat similar constitution, they are
liable to vary in the same manner. From these two causes analogous varieties
often arise. When we reflect on the several foregoing laws, imperfectly as we
understand them, and when we bear in mind how much remains to be discovered,
we need not be surprised at the intricate and to us unintelligible manner in
which our domestic productions have varied, and still go on varying.


CHAPTER 2.XXVII.

PROVISIONAL HYPOTHESIS OF PANGENESIS.

PRELIMINARY REMARKS.
FIRST PART:
THE FACTS TO BE CONNECTED UNDER A SINGLE POINT OF VIEW, NAMELY, THE VARIOUS
KINDS OF REPRODUCTION.
REGROWTH OF AMPUTATED PARTS.
GRAFT-HYBRIDS.
THE DIRECT ACTION OF THE MALE ELEMENT ON THE FEMALE.
DEVELOPMENT.
THE FUNCTIONAL INDEPENDENCE OF THE UNITS OF THE BODY.
VARIABILITY.
INHERITANCE.
REVERSION.

SECOND PART:
STATEMENT OF THE HYPOTHESIS.
HOW FAR THE NECESSARY ASSUMPTIONS ARE IMPROBABLE.
EXPLANATION BY AID OF THE HYPOTHESIS OF THE SEVERAL CLASSES OF FACTS SPECIFIED
IN THE FIRST PART.
CONCLUSION.

In the previous chapters large classes of facts, such as those bearing on bud-
variation, the various forms of inheritance, the causes and laws of variation,
have been discussed; and it is obvious that these subjects, as well as the
several modes of reproduction, stand in some sort of relation to one another.
I have been led, or rather forced, to form a view which to a certain extent
connects these facts by a tangible method. Every one would wish to explain to
himself, even in an imperfect manner, how it is possible for a character
possessed by some remote ancestor suddenly to reappear in the offspring; how
the effects of increased or decreased use of a limb can be transmitted to the
child; how the male sexual element can act not solely on the ovules, but
occasionally on the mother-form; how a hybrid can be produced by the union of
the cellular tissue of two plants independently of the organs of generation;
how a limb can be reproduced on the exact line of amputation, with neither too
much nor too little added; how the same organism may be produced by such
widely different processes, as budding and true seminal generation; and,
lastly, how of two allied forms, one passes in the course of its development
through the most complex metamorphoses, and the other does not do so, though
when mature both are alike in every detail of structure. I am aware that my
view is merely a provisional hypothesis or speculation; but until a better one
be advanced, it will serve to bring together a multitude of facts which are at
present left disconnected by any efficient cause. As Whewell, the historian of
the inductive sciences, remarks:--"Hypotheses may often be of service to
science, when they involve a certain portion of incompleteness, and even of
error." Under this point of view I venture to advance the hypothesis of
Pangenesis, which implies that every separate part of the whole organisation
reproduces itself. So that ovules, spermatozoa, and pollen-grains,--the
fertilised egg or seed, as well as buds,--include and consist of a multitude
of germs thrown off from each separate part or unit. (27/1. This hypothesis
has been severely criticised by many writers, and it will be fair to give
references to the more important articles. The best essay which I have seen is
by Prof. Delpino, entitled 'Sulla Darwiniana Teoria della Pangenesi, 1869' of
which a translation appeared in 'Scientific Opinion' September 29, 1869 and
the succeeding numbers. He rejects the hypothesis, but criticises it fairly,
and I have found his criticisms very useful. Mr. Mivart ('Genesis of Species'
1871 chapter 10.) follows Delpino, but adds no new objections of any weight.
Dr. Bastian ('The Beginnings of Life' 1872 volume 2 page 98) says that the
hypothesis "looks like a relic of the old rather than a fitting appanage of
the new evolution philosophy." He shows that I ought not to have used the term
"pangenesis," as it had been previously used by Dr. Gros in another sense. Dr.
Lionel Beale ('Nature' May 11, 1871 page 26) sneers at the whole doctrine with
much acerbity and some justice. Prof. Wigand ('Schriften der Gesell. der
gesammt. Naturwissen. zu Marburg' b. 9 1870) considers the hypothesis as
unscientific and worthless. Mr. G.H. Lewes ('Fortnightly Review' November 1,
1868 page 503) seems to consider that it may be useful: he makes many good
criticisms in a perfectly fair spirit. Mr. F. Galton, after describing his
valuable experiments ('Proc. Royal Soc.' volume 19 page 393) on the
intertransfusion of the blood of distinct varieties of the rabbit, concludes
by saying that in his opinion the results negative beyond all doubt the
doctrine of Pangenesis. He informs me that subsequently to the publication of
his paper he continued his experiments on a still larger scale for two more
generations, without any sign of mongrelism showing itself in the very
numerous offspring. I certainly should have expected that gemmules would have
been present in the blood, but this is no necessary part of the hypothesis,
which manifestly applies to plants and the lowest animals. Mr. Galton, in a
letter to 'Nature' (April 27, 1871 page 502), also criticises various
incorrect expressions used by me. On the other hand, several writers have
spoken favourably of the hypothesis, but there would be no use in giving
references to their articles. I may, however, refer to Dr. Ross' work, 'The
Graft Theory of Disease; being an application of Mr. Darwin's hypothesis of
Pangenesis' 1872 as he gives several original and ingenious discussions.)

In the First Part I will enumerate as briefly as I can the groups of facts
which seem to demand connection; but certain subjects, not hitherto discussed,
must be treated at disproportionate length. In the Second Part the hypothesis
will be given; and after considering how far the necessary assumptions are in
themselves improbable, we shall see whether it serves to bring under a single
point of view the various facts.

PART I.

Reproduction may be divided into two main classes, namely, sexual and asexual.
The latter is effected in many ways--by the formation of buds of various
kinds, and by fissiparous generation, that is by spontaneous or artificial
division. It is notorious that some of the lower animals, when cut into many
pieces, reproduce so many perfect individuals: Lyonnet cut a Nais or
freshwater worm into nearly forty pieces, and these all reproduced perfect
animals. (27/2. Quoted by Paget 'Lectures on Pathology' 1853 page 159.) It is
probable that segmentation could be carried much further in some of the
protozoa; and with some of the lowest plants each cell will reproduce the
parent-form. Johannes Muller thought that there was an important distinction
between gemmation and fission; for in the latter case the divided portion,
however small, is more fully developed than a bud, which also is a younger
formation; but most physiologists are now convinced that the two processes are
essentially alike. (27/3. Dr. Lachmann also observes ('Annals and Mag. of Nat.
History' 2nd series volume 19 1857 page 231) with respect to infusoria, that
"fissation and gemmation pass into each other almost imperceptibly." Again,
Mr. W.C. Minor ('Annals and Mag. of Nat. Hist.' 3rd series volume 11 page 328)
shows that with Annelids the distinction that has been made between fission
and budding is not a fundamental one. See also Professor Clark's work 'Mind in
Nature' New York 1865 pages 62, 94.) Prof. Huxley remarks, "fission is little
more than a peculiar mode of budding," and Prof. H.J. Clark shows in detail
that there is sometimes "a compromise between self-division and budding." When
a limb is amputated, or when the whole body is bisected, the cut extremities
are said to bud forth (27/4. See Bonnet 'Oeuvres d'Hist. Nat.' tome 5 1781
page 339 for remarks on the budding-out of the amputated limbs of
Salamanders.); and as the papilla, which is first formed, consists of
undeveloped cellular tissue like that forming an ordinary bud, the expression
is apparently correct. We see the connection of the two processes in another
way; for Trembley observed with the hydra, that the reproduction of the head
after amputation was checked as soon as the animal put forth reproductive
gemmae. (27/5. Paget 'Lectures on Pathology' 1853 page 158.)

Between the production, by fissiparous generation, of two or more complete
individuals, and the repair of even a very slight injury, there is so perfect
a gradation, that it is impossible to doubt that the two processes are
connected. As at each stage of growth an amputated part is replaced by one in
the same state of development, we must also follow Sir J. Paget in admitting,
"that the powers of development from the embryo, are identical with those
exercised for the restoration from injuries: in other words, that the powers
are the same by which perfection is first achieved, and by which, when lost,
it is recovered." (27/6. Ibid pages 152, 164.) Finally, we may conclude that
the several forms of budding, fissiparous generation, the repair of injuries,
and development, are all essentially the results of one and the same power.

SEXUAL GENERATION.

The union of the two sexual elements seems at first sight to make a broad
distinction between sexual and asexual generation. But the conjugation of
algae, by which process the contents of two cells unite into a single mass
capable of development, apparently gives us the first step towards sexual
union: and Pringsheim, in his memoir on the pairing of Zoospores (27/7.
Translated in 'Annals and Mag. of Nat. Hist.' April 1870 page 272.), shows
that conjugation graduates into true sexual reproduction. Moreover, the now
well-ascertained cases of Parthenogenesis prove that the distinction between
sexual and asexual generation is not nearly so great as was formerly thought;
for ova occasionally, and even in some cases frequently, become developed into
perfect beings, without the concourse of the male. With most of the lower
animals and even with mammals, the ova show a trace of parthenogenetic power,
for without being fertilised they pass through the first stages of
segmentation. (27/8. Bischoff as quoted by von Siebold "Ueber Parthenogenesis"
'Sitzung der math. phys. Classe.' Munich November 4, 1871 page 240. See also
Quatrefages 'Annales des Sc. Nat. Zoolog.' 3rd series 1850 page 138.) Nor can
pseudova which do not need fertilisation, be distinguished from true ova, as
was first shown by Sir J. Lubbock, and is now admitted by Siebold. So, again,
the germ-balls in the larvae of Cecidomyia are said by Leuckart (27/9. 'On the
Asexual Reproduction of Cecidomyide Larvae' translated in 'Annals and Mag. of
Nat. Hist.' March 1866 pages 167, 171.) to be formed within the ovarium, but
they do not require to be fertilised. It should also be observed that in
sexual generation, the ovules and the male element have equal power of
transmitting every single character possessed by either parent to their
offspring. We see this clearly when hybrids are paired inter se, for the
characters of both grandparents often appear in the progeny, either perfectly
or by segments. It is an error to suppose that the male transmits certain
characters and the female other characters; although no doubt, from unknown
causes, one sex sometimes has a much stronger power of transmission than the
other.

It has, however, been maintained by some authors that a bud differs
essentially from a fertilised germ, in always reproducing the perfect
character of the parent-stock; whilst fertilised germs give birth to variable
beings. But there is no such broad distinction as this. In the eleventh
chapter numerous cases were advanced showing that buds occasionally grow into
plants having quite new characters; and the varieties thus produced can be
propagated for a length of time by buds, and occasionally by seed.
Nevertheless, it must be admitted that beings produced sexually are much more
liable to vary than those produced asexually; and of this fact a partial
explanation will hereafter be attempted. The variability in both cases is
determined by the same general causes, and is governed by the same laws. Hence
new varieties arising from buds cannot be distinguished from those arising
from seed. Although bud-varieties usually retain their character during
successive bud-generations, yet they occasionally revert, even after a long
series of bud-generations, to their former character. This tendency to
reversion in buds, is one of the most remarkable of the several points of
agreement between the offspring from bud and seminal reproduction.

But there is one difference between organisms produced sexually and asexually,
which is very general. The former pass in the course of their development from
a very low stage to their highest stage, as we see in the metamorphoses of
insects and of many other animals, and in the concealed metamorphoses of the
vertebrata. Animals propagated asexually by buds or fission, on the other
hand, commence their development at that stage at which the budding or self-
dividing animal may happen to be, and therefore do not pass through some of
the lower developmental stages. (27/10. Prof. Allman speaks ('Transact. R.
Soc. of Edinburgh' volume 26 1870 page 102) decisively on this head with
respect to the Hydroida: he says, "It is a universal law in the succession of
zooids, that no retrogression ever takes place in the series.") Afterwards,
they often advance in organisation, as we see in the many cases of "alternate
generation." In thus speaking of alternate generation, I follow those
naturalists who look at this process as essentially one of internal budding or
of fissiparous generation. Some of the lower plants, however, such as mosses
and certain algae, according to Dr. L. Radlkofer (27/11. 'Annals and Mag. of
Nat. Hist.' 2nd series volume 20 1857 pages 153-455), when propagated
asexually, do undergo a retrogressive metamorphosis. As far as the final cause
is concerned, we can to a certain extent understand why beings propagated by
buds should not pass through all the early stages of development; for with
each organism the structure acquired at each stage must be adapted to its
peculiar habits; and if there are places for the support of many individuals
at some one stage, the simplest plan will be that they should be multiplied at
this stage, and not that they should first retrograde in their development to
an earlier or simpler structure, which might not be fitted for the then
surrounding conditions.

From the several foregoing considerations we may conclude that the difference
between sexual and asexual generation is not nearly so great as at first
appears; the chief difference being that an ovule cannot continue to live and
to be fully developed unless it unites with the male element; but even this
difference is far from invariable, as shown by the many cases of
parthenogenesis. We are therefore naturally led to inquire what the final
cause can be of the necessity in ordinary generation for the concourse of the
two sexual elements.

Seeds and ova are often highly serviceable as the means of disseminating
plants and animals, and of preserving them during one or more seasons in a
dormant state; but unimpregnated seeds or ova, and detached buds, would be
equally serviceable for both purposes. We can, however, indicate two important
advantages gained by the concourse of the two sexes, or rather of two
individuals belonging to opposite sexes; for, as I have shown in a former
chapter, the structure of every organism appears to be especially adapted for
the concurrence, at least occasionally, of two individuals. When species are
rendered highly variable by changed conditions of life, the free intercrossing
of the varying individuals tends to keep each form fitted for its proper place
in nature; and crossing can be effected only by sexual generation; but whether
the end thus gained is of sufficient importance to account for the first
origin of sexual intercourse is extremely doubtful. Secondly, I have shown
from a large body of facts, that, as a slight change in the conditions of life
is beneficial to each creature, so, in an analogous manner, is the change
effected in the germ by sexual union with a distinct individual; and I have
been led, from observing the many widely-extended provisions throughout nature
for this purpose, and from the greater vigour of crossed organisms of all
kinds, as proved by direct experiments, as well as from the evil effects of
close interbreeding when long continued, to believe that the advantage thus
gained is very great.

Why the germ, which before impregnation undergoes a certain amount of
development, ceases to progress and perishes, unless it be acted on by the
male element; and why conversely the male element, which in the case of some
insects is enabled to keep alive for four or five years, and in the case of
some plants for several years, likewise perishes, unless it acts on or unites
with the germ, are questions which cannot be answered with certainty. It is,
however, probable that both sexual elements perish, unless brought into union,
simply from including too little formative matter for independent development.
Quatrefages has shown in the case of the Teredo (27/12. 'Annales des Sc. Nat.'
3rd series 1850 tome 13.), as did formerly Prevost and Dumas with other
animals, that more than one spermatozoon is requisite to fertilise an ovum.
This has likewise been shown by Newport (27/13. 'Transact. Phil. Soc.' 1851
pages 196, 208, 210; 1853 pages 245, 247.), who proved by numerous
experiments, that, when a very small number of spermatozoa are applied to the
ova of Batrachians, they are only partially impregnated, and an embryo is
never fully developed. The rate also of the segmentation of the ovum is
determined by the number of the spermatozoa. With respect to plants, nearly
the same results were obtained by Kolreuter and Gartner. This last careful
observer, after making successive trials on a Malva with more and more pollen-
grains, found (27/14. 'Beitrage zur Kenntniss' etc. 1844 s. 345.), that even
thirty grains did not fertilise a single seed; but when forty grains were
applied to the stigma, a few seeds of small size were formed. In the case of
Mirabilis the pollen grains are extraordinarily large, and the ovarium
contains only a single ovule; and these circumstances led Naudin (27/15.
'Nouvelles Archives du Museum' tome 1 page 27.) to make the following
experiments: a flower was fertilised by three grains and succeeded perfectly;
twelve flowers were fertilised by two grains, and seventeen flowers by a
single grain, and of these one flower alone in each lot perfected its seed:
and it deserves especial notice that the plants produced by these two seeds
never attained their proper dimensions, and bore flowers of remarkably small
size. From these facts we clearly see that the quantity of the peculiar
formative matter which is contained within the spermatozoa and pollen-grains
is an all-important element in the act of fertilisation, not only for the full
development of the seed, but for the vigour of the plant produced from such
seed. We see something of the same kind in certain cases of parthenogenesis,
that is, when the male element is wholly excluded; for M. Jourdan (27/16. As
quoted by Sir J. Lubbock in 'Nat. Hist. Review' 1862 page 345. Weijenbergh
also raised ('Nature' December 21, 1871 page 149) two successive generations
from unimpregnated females of another lepidopterous insect, Liparis dispar.
These females did not produce at most one-twentieth of their full complement
of eggs, and many of the eggs were worthless. Moreover the caterpillars raised
from these unfertilised eggs "possessed far less vitality" than those from
fertilised eggs. In the third parthenogenetic generation not a single egg
yielded a caterpillar.) found that, out of about 58,000 eggs laid by
unimpregnated silk-moths, many passed through their early embryonic stages,
showing that they were capable of self-development, but only twenty-nine out
of the whole number produced caterpillars. The same principle of quantity
seems to hold good even in artificial fissiparous reproduction, for Hackel
(27/17. 'Entwickelungsgeschichte der Siphonophora' 1869 page 73.) found that
by cutting the segmented and fertilised ova or larva of Siphonophorae (jelly-
fishes) into pieces, the smaller the pieces were, the slower was the rate of
development, and the larvae thus produced were by so much the more imperfect
and inclined to monstrosity. It seems, therefore, probable that with the
separate sexual elements deficient quantity of formative matter is the main
cause of their not having the capacity for prolonged existence and
development, unless they combine and thus increase each other's bulk. The
belief that it is the function of the spermatozoa to communicate life to the
ovule seems a strange one, seeing that the unimpregnated ovule is already
alive and generally undergoes a certain amount of independent development.
Sexual and asexual reproduction are thus seen not to differ essentially; and
we have already shown that asexual reproduction, the power of regrowth and
development are all parts of one and the same great law.

REGROWTH OF AMPUTATED PARTS.

This subject deserves a little further discussion. A multitude of the lower
animals and some vertebrates possess this wonderful power. For instance,
Spallanzani cut off the legs and tail of the same salamander six times
successively, and Bonnet (27/18. Spallanzani 'An Essay on Animal Reproduction'
translated by Dr. Maty 1769 page 79. Bonnet 'Oeuvres d'Hist. Nat.' tome 5 part
1 4to. edition 1781 pages 343, 350.) did so eight times; and on each occasion
the limbs were reproduced on the exact line of amputation, with no part
deficient or in excess. An allied animal, the axolotl, had a limb bitten off,
which was reproduced in an abnormal condition, but when this was amputated it
was replaced by a perfect limb. (27/19. Vulpian as quoted by Prof. Faivre 'La
Variabilite des Especes' 1868 page 112.) The new limbs in these cases bud
forth, and are developed in the same manner as during the regular development
of a young animal. For instance, with the Amblystoma lurida, three toes are
first developed, then the fourth, and on the hind-feet the fifth, and so it is
