strangers; or, if we may conjecture still further, the consciousness of
the instinctive feud between the American and Caucasian race told him
that the plan he took was the only one that offered safety to himself.
What reason had he to believe that the hunters were kind of heart? If he
hid his distress, would he not be treated as a well Indian? And was
there any but the one common ground upon which the two races met?

But the fever had passed and he was himself again. True, he was still
feeble, and his limbs trembled at times like those of an old man; but
the disease had gone, and the stern, unbending will had resumed its
sway. He was not a child, but he was Shasta, the Pah Utah Indian.

The inexperience of Elwood Brandon and Howard Lawrence with these
strange people made this savage an enigma to them. As he stood with his
arms folded, his blanket wrapped around him, his long black hair
streaming over his shoulders, and the mingling of the paint on his crown
and over his face, and his midnight eyes fixed upon them, it was hard
indeed to conjecture the thoughts filtrating through his brain.

But there is a language in which the human heart can speak--that of
emotion. The boys felt no fear--ingratitude is not an element of the
savage character, though sad to say it is sometimes manifested among us
of greater moral pretensions.

He looked at them as they came up and paused a few feet from him.

"You seem to be better?" asked Elwood, feeling it incumbent that he
should make some remark, even though it was incomprehensible to their
dusky friend. He muttered something and then stretched out his arms as
if to show that he had recovered from his illness.

At this point Terror went up to the savage and snuffed around him, as if
to satisfy himself of his identity. The latter laid his hand upon his
knife and watched the dog narrowly, but he appeared to judge the animal
by the company, and quietly removed his hand and folded his arms again.

He stood thus a moment, when he pointed to the eastern shore and then
down the river, nodding his head and gesticulating somewhat excitedly.
The boys in return nodded, which satisfied the aborigine. All at once he
moved off and strode rapidly to the other side of the island, where he
drew forth a tiny canoe and shoved it into the water.

[Illustration: "The Indian drew forth a tiny canoe and shoved it into
the water"]

When it was launched he turned again toward his friends, and looking
steadily at them a moment, once more pointed down stream, sprang into
the boat and dipped his paddle first upon one side and then upon the
other.

It was a sight to see him manage the canoe! It seemed made to contain a
single person, and the way it skimmed over the water was a perfect
marvel to the spectators. It appeared fairly to fly, scarcely touching
the water, while human art could not have exceeded the skill with which
he managed the paddle. He sat as motionless as a statue, like the
artistic violinist. It could not be seen that he raised his arms above
the elbow.

The sun was just going over the western hills, and the reflection of the
water as it flashed and rippled from his paddle gave a fairy-like
appearance to the Indian as he sped down stream that was pleasing to the
last degree.

"What does that mean?" asked Elwood.

"It means that he is going to the rescue of Tim."

"If he goes after him he will bring him back. Just see the way in which
he manages that canoe! It is worth going a hundred miles to see!"

"No doubt he has practiced it long enough."

"But what of our remaining here?"

"I don't see how it can be helped."

"Suppose those Indians that have followed Tim take it into their heads
to pay us a visit?"

"He will take all their attention, if Shasta concludes to have a part in
the matter, and they won't have time to think of us."

"But suppose they _do_ come back here?"

"We must be prepared at any rate; but don't let the thought make us
uneasy. We have two good guns, and Terror would be worth half a dozen
men if we get into close quarters."

"He may be all that; but a rifle-shot could quickly stretch him out
lifeless. It won't do for us to go to sleep until Tim or Shasta come
back."

"Of course not. I do not feel like it, even if we were satisfied that it
was safe for us to do so."

"Look at Shasta!"

The Indian was far down the stream, still speeding with his
extraordinary velocity, using his arms as though they would never tire.

"So sick a few hours ago!"

"Well enough now."

"Didn't you notice how he trembled?"

"Yes; he is still weak, but an Indian soon recovers himself."

"All he needed was the root which he chewed and which cured him almost
immediately. These savages are what you call Thomsonians I suppose."

"They are the original ones no doubt. I have heard that some of their
medicine men are the most skillful of physicians."

"Yes; we hear all kinds of things about them. What stories we have read,
and yet they don't look and act as I imagined they would. I thought they
would suffer and die without showing the least pain, and yet Shasta
wasn't anyways backward about it."

"No doubt the poor fellow felt bad enough, and he hasn't got over it
yet. You can tell that from his appearance."

"It will take all his skill to help Tim. Just as like as not he will
take Shasta for an enemy and shoot him."

"If they only see each other before dark, so that Tim can understand
that he has a friend at work."

"But you see it is nearly dark now, and it is likely he is in the woods
by this time."

"What danger can he be in then?"

"The Indians may cross over to follow him."

They were silent a while when Elwood suddenly exclaimed.

"Suppose Shasta is an enemy and has gone to help his people?"

Howard shook his head.

"No fear of that. That is the last thing that can occur."

The night gradually deepened and proved to be quite dark, a faint moon
shedding a luster that made the dim light more impressive. The boys
walked back and forth, watching and listening for some evidence of the
approach of their friends, and gradually becoming apprehensive despite
the attempt each made to cheer the spirits of the other.

It was not until quite late that Terror gave utterance to a low, warning
growl, and as they looked across the river they descried a dark object
cautiously approaching.

"What is it?" whispered Elwood.

"It is too dark to tell; but it can't be Tim or Shasta for it's coming
from the wrong direction."

"Aisy now, Mr. Shasta, aisy I say, for the boys may be asleep and we
won't come upon them too sudden't like, as me uncle said when he sat on
a barrel of gun-powder and it blowed up with him. Aisy, Mr. Shasta,
aisy!"




CHAPTER XXVII.

THE NIGHT VOYAGE.


The indistinct object gradually took shape, and the boys then saw Shasta
sitting in his small canoe, while directly behind him was Tim O'Rooney,
his left hand extended backward and grasping the prow of his own boat,
which was being towed by the Indian.

The next moment the foremost lightly touched the shore and the savage
sprung out, quickly followed by the Irishman.

"I beg yez pardon, boys, for the time I tuk to git your dinner; but to
shpake the thruth, I was unavoidably detained, as me brother writ me
when he was locked up in Tipperary jail on his way to visit me."

"We are glad enough to see you again, but where is your game?"

"Worrah, worrah, but I had bad luck wid it. When I tuk it ashore, I sat
it down for a minit, and I hadn't the time to pick it up again."

"But tell us all about it."

This was quickly done, up to the point where Tim was saved by the timely
appearance of the grizzly bear, when, as may well be supposed, the
expressions of wonder were loud and continued.

"You saw nothing more of your pursuers?" asked Howard.

"Not a bit--nor be the same towken do I think they saw me."

"How did you and Shasta meet?"

"That was shtrange, was the same. After I found I was cl'ar of the
varmints, from the raisin that their exclusive attention was occupied by
the b'ar, I stopped and went to thinking--did I. I could saa the great
necessity of our having me own canoe and I went back to whom I left the
same. It took me some time to find it, and when I did find it, it wasn't
it, but the one that belonged to the red gintlemen.

"There was little difference atwixt the two and I thought the best thing
was to make a thrade, and just as I thought that I spied another canoe
coming along the shore as though it was looking for something. I stepped
back and raised the hammer of my gun, when I obsarved there was but one
Injin in the same--was there. So, 'Tim,' says I, ''twould be a shame,'
and I lowered me gun agin.

"Just then, and fur the life of me I don't know what put it into me
head, I thought it was Shasta, though I knowed I had lift him with a big
pain all through him. So I give a low whistle like, and called out
'Shasta,' and with one whip of his paddle he sent his canoe right at my
faat, though I was sure he didn't saa me, and then waited fur me to step
in.

"But he's a quaar fellow, is Shasta," added Tim. "I rached out me hand
to shake his own, but he never noticed it, but motioned fur me to stow
mesilf into the bottom of the canoe; and thin, after some muttering and
throwing of his arms, I could saa he wanted me to howld on to the other
canoe."

"And I did the same, and the way he towed us over the water would have
frightened a steamboat."

"He is a smart fellow, indeed."

The Indian upon landing had just pulled his canoe slightly up the bank
and then had gone at once to the opposite side of the island where he
had lain when sick. They could see him walking slowly back and forth us
if searching for something which he had some difficulty in finding.

"Well, boys, I shpose you are hungry," said Tim, "If yez isn't I begins
to howld a very strong suspicion that it's meself that is."

"Yes," replied Elwood, "we are both very hungry, but we had little
appetite so long as we knew you were in danger."

"It was very kind of yez to restrain your appetite out of respict to me,
and I'll not forgit to do the same when yez git into throuble."

"We can afford to go supperless to-night," remarked Howard, "and feast
on the contemplation of our good fortune. There was a time when our
prospects looked pretty dark."

"Yis, sir; you may well say that. When I had the big bear walking at me
from one direction and the three red gintlemen from the other, I thought
to mesilf what a shplendid opportunity there was for the illigant
exercise of one's idaas. But it was all the doings of the good Lord
above," added Tim very reverently.

"Yes; there can be no doubt of that," replied Howard. "He has cared for
us all the time."

Tim now gave an account of his adventures in his hunt after the deer,
previous to when he was first seen from the island. When he had finished
Elwood asked:

"Are we to stay here over night?"

"I think not, but I defers to the judgment of Mr. Shasta. It's just as
he says about it."

"He appears to be taken up with something over yonder."

"He is searching for some object that he left when he made up his mind
to get well," said Howard.

"He must know all that has occurred, for when we came back from watching
you, there he stood with his arms folded, and a look in his eye that
said he understood more about matters and things than we imagined he
did."

"He must know that we are in danger so long as we are upon this island,
and I should think he would leave it while it is dark."'

"Do yez rest on that pint?" said Tim. "The red gintlemen will attind to
the same--will he."

At this juncture the Pah Utah was observed walking slowly toward them,
his long blanket grasped at the breast by his left hand, while his right
was free. As soon as he came up he pointed at the canoes and muttered
something.

"What does he mean?" asked Elwood.

"Terror understands him better than we do," replied Howard, as the
Newfoundland sprung into the larger boat and nestled down near the
stern.

Our friends were not long in imitating the action of the dog. Tim made
as if to step into the Indian's boat, but he motioned him back, and took
his seat in the front of the larger canoe. The savage now produced a
cord, probably the tendon of some wild animal, with which he speedily
fastened the prow of the larger canoe to the stem of his own.

This done he turned the head down stream and began using his paddle with
the same wonderful dexterity he had displayed during the afternoon. The
boys watched and admired his skill for a long time. The faint moon
barely revealed the shores on either hand, stretching away in misty
gloom, while all before and behind them was darkness.

The muscular arms of Shasta appeared to be as tireless as the
piston-rods of an engine, and at last our friends grow weary of watching
him. The boys became drowsy, and they finally lay down in the bottom of
the boat, with their blanket over them, and went to sleep.

In the course of an hour Tim did the same, and the Pah Utah was this
left alone to ply the canoe, the Newfoundland now and then raising his
head and looking over the edge as if to satisfy himself that all was
right.

Once near the middle of the night Elwood awoke, and pushing his blanket
from his face, raised himself on his elbow and looked around. The same
picture met his eye--the dark-hued Shasta, his long hair streaming over
his shoulders, the blanket down to his waist, and his bronzed arms
working with the silence, skill and regularity of a perfect machine.




CHAPTER XXVIII.

A PAH UTAH'S METHOD OF FISHING.


The gray light of dawn was spreading over the wood and river when Elwood
Brandon again opened his eyes. He was somewhat startled to see nothing
of the Pah Utah, although his canoe was still in the advance; but a
second look showed that they were resting against the bank, and the
Indian lay asleep in the front of his boat, his body and face covered
entirely by his somber-hued blanket.

"No doubt he needs rest, and so I will not wake him!" was Elwood's
thought, as he carefully raised himself to the sitting position. But he
had scarcely moved when the end of Shasta's blanket was raised, and the
boy saw his dark eyes fixed inquiringly upon him. Satisfied that there
was nothing wrong the blanket dropped again and all was still.

Elwood now looked around. Howard was sleeping soundly, his feet resting
against the shaggy sides of Terror, who was equally oblivious to the
external world. There could be no doubt of Tim's somnolence for he gave
unmistakable evidence of it. The light was just sufficient to afford a
distinct view of the other shore, and in the clear summer air of the
morning it had a cool appearance, very pleasing and refreshing to the
eye.

Elwood, of course, had no knowledge of the distance they had come during
the night; but he believed Shasta had not slept more than an hour or
two, and that as a consequence they were many miles from their starting
point--far enough at any rate to make them perfectly easy regarding the
troublesome visitors of yesterday.

He noticed the peculiar character of the place in which Shasta had run
the canoe. It was a small indentation covered with overhanging limbs and
shrubbery in such manner that while the whites could peer out upon the
river there was no danger of their being seen by any passers-by, unless
particular suspicion was directed toward the spot.

Elwood's limbs were so cramped from the forced position in which he had
lain during the night, that he concluded there could be no harm in
stepping ashore to yawn and stretch himself. Of course he would take
good care not to wander away from the boat, as he had seen the danger of
secession in a small party like theirs. As he was stepping over the
canoe he saw Shasta looking at him so intently that he paused. The Pah
Utah nodded, but made a rather odd gesture, which Elwood took as a
caution not to wander away. He nodded assent and stepped out upon the
land. At this juncture Howard awoke and followed him.

"Shall we try and hunt something for breakfast?" asked Elwood.

"Tim's troubles have proved that it is hardly safe; I think we had
better leave all such matters to Shasta."

This was good advice certainly, and the boys acted upon it. They walked
up and down the banks of the river admiring the beautiful scenery, but
seeing nothing of wild animals. They heard the whirr of a flock of birds
overhead, alarmed by the apparition of two human beings, but the
luxuriant vegetation allowed but a glimpse of them as they shot away.

While a few rods distant, they heard the discharge of a rifle, and in no
little trepidation they hastened back to their friends. They were
relieved by finding that it had been done by Tim O'Rooney for the
purpose of affording a means of ignition to some sticks and leaves. He
and the Pah Utah were on shore, making as much preparation for their
breakfast as though they had a dozen men to provide for.

"What does yez think of it?" asked Tim.

"All very well, but where is your breakfast?"

The Irishman jerked his thumb in a very significant manner toward
Shasta.

"You don't mean to eat him," laughed Elwood.

"Git out wid yer nonsense!" retorted Tim. "He and meself have been
talking together, and we've fixed the whole thing."

"What language did you use?"

"This kind of talk."

And the Irishman explained himself by several extravagant but
meaningless gestures.

The fire being nicely burning, Shasta took some white crumbs from a sort
of receptacle in his hunting-shirt, stepped carefully into the canoe,
and then gently dropped them upon the surface of the water. Our friend
watched his movements with interest.

Leaning carefully over the boat, he curved his arm and held his closed
fingers so that they were just within the water, looking down into the
stream all the time with the fixedness of gaze that characterizes the
hawk when about to dart downward after his prey.

Suddenly a flight ripple was heard, and before either of the three on
shore comprehended what he was doing, something flashed before their
gaze, and a plump, glistening fish, fully two pounds in weight, lay
floundering at their feet.

