civilisation of Yucatan."

"Where's that, anyway?"

"In the middle of the Gulf of Mexico. It's all ruins to-day, but once it
was a very prosperous colony of the Atlanteans."

"Never heard of them. Oh yes, I have though. They were the people
Herodotus wrote about, didn't he? But I thought they were mythical."

"They were very real, and so was Atlantis, the continent where they
lived, which lay just north of the Canaries here."

"What's that crocodile sort of thing with wings drawn in the margin?"

"Some sort of beast that lived in those bygone days. The pages are full
of them. That's a cave-tiger. And that's some sort of colossal bat.
Thank goodness he had the sense to illustrate fully, the man who wrote
this, or we should never have been able to reconstruct the tale, or at
any rate we could not have understood half of it. Whole species have
died out since this was written, just as a whole continent has been
swept away and three civilisations quenched. The worst of it is, it was
written by a highly-educated man who somewhat naturally writes a very
bad fist. I've hammered at it all the night through, and have only
managed to make out a few sentences here and there"--he rubbed his hands
appreciatively. "It will take me a year's hard work to translate this
properly."

"Every man to his taste. I'm afraid my interest in the thing wouldn't
last as long as that. But how did it get there? Did your ancient
Egyptian come to Grand Canary for the good of his lungs, and write it
because he felt dull up in that cave?"

"I made a mistake there. The author was not an Egyptian. It was the
similarity of the inscribed character which misled me. The book was
written by one Deucalion, who seems to have been a priest or general--or
perhaps both--and he was an Atlantean. How it got there, I don't know
yet. Probably that was told in the last few pages, which a certain
vandal smashed up with his pocketknife, in getting them away from the
place where they were stowed."

"That's right, abuse me. Deucalion you say? There was a Deucalion in the
Greek mythology. He was one of the two who escaped from the Flood: their
Noah, in fact."

"The swamping of the continent of Atlantis might very well correspond to
the Flood."

"Is there a Pyrrha then? She was Deucalion's wife."

"I haven't come across her yet. But there's a Phorenice, who may be the
same. She seems to have been the reigning Empress, as far as I can make
out at present."

I looked with interest at illustrations in the margin. They were quite
understandable, although the perspective was all wrong. "Weird beasts
they seem to have had knocking about the country in those days. Whacking
big size too, if one may judge. By Jove, that'll be a cave-tiger trying
to puff down a mammoth. I shouldn't care to have lived in those days."

"Probably they had some way of fighting the creatures. However, that
will show itself as I get along with the translation." He looked at his
watch--"I suppose I ought to be ashamed of myself, but I haven't been to
bed. Are you going out?"

"I shall drive back to Las Palmas. I promised a man to have a round at
golf this afternoon."

"Very well, see you at dinner. I hope they've sent back my dress shirts
from the wash. O, lord! I am sleepy."

I left him going up to bed, and went outside and ordered a carriage to
take me down, and there I may say we parted for a considerable time.
A cable was waiting for me in the hotel at Las Palmas to go home for
business forthwith, and there was a Liverpool boat in the harbour which
I just managed to catch as she was steaming out. It was a close thing,
and the boatmen made a small fortune out of my hurry.

Now Coppinger was only an hotel acquaintance, and as I was up to the
eyes in work when I got back to England, I'm afraid I didn't think very
much more about him at the time. One doesn't with people one just meets
casually abroad like that. And it must have been at least a year later
that I saw by a paragraph in one of the papers, that he had given the
lump of sheets to the British Museum, and that the estimated worth of
them was ten thousand pounds at the lowest valuation.

Well, this was a bit of revelation, and as he had so repeatedly
impressed on me that the things were mine by right of discovery, I wrote
rather a pointed note to him mentioning that he seemed to have been
making rather free with my property. Promptly came back a stilted letter
beginning, "Doctor Coppinger regrets" and so on, and with it the English
translation of the wax-upon-talc MSS. He "quite admitted" my claim,
and "trusted that the profits of publication would be a sufficient
reimbursement for any damage received."

Now I had no idea that he would take me unpleasantly like this, and
wrote back a pretty warm reply to that effect; but the only answer I got
to this was through a firm of solicitors, who stated that all further
communications with Dr. Coppinger must be made through them.

I will say here publicly that I regret the line he has taken over the
matter; but as the affair has gone so far, I am disposed to follow out
his proposition. Accordingly the old history is here printed; the credit
(and the responsibility) of the translation rests with Dr. Coppinger;
and whatever revenue accrues from readers, goes to the finder of the
original talc-upon-wax sheets, myself.

If there is a further alteration in this arrangement, it will be
announced publicly at a later date. But at present this appears to be
most unlikely.




1. MY RECALL


The public official reception was over. The sentence had been read, the
name of Phorenice, the Empress, adored, and the new Viceroy installed
with all that vast and ponderous ceremonial which had gained its pomp
and majesty from the ages. Formally, I had delivered up the reins of my
government; formally, Tatho had seated himself on the snake-throne, and
had put over his neck the chain of gems which symbolised the supreme
office; and then, whilst the drums and the trumpets made their
proclamation of clamour, he had risen to his feet, for his first state
progress round that gilded council chamber as Viceroy of the Province of
Yucatan.

With folded arms and bended head, I followed him between the glittering
lines of soldiers, and the brilliant throng of courtiers, and chiefs,
and statesmen. The roof-beams quivered to the cries of "Long Live
Tatho!" "Flourish the Empress!" which came forth as in duty bound, and
the new ruler acknowledged the welcome with stately inclinations of
the head. In turn he went to the three lesser thrones of the lesser
governors--in the East, the North, and the South, and received homage
from each as the ritual was; and I, the man whom his coming had deposed,
followed with the prescribed meekness in his train.

It was a hard task, but we who hold the higher offices learn to carry
before the people a passionless face. Once, twenty years before, these
same fine obeisances had been made to me; now the Gods had seen fit to
make fortune change. But as I walked bent and humbly on behind the heels
of Tatho, though etiquette forbade noisy salutations to myself, it could
not inhibit kindly glances, and these came from every soldier, every
courtier, and every chief who stood there in that gilded hall, and
they fell upon me very gratefully. It is not often the fallen meet such
tender looks.

The form goes, handed down from immemorial custom, that on these great
ceremonial days of changing a ruler, those of the people being present
may bring forward petitions and requests; may make accusations against
their retiring head with sure immunity from his vengeance; or may state
their own private theories for the better government of the State in the
future. I think it may be pardoned to my vanity if I record that not a
voice was raised against me, or against any of the items of my twenty
years of rule. Nor did any speak out for alterations in the future.
Yes, even though we made the circuit for the three prescribed times, all
present showed their approval in generous silence.

Then, one behind the other, the new Viceroy and the old, we marched with
formal step over golden tiles of that council hall beneath the pyramid,
and the great officers of state left their stations and joined in our
train; and at the farther wall we came to the door of those private
chambers which an hour ago had been mine own.

Ah, well! I had no home now in any of those wondrous cities of Yucatan,
and I could not help feeling a bitterness, though in sooth I should have
been thankful enough to return to the Continent of Atlantis with my head
still in its proper station.

Tatho gave his formal summons of "Open ye to the Viceroy," which the
ritual commands, and the slaves within sent the massive stone valves of
the door gaping wide. Tatho entered, I at his heels; the others halted,
sending valedictions from the threshold; and the valves of the door
clanged on the lock behind us. We passed on to the chamber beyond, and
then, when for the first time we were alone together, and the forced
etiquette of courts was behind us, the new Viceroy turned with meekly
folded arms, and bowed low before me.

"Deucalion," he said, "believe me that I have not sought this office. It
was thrust upon me. Had I not accepted, my head would have paid forfeit,
and another man--your enemy--would have been sent out as viceroy in
your place. The Empress does not permit that her will shall ever be
questioned."

"My friend," I made answer, "my brother in all but blood, there is no
man living in all Atlantis or her territories to whom I had liefer hand
over my government. For twenty years now have I ruled this country
of Yucatan, and Mexico beyond, first under the old King, and then
as minister to this new Empress. I know my colony like a book. I am
intimate with all her wonderful cities, with their palaces, their
pyramids, and their people. I have hunted the beasts and the savages in
the forests. I have built roads, and made the rivers so that they will
carry shipping. I have fostered the arts and crafts like a merchant; I
have discoursed, three times each day, the cult of the Gods with
mine own lips. Through evil years and through good have I ruled here,
striving only for the prosperity of the land and the strengthening of
Atlantis, and I have grown to love the peoples like a father. To you I
bequeath them, Tatho, with tender supplications for their interests."

"It is not I that can carry on Deucalion's work with Deucalion's power,
but rest content, my friend, that I shall do my humble best to follow
exactly on in your footsteps. Believe me, I came out to this government
with a thousand regrets, but I would have died sooner than take your
place had I known how vigorously the supplanting would trouble you."

"We are alone here," I said, "away from the formalities of formal
assemblies, and a man may give vent to his natural self without fear of
tarnishing a ceremony. Your coming was something of the suddenest.
Till an hour ago, when you demanded audience, I had thought to rule on
longer; and even now I do not know for what cause I am deposed."

"The proclamation said: 'We relieve our well-beloved Deucalion of his
present service, because we have great need of his powers at home in our
kingdom of Atlantis.'"

"A mere formality."

Tatho looked uneasily round the hangings of the chamber, and drew me
with him to its centre, and lowered his voice.

"I do not think so," he whispered. "I believe she has need of you. There
are troublous times on hand, and Phorenice wants the ablest men in the
kingdom ready to her call."

"You may speak openly," I said, "and without fear of eavesdroppers.
We are in the heart of the pyramid here, built in every way by a man's
length of solid stone. Myself, I oversaw the laying of every course.
And besides, here in Yucatan, we have not the niceties of your old world
diplomacy, and do not listen, because we count it shame to do so."

Tatho shrugged his shoulders. "I acted only according to mine education.
At home, a loose tongue makes a loose head, and there are those whose
trade it is to carry tales. Still, what I say is this: The throne
shakes, and Phorenice sees the need of sturdy props. So she has sent
this proclamation."

"But why come to me? It is twenty years since I sailed to this colony,
and from that day I have not returned to Atlantis once. I know little of
the old country's politics. What small parcel of news drifts out to us
across the ocean, reads with slender interest here. Yucatan is another
world, my dear Tatho, as you in the course of your government will
learn, with new interests, new people, new everything. To us here,
Atlantis is only a figment, a shadow, far away across the waters. It
is for this new world of Yucatan that I have striven through all these
years."

"If Deucalion has small time to spare from his government for brooding
over his fatherland, Atlantis, at least, has found leisure to admire
the deeds of her brilliant son. Why, sir, over yonder at home, your name
carries magic with it. When you and I were lads together, it was the
custom in the colleges to teach that the men of the past were the
greatest this world has ever seen; but to-day this teaching is changed.
It is Deucalion who is held up as the model and example. Mothers name
their sons Deucalion, as the most valuable birth-gift they can make.
Deucalion is a household word. Indeed, there is only one name that is
near to it in familiarity."

"You trouble me," I said, frowning. "I have tried to do my duty for its
own sake, and for the country's sake, not for the pattings and fondlings
of the vulgar. And besides, if there are names to be in every one's
mouth, they should be the names of the Gods."

Tatho shrugged his shoulders. "The Gods? They occupy us very little
these latter years. With our modern science, we have grown past the
tether of the older Gods, and no new one has appeared. No, my Lord
Deucalion, if it were merely the Gods who were your competitors on men's
lips, your name would be a thousand times the better known."

"Of mere human names," I said, "the name of this new Empress should come
first in Atlantis, our lord the old King being now dead."

"She certainly would have it so," replied Tatho, and there was something
in his tone which made me see that more was meant behind the words. I
drew him to one of the marble seats, and bent myself familiarly towards
him. "I am speaking," I said, "not to the new Viceroy of Yucatan, but
to my old friend Tatho, a member of the Priests' Clan, like myself, with
whom I worked side by side in a score of the smaller home governments,
in hamlets, in villages, in smaller towns, in greater towns, as we
gained experience in war and knowledge in the art of ruling people, and
so tediously won our promotion. I am speaking in Tatho's private abode,
that was mine own not two hours since, and I would have an answer with
that plainness which we always then used to one another."

The new Viceroy sighed whimsically. "I almost forget how to speak in
plain words now," he said. "We have grown so polished in these latter
days, that mere bald truth would be hissed as indelicate. But for the
memory of those early years, when we expended as much law and thought
over the ownership of a hay-byre as we should now over the fate of a
rebellious city, I will try and speak plain to you even now, Deucalion.
Tell me, old friend, what is it?"

"What of this new Empress?"

He frowned. "I might have guessed your subject," he said.


"Then speak upon it. Tell me of all the changes that have been made.
What has this Phorenice done to make her throne unstable in Atlantis?"

Tatho frowned still. "If I did not know you to be as honest as our Lord
the Sun, your questions would carry mischief with them. Phorenice has a
short way with those who are daring enough to discuss her policies for
other purpose than politely to praise them."

"You can leave me ignorant if you wish," I said with a touch of chill.
This Tatho seemed to be different from the Tatho I had known at home,
Tatho my workmate, Tatho who had read with me in the College of Priests,
who had run with me in many a furious charge, who had laboured with me
so heavily that the peoples under us might prosper. But he was quick
enough to see my change of tone.

"You force me back to my old self," he said with a half smile, "though
it is hard enough to forget the caution one has learned during the last
twenty years, even when speaking with you. Still, whatever may have
happened to the rest of us, it is clear to see that you at least have
not changed, and, old friend, I am ready to trust you with my life if
you ask it. In fact, you do ask me that very thing when you tell me to
speak all I know of Phorenice."

I nodded. This was more like the old times, when there was full
confidence between us. "The Gods will it now that I return to Atlantis,"
I said, "and what happens after that the Gods alone know. But it would
be of service to me if I could land on her shores with some knowledge of
this Phorenice, for at present I am as ignorant concerning her as some
savage from Europe or mid-Africa."

"What would you have me tell?"

"Tell all. I know only that she, a woman, reigns, whereby the ancient
law of the land, a man should rule; that she is not even of the Priestly
Clan from which the law says all rulers must be drawn; and that, from
