you realize how big it will be to us, after we've diminished a few
hundred more times?"

"We needn't worry over it," said the Doctor. "Even if we knew the lizard
got into the valley the chances of our seeing it here are one in a
million. But we don't even know that. If you'll remember it was still
some distance away from the scratch when it became invisible; I doubt
very much if it even got there. No, I think probably we'll never see it
again."

"I hope not," declared the Very Young Man emphatically.

For another hour they climbed steadily downward, making more rapid
progress than before, for the descent became constantly less difficult.
During this time they spoke little, but it was evident that the Very
Young Man, from the frequent glances he threw around, never for a moment
forgot the possibility of encountering the lizard. The sparrow did not
return, although for that, too, they were constantly on the look-out.

It was nearly half-past one when the Big Business Man threw himself upon
the ground exhausted. The valley at this time had reached a depth of
over ten thousand feet. It was still growing deeper, but the travelers
had made good progress and were not more than fifteen hundred feet above
its bottom.

They had been under tremendous physical exertion for over five hours,
too absorbed in their strange experiences to think of eating, and now
all three agreed it was foolish to attempt to travel farther without
food and rest.

"We had better wait here an hour or two," the Doctor decided. "Our size
will soon remain constant and it won't take us long to get down after
we've rested."

"I'm hungry," suggested the Very Young Man, "how about you?"

They ate and drank sparingly of the little store they had brought with
them. The Doctor would not let them have much, both because he wanted to
conserve their supply, and because he knew in their exhausted condition
it would be bad for them to eat heartily.

It was about two o'clock when they noticed that objects around them no
longer were increasing in size. They had finished their meal and felt
greatly refreshed.

"Things have stopped growing," observed the Very Young Man. "We've done
four pills' worth of the journey anyway," he added facetiously. He rose
to his feet, stretching. He felt sore and bruised all over, but with the
meal and a little rest, not particularly tired.

"I move we go on down now," he suggested, walking to the edge of the
huge crevice in which they were sitting. "It's only a couple of thousand
feet."

"Perhaps we might as well," agreed the Doctor, rising also. "When we get
to the floor of the valley, we can find a good spot and turn in for the
night."

The incongruity of his last words with the scene around made the Doctor
smile. Overhead the sky still showed a narrow ribbon of blue. Across the
valley the sunlight sparkled on the yellowish crags of the rocky wall.
In the shadow, on the side down which they were climbing, the rocks now
shone distinctly phosphorescent, with a peculiar waviness of outline.

"Not much like either night or day, is it?" added the Doctor. "We'll
have to get used to that."

They started off again, and in another two hours found themselves going
down a gentle rocky slope and out upon the floor of the valley.

"We're here at last," said the Big Business Man wearily.

The Very Young Man looked up the great, jagged precipice down which they
had come, to where, far above, its edge against the strip of blue marked
the surface of the ring.

"Some trip," he remarked. "I wouldn't want to tackle that every day."

"Four o'clock," said the Doctor, "the light up there looks just the
same. I wonder what's happened to George."

Neither of his companions answered him. The Big Business Man lay
stretched full length upon the ground near by, and the Very Young Man
still stood looking up the precipice, lost in thought.

"What a nice climb going back," he suddenly remarked.

The Doctor laughed. "Don't let's worry about that, Jack. If you remember
how Rogers described it, getting back is easier than getting in. But the
main point now," he added seriously, "is for us to make sure of getting
down to Arite as speedily as possible."

The Very Young Man surveyed the barren waste around them in dismay. The
floor of the valley was strewn with even larger rocks and bowlders than
those on the surface above, and looked utterly pathless and desolate.
"What do we do first?" he asked dubiously.

"First," said the Doctor, smiling at the Big Business Man, who lay upon
his back staring up into the sky and paying no attention to them
whatever, "I think first we had better settle ourselves for a good long
rest here."

"If we stop at all, let's sleep a while," said the Very Young Man. "A
little rest only gets you stiff. It's a pretty exposed place out here
though, isn't it, to sleep?" he added, thinking of the sparrow and the
lizard.

"One of us will stay awake and watch," answered the Doctor.




CHAPTER XVI

THE PIT OF DARKNESS


At the suggestion of the Very Young Man they located without much
difficulty a sort of cave amid the rocks, which offered shelter for
their rest. Taking turns watching, they passed eight hours in fair
comfort, and by noon next day, after another frugal meal they felt
thoroughly refreshed and eager to continue the journey.

"We sure are doing this classy," observed the Very Young Man. "Think of
Rogers--all he could do was fall asleep when he couldn't stay awake any
more. Gosh, what chances he took!"

"We're playing it safe," agreed the Big Business Man.

"But we mustn't take it too easy," added the Doctor.

The Very Young Man stretched himself luxuriously and buckled his belt on
tighter. "Well, I'm ready for anything," he announced. "What's next?"

The Doctor consulted his papers. "We find the circular pit Rogers made
in the scratch and we descend into it. We take twelve more pills at the
edge of the pit," he said.

The Very Young Man leaped to the top of a rock and looked out over the
desolate waste helplessly. "How are we going to find the pit?" he asked
dubiously. "It's not in sight, that's sure."

"It's down there--about five miles," said the Doctor. "I saw it
yesterday as we came down."

"That's easy," said the Very Young Man, and he started off
enthusiastically, followed by the others.

In less than two hours they found themselves at the edge of the pit. It
appeared almost circular in form, apparently about five miles across,
and its smooth, shining walls extended almost perpendicularly down into
blackness. Somewhat awed by the task confronting them in getting down
into this abyss, the three friends sat down near its brink to discuss
their plan of action.

"We take twelve pills here," said the Doctor. "That ought to make us
small enough to climb down into that."

"Do you think we need so many?" asked the Big Business Man thoughtfully.
"You know, Frank, we're making an awful lot of work for ourselves,
playing this thing so absolutely safe. Think of what a distance down
that will be after we have got as small as twelve pills will make us. It
might take us days to get to the bottom."

"How did Rogers get down?" the Very Young Man wanted to know.

"He took the twelve pills here," the Doctor answered.

"But as I understand it, he fell most of the way down while he was still
big, and then got small afterwards at the bottom." This from the Big
Business Man.

"I don't know how about you," said the Very Young Man drily, "but I'd
much rather take three days to walk down than fall down in one day."

The Doctor smiled. "I still think," he said, "that we had better stick
to the directions Rogers left us. Then at least there is no danger of
our getting lost in size. But I agree with you, Jack. I'd rather not
fall down, even if it takes longer to walk."

"I wonder----" began the Big Business Man. "You know I've been
thinking--it does seem an awful waste of energy for us to let ourselves
get smaller than absolutely necessary in climbing down these places.
Maybe you don't realize it."

"I do," said the Very Young Man, looking sorrowfully at the ragged shoes
on his feet and the cuts and bruises on his legs.

"What I mean is----" persisted the Big Business Man.

"How far do you suppose we have actually traveled since we started last
night?"

"That's pretty hard to estimate," said the doctor. "We have walked
perhaps fifteen miles altogether, besides the climb down. I suppose we
actually came down five or six thousand feet."

"And at the size we are now it would have been twelve thousand feet
down, wouldn't it?"

"Yes," answered the Doctor, "it would."

"And just think," went on the Big Business Man, "right now, based on the
size we were when we began, we've only gone some six feet altogether
from the place we started."

"And a sixteenth of an inch or less since we left the surface of the
ring," said the Doctor smiling.

"Gee, that's a weird thought," the Very Young Man said, as he gazed in
awe at the lofty heights about them.

"I've been thinking," continued the Big Business Man. "You say we must
be careful not to get lost in size. Well, suppose instead of taking
twelve pills here, we only take six. That should be enough to get us
started--possibly enough to get us all the way down. Then before we
moved at all we could take the other six. That would keep it straight,
wouldn't it?"

"Great idea," said the Very Young Man. "I'm in favor of that."

"It sounds feasible--certainly if we can get all the way down with six
pills we will save a lot of climbing."

"If six aren't enough, we can easily take more," added the Big Business
Man.

And so they decided to take only six pills of the drug and to get down
to the bottom of the pit, if possible, without taking more. The pit, as
they stood looking down into it now, seemed quite impossible of descent,
for its almost perpendicular wall was smooth and shining as polished
brass.

They took the drug, standing close together at the edge of the pit.
Immediately began again the same crawling sensation underfoot, much more
rapid this time, while all around them the rocks began very rapidly
increasing in size.

The pit now seemed widening out at an astounding rate. In a few minutes
it had broadened so that its opposite side could not be seen. The wall
at the brink of which they stood had before curved in a great sweeping
arc to enclose the circular hole; now it stretched in a nearly straight,
unbroken line to the right and left as far as they could see. Beneath
them lay only blackness; it was as though they were at the edge of the
world.

"Good God, what a place to go down into," gasped the Big Business Man,
after they had been standing nearly half an hour in silence, appalled at
the tremendous changes taking place around them.

For some time past the wall before them had become sufficiently indented
and broken to make possible their descent. It was the Doctor who first
realized the time--or perhaps it should be said, the size--they were
losing by their inactivity; and when with a few crisp words he brought
them to themselves, they immediately started downward.

For another six hours they traveled downward steadily, stopping only
once to eat. The descent during this time was not unlike that down the
side of the valley, although towards the last it began rapidly to grow
less precipitous.

They now found themselves confronted frequently with gentle slopes
downward, half a mile or more in extent, and sometimes by almost level
places, succeeded by another sharp descent.

During this part of the trip they made more rapid progress than at any
time since starting, the Very Young Man in his enthusiasm at times
running forward and then sitting down to wait for the others to overtake
him.

The light overhead gradually faded into the characteristic luminous
blackness the Chemist had described. As it did so, the phosphorescent
quality of the rocks greatly increased, or at least became more
noticeable, so that the light illuminating the landscape became hardly
less in volume, although totally different in quality.

The ground underfoot and the rocks themselves had been steadily
changing. They had lost now almost entirely the yellowishness, metal
look, and seemed to have more the quality of a gray opaque glass, or
marble. They appeared rather smoother, too, than before, although the
huge bowlders and loosely strewn rocks and pebbles still remained the
characteristic feature of the landscape.

The three men were still diminishing in size; in fact, at this time the
last dose of the drug seemed to have attained its maximum power, for
objects around them appeared to be growing larger at a dizzying rate.
They were getting used to this effect, however, to a great extent, and
were no longer confused by the change as they had been before.

It was the Big Business Man who first showed signs of weakening, and at
the end of six hours or more of steady--and, towards the end, extremely
rapid--traveling he finally threw himself down and declared he could go
no farther. At this point they rested again several hours, taking turns
at watch, and each of them getting some measure of sleep. Of the three,
the Very Young Man appeared in the best condition, although possibly it
was his enthusiasm that kept him from admitting even to himself any
serious physical distress.

It was perhaps ten or twelve hours after they had taken the six pills
that they were again ready to start downward. Before starting the three
adventurers discussed earnestly the advisability of taking the other six
pills. The action of the drug had ceased some time before. They decided
not to, since apparently there was no difficulty facing them at this
part of the journey, and decreasing their stature would only
immeasurably lengthen the distance they had to go.

They had been traveling downward, through a barren land that now showed
little change of aspect, for hardly more than another hour, when
suddenly, without warning, they came upon the tremendous glossy incline
that they had been expecting to reach for some time. The rocks and
bowlders stopped abruptly, and they found at their feet, sloping
downward at an angle of nearly forty-five degrees, a great, smooth
plane. It extended as far as they could see both to the right and left
and downward, at a slightly lessening angle, into the luminous darkness
that now bounded their entire range of vision in every direction.

This plane seemed distinctly of a different substance than anything they
had hitherto encountered. It was, as the Chemist had described it,
apparently like a smooth black marble. Yet it was not so smooth to them
now as he had pictured it, for its surface was sufficiently indented and
ridged to afford foothold.

They started down this plane gingerly, yet with an assumed boldness they
were all of them far from feeling. It was slow work at first, and
occasionally one or the other of them would slide headlong a score of
feet, until a break in the smoothness brought him to a stop. Their
rubber-soled shoes stood them in good stead here, for without the aid
given by them this part of the journey would have been impossible.

For several hours they continued this form of descent. The incline grew
constantly less steep, until finally they were able to walk down it
quite comfortably. They stopped again to eat, and after traveling what
seemed to them some fifteen miles from the top of the incline they
finally reached its bottom.

They seemed now to be upon a level floor--a ground of somewhat metallic
quality such as they had become familiar with above. Only now there were
no rocks or bowlders, and the ground was smoother and with a peculiar
corrugation. On one side lay the incline down which they had come. There
was nothing but darkness to be seen in any other direction. Here they
stopped again to rest and recuperate, and then they discussed earnestly
their next movements.

The Doctor, seated wearily upon the ground, consulted his memoranda
earnestly. The Very Young Man sat close beside him. As usual the Big
Business Man lay prone upon his back nearby, waiting for their decision.

"Rogers wasn't far from a forest when he got here," said the Very Young
Man, looking sidewise at the papers in the Doctor's hand. "And he speaks
of a tiny range of hills; but we can't see anything from here."

"We may not be within many miles of where Rogers landed," answered the
Doctor.

"No reason why we should be, at that, is there? Do you think we'll ever
find Arite?"

"Don't overlook the fact we've got six more pills to take here," called
the Big Business Man.

"That's just what I was considering," said the Doctor thoughtfully.
"There's no use our doing anything until we have attained the right
size. Those hills and the forest and river we are looking for might be
here right at our feet and we couldn't see them while we are as big as
this."

"We'd better take the pills and stay right here until their action wears
off. I'm going to take a sleep," said the Big Business Man.

"I think we might as well all sleep," said the Doctor. "There could not
possibly be anything here to harm us."

They each took the six additional pills without further words.
Physically exhausted as they were, and with the artificial drowsiness
produced by the drug, they were all three in a few moments fast asleep.




CHAPTER XVII

THE WELCOME OF THE MASTER


It was nearly twelve hours later, as their watches showed them, that the
first of the weary adventurers awoke. The Very Young Man it was who
first opened his eyes with a confused sense of feeling that he was in
bed at home, and that this was the momentous day he was to start his
journey into the ring. He sat up and rubbed his eyes vigorously to see
more clearly his surroundings.

Beside him lay his two friends, fast asleep. With returning
consciousness came the memory of the events of the day and night before.
The Very Young Man sprang to his feet and vigorously awoke his
companions.

The action of the drug again had ceased, and at first glance the scene
seemed to have changed very little. The incline now was some distance
away, although still visible, stretching up in a great arc and fading
away into the blackness above. The ground beneath their feet still of
its metallic quality, appeared far rougher than before. The Very Young
