the sins of our learning."

With this, the archbishop passed his arm affectionately through his
brother's, and said, "Beshrew me, Montagu, thou lookest worn and weary.
Surely thou lackest food, and supper shall be hastened. Even I, who have
but slender appetite, grow hungered in these cool gloaming hours."

"Dismiss my comrade, George,--I would speak to thee," whispered Montagu.

"Thou knowest not Latin?" said the archbishop, turning with a
compassionate eye to Nevile, whose own eye was amorously fixed on the
delicate confectioneries,--"never too late to learn. Hold, here is a
grammar of the verbs, that, with mine own hand, I have drawn up for
youth. Study thine amo and thy moneo, while I confer on Church matters
with giddy Montagu. I shall expect, ere we sup, that thou wilt have
mastered the first tenses."

"But--"

"Oh, nay, nay; but me no buts. Thou art too tough, I fear me, for
flagellation, a wondrous improver of tender youth,"--and the prelate
forced his grammar into the reluctant hands of Marmaduke, and sauntered
down one of the solitary alleys with his brother.

Long and earnest was their conference, and at one time keen were their
dispute's.

The archbishop had very little of the energy of Montagu or the
impetuosity of Warwick, but he had far more of what we now call mind, as
distinct from talent, than either; that is, he had not their capacities
for action, but he had a judgment and sagacity that made him considered
a wise and sound adviser: this he owed principally to the churchman's
love of ease, and to his freedom from the wear and tear of the passions
which gnawed the great minister and the aspiring courtier; his natural
intellect was also fostered by much learning. George Nevile had been
reared, by an Italian ecclesiastic, in all the subtle diplomacy of the
Church; and his ambition, despising lay objects (though he consented to
hold the office of chancellor), was concentrated in that kingdom over
kings which had animated the august dominators of religious Rome.
Though, as we have said, still in that age when the affections are
usually vivid, [He was consecrated Bishop of Exeter at the age of
twenty; at twenty-six he became Archbishop of York, and was under thirty
at the time referred to in the text.] George Nevile loved no human
creature,--not even his brothers; not even King Edward, who, with all
his vices, possessed so eminently the secret that wins men's hearts.
His early and entire absorption in the great religious community, which
stood apart from the laymen in order to control them, alienated him from
his kind; and his superior instruction only served to feed him with a
calm and icy contempt for all that prejudice, as he termed it, held dear
and precious. He despised the knight's wayward honour, the burgher's
crafty honesty. For him no such thing as principle existed; and
conscience itself lay dead in the folds of a fancied exemption from all
responsibility to the dull herd, that were but as wool and meat to the
churchman shepherd. But withal, if somewhat pedantic, he had in his
manner a suavity and elegance and polish which suited well his high
station, and gave persuasion to his counsels. In all externals he was as
little like a priest as the high-born prelates of that day usually were.
In dress he rivalled the fopperies of the Plantagenet brothers; in the
chase he was more ardent than Warwick had been in his earlier youth; and
a dry sarcastic humour, sometimes elevated into wit, gave liveliness to
his sagacious converse.

Montagu desired that the archbishop and himself should demand solemn
audience of Edward, and gravely remonstrate with the king on the
impropriety of receiving the brother of a rival suitor, while Warwick
was negotiating the marriage of Margaret with a prince of France.

"Nay," said the archbishop, with a bland smile, that fretted Montagu
to the quick, "surely even a baron, a knight, a franklin, a poor priest
like myself, would rise against the man who dictated to his hospitality.
Is a king less irritable than baron, knight, franklin, and priest,--or
rather, being, as it were, per legem, lord of all, hath he not
irritability eno' for all four? Ay, tut and tush as thou wilt, John, but
thy sense must do justice to my counsel at the last. I know Edward well;
he hath something of mine own idlesse and ease of temper, but with more
of the dozing lion than priests, who have only, look you, the mildness
of the dove. Prick up his higher spirit, not by sharp remonstrance, but
by seeming trust. Observe to him, with thy gay, careless laugh--which,
methinks, thou hast somewhat lost of late--that with any other prince
Warwick might suspect some snare, some humiliating overthrow of his
embassage, but that all men know how steadfast in faith and honour is
Edward IV."

"Truly," said Montagu, with a forced smile, "you understand mankind; but
yet, bethink you--suppose this fail, and Warwick return to England to
hear that he hath been cajoled and fooled; that the Margaret he had
crossed the seas to affiance to the brother of Louis is betrothed to
Charolois--bethink you, I say, what manner of heart beats under our
brother's mail."

"Impiger, iracundus!" said the archbishop; "a very Achilles, to whom our
English Agamemnon, if he cross him, is a baby. All this is sad truth;
our parents spoilt him in his childhood, and glory in his youth, and
wealth, power, success, in his manhood. Ay! if Warwick be chafed,
it will be as the stir of the sea-serpent, which, according to the
Icelanders, moves a world. Still, the best way to prevent the danger is
to enlist the honour of the king in his behalf,--to show that our
eyes are open, but that we disdain to doubt, and are frank to confide.
Meanwhile send messages and warnings privately to Warwick."

These reasonings finally prevailed with Montagu, and the brothers
returned with one mind to the house. Here, as after their ablutions they
sat down to the evening meal, the archbishop remembered poor Marmaduke,
and despatched to him one of his thirty household chaplains. Marmaduke
was found fast asleep over the second tense of the verb amo.




CHAPTER VI. THE ARRIVAL OF THE COUNT DE LA ROCHE, AND THE VARIOUS
EXCITEMENT PRODUCED ON MANY PERSONAGES BY THAT EVENT.

The prudence of the archbishop's counsel was so far made manifest, that
on the next day Montagu found all remonstrance would have been too late.
The Count de la Roche had already landed, and was on his way to London.
The citizens, led by Rivers partially to suspect the object of the
visit, were delighted not only by the prospect of a brilliant pageant,
but by the promise such a visit conveyed of a continued peace with their
commercial ally; and the preparations made by the wealthy merchants
increased the bitterness and discontent of Montagu. At length, at the
head of a gallant and princely retinue, the Count de la Roche entered
London. Though Hastings made no secret of his distaste to the Count de
la Roche's visit, it became his office as lord chamberlain to meet the
count at Blackwall, and escort him and his train, in gilded barges, to
the palace.

In the great hall of the Tower, in which the story of Antiochus was
painted by the great artists employed under Henry III., and on the
elevation of the dais, behind which, across Gothic columns, stretched
draperies of cloth-of-gold, was placed Edward's chair of state. Around
him were grouped the Dukes of Clarence and Gloucester, the Lords
Worcester, Montagu, Rivers, D'Eyncourt, St. John, Raoul de Fulke, and
others. But at the threshold of the chamber stood Anthony Woodville, the
knightly challenger, his knee bound by the ladye-badge of the S. S.,
and his fine person clad in white-flowered velvet of Genoa, adorned with
pearls. Stepping forward, as the count appeared, the gallant Englishman
bent his knee half-way to the ground, and raising the count's hand to
his lips, said in French, "Deign, noble sir, to accept the gratitude of
one who were not worthy of encounter from so peerless a hand, save
by the favour of the ladies of England, and your own courtesy, which
ennobles him whom it stoops to." So saying, he led the count towards the
king.

De la Roche, an experienced and profound courtier, and justly deserving
Hall's praise as a man of "great witte, courage, valiantness, and
liberalitie," did not affect to conceal the admiration which the
remarkable presence of Edward never failed to excite; lifting his hand
to his eyes, as if to shade them from a sudden blaze of light, he would
have fallen on both knees, but Edward with quick condescension raised
him, and, rising himself, said gayly,--

"Nay, Count de la Roche, brave and puissant chevalier, who hath crossed
the seas in honour of knighthood and the ladies, we would, indeed,
that our roiaulme boasted a lord like thee, from whom we might ask such
homage. But since thou art not our subject, it consoles us at least that
thou art our guest. By our halidame, Lord Scales, thou must look well
to thy lance and thy steed's girths, for never, I trow, hast thou met a
champion of goodlier strength and knightlier mettle."

"My lord king," answered the count, "I fear me, indeed, that a knight
like the Sieur Anthony, who fights under the eyes of such a king, will
prove invincible. Did kings enter the lists with kings, where, through
broad Christendom, find a compeer for your Highness?"

"Your brother, Sir Count, if fame lies not," returned Edward, slightly
laughing, and lightly touching the Bastard's shoulder, "were a fearful
lance to encounter, even though Charlemagne himself were to revive with
his twelve paladins at his back. Tell us, Sir Count," added the king,
drawing himself up,--"tell us, for we soldiers are curious in such
matters, hath not the Count of Charolois the advantage of all here in
sinews and stature?"

"Sire," returned De la Roche, "my princely brother is indeed mighty
with the brand and battle-axe, but your Grace is taller by half the
head,--and, peradventure, of even a more stalwart build; but that mere
strength in your Highness is not that gift of God which strikes the
beholder most."

Edward smiled good-humouredly at a compliment the truth of which was too
obvious to move much vanity, and said with a royal and knightly grace,
"Our House of York hath been taught, Sir Count, to estimate men's beauty
by men's deeds, and therefore the Count of Charolois hath long been
known to us--who, alas, have seen him not!--as the fairest gentleman
of Europe. My Lord Scales, we must here publicly crave your pardon. Our
brother-in-law, Sir Count, would fain have claimed his right to hold you
his guest, and have graced himself by exclusive service to your person.
We have taken from him his lawful office, for we kings are jealous, and
would not have our subjects more honoured than ourselves." Edward turned
round to his courtiers as he spoke, and saw that his last words had
called a haughty and angry look to the watchful countenance of Montagu.
"Lord Hastings," he continued, "to your keeping, as our representative,
we intrust this gentleman. He must need refreshment ere we present him
to our queen."

The count bowed to the ground, and reverently withdrew from the royal
presence, accompanied by Hastings. Edward then, singling Anthony
Woodville and Lord Rivers from the group, broke up the audience, and,
followed by those two noblemen, quitted the hall.

Montagu, whose countenance had recovered the dignified and high-born
calm habitual to it, turned to the Duke of Clarence, and observed
indifferently, "The Count de la Roche hath a goodly mien, and a fair
tongue."

"Pest on these Burgundians!" answered Clarence, in an undertone, and
drawing Montagu aside. "I would wager my best greyhound to a scullion's
cur that our English knights will lower their burgonets."

"Nay, sir, an idle holiday show. What matters whose lance breaks, or
whose destrier stumbles?"

"Will you not, yourself, cousin Montagu--you who are so peerless in the
joust--take part in the fray?"

"I, your Highness,--I, the brother of the Earl of Warwick, whom this
pageant hath been devised by the Woodvilles to mortify and disparage in
his solemn embassy to Burgundy's mightiest foe!--I!"

"Sooth to say," said the young prince, much embarrassed, "it grieves
me sorely to hear thee speak as if Warwick would be angered at this
pastime. For, look you, Montagu, I, thinking only of my hate to Burgundy
and my zeal for our English honour, have consented, as high constable,
and despite my grudge to the Woodvilles, to bear the bassinet of our own
champion, and--"

"Saints in heaven!" exclaimed Montagu, with a burst of his fierce
brother's temper, which he immediately checked, and changed into a tone
that concealed, beneath outward respect, the keenest irony, "I crave
your pardon humbly for my vehemence, Prince of Clarence. I suddenly
remember me that humility is the proper virtue of knighthood. Your
Grace does indeed set a notable example of that virtue to the peers of
England; and my poor brother's infirmity of pride will stand rebuked for
aye, when he hears that George Plantagenet bore the bassinet of Anthony
Woodville."

"But it is for the honour of the ladies," said Clarence, falteringly;
"in honour of the fairest maid of all--the flower of English beauty--the
Lady Isabel--that I--"

"Your Highness will pardon me," interrupted Montagu; "but I do trust to
your esteem for our poor and insulted House of Nevile so far as to be
assured that the name of my niece Isabel will not be submitted to the
ribald comments of a base-born Burgundian."

"Then I will break no lance in the lists!"

"As it likes you, prince," replied Montagu, shortly; and, with a low
bow, he quitted the chamber, and was striding to the outer gate of the
Tower, when a sweet, clear voice behind him called him by his name.
He turned abruptly, to meet the dark eye and all-subduing smile of the
boy-Duke of Gloucester.

"A word with you, Montagu, noblest and most prized, with your princely
brothers, of the champions of our House,--I read your generous
indignation with our poor Clarence. Ay, sir! ay!--it was a weakness in
him that moved even me. But you have not now to learn that his nature,
how excellent soever, is somewhat unsteady. His judgment alone lacks
weight and substance,--ever persuaded against his better reason by
those who approach his infirmer side; but if it be true that our cousin
Warwick intends for him the hand of the peerless Isabel, wiser heads
will guide his course."

"My brother," said Montagu, greatly softened, "is much beholden to your
Highness for a steady countenance and friendship, for which I also,
believe me--and the families of Beauchamp, Montagu, and Nevile--are duly
grateful. But to speak plainly (which your Grace's youthful candour,
so all-acknowledged, will permit), the kinsmen of the queen do now so
aspire to rule this land, to marry or forbid to marry, not only our own
children, but your illustrious father's, that I foresee in this visit of
the bastard Anthony the most signal disgrace to Warwick that ever king
passed upon ambassador or gentleman. And this moves me more!--yea, I vow
to Saint George, my patron, it moves me more--by the thought of
danger to your royal House than by the grief of slight to mine; for
Warwick--but you know him."

"Montagu, you must soothe and calm your brother if chafed. I impose that
task on your love for us. Alack, would that Edward listened more to me
and less to the queen's kith! These Woodvilles!--and yet they may live
to move not wrath but pity. If aught snapped the thread of Edward's life
(Holy Paul forbid!), what would chance to Elizabeth, her brothers, her
children?"

"Her children would mount the throne that our right hands built," said
Montagu, sullenly.

"Ah, think you so?--you rejoice me! I had feared that the barons might,
that the commons would, that the Church must, pronounce the unhappy
truth, that--but you look amazed, my lord! Alas, my boyish years are too
garrulous!"

"I catch not your Highness's meaning."

"Pooh, pooh! By Saint Paul, your seeming dulness proves your loyalty;
but with me, the king's brother, frankness were safe. Thou knowest well
that the king was betrothed before to the Lady Eleanor Talbot; that
such betrothal, not set aside by the Pope, renders his marriage with
Elizabeth against law; that his children may (would to Heaven it were
not so!) be set aside as bastards, when Edward's life no longer shields
them from the sharp eyes of men."

"Ah," said Montagu, thoughtfully; "and in that case, George of Clarence
would wear the crown, and his children reign in England."

"Our Lord forefend," said Richard, "that I should say that Warwick
thought of this when he deemed George worthy of the hand of Isabel. Nay,
it could not be so; for, however clear the claim, strong and powerful
would be those who would resist it, and Clarence is not, as you will
see, the man who can wrestle boldly,--even for a throne. Moreover, he is
too addicted to wine and pleasure to bid fair to outlive the king."

Montagu fixed his penetrating eyes on Richard, but dropped them,
abashed, before that steady, deep, unrevealing gaze, which seemed to
pierce into other hearts, and show nothing of the heart within.

"Happy Clarence!" resumed the prince, with a heavy sigh, and after a
brief pause,--"a Nevile's husband and a Warwick's son--what can the
saints do more for men? You must excuse his errors--all our errors--to
your brother. You may not know, peradventure, sweet Montagu, how deep
an interest I have in maintaining all amity between Lord Warwick and the
king. For methinks there is one face fairer than fair Isabel's, and one
man more to be envied than even Clarence. Fairest face to me in the wide
world is the Lady Anne's! happiest man between the cradle and the grave
is he whom the Lady Anne shall call her lord! and if I--oh, look you,
Montagu, let there be no breach between Warwick and the king! Fare you
well, dear lord and cousin,--I go to Baynard's Castle till these feasts
are over."

"Does not your Grace," said Montagu, recovering from the surprise into
which one part of Gloucester's address had thrown him--"does not your
Grace--so skilled in lance and horsemanship--preside at the lists?"

"Montagu, I love your brother well enough to displease my king. The
great earl shall not say, at least, that Richard Plantagenet in his
absence forgot the reverence due to loyalty and merit. Tell him that;
and if I seem (unlike Clarence) to forbear to confront the queen and
her kindred, it is because you should make no enemies,--not the less for
that should princes forget no friends."

Richard said this with a tone of deep feeling, and, folding his arms
within his furred surcoat, walked slowly on to a small postern admitting
to the river; but there, pausing by a buttress which concealed him till
Montagu had left the yard, instead of descending to his barge, he turned
back into the royal garden. Here several of the court of both sexes
were assembled, conferring on the event of the day. Richard halted at a
distance, and contemplated their gay dresses and animated countenances
with something between melancholy and scorn upon his young brow. One
of the most remarkable social characteristics of the middle ages is
the prematurity at which the great arrived at manhood, shared in its
passions, and indulged its ambitions. Among the numerous instances in
our own and other countries that might be selected from history, few are
more striking than that of this Duke of Gloucester, great in camp and
in council at an age when nowadays a youth is scarcely trusted to the
discipline of a college. The whole of his portentous career was closed,
indeed, before the public life of modern ambition usually commences.
Little could those accustomed to see on our stage "the elderly ruffian"
[Sharon Turner] our actors represent, imagine that at the opening
of Shakspeare's play of "Richard the Third" the hero was but in his
nineteenth year; but at the still more juvenile age in which he appears
in this our record, Richard of Gloucester was older in intellect,
and almost in experience, than many a wise man at the date of
thirty-three,--the fatal age when his sun set forever on the field of
Bosworth!

The young prince, then, eyed the gaudy, fluttering, babbling assemblage
before him with mingled melancholy and scorn. Not that he felt, with the
acuteness which belongs to modern sentiment, his bodily defects amidst
that circle of the stately and the fair, for they were not of a nature
to weaken his arm in war or lessen his persuasive influences in peace.
But it was rather that sadness which so often comes over an active and
ambitious intellect in early youth, when it pauses to ask, in sorrow and
disdain, what its plots and counterplots, its restlessness and strife,
are really worth. The scene before him was of pleasure,--but in pleasure
neither the youth nor the manhood of Richard III. was ever pleased;
though not absolutely of the rigid austerity of Amadis or our Saxon
Edward, he was comparatively free from the licentiousness of his times.
His passions were too large for frivolous excitements. Already the
Italian, or, as it is falsely called, the Machiavelian policy, was
pervading the intellect of Europe, and the effects of its ruthless,
grand, and deliberate statecraft are visible from the accession of
Edward IV. till the close of Elizabeth's reign. With this policy, which
reconciled itself to crime as a necessity of wisdom, was often blended a
refinement of character which disdained vulgar vices. Not skilled alone
in those knightly accomplishments which induced Caxton, with propriety,
to dedicate to Richard "The Book of the Order of Chivalry," the Duke of
Gloucester's more peaceful amusements were borrowed from severer Graces
than those which presided over the tastes of his royal brothers. He
loved, even to passion, the Arts, Music,--especially of the more Doric
and warlike kind,--Painting and Architecture; he was a reader of books,
as of men,--the books that become princes,--and hence that superior
knowledge of the principles of law and of commerce which his brief reign
evinced. More like an Italian in all things than the careless Norman
or the simple Saxon, Machiavel might have made of his character a
companion, though a contrast to that of Castruccio Castrucani.

The crowd murmured and rustled at the distance, and still with folded
arms Richard gazed aloof, when a lady, entering the garden from the
palace, passed by him so hastily that she brushed his surcoat, and,
turning round in surprise, made a low reverence, as she exclaimed,
"Prince Richard! and alone amidst so many!"

"Lady," said the duke, "it was a sudden hope that brought me into this
garden,--and that was the hope to see your fair face shining above the
rest."

"Your Highness jests," returned the lady, though her superb countenance
and haughty carriage evinced no opinion of herself so humble as her
words would imply.

"My Lady of Bonville," said the young duke, laying his hand on her arm,
"mirth is not in my thoughts at this hour."

"I believe your Highness; for the Lord Richard Plantagenet is not one of
the Woodvilles. The mirth is theirs to-day."

"Let who will have mirth,--it is the breath of a moment. Mirth cannot
tarnish glory,--the mirror in which the gods are glassed."

"I understand you, my lord," said the proud lady; and her face, before
stern and high, brightened into so lovely a change, so soft and winning
a smile, that Gloucester no longer marvelled that that smile had rained
so large an influence on the fate and heart of his favourite Hastings.
The beauty of this noble woman was indeed remarkable in its degree, and
peculiar in its character. She bore a stronger likeness in feature to
the archbishop than to either of her other brothers; for the prelate
had the straight and smooth outline of the Greeks,--not like Montagu and
Warwick, the lordlier and manlier aquiline of the Norman race,--and
his complexion was feminine in its pale clearness. But though in this
resembling the subtlest of the brethren, the fair sister shared with
Warwick an expression, if haughty, singularly frank and candid in its
imperious majesty; she had the same splendid and steady brilliancy
of eye, the same quick quiver of the lip, speaking of nervous
susceptibility and haste of mood. The hateful fashion of that day which
pervaded all ranks, from the highest to the lowest, was the prodigal
use of paints and cosmetics, and all imaginable artificial adjuncts of a
spurious beauty. This extended often even to the men, and the sturdiest
warrior deemed it no shame to recur to such arts of the toilet as the
vainest wanton in our day would never venture to acknowledge. But the
Lady Bonville, proudly confident of her beauty, and possessing a purity
of mind that revolted from the littleness of courting admiration,
contrasted forcibly in this the ladies of the court. Her cheek was of a
marble whiteness, though occasionally a rising flush through the clear,
rich, transparent skin showed that in earlier youth the virgin bloom had
not been absent from the surface. There was in her features, when they
reposed, somewhat of the trace of suffering,--of a struggle, past it may
be, but still remembered. But when she spoke, those features lighted
up and undulated in such various and kindling life as to dazzle, to
bewitch, or to awe the beholder, according as the impulse moulded the
expression. Her dress suited her lofty and spotless character. Henry
VI. might have contemplated with holy pleasure its matronly decorum; the
jewelled gorget ascended to the rounded and dimpled chin; the arms were
bare only at the wrists, where the blue veins were seen through a
skin of snow; the dark glossy locks, which her tirewoman boasted, when
released, swept the ground, were gathered into a modest and simple
braid, surmounted by the beseeming coronet that proclaimed her rank. The
Lady Bonville might have stood by the side of Cornelia, the model of
a young and high-born matron, in whose virtue the honour of man might
securely dwell.

"I understand you, my lord," she said, with her bright, thankful smile;
"and as Lord Warwick's sister, I am grateful."

"Your love for the great earl proves you are noble enough to forgive,"
said Richard, meaningly. "Nay, chide me not with that lofty look; you
know that there are no secrets between Hastings and Gloucester."

"My lord duke, the head of a noble House hath the right to dispose of
the hands of the daughters; I know nothing in Lord Warwick to forgive."

But she turned her head as she spoke, and a tear for a moment trembled
in that haughty eye.

"Lady," said Richard, moved to admiration, "to you let me confide my
secret. I would be your nephew. Boy though I be in years, my heart beats
as loudly as a man's; and that heart beats for Anne."

"The love of Richard Plantagenet honours even Warwick's daughter!"

"Think you so? Then stand my friend; and, being thus my friend,
intercede with Warwick, if he angers at the silly holiday of this
Woodville pageant."

"Alas, sir! you know that Warwick listens to no interceders between
himself and his passions. But what then? Grant him wronged, aggrieved,
trifled with,--what then? Can he injure the House of York?"

Richard looked in some surprise at the fair speaker.

"Can he injure the House of York?--Marry, yes," he replied bluntly.

"But for what end? Whom else should he put upon the throne?"

"What if he forgive the Lancastrians? What if--"

"Utter not the thought, prince, breathe it not," exclaimed the Lady
Bonville, almost fiercely. "I love and honour my brave brother,
despite--despite--" She paused a moment, blushed, and proceeded rapidly,
without concluding the sentence. "I love him as a woman of his House
must love the hero who forms its proudest boast. But if, for any
personal grudge, any low ambition, any rash humour, the son of my father
Salisbury could forget that Margaret of Anjou placed the gory head of
that old man upon the gates of York, could by word or deed abet the
cause of usurping and bloody Lancaster,--I would--I would--Out upon my
sex! I could do nought but weep the glory of Nevile and Monthermer gone
forever."

Before Richard could reply, the sound of musical instruments, and a
procession of heralds and pages proceeding from the palace, announced
the approach of Edward. He caught the hand of the dame of Bonville,
lifted it to his lips, and saying, "May fortune one day permit me to
face as the earl's son the earl's foes," made his graceful reverence,
glided from the garden, gained his barge, and was rowed to the huge pile
of Baynard's Castle, lately reconstructed, but in a gloomy and barbaric
taste, and in which, at that time, he principally resided with his
mother, the once peerless Rose of Raby.

The Lady of Bonville paused a moment, and in that pause her countenance
recovered its composure. She then passed on, with a stately step,
towards a group of the ladies of the court, and her eye noted with proud
pleasure that the highest names of the English knighthood and nobility,
comprising the numerous connections of her family, formed a sullen
circle apart from the rest, betokening, by their grave countenances and
moody whispers, how sensitively they felt the slight to Lord Warwick's
embassy in the visit of the Count de la Roche, and how little they were
disposed to cringe to the rising sun of the Woodvilles. There, collected
into a puissance whose discontent hard sufficed to shake a firmer throne
(the young Raoul de Fulke, the idolater of Warwick, the impersonation in
himself of the old Norman seignorie, in their centre), with folded arms
and lowering brows, stood the earl's kinsmen, the Lords Fitzhugh and
Fauconberg: with them, Thomas Lord Stanley, a prudent noble, who rarely
sided with a malcontent, and the Lord St. John, and the heir of the
ancient Bergavennies, and many another chief, under whose banner marched
an army. Richard of Gloucester had shown his wit in refusing to mingle
in intrigues which provoked the ire of that martial phalanx. As the Lady
of Bonville swept by these gentlemen, their murmur of respectful homage,
their profound salutation, and unbonneted heads, contrasted forcibly
with the slight and grave, if not scornful, obeisance they had just
rendered to one of the queen's sisters, who had passed a moment before
in the same direction. The lady still moved on, and came suddenly across
the path of Hastings, as, in his robes of state, he issued from the
palace. Their eyes met, and both changed colour.

"So, my lord chamberlain," said the dame, sarcastically, "the Count de
la Roche is, I hear, consigned to your especial charge."

"A charge the chamberlain cannot refuse, and which William Hastings does
not covet."

"A king had never asked Montagu and Warwick to consider amongst their
duties any charge they had deemed dishonouring."

"Dishonouring, Lady Bonville!" exclaimed Hastings, with a bent brow and
a flushed cheek,--"neither Montagu nor Warwick had, with safety, applied
to me the word that has just passed your lips."

"I crave your pardon," answered Katherine, bitterly. "Mine articles
of faith in men's honour are obsolete or heretical. I had deemed it
dishonouring in a noble nature to countenance insult to a noble enemy
in his absence. I had deemed it dishonouring in a brave soldier, a
well-born gentleman (now from his valiantness, merit, and wisdom
become a puissant and dreaded lord), to sink into that lackeydom and
varletaille which falsehood and cringing have stablished in these walls,
and baptized under the name of 'courtiers.' Better had Katherine de
Bonville esteemed Lord Hastings had he rather fallen under a king's
displeasure than debased his better self to a Woodville's dastard
schemings."

"Lady, you are cruel and unjust, like all your haughty race; and idle
were reply to one who, of all persons, should have judged me better.
For the rest, if this mummery humbles Lord Warwick, gramercy! there
is nothing in my memory that should make my share in it a gall to my
conscience; nor do I owe the Neviles so large a gratitude, that rather
than fret the pile of their pride, I should throw down the scaffolding
on which my fearless step hath clomb to as fair a height, and one
perhaps that may overlook as long a posterity, as the best baron that
ever quartered the Raven Eagle and the Dun Bull. But," resumed Hastings,
with a withering sarcasm, "doubtless the Lady de Bonville more admires
the happy lord who holds himself, by right of pedigree, superior to
all things that make the statesman wise, the scholar learned, and the
soldier famous. Way there--back, gentles,"--and Hastings turned to the
crowd behind,--"way there, for my lord of Harrington and Bonville!"

The bystanders smiled at each other as they obeyed; and a heavy,
shambling, graceless man, dressed in the most exaggerated fopperies of
the day, but with a face which even sickliness, that refines most faces,
could not divest of the most vacant dulness, and a mien and gait to
which no attire could give dignity, passed through the group, bowing
awkwardly to the right and left, and saying, in a thick, husky voice,
"You are too good, sirs,--too good: I must not presume so overmuch on my
seignorie. The king would keep me,--he would indeed, sirs; um--um--why,
Katherine--dame--thy stiff gorget makes me ashamed of thee. Thou wouldst
not think, Lord Hastings, that Katherine had a white skin,--a parlous
white skin. La, you now, fie on these mufflers!" The courtiers sneered;
Hastings, with a look of malignant and pitiless triumph, eyed the
Lady of Bonville. For a moment the colour went and came across her
transparent cheek; but the confusion passed, and returning the insulting
gaze of her ancient lover with an eye of unspeakable majesty, she placed
her arm upon her lord's, and saying calmly, "An English matron cares but
to be fair in her husband's eyes," drew him away; and the words and
the manner of the lady were so dignified and simple, that the courtiers
hushed their laughter, and for the moment the lord of such a woman was
not only envied but respected.

While this scene had passed, the procession preceding Edward had
filed into the garden in long and stately order. From another entrance
Elizabeth, the Princess Margaret, and the Duchess of Bedford, with their
trains, had already issued, and were now ranged upon a flight of marble
steps, backed by a columned alcove, hung with velvet striped into the
royal baudekin, while the stairs themselves were covered with leathern
carpets, powdered with the white rose and the fleur de lis; either side
lined by the bearers of the many banners of Edward, displaying the white
lion of March, the black bull of Clare, the cross of Jerusalem, the
dragon of Arragon, and the rising sun, which he had assumed as his
peculiar war-badge since the battle of Mortimer's Cross. Again, and
louder, came the flourish of music; and a murmur through the crowd,
succeeded by deep silence, announced the entrance of the king. He
appeared, leading by the hand the Count de la Roche, and followed by the
Lords Scales, Rivers, Dorset, and the Duke of Clarence. All eyes were
bent upon the count, and though seen to disadvantage by the side of
the comeliest and stateliest and most gorgeously-attired prince in
Christendom, his high forehead, bright sagacious eye, and powerful frame
did not disappoint the expectations founded upon the fame of one equally
subtle in council and redoubted in war.

The royal host and the princely guest made their way where Elizabeth,
blazing in jewels and cloth-of-gold, shone royally, begirt by the ladies
of her brilliant court. At her right hand stood her mother, at her left,
the Princess Margaret.

"I present to you, my Elizabeth," said Edward, "a princely gentleman, to
whom we nevertheless wish all ill-fortune,--for we cannot desire that he
may subdue our knights, and we would fain hope that he may be conquered
by our ladies."

"The last hope is already fulfilled," said the count, gallantly, as
on his knee he kissed the fair hand extended to him. Then rising, and
gazing full and even boldly upon the young Princess Margaret, he added,
"I have seen too often the picture of the Lady Margaret not to be aware
that I stand in that illustrious presence."

"Her picture! Sir Count," said the queen; "we knew not that it had been
ever limned."

"Pardon me, it was done by stealth."

"And where have you seen it?"

"Worn at the heart of my brother the Count of Charolois!" answered De la
Roche, in a whispered tone.

Margaret blushed with evident pride and delight; and the wily envoy,
leaving the impression his words had made to take their due effect,
addressed himself, with all the gay vivacity he possessed, to the fair
queen and her haughty mother.

After a brief time spent in this complimentary converse, the count then
adjourned to inspect the menagerie, of which the king was very proud.
Edward, offering his hand to his queen, led the way, and the Duchess of
Bedford, directing the count to Margaret by a shrewd and silent glance
of her eye, so far smothered her dislike to Clarence as to ask his
highness to attend herself.

"Ah, lady," whispered the count, as the procession moved along, "what
thrones would not Charolois resign for the hand that his unworthy envoy
is allowed to touch!"

"Sir," said Margaret, demurely looking down, "the Count of Charolois is
a lord who, if report be true, makes war his only mistress."

"Because the only loving mistress his great heart could serve is denied
to his love! Ah, poor lord and brother, what new reasons for eternal war
to Burgundy, when France, not only his foe, becomes his rival!"

Margaret sighed, and the count continued till by degrees he warmed
the royal maiden from her reserve; and his eye grew brighter, and a
triumphant smile played about his lips, when, after the visit to the
menagerie, the procession re-entered the palace, and the Lord Hastings
conducted the count to the bath prepared for him, previous to the
crowning banquet of the night. And far more luxurious and more splendid
than might be deemed by those who read but the general histories of that
sanguinary time, or the inventories of furniture in the houses even of
the great barons, was the accommodation which Edward afforded to his
guest. His apartments and chambers were hung with white silk and linen,
the floors covered with richly-woven carpets; the counterpane of his bed
was cloth-of-gold, trimmed with ermine; the cupboard shone with vessels
of silver and gold; and over two baths were pitched tents of white
cloth of Rennes fringed with silver. [See Madden's Narrative of the Lord
Grauthuse; Archaelogia, 1830.]

Agreeably to the manners of the time, Lord Hastings assisted to disrobe
the count; and, the more to bear him company, afterwards undressed
himself and bathed in the one bath, while the count refreshed his limbs
in the other.

"Pri'thee," said De la Roche, drawing aside the curtain of his tent, and
putting forth his head--"pri'thee, my Lord Hastings, deign to instruct
my ignorance of a court which I would fain know well, and let me weet
whether the splendour of your king, far exceeding what I was taught to
look for, is derived from his revenue as sovereign of England, or chief
of the House of York?"

"Sir," returned Hastings, gravely, putting out his own head, "it is
Edward's happy fortune to be the wealthiest proprietor in England,
except the Earl of Warwick, and thus he is enabled to indulge a state
which yet oppresses not his people."

"Except the Earl of Warwick!" repeated the count, musingly, as the fumes
of the odours with which the bath was filled rose in a cloud over his
long hair,--"ill would fare that subject, in most lands, who was as
wealthy as his king! You have heard that Warwick has met King Louis at
Rouen, and that they are inseparable?"

"It becomes an ambassador to win grace of him he is sent to please."

"But none win the grace of Louis whom Louis does not dupe."

"You know not Lord Warwick, Sir Count. His mind is so strong and
so frank, that it is as hard to deceive him as it is for him to be
deceived."

"Time will show," said the count, pettishly, and he withdrew his head
into the tent.

And now there appeared the attendants, with hippocras, syrups, and
comfits, by way of giving appetite for the supper, so that no further
opportunity for private conversation was left to the two lords. While
the count was dressing, the Lord Scales entered with a superb gown,
clasped with jewels, and lined with minever, with which Edward had
commissioned him to present the Bastard. In this robe the Lord Scales
insisted upon enduing his antagonist with his own hands, and the three
knights then repaired to the banquet. At the king's table no male
personage out of the royal family sat, except Lord Rivers--as
Elizabeth's father--and the Count de la Roche, placed between Margaret
and the Duchess of Bedford.

At another table, the great peers of the realm feasted under the
presidence of Anthony Woodville, while, entirely filling one side of the
hall, the ladies of the court held their "mess" (so-called) apart, and
"great and mighty was the eating thereof!"

The banquet ended, the dance began. The admirable "featliness" of the
Count de la Roche, in the pavon, with the Lady Margaret, was rivalled
only by the more majestic grace of Edward and the dainty steps of
Anthony Woodville. But the lightest and happiest heart which beat in
that revel was one in which no scheme and no ambition but those of love
nursed the hope and dreamed the triumph.

Stung by the coldness even more than by the disdain of the Lady
Bonville, and enraged to find that no taunt of his own, however galling,
could ruffle a dignity which was an insult both to memory and to
self-love, Hastings had exerted more than usual, both at the banquet and
in the revel, those general powers of pleasing, which, even in an age
when personal qualifications ranked so high, had yet made him no less
renowned for successes in gallantry than the beautiful and youthful
king. All about this man witnessed to the triumph of mind over the
obstacles that beset it,--his rise without envy, his safety amidst
foes, the happy ease with which he moved through the snares and pits
of everlasting stratagem and universal wile! Him alone the arts of the
Woodvilles could not supplant in Edward's confidence and love; to him
alone dark Gloucester bent his haughty soul; him alone, Warwick, who
had rejected his alliance, and knew the private grudge the rejection
bequeathed,--him alone, among the "new men," Warwick always treated with
generous respect, as a wise patriot and a fearless soldier; and in
the more frivolous scenes of courtly life, the same mind raised one no
longer in the bloom of youth, with no striking advantages of person, and
studiously disdainful of all the fopperies of the time, to an equality
with the youngest, the fairest, the gaudiest courtier, in that rivalship
which has pleasure for its object and love for its reward. Many a heart
beat quicker as the graceful courtier, with that careless wit which
veiled his profound mournfulness of character, or with that delicate
flattery which his very contempt for human nature had taught him, moved
from dame to donzell; till at length, in the sight and hearing of the
Lady Bonville, as she sat, seemingly heedless of his revenge, amidst
a group of matrons elder than herself, a murmur of admiration made him
turn quickly, and his eye, following the gaze of the bystanders, rested
upon the sweet, animated face of Sibyll, flushed into rich bloom at the
notice it excited. Then as he approached the maiden, his quick glance
darting to the woman he had first loved told him that he had at last
discovered the secret how to wound. An involuntary compression of
Katherine's proud lips, a hasty rise and fall of the stately neck, a
restless, indescribable flutter, as it were, of the whole frame, told
the experienced woman-reader of the signs of jealousy and fear. And he
passed at once to the young maiden's side. Alas! what wonder that Sibyll
that night surrendered her heart to the happiest dreams; and finding
herself on the floors of a court, intoxicated by its perfumed air,
hearing on all sides the murmured eulogies which approved and justified
the seeming preference of the powerful noble, what wonder that she
thought the humble maiden, with her dower of radiant youth and exquisite
beauty, and the fresh and countless treasures of virgin love, might be
no unworthy mate of the "new lord"?

It was morning [The hours of our ancestors, on great occasions, were not
always more seasonable than our own. Froissart speaks of court balls, in
the reign of Richard II., kept up till day.] before the revel ended; and
when dismissed by the Duchess of Bedford, Sibyll was left to herself,
not even amidst her happy visions did the daughter forget her office.
She stole into her father's chamber. He, too, was astir and up,--at work
at the untiring furnace, the damps on his brow, but all Hope's vigour at
his heart. So while Pleasure feasts, and Youth revels, and Love deludes
itself, and Ambition chases its shadows (chased itself by Death),--so
works the world-changing and world-despised SCIENCE, the life within
life, for all living,--and to all dead!




CHAPTER VII. THE RENOWNED COMBAT BETWEEN SIR ANTHONY WOODVILLE AND THE
BASTARD OF BURGUNDY.

And now the day came for the memorable joust between the queen's brother
and the Count de la Roche. By a chapter solemnly convoked at St. Paul's,
the preliminaries were settled; upon the very timber used in decking the
lists King Edward expended half the yearly revenue derived from all the
forests of his duchy of York. In the wide space of Smithfield, destined
at a later day to blaze with the fires of intolerant bigotry, crowded
London's holiday population: and yet, though all the form and parade
of chivalry were there; though in the open balconies never presided
a braver king or a comelier queen; though never a more accomplished
chevalier than Sir Anthony Lord of Scales, nor a more redoubted knight
than the brother of Charles the Bold, met lance to lance,--it was
obvious to the elder and more observant spectators, that the true spirit
of the lists was already fast wearing out from the influences of the
age; that the gentleman was succeeding to the knight, that a more silken
and scheming race had become the heirs of the iron men, who, under
Edward III., had realized the fabled Paladins of Charlemagne and Arthur.
But the actors were less changed than the spectators,--the Well-born
than the People. Instead of that hearty sympathy in the contest, that
awful respect for the champions, that eager anxiety for the honour of
the national lance, which, a century or more ago, would have moved the
throng as one breast, the comments of the bystanders evinced rather the
cynicism of ridicule, the feeling that the contest was unreal, and that
chivalry was out of place in the practical temper of the times. On the
great chessboard the pawns were now so marshalled, that the knight's
moves were no longer able to scour the board and hold in check both
castle and king.

"Gramercy," said Master Stokton, who sat in high state as sheriff,
[Fabyan] "this is a sad waste of moneys; and where, after all, is the
glory in two tall fellows, walled a yard thick in armor, poking at each
other with poles of painted wood?"

"Give me a good bull-bait!" said a sturdy butcher, in the crowd below;
"that's more English, I take it, than these fooleries."

Amongst the ring, the bold 'prentices of London, up and away betimes,
had pushed their path into a foremost place, much to the discontent of
the gentry, and with their flat caps, long hair, thick bludgeons, loud
exclamations, and turbulent demeanour, greatly scandalized the formal
heralds. That, too, was a sign of the times. Nor less did it show
the growth of commerce, that, on seats very little below the regal
balconies, and far more conspicuous than the places of earls and barons,
sat in state the mayor (that mayor a grocer!) [Sir John Yonge.--Fabyan]
and aldermen of the city.

A murmur, rising gradually into a general shout, evinced the admiration
into which the spectators were surprised, when Anthony Woodville Lord
Scales--his head bare--appeared at the entrance of the lists,--so bold
and so fair was his countenance, so radiant his armour, and so richly
caparisoned his gray steed, in the gorgeous housings that almost swept
the ground; and around him grouped such an attendance of knights and
peers as seldom graced the train of any subject, with the Duke of
Clarence at his right hand, bearing his bassinet.

But Anthony's pages, supporting his banner, shared at least the popular
admiration with their gallant lord: they were, according to the old
custom, which probably fell into disuse under the Tudors, disguised in
imitation of the heraldic beasts that typified his armourial cognizance;
[Hence the origin of Supporters] and horrible and laidly looked they in
the guise of griffins, with artful scales of thin steel painted green,
red forked tongues, and griping the banner in one huge claw, while, much
to the marvel of the bystanders, they contrived to walk very statelily
on the other. "Oh, the brave monsters!" exclaimed the butcher. "Cogs
bones, this beats all the rest!"

But when the trumpets of the heralds had ceased, when the words "Laissez
aller!" were pronounced, when the lances were set and the charge began,
this momentary admiration was converted into a cry of derision, by the
sudden restiveness of the Burgundian's horse. This animal, of the pure
race of Flanders, of a bulk approaching to clumsiness, of a rich bay,
where, indeed, amidst the barding and the housings, its colour could be
discerned, had borne the valiant Bastard through many a sanguine field,
and in the last had received a wound which had greatly impaired its
sight. And now, whether scared by the shouting, or terrified by its
obscure vision, and the recollection of its wound when last bestrode by
its lord, it halted midway, reared on end, and, fairly turning round,
despite spur and bit, carried back the Bastard, swearing strange oaths,
that grumbled hoarsely through his vizor, to the very place whence he
had started.

The uncourteous mob yelled and shouted and laughed, and wholly
disregarding the lifted wands and drowning the solemn rebukes of the
heralds, they heaped upon the furious Burgundian all the expressions of
ridicule in which the wit of Cockaigne is so immemorially rich. But the
courteous Anthony of England, seeing the strange and involuntary flight
of his redoubted foe, incontinently reined in, lowered his lance, and
made his horse, without turning round, back to the end of the lists in
a series of graceful gambadas and caracoles. Again the signal was
given, and this time the gallant bay did not fail his rider; ashamed,
doubtless, of its late misdemeanour, arching its head till it almost
touched the breast, laying its ears level on the neck, and with a snort
of anger and disdain, the steed of Flanders rushed to the encounter.
The Bastard's lance shivered fairly against the small shield of the
Englishman; but the Woodville's weapon, more deftly aimed, struck full
on the count's bassinet, and at the same time the pike projecting from
the gray charger's chaffron pierced the nostrils of the unhappy bay,
which rage and shame had blinded more than ever. The noble animal, stung
by the unexpected pain, and bitted sharply by the rider, whose seat
was sorely shaken by the stroke on his helmet, reared again, stood an
instant perfectly erect, and then fell backwards, rolling over and over
the illustrious burden it had borne. Then the debonair Sir Anthony of
England, casting down his lance, drew his sword, and dexterously caused
his destrier to curvet in a close circle round the fallen Bastard,
courteously shaking at him the brandished weapon, but without attempt to
strike.

"Ho, marshal!" cried King Edward, "assist to his legs the brave count."
