And that he had sought it far and long, and in all the earth there was
no man more unhappy. So the old woman's heart melted, and she agreed to
hide him.

When the Sun arrived, he declared that he smelt Christian flesh, and he
meant to have it for his dinner. But his mother told him such a pitiful
story of the miserable wretch who had lost everything, and had come from
far to ask his help, that at last he promised to see him.

So the young man came out from his hiding-place and begged the sun to
tell him if in the course of his travels he had not seen somewhere a
palace that had not its like in the whole world, for its laths were of
gold and its tiles of diamond, and all the furniture in silver and gold.

And the sun said no, but that perhaps the wind had seen it, for he
entered everywhere, and saw things that no one else ever saw, and if
anyone knew where it was, it was certainly the wind.

Then the poor young man again set forth as well as his horse could take
him, begging his living as he went, and, somehow or other, he ended by
reaching the home of the wind. He found there a little old woman busily
occupied in filling great barrels with water. She asked him what had put
it into his head to come there, for her son ate everything he saw,
and that he would shortly arrive quite mad, and that the young man had
better look out. But he answered that he was so unhappy that he had
ceased to mind anything, even being eaten, and then he told her that he
had been robbed of a palace that had not its equal in all the world,
and of all that was in it, and that he had even left his wife, and was
wandering over the world until he found it. And that it was the sun who
had sent him to consult the wind. So she hid him under the staircase,
and soon they heard the south wind arrive, shaking the house to its
foundations. Thirsty as he was, he did not wait to drink, but he told
his mother that he smelt the blood of a Christian man, and that she had
better bring him out at once and make him ready to be eaten. But she
bade her son eat and drink what was before him, and said that the poor
young man was much to be pitied, and that the sun had granted him his
life in order that he might consult the wind. Then she brought out the
young man, who explained how he was seeking for his palace, and that no
man had been able to tell him where it was, so he had come to the wind.
And he added that he had been shamefully robbed, and that the laths were
of gold and the tiles of diamond, and all the furniture in silver and
gold, and he inquired if the wind had not seen such a palace during his
wanderings.

And the wind said yes, and that all that day he had been blowing
backwards and forwards over it without being able to move one single
tile. 'Oh, do tell me where it is,' cried the you man. 'It is a long
way off,' replied the wind, 'on the other side of the Red Sea.' But our
traveller was not discouraged, he had already journeyed too far.

So he set forth at once, and, somehow or other, he managed to reach that
distant land. And he enquired if anyone wanted a gardener. He was told
that the head gardener at the castle had just left, and perhaps he might
have a chance of getting the place. The young man lost no time, but
walked up to the castle and asked if they were in want of a gardener;
and how happy he was when they agreed to take him! Now he passed most of
his day in gossiping with the servants about the wealth of their masters
and the wonderful things in the house. He made friends with one of the
maids, who told him the history of the snuff-box, and he coaxed her to
let him see it. One evening she managed to get hold of it, and the young
man watched carefully where she hid it away, in a secret place in the
bedchamber of her mistress.

The following night, when everyone was fast asleep, he crept in and took
the snuff-box. Think of his joy as he opened the lid! When it asked him,
as of yore, 'What do you want?' he replied: 'What do I want? What do
I want? Why, I want to go with my palace to the old place, and for the
King and the Queen and all their servants to be drowned in the Red Sea.'
He hardly finished speaking when he found himself back again with his
wife, while all the other inhabitants of the palace were lying at the
bottom of the Red Sea.

Sebillot.





THE GOLDEN BLACKBIRD



Once upon a time there was a great lord who had three sons. He fell very
ill, sent for doctors of every kind, even bonesetters, but they, none of
them, could find out what was the matter with him, or even give him
any relief. At last there came a foreign doctor, who declared that the
Golden Blackbird alone could cure the sick man.

So the old lord despatched his eldest son to look for the wonderful
bird, and promised him great riches if he managed to find it and bring
it back.

The young man began his journey, and soon arrived at a place where four
roads met. He did not know which to choose, and tossed his cap in the
air, determining that the direction of its fall should decide him.
After travelling for two or three days, he grew tired of walking without
knowing where or for how long, and he stopped at an inn which was filled
with merrymakers and ordered something to eat and drink.

'My faith,' said he, 'it is sheer folly to waste more time hunting for
this bird. My father is old, and if he dies I shall inherit his goods.'

The old man, after waiting patiently for some time, sent his second son
to seek the Golden Blackbird. The youth took the same direction as his
brother, and when he came to the cross roads, he too tossed up which
road he should take. The cap fell in the same place as before, and he
walked on till he came to the spot where his brother had halted. The
latter, who was leaning out of the window of the inn, called to him to
stay where he was and amuse himself.

'You are right,' replied the youth. 'Who knows if I should ever find the
Golden Blackbird, even if I sought the whole world through for it. At
the worst, if the old man dies, we shall have his property.'

He entered the inn and the two brothers made merry and feasted, till
very soon their money was all spent. They even owed something to their
landlord, who kept them as hostages till they could pay their debts.

The youngest son set forth in his turn, and he arrived at the place
where his brothers were still prisoners. They called to him to stop, and
did all they could to prevent his going further.

'No,' he replied, 'my father trusted me, and I will go all over the
world till I find the Golden Blackbird.'

'Bah,' said his brothers, 'you will never succeed any better than we
did. Let him die if he wants to; we will divide the property.'

As he went his way he met a little hare, who stopped to look at him, and
asked:

'Where are you going, my friend?'

'I really don't quite know,' answered he. 'My father is ill, and he
cannot be cured unless I bring him back the Golden Blackbird. It is a
long time since I set out, but no one can tell me where to find it.'

'Ah,' said the hare, 'you have a long way to go yet. You will have to
walk at least seven hundred miles before you get to it.'

'And how am I to travel such a distance?'

'Mount on my back,' said the little hare, 'and I will conduct you.'

The young man obeyed: at each bound the little hare went seven miles,
and it was not long before they reached a castle that was as large and
beautiful as a castle could be.

'The Golden Blackbird is in a little cabin near by,' said the little
hare, 'and you will easily find it. It lives in a little cage, with
another cage beside it made all of gold. But whatever you do, be sure
not to put it in the beautiful cage, or everybody in the castle will
know that you have stolen it.'

The youth found the Golden Blackbird standing on a wooden perch, but as
stiff and rigid as if he was dead. And beside the beautiful cage was the
cage of gold.

'Perhaps he would revive if I were to put him in that lovely cage,'
thought the youth.

The moment that Golden Bird had touched the bars of the splendid cage he
awoke, and began to whistle, so that all the servants of the castle ran
to see what was the matter, saying that he was a thief and must be put
in prison.

'No,' he answered, 'I am not a thief. If I have taken the Golden
Blackbird, it is only that it may cure my father, who is ill, and I have
travelled more than seven hundred miles in order to find it.'

'Well,' they replied, 'we will let you go, and will even give you the
Golden Bird, if you are able to bring us the Porcelain Maiden.'

The youth departed, weeping, and met the little hare, who was munching
wild thyme.

'What are you crying for, my friend?' asked the hare.

'It is because,' he answered, 'the castle people will not allow me to
carry off the Golden Blackbird without giving them the Porcelain Maiden
in exchange.'

'You have not followed my advice,' said the little hare. 'And you have
put the Golden Bird into the fine cage.'

'Alas! yes!'

'Don't despair! the Porcelain Maiden is a young girl, beautiful as
Venus, who dwells two hundred miles from here. Jump on my back and I
will take you there.'

The little hare, who took seven miles in a stride, was there in no time
at all, and he stopped on the borders of a lake.

'The Porcelain Maiden,' said the hare to the youth, 'will come here to
bathe with her friends, while I just eat a mouthful of thyme to refresh
me. When she is in the lake, be sure you hide her clothes, which are of
dazzling whiteness, and do not give them back to her unless she consents
to follow you.'

The little hare left him, and almost immediately the Porcelain Maiden
arrived with her friends. She undressed herself and got into the water.
Then the young man glided up noiselessly and laid hold of her clothes,
which he hid under a rock at some distance.

When the Porcelain Maiden was tired of playing in the water she came out
to dress herself, but, though she hunted for her clothes high and low,
she could find them nowhere. Her friends helped her in the search, but,
seeing at last that it was of no use, they left her, alone on the bank,
weeping bitterly.

'Why do you cry?' said the young man, approaching her.

'Alas!' answered she, 'while I was bathing someone stole my clothes, and
my friends have abandoned me.'

'I will find your clothes if you will only come with me.'

And the Porcelain Maiden agreed to follow him, and after having given up
her clothes, the young man bought a small horse for her, which went like
the wind. The little hare brought them both back to seek for the Golden
Blackbird, and when they drew near to the castle where it lived the
little hero said to the young man:

'Now, do be a little sharper than you were before, and you will manage
to carry off both the Golden Blackbird and the Porcelain Maiden. Take
the golden cage in one hand, and leave the bird in the old cage where he
is, and bring that away too.'

The little hare then vanished; the youth did as he was bid, and the
castle servants never noticed that he was carrying off the Golden Bird.
When he reached the inn where his brothers were detained, he delivered
them by paying their debt. They set out all together, but as the two
elder brothers were jealous of the success of the youngest, they took
the opportunity as they were passing by the shores of a lake to throw
themselves upon him, seize the Golden Bird, and fling him in the water.
Then they continued their journey, taking with them the Porcelain
Maiden, in the firm belief that their brother was drowned. But, happily,
he had snatched in falling at a tuft of rushes and called loudly for
help. The little hare came running to him, and said 'Take hold of my leg
and pull yourself out of the water.'

When he was safe on shore the little hare said to him:

'Now this is what you have to do: dress yourself like a Breton seeking a
place as stable-boy, and go and offer your services to your father. Once
there, you will easily be able to make him understand the truth.'

The young man did as the little hare bade him, and he went to his
father's castle and enquired if they were not in want of a stable-boy.

'Yes,' replied his father, 'very much indeed. But it is not an easy
place. There is a little horse in the stable which will not let anyone
go near it, and it has already kicked to death several people who have
tried to groom it.'

'I will undertake to groom it,' said the youth. 'I never saw the horse
I was afraid of yet.' The little horse allowed itself to be rubbed down
without a toss of its head and without a kick.

'Good gracious!' exclaimed the master; 'how is it that he lets you touch
him, when no one else can go near him?'

'Perhaps he knows me,' answered the stable-boy.

Two or three days later the master said to him: 'The Porcelain Maiden
is here: but, though she is as lovely as the dawn, she is so wicked that
she scratches everyone that approaches her. Try if she will accept your
services.'

When the youth entered the room where she was, the Golden Blackbird
broke forth into a joyful song, and the Porcelain Maiden sang too, and
jumped for joy.

'Good gracious!' cried the master. 'The Porcelain Maiden and the Golden
Blackbird know you too?'

'Yes,' replied the youth, 'and the Porcelain Maiden can tell you the
whole truth, if she only will.'

Then she told all that had happened, and how she had consented to follow
the young man who had captured the Golden Blackbird.

'Yes,' added the youth, 'I delivered my brothers, who were kept
prisoners in an inn, and, as a reward, they threw me into a lake. So I
disguised myself and came here, in order to prove the truth to you.'

So the old lord embraced his son, and promised that he should inherit
all his possessions, and he put to death the two elder ones, who had
deceived him and had tried to slay their own brother.

The young man married the Porcelain Maiden, and had a splendid
wedding-feast.

Sebillot.





THE LITTLE SOLDIER



I

Once upon a time there was a little soldier who had just come back from
the war. He was a brave little fellow, but he had lost neither arms nor
legs in battle. Still, the fighting was ended and the army disbanded, so
he had to return to the village where he was born.

Now the soldier's name was really John, but for some reason or other his
friends always called him the Kinglet; why, no one ever knew, but so it
was.

As he had no father or mother to welcome him home, he did not hurry
himself, but went quietly along, his knapsack on his back and his sword
by his side, when suddenly one evening he was seized with a wish to
light his pipe. He felt for his match-box to strike a light, but to his
great disgust he found he had lost it.

He had only gone about a stone's throw after making this discovery when
he noticed a light shining through the trees. He went towards it, and
perceived before him an old castle, with the door standing open.

The little soldier entered the courtyard, and, peeping through a window,
saw a large fire blazing at the end of a low hall. He put his pipe in
his pocket and knocked gently, saying politely:

'Would you give me a light?'

But he got no answer.

After waiting for a moment John knocked again, this time more loudly.
There was still no reply.

He raised the latch and entered; the hall was empty.

The little soldier made straight for the fireplace, seized the tongs,
and was stooping down to look for a nice red hot coal with which to
light his pipe, when clic! something went, like a spring giving way,
and in the very midst of the flames an enormous serpent reared itself up
close to his face.

And what was more strange still, this serpent had the head of a woman.

At such an unexpected sight many men would have turned and run for
their lives; but the little soldier, though he was so small, had a true
soldier's heart. He only made one step backwards, and grasped the hilt
of his sword.

'Don't unsheath it,' said the serpent. 'I have been waiting for you, as
it is you who must deliver me.'

'Who are you?'

'My name is Ludovine, and I am the daughter of the King of the Low
Countries. Deliver me, and I will marry you and make you happy for ever
after.'

Now, some people might not have liked the notion of being made happy by
a serpent with the head of a woman, but the Kinglet had no such fears.
And, besides, he felt the fascination of Ludovine's eyes, which looked
at him as a snake looks at a little bird. They were beautiful green
eyes, not round like those of a cat, but long and almond-shaped, and
they shone with a strange light, and the golden hair which floated round
them seemed all the brighter for their lustre. The face had the beauty
of an angel, though the body was only that of a serpent.

'What must I do?' asked the Kinglet.

'Open that door. You will find yourself in a gallery with a room at the
end just like this. Cross that, and you will see a closet, out of which
you must take a tunic, and bring it back to me.'

The little soldier boldly prepared to do as he was told. He crossed the
gallery in safety, but when he reached the room he saw by the light
of the stars eight hands on a level with his face, which threatened to
strike him. And, turn his eyes which way he would, he could discover no
bodies belonging to them.

He lowered his head and rushed forward amidst a storm of blows, which he
returned with his fists. When he got to the closet, he opened it, took
down the tunic, and brought it to the first room.

'Here it is,' he panted, rather out of breath.

'Clic!' once more the flames parted. Ludovine was a woman down to her
waist. She took the tunic and put it on.

It was a magnificent tunic of orange velvet, embroidered in pearls, but
the pearls were not so white as her own neck.

'That is not all,' she said. 'Go to the gallery, take the staircase
which is on the left, and in the second room on the first story you will
find another closet with my skirt. Bring this to me.'

The Kinglet did as he was told, but in entering the room he saw,
instead of merely hands, eight arms, each holding an enormous stick. He
instantly unsheathed his sword and cut his way through with such vigour
that he hardly received a scratch.

He brought back the skirt, which was made of silk as blue as the skies
of Spain.

'Here it is,' said John, as the serpent appeared. She was now a woman as
far as her knees.

'I only want my shoes and stockings now,' she said. 'Go and get them
from the closet which is on the second story.'

The little soldier departed, and found himself in the presence of eight
goblins armed with hammers, and flames darting from their eyes. This
time he stopped short at the threshold. 'My sword is no use,' he thought
to himself; 'these wretches will break it like glass, and if I can't
think of anything else, I am a dead man.' At this moment his eyes fell
on the door, which was made of oak, thick and heavy. He wrenched it
