The Project Gutenberg EBook of A Jolly Fellowship, by Frank R. Stockton

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: A Jolly Fellowship

Author: Frank R. Stockton

Release Date: February 24, 2007 [EBook #20651]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A JOLLY FELLOWSHIP ***




Produced by Suzanne Shell, Emmy and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net











A JOLLY FELLOWSHIP.




FRANK R. STOCKTON'S WRITINGS

       *       *       *       *       *

_New Uniform Edition_

          RUDDER GRANGE                                 $1.25
          THE LATE MRS. NULL                             1.25
          ARDIS CLAVERDEN                                1.50
          THE WATCHMAKER'S WIFE                          1.25
          THE RUDDER GRANGERS ABROAD                     1.25
          THE BEE-MAN OF ORN                             1.25
          THE LADY, OR THE TIGER?                        1.25
          THE CHRISTMAS WRECK                            1.25
          AMOS KILBRIGHT                                 1.25
          THE HOUSE OF MARTHA                            1.25

       *       *       *       *       *

          AFIELD AND AFLOAT. Illustrated. 12mo          $1.50
          THE GIRL AT COBHURST. 12mo                     1.50
          A STORY-TELLER'S PACK. Illustrated. 12mo       1.50
          MRS. CLIFF'S YACHT. _Illustrated._ 12mo        1.50
          THE ADVENTURES OF CAPTAIN HORN. 12mo           1.50
          A CHOSEN FEW. SHORT STORIES.
            _Cameo Edition_                              1.25
          RUDDER GRANGE. _With over 100 Illustrations
            by A. B. Frost._ 12mo                        1.50
          POMONA'S TRAVELS. _Illustrated by A. B.
            Frost._ 12mo                                 1.50

       *       *       *       *       *

BOOKS FOR YOUNG PEOPLE

          A JOLLY FELLOWSHIP. Illustrated. 12mo         $1.50
          THE STORY OF VITEAU. Illustrated. 12mo         1.50
          THE TING-A-LING TALES. Illustrated. 12mo       1.00
          THE FLOATING PRINCE, and Other Fairy Tales.
            Illustrated. 4to                             1.50
          ROUNDABOUT RAMBLES IN LANDS OF FACT
            AND FANCY. Illustrated. 4to                  1.50
          TALES OUT OF SCHOOL. Illustrated. 4to          1.50
          PERSONALLY CONDUCTED. Illustrated, square 8vo  2.00
          THE CLOCKS OF RONDAINE, and Other Stories,
            Illustrated, square 8vo                      1.50

  [Illustration: "BANG! BANG! BANG!--SEVEN TIMES."

    [Page 105.]]




A JOLLY FELLOWSHIP

BY

FRANK R. STOCKTON

AUTHOR OF "RUDDER GRANGE," ETC.

_ILLUSTRATED_

          NEW-YORK
          CHARLES SCRIBNER'S SONS
          1901




          Copyright, 1880, by
          CHARLES SCRIBNER'S SONS.




          TROW'S
          PRINTING AND BOOKBINDING COMPANY,
          NEW YORK.


_This story is told by Will Gordon, a young fellow about sixteen years
old, who saw for himself everything worth seeing in the course of the
events he relates, and so knows much more about them than any one who
would have to depend upon hearsay. Will is a good-looking boy, with
brown hair and gray eyes, rather large for his age, and very fond of
being a leader among his young companions. Whether or not he is good at
that sort of thing, you can judge from the story he tells._




CONTENTS.


          _Chapter._                                  _Page._

              I. WE MAKE A START                         1

             II. GOING BACK WITH THE PILOT              16

            III. RECTUS OPENS HIS EYES                  29

             IV. TO THE RESCUE                          43

              V. STORMING SAN MARCO                     56

             VI. THE GIRL ON THE BEACH                  69

            VII. MR. CHIPPERTON                         88

           VIII. THE STEAM-BOAT IN THE FOREST          100

             IX. THE THREE GRAY BEANS                  116

              X. THE QUEEN ON THE DOOR-STEP            128

             XI. REGAL PROJECTS                        140

            XII. RECTUS LOSES RANK                     154

           XIII. THE CORONATION                        166

            XIV. A HOT CHASE                           178

             XV. A STRANGE THING HAPPENS TO ME         191

            XVI. MR. CHIPPERTON KEEPS PERFECTLY COOL   204

           XVII. WHAT BOY HAS DONE, BOY MAY DO         217

          XVIII. I WAKE UP MR. CHIPPERTON              229

            XIX. THE LIFE-RAFT                         241

             XX. THE RUSSIAN BARK                      252

            XXI. THE TRIP OF THE TUG                   263

           XXII. LOOKING AHEAD                         274

          XXIII. UNCLE CHIPPERTON'S DINNER             285

           XXIV. THE STORY ENDS                        296




LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS.


                                                           _Page._
          "BANG! BANG! BANG!--SEVEN TIMES."   (_Frontispiece._)

          "SHE SEIZED ME BY BOTH HANDS"                      10

          THE VESSEL IS OFF                                  17

          SCOTT AND THE CAPTAIN                              19

          RECTUS AND THE LEMONS                              27

          "'HOLD YOUR TONGUE!' ROARED MR. RANDALL"           32

          "RECTUS SHOWED ME THE MAP"                         35

          "HOW?"                                             46

          "ANOTHER BEAN"                                     64

          "THE GENTLEMAN WAVED HIS HAT TO US"                80

          "WHY, HOW DO YOU DO?"                              88

          "VOY-EZZ VOWS CETT HOMMY ETT SES DUCKS FEMMYS
               SEELAH?"                                     110

          "WE SAW HER SLOWLY RISING BENEATH US"             119

          "'ALL RIGHT,' SAID GOLIAH, WITH A SMILE"          157

          A SMALL DIVE                                      170

          "I WOULDN'T LIKE IT MYSELF"                       197

          "WE STRUCK OUT TOGETHER FOR THE BOAT"             224

          "'KEEP PERFECTLY COOL,' SAID MR. CHIPPERTON"      239

          "RECTUS HELPED ME TO FASTEN THE LIFE-PRESERVER"   243

          "YOU'RE A REGULAR YOUNG TRUMP"                    277




A JOLLY FELLOWSHIP.




CHAPTER I.

WE MAKE A START.


I was sitting on the deck of a Savannah steam-ship, which was lying at a
dock in the East River, New York. I was waiting for young Rectus, and
had already waited some time; which surprised me, because Rectus was, as
a general thing, a very prompt fellow, who seldom kept people waiting.
But it was probably impossible for him to regulate his own movements
this time, for his father and mother were coming with him, to see him
off.

I had no one there to see me off, but I did not care for that. I was
sixteen years old, and felt quite like a man; whereas Rectus was only
fourteen, and couldn't possibly feel like a man--unless his looks very
much belied his feelings. My father and mother and sister lived in a
small town some thirty miles from New York, and that was a very good
reason for their not coming to the city just to see me sail away in a
steam-ship. They took a good leave of me, though, before I left home.

I shall never forget how I first became acquainted with Rectus. About a
couple of years before, he was a new boy in the academy at Willisville.
One Saturday, a lot of us went down to the river to swim. Our favorite
place was near an old wharf, which ran out into deep water, and a fellow
could take a good dive there, when the tide was high. There were some of
the smaller boys along that day, but they didn't dive any, and if they
even swam, it was in shallow water near the shore, by the side of the
wharf. But I think most of them spent their time wading about.

I was a good swimmer, and could dive very well. I was learning to swim
under water, but had not done very much in that line at the time I speak
of. We were nearly ready to come out, when I took a dive from a post on
the end of the wharf, and then turned, under water, to swim in shore. I
intended to try to keep under until I got into water shallow enough for
me to touch bottom, and walk ashore. After half a dozen strokes, I felt
for the bottom and my feet touched it. Then I raised my head, but I
didn't raise it out of the water. It struck something hard.

In an instant I knew what had happened. There was a big mud-scow lying
by the side of the wharf, and I had got under that! It was a great flat
thing, ever so long and very wide. I knew I must get from under it as
quickly as I could. Indeed, I could hardly hold my breath now. I waded
along with my head bent down, but I didn't reach the side of it. Then I
turned the other way, but my hands, which I held up, still touched
nothing but the hard, slimy bottom of the scow. I must have been wading
up and down the length of the thing. I was bewildered. I couldn't think
which way to turn. I could only think of one thing. I would be drowned
in less than a minute. Scott would be head of the class. My mother, and
little Helen--but I can't tell what my thoughts were then. They were
dreadful. But just as I was thinking of Helen and mother, I saw through
the water some white things, not far from me. I knew by their looks that
they were a boy's legs.

I staggered toward them, and in a moment my hands went out of water,
just at the side of the scow. I stood up, and my head with half my body
