
Arrived at the village they found the people in great excitement
preparing for defence, as news had been brought to the effect that the
pirates had landed at the mouth of the river, joined the disaffected
band which awaited them, and that an attack might be expected without
delay, for they were under command of the celebrated Malay pirate
Baderoon.

Nigel observed that the countenance of his friend Van der Kemp underwent
a peculiar change on hearing this man's name mentioned. There was a
combination of anxiety, which was unnatural to him, and of resolution,
which was one of his chief characteristics.

"Is Baderoon the enemy whom you saw on the islet on our first night
out?" asked Nigel, during a ramble with the hermit that evening.

"Yes, and I fear to meet him," replied his friend in a low voice.

Nigel was surprised. The impression made on his mind since their
intercourse was that Van der Kemp was incapable of the sensation of
fear.

"Is he so very bitter against you?" asked Nigel.

"Very," was the curt reply.

"Have you reason to think he would take your life if he could?"

"I am sure he would. As I told you before, I have thwarted his plans
more than once. When he hears that it is I who have warned the
Orang-Kaya against him he will pursue me to the death--and--and I _must
not_ meet him."

"Indeed!" exclaimed Nigel, with renewed surprise.

But the hermit took no note of the exclamation. Anxiety had given place
to a frown, and his eyes were fixed on the ground. It seemed to Nigel so
evident that he did not wish to pursue the subject, that he slightly
changed it.

"I suppose," he said, "that there is no fear of the Dyaks of the village
being unable to beat off the pirates now that they have been warned?"

"None whatever. Indeed, this is so well known to Baderoon that I think
he will abandon the attempt. But he will not abandon his designs on me.
However, we must wait and see how God will order events."

Next morning spies returned to the village with the information that the
pirates had taken their departure from the mouth of the river.

"Do you think this is an attempt to deceive us?" asked the chief,
turning to Van der Kemp, when he heard the news.

"I think not. And even should it be so, and they should return, you are
ready and well able to meet them."

"Yes, ready--and _well_ able to meet them," replied the Orang-Kaya,
drawing himself up proudly.

"Did they _all_ go in one direction?" asked Van der Kemp of the youths
who had brought the news.

"Yes, all went in a body to the north--except one boat which rowed
southward."

"Hm! I thought so. My friends, listen to me. This is no pretence. They
do not mean to attack you now you are on your guard; but that boat which
went south contains Baderoon, and I feel certain that he means to hang
about here till he gets the chance of killing me."

"That is well," returned the chief, calmly. "My young men will hunt till
they find where he is. Then they will bring us the information and Van
der Kemp will go out with a band and slay his enemy."

"No, my friend," said the hermit, firmly; "that shall not be. I must get
out of his way, and in order to do so will leave you at once, for there
will be no further need for my services here."

The chief looked at his friend in surprise. "Well," he said, "you have a
good judgment, and understand your own affairs. But you have already
rendered me good service, and I will help you to fly--though such is not
the habit of the Dyaks! There is a trader's vessel to start for Sumatra
by the first light of day. Will my friend go by that?"

"I am grateful," answered the hermit, "but I need no help--save some
provisions, for I have my little canoe, which will suffice."

As this colloquy was conducted in the native tongue it was
unintelligible to Nigel, but after the interview with the chief the
hermit explained matters to him, and bade Moses get ready for a start
several hours before dawn.

"You see we must do the first part of our trip in the dark, for Baderoon
has a keen eye and ear. Then we will land and sleep all day where the
sharpest eye will fail to find us--and, luckily, pirates have been
denied the power of scenting out their foes. When night comes we will
start again and get out of sight of land before the next dawn."

"Mine frond," said the professor, turning his moon-like goggles full on
the hermit. "I vill go viz you."

"I should be only too happy to have your company," returned the hermit,
"but my canoe cannot by any contrivance be made to hold more than
three."

"Zat is no matter to me," rejoined Verkimier; "you forget zee trader's
boat. I vill go in zat to Sumatra. Ve vill find out zee port he is going
to, ant you vill meet me zere. Vait for me if I have not arrived--or I
vill vait for you. I have longed to visit Sumatra, ant vat better fronds
could I go viz zan yourselfs?"

"But, my good friend," returned the hermit, "my movements may not
exactly suit yours. Here they are,--you can judge for yourself. First I
will, God permitting, cross over to Sumatra in my canoe."

"But it is t'ree hoondert miles across, if not more!"

"No matter--there are plenty of islands on the way. Besides, some
passing vessel will give me a lift, no doubt. Then I will coast along to
one of the eastern ports, where I know there is a steamboat loading up
about this time. The captain is an old friend of mine. He brought me and
my companions the greater part of the way here. If I find him I will ask
him to carry my canoe on his return voyage through Sunda Straits, and
leave it with another friend of mine at Telok Betong on the south coast
of Sumatra--not far, as you know, from my home in Krakatoa. Then I will
proceed overland to the same place, so that my friend Nigel Roy may see
a little of the country."

"Ant vat if you do _not_ find your frond zee captain of zee steamer?"

"Why, then I shall have to adopt some other plan. It is the uncertainty
of my movements that makes me think you should not depend on them."

"Zat is not'ing to me, Van der Kemp; you joost go as you say. I vill
follow ant take my chance. I am use' to ooncertainties ant
difficoolties. Zey can not influence me."

After a good deal of consideration this plan was agreed to. The
professor spent part of the night in giving directions about the
preserving of his specimens, which he meant to leave at the village in
charge of a man whom he had trained to assist him, while Van der Kemp
with his companions lay down to snatch a little sleep before setting out
on their voyage, or, as the Dyak chief persisted in calling it, their
flight!

When Nigel had slept about five minutes--as he thought--he was awakened
by Moses.

"Don't make a noise, Massa Nadgel! Dere may be spies in de camp for all
we knows, so we mus' git off like mice. Canoe's ready an' massa waitin';
we gib you to de last momint."

In a few minutes our hero was sleepily following the negro through the
woods to the spot where the canoe was in waiting.

The night was very dark. This was in their favour,--at least as regarded
discovery.

"But how shall we ever see to make our way down stream?" asked Nigel of
the hermit in a whisper on reaching the place of embarkation.

"The current will guide us. Besides, I have studied the river with a
view to this flight. Be careful in getting in. Now, Moses, are you
ready?"

"All right, massa."

"Shove off, then."

There was something so eerie in the subdued tones, and stealthy
motions, and profound darkness, that Nigel could not help feeling as if
they were proceeding to commit some black and criminal deed!

Floating with the current, with as little noise as possible, and having
many a narrow escape of running against points of land and sandbanks,
they flew swiftly towards the sea, so that dawn found them among the mud
flats and the mangrove swamps. Here they found a spot where mangrove
roots and bushes formed an impenetrable screen, behind which they spent
the day, chiefly in sleep, and in absolute security.

When darkness set in they again put forth, and cautiously clearing the
river's mouth, were soon far out on the open sea, which was fortunately
calm at the time, the slight air that blew being in their favour.

"We are safe from pursuit now," said Van der Kemp in a tone of
satisfaction, as they paused for a breathing spell.

"O massa!" exclaimed Moses at that moment, in a voice of consternation;
"we's forgotten Spinkie!"

"So we have!" returned the hermit in a voice of regret so profound that
Nigel could scarce restrain a laugh in spite of his sympathy.

But Spinkie had not forgotten himself. Observing probably, that these
night expeditions were a change in his master's habits, he had kept an
unusually watchful eye on the canoe, so that when it was put in the
water, he had jumped on board unseen in the darkness, and had retired to
the place where he usually slept under hatches when the canoe travelled
at night.

Awakened from refreshing sleep at the sound of his name, Spinkie emerged
suddenly from the stern-manhole, right under the negro's nose, and with
a sleepy "oo, oo!" gazed up into his face.

"Ho! Dare you is, you mis'rible hyperkrite!" exclaimed Moses, kissing
the animal in the depth of his satisfaction. "He's here, massa, all
right. Now, you go to bed agin, you small bundle ob hair."

The creature retired obediently to its place, and laying its little
cheek on one of its small hands, committed itself to repose.

Van der Kemp was wrong when he said they were safe. A pirate scout had
seen the canoe depart. Being alone and distant from the rendezvous of
his commander, some time elapsed before the news could be conveyed to
him. When Baderoon was at length informed and had sailed out to sea in
pursuit, returning daylight showed him that his intended victim had
escaped.




CHAPTER XVII.

TELLS OF THE JOYS, ETC., OF THE PROFESSOR IN THE SUMATRAN FORESTS, ALSO
OF A CATASTROPHE AVERTED.


Fortunately the weather continued fine at first, and the light wind
fair, so that the canoe skimmed swiftly over the wide sea that separates
Borneo from Sumatra. Sometimes our travellers proceeded at night when
the distance between islets compelled them to do so. At other times they
landed on one of these isles when opportunity offered to rest and
replenish the water-casks.

We will not follow them step by step in this voyage, which occupied more
than a week, and during which they encountered without damage several
squalls in which a small open boat could not have lived. Beaching at
last the great island of Sumatra--which, like its neighbour Borneo, is
larger in extent than the British Islands--they coasted along
southwards, without further delay than was absolutely necessary for rest
and refreshment, until they reached a port where they found the steamer
of which they were in search just about to start on its return voyage.
Van der Kemp committed his little craft to the care of the captain, who,
after vainly advising his friend to take a free passage with him to the
Straits of Sunda, promised to leave the canoe in passing at Telok
Betong. We may add that Spinkie was most unwillingly obliged to
accompany the canoe.

"Now, we must remain here till our friend Verkimier arrives," said the
hermit, turning to Nigel after they had watched the steamer out of
sight.

"I suppose we must," said Nigel, who did not at all relish the
delay--"of course we must," he added with decision.

"I sees no 'ob course' about it, Massa Nadgel," observed Moses, who
never refrained from offering his opinion from motives of humility, or
of respect for his employer. "My 'dvice is to go on an' let de purfesser
foller."

"But I promised to wait for him," said the hermit, with one of his
kindly, half-humorous glances, "and you know I _never_ break my
promises."

"Das true, massa, but you di'n't promise to wait for him for eber an'
eber!"

"Not quite; but of course I meant that I would wait a reasonable time."

The negro appeared to meditate for some moments on the extent of a
"reasonable" time, for his huge eyes became huger as he gazed
frowningly at the ground. Then he spoke.

"A 'reasonable' time, massa, is such an oncertain time--wariable, so to
speak, accordin' to the mind that t'inks upon it! Hows'eber, if you's
_promised,_ ob coorse dat's an end ob it; for w'en a man promises, he's
bound to stick to it."

Such devotion to principle was appropriately rewarded the very next day
by the arrival of the trading prau in which the professor had embarked.

"We did not expect you nearly so soon," said Nigel, as they heartily
shook hands.

"It vas because zee vind freshen soon after ve set sail--ant, zen, ve
made a straight line for zis port, w'ereas you possibly crossed over,
ant zen push down zee coast."

"Exactly so, and that accounts for your overtaking us," said the hermit.
"Is that the lad Baso I see down there with the crew of the prau?"

"It is. You must have some strainch power of attracting frondship, Van
der Kemp, for zee poor yout' is so fond of you zat he beg ant entreat me
to take him, ant he says he vill go on vit zee traders if you refuse to
let him follow you."

"Well, he may come. Indeed, we shall be the better for his services, for
I had intended to hire a man here to help to carry our things. Much of
our journeying, you see, must be done on foot."

Baso, to his great joy, thus became one of the party.

We pass over the next few days, which were spent in arranging and
packing their provisions, etc., in such a way that each member of the
party should carry on his shoulders a load proportioned to his strength.
In this arrangement the professor, much against his will, was compelled
to accept the lightest load in consideration of his liability to dart
off in pursuit of creeping things and "bootterflies" at a moment's
notice. The least damageable articles were also assigned to him in
consideration of his tendency at all times to tumble into bogs and
stumble over fallen trees, and lose himself, and otherwise get into
difficulties.

We also pass over part of the journey from the coast, and plunge with
our travellers at once into the interior of Sumatra.

One evening towards sunset they reached the brow of an eminence which,
being rocky, was free from much wood, and permitted of a wide view of
the surrounding country. It was covered densely with virgin forest, and
they ascended the eminence in order that the hermit, who had been there
before, might discover a forest road which led to a village some miles
off, where they intended to put up for the night. Having ascertained his
exact position, Van der Kemp led his followers down to this footpath,
which led through the dense forest.

The trees by which they were surrounded were varied and
magnificent--some of them rising clear up seventy and eighty feet
without a branch, many of them had superb leafy crowns, under any one of
which hundreds of men might have found shelter. Others had trunks and
limbs warped and intertwined with a wild entanglement of huge creepers,
which hung in festoons and loops as if doing their best to strangle
their supports, themselves being also encumbered, or adorned, with ferns
and orchids, and delicate twining epiphytes. A forest of smaller trees
grew beneath this shade, and still lower down were thorny shrubs,
rattan-palms, broad-leaved bushes, and a mass of tropical herbage which
would have been absolutely impenetrable but for the native road or
footpath along which they travelled.

"A most suitable abode for tigers, I should think," remarked Nigel to
the hermit, who walked in front of him--for they marched in single file.
"Are there any in these parts?"

"Ay, plenty. Indeed, it is because I don't like sleeping in their
company that I am so anxious to reach a village."

"Are zey dangerows?" asked the professor, who followed close on Nigel.

"Well, they are not safe!" replied the hermit. "I had an adventure with
one on this very road only two years ago."

"Indeed! vat vas it?" asked the professor, whose appetite for anecdote
was insatiable. "Do tell us about it."

"With pleasure. It was on a pitch-dark night that it occurred. I had
occasion to go to a neighbouring village at a considerable distance, and
borrowed a horse from a friend----"

"Anozer frond!" exclaimed the professor; "vy, Van der Kemp, zee country
seems to be svarming vid your fronds."

"I have travelled much in it and made many friends," returned the
hermit. "The horse that I borrowed turned out to be a very poor one, and
went lame soon after I set out. Business kept me longer than I expected,
and it was getting dark before I started to return. Erelong the darkness
became so intense that I could scarcely see beyond the horse's head, and
could not distinguish the path. I therefore let the animal find his own
way--knowing that he would be sure to do so, for he was going home. As
we jogged along, I felt the horse tremble. Then he snorted and came to a
dead stop, with his feet planted firmly on the ground. I was quite
unarmed, but arms would have been useless in the circumstances.
Suddenly, and fortunately, the horse reared, and next moment a huge dark
object shot close past my face--so close that its fur brushed my
cheek--as it went with a heavy thud into the jungle on the other side.
I knew that it was a tiger and felt that my life, humanly speaking, was
due to the rearing of the poor horse."

"Are ve near to zee spote?" asked the professor, glancing from side to
side in some anxiety.

"Not far from it!" replied the hermit, "but there is not much fear of
such an attack in broad daylight and with so large a party."

"Ve are not a very large party," returned the professor. "I do not zink
I would fear much to face a tiger vid my goot rifle, but I do not relish
his choomping on me unavares. Push on, please."

They pushed on and reached the village a little before nightfall.

Hospitality is a characteristic of the natives of Sumatra. The
travellers were received with open arms, so to speak, and escorted to
the public building which corresponds in some measure to our western
town-halls. It was a huge building composed largely of bamboo
wooden-planks and wicker-work, with a high thatched roof, and it stood,
like all the other houses, on posts formed of great tree-stems which
rose eight or ten feet from the ground.

"You have frunds here too, I zink," said Verkimier to the hermit, as
they ascended the ladder leading to the door of the hall.

"Well, yes--I believe I have two or three."

There could be no doubt upon that point, unless the natives were
consummate hypocrites, for they welcomed Van der Kemp and his party with
effusive voice, look and gesture, and immediately spread before them
part of a splendid supper which had just been prepared; for they had
chanced to arrive on a festive occasion.

"I do believe," said Nigel in some surprise, "that they are lighting up
the place with petroleum lamps!"

"Ay, and you will observe that they are lighting the lamps with Congreve
matches--at least with matches of the same sort, supplied by the Dutch
and Chinese. Many of their old customs have passed away (among others
that of procuring fire by friction), and now we have the appliances of
western civilisation to replace them."

"No doubt steam is zee cause of zee change," remarked the professor.

"That," said Nigel, "has a good deal to do with most things--from the
singing of a tea-kettle to the explosion of a volcano; though,
doubtless, the commercial spirit which is now so strong among men is the
proximate cause."

"Surely dese people mus' be reech," said the professor, looking round
him with interest.

"They are rich enough--and well off in every respect, save that they
don't know very well how to make use of their riches. As you see, much
of their wealth is lavished on their women in the shape of ornaments,
most of which are of solid gold and silver."

There could be little doubt about that, for, besides the ornaments
proper, such as the bracelets and rings with which the arms of the young
women were covered, and earrings, etc.,--all of solid gold and
native-made--there were necklaces and collars composed of Spanish and
American dollars and British half-crowns and other coins. In short,
these Sumatran young girls carried much of the wealth of their parents
on their persons, and were entitled to wear it until they should be
relegated to the ranks of the married--the supposed-to-be unfrivolous,
and the evidently unadorned!

As this was a region full of birds, beasts, and insects of many kinds,
it was resolved, for the professor's benefit, that a few days should be
spent in it. Accordingly, the village chief set apart a newly-built
house for the visitors' accommodation, and a youth named Grogo was
appointed to wait on them and act as guide when they wished to traverse
any part of the surrounding forest.

The house was on the outskirts of the village, a matter of satisfaction
to the professor, as it enabled him at once to plunge into his beloved
work unobserved by the youngsters. It also afforded him a better
opportunity of collecting moths, etc., by the simple method of opening
his window at night. A mat or wicker-work screen divided the hut into
two apartments, one of which was entirely given over to the naturalist
and his _materiel_.

"I vil begin at vonce," said the eager man, on taking possession.

And he kept his word by placing his lamp on a table in a conspicuous
position, so that it could be well seen from the outside. Then he threw
his window wide open, as a general invitation to the insect world to
enter!

Moths, flying beetles, and other creatures were not slow to accept the
invitation. They entered by twos, fours, sixes--at last by scores,
insomuch that the room became uninhabitable except by the man himself,
and his comrades soon retired to their own compartment, leaving him to
carry on his work alone.

"You enjoy this sort of thing?" said Nigel, as he was about to retire.

"Enchoy it? yes--it is 'paradise regained'!" He pinned a giant moth at
the moment and gazed triumphant through his blue glasses.

"'Paradise lost' to the moth, anyhow," said Nigel with a nod, as he bade
him good-night, and carefully closed the wicker door to check the
incursions of uncaptured specimens. Being rather tired with the day's
journey, he lay down on a mat beside the hermit, who was already sound
asleep.

But our hero found that sleep was not easily attainable so close to an
inexhaustible enthusiast, whose every step produced a rattling of the
bamboo floor, and whose unwearied energy enabled him to hunt during the
greater part of the night.

At length slumber descended on Nigel's spirit, and he lay for some time
in peaceful oblivion, when a rattling crash awoke him. Sitting up he
listened, and came to the conclusion that the professor had upset some
piece of furniture, for he could hear him distinctly moving about in a
stealthy manner, as if on tip-toe, giving vent to a grumble of
