"Only four days!" Mrs. Barclay and Milly repeated, aghast.

"It is not much, mamma," Ralph put in, "but it is better than
nothing. You see, you did not expect us at all."

"Quite so," Captain Barclay said, cheerfully. "It is a clear gain,
and we waste the time in regretting that it is not longer. It is a
great delight to have you back again, even for a few hours. You
both look wonderfully well, and fully a year older than when you
left. Roughing it, and exposure, evidently suits you.

"Has Louis come back with you?"

"Yes, papa, he has come back to stay, for some time. He is
completely done up, and the surgeon has ordered rest and quiet, for
a while.

"How is Philippe?"

"He is getting on well; and will walk, the doctor hopes, in another
fortnight, or three weeks; but I have not seen him for--although
your uncle comes in, as usual, for a chat with me--Madame Duburg
has never forgiven me for having, as she says, influenced him in
allowing the boys to go; and of course, since this wound of
Philippe's, she has been more angry than ever."

The boys laughed. They understood their aunt's ways.

"Tim has not been hurt, I hope?" Milly asked.

"Oh no; Tim is as well as ever, and the life and soul of the
corps."

As breakfast went on, the boys gradually related the changes that
were taking place: Major Tempe's promotion to be colonel, and the
fact that he was placed in command of several corps of franc
tireurs, who were hereafter to act together. They said no word,
however, about their own promotion; having agreed to keep that
matter secret, until the uniforms were completed. They had also
asked their cousin to say nothing about it, at home; as otherwise
their uncle would have been sure to have come in to congratulate
them, and the secret would have been at an end, at once.

An hour later, Monsieur Duburg came in to see them. After the first
talk, he said to Captain Barclay:

"The way in which your boys have stood the fatigue is a proof, in
itself, how much the prosperity of a nation depends upon the
training of its boys. England is strong because her boys are all
accustomed, from their childhood, to active exercise and outdoor,
violent games. In case of a war, like this which we are going
through, almost every man could turn soldier, and go through the
fatigues of a campaign; and what is more, could make light of--not
to say enjoy--them.

"Here, upon the contrary, our young fellows do nothing and, in an
emergency like the present, want both spirit and strength to make
soldiers. Almost all the boys who went from here in Tempe's corps
have returned, completely worn out. Even Louis is a wreck;
although, thanks to the companionship of your boys, he has
supported it better, and longer, than the majority of them. Had he
began, as a child, to take pleasure in strong exercise; no doubt he
could have stood it as well as Ralph and Percy, who look absolutely
benefited by it. Unfortunately, I allowed my wife's silly objection
to prevail; until the last three years, when I insisted that they
should do as they liked.

"As I have said before, Barclay, I say again: I congratulate you on
your boys. You have a right to be proud of them. I wish the race of
young Frenchmen were only like them."

Great indeed was the astonishment--upon the afternoon of the
following day--when Ralph and Percy walked into the sitting room,
dressed as staff officers; feeling a little awkward with their
swords, but flushed with an honorable pleasure and pride--for their
epaulets had been gained by no family interests, no private
influence. They were worn as the reward of good service. Captain
Barclay wrung the boys' hands, silently. Their mother cried with
delight, and Milly danced round the boys like a small possessed
one.

"It is not for the absolute rank itself, boys, that I am pleased,"
their father said, when they had related the whole circumstances;
"for you have no idea of remaining in the French service and,
consequently, the rank will be of no use to you, after the end of
the war. Still, it is a thing all your lives to be proud of--that
you won your commission in the French army, by good service."

"What I am thinking of most," Mrs. Barclay said, "is that, now they
are officers in the regular army, they will run no risk of being
shot, if they are taken prisoners."

"We don't mean to be taken prisoners, mamma. Still, as you say, it
is certainly an advantage in favor of the regular uniform."

"And what is to become of Tim?" Milly asked.

"Oh, Tim is going to become a hussar, and act as one of the
general's orderlies; and be our servant, when he has nothing else
to do. You see, now we are officers, we have a right to servants."

"I am very glad Tim is going with you," Mrs. Barclay said. "My
brother tells us that he saved Philippe's life, and it seems a
comfort to know that he is with you."

The next morning Captain Barclay went down with them to the town,
and purchased a couple of capital horses which, by great good
fortune, were on sale.

Upon the morning of the fourth day of their visit, the boys took
leave of their father and mother, and left to join the headquarters
of General Cambriels. The parting was far less trying than it had
been, the first time they went away. The boys were not, now, going
out to an unknown danger. Although the risk that a staff officer
runs is, absolutely, somewhat greater than that incurred by a
regimental officer; still, it is slight in comparison with the risk
run by a franc tireur, employed in harassing an enemy, and in
cutting his communications--especially when capture means death.
Those who remained behind were encouraged partly by this thought,
but still more by the really irrational one that, as the boys had
gone away and come back safe, once, they would probably do so
again.

The evening of the same day, the Barclays reported themselves for
duty to the general and, next morning, began work. Their duty was
hard, though simple. By day they were constantly on duty--that is to
say, either riding over the country, or waiting near the general's
quarters in readiness for a start or--more seldom--writing, and
drawing up reports in the office. By night they took it in turns
with the other staff officers to be on duty--that is to say, to lie
down to sleep in uniform, with the horse saddled at the door, in
readiness to start at an instant's notice.

Tim's duties as an orderly were not heavy, and were generally over
by five o'clock; after which he acted as servant to the boys. It
was impossible, under the circumstances, for the staff to mess
together, as usual. There was neither a room available nor, indeed,
any of the appliances. Among Tim's other duties, therefore, was
that of cooking. They had also another orderly allotted to them,
and he devoted himself to the care of the horses; Tim undertaking
all other work.

The boys liked their new duties much. The work was hard, but
pleasant. Their fellow officers were pleasant companions, and their
general most kind, and genial.

A week after they had joined, General Cambriels advanced into the
Vosges to oppose the Prussians, who were marching south. The
progress of the army was slow, for they had to carry what supplies
they required with them. Colonel Tempe kept, with his command, a
few hours' march ahead; and one or other of the boys was frequently
dispatched with orders, etc. to obtain reports from him.

After three days' marching, they neared the enemy. All was now
watchfulness, and excitement. The franc tireurs were already
engaged in skirmishing and, early one morning, Ralph received
orders to ride forward and reconnoiter the enemy's position.
Passing through the posts of franc tireurs, he rode cautiously
along the road; with his hand on the butt of his revolver, and his
horse well in hand--ready to turn and ride for his life, on an
instant's notice.

Presently, as the road wound through a narrow gorge, lined with
trees, he heard a voice say, close in his ear, "Stop!"

He reined in his horse, and drew his pistol. The leaves parted; and
a man of some sixty years of age, armed with an old double-barreled
fowling piece, stepped out.

"The Germans are just beyond," he said. "I expect them every
moment."

"And what are you doing here?" Ralph asked.

"What am I doing?" repeated the peasant. "I am waiting to shoot
some of them."

"But they will hang you, to a certainty, if they catch you."

"Let them," the old man said, quietly; "they will do me no more
harm than they have done me. I had a nice farm, near Metz. I lived
there with my wife and daughter, and my three boys. Someone fired
at the Prussians from a wood near. No one was hit, but that made no
difference. The black-hearted scoundrels came to my farm; shot my
three boys, before their mother's eyes; ill treated her, so that
she died next day and, when I returned--for I was away, at the
time--I found a heap of ashes, where my house had stood; the dead
bodies of my three boys; my wife dying, and my daughter sitting by,
screaming with laughter--mad--quite mad!

"I took her away to a friend's house; and stayed with her till she
died, too, a fortnight after. Then I bought this gun, and some
powder and lead, with my last money; and went out to kill
Prussians. I have killed thirteen already and, please God," and the
peasant lifted his hat, devoutly, "I will kill two more, today."

"How is it that you have escaped so long?" Ralph asked, in
surprise.

"I never fire at infantry," the peasant said. "It was Uhlans that
did it, and it's only Uhlans I fire at. I put myself on a rock, or
a hillside, where they can't come--or in a thick wood--and I
content myself with my two shots, and then go. I don't want to be
killed, yet. I have set my mind on having fifty--just ten for each
of mine--and when I've shot the last of the fifty, the sooner they
finish me, the better.

"You'd better not go any farther, sir. The valley widens out, round
the corner; and there are Prussians in the nearest village."

"Thank you," Ralph said, "but my orders are to reconnoiter them,
myself, and I must do so. I am well mounted, and I don't think that
they will catch me, if I get a couple of hundred yards' start.
There are franc tireurs in the village, a mile back."

Ralph now rode carefully forward, while the peasant went back into
his hiding place by the wood. As he had said, the gorge widened
into a broad valley, a few hundred yards farther on. Upon emerging
from the gorge, Ralph at once saw a village--almost hidden among
trees--at a distance of less than a quarter of a mile. After what
he had heard, he dared not ride on farther. He therefore drew his
horse aside from the road, among some trees; dismounted, and made
his way carefully up the rocky side of the hill, to a point from
which he could command a view down the whole valley.

When he gained this spot, he looked cautiously round. Below, beyond
the village, he could see large numbers of men; could make out
lines of cavalry horses, and rows of artillery. A considerable
movement was going on, and Ralph had no doubt that they were about
to advance. In his interest in what he saw, he probably exposed his
figure somewhat; and caught the eye of some sharp-sighted sentry,
in the village.

The first intimation of his danger was given him by seeing some
twenty Uhlans dart suddenly out of the trees, in which the village
lay, at the top of their speed while, almost at the same moment,
eight or ten rifles flashed, and the balls whizzed round him in
most unpleasant propinquity. Ralph turned in an instant; and
bounded down the rock with a speed and recklessness of which, at
any other moment, he would have been incapable. Fierce as was the
pace at which the Uhlans were galloping, they were still a hundred
yards distant when Ralph leaped upon his horse, and galloped out in
front of them.

There was a rapid discharge of their carbines, but men at full
gallop make but poor shooting. Ralph felt he was untouched but, by
the convulsive spring which his horse gave, he knew the animal was
wounded. For a couple of hundred yards, there was but little
difference in his speed; and then Ralph--to his dismay--felt him
flag, and knew that the wound had been a severe one. Another
hundred yards, and the animal staggered; and would have fallen, had
not Ralph held him up well, with knee and bridle.

The Uhlans saw it; for they gave a shout, and a pistol bullet
whizzed close to his head. Ralph looked round. An officer, twenty
yards ahead of his men, was only about forty yards in his rear. In
his hand he held a revolver, which he had just discharged.

"Surrender!" he shouted, "or you are a dead man!"

Ralph saw that his pursuers were too close to enable him to carry
out his intention of dismounting, and taking to the wood--which,
here, began to approach thickly close to the road--and was on the
point of throwing up his arm, in token of surrender; when his horse
fell heavily, with him, at the moment when the Prussian again
fired. Almost simultaneously with the crack of the pistol came the
report of a gun; and the German officer fell off his horse, shot
through the heart.

Ralph leaped to his feet, and dashed up the bank in among the
trees; just as another shot was fired, with a like fatal result,
into the advancing Uhlans. The rest--believing that they had fallen
into an ambush--instantly turned their horses' heads, and galloped
back the road they had come.

Ralph's first impulse was to rush down into the road, and catch the
officer's horse; which had galloped on a short distance when its
master fell, and was now returning, to follow its companions. As he
did so, the old peasant appeared, from the wood.

"Thank you," Ralph said warmly. "You have saved my life or, at any
rate, have saved me from a German prison."

The peasant paid no attention to him; but stooped down to examine,
carefully, whether the Germans were both dead.

"Two more," he said, with a grim smile. "That makes fifteen. Three
apiece."

Then he picked up the officer's revolver, took the cartridge
belonging to it from the pouch and, with a wave of the hand to
Ralph, strode back into the wood.

Ralph removed the holsters from the saddle of his own horse--which
had fallen dead--placed them on the horse of the German officer and
then, mounting it, rode off at full speed, to inform General
Cambriels of the results of his investigation.

"Hallo, Barclay!" one of his fellow officers said, as he rode up to
the headquarters, "what have you been up to? Doing a little barter,
with a German hussar? You seem to have got the best of him, too;
for your own horse was a good one, but this is a good deal better,
unless I am mistaken.

"How has it come about?"

Quite a crowd of idlers had collected round, while the officer was
speaking; struck, like him, with the singularity of the sight of a
French staff officer upon a horse with German trappings. Ralph did
not wish to enter into explanations, there; so merely replied, in
the same jesting strain, that it had been a fair exchange--the
small difference in the value of the horses being paid for, with a
small piece of lead. Then, throwing his reins to his orderly--who
came running up--he went in to report, to the general, the evident
forward movements of the Germans.

"Are they as strong as we have heard?" the general asked.

"Fully, I should say, sir. I had no means of judging the infantry,
but they seemed in large force. They were certainly strong in
cavalry, and I saw some eight or ten batteries of artillery."

"Let the next for duty ride, with all speed, to Tempe; and tell him
to hold the upper end of this valley. Send Herve's battery forward
to assist him. Have the general assembly sounded."

Ralph left to obey these orders, while the general gave the colonel
of his staff the instructions for the disposition of his forces.

The army of the Vosges--pompous as was its name--consisted, at this
time, of only some ten thousand men; all Mobiles or franc tireurs,
with the exception of a battalion of line, and a battalion of
Zouaves. The Mobiles were almost undisciplined, having only been
out a month; and were, for the most part, armed only with the old
muzzle loader. Many were clothed only in the gray trousers, with a
red stripe, which forms part of the mobile's uniform; and in a blue
blouse. Great numbers of them were almost shoeless; having been
taken straight from the plow, or workshop, and having received no
shoes since they joined. Half disciplined, half armed, half
clothed, they were too evidently no match for the Germans.

The fact was patent to their general, and his officers. Still, his
instructions were to make a stand, at all hazards, in the Vosges;
and he now prepared to obey the orders--not hoping for victory, but
trusting in the natural courage of his men to enable him to draw
them off without serious disaster. His greatest weakness was his
artillery, of which he had only two batteries; against eight or ten
of the Germans--whose forces were, even numerically, superior to
his own.

In half an hour, the dispositions were made. The valley was wide,
at this point; and there were some five or six villages nestled in
it. It was pretty thickly wooded and, two miles behind, narrowed
again considerably. Just as the troops had gained their appointed
places, a faint sound of heavy musketry fire was heard, in the
gorge ahead; mingled, in a few minutes, with the deep boom of
cannon.

The general, surrounded by his staff, moved forward towards the
spot. From the road at the entrance to the narrow part of the
valley, nothing could be seen; but the cracking of rifles among the
trees and rocks on either side, the bursting of shells and the
whistling of bullets were incessant. The general and his staff
accordingly dismounted, handed their horses to the men of the
escort, and mounted the side of the hill.

After a sharp climb, they reached a point from whence they could
see right down the long narrow valley. On beyond, the trees--except
near the road--were thin; the steep sides of the hills being
covered with great blocks of stone, and thick brushwood. Among
these--all down one side, and up the other--at a distance of some
five hundred yards from the post taken up by the general, a
succession of quick puffs of smoke told where Colonel Tempe's franc
tireurs were placed; while among the trees below there came up
great wreaths of smoke from the battery, which was supporting them
by firing at the Germans.

These formed a long line, up and down the sides of the valley, at
three or four hundred yards distance from the French lines. Two
German batteries were down in the road, a few hundred yards to the
rear of their skirmishers; and these were sending shells thickly up
among the rocks, where the franc tireurs were lying hid; while two
other batteries--which the Germans had managed to put a short way
up on the mountain sides, still farther in the rear--were raining
shell, with deadly precision, upon the French batteries in the
road.

A prettier piece of warfare it would have been difficult to
imagine--the lofty mountain sides; the long lines of little puffs
of smoke, among the brushwood and rocks; the white smoke arising
from the trees, in the bottom; the quick, dull bursts of the
shells--as a spectacle, it was most striking. The noise was
prodigious. The steep sides of the mountain echoed each report of
the guns into a prolonged roar, like the rumble of thunder. The
rattle of the musketry never ceased for an instant, and loud and
distinct above the din rose the menacing scream of the shells.

"This is grand, indeed, Ralph!" Percy said, after a moment's
silence.

"Splendid!" Ralph said, "but it is evident we cannot hold the
gorge. Their skirmishers are three to our one, and their shells
must be doing terrible damage."

"Barclay," General Cambriels said, "go down to the battery, and
bring me back word how they are getting on."

The scene quite lost its beauty to Percy, now, as he saw Ralph
scramble rapidly down the hillside in the direction of the trees;
among which the French battery was placed, and over and among which
the shells were bursting, every second. It seemed like entering a
fiery furnace.

It was a terribly long ten minutes before Ralph was seen, climbing
up the hillside again; and Percy's heart gave a jump of delight,
when he first caught sight of his figure. As Ralph came near, his
brother saw that he was very pale, and had a handkerchief bound
round one arm. This was already soaked with blood. He kept on
steadily, however, until he reached the general; who had, upon
seeing he was wounded, advanced to meet him.

"One gun is dismounted, sir, and half the men are killed or
wounded."

