that it would cost her her life if she did not say that the two brothers
had won all the treasures.

When they arrived at their father's palace there was great rejoicing,
and everyone praised the two princes for their courage and bravery.

When the king inquired after the youngest brother they answered that
he had led such a life in the inn that he had been hanged for debt. The
king sorrowed bitterly over this, because the youngest prince was his
dearest son, and the joy over the treasures soon died away, for the
bird Grip would not sing so that the king might recover his sight, the
princess wept night and day, and no one dared to venture so close to the
horse as to have a look at his golden shoes.

Now when the youngest prince was thrown down into the lions' den he
found the fox sitting there, and the lions, instead of tearing him to
pieces, showed him the greatest friendliness. Nor was the fox angry with
him for having forgot his last warning. He only said that sons who could
so forget their old father and disgrace their royal birth as those had
done would not hesitate to betray their brother either. Then he took the
prince up out of the lion's den and gave him directions what to do now
so as to come by his rights again.

The prince thanked the fox with all his heart for his true friendship,
but the fox answered that if he had been of any use to him he would now
for his own part ask a service of him. The prince replied that he would
do him any service that was in his power.

'I have only one thing to ask of you,' said the fox, 'and that is, that
you should cut off my head with your sword.'

The prince was astonished, and said that he could not bring himself to
cut the had off his truest friend, and to this he stuck in spite of all
the fox's declarations that it was the greatest service he could do him.
At this the fox became very sorrowful, and declared that the prince's
refusal to grant his request now compelled him to do a deed which he was
very unwilling to do--if the prince would not cut off his head, then
he must kill the prince himself. Then at last the prince drew his good
sword and cut off the fox's head, and the next moment a youth stood
before him.

'Thanks,' said he, 'for this service, which has freed me from a spell
that not even death itself could loosen. I am the dead man who lay
unburied in the robber's inn, where you ransomed me and gave me
honourable burial, and therefore I have helped you in your journey.'

With this they parted and the prince, disguising himself as a
horse-shoer, went up to his father's palace and offered his services
there.

The king's men told him that a horse-shoer was indeed wanted at the
palace, but he must be one who could lift up the feet of the horse with
the golden shoes, and such a one they had not yet been able to find. The
prince asked to see the horse, and as soon as he entered the stable the
steed began to neigh in a friendly fashion, and stood as quiet and still
as a lamb while the prince lifted up his hoofs, one after the other, and
showed the king's men the famous golden shoes.

After this the king's men began to talk about the bird Grip, and how
strange it was that he would not sing, however well he was attended to.
The horse-shoer then said that he knew the bird very well; he had seen
it when it sat in its cage in another king's palace, and if it did
not sing now it must be because it did not have all that it wanted. He
himself knew so much about the bird's ways that if he only got to see it
he could tell at once what it lacked.

The king's men now took counsel whether they ought to take the stranger
in before the king, for in his chamber sat the bird Grip along with the
weeping princess. It was decided to risk doing so, and the horse-shoer
was led into the king's chamber, where he had no sooner called the bird
by its name than it began to sing and the princess to smile. Then the
darkness cleared away from the king's eyes, and the more the bird sang
the more clearly did he see, till at last in the strange horse-shoer
he recognised his youngest son. Then the princess told the king how
treacherously his eldest sons had acted, and he had them banished from
his kingdom; but the youngest prince married the princess, and got the
horse with the golden shoes and half the kingdom from his father, who
kept for himself so long as he lived the bird Grip, which now sang with
all its heart to the king and all his court.




Snowflake

Slavonic story. Contes Populaires Slaves, traduits par Louis Leger.
Paris: Leroux, Editeur.


Once upon a time there lived a peasant called Ivan, and he had a wife
whose name was Marie. They would have been quite happy except for one
thing: they had no children to play with, and as they were now old
people they did not find that watching the children of their neighbours
at all made up to them for having one of their own.

One winter, which nobody living will ever forget, the snow lay so deep
that it came up to the knees of even the tallest man. When it had all
fallen, and the sun was shining again, the children ran out into the
street to play, and the old man and his wife sat at their window and
gazed at them. The children first made a sort of little terrace, and
stamped it hard and firm, and then they began to make a snow woman. Ivan
and Marie watched them, the while thinking about many things.

Suddenly Ivan's face brightened, and, looking at his wife, he said,
'Wife, why shouldn't we make a snow woman too?'

'Why not?' replied Marie, who happened to be in a very good temper; 'it
might amuse us a little. But there is no use making a woman. Let us make
a little snow child, and pretend it is a living one.'

'Yes, let us do that,' said Ivan, and he took down his cap and went into
the garden with his old wife.

Then the two set to work with all their might to make a doll out of
the snow. They shaped a little body and two little hands and two little
feet. On top of all they placed a ball of snow, out of which the head
was to be.

'What in the world are you doing?' asked a passer-by.

'Can't you guess?' returned Ivan.

'Making a snow-child,' replied Marie.

They had finished the nose and the chin. Two holes were left for the
eyes, and Ivan carefully shaped out the mouth. No sooner had he done so
than he felt a warm breath upon his cheek. He started back in surprise
and looked--and behold! the eyes of the child met his, and its lips,
which were as red as raspberries, smiled at him!

'What is it?' cried Ivan, crossing himself. 'Am I mad, or is the thing
bewitched?'

The snow-child bent its head as if it had been really alive. It moved
its little arms and its little legs in the snow that lay about it just
as the living children did theirs.

'Ah! Ivan, Ivan,' exclaimed Marie, trembling with joy, 'heaven has sent
us a child at last!' And she threw herself upon Snowflake (for that was
the snow-child's name) and covered her with kisses. And the loose snow
fell away from Snowflake as an egg shell does from an egg, and it was a
little girl whom Marie held in her arms.

'Oh! my darling Snowflake!' cried the old woman, and led her into the
cottage.

And Snowflake grew fast; each hour as well as each day made a
difference, and every day she became more and more beautiful. The old
couple hardly knew how to contain themselves for joy, and thought of
nothing else. The cottage was always full of village children, for they
amused Snowflake, and there was nothing in the world they would not
have done to amuse her. She was their doll, and they were continually
inventing new dresses for her, and teaching her songs or playing with
her. Nobody knew how clever she was! She noticed everything, and could
learn a lesson in a moment. Anyone would have taken her for thirteen
at least! And, besides all that, she was so good and obedient; and
so pretty, too! Her skin was as white as snow, her eyes as blue as
forget-me-nots, and her hair was long and golden. Only her cheeks had no
colour in them, but were as fair as her forehead.

So the winter went on, till at last the spring sun mounted higher in the
heavens and began to warm the earth. The grass grew green in the fields,
and high in the air the larks were heard singing. The village girls met
and danced in a ring, singing, 'Beautiful spring, how came you here?
How came you here? Did you come on a plough, or was it a harrow?' Only
Snowflake sat quite still by the window of the cottage.

'What is the matter, dear child?' asked Marie. 'Why are you so sad? Are
you ill? or have they treated you unkindly?'

'No,' replied Snowflake, 'it is nothing, mother; no one has hurt me; I
am well.'

The spring sun had chased away the last snow from its hiding place under
the hedges; the fields were full of flowers; nightingales sang in the
trees, and all the world was gay. But the gayer grew the birds and the
flowers the sadder became Snowflake. She hid herself from her playmates,
and curled herself up where the shadows were deepest, like a lily
amongst its leaves. Her only pleasure was to lie amid the green willows
near some sparkling stream. At the dawn and at twilight only she seemed
happy. When a great storm broke, and the earth was white with hail, she
became bright and joyous as the Snowflake of old; but when the clouds
passed, and the hail melted beneath the sun, Snowflake would burst into
tears and weep as a sister would weep over her brother.

The spring passed, and it was the eve of St. John, or Midsummer Day.
This was the greatest holiday of the year, when the young girls met in
the woods to dance and play. They went to fetch Snowflake, and said to
Marie: 'Let her come and dance with us.'

But Marie was afraid; she could not tell why, only she could not bear
the child to go. Snowflake did not wish to go either, but they had no
excuse ready. So Marie kissed the girl and said: 'Go, my Snowflake, and
be happy with your friends, and you, dear children, be careful of her.
You know she is the light of my eyes to me.'

'Oh, we will take care of her,' cried the girls gaily, and they ran off
to the woods. There they wore wreaths, gathered nosegays, and sang songs
some sad, some merry. And whatever they did Snowflake did too.

When the sun set they lit a fire of dry grass, and placed themselves in
a row, Snowflake being the last of all. 'Now, watch us,' they said, 'and
run just as we do.'

And they all began to sing and to jump one after another across the
fire.

Suddenly, close behind them, they heard a sigh, then a groan. 'Ah!' They
turned hastily and looked at each other. There was nothing. They
looked again. Where was Snowflake? She has hidden herself for fun, they
thought, and searched for her everywhere. 'Snowflake! Snowflake!' But
there was no answer. 'Where can she be? Oh, she must have gone home.'
They returned to the village, but there was no Snowflake.

For days after that they sought her high and low. They examined every
bush and every hedge, but there was no Snowflake. And long after
everyone else had given up hope Ivan and Marie would wander through the
woods crying 'Snowflake, my dove, come back, come back!' And sometimes
they thought they heard a call, but it was never the voice of Snowflake.

And what had become of her? Had a fierce wild beast seized her and
dragged her into his lair in the forest? Had some bird carried her off
across the wide blue sea?

No, no beast had touched her, no bird had borne her away. With the
first breath of flame that swept over her when she ran with her friends
Snowflake had melted away, and a little soft haze floating upwards was
all that remained of her.




I Know What I Have Learned

From the Danish.


There was once a man who had three daughters, and they were all married
to trolls, who lived underground. One day the man thought that he would
pay them a visit, and his wife gave him some dry bread to eat by the
way. After he had walked some distance he grew both tired and hungry, so
he sat down on the east side of a mound and began to eat his dry bread.
The mound then opened, and his youngest daughter came out of it, and
said, 'Why, father! why are you not coming in to see me?'

'Oh,' said he, 'if I had known that you lived here, and had seen any
entrance, I would have come in.'

Then he entered the mound along with her.

The troll came home soon after this, and his wife told him that her
father was come, and asked him to go and buy some beef to make broth
with.

'We can get it easier than that!' said the troll.

He fixed an iron spike into one of the beams of the roof, and ran his
head against this till he had knocked several large pieces off his head.
He was just as well as ever after doing this, and they got their broth
without further trouble.

The troll then gave the old man a sackful of money, and laden with this
he betook himself homewards. When he came near his home he remembered
that he had a cow about to calve, so he laid down the money on the
ground, ran home as fast as he could, and asked his wife whether the cow
had calved yet.

'What kind of a hurry is this to come home in?' said she. 'No, the cow
has not calved yet.'

'Then you must come out and help me in with a sackful of money,' said
the man.

'A sackful of money?' cried his wife.

'Yes, a sackful of money,' said he. 'Is that so very wonderful?'

His wife did not believe very much what he told her, but she humoured
him, and went out with him.

When they came to the spot where he had left it there was no money
there; a thief had come along and stolen it. His wife then grew angry
and scolded him heartily.

'Well, well!' said he, 'hang the money! I know what I have learned.'

'What have you learned?' said she.

'Ah! I know that,' said the man.

After some time had passed the man had a mind to visit his second eldest
daughter. His wife again gave him some dry bread to eat, and when he
grew tired and hungry he sat down on the east side of a mound and began
to eat it. As he sat there his daughter came up out of the mound, and
invited him to come inside, which he did very willingly.

Soon after this the troll came home. It was dark by that time, and his
wife bade him go and buy some candles.

'Oh, we shall soon get a light,' said the troll. With that he dipped his
fingers into the fire, and they then gave light without being burned in
the least.

The old man got two sacks of money here, and plodded away homewards with
these. When he was very nearly home he again thought of the cow that
was with calf, so he laid down the money, ran home, and asked his wife
whether the cow had calved yet.

'Whatever is the matter with you?' said she. 'You come hurrying as if
the whole house was about to fall. You may set your mind at rest: the
cow has not calved yet.'

The man now asked her to come and help him home with the two sacks of
money. She did not believe him very much, but he continued to assure her
that it was quite true, till at last she gave in and went with him. When
they came to the spot there had again been a thief there and taken the
money. It was no wonder that the woman was angry about this, but the man
only said, 'Ah, if you only knew what I have learned.'

A third time the man set out--to visit his eldest daughter. When he
came to a mound he sat down on the east side of it and ate the dry bread
which his wife had given him to take with him. The daughter then came
out of the mound and invited her father to come inside.

In a little the troll came home, and his wife asked him to go and buy
some fish.

'We can get them much more easily than that,' said the troll. 'Give me
your dough trough and your ladle.'

They seated themselves in the trough, and rowed out on the lake which
was beside the mound. When they had got out a little way the troll said
to his wife, 'Are my eyes green?'

'No, not yet,' said she.

He rowed on a little further and asked again, 'Are my eyes not green
yet?'

'Yes,' said his wife, 'they are green now.'

Then the troll sprang into the water and ladled up so many fish that in
a short time the trough could hold no more. They then rowed home again,
and had a good meal off the fish.

The old man now got three sacks full of money, and set off home with
them. When he was almost home the cow again came into his head, and he
laid down the money. This time, however, he took his wooden shoes and
laid them above the money, thinking that no one would take it after
that. Then he ran home and asked his wife whether the cow had calved. It
had not, and she scolded him again for behaving in this way, but in the
end he persuaded her to go with him to help him with the three sacks of
money.

When they came to the spot they found only the wooden shoes, for a thief
had come along in the meantime and taken all the money. The woman was
very angry, and broke out upon her husband; but he took it all very
quietly, and only said, 'Hang the money! I know what I have learned.'

'What have you learned I should like to know?' said his wife.

'You will see that yet,' said the man.

One day his wife took a fancy for broth, and said to him, 'Oh, go to the
village, and buy a piece of beef to make broth.'

'There's no need of that,' said he; 'we can get it an easier way.' With
