the prefect of the Zacatecan friars, became his successor. Diego
afterwards became the first bishop of California.

In July, 1839, a party called Yozcolos, doubtless after their leader,
attacked the neophytes guarding the Santa Clara wheat-fields, killing
one of them. The attackers were pursued, and their leader slain, and the
placing of his head on a pole seemed to act as a deterrent of further
acts for awhile.

In December of the same year Prado Mesa made an expedition against
gentile thieves in the region of the Stanislaus River. He was surprised
by the foe, three of his men killed, and he and six others wounded,
besides losing a number of his weapons. This Indian success caused great
alarm, and a regular patrol was organized to operate between San Jose
and San Juan Missions for the protection of the ranches. This uprising
of the Indians was almost inevitable. Deprived of their maintenance at
the Missions, they were practically thrown on their own resources, and
in many cases this left them a prey to the evil leadership of desperate
men of their own class.

Santa Clara was one of the Missions immediately affected by the decree
of Micheltorena, of March 29, 1843, requiring that the padres reassume
the management of the temporalities. They set to work to gather up what
fragments they could find, but the flocks and herds were "lent" where
they could not be recovered, and one flock of 4000 sheep--the padre says
6000--were taken by M.J. Vallejo, "legally, in aid of the government."

Pio Pico's decree of June 5, 1845, affected Santa Clara. Andres Pico
made a valuation of the property at $16,173. There were then 130
ex-neophytes, the live-stock had dwindled down to 430 cattle, 215
horses, and 809 sheep. The padre found it necessary to write a sharp
letter to the alcalde of San Jose on the grog-shops of that pueblo,
which encouraged drinking among his Indians to such extent that they
were completely demoralized.

March 19, 1851, the parish priest, who was a cultivated and learned
Jesuit, and who had prepared the way, succeeded in having the Santa
Clara College established in the old Mission buildings. On the 28th of
April, 1855, it was chartered with all the rights and privileges of a
university. In due time the college grew to large proportions, and it
was found imperative either to remove the old Mission structure
completely, or renovate it out of all recognition. This latter was done,
so that but little of the old church remains.

In restoring it in 1861-1862 the nave was allowed to remain, but in
1885 it was found necessary to remove it. Its walls were five feet
thick. The adobe bricks were thrown out upon the plaza behind the cross.

The present occupation of Santa Clara as a university as well as a
church necessitated the adaptation of the old cloisters to meet the
modern conditions. Therefore the casual visitor would scarcely notice
that the reception-room into which he is ushered is a part of the old
cloisters. The walls are about three feet thick, and are of adobe. In
the garden the beams of the cloister roofs are to be seen.

The old Mission vineyard, where the grapes used to thrive, is now
converted into a garden. A number of the old olive trees still remain.
Of the three original bells of the Mission, two still call the faithful
to worship. One was broken and had to be recast in San Francisco.

On the altar, there are angels with flambeaux in their hands, of wooden
carving. These are deemed the work of the Indians. There are also
several old statues of the saints, including San Joaquin, Santa Ana, San
Juan Capistrano, and Santa Colette. In the sodality chapel, also, there
are statues of San Francisco and San Antonio. The altar rail of the
restored Santa Clara church was made from the beams of the old Mission.
These were of redwood, secured from the Santa Cruz mountains, and, I
believe, are the earliest specimens of redwood used for lumber in
California The rich natural coloring and the beauty of the grain and
texture have improved with the years The old octagonal pulpit, though
not now used is restored and honored, standing upon a modern pedestal.

Santa Clara was noted for the longevity of some of its Indians. One of
them, Gabriel, who died in 1891 or 1892 at the hospital in Salinas,
claimed he was a grandfather when Serra came in 1767. He must have been
over 150 years old when he died. Another, Inigo, was known to be 101
years of age at his death.

In a room in the college building is gathered together an interesting
collection of articles belonging to the old Mission. Here are the chairs
of the sanctuary, processional candlesticks, pictures, and the best
bound book in the State--an old choral. It rests on a stand at the end
of the room. The lids are of wood, covered with thick leather and bound
in very heavy bronze, with bosses half an inch high. Each corner also
has bronze protuberances, half an inch long, that stand out on the
bottom, or edge of the cover, so that they raise the whole book. The
volume is of heaviest vellum and is entirely hand-written in red and
black; and though a century or more has passed since it was written it
is clear and perfect, has 139 pages. The brothers of the college have
placed this inscription over it: "Ancient choral, whose wooden cover,
leather bound and covered in bronze, came, probably, originally from
Spain, and has age of some 500 years."

In a case which extends across the room are ancient vestments, the key
of the old Mission, statuary brackets from the ancient altar, the altar
bell, crown of thorns from the Mission crucifix, altar card-frames, and
the rosary and crucifix that once belonged to Padre Magin Catala.

Padre Catala, the good man of Santa Clara, is deemed by the leaders of
the Catholic Church in California to be worthy the honors and elevation
of sainthood, and proceedings are now in operation before the highest
Court of the Church in Rome to see whether he is entitled to these
posthumous honors. The Franciscan historian for California, Father
Zephyrin Englehardt, has written a book entitled _The Holy Man of Santa
Clara_, in which not only the life of Padre Catala is given, but the
whole of the procedure necessary to convince the Church tribunal of his
worth and sainthood. The matter is not yet (1913) settled.

On the walls are some of the ancient paintings, one especially
noteworthy. It is of Christ multiplying the loaves and fishes (John vi.
II). While it is not a great work of art, the benignity and sweetness of
the Christ face redeem it from crudeness. With upraised right hand he is
blessing the loaves which rest in his left hand, while the boy with the
fishes kneels reverently at his feet.

The University of Santa Clara is now rapidly erecting its new buildings,
in a modified form of Mission architecture, to meet its enlarging needs
The buildings, when completed, will present to the world a great
institution of learning--the oldest west of the Rocky Mountains--well
equipped in every department for the important labor in the education of
the Catholic youth of California and the west that it has undertaken.



CHAPTER XVIII

SAN BUENAVENTURA

For thirteen years the heart of the venerable Serra was made sick by the
postponements in the founding of this Mission. The Viceroy de Croix had
ordered Governor Rivera "to recruit seventy-five soldiers for the
establishment of a presidio and three Missions in the channel of Santa
Barbara: one towards the north of the channel, which was to be dedicated
to the Immaculate Conception; one towards the south, dedicated to San
Buenaventura, and a third in the centre, dedicated to Santa Barbara."

It was with intense delight that Serra received a call from Governor
Neve, who, in February, 1782, informed him that he was prepared to
proceed at once to the founding of the Missions of San Buenaventura and
Santa Barbara. Although busy training his neophytes, he determined to go
in person and perform the necessary ceremonies. Looking about for a
padre to accompany him, and all his own coadjutors being engaged, he
bethought him of Father Pedro Benito Cambon, a returned invalid
missionary from the Philippine Islands, who was recuperating at San
Diego. He accordingly wrote Padre Cambon, requesting him, if possible,
to meet him at San Gabriel. On his way to San Gabriel, Serra passed
through the Indian villages of the channel region, and could not refrain
from joyfully communicating the news to the Indians that, very speedily,
he would return to them, and establish Missions in their midst.

In the evening of March 18, Serra reached Los Angeles, and next evening,
after walking to San Gabriel, weighed down with his many cares, and
weary with his long walk, he still preached an excellent sermon, it
being the feast of the patriarch St. Joseph. Father Cambon had arrived,
and after due consultation with him and the governor, the date for the
setting out of the expedition was fixed for Tuesday, March 26. The week
was spent in confirmation services and other religious work, and, on the
date named, after solemn mass, the party set forth. It was the most
imposing procession ever witnessed in California up to that time, and
called forth many gratified remarks from Serra. There were seventy
soldiers, with their captain, commander for the new presidio, ensign,
sergeant, and corporals. In full gubernatorial dignity followed Governor
Neve, with ten soldiers of the Monterey company, their wives and
families, servants and neophytes.

[Illustration: SIDE ENTRANCE AT SAN BUENAVENTURA.]

[Illustration: FACHADA OF MISSION SAN BUENAVENTURA.]

[Illustration: STATUE OF SAN BUENAVENTURA. Now at Dominican Convent,
Mission San Jose.]

[Illustration: RAWHIDE FASTENING OF MISSION BELL, AND WORM-EATEN BEAM.]

At midnight they halted, and a special messenger overtook them with news
which led the governor to return at once to San Gabriel with his ten
soldiers. He ordered the procession to proceed, however, found the San
Buenaventura Mission, and there await his arrival. Serra accordingly
went forward, and on the twenty-ninth arrived at "Assumpta." Here, the
next day, on the feast of Easter, they pitched their tents, "erected a
large cross, and prepared an altar under a shade of evergreens," where
the venerable Serra, now soon to close his life-work, blessed the cross
and the place, solemnized mass, preached a sermon to the soldiers on the
Resurrection of Christ, and formally dedicated the Mission to God, and
placed it under the patronage of St. Joseph.

In the earlier part of the last century the Mission began to grow
rapidly. Padres Francisco Dumetz and Vicente de Santa Maria, who had
been placed in charge of the Mission from the first, were gladdened by
many accessions, and the Mission flocks and herds also increased
rapidly. Indeed, we are told that "in 1802 San Buenaventura possessed
finer herds of cattle and richer fields of grain than any of her
contemporaries, and her gardens and orchards were visions of wealth
and beauty."

On his second visit to the California coast, Vancouver, when anchored
off Santa Barbara, traded with Padre Santa Maria of San Buenaventura for
a flock of sheep and as many vegetables as twenty mules could carry.

It is to Vancouver, on this voyage, that we owe the names of a number of
points on the California coast, as, for instance, Points Sal, Argueello
Felipe, Vicente, Dumetz, Fermin, and Lasuen.

In 1795 there was a fight between the neophyte and gentile Indians, the
former killing two chiefs and taking captive several of the latter. The
leaders on both sides were punished, the neophyte Domingo even being
sentenced to work in chains.

In 1806 the venerable Santa Maria, one of the Mission founders, died.
His remains were ultimately placed in the new church.

In 1800 the largest population in its history was reached, with 1297
souls. Cattle and horses prospered, and the crops were reported as among
the best in California.

The earthquake of 1812-1813 did considerable damage at San Buenaventura.
Afraid lest the sea would swallow them up, the people fled to San
Joaquin y Santa Ana for three months, where a temporary _jacal_ church
was erected. The tower and a part of the _fachada_ had to be torn down
and rebuilt, and this was done by 1818, with a new chapel dedicated to
San Miguel in addition.

That San Buenaventura was prosperous is shown by the fact that in June,
1820, the government owed it $27,385 for supplies, $6200 in stipends,
and $1585 for a cargo of hemp,--a total of $35,170, which, says
Bancroft, "there was not the slightest chance of it ever receiving."

In 1823 the president and vice-prefect Senan, who had served as padre
at this Mission for twenty-five years, died August 24, and was buried by
the side of Santa Maria. After his death San Buenaventura began rapidly
to decline.

In 1822 a neophyte killed his wife for adultery. It is interesting to
note that in presenting his case the fiscal said that as the culprit had
been a Christian only seven years, and was yet ignorant in matters of
domestic discipline, he asked for the penalty of five years in the chain
gang and then banishment.

The baptisms for the whole period of the Mission's history, viz., for
1782-1834, are 3876. There is still preserved at the Mission the first
register, which was closed in 1809. At that time 2648 baptisms had been
administered. The padre presidente, Serra, wrote the heading for the
Index, and the contents themselves were written in a beautiful hand by
Padre Senan. There are four signatures which occur throughout in the
following order: Pedro Benito Cambon, Francisco Dumetz, Vicente de Sta
Maria, and Jose Senan.

The largest population was 1330 in 1816. The largest number of cattle
was 23,400 in the same year. In 1814, 4652 horses; in 1816,
13,144 sheep.

Micheltorena's decree in 1843 restored the temporalities of the Mission
to the padres. This was one of the two Missions, Santa Ines being the
other, that was able to provide a moderate subsistence out of the wreck
left by secularization. On the 5th of December, 1845, Pico rented San
Buenaventura to Jose Arnaz and Marcisco Botello for $1630 a year. There
are no statistics of the value of the property after 1842, though in
April of 1843 Padre Jimeno reports 2382 cattle, 529 horses, 2299 sheep,
220 mules and 18 asses, 1032 fruit trees and 11,907 vines. In November
of that same year the bishop appointed Presbyter, Resales, since which
time the Mission has been the regular parish church of the city.

In 1893 the Mission church was renovated out of all its historic
association and value by Father Rubio, who had a good-natured but
fearfully destructive zeal for the "restoration" of the old Missions.
Almost everything has been modernized. The fine old pulpit, one of the
richest treasures of the Mission, was there several years ago; but when,
in 1904, I inquired of the then pastor where it was, I was curtly
informed that he neither knew nor cared. All the outbuildings have been
demolished and removed in order to make way for the modern spirit of
commercialism which in the last decade has struck the town. It is now an
ordinary church, with little but its history to redeem it from the look
of smug modernity which is the curse of the present age.

Before leaving San Buenaventura it may be interesting to note that a few
years ago I was asked about two "wooden bells" which were said to have
been hung in the tower at this Mission. I deemed the question absurd,
but on one of my visits found one of these bells in a storeroom under
the altar, and another still hanging in the belfry. By whom, or why,
these dummy bells were made, I have not been able to discover.



CHAPTER XIX

SANTA BARBARA

After the founding of San Buenaventura. Governor Neve arrived from San
Gabriel, inspected the new site, and expressed himself as pleased with
all that had been done. A few days later he, with Padre Serra, and a
number of soldiers and officers, started up the coast, and, selecting a
site known to the Indians after the name of their chief, _Yanonalit_,
established the presidio of Santa Barbara. Yanonalit was very friendly,
and as he had authority over thirteen rancherias he was able to help
matters along easily. This was April 21, 1782.

When Serra came to the establishment of the presidio, he expected also
to found the Mission, and great was his disappointment. This undoubtedly
hastened his death, which occurred August 28, 1782.

[Illustration: MISSION SANTA BARBARA.]

[Illustration: MISSION SANTA BARBARA FROM THE HILLSIDE.]

[Illustration: INTERIOR OF MISSION SANTA BARBARA.]

It was not until two years later that Neve's successor, Fages,
authorized Serra's successor, Lasuen, to proceed. Even then it was
feared that he would demand adherence to new conditions which were to
the effect that the padres should not have control over the temporal
affairs of the Indians; but, as the guardian of the college had
positively refused to send missionaries for the new establishments,
unless they were founded on the old lines, Fages tacitly agreed. On
December 4, therefore, the cross was raised on the site called
_Taynayan_ by the Indians and _Pedragoso_ by the Spaniards, and formal
possession taken, though the first mass was not said until Fages's
arrival on the 16th. Lasuen was assisted by Padres Antonio Paterna and
Cristobal Oramas. Father Zephyrin has written a very interesting account
of Santa Barbara Mission, some of which is as follows:

"The work of erecting the necessary buildings began early in 1787. With
a number of Indians, who had first to be initiated into the mysteries of
house construction, Fathers Paterna and Oramas built a dwelling for
themselves together with a chapel. These were followed by a house for
the servants, who were male Indians, a granary, carpenter shop, and
quarters for girls and unmarried young women.

"In succeeding years other structures arose on the rocky height as the
converts increased and industries were introduced. At the end of 1807
the Indian village, which had sprung up just southwest of the main
building, consisted of 252 separate adobe dwellings harboring as many
Indian families. The present Mission building, with its fine corridor,
was completed about the close of the eighteenth century. The fountain in
front arose in 1808. It furnished the water for the great basin just
below, which served for the general laundry purposes of the Indian
village. The water was led through earthen pipes from the reservoir
north of the church, which to this day furnishes Santa Barbara with
water. It was built in 1806. To obtain the precious liquid from the
mountains, a very strong dam was built across 'Pedragoso' creek about
two miles back of the Mission. It is still in good condition. Then there
were various structures scattered far and near for the different trades,
since everything that was used in the way of clothing and food had to be
raised or manufactured at the Mission.

"The chapel grew too small within a year from the time it was dedicated,
Sunday, May 21, 1787. It was therefore enlarged in 1788, but by the year
1792 this, also, proved too small. Converts were coming in rapidly. The
old structure was then taken down, and a magnificent edifice took its
place in 1793. Its size was 25 by 125 feet. There were three small
chapels on each side, like the two that are attached to the present
church. An earthquake, which occurred on Monday, December 21, 1812,
damaged this adobe building to such an extent that it had to be taken
down. On its site rose the splendid structure, which is still the
admiration of the traveler. Padre Antonio Ripoll superintended the work,
which continued through five years, from 1815 to 1820. It was dedicated
on the 10th of September, 1820. The walls, which are six feet thick,
consist of irregular sandstone blocks, and are further strengthened by
solid stone buttresses measuring nine by nine feet. The towers to a
height of thirty feet are a solid mass of stone and cement twenty feet
square. A narrow passage leads through one of these to the top, where
the old bells still call the faithful to service as of yore. Doubtless
the Santa Barbara Mission church is the most solid structure of its
kind in California. It is 165 feet long, forty feet wide and thirty feet
high on the outside. Like the monastery, the church is roofed with tiles
which were manufactured at the Mission by the Indians."

The report for 1800 is full of interest. It recounts the activity in
building, tells of the death of Padre Paterna, who died in 1793, and was
followed by Estevan Tapis (afterwards padre presidente), and says that
1237 natives have been baptized, and that the Mission now owns 2492
horses and cattle, and 5615 sheep. Sixty neophytes are engaged in
weaving and allied tasks; the carpenter of the presidio is engaged at a
dollar a day to teach the neophytes his trade; and a corporal is
teaching them tanning at $150 a year.

In 1803 the population was the highest the Mission ever reached, with
1792. In May, 1808, a determined effort lasting nine days was made to
rid the region of ground squirrels, and about a thousand were killed.

The earthquakes of 1812 alarmed the people and damaged the buildings at
Santa Barbara as elsewhere. The sea was much disturbed, and new springs
of asphaltum were formed, great cracks opened in the mountains, and the
population fled all buildings and lived in the open air.

On the sixth of December, in the same year, the arrival of Bouchard,
"the pirate," gave them a new shock of terror. The padres had already
been warned to send all their valuables to Santa Ines, and the women
and children were to proceed thither on the first warning of an expected
