we laid in the oars and the anchorage was reached, there crept from
inland a dim haze over the sun, dimming the light, and making all
things look strange among the mountains. Then the sounds of the
ships seemed to echo loudly over the still water and when all the
bustle of anchoring was over, the stillness seemed yet greater, for
the men went to their meals, and for a while spoke little.

Einar and I sat on his after deck under the awning, and spoke in
low voices, as if afraid to raise our tones.

"There is a thunderstorm about," I said.

"Ay--listen," the jarl answered.

Then I heard among the hills, far up the firth beyond us, a strange
sound that seemed to draw nearer, like and yet unlike thunder,
roaring and jarring ever closer to us, till it was all around us
and beneath us everywhere, and our very hearts seemed to stop
beating in wonder.

Then of a sudden the ship was smitten from under the keel with a
heavy, soundless blow, and the waters of the firth ebbed and flowed
fiercely about us; and then the sound passed on and down the firth
swiftly and strangely as it had come, and left us rocking on the
troubled waters that plashed and broke along the rocks of the
shore, while the still, thick air seemed full of the screams of the
terrified eagles and sea birds that had left them.

"Odin defend us!" the jarl said; "what is this?"

I shook my head, looking at him, and wondering if my face was white
and scared as his and that of every man whom I could see.

Now we waited breathless for more to come, but all was quiet again.
The birds went back to their eyries, and the troubled water was
still. Then presently our fears passed enough to let us speak with
one another; and then there were voices enough, for every man
wished to hear his own again, that courage might return.

Then a man from the Orkneys who had been with Jarl Sigurd came aft
to us, and stood at the break of the deck to speak with Einar.

"Jarl," he said, almost under his breath, "it is in my mind that
Sigurd, your brother, is wroth because his mound has been untended
since we made it."

Then Einar said:

"Was it so ill made that it needs tending?"

"It was well made, jarl; but rain and frost and sun on a new-made
mound may have wrought harm to it. Or maybe he thinks that enough
honour has not been paid him. He was a great warrior, jarl, and
perhaps would have more sacrifice, and a remembrance cup drunk by
his own brother at his grave."

Now this man's name was Thord, the same who taught me runes--a good
seaman and leader of men, and one who was held to be wise in more
matters than most folk. So his word was to be listened to.

"You know more of these matters than I, Thord," Einar answered. "Is
it possible that Sigurd could work this?"

"Who knows what a dead chief of might cannot work?" Thord said. "I
think it certain that Sigurd is angry for some reason; and little
luck shall we have if we do not appease his spirit."

Then the jarl looked troubled, as well he might, for to go near the
mound that held an angry ghost was no light matter. It lay far up
the firth, Thord said, and the ships could not go so far. But Einar
was very brave, and when he had thought for a little while he said:

"Well, then, I will take boat and go to Sigurd's mound and see if
he ails aught. Will any man come with me, however?"

I liked not the errand, as may be supposed, but I could not leave
my foster father to go alone.

"I will be with you," I said. "Will not Thord come also?"

"Ay," the grim Orkney man answered.

Now all our crew were listening to us, and I looked down the long
gangways by chance, and when I did so no man would meet my eye.
They feared lest they should be made to go to this haunted place,
as it seemed--all but one man, who sat on the mast step swinging
his feet. This was Kolgrim the Tall, the captain of the fore deck,
a young man and of few words, but a terrible swordsman, and knowing
much of sea craft. And when this man saw that I looked at him, he
nodded a little and smiled, for he had been a friend of mine since
I had first come to Einar.

"Two men to row the boat will be enough, jarl," I said. "Kolgrim
yonder will come with us."

"Well," the jarl answered, "maybe four of us are enough. We shall
not fright Sigurd with more, and maybe would find it hard to get
them to come."

So he called Kolgrim, and he said that he would go with us, and
went to get the boat alongside without more words.

Then the jarl and I and Thord armed ourselves--for a warrior should
be met by warriors. The men were very silent, whispering among
themselves, until the jarl was ready and spoke to them.

"Have no fear for us," he said. "Doubtless my brother needs
somewhat, and calls me. I am going to find out what it is and
return."

So we pushed off, Thord and Kolgrim rowing. It was strange to look
back, as we went, on the ships, for not a soul stirred on board
them, as it seemed, so intently were we watched; and the water was
like a sheet of steel under them, so that they were doubled.

Presently they were hidden as we rounded a turn in the firth, and
we were alone among the hills, and the lonesomeness was very great.
There was no dwelling anywhere along the shores, nor in the deep
glens that came down to them, each with its noisy burn falling
along it. Once I saw deer feeding far up at the head of a valley
that opened out, but they and the eagles were the only living
things we could see beside the loons that swam and dived silently
as we neared them.

The silence and the heat weighed on us, and we went for a mile or
more without a word. Then we turned into the last reach of the
water, and saw Sigurd's mound beside its edge at the very head of
the firth, where the hills came round in a circle that was broken
only by the narrow waters and the valley that went beyond them
among the mountains. It was a fitting resting place for one who
would sleep in loneliness; but I thought that I had rather lie
where I could look out on the sea I loved, and see the long ships
pass and the white waves break beneath me.

Now all seemed very peaceful here in the hot haze that brooded over
the still mountains, and there seemed to be nought to fear. We drew
swiftly up to the mound, with the plash of oars only to break the
silence, and there was nought amiss that we could see. They had
made it on a little flat tongue of land that jutted from the
mountain's foot into the deep water, so that on two sides the mound
was close to its edge. So we pulled on softly round the tongue of
land, being maybe about fifty paces from the mound across the
water. And when we saw the other side of Sigurd's resting place,
the oars stayed suddenly, and the jarl, who held the tiller, swung
the boat away from the shore, and I think I knew then what fear
was.

The mound was open. There was a wide, brown scar, as of
freshly-moved earth, across its base, reaching from the level to
six or eight feet of its height, as though half the grass-grown
side had been shorn away by a sword cut; and in the midst of that
scar was a doorway, open to the grave's heart, low and stone built.
Some of the earth that had fallen lay before it on the water's
edge, but the rest was doubtless in the water, for there was but a
narrow path between bank and mound.

At that sight we stared, thinking we should surely see the grim
form of Sigurd loom gigantic and troll-like {iii} across the
doorway; and the jarl half rose from his seat beside me, and cried
out with a great voice:

"Sigurd--my brother!"

I think he knew not what or why he cried thus, for he sank back
into his place and swayed against me, while his cry rang loud among
the hills, and the eagles answered it.

And I grasped my sword hilt, as one does in some sudden terror,
staring at the open mound; while old Thord muttered spells against
I know not what, and Kolgrim looked at me, pale and motionless.

Then came the sharp, mocking cry of a diver, that rang strangely;
and at once, without order. Thord dug his oar blade into the water
and swung the boat round, and when once Kolgrim's back was towards
that he feared, he held water strongly and then the boat was about,
and we were flying from the place towards the ships, before we knew
what was being done, panic stricken.

But Einar said never a word, and the two rowers slackened their
pace only when the bend of the firth hid the mound from our sight.

Then said I, finding that Einar spoke not:

"What are we flying from? there was nought to harm us."

For I began to be ashamed. Thereat Kolgrim stopped rowing, and
Thord must needs do likewise, though he said:

"It is ill for us to stay here. The dead jarl is very wroth."

"I saw nought to fray us; the cry we heard was but that of a loon."

But Thord shook his head. The silence of the place had made all
things seem strange, with the dull light that was over us, and the
great heat among the towering hills.

"The mound was freshly opened," he said. "I saw earth crumbling
even yet from the broken side. The blow we felt was that which
Sigurd struck when he broke free."

Then at last Einar spoke, and his voice was strange:

"I have left my brother unhonoured, and he is angry. What must be
done?"

Now I cannot tell what hardiness took hold of me, but it seemed
that I must needs go back and see more of this. I was drawn to do
so, as a thing they fear will make some men long to face it and
know its worst, not as if they dared so much as when they must.

"I think we should have waited to ask Sigurd that," I said; and
Einar looked strangely at me.

"Would you have us return?" he asked.

"Why not?" said I. "If the great jarl has called us as it seems,
needs must that we know what he wills."

Then said Thord:

"I helped to lay him in that place, and I mind how he looked at
that time. Somewhat we left undone, doubtless. I dare not go back."

Einar looked at the hills, leaning his chin on his hand, and said
slowly, when Thord had done:

"That is the first time Thord has said 'I dare not.' Now I would
that I had stayed to fight Harald and fall under his sword before.
I too must say the same. I have left my brother unhonoured, and I
dare not go back."

Pale and drawn the jarl's face was, and I knew he meant what he
said. Nevertheless it seemed to me that some one must know what
Sigurd willed.

"Jarl Einar," I said, "this is a strange business, and one cannot
tell what it means. Now Sigurd was my father's close friend, and I
have had nought to do with him. I will go back, therefore, and
learn what I can of him. I think he will not harm me, for he has no
reason to do so. Moreover if he does, none will learn what he
needs."

"I have heard," said Thord, "that a good warrior may ask what he
will of a dead hero, so that he shows no fear and is a friend. If
his courage fails, however, then he will be surely destroyed."

Then I said:

"I have no cause to fear Sigurd, save that he is a ghost. I do not
know if I fear him as such; that is to be seen."

Now Einar laid his hand on mine and spoke gravely:

"I think it is a hero's part to do what you say. If you go back and
return in safety, the scalds will sing of you for many a long day.
Go, therefore, boldly; this is not a matter from which you should
be held back, as it has come into your mind."

Then said Thord:

"It will be well to ask Sigurd for a token whereby we may know that
he sends messages by you."

And Einar said on that:

"In Sigurd's hand is his sword Helmbiter. I think he will give that
to the man who dares speak to him, for he will know that it goes
into brave hands. Ask him for it bravely."

"Put me ashore, therefore, before my courage goes," I said; and
they pulled the boat to the bank where I could step on a rock and
so to shore. And when I was there, Kolgrim rose up and followed me
without a word.

"Bide here for two hours, jarl, and maybe I will return in that
time," I said. "Farewell."

So I turned away as they answered me, thinking that Kolgrim held
the boat's painter. But he came after me, and I spoke to him:

"Why, Kolgrim, will you come also?"

"You shall not go alone, Ranald the king's son; I will come with
you as far as I dare."

"That is well," I answered, and with that wasted no more words, but
climbed the hillside a little, and then went steadily towards where
the mound was, with Kolgrim close at my shoulder, and the jarl and
Thord looking fixedly after us till we were out of sight.



Chapter II. The Gifts of Two Heroes.


I will not say that my steps did not falter when we came to whence
we could see the mound. But it was lonely and still and silent; no
shape of warrior waited our coming.

"Almost do I fear to go nearer," said Kolgrim.

"Put fear away, comrade," said I; "we shall fare ill if we turn our
backs now."

"Where you go I go," he answered, "though I am afraid."

"The next best thing to not being afraid is to be afraid and not to
show it," I said then, comforting myself also with a show of wisdom
at least. "Maybe fear is the worst thing we have to face."

So we went on more swiftly, and at last were on the tongue of land
on the tip of which the mound stood. Still, since we could not see
the open doorway, which was towards the water, the place seemed not
so terrible. Yet I thought that by this time we should have seen
Sigurd, or maybe heard his voice from the tomb. So now I dared to
