the end of each to protrude just far enough to act as a tooth. In
this way a good gear for light work can be quickly and cheaply
constructed.
--Contributed by Henry Schaefer, New York City.



** A Home-Made Vise [226]

While making a box I had some dovetailing to do, and as there was
no

[Illustration: Vise on Bench]

vise on the bench I rigged up a substitute. I secured a board 3/4
in. thick, 3 in. wide and 20 in. long and bored a 1/2-in. hole
through it, 1 in. from each end. The board was then attached to
the bench with two screws passing through washers and the two
holes in the . board into the bench top. The screws should be of a
length suitable to take in the piece to be worked. --Contributed
by A. M. Rice, Syracuse, New York.



** Cardboard Spiral Turned by Heat [226]

A novel attraction for a window display can be made from a piece
of stiff cardboard cut in a spiral as shown in Fig. 1. The
cardboard should be about 7 or 8 in. in diameter. Tie a piece of
string to the center point of the spiral

[Illustration: Spiral Cut from Cardboard]

and fasten it so as to hang over a gas jet, Fig. 2. A small swivel
must be put in the string at the top or near the cardboard, if it
is desired to have the spiral run for any length of time. The
cardboard will spin around rapidly and present quite an
attraction.
--Contributed by Harry Szerlip, Brooklyn, N. Y.



** A Workbench for the Amateur [226]

The accompanying detail drawing shows a design of a portable
workbench suitable for the amateur woodworker. This bench can be
made easily by anyone who has a few sharp tools and a little spare
time. If the stock is purchased from the mill ready planed and cut
to length, much of the hard labor will be saved. Birch or maple
wood makes a very good bench. and the following pieces should be
ordered:

    4 legs, 3 by 3 by 36.
    2 side rails, 3 by 3 by 62-1/2 in.
    2 end rails, 3 by 3 by 20 in.
    1 back board, 1 by 9 by 80 in.
    1 top board, 2 by 12 by 77 in.
    1 top board, 1 by 12 by 77 in.
    2 crosspieces, 1-1/2 by 3 by 24 in.
    1 piece for clamp, 1-1/2 by 6-1/2 by 12 in.
    1 piece for clamp, 1-1/2 by 6-1/2 by 14 in.
    4 guides, 2 by 2 by 18 in.
    1 screw block, 3 by 3 by 6 in.
    1 piece, 1-1/2 by 4-1/2 by 10-1/2 in.


Make the lower frame first. Cut tenons on the rails and mortise
the posts, then fasten them securely together with 3/8 by 5-in.
lag screws as shown. Also fasten the 1-1/2 by 3 by 24-in. pieces
to the tops of the posts with screws. The heads should be
countersunk or else holes bored in the top boards to fit over
them. Fasten the front top board to the crosspieces by lag screws
through from the under side. The screws can be put in from the top
for the 1-in. thick top board.

Fasten the end pieces on with screws, countersinking the heads of
the vise end. Cut the 2-in. square holes in the 1-1/2 by 4-1/2 by
10-in. pieces for the vise slides, and fit it in place for the
side vise. Also cut square holes in the one end piece for the end
vise slides as shown. Now fit up the two clamps. Fasten the slides
to the front pieces with screws. Countersink the heads of the
screws so they will not be in the way of the hands when the vise
is used. The two clamp screws should be about 1-1/2 in. in
diameter. They can be purchased at a hardware store. A block
should be fitted under the crosspiece to hold the nut for the end
vise. After

[Illustration: Detail of the Bench]

you have the slides fitted, put them in place and bore the holes
for the clamp screws.

The back board can now be fastened to the back with screws as
shown in the top view. The bench is now complete, except for a
couple of coats of oil which should be applied to give it a finish
and preserve the wood. The amateur workman, as well as the pattern
maker, will find this a very handy and serviceable bench for his
workshop.

As the amateur workman does not always know just what tools he
will need, a list is given which will answer for a general class
of work. This list can be added to as the workman becomes more
proficient in his line and has need for other tools. Only the long
run. If each tool is kept in a certain place, it can be easily
found when wanted.

    1 bench plane or jointer;
    1 jack plane or smoother;
    1 cross cut saw, 24 in.;
    1 rip saw, 24 in.;
    1 claw hammer;
    1 set gimlets;
    1 brace and set of bits;
    2 screwdrivers, 3 and 6 in.;
    1 countersink;
    1 compass saw;
    1 set chisels;
    1 wood scraper;
    1 monkey wrench;
    1 2-ft. rule;
    1 marking gauge;
    1 pair pliers;
    1 nail set;
    1 pair dividers;
    1 pocket level;
    1 6-in. try square;
    1 oilstone;
    No.1, 2 and 00 sandpaper.

[Illustration: Workbench Complete]



** Repairing a Worn Knife Blade [228]

When the blade of a favorite pocket knife, after constant use,
becomes like A, Fig. 1, it is more dangerous than

[Illustration: The Blade Is Cut Down]

useful. To cut down the already worn blade would leave only a
stump, but if the blade is fastened in a vise and the point B
filed off until it is like C, Fig. 2, the projecting point A, Fig.
1, will sink into the handle as shown at D, Fig. 3, and the knife
will be given a new lease of usefulness. -
--Contributed by James M. Kane, Doylestown, Pa.



** How to Make a Leather Spectacle Case [228]

The spectacle case shown in the accompanying illustration may be
made of either calf or cow skin. The calf skin, being softer, will
be easier to work, but will not make as rigid a case as the cow
skin. If calf skin is to be used, secure a piece of modeling calf.
The extreme width of the case is 2-3/8 in. and the length 6-5/8
in. Two pieces will be required of this size. Put on the design
before the two parts are sewed together. First draw the design on
paper, then prepare the leather. Place the leather on a small
non-absorbent surface, such as copper or brass, and moisten the
back side with as much water as it will take and still not show on
the face side. Turn the leather, lay the design on the face, and
hold it in place while both the outline and decoration are traced
on the surface with a pencil or some tool that will make a sharp
line without tearing the paper.

After the outlines are traced, go over the indentations a second
time so as to make them sharp and distinct. There are special
modeling tools that can be purchased for this purpose, but a
V-shaped nut pick, if smoothed with emery paper so that it will
not cut the leather, will do just as well.

Take a stippling tool--if no such tool is at hand, a cup-pointed
nail set will do--and stamp the background. It is intended that
the full design shall be placed on the back and the same design
placed on the front as far as the material will allow. Be careful
in stamping not to pound so hard as to cut the leather. A little
rubbing on the point with emery will take off the sharpness always
found on a new tool.

Having prepared the two sides, they may be placed together and
sewed around the edges.

If cow hide is preferred, the same

[Illustration: Two Designs of Cases]

method of treatment is used, but a form will need to be made and
placed inside the case while the leather is drying to give it the
right shape. The form can be made of a stick of wood.



** Waterproofing a Wall [229]

The best way to make a tinted wall waterproof is to first use a
material composed of cement properly tinted and with no glue in
it--one that will not require a glue size on the wall. After this
coating of cement is applied directly to the plaster, cover it
completely with water enamel and, when dry, give the surface a
thorough coating of varnish. This will make a perfectly impervious
covering, which steam, water or heat will not affect.
--Contributed by Julia A. White, New York City.



**Polishing Flat Surfaces [229]

[Illustration: Polisher]

The work of finishing a number of brass castings with flat sides
was accomplished on an ordinary polishing wheel, from which the
first few layers of cloth were removed and replaced with emery
cloth. The emery surface of the cloth was placed outward and
trimmed to the same diameter as the wheel. This made a sanding and
polishing wheel in one.
--Contributed by Chester L. Cobb, Portland, Maine.



** Rubber Tip for Chair Legs [229]

[Illustration: Rubber Tips]

An inexpensive method of preventing a chair from scratching the
floor is to bore a hole of the proper size in the bottom end of
each chair leg and then procure four rubber stoppers of uniform
size and press them into place.

This cushion of rubber eliminates vibrations, and they will not
slip nor mar the finest surface upon which they rest.
--Contributed by W. A. Jaquythe, Richmond, Cal.



** Adjusting a Plumb-Bob Line [229]

[Illustration: Line Adjustment]

When plumbing a piece of work, if there is no help at hand to hold
the overhead line, it is common practice to fasten the plumb line
to a nail or other suitable projection. On coming down to the
lower floor it is often found that the bob has been secured either
too high or too low. When fastening the line give it plenty of
slack and when the lower floor is reached make a double loop in
the line, as shown in the sketch. Tightening up on the parts AA
will bind the loop bight B, and an adjustable friction-held loop,
C, will be had for adjusting the bob accurately either up or down.
--Contributed by Chas. Herrman, New York City.



** Drier for Footwear [229]

A drier for footwear can be readily made by a tinner, or anyone
that can shape tin and solder. The drier consists of a pipe of
sufficient length to enter the longest boot leg. Its top is bent
at right angles and the other end is riveted to a base, an
inverted stewpan, for instance, in whose bottom a few perforations
have been made to let air in. The boot or stocking to be dried is
placed over the pipe and the whole set on a heated surface. The
heat will cause a rapid circulation of air which will dry the
article quickly.
--Contributed by Wm. Roberts, Cambridge, Mass.

[Illustration: Show Drier]



** Repairing A Roller Shade [229]

A very satisfactory repair can be made by using a good
photographic paste to fasten a torn window shade to its roller.



** A Shot Scoop [230]

In the ammunition department of our hardware store the shot was
kept in regular square bins and dished out

[Illustration: A Small Square Scoop Made of Tin for Dipping Up
Shot Stored in a Square Bin]

with a round-bottom scoop. This was very difficult, especially
when the bottom of the bin was nearly reached, as the round scoop
would roll over them and only pick up a few at a time. To overcome
this difficulty I constructed a square-shaped scoop that gave
entire satisfaction. The scoop can be used for other purposes as
well.

A thick piece of tin, 6-1/4 by 9-3/4 in., was marked out as shown,
the pattern being cut on the full lines and bent on the dotted
ones. The strip for the handle was riveted to the end of the
scoop.
--Contributed by Geo. B. Wright, Middletown, Conn.



** Removing Grease Stains from the Leaves of a Book [230]

Happening to get a grease spot on a page of a valuable book, I
found a way to remove it without injury to the paper, which has
been tried out several times with success.

Heat an iron and hold it as near as possible to the stain without
discoloring the paper, and the grease will disappear. If any
traces of the grease are left, apply powdered calcined magnesia.
Bone, well calcined and powdered, and plaster of Paris are also
excellent absorbents of grease.

A beautifully bound book, and quite new, had oil from a lamp
spilled over it. There was no quicklime to be had, so some bones
were quickly calcined, pulverized and applied. The next morning
there was no trace of oil, but only an odor which soon vanished.
--Contributed by Paul Keller, Indianapolis, Ind.



** Tightening Cane in Furniture [230]

Split cane, used as part of furniture, such as chair seats, often
becomes loose and the threads of cane pull out. This can be
prevented by sponging with hot water, or by applying steaming
cloths to the cane. This process also tightens the shreds of cane
and does not injure ordinary furniture. If the article is highly
polished, care should be taken to prevent the hot water from
coming in contact with anything but the cane.



** Cleaner for a Stovepipe [230]

A long horizontal pipe for a stove soon fills with soot and must
be cleaned. The usual method is to beat the pipe after taking it
down to be cleaned, but a much better device for the purpose is
shown in the sketch.

A scrub brush is procured and cut in two, the parts being hinged
to a crosspiece fastened to a long broom handle. The brushes are
pressed outward

[Illustration: Stovepipe Brush]

against the inside surfaces of the pipe with a wire and spring, as
shown.
--Contributed by C. L. Herbert, Chicago, Illinois.



** Mounting Photo Prints on Glass [231]

Photograph prints can be mounted on glass with an adhesive made by
soaking 1 oz. of sheet gelatine in cold water to saturation, then
dissolving in 3-1/2 oz. of boiling water. Let the solution cool to
about 110 deg. F., then immerse the print in it and squeegee, face
down, on a clear piece of glass. When dry, take a damp cloth or
soft sponge and wipe off any surplus gelatine on the glass.



** Dropping Coins in a Glass Full of Water [231]

Take a glass and fill it to the brim with water, taking care that
the surface of the water is raised a little above the edge of the
glass, but not running over. Place a number of nickels or dimes on
the table near the glass and ask your spectators how many coins
can be put into the water without making it overflow. No doubt the
reply will be that the water will run over before two coins are
dropped in. But it is possible to put in ten or twelve of them.
With a great deal of care the coins may be made to fall without
disturbing the water, the surface of which will become more and
more convex before the water overflows.

[Illustration: Dropping Coins]



** Hollow-Grinding Ice Skates [231]

The accompanying sketch illustrates a practical method of clamping
ice skates to hold them for grinding the small arc of a circle so
much desired.

The U-shaped clamps are made of 3/4-in. soft steel with the
opening 6 in. deep and 5 in. high and are bolted to a block of
wood, 2 in. thick, 6 in. wide and 12 in. long. The skate runner is
adjusted to the proper height by 1/2-in.. set and thumbscrews. The
block

[Illustration: Skate Runner Fastened in Clamp]

of wood holding the clamp and skate can be pushed along on the
emery-wheel table in front of the revolving wheel.

If properly adjusted, a slight concave or hollow can be made full
length of the runner, true and uniform which will hold on the ice
sideways and not retard the forward movement.
--Contributed by Geo. A. Howe, Tarrytown, New York.



** How to Make a Bicycle Coasting Sled [231]

The accompanying drawing and sketch illustrate a new type of
coasting sled built on the bicycle principle. This coaster is
simple and easy to make, says Scientific American. It is
constructed of a good quality of pine. The pieces marked S are
single, and should be about 1 by 1-1/2 in.; the pieces

[Illustration: Has the Lines of a Bicycle]

marked D are double or in duplicate, and should be 1/2 by 1-1/2
in.

[Illustration: Coasting]

The runners are shod with iron and are pivoted to the uprights as
shown, double pieces being secured to the uprights to make a fork.
The seat is a board, to the underside of which is a block, which
drops down between the two top slats and is secured with a pin. A
footrest is provided consisting of a short crosspiece secured to
the front of the frame and resting on the two lower slats. The
frame and front fork are hinged together with four short eyebolts,
E, with a short bolt through each pair as shown.



** Spelling Names with Photo Letters [232]

There are, no doubt, many amateur photographers who make only
occasional trips afield or through the more traveled thoroughfares
with their cameras during the winter months. Each one is generally
interested in working up the negatives that he or she made during
the summer or on that last vacation into souvenir post cards,
albums and the like, for sending to friends. Illustrated herewith
is something different from the album or photographic calendar.
The letters forming part of the word POPULAR are good examples of
this work.

The masks which outline the letters are cut from the black paper
in which plates come packed. Their size depends on the plate used.
A sharp knife, a smooth board and a straightedge are all the tools
needed, says Camera Craft. If the letters are all cut the same
height, they will look remarkably uniform, even if one is not
skilled in the work of forming them all in accordance with the
rules. Be sure to have the prints a little larger than the letters
to insure a sufficient margin in trimming, so as to have a white
margin around the finished letters. The best method is to use a
good pair of scissors or a sharp knife.

Many combinations can be made of these letter pictures to spell
out the recipient's name or the season's greeting. During the
holidays the letters may be made from winter scenes to spell "A
Merry Christmas" or "A Happy New Year." An Easter greeting may
have more spring-like subjects and a birthday remembrance a
fitting month. The prints are no more difficult to make than the
ordinary kind. In cutting out an 0, for example, do not forget to
cut out a piece to correspond to the center. This piece can be

[Illustration: Letters Made from photographs]

placed on the printing paper after the outline mask has been laid
down, using care to get it in the right position, and closing the
frame carefully so that the small piece will not be disturbed. The
letters should be of the kind to give as large an area of surface
to have as much of the picture show as possible. What the printer
calls black face letters are the most suitable.

By cutting the letters out of black paper in a solid form, and
using these as a mask for a second printing after printing the
full size of the negatives, these letter pictures can be made with
a black border. So made, they can be trimmed to a uniform black
line all around; and, mounted on a white card and photographed
down to post card size, the greeting so spelled out makes a most
unique souvenir. Another application of the letters in copying is
to paste them on a white card as before, trim the card even with
the bottoms of the letters, stand the strip of card on a mirror
laid flat on a table, and then photograph both the letters and
their reflections so as to nicely fill a post card. Still another
suggestion is to cut out the letters, after, pasting the prints on
some thin card, and then arrange them in the desired order to
spell out the name or greeting, but with flowers interspersed and
forming a background, photographing them down to the desired size.
A third means of securing a novel effect by photographing down an
arrangement of the letters is to have them cut out in stiff form
as in the last method; mount them on short pieces of corks, in
turn fastened to a white card forming the background. So arranged,
the letters will stand out from the card about 1/2 in. If they are
now placed in a light falling from the side and slightly in front,
each letter will cast a shadow upon the background, and in the
finished print the letters will look as if suspended in the air in
front of the surface of the card.



** Holding a Loose Screw [233]

A piece of sheet lead put on each side of a screw will fill up and
hold the threads in a too large hole.

A Checker Board Puzzle [233]

Place eight checker men upon the checker board as shown in the
first row in the sketch. The puzzle is to get

[Illustration: Placing the Checkers]

them in four piles of two men each without omitting to jump over
two checker men every time a move is made.

The first move is to jump 5 over 4 and 3 on 2 which is shown in
the second row, then jump 3 over 4 and 6 on 7 and the positions
will appear as shown in the third row; jump 1 over 2 and 5 on 4 to
get the men placed like the fourth row and the last move is to
jump 8 over 3 and 7 on 6 which will make the four piles of two men
each as shown in the fifth row.
--Contributed by I. G. Bayley, Cape May Point, N.J.



** A Home-Made Rabbit Trap [233]

[Illustration: Rabbit in the Trap]

A good serviceable rabbit trap can be made by sinking a common dry
goods box in the ground to within 6 in. of its top. A hole 6 or 7
in. square is cut in each end level with the earth's surface and
boxes 18 in. long that will just fit are set in, hung on pivots,
with the longest end outside, so they will lie horizontal. A
rabbit may now look through the two tubes, says the American
Thresherman. The bait is hung on a string from the top of the
large box so that it may be seen and smelled from the outside. The
rabbit naturally goes into the holes and in this trap there is
nothing to awaken his suspicion. He smells the bait, squeezes
along past the center of the tube, when it tilts down and the game
is shot into the pit, the tube righting itself at once for another
catch. The top and sides of the large box may be covered with
leaves, snow or anything to hide it. A door placed in the top will
enable the trapper to take out the animals. By placing a little
hay or other food in the bottom of the box the trap need not be
visited oftener than once a week.



** Old-Time Magic - Changing a Button into a Coin [234]

Place a button in the palm of the left hand, then place a coin
between the second and third fingers of the right hand. Keep the
right hand faced down and the left hand faced up, so as to conceal
the coin and expose the button. With a quick motion bring the left
hand under the right, stop quick and

[Illustration: Making the Change]

the button will go up the right-hand coat sleeve. Press the hands
together, allowing the coin to drop into the left hand, then
expose again, or rub the hands a little before doing so, saying
that you are rubbing a button into a coin.
--Contributed by L. E. Parker, Pocatello, Idaho.



** Buttonhole Trick [234]

This trick is performed with a small stick having a loop attached
that is too small for the stick to pass through. Spread out the
string and place it each side of the buttonhole, then draw the
cloth around the hole through the string until it is far enough to
pass the stick through the hole. Pull back the cloth and you have
the string looped in

[Illustration: Buttonhole Trick]

the hole with a hitch the same as if the stick had been passed
through the string.

The stick may be removed by pulling up the loop as if you were
passing the stick through it, putting the stick in the hole and
leaving the string on the outside, then spread the string, pulling
up the cloth and passing the stick through the hole as before.
--Contributed by Charles Graham, Pawtucket, Rhode Island.



** How to Remove Paper from Stamps [234]

Old stamps as they are purchased usually have a part of the
envelope from which they are taken sticking to them and in
removing this paper many valuable stamps are torn or ruined. Place
all the stamps that are stuck to pieces of envelopes in hot water
and in a short time they can be separated without injury. Dry the
stamps between two white blotters. Stamps removed in this way will
have a much better appearance when placed in an album.
--Contributed by L. Szerlip, Brooklyn, N. Y.



** Imitation Arms and Armor PART I [235]

Genuine antique swords and armor, as used by the knights and
soldiers in the days of old, are very expensive and at the present
time practically impossible to obtain. The accompanying
illustration shows four designs of swords that anyone can make,
and if carefully made, they will look very much like the genuine
article.

The drawings are so plain that the amateur armorer should have
very little difficulty, if any, in building up his work from the
illustrations, whether he requires a single sword only, or a
complete suit of armor, full size.

The pieces. or designs in this article are from authentic sources,
says the English Mechanic, so that where names are given the
amateur can so label them, and will thereby greatly add to their
interest and value.

An executioners' sword of the fifteenth century is shown in Fig.
1. The blade should be about 27 in. long with a handle of
sufficient length to be grasped by both hands. The width of the
blade near the handle is about 2-1/2 in., tapering down to 1-1/2
in. near the point end. Several ridges are cut around the handle
to permit a firm grip. The cross guard is flat and about 1 in. in
width.

Mark out the shape and size of the blade on a piece of wood 1/8
in. thick, using a straightedge and a pencil, and allowing a few
inches more in length on which to fasten the handle. Cut out the
wood with a scroll saw or a keyhole saw, trim the edges down thin
and smooth both surfaces with fine sandpaper. The end for the
handle is cut about 1 in. wide and 2 in. long. The cross guard is
cut out and a hole made in the center through which to pass the
handle end of the blade. The handle is next made, and if the
amateur does not possess a lathe on which to turn the shape of the
handle, the ridges around the wood may be imitated by gluing and
tacking on pieces of small rope. The handle is then mortised to
receive the 1 by 2-in. end of the blade. The cross guard is now
glued and placed

[Illustration: Swords; Fig. 1, Fig. 2, Fig. 3, Fig. 4]

on the blade, then the hole in the handle is well glued with glue
that is not too thick and quite hot. The blade with the cross
guard is inserted in the handle and allowed to set. When the glue
is thoroughly dry, remove the surplus with a sharp knife and paint
the handle with brown, dark red, or green oil paint. The blade is
covered with tinfoil to give it the appearance of steel. Secure
some pieces of tinfoil and cut one strip 1/2 in. wider than the
blade and the other 1/4 in. narrower. Quickly paint the blade well
with thin glue on one side., then lay evenly and press on the
narrow strip of tinfoil. Glue the other side of the blade, put on
the wider strip of tinfoil and glue the overlapping edge and press
it around and on the surface of the narrow strip. The cross guard
must be covered with tinfoil in the same manner as the blade. When
the whole is quite dry, wipe the blade with light strokes up and
down several times, using a soft and dry piece of cloth. The sword
is then ready to hang in its chosen place as a decoration, not for
use only in cases of tableaux, for which this article will be
especially useful to those who are arranging living pictures
wherein swords and armor are part of the paraphernalia.

A Chinese scimitar is shown in Fig. 2. The handle of this sword is
oval and covered with plaited cord. In making this scimitar,
follow the directions as for Fig. 1, except that the handle has to
be covered with a round black cord. If it is found difficult to
plait the cord on the handle as in the illustration, wind it
around in a continuous line closely together, and finish by
fastening with a little glue and a small tack driven through the
cord into the handle. The pommel is a circular piece of wood, 1/8
in. thick and 5 in. in diameter. The length of the handle,
allowing for a good hold with both hands, should be about 9 in.,
the length of the blade 28 in., the width near the pommel 1-1/2
in. and 3 in. in the widest part at the lower end. The sharp or
cutting edge is only on the short side, the other is flat or
half-round.

A Turkish sabre of ancient manufacture from Constantinople is
shown in Fig. 3. The handle is painted a dull creamy white in
imitation of ivory. The enamel paint sold in small tins will
answer well for this purpose. The cross guard and blade are
covered as described in Fig. 1. The sharp edge is on the longer
curved side, the other is flat or half-round.

A two-handed sword used in the 14th and 15th centuries is shown in
Fig. 4. This sword is about 68 in. long, has a cross guard and
blade of steel with a round wood handle painted black. The ball or
pommel on top of the handle is steel. Both edges of the blade are
sharp. This sword is made in wood the same as described for Fig.
1.



** A Dovetail Joint Puzzle [236]

A simple but very ingenious example in joinery is illustrated. In
the finished piece, Fig. 1, the dovetail appears on each side of
the square stick of

[Illustration: How the Joint Is Cut]

wood, the illustration, of course, shows only two sides, the other
two are identical. The joint is separable and each part is solid
and of one piece. In making, take two pieces of wood, preferably
of contrasting colors, such as cherry and walnut or mahogany and
boxwood, about 1-1/2 in. square and of any length desired. Cut the
dovetail on one end of each stick as shown in Fig. 2, drive
together and then plane off the triangular corners marked A. The
end of each piece after the dovetails are cut appear as shown in
Fig. 3, the lines marking the path of the dovetail through the
stick.



** Radiator Water [236]

Pure rain water is the best to use in a cooling system of an
automobile engine, as it is free from the mineral substances which
are deposited in the radiator, piping and jackets by hard water.



** Springboard for Swimmers [237]

A good springboard adds much to the fun of swimming. The boards
are generally made so that the plank will bend, being dressed down
thin at one end and fastened. The thinness of the plank, or an
insecure fastening, causes many a plank to snap in two or come
loose from its fastenings in a short time.

The accompanying sketch shows the method of constructing a
springboard that does not depend upon the bending of the wood for
its spring. It is made of a plank, 2 in. thick and from 14 to 16
ft. long, one end of which is secured with a hinge arrangement
having a U-shaped rod whose ends are held with nuts. On each edge
of the board, at the lower end, are fastened two pieces of strap
iron, each about 1 ft. long and with the lower ends drilled to fit
the horizontal of the U-shaped rod.

Secure a pair of light buggy springs from a discarded rig and
attach them to the ends of a square bar of iron having a length
equal to the width of the plank. Fasten this to the plank with
bolts, as shown in the sketch. Should the springs be too high they
can be moved forward.
--Contributed by John Blake, Franklin, Mass.

[Illustration: Buggy Springs Used beneath the Board]



** Taking Button from a Child's Nostril [237]

A three-year-old child snuffed a button up its nostril and the
mother, in an attempt to remove it, had caused the button to be
pushed farther up the channel. Doctors probed for the button
without success. The distracted mother happened to think of snuff,
and, as there was some at hand, took a pinch of snuff between the
thumb and forefinger and held it close to the child's nose. The
violent sneezing caused the button to be blown out. Such an
accident may come under the observation of any parent, and if so,
this method can be used to relieve the child when medical
assistance is not at hand.
--Contributed by Katharine D. Morse, Syracuse, N. Y.



** Brass Frame in Repousse  [237]

Punches can be purchased, as can the pitch bed or block. Both can
be made easily, however. Several punches of different sizes and
shapes will be needed. A piece of mild steel, about 3/8 in.
square, can be easily worked into tools shaped as desired. A cold
chisel will be needed to cut the metal to length; a file to reduce
the ends to shape, and a piece of emery paper to smooth and polish
the end of the tool so that it will not scar the metal.

A small metal box must be secured to hold the pitch. The
illustration shows an iron receptacle. The pitch is prepared by
heating the following materials in these proportions: pitch, 5
lb.; plaster of Paris, 5 lb.; tallow, 1/2

[Illustration: Design for the Frame]

lb. To put it in another way, use pitch and plaster in equal parts
with 1/10 part tallow. See that the pitch and plaster are dry so
that the moisture will not cause the pitch to boil over. Keep
stirring the mass so that it never boils. Melt the pitch first and
add the plaster by degrees.

For a piece of repousse such as the frame shown, secure a piece of
brass of about No. 18 gauge. With carbon paper trace the design on
the brass. Place the metal on the pitch bed and work over the
outline of the design. Use the chisel-edged tool and try to make
the lines continuous. When this has been done, heat the pitch
slightly

[Illustration: Working Out The Design]

and place the metal, design down, on the pitch, and with the
raising punches work up the shape as desired after the pitch has
hardened. When the desired form has been obtained, turn the metal
over and "touch up" any places improperly raised. The metal will
probably be warped somewhat. To remedy this, place a board on the
metal and pound until the metal assumes a flat shape again. Next
drill a hole in the center waste and saw out for the opening,
using a small metal saw. Trim up the edges and file them smooth.
Clean the metal thoroughly, using powdered pumice with lye. Cotton
batting fastened to the end of a stick will make a good brush.
Upon the cleansed metal put a lacquer to prevent tarnishing. Metal
clips may be soldered to the back to hold the picture in place and
also a metal strip to hold the frame upright. These should be
placed before the metal is lacquered.



** Finding the Horsepower of Small Motors [238]

A small motor often excites curiosity as to its true horsepower,
or fraction of a horsepower. Guesses in this direction vary
remarkably for the same motor or engine. It is comparatively easy
to determine the horsepower put out by almost any machine by the
following method which is intended for small battery motors and
small steam engines.

Before giving the description, it may be well to know what
horsepower means. Horsepower is the rate of work and a unit is
equal to 33,000 ft. lb. per minute, or 550 ft. lb. per second.
That is lifting 33,000 lb. 1 ft. in one minute or 550 lb. 1 ft. in
one second. This may be applied to the problem of finding the
horsepower of a motor by fastening a piece of twine about 25 ft.
long to the shaft of the engine or motor to be tested in such a
way that when the shaft revolves it will wind up the string
similar to a windlass. Place the motor in such a position that the
twine will hang freely without touching anything: out of a high
window will do. Fasten a weight to the other end of the line as
heavy as the motor or engine can lift and still run. It must weigh
enough to slow the power down a little, but not to stop it. Mark
the position of the weight and start the motor, at the same time
accurately measuring time in minutes and seconds it takes to lift
the weight from the lowest point to the highest. Next measure
accurately the distance in feet covered by the weight in its
ascent and obtain the correct weight in pounds of the weight.

Multiply the weight by the distance covered and divide the result
by the number of minutes or fraction of a minute obtained and
divide this last result by 33,000 and the quotient will be the
horsepower of the motor or engine.

Perhaps an illustration will make this solution much plainer.
Suppose the motor will lift a weight of 1 lb. and still revolve,
30 ft. in 10 seconds or 1/6 of a minute. Multiplying 1 by 30 we
get 30, which divided by 1/6 gives 180. This in turn divided by
33,000 equals in round numbers 1/200 part of a horsepower.
--Contributed by Harold H. Cutter.



** Illusion for Window Attraction [239]

Gold fish and canary birds, living together in what seems like one
receptacle, make an unusual show window attraction. Secure two
glass vessels having straight sides of the same height, one 18 in.
in diameter (Fig. 1) and the other 12 in. in diameter (Fig. 2).
The smaller is placed within the larger, the bottoms being covered
with moss and aquarium decorations which can be purchased at a
bird store. Fill the 3-in. space between the vessels with water.
Cut a piece of galvanized screen into circular form to cover the
larger vessel, and hang a bird swing, A, Fig. 3, in the center.
Place the screen on top of the vessels so that the swing will hang
in the center of the inner vessel. A weight--a box filled with
sand will do--should be placed on top of the screen, over the
smaller vessel, to keep it from floating. Moss should be put over
the top of the screen so that the two separate vessels can not be
seen.

[Illustration: 18 in. Diameter; 12 in. Diameter]

[Illustration: Birds and Fish Apparently Together]

Place the birds in the inner vessel and the fish in the water. The
effect is surprising. To complete the effect and aid the illusion
the vessels can be set in a box lined with black velvet, or on a
pedestal.
--Contributed by J. F. Campbell, Somerville, Mass.



** Cleaner for White Shoes [239]

Finely ground whiting mixed with water to the consistency of paste
makes a very good coating for white shoes. A brush can be used in
applying the mixture which will dry in a few minutes. It is best
to mix only as much paste as required for immediate use.
--Contributed . by L. Szerlip, Brooklyn, N. Y.



** Crossing Belt Laces [239]

Belt laces should never cross on the side next to the pulley as
they will cut themselves in two.



** How to Make a Candlestick Holder [240]

A candlestick of very simple construction and design can be made
as follows: Secure a piece of brass or

[Illustration: Candle Holder Complete]

copper of No. 23 gauge of a size sufficient to make the pieces
detailed in the accompanying sketch. A riveting hammer and a pair
of pliers will be needed, also a pair of tin shears and a piece of
metal upon which to rivet.

Cut out a piece of metal for the base to a size of  5-1/2 by 5-1/2
in. Trim the sharp corners off slightly. Draw a pencil line all
around the margin and 5/8 in. away from the edge. With the pliers
shape the sides as shown in the illustration.

Next lay out the holding cup according to the plan of development
shown, and cut out the shape with the shears. Polish both of these
pieces, using any of the common metal polishes. Rivet the cup to
the base, and then, with the pliers, shape the sides as shown in
the photograph. The manner of making and fastening the handle is
clearly illustrated. Use a file to smooth all the cut edges so
that they will not injure the hands.

In riveting, care should be taken to round up the heads of the
rivets nicely as a good mechanic would. Do not be content merely
to bend them over. This rounding is easily accomplished by
striking around the rivets' outer circumference, keeping the
center high.

A good lacquer should be applied after the parts have been
properly cleaned and polished, to keep the metal from tarnishing.

[Illustration: Details of Candle Holder]



** A Home-Made Duplicator [240]

The usual gelatine pad, which is the principal part of the average
hectograph or duplicator, is, as a rule, unsatisfactory, as it is
apt to sour and mold in the summer and freeze in the winter,
which, with other defects, often render it useless after a few
months service.

A compound that is almost indestructible is the preparation sold
at art stores as modeling clay. This clay is as easily worked as a
putty and is spread into the tray, which may be of wood or tin,
and the surface leveled by pounding with a mallet or hammer, then
by drawing a straightedge over it.

The surface of the pad is now saturated with pure glycerine. This
is poured upon the surface after it is slightly warmed, covering
the same and then laying a cloth over the pad and allowing it to
stand long enough for the clay to absorb the glycerine, after
which it is ready for use.

The original copy is written with a copying pencil or typewritten
through a hectograph ribbon. A sheet of newspaper is laid upon the
pad and a round stick or pencil is passed over it to make the
surface level and smooth. Remove the newspaper and place the
original copy face down on the leveled surface and smooth it out
in the same way so that every part touches the pad. Remove the
copy in about five minutes and place the clean sheets of paper one
after another on the surface and remove them. From 50 to 75 copies
of the original can be made in a short time.

This compound is impervious to water, so the negative print is
removed by simply washing with a damp sponge, the same as removing
writing from a slate. This makes it possible to place another
original on the pad immediately without waiting for the ink to
vanish by chemical action as in the original hectograph.

The action of the weather has no effect upon this compound and it
is proof against accident, for the tray may be dropped and the pad
dented or cut into pieces, and the clay can be pressed back and
leveled. The only caution is to keep it covered with a cloth
saturated in glycerine while not in use.
--Contributed by A. A. Houghton, Northville, Mich.



** Paper-Clip Bookmark [241]

The combination of a paper clip and a calling card makes a good
bookmark.

[Illustration: Bookmark]

The clip and card can be kept together by piercing the card and
bending the ends of the wire to stick through the holes. The clip
is attached to a page as shown in the sketch.
--Contributed by Thos. DeLoof, Grand Rapids, Mich.



** Aerating Water in a Small Tank [241]

A simple way of producing air pressure sufficient to aerate water
is by the use of a siphon as shown in Fig. 1. The siphon is made
of glass tubes, the longer pieces being bent on one end as shown.
The air receiver and regulating device are attached to the top end
of the lower tube, as shown in Fig. 2. The receiver or air inlet
is the most important part. It is made of a glass tube, 3/4 in. in
