show that nothing is ever settled until it is settled right.

(_d_) History affords specially good exercise for the judgment we use in
everyday life in weighing evidence and balancing probabilities. Such a
question as "Did Champlain do right in taking the side of the Hurons
against the Iroquois, or even in taking sides at all?" may be suggested
to the older pupils for consideration.

(_e_) History, when taught by a broad-minded, well-informed teacher, may
do much to correct the prejudices--social, political, religious--of
individuals and communities.

(_f_) The imagination is exercised in the effort to recall or
reconstruct the scenes of the past and in discovering relations of cause
and effect.

(_g_) The memory is aided and stimulated by the increase in the number
of the centres of interest round which facts, both new and old, may be
grouped.

(_h_) A knowledge of the facts and inferences of history is invaluable
for general reading and culture.

To sum up: It is important that the good citizen should know his
physical environment; it is just as important for him "to know his
social and political environment, to have some appreciation of the
nature of the state and society, some sense of the duties and
responsibilities of citizenship, some capacity in dealing with political
and governmental questions, something of the broad and tolerant spirit
which is bred by the study of past times and conditions."


SCOPE

The ideal course in history would include (1) a general view of the
history of the world, giving the pupil knowledge enough to provide the
proper setting for the history of his own country; (2) a more detailed
knowledge of the whole history of his own country; (3) and a special
knowledge of certain outstanding periods or tendencies in that history.
In our schools, we should give most attention to the study of Canadian
and British history as a whole, to enough of the history of France
and other countries to make clear certain parts of our own history,
and to certain important periods, such as the settlement of Upper
Canada by the United Empire Loyalists, etc. (See Detailed Course of
Study, p. 5.) We may also study our history along special lines of
development--political, military, social, educational, religious,
industrial, and commercial--but these phases are subjects of study
rather for secondary schools and colleges.


STAGES OF STUDY

There are three stages in the study of history which, though they
overlap each other, yet indicate different methods of treatment for
pupils at different ages. They are the Story stage, the Information
stage, and the Reflective stage. These stages are not exclusive, nor do
they coincide with the first three Forms in the schools.


THE STORY STAGE

This stage is suitable for children in the primary grades and is chiefly
preparatory to the real study of history in the higher grades. The need
for this stage lies in the fact that the child's "ideas are of the
pictorial rather than of the abstract order"; yet his spontaneous
interest in these things must be made to serve "as a stepping-stone to
the acquired interests of civilized life." The definite objects at this
stage are:

(_a_) To create and foster a liking for historical study. It is
impossible, in the public school life of a child, which is usually ended
at the age of twelve to fourteen years, to accomplish all that has been
indicated above concerning the aims of history teaching. The most that
can be done is to lay the foundation and give the pupil a desire to
continue his reading after his school days are over. Serious blame rests
on the teacher whose methods of teaching history, instead of attracting
the child to the subject, give him a distaste for it. If history is made
real and living to children, it is usually not difficult to have them
like it. (For suggestions, see p. 34.)

(_b_) To acquaint the pupils with some of the important historical
persons. We wish to take advantage of the fact that "the primitive form
of attention which is captured at once by objects that strike the senses
is giving place in some degree to appreciative attention, which is
yielded to things that connect themselves with what we already know, and
which implies ability to adopt the reflective attitude towards a
proposed problem."[A] Now children are more interested in people than in
institutions or events; and, if we can give them a knowledge of some of
the striking incidents in the lives of important characters in history,
we may expect them to be more interested in the study of history at a
later period, because they will frequently meet with these familiar
names. The emphasis at this stage is therefore on biography.

[Footnote A: Raymont: _Principles of Education_]

(_c_) To help the development of the "historical sense." The "historical
sense" includes the notion of time, the notion of a social unit and,
according to some, the notion of cause and effect. The notion of time
implies the power "to represent the past as if it were present"--that
is, the power to enter into the thoughts and feelings of people of the
past as if we were living amongst them. This notion of time comes at
different ages; to some early, to others very late. It came to Professor
Shaler at the age of about eight or nine years, as the direct result of
vivid story-telling:

     Of all the folk who were about me, the survivors of the Indian wars
     were the most interesting. There were several of these old
     clapper-clawed fellows still living, with their more or less
     apocryphal tales of adventures they had heard of or shared. There
     was current a tradition--I have seen it in print--that there had
     been a fight between the Indians and whites where the government
     barracks stood, and that two wounded whites had been left upon the
     ground, where they were not found by the savages. One of these had
     both arms broken, the other was similarly disabled as to his legs.
     It was told that they managed to subsist by combining their limited
     resources. The man with sound legs drove game up within range of
     the other cripple's gun, and as the turkeys or rabbits fell, he
     kicked them within reach of his hands, and in like manner provided
     him with sticks for their fire. This legend, much elaborated in the
     telling, gave me, I believe at about my eighth year, my first sense
     of a historic past, and it led to much in the way of fanciful
     invention of like tales. (N.F. Shaler: _Autobiography_, Chap. I.)

The best means at the teacher's command to assist its coming is to tell
good stories from history with all the skill he has; the stories need
not be told in chronological order. The notion of time implies also in
the older pupils the power to place events in chronological order.

The notion of a social unit is also of slow growth and must spring from
the child's conception of the social units he belongs to--the home, the
school, the community.

The notion of cause and effect does not belong so wholly to the study of
history as the notions of time and of the social unit; it is surprising,
however, how soon it makes its appearance in the child's conceptions of
history, in his desire to know the "why" of things. (See Barnes'
_Studies in Historical Method_.)


THE INFORMATION STAGE

There are several questions that children soon come to ask: "When?" and
"Where?" "What?" and "Who?" This stage may be said to begin in earnest
with the Second Form, and it continues through the whole course. One of
the essential elements in history study is to have a knowledge of the
important facts of history, without which there can be no inferences of
value for present use. The all-important point in this teaching of facts
is to keep the lessons interesting and not allow them to become mere
lifeless memorizing of isolated happenings; for a fact is of value only
when related to other facts. (See pp. 36, 38.)


THE REFLECTIVE STAGE

This stage naturally follows the Information stage, as one must acquire
facts before reflecting on them in order to draw inferences. But
reflection of a simple kind may begin as soon as any facts are given
that will show the relations of cause and effect. The question for the
pupil here is "Why?" just as in the preceding stage the questions were
"When?" and "Where?" "What?" and "Who?" Information and reflection may
therefore be combined--with due regard to the pupil's capacity.


PRACTICAL DIFFICULTIES

We may speak of two difficulties. The first concerns the enormous amount
of historical material that exists. It is increased still more by the
intermingling of legend with history and by the partial narratives of
prejudiced writers. The legendary part may be taken up in the Story
stage; and the evils of one-sided accounts are often balanced by the
greater vigour and interest of the narrative, as in Macaulay's writings.
The difficulty connected with the great amount of material can be solved
by the selection (already largely made by the text-books) of the more
important parts, that is, those facts of history that have the greatest
influence on after times--"the points of vital growth and large
connection" without which subsequent history cannot be properly
understood.

The second difficulty has to do with deciding where to begin the
teaching of history. There are two principles of teaching that will help
to solve this difficulty: (1) The child learns by relating everything
new to his present fund of experiences; (2) A child's notions grow more
complex as his knowledge increases. To apply these, we must know the
child's experiences and his present notions. We cannot assume that the
present conditions of social life are known to the child through his
experiences. Our social life is also too complex to be understood by him
yet; he can understand an _individual_ hero better than he can the
complex idea of a _nation_. How many children would be able to begin a
study of history by having, as one writer suggests, "a short series of
lessons ... to make some simple and fundamental historical ideas
intelligible--a state, a nation, a dynasty, a monarch, a parliament,
legislation, the administration of justice, taxes, civil and foreign
war!" These are ideas far beyond the comprehension of the beginner. We
must be guided, not by "what happens to be near the child in time and
place, but by what lies near his interests." As Professor Bourne says:
"it may be that mediaeval man, because his characteristics belong to a
simple type, is closer to the experience of a child than many a later
hero." With older children it is more likely to be true that the life of
history lies "in its personal connections with what is here and now and
still alive with us"; with historic places and relics, etc., which make
their appeal first through the senses; with institutions, such as trial
by jury; with anniversaries and celebrations of great events which may
be used to arouse interest in the history which they suggest and recall.

However, as McMurry points out, we are in a peculiarly favourable
position in Canada, because we have in our own history, in the
comparatively short time of 400 years, the development of a free and
prosperous country from a state of wildness and savagery. The early
stages of our history present those elements of life that appeal
strongly to children--namely, Indians with all their ways of living and
fighting, and the early settlers with their simpler problems and
difficulties. The development of this simpler life to the more complex
life of the present can be more readily understood by children as they
follow up the changes that have taken place. (See McMurry, _Special
Method in History_, pp. 26-30.) Of course, at every step appeal must be
made to the experiences of children, as the teacher knows them. In
Civics, however, the beginning must be made with conditions that exist
to-day--schools, taxes, the policeman, the postmaster, etc. The
beginning of the real teaching of history may then be made at the
beginning of Canadian History, as this will enable the child to go
gradually from the simple, or individual, to the complex, and will also
allow the teacher to make use of whatever historical remains may be
within reach.




CHAPTER II

GENERAL METHODS IN THE TEACHING OF HISTORY


There are many methods used in the teaching of history. A brief
description of the principal ones is given for reference merely, since
their best features are incorporated in a combination of methods, which
is strongly recommended to teachers, and is described fully in
succeeding pages.


1. _Methods based on the arrangement and selection of the matter_:
Chronological, Topical


THE CHRONOLOGICAL METHOD

The matter is chosen according to the "time" order, beginning at the
first of the history, and the events are taught in the order of
occurrence without any marked emphasis on their importance, or without
considering whether a knowledge of the event is useful or interesting to
the class at this stage. Such an arrangement of matter is more suitable
when the formal study of history is begun.


THE TOPICAL METHOD

In studying a certain period of history the events are arranged under
topics or heads; for example, the period of discovery in Canadian
History may be arranged thus--Discoveries, Explorations, Early
Settlements, Indian Wars--and the study of each of these pursued to
completion, contemporary events belonging to other topics being
neglected for a time.

Events having the same underlying purpose, though occurring in different
periods, may be arranged under one topic for review; for example, all
the voyages of discovery to America may be grouped under the topic, "The
Road to Cathay." (See p. 92.) In this way a comprehensive knowledge is
gained. This method gives a full treatment of each topic and may be used
to best advantage in connection with reviews in junior classes and
occasionally as a text-book or library exercise in senior classes.


2. _Methods based on the treatment of historical facts_: Comparative,
Regressive, Concentric


THE COMPARATIVE METHOD

By this method a comparison is made between two events, two biographies,
two reigns, etc., a very useful device when applied in connection with
other methods.


THE REGRESSIVE METHOD

In this method the pupil is expected to begin with the present and work
backward; that is, to begin with institutions as they are to-day and to
work back through the various steps in their progress to their present
state. This method may be followed most profitably in advanced classes.
In junior classes it is sufficient to refer to things as they exist
to-day in order to arouse curiosity regarding the facts of history that
are to be taught; for example, by the use of local material; by a visit
to some place of historical interest to prepare for the story of what
has occurred there in the past. (See p. 112.)


THE CONCENTRIC METHOD

This method, which is much used, deals in ever widening circles with the
same topic or event; for example, a simple story of Champlain's life
and voyages to Canada is told to Form II; the same story is considered
again in Form III, but this time the different voyages are noted, the
results of each investigated, and the whole summarized and memorized;
again, in Form IV, but this time by the topical and comparative methods,
where comparison is made of the purposes and achievements of the
explorer with those of other explorers--Jacques Cartier, La Salle, etc.
In this third discussion a full knowledge of Champlain's work is given.

The excellence of this work lies in its review and repetition. The old
or former knowledge is recalled and used in each succeeding discussion
of the topic. The pupils grow gradually into fuller knowledge.


3. _Methods based on class procedure_: Oral, Text-book


THE ORAL METHOD

This usually takes the form of an oral presentation of the story or
description of the event by the teacher, while the pupils listen and
afterwards reproduce what they have heard. The narration of the story is
accompanied by pictures, sketches, maps, etc., illustrative of persons,
places, and facts mentioned. It may also take the "development" form, in
which a combination of narrative and questioning is employed. (See pp.
66, 92.)

The Lecture method of Colleges and Universities is an advanced oral
method. In this the teacher narrates and describes events, propounds
questions, and discusses and answers them himself, while the pupils
listen and during the lecture, or afterwards, make notes of what has
been heard.


THE TEXT-BOOK METHOD

By this method the teacher assigns a lesson in the book and, after the
pupils have an opportunity to study it, he asks questions concerning the
facts learned. The exclusive use of this method results ordinarily in
dull, lifeless teaching, and with junior pupils will prevent their
enjoying, or receiving much benefit from, the study of history. There
are two reasons for the too general use of it--first, it is an easy
method for the teacher, and secondly, it is easy for the pupils to
memorize facts for the sole purpose of passing examinations. While this
criticism is true when an exclusive use is made of the text-book, the
same cannot be said when the text-book is used as an auxiliary to the
teacher. Following the oral presentation of the story, reference may be
made to the book for another version or for a fuller account and, in
Form IV, topics may be assigned and the pupils directed to consult the
text-book for the necessary information. (See pp. 26, 28.)

The text-book should be one that does not show an abrupt change from the
story told by the teacher. It should not be merely a short outline of
the important facts in history, written separately and then pieced
together in chronological order, but should be written in a readable
form by one who is able to distinguish the important and necessary from
the unimportant and burdensome. It should have short summaries at the
ends of chapters or stories of events, so that a grasp of what has been
read may be easily obtained. It should also have many pictures,
illustrations, and maps, to take the place of the teacher's explanations
in the earlier stage. (On the use of the text-book, see p. 29.)


A COMBINATION OF THESE METHODS

General Description.--As each of the above methods has its strong and
its weak points, we should attempt to combine the strong points into one
method, varied to keep pace with the mental development of the pupil,
and thus secure the best results. The general outline of such a
combination may be given as follows: The "oral story" is to be used in
the junior classes, with "development" problems presented where helpful;
in Form III the pupils should be introduced to the text-book (The
History Reader for Form III), besides being taught by the oral method;
in Form IV, the oral method is still to be the chief means used by the
teacher, who will now, however, pay more attention to the arrangement of
the matter (for example, in topical outlines), to accustom the pupils to
grasp more thoroughly the relations of cause and effect in history. The
topics of history will also be taken up more exhaustively than in the
junior classes, and the pupils must have more practice in acquiring
knowledge from the text-books.


DETAILS OF METHOD


FORMS I, II

In Forms I and II, the pupils are accustomed to the oral reproduction of
stories told by the teacher. In these should be included a good many
historical stories, such as those suggested in the Course of Study in
History for these Forms; they will serve the usual purposes of oral
reproduction work for composition and literature, and will be, besides,
a good foundation for the study of history in the higher forms. (For
objects of the Story stage, see p. 16.)

The oral presentation of a story or description of an event requires a
certain degree of skill on the part of a teacher--skill in
story-telling, in grasping the important parts of the story or
description, in knowing what details to omit as well as what to narrate,
in explaining the story in a way that will make it real to the pupils,
in preparing pictures and sketches to illustrate the different parts,
and in questioning so that the minds of the pupils will be active as
well as receptive. The care and time necessary to secure this skill will
be well repaid by the interest aroused in history, by the appreciation
of the thoughts thus presented, and by the lasting impressions conveyed.
Simple, clear language should be employed, not necessarily small words,
but words whose meaning is made clear by the context or illustration.
(For material for these Forms, see Bibliography, C, p. 132.)

When the whole story is told, revision may be made by having the pupils
reproduce it after suitable questioning, either immediately or at some
future time. Exercises in reproduction may also be given, for either
seat work or class work, in constructive or art work; for example, after
the story of the North American Indians, the pupils may be asked to
construct a wigwam, a canoe, a bow and arrow, or to make pictures of
Indians, of their houses, of their dress, etc.

Further exercise in composition may also be given by having the pupils
write the story. To each pupil may be assigned a special part; for
example, the story of Moses may be divided thus: (1) As a babe; (2) His
adoption by the Princess; (3) His life at the palace; (4) His flight to
Midian; (5) The Burning Bush, etc. The whole story is then reproduced by
having these parts read aloud in a reading lesson.


FORM III

The value of the oral work done in Forms I and II will be realized by
the teacher when the real study of history is begun in Forms III and
IV. The pupils have a liking for the stories of history and have a
knowledge of some of the leading actors and of the chief events in
history that calls for more complete satisfaction.

There are several methods of using the History Reader which is the basis
of the work in Form III. Perhaps the best method is to continue to make
oral teaching the chief feature, and to add to that the use by the
pupils, in various ways, of the History Reader.

For example, the teacher will tell the story of Jacques Cartier,
following in the main the narrative as given in the History Reader. It
is well, however, not to follow it too closely in order that, when the
pupils come to read the story in the book for themselves, they will find
it an interesting combination of the familiar and the new. For that
reason, it will be necessary for the teacher to have prepared the story
from a somewhat different narrative in some other book at her command.
In the telling of the story, problems may be asked, if thought advisable
(see p. 33); a few headings may be placed on the black-board for
subsequent reproduction, oral or written, by the pupils; all
difficulties of pronunciation, especially of proper names, should be
attended to, orally and on the black-board; the places mentioned should
be found on the map; pictures and sketches should be used; and in fact,
every possible means taken to make the narrative more real to the class.
(See p. 34.)

When the oral teaching is finished, the pupils may have the books to
read at their desks, and they often ask permission to take them home.
They may sometimes be required to read aloud from the History Reader for
supplementary practice in oral reading. Reproduction by the pupils,
either immediately or in a subsequent lesson, should follow. Teachers,
however, are advised not to insist on too much written reproduction, as
that might very easily arouse a dislike for both history and written
composition. Procedure as outlined above has had most gratifying results
in the way of creating a liking for, and an intelligent interest in, the
study of history.

Other methods have also had good results. The teacher may, instead of
telling the story, read aloud from the Reader to pave the way for the
reading of the story by the pupils themselves. Difficulties, either in
language or in meaning, may be taken up as in a literature lesson. The
pupils will at first find the reading somewhat difficult, but the
interest generated by the teacher's reading or oral narrative will carry
them through that stage till they acquire a love for reading history,
and have enlarged their vocabulary till reading is no longer a
burdensome task.

A taste of the more serious study of history may be given by asking the
pupils a few not very difficult questions that they can answer only by
combining facts contained in several stories. For example, in the
chapters selected for Form III, Junior Grade, the answer can be found to
a question about the explorers of Canada, the order of their visits, and
a comparison of their work; to another question about the expansion of
Canada from the little part of Quebec first visited to the whole of
British North America.

It is unnecessary, perhaps, to add that the emphasis in Form III history
should be still very largely on biography, so as to influence the
forming of moral ideals by concrete examples.


FORM IV

Although the pupils have now had some experience in the use of the
History Reader, yet that is no reason why oral teaching should be
discarded in Form IV history, any more than in arithmetic or geography.
It is scarcely a high estimate to have of history, to think that pupils
of this age can grasp even the simpler lines of development in history
without guidance from the teacher. Hence it is necessary for the
attainment of good results, that many of the lessons should be taught
orally before the pupils are asked to study their books. The aim of the
teaching should be not merely the acquisition of facts, but the welding
of them together in a sequence of cause and effect, and the pupils at
this stage can scarcely be expected to do that for themselves.

In preparing for a lesson in Form IV history, the teacher should analyse
the incidents of the period to be studied, should see how certain causes
have led to certain results, and should be sure enough of the facts to
have little recourse to the text-book while teaching. It does not look
like fair play to expect a class to answer questions that the teacher
cannot answer without consulting the text. On the other hand, it is
refreshing to see the interest aroused in a class by a teacher who
thinks enough of the subject to be able to teach it without constant
reference to the text-book. Therefore, let the oral method be here again
the chief dependence of the teacher. In such a lesson, for example, as
that on the Intercolonial Railway (see p. 82) no book is needed--only
the map and the black-board.


TRAINING IN USE OF TEXT-BOOK

However, as the pupils must learn, for their own profit in after years,
how to read history without a guiding hand, they need training in the
use of the text-book. The chief line on which such training may proceed
is to have the pupils search out the answers to definite questions. Any
one who has searched for material on a certain topic will appreciate
the good results that have come in the way of added knowledge and
increased interest. The topics at first should be quite simple,
gradually increasing in breadth. A few suggestions for such work are
given below; they may be called examination questions to be answered
with the help of the text-book:

     1. Name, and tell something about, four of the explorers of Canada
     before 1759.

     2. Name several other explorers of the New World.

     3. Which explorer did the most for Canada, Champlain or La Salle?

     4. In what wars did the French fight against the Iroquois? With
     what result?

     5. What explorers of North America were trying to find a way to
     China and India? (This investigation by the class may precede the
     lesson on the "Road to Cathay." See p. 92.)

     6. On what did English kings base their claim to be the overlords
     of Scotland? Trace the dispute down to the Union of the Crowns in
     1603.

     7. Find out how the slave trade was treated by the English.

     8. Make a list of the early newspapers in Canada. Did they have
     much influence on public opinion?

     9. Compare the struggles for the control of taxation in Canada and
     in the Thirteen Colonies of America. Explain why these were settled
     differently in the two cases.

With questions such as these for investigation, no pupil will be likely
to secure the full facts; each may state in the next lesson what he has
found, and the work of each will be supplemented by that of the others.
With succeeding investigations it may be expected that the pupils will
be more eager to get at all the facts in the text-book. At any rate they
are learning how to gather material from books--a very valuable
training, no matter how simple the topic is.

When, in the ordinary course of work, lessons from the text-book are
assigned, the teacher should indicate the important points, should
suggest certain matters for discussion, and should note certain
