women, although fallen into distress, yet protect themselves and thus
certainly secure heaven. Although they may be deserted by their lords,
they do not yet become angry on that account, for women that are chaste
lead their lives, encased in the armour of virtuous behaviour. It
behoveth her not to be angry, since he that deserted her was overwhelmed
with calamity, and deprived of every bliss. A beautious and virtuous
woman should not be angry with one that was deprived by birds of his
garment while striving to procure sustenance and who is being consumed
with grief. Whether treated well or ill, such a wife should never
indulge in ire, beholding her husband in that plight, despoiled of
kingdom and destitute of prosperity, oppressed with hunger and
overwhelmed with calamity.' Hearing these words of his, I have speedily
come here. Thou hast now heard all. Do what thou thinkest proper, and
inform the king of it."

"'O king, having heard these words of Parnada, Damayanti with tearful
eyes came to her mother, and spake unto her in private, "O mother, king
Bhima should not, by any means, be made acquainted with my purpose. In
thy presence will I employ that best of Brahmanas, Sudeva! If thou
desirest my welfare, act in such a way that king Bhima may not know my
purpose. Let Sudeva without delay go hence to the city of Ayodhya, for
the purpose of bringing Nala, O mother, having performed the same
auspicious rites by virtue of which he had speedily brought me into the
midst of friends." With these words, after Parnada had recovered from
fatigue, the princess of Vidarbha worshipped him with profuse wealth and
also said, "When Nala will come here, O Brahmana, I will bestow on thee
wealth in abundance again. Thou hast done me the immense service which
none else, indeed, can do me, for, (owing to that service of thine), O
thou best of the regenerate ones, I shall speedily regain my (lost)
lord." And thus addressed by Damayanti, that high-minded Brahmana
comforted her, uttering benedictory words of auspicious import, and then
went home, regarding his mission to have been successful. And after he
had gone away, Damayanti oppressed with grief and distress, calling
Sudeva, addressed him, O Yudhishthira, in the presence of her mother,
saying, "O Sudeva, go thou to the city of Ayodhya, straight as a bird,
and tell king Rituparna living there, these words: 'Bhima's daughter,
Damayanti will hold another _Swayamvara_. All the kings and princes are
going thither. Calculating the time, I find that the ceremony will take
place tomorrow. O represser of foes, if it is possible for thee, go
thither without delay. Tomorrow, after the sun hath risen, she will
choose a second husband, as she doth not know whether the heroic Nala
liveth or not.'" And addressed by her, O monarch thus, Sudeva set out.
And he said unto Rituparna, all that he had been directed to say.'"


SECTION LXXI

"Vrihadaswa continued, 'Having heard the words of Sudeva king Rituparna,
soothing Vahuka with gentle words, said, "O Vahuka, thou art
well-skilled in training and guiding horses. If it pleases thee, I
intend to go to Damayanti's _Swayamvara_ in course of a single day."
Thus addressed, O son of Kunti, by that king, Nala felt his heart to be
bursting in grief. And the high-souled king seemed to burn in sorrow.
And he thought within himself, "Perhaps Damayanti in doing this is
blinded by sorrow. Or, perhaps, she hath conceived this magnificent
scheme for my sake. Alas, cruel is the deed that the innocent princess
of Vidarbha intends to do, having been deceived by my sinful and low
self of little sense. It is seen in the world that the nature of woman
is inconstant. My offence also hath been great; perhaps she is acting
so, because she hath no longer any love for me owing to my separation
from her. Indeed, that girl of slender waist, afflicted with grief on my
account and with despair, will not certainly do anything of the kind,
when especially, she is the mother of offspring (by me). However whether
this is true or false, I shall ascertain with certitude by going
thither. I will, therefore, accomplish Rituparna's and my own purpose
also." Having resolved thus in his mind, Vahuka, with his heart in
sorrow, spake unto king Rituparna, with joined hands, saying, "O
monarch, I bow to thy behest, and, O tiger among men, I will go to the
city of the Vidarbhas in a single day, O king!" Then, O monarch, at the
command of the royal son of Bhangasura, Vahuka went to the stables and
began to examine the horses. And repeatedly urged by Rituparna to make
haste, Vahuka after much scrutiny and careful deliberation, selected
some steeds that were lean-fleshed, yet strong and capable of a long
journey and endued with energy and strength of high breed and docility,
free from inauspicious marks, with wide nostrils and swelling cheeks,
free from faults as regards the ten hairy curls, born in (the country
of) Sindhu, and fleet as the winds. And seeing those horses, the king
said somewhat angrily, "What is this, that thou wishest to do? Thou
shouldst not jest with us. How can these horses of mine, weak in
strength and breath, carry us? And how shall we be able to go this long
way by help of these?" Vahuka replied, "Each of these horses bears one
curl on his forehead, two on his temples, four on his sides, four on his
chest, and one on his back. Without doubt, these steeds will be able to
go to the country of the Vidarbhas. If, O king, thou thinkest of
choosing others, point them out and I shall yoke them for thee."
Rituparna rejoined, "O Vahuka, thou art versed in the science of horses
and art also skillful (in guiding them). Do thou speedily yoke those
that thou thinkest to be able." Thereupon the skillful Nala yoked upon
the car four excellent steeds of good breed that were, besides, docile
and fleet. And after the steeds had been yoked, the king without loss of
time mounted upon the car, when those best of horses fell down upon the
ground on their knees. Then, O king, that foremost of men, the blessed
king Nala began to soothe horses endued with energy and strength. And
raising them up with the reins and making the charioteer Varshneya sit
on the car, he prepared to set out with great speed. And those best of
steeds, duly urged by Vahuka, rose to the sky, confounding the occupant
of the vehicle. And beholding those steeds gifted with the speed of the
wind thus drawing the car, the blessed king of Ayodhaya was exceedingly
amazed. And noticing the rattle of the car and also the management of
the steeds, Varshneya reflected upon Vahuka's skill in guiding horses.
And he thought, "Is he Matali, the charioteer of the king of the
celestials? I find the same magnificent indications in the heroic
Vahuka. Or, hath Salihotra versed in the science of horses taken this
human shape so beautiful? Or, is it king Nala the reducer of hostile
towns that hath come here? Or, it may be that this Vahuka knoweth the
science that Nala knoweth, for I perceive that the knowledge of Vahuka
is equal to that of Nala. Further, Vahuka and Nala are of the same age.
This one, again, may not be Nala of high prowess, but somebody of equal
knowledge. Illustrious persons, however, walk this earth in disguise in
consequence of misfortune, or agreeably to the ordinance of the
scriptures. That this person is of unsightly appearance need not change
my opinion; for Nala, I think, may even be despoiled of his personal
features. In respect of age this one equals Nala. There is difference,
however, in personal appearance. Vahuka, again is endued with every
accomplishment. I think, therefore, he is Nala." Having thus reasoned
long in his mind, O mighty monarch, Varshneya, the (former) charioteer
of the righteous Nala, became absorbed in thought. And that foremost of
kings Rituparna, also, beholding the skill of Vahuka in equestrian
science experienced great delight, along with his charioteer Varshneya.
And thinking of Vahuka's application and ardour and the manner of his
holding the reins, the king felt exceedingly glad.'"


SECTION LXXII

"Vrihadaswa said, 'Like a bird coursing through the sky, Nala soon
crossed rivers and mountains, and woods and lakes. And while the car was
coursing thus, that conqueror of hostile cities, the royal son of
Bhangasura, saw his upper garment drop down on the ground. And at soon
as his garment had dropped down the high-minded monarch, without loss of
time, told Nala, "I intend to recover it. O thou of profound
intelligence, retain these steeds endued with exceeding swiftness until
Varshneya bringeth back my garment." Thereupon Nala replied unto him,
"The sheet is dropped down far away. We have travelled one _yojana_
thence. Therefore, it is incapable of being recovered." After Nala had
addressed him thus, O king, the royal son of Bhangasura came upon a
_Vibhitaka_ tree with fruits in a forest. And seeing that tree, the king
hastily said to Vahuka, "O charioteer, do thou also behold my high
proficiency in calculation. All men do not know everything. There is no
one that is versed in every science of art. Knowledge in its entirety is
not found in any one person. O Vahuka, the leaves and fruits of this
tree that are lying on the ground respectively exceed those that are on
it by one hundred and one. The two branches of the tree have fifty
millions of leaves, and two thousand and ninety five fruits. Do thou
examine these two branches and all their boughs." Thereupon staying the
car Vahuka addressed the king, saying, "O crusher of foes, thou takest
credit to thyself in a matter which is beyond my perception. But, O
monarch, I will ascertain it by the direct evidence of my senses, by
cutting down the _Vibhitaka_. O king, when I actually count, it will no
longer be matter of speculation. Therefore, in thy presence, O monarch,
I will hew down this _Vibhitaka_. I do not know whether it be not (as
thou hast said). In thy presence, O ruler of men, I will count the
fruits and leaves. Let Varshneya hold the reins of the horses for a
while." Unto the charioteer the king replied, "There is no time to
lose." But Vahuka answered with humility, "Stay thou a short space, or,
if thou art in a hurry, go then, making Varshneya thy charioteer. The
road lies direct and even." And at this, O son of the Kuru race,
soothing Vahuka, Rituparna said, "O Vahuka, thou art the only
charioteer, there is none other in this world. And, O thou versed in
horse lore, it is through thy help that I expect to go to the Vidarbhas.
I place myself in thy hands. It behoveth thee not to cause any obstacle.
And, O Vahuka, whatever thy wish. I will grant it if taking me to the
country of the Vidarbhas to-day, thou makest me see the sun rise." At
this, Vahuka answered him, saying, "After having counted (the leaves and
fruits of the) _Vibhitaka_, I shall proceed to Vidarbha, do thou agree
to my words." Then the king reluctantly told him, "Count. And on
counting the leaves and fruits of a portion of this branch, thou wilt be
satisfied of the truth of my assertion." And thereupon Vahuka speedily
alighted from the car, and felled that tree. And struck with amazement
upon finding the fruits, after calculation, to be what the king had
said, he addressed the king, saying, "O monarch, this thy power is
wonderful. I desire, O prince, to know the art by which thou hast
ascertained all this." And at this the king, intent upon proceeding
speedily, said unto Vahuka, "Know that I am proficient at dice besides
being versed in numbers." And Vahuka said unto him, "Impart unto me this
knowledge and, O bull among men, take from me my knowledge of horses."
And king Rituparna, having regard to the importance of the act that
depended upon Vahuka's good-will, and tempted also by the horse-lore
(that his charioteer possessed), said, "So be it. As solicited by thee,
receive this science of dice from me, and, O Vahuka, let my equine
science remain with thee in trust." And saying this, Rituparna imparted
unto Nala the science (he desired). And Nala upon becoming acquainted
with the science of dice, Kali came out of his body, incessantly
vomiting from his mouth the virulent poison of Karkotaka. And when Kali,
afflicted (by Damayanti's curse) came out (of Nala's body), the fire of
that curse also left Kali. Indeed, long had been the time for which the
king had been afflicted by Kali, as if he were of unregenerate soul. And
Nala the ruler of the Nishadhas, in wrath, was bent upon cursing Kali,
when the latter, frightened, and trembling, said with joined hands,
"Control thy wrath, O king! I will render thee illustrious. Indrasena's
mother had formerly cursed me in anger when she had been deserted by
thee. Ever since that time undergoing sore affliction I resided in thee,
O mighty monarch, O unconquered one, miserably and burning night and
day with the venom of the prince of snakes. I seek thy protection. If
thou dost not curse me who am affrighted and seek thy protection, then
those men that will attentively recite thy history, shall be even free
from fear on my account." And thus addressed by Kali, king Nala
controlled his wrath. And thereupon the frightened Kali speedily entered
into the _Vibhitaka_ tree. And while the Kali was conversing with
Naishadha, he was invisible to others. And delivered from his
afflictions, and having counted the fruits of that tree, the king,
filled with great joy and of high energy, mounted on the car and
proceeded with energy, urging those fleet horses. And from the touch of
Kali the _Vibhitaka_ tree from that hour fell into disrepute. And Nala,
with a glad heart, began to urge those foremost of steeds which sprang
into the air once and again like creatures endued with wings. And the
illustrious monarch drove (the car) in the direction of the Vidarbhas.
And after Nala had gone far away, Kali also returned to his abode. And
abandoned by Kali, O king, that lord of earth, the royal Nala, became
freed from calamity though he did not assume his native form.'"


SECTION LXXIII

"Vrihadaswa said, 'After Rituparna of prowess incapable of being baffled
had, in the evening, arrived at the city of the Vidarbhas, the people
brought unto king Bhima the tidings (of his arrival). And at the
invitation of Bhima, the king (of Ayodhya) entered the city of Kundina,
filling with the rattle of his car all the ten points, direct and
transverse, of the horizon. And the steeds of Nala that were in that
city heard that sound, and hearing it they became delighted as they used
to be in the presence of Nala himself. And Damayanti also heard the
sound of that car driven by Nala, like the deep roar of the clouds in
the rainy season. And Bhima and the steeds (of Nala) regarded the
clatter of that car to be like that which they used to hear in days of
yore when king Nala himself urged his own steeds. And the peacocks on
the terraces, and the elephants in the stables, and the horses also, all
heard the rattle of Rituparna's car. And hearing the sound, so like the
roar of the clouds, the elephants and the peacocks, O king, began to
utter their cries, facing that direction, and filled with delight such
as they experience when they hear the actual roar of the clouds. And
Damayanti said, "Because the rattle of his car filling the whole earth,
gladdens my heart, it must be King Nala (that has come). If I do not see
Nala, of face bright as the moon, that hero with countless virtues, I
shall certainly die. If I am not clasped today in that hero's thrilling
embrace, I shall certainly cease to be. If Naishadha with voice deep as
that of the clouds doth not come to me today, I shall enter into a pyre
of golden brilliance. If that foremost of kings, powerful as a lion and
gifted with the strength of an infuriated elephant, doth not present
himself before me, I shall certainly cease to live. I do not remember a
single untruth in him, or a single wrong done by him to others. Never
hath he spoken an untruth even in jest. Oh, my Nala is exalted and
forgiving and heroic and magnificent and superior to all other kings,
and faithful to his marriage vow and like unto a eunuch in respect of
other females. Night and day dwelling upon his perceptions, my heart, in
absence of that dear one, is about to burst in grief."

"'Thus bewailing as if devoid of sense, Damayanti, O Bharata, ascended
the terrace (of her mansion) with the desire of seeing the righteous
Nala. And in the yard of the central mansion she beheld king Rituparna
on the car with Varshneya and Vahuka. And Varshneya and Vahuka,
descending for that excellent vehicle, unyoked the steeds, and kept the
vehicle itself in a proper place. And king Rituparna also, descending
from the car, presented himself before king Bhima possessed of terrible
prowess. And Bhima received him with great respect, for in the absence
of a proper occasion, a great person cannot be had (as a guest). And
honoured by Bhima, king Rituparna looked about him again and again, but
saw no traces of the _Swayamvara_. And the ruler of the Vidarbhas, O
Bharata, approaching Rituparna, said, "Welcome! What is the occasion of
this thy visit?" And king Bhima asked this without knowing that
Rituparna had come to obtain the hand of his daughter. And king
Rituparna, of unbaffled prowess and gifted with intelligence, saw that
there were no other kings or princes. Nor did he hear any talk relating
to the _Swayamvara_, nor saw any concourse of Brahmanas. And at this,
the king of Kosala reflected a while and at length said, "I have come
here to pay my respects to thee." And the king Bhima was struck with
astonishment, and reflected upon the (probable) cause of Rituparna's
coming, having passed over a hundred _yojanas_. And he reflected, "That
passing by other sovereigns, and leaving behind him innumerable
countries, he should come simply to pay his respect to me is scarcely
the reason of his arrival. What he assigneth to be the cause of his
coming appeareth to be a trifle. However, I shall learn the true reason
in the future." And although king Bhima thought so, he did not dismiss
Rituparna summarily, but said unto him again and again, "Rest, thou art
weary." And honoured thus by the pleased Bhima, king Rituparna was
satisfied, and with a delighted heart, he went to his appointed quarters
followed by the servants of the royal household.'

"Vrihadaswa continued, 'And, O king, after Rituparna had gone away with
Varshneya, Vahuka took the car to the stables. And there freeing the
steeds, and tending them according to rule, and soothing them himself,
sat down on a side of the car. Meanwhile, the princess of Vidharbha,
Damayanti, afflicted with grief, having beheld the royal son of
Bhangasura, and Varshneya of the _Suta_ race, and also Vahuka in that
guise, asked herself, "Whose is this car-rattle? It was loud as that of
Nala, but I do not see the ruler of the Nishadhas. Certainly, Varshneya
hath learnt the art from Nala, and it is for this the rattle of the car
driven by him hath been even like that of Nala. Or, is Rituparna equally
skilled with Nala so that the rattle of his car seemeth to be like that
of Nala?" And reflecting thus, O monarch, the blessed and beauteous girl
sent a female messenger in search of Nishada.'"


SECTION LXXIV

"'Damayanti said, "O Kesini, go thou and learn who that charioteer is
that sitteth by the car, unsightly and possessed of short arms. O
blessed one, O faultless one, approaching him, cautiously and with sweet
words, make thou the usual inquiries of courtesy and learn all
particulars truly. Having regard to the feeling of satisfaction my mind
experienceth, and the delight my heart feeleth, I am greatly afraid this
one is king Nala himself. And, O faultless one, having inquired after
his welfare, thou shalt speak unto him the words of Parnada. And, O
beauteous one, understand the reply he may make thereto." Thus
instructed, that female messenger, going cautiously, while the blessed
Damayanti watched from the terrace, addressed Vahuka in these words, "O
foremost of men, thou art welcome. I wish thee happiness. O bull among
men, hear now the words of Damayanti. When did ye all set out, and with
what object have ye come hither. Tell us truly, for the princess of
Vidarbha wisheth to hear it." Thus addressed, Vahuka answered, "the
illustrious king of Kosala had heard from a Brahmana that a second
_Swayamvara_ of Damayanti would take place. And hearing it, he hath come
here, by the help of excellent steeds fleet as the wind and capable of
going a hundred _yojanas_. I am his charioteer." Kesini then asked,
"Whence doth the third among you come, and whose (son) is he? And whose
son art thou, and how hast thou come to do this work?" Thus questioned,
Vahuka replied, "He (of whom thou inquirest) was the charioteer of the
virtuous Nala, and known to all by the name of Varshneya. After Nala
had, O beauteous one, left his kingdom, he came to the son of
Bhangasura. I am skilled in horse-lore, and have, therefore, been
appointed as charioteer. Indeed, king Rituparna hath himself chosen me
as his charioteer and cook." At this Kesini rejoined, "Perhaps Varshneya
knoweth where king Nala hath gone, and O Vahuka, he may also have spoken
to thee (about his master)." Vahuka then said, "Having brought hither
the children of Nala of excellent deeds, Varshneya went away whither he
listed: He doth not know where Naishadha is. Nor, O illustrious one,
doth anybody else know of Nala's whereabouts; for the king (in calamity)
wandereth over the world in disguise and despoiled of (his native)
beauty. Nala's self only knoweth Nala. Nala never discovereth his marks
of identity anywhere." Thus addressed, Kesini returned, "The Brahmana
that had before this gone to Ayodhya, had repeatedly said these words
suitable to female lips, 'O beloved gambler, where hast thou gone
cutting off half my piece of cloth, and deserting me, his dear and
devoted wife asleep in the woods? And she herself, as commanded by him,
waiteth expecting him clad in half a garment and burning day and night
in grief. O king, O hero, do thou relent towards her that weepeth
ceaselessly for that calamity and do thou give her an answer. O
illustrious one, do thou speak the words agreeable to her for the
blameless one panteth to hear them.' Hearing these words of the Brahmana
thou didst formerly give a reply! The princess of Vidarbha again wisheth
to hear the words thou didst then say."'

"Vrihadaswa continued, 'O son of the Kuru race, hearing these words of
Kesini, Nala's heart was pained, and his eyes filled with tears. And
repressing his sorrow, the king who was burning in grief, said again
these words, in accents choked with tears: "Chaste women, though
overtaken by calamity, yet protect themselves, and thereby secure
heaven. Women that are chaste, deserted by their lords, never become
angry, but continue to live, cased in virtue's mail. Deserted by one
fallen into calamity, bereft of sense, and despoiled of bliss, it
behoveth her not to be angry. A virtuous lady should not be angry with
one that was deprived by birds of his garment while striving to procure
sustenance and who is burning in misery. Whether treated well or ill she
would never be angry, seeing her husband in that plight, despoiled of
his kingdom, bereft of prosperity, oppressed with hunger, and
overwhelmed with calamity." And, O Bharata, while speaking thus, Nala
oppressed with grief, could not restrain his tears, but began to weep.
And thereupon Kesini went back to Damayanti, and acquainted her with
everything about that conversation as well as that outburst of grief.'"


SECTION LXXV

"Vrihadaswa said, 'Hearing everything, Damayanti became oppressed with
grief, and suspecting the person to be Nala, said unto Kesini, "O
Kesini, go thou again, and examine Vahuka, and staying in silence at his
side mark thou his conduct. And, O beauteous one, whenever he happens to
do anything skilful, do thou observe well his act while accomplishing
it. And, O Kesini, whenever he may ask water or fire, with the view of
offering him obstruction, thou shalt be in no hurry to give it. And
marking everything about his behaviour, come thou and tell me. And
whatever human or super-human thou seest in Vahuka, together with
anything else, should all be reported unto me." And thus addressed by
Damayanti, Kesini went away, and having marked the conduct of that
person versed in horse-lore, she came back. And she related unto
Damayanti all that had happened, indeed, everything of human and
superhuman that she had witnessed in Vahuka. And Kesini said, "O
Damayanti, a person of such control over the elements I have never
before seen or heard of. Whenever he cometh to low passage, he never
stoopeth down, but seeing him, the passage itself groweth in height so
that he may pass through it easily. And at his approach, impassable
narrow holes open wide. King Bhima had sent various kinds of meat--of
diverse animals, for Rituparna's food. And many vessels had been placed
there for washing the meat. And as he looked upon them, those vessels
became filled (with water). And having washed the meat, as he set
himself to cook, he took up a handful of grass and held it in the sun,
when fire blazed up all on a sudden. Beholding this marvel, I have come
hither amazed. Further, I have witnessed in him another great wonder. O
beauteous one, he touched fire and was not burnt. And at his will, water
falling floweth in a stream. And, I have witnessed another greater
wonder still. He took up some flowers, began to press them slowly with
his hands. And pressed by his hand, the flowers did not lose their
original forms, but, on the contrary, became gayer and more odorous than
before. Having beheld wonderful things I have come hither with speed."'

"Vrihadaswa continued, 'Hearing of these acts of the virtuous Nala, and
discovering him from his behaviour, Damayanti considered him as already
recovered. And from these indications suspecting that Vahuka was her
husband, Damayanti once more weepingly addressed Kesini in soft words,
saying, "O beauteous one, go thou once more, and bring from the kitchen
without Vahuka's knowledge some meat that hath been boiled and dressed
(by him)." Thus commanded, Kesini, ever bent on doing what was agreeable
to Damayanti, went to Vahuka, and taking some hot meat came back without
loss of time. And Kesini gave that meat, O son of the Kuru race, unto
Damayanti. And Damayanti who had formerly often partaken of meat dressed
by Nala, tasted the meat that was brought by her hand-maid. And she
thereupon decided Vahuka to be Nala and wept aloud in grief of heart.
And, O Bharata, overwhelmed with grief, and washing her face, she sent
her two children with Kesini. And Vahuka, who was the king in disguise,
recognising Indrasena with her brother, advanced hastily, and embracing
them, took them up on his lap. And taking up his children like unto the
children of the celestials, he began to weep aloud in sonorous accents,
his heart oppressed with great sorrow. And after having repeatedly
betrayed his agitation, Naishadha suddenly left children, and addressed
Kesini, saying, "O fair damsel, these twins are very like my own
children. Beholding them unexpectedly, I shed tears. If thou comest to
me frequently people may think evil, for we are guests from another
land. Therefore. O blessed one, go at thy ease."'"


SECTION LXXVI

"Vrihadaswa said, 'Beholding the agitation of the virtuous and wise
Nala, Kesini returned unto Damayanti and related everything unto her.
And thereupon Damayanti with a sorrowful heart and eager to behold Nala,
again despatched Kesini to her mother, asking her to say on her behalf:
"Suspecting Vahuka to be Nala, I have tried him in various ways. My
doubt now only relates to his appearance. I intend to examine him
myself. O mother, either let him enter the palace, or give me permission
to go to him. And arrange this with the knowledge of my father or
without it." And thus addressed to Damayanti, that lady communicated
unto Bhima the intention of his daughter, and upon learning it the king
gave his consent. And, O bull of the Bharata race, having obtained the
consent both of her father and mother, Damayanti caused Nala to be
brought to her apartments. And as soon as he saw Damayanti unexpectedly,
king Nala was overwhelmed with grief and sorrow, and bathed in tears.
And that best of women, Damayanti, also, upon beholding king Nala in
that condition, was sorely afflicted with grief. And, O monarch, herself
clad in a piece of red cloth, and wearing matted locks, and covered with
dirt and dust, Damayanti then addressed Vahuka, saying, "O Vahuka, hast
thou ever seen any person acquainted with duty, who hath gone away,
deserting his sleeping wife in the forest? Who, except the virtuous
Nala, could go away, deserting in the woods, his dear and unoffending
wife overcome with fatigue? Of what offence was I guilty in the eyes of
that monarch since my early youth that he should go away deserting me in
the woods while asleep overcome with fatigue? Why should he whom I
formerly chose in preference to the gods themselves abandon his
ever-devoted and loving wife who had become the mother also of his
children? Before the fire, and in presence also of the celestials, he
had taken my hand, vowing, '_Verily I will be thine_.' Oh, where was
that vow when he deserted me, O represser of foes." While Damayanti was
saying all this, tears of sorrow began to flow plentifully from her
eyes. And beholding her thus afflicted with grief, Nala also, shedding
tears, black of those of the gazelle with extremities of reddish hue,
said, "O timid one, neither the loss of my kingdom nor my desertion of
thee was my act. Both were due to Kali. And, O foremost of virtuous
women, lamenting for me day and night, and overcome with sorrow, thou
hadst in the woods cursed Kali, and so he began to dwell in my body,
burning in consequence of thy curse. Indeed burning with thy curse, he
lived within me like fire within fire. O blessed girl, that our sorrows
might terminate, that wretch have I overcome by my observances and
austerities. The sinful wretch hath already left me, and it is for this
that I have come hither. My presence here, O fair lady, is for thy sake.
I have no other object. But, O timid one, can any other woman, forsaking
her loving and devoted husband, ever choose a second lord like thee? At
the command of the king, messengers are ranging this entire earth,
saying, '_Bhima's daughter will, of her own accord, choose a second
husband worthy of her_.' Immediately on hearing this, the son of
Bhangasura hath arrived here." Hearing these lamentations of Nala,
Damayanti, frightened and trembling, said with joined hand, "It behoveth
