particles (owing to their lightness) and this may lead to scratching.
If the finer grades are very light in colour, it may be inferred that
a considerable portion of the dust is composed of glass, and this does
no good.  Consequently time may be saved by stirring up the
light-coloured mass with a little hydrofluoric acid in a platinum
capsule;  this dissolves the finely divided glass almost
instantaneously.  The emery and excess of hydrofluoric acid may then
be thrown into a large beaker of clean water and washed several times.
Fine emery thus treated has much the same dark chocolate colour as the
coarser varieties.

The operator should not wear a coat, and should have his arms bare
while working with fine emery, for a workshop coat is sure to have
gathered a good deal of dust, and increases the chances of coarse
particles getting between the surfaces.

Sec. 61.  Details of the Process of Fine Grinding.

A lens of the size selected for description is mounted as before
mentioned on a leaden pedestal, and the operator places the latter on
a table of convenient height in a room as free from dust as possible.
Everything should be as clean as a pin, and no splashes of emery mud
should be allowed to lie about.  I have found it convenient to spread
clean newspapers on the table and floor, and to wear clean linen
clothes, which do not pick up dust.  I have an idea that in large
workshops some simpler means of avoiding scratches must have been
discovered, but I can only give the results of my own experience.  I
never successfully avoided scratches till I adopted the precautions
mentioned.

Fig.  52.

The left hand should be employed in rotating the pedestal either
continuously (though slowly) or at intervals of, say, one minute.
This point is rather important.  Some operators require two hands to
work the grinding tool, and in any case this is the safer practice.
Under these circumstances the pedestal may be rotated through
one-eighth or tenth of a revolution every three minutes, or
thereabouts.  The general motion given to the grinding tool should be
a series of circular sweeps of about one-fourth the diameter of the
glass disc, and gradually carried round an imaginary circle drawn on
the surface of the lens and concentric with it (Fig.  52).

The tool may overhang the lens by a quarter of the diameter of the
latter as a maximum. The circuit may be completed in from twelve to
thirty sweeps.  The grinding tool should be lightly held by the
fingers and the necessary force applied parallel to the surface.  The
tool itself must be slowly rotated about its axis of figure.  If the
tool be lightly held, it will be found that it tends to rotate by
itself.  I say "tends to rotate," for if the tool be touching evenly
all over the surface it will rotate in a direction opposite to the
direction of the circular sweep.  For instance, if the tool be carried
round its looped path clockwise, it will tend to rotate about its own
axis of figure counter-clockwise.  If it touch more in the middle,
this rotation will be increased, while if it touches more along the
edge, the rotation will be diminished, or even reversed in an extreme
case.

Every fifty sweeps or so the tool should be simply ground backwards
and forwards along a diameter of the lens surface.  This grinding
should consist of three or four journeys to and fro along, say, eight
different diameters.  About one-quarter of the whole grinding should
be accomplished by short straight strokes, during which the tool
should only overhang about one-quarter of an inch.  The object of the
straight strokes is to counteract the tendency to a gradual
accumulation of the emery in the centre, which results from the
circular grinding.

A great deal of the art of the process consists in knowing how to work
the tool to produce any given effect.  For instance, if the lens
requires to be ground down near the centre, the epicycloidal strokes
must be nearly central;  the tool must never overhang very much.  If,
on the other hand, it is the edges which require attention, these must
be dealt with by wider overhanging strokes.  The tool must be
frequently tested on its fellow, and, indeed, ground upon it if any
marked unevenness of action (such as that just described) is required
for the lens.  A check by spherometer will be applied at intervals
according to the judgment of the operator, but, in any case, the
fellow tool and lens should be kept at very nearly the same figure.

The emery should never be allowed to become anything like dry between
the tool and the lens, for in some way (probably by capillary action
increasing the pressure of the tool) this seems to lead to scratching
and "rolling" of the emery.  The channels in the glass tool between
the squares are of the greatest importance in enabling the emery to
distribute itself.  Perhaps the best guide in enabling one to judge
as to when it is time to wash off the emery and apply fresh is the
"feel" of the tool; also when the mud gets light in colour we know
that it is full of glass dust, and proportionately inoperative.

New emery may be put on, say, every five minutes, but no absolute rule
can be given, for much depends on the pressure of the tool upon the
lens.  In the case considered a brass or lead, or even slate tool, of
an inch, or even less, in thickness, will press quite heavily enough.
In washing the lens and tool before new emery is introduced, a large
enamelled iron bucket is very handy;  the whole of the tool should be
immersed and scrubbed with a nail-brush.  The lens surface may be
wiped with a bit of clean sponge, free from grit, or even a clean damp
cloth.

When the time comes to alter the grade of emery, a fresh lot of
newspapers should be put down, and tools, lens, and pedestal well
washed and brushed by the nail-brush.  The surfaces should be wiped
dry by a fresh piece of rag, and examined for scratches and also for
uniformity of appearance; a good opinion can be formed as to the fit
of the surfaces by noting whether--and if so, to what degree--they
differ in appearance from point to point when held so that the light
falls on them obliquely.

It is necessary to exercise the greatest care in the washing between
the application of successive grades of emery, and this will be
facilitated if the edges of the glass squares were dressed on a
grindstone before they were mounted.  An additional precaution which
may be of immense advantage is to allow the tool to dry between the
application of successive grades of emery (of course, after it has
been scrubbed), and then to brush it vigorously with a hat-brush.  It
sometimes happens that particles of mud which have resisted the wet
scrubbing with the nail-brush may be removed by this method.

As my friend Mr. Cook informs me that his present practice differs
slightly from the above, I will depart from the rule I laid down, and
add a note on an alternative method.

Consider a single lens surface.  This is roughed out as before by an
iron tool, a rough fellow tool being made at the same time.  The
squares of glass are cemented to the roughing tool, and this is ground
to the spherometer by means of the counterpart tool.  The glass-coated
tool is then applied to the lens surface and grinding with the first
grade of emery commenced.  The curvature is checked by the
spherometer.  Two auxiliary tools of, say, half the diameter of the
lens, are prepared from slate, or glass backed with iron, and applied
to grind down either the central part of the lens surface or tool
surface, according to the indications of the spherometer.  Any changes
that may occur during grinding are corrected by these tools.  The
spherometer is accepted as the sole guide in obtaining the proper
curvature.  A slate backing is preferred for tools of any diameter
over, say, 2 inches.

Sec. 62.  Polishing.

After the surface has been ground with the last grade of emery, and
commences to become translucent even when dry, the grinding may be
considered to be accomplished, and the next step is the polishing.
There are many ways of carrying out this process, and the relative
suitability of these methods depends on a good many, so to speak,
accidental circumstances.  For instance, if the intention is to finish
the polishing at a sitting, the polishing tool may be faced with
squares of archangel--not mineral or coal-tar--pitch and brought to
shape simply by pressing while warm against the face of the lens.  A
tool thus made is very convenient, accurate, and good, but it is
difficult to keep it in shape for any length of time;  if left on the
lens it is apt to stick, and if it overhangs ever so little will, of
course, droop at the edges.

On the whole, the following will be found a good and sufficient plan.
The glass-grinding tool is converted into a polishing tool by pasting
a bit of thin paper over its surface;  a bit of woven letter paper of
medium thickness with a smooth but not glazed surface does very well.
We have found that what is called Smith's "21 lbs.  Vellum Wove" is
excellent.  This is steeped in water till quite pliable and almost
free from size.  The glass tool is brushed over with a little thin
arrowroot or starch paste, and the paper is laid upon it and squeezed
down on the glass squares as well as possible;  if the paper is wet
enough and of the proper quality it will expand sufficiently to
envelop the tool without creases, unless the curvature is quite out of
the common.

This being accomplished, and the excess of water and paste removed,
the face of the paper is (for security) washed with a little clean
water and a bit of sponge, and, finally, the tool is slightly pressed
on the lens so as to get the paper to take up the proper figure as
nearly as possible.  After the polishing tool has been thus brought to
the proper figure, it is lifted off and allowed to dry slowly.  When
the paper is dry it may be trimmed round the edges so as not to
project sensibly beyond the glass squares.  The next step is to brush
the surface over very carefully with polishing rouge (prepared as is
described at the end of this section) by means of a hat-brush.  When
the surface of the paper is filled with rouge all excess must be
removed by vigorous brushing.

Fig.  53.

The tool being placed on the lens, two or three strokes similar to
those used in grinding may be taken, and the tool is then lifted off
and examined.  It will be found to be dotted with a few bright points,
produced by the adhesion of glass at the places of contact.  These
points are then to be removed in the following manner.  An old
three-cornered file is ground on each side till the file marks
disappear, and sharp edges are produced (Fig.  53).  This tool is used
as an ink eraser, and it will be found to scrape the paper of the
polishing tool very cleanly and well.

The bright spots are the objects of attention, and they must be erased
by the old file, and the polisher reapplied to the glass.  A few
strokes will develop other points, more numerous than before, and
these in turn must be erased.  The process is continued till the whole
surface of the polishing tool is evenly covered with bright specks,
and then the polishing may be proceeded with.  The specks should not
be more than about one-eighth of an inch apart, or the polishing will
be irregular.

The operation of polishing is similar to that of grinding.  A
reasonable time for polishing a glass surface is twenty hours;  if
more time is required it is a sign that the fine grinding has not been
carried far enough.  The progress of the operation may be best watched
by looking at the surface--not through it.  For this purpose a good
light is requisite.  When the lens is dismounted it may be examined by
a beam of sunlight in a dark room, under which circumstances the
faintest signs of grayness are easily discernible.

It may be mentioned here that if the surface is in any way scratched
the rouge will lodge in the scratches with great persistence, and an
expert can generally tell from the appearance of scratches what kind
of polishing powder has been employed.

The persistence with which rouge clings to a rough surface of glass is
rather remarkable.  Some glass polishers prefer to use putty powder as
a polishing material, and it is sometimes said to act more quickly
than rouge;  from my rather limited experience I have not found this
to be the case, but it may have merits that I do not know of.  Is it
possible that its recommendation lies in the fact that it does not
render scratches so obtrusively obvious as rouge does?

Rouge is generally made in two or more grades.  The softer grade is
used for polishing silver, and is called jewellers' rouge.  The harder
grade, suitable for glass polishing, is best obtained from practical
opticians (not mere sellers of optical instruments).  I mean people
like Messrs.  Cook of York.  Many years ago I prepared my own hard
rouge by precipitating ferrous sulphate solution by aqueous ammonia,
washing the precipitate, and heating it to a red heat.  The product
was ground up with water, and washed to get rid of large particles.
This answered every purpose, and I could not find that it was in any
way inferior to hard rouge as purchased.  The same precipitate heated
to a lower temperature is said to furnish a softer variety of rouge;
at all events, it gives one more suitable for polishing speculum
metal.  Lord Rosso used rouge heated to a dull redness for this
purpose.

Rouge, whether made or bought, should always be washed to get rid of
grit.  I ought to add that not the least remarkable fact about the
polishing is the extraordinarily small quantity of the polishing
material requisite, which suggests that the process of polishing is
not by any means the same as that of exceptionally fine grinding.  Is
it possible that the chief proximate cause of the utility of rouge is
to be sought in its curious property of adhering to a rough glass
surface, causing it, so to speak, to drag the glass off in minute
quantities, and redeposit it after a certain thickness has been
attained on another part of the surface?

Sec. 63.  Centering.

When a lens is ground and polished it will almost always happen that
the axis of revolution of its cylindrical edge is inclined to the axis
of revolution of its curved surfaces.  Since in practice lenses have
to be adjusted by their edges, it is generally necessary to adjust the
edge to a cylinder about the axis of figure of the active surfaces.
This is best done on a lathe with a hollow mandrel..  The lens is
chucked on a chuck with a central aperture--generally by means of
pitch or Regnault's mastic, or "centering" cement for small
lenses--and a cross wire is fixed in the axis of revolution of the lathe,
and is illuminated by a lamp.  This cross wire is observed by an
eye-piece (with cross wires only in the case of a convex lens, or a
telescope similarly furnished in the case of a concave lens),
also placed in the axis of rotation of the lathe.

Both cross wires are thus in the axis of revolution of the mandrel,
and the distant one (B in the figure) is viewed through the lens and
referred to the fixed cross wires at A.  In general, as the lathe is
rotated by turning the mandrel the image of the illuminated cross
wires will be observed to rotate also.  The lens is adjusted until the
image remains steady on rotating the mandrel and it is to give time
for this operation that a slow-setting cement is recommended.  When
the image remains stationary we know that the optical centre of the
lens is in the axis of revolution, and that this axis is normal to
both lens surfaces, i.e.  is the principal axis of the lens, or axis
of figure.

Fig.  54.

A much readier method, and one, in general, good enough for most
purposes, is to put a candle on the end of the lathe-bed where the
back centre generally is, and observe the images of the flame by
reflection from both the lens surfaces.  This method is very handy
with small lenses;  the mandrel is turned, and the lens adjusted by
hand till the images are immovable.  In both cases, of course, the
edge of the lens is turned or ground till it is truly circular, the
position of the lens remaining undisturbed on the chuck.  If the edge
gauge has been properly used in the earlier stages of figuring, it
will be found that very little turning or grinding is requisite to
produce a true centering.

The particular defect due to want of centering in a lens may be
observed by using it as the objective of a telescope, and observing a
star slightly out of focus.  The interference fringes will not be
concentric circles  unless the lens is properly  centred.  I ought to
say that I have not looked into the theory of this, but have merely
taken it as a generally admitted fact.  The diseases of lenses and the
modes of treating them are dealt with in a book by Messrs.  Cook of
York, entitled On the Adjustment and Testing of Telescopic Objectives.

The final process of figuring will be dealt with later on (Sec. Sec. 66 and
67), as it applies not only to lenses but to mirrors, prisms, etc.  If
the instructions given have been carefully carried out on a 2-inch
lens, it should perform fairly well, and possibly perfectly, without
any further adjustment of the glass.

Sec. 64.  Preparation of Small Lenses, where great Accuracy is not of the
first Importance.

Such lenses may generally be made out of bits of good plate or sheet
glass, and are of constant use in the physical laboratory.  They may
be purchased so cheaply, however, that only those who have the
misfortune to work in out-of-the-way places need be driven to make
them.

Suitable glass having been obtained and the curves calculated from the
index of refraction, as obtained by any of the ordinary methods
applicable to plates (the microscope method, in general, is quite good
enough), squares circumscribing the desired circles are cut out by the
help of a diamond.  [Footnote: Glazebrook and Shaw's Practical
Physics, p.  383 (4th ed.).]  The squares are roughly snipped by means
of a pair of pliers or spectacle-maker's shanks.  The rough circles
are then mounted on the end of a brass or iron rod of rather greater
diameter than the finished lenses are to possess.  This mounting is
best done by centering cement.

The discs are then dressed circular on a grindstone, the rod serving
both as a gauge and handle.  A sufficient number of these discs having
been prepared, a pair of brass tools of the form shown in the sketch
(Fig.  55), and of about the proper radius of curvature, are made.
One of these tools is used as a support for the glass discs.

Fig. 55.

A compass being set to scribe circles of the same diameter as the
glass discs, centre marks are made on the surface of the appropriate
tool, circles are drawn on this, and facets are filed or milled (for
which the spiral head of the milling machine is excellent).  In the
case of concave supporting surfaces, i.e.  in making concave lenses, I
apprehend filing would be difficult, and the facets would have to be
made by a rose cutter or mill;  but if the discs are fairly round,
then, in fact, no facets are required.

The facets being ready, the glass discs are cemented to them by
centering cement, which may be used quite generally for small lenses.
When the cutting of facets has been omitted on a concave surface, the
best cement is hard pitch.  The grinding tool is generally rather
larger than the nest of lenses.  Coarse and fine grinding is
accomplished wholly on the lathe--the tool being rotated at a fair
speed (see infra), and the nest of lenses moved about by its handle so
as to grind all parts equally.  It must, of course, be held anywhere
