tailor's--"

"I've done all that?" Val demanded, somewhat staggered.

"Well, the author says you have, so you've got to look it. We'd better
muss you up a bit. Let's see." She tapped her fingernail against her
teeth as she looked him up and down. "Off with that coat first."

He wriggled out of the coat and stood with the glories of his ruffled
shirt fully displayed. "Now what?" he asked.

"This," she reached forward and ripped his left sleeve to the shoulder.
"Untie that cravat and take it off. Roll up your other sleeve above the
elbow. That's right. Ricky, you muss up his hair. Let a lock of it fall
across his forehead. No, not there--there. Good. Now he's ready for the
final touches." She went to the table where her paints had been left.
"Let's see--carmine, that ought to be right. This is water-color, Val,
it'll all wash off in a minute."

Across his smooth tanned cheek she dribbled a jagged line of scarlet.
Then instructing Ricky to bind the torn edge of his sleeve above his
elbow, she also stained the bandage. "Well?" she turned to Rupert.

"He looks as though he had been through the wars all right," he agreed.
"But what about the costume?"

"Oh, we needn't worry about that. They knew I'd have to do this, so they
duplicated everything. Now for you, Ricky. Pull your sleeve down off
your shoulder and see if you can tear the skirt up from the hem on that
side--about as far as your knee. Yes, that's fine. You're ready now."

Rupert picked up from the table a sword and a long-barrelled dueling
pistol and led the way out onto the terrace. Charity pointed to the big
chair in the sunlight.

"This will probably be hard for you two," she warned them frankly. "If
you get tired, don't hesitate to tell me. I'll give you a rest every ten
minutes. Val, you sit down in the chair. Slump over toward that arm as
if you were about finished. No, more limp than that. Now look straight
ahead. You are on the terrace of Beauvallet. Beside you is the girl you
love. You are all that stands between her and the black rebels. Now take
this sword in your right hand and the pistol in your left. Lean forward
a little. There! Now don't move; you've got just the pose I want. Ricky,
crouch down by the side of his chair with your arm up so that you can
touch his hand. You're terrified. There's death, horrible death, before
you!"

Val could feel Ricky's hand quiver against his. Charity had made them
both see and feel what she wanted them to. They weren't in the peaceful
sunlight on the terrace of Pirate's Haven; they were miles farther south
in the dark land of Haiti, the Haiti of more than a hundred years ago.
Before them was a semitropical forest from which at any moment might
crawl--death. Val's hand tightened on the sword hilt; the pistol butt
was clammy in his grip.

Rupert had put up the easel and laid out the paints. And now, taking up
her charcoal, Charity began to sketch with clear, clean strokes.

Her models' unaccustomed muscles cramped so that when they shifted
during their rest periods they grimaced with pain. Ricky whispered that
she did not wonder models were hard to get. After a while Rupert went
away without Charity noticing his leaving. The sun burned Val's cheek
where the paint had dried and he felt a trickle of moisture edge down
his spine. But Charity worked on, thoroughly intent upon what was
growing under her brushes.

It must have been close to noon when she was at last interrupted.

"Hello there, Miss Biglow!"

Two men stood below the terrace on a garden path. One of them waved his
hat as Charity looked around. And behind them stood Jeems.

"Go away," said the worker, "go away, Judson Holmes. I haven't any time
for you today."

"Not after I've come all the way from New York to see you?" he asked
reproachfully. "Why, Charity!" He had the reddest hair Val had ever
seen--and the homeliest face--but his small-boy grin was friendliness
itself.

"Go away," she repeated stubbornly.

"Nope!" He shook his head firmly. "I'm staying right here until you
forget that for at least a minute." He motioned toward the picture.

With a sigh she put down her brush. "I suppose I'll have to humor you."

"Miss Charity," Jeems had not taken his eyes from the two models since
he had arrived and he did not move them now, "what're they all fixed up
like that fur?"

"It's a picture for a story," she explained. "A story about Haiti in the
old days--"

"Ah reckon Ah know," he nodded eagerly, his face suddenly alight.
"That's wheah th' blacks kilt th' French back in history times. Ah got
me a book 'bout it. A book in handwritin', not printin'. Pere Armand
larned me to read it."

Judson Holmes' companion moved forward. "A book in handwriting," he said
slowly. "Could that possibly mean a diary?"

Charity was wiping her hands on a paint rag. "It might. New Orleans was
a port of refuge for a great many of the French who fled the island
during the slave uprising. It is not impossible."

"I've got to see it! Here, boy, what's your name?" He pounced upon
Jeems. "Can you get that book here this afternoon?"

Jeems drew back. "Ah ain't gonna bring no book heah. That's mine an' you
ain't gonna set eye on it!" With that parting shot he was gone.

"But--but--" protested the other, "I've got to see it. Why, such a find
might be priceless."

Mr. Holmes laughed. "Curb your hunting instincts for once, Creighton.
You can't handle a swamper that way. Let's go and see Charity's
masterpiece instead."

"I don't remember having asked you to," she observed.

"Oh, see here now, wasn't I the one who got you this commission? And
Creighton here is that strange animal known as a publisher's scout. And
publishers sometimes desire the services of illustrators, so you had
better impress Creighton as soon as possible. Well," he looked at the
picture, "you have done it!"

Even Creighton, who had been inclined to stare back over his shoulder at
the point where Jeems disappeared, now gave it more than half his
attention.

"Is that for _Drums of Doom_?" he asked becoming suddenly crisp and
professional.

"Yes."

"Might do for the jacket of the book. Have Mr. Richards see this.
Marvelous types, where did you get them?" he continued, looking from the
canvas to Ricky and Val.

"Oh, I am sorry. Miss Ralestone, may I present Mr. Creighton, and Mr.
Holmes, both of New York. And this," she smiled at Val, "is Mr. Valerius
Ralestone, the brother of the owner of this plantation. The family, I
believe, has lived here for about two hundred and fifty years."

Creighton's manner became a shade less brusque as he took the hand Ricky
held out to him. "I might have known that no professional could get that
look," he said.

"Then this isn't your place?" Mr. Holmes said to Charity after he had
greeted the Ralestones.

"Mine? Goodness no! I rent the old overseer's house. Pirate's Haven is
Ralestone property."

"Pirate's Haven." Judson Holmes' infectious grin reappeared. "A rather
suggestive name."

"The builder intended to name it 'King's Acres' because it was a royal
grant," Val informed him. "But he was a pirate, so the other name was
given it by the country folk and he adopted it. And he was right in
doing so because there were other freebooters in the family after his
time."

"Yes, we are even equipped with a pirate ghost," contributed Ricky with
a mischievous glance in her brother's direction.

Holmes fanned himself with his hat. "So romance isn't dead after all.
Well, Charity, shall we stay--in town I mean?"

"Why?" a thin line appeared between her eyes as if she had little liking
for such a plan.

"Well, Creighton is here on the track of a mysterious new writer who is
threatening to produce a second _Gone with the Wind_. And I--well, I
like the climate."

"We'll see," muttered Charity.




CHAPTER X

INTO THE SWAMP


In spite of the fact that they received but lukewarm encouragement from
Charity, both Holmes and Creighton lingered on in New Orleans. Mr.
Creighton made several attempts to get in touch with Jeems, whom he
seemed to suspect of concealing vast literary treasures. And he spent
one hot morning going through the trunk of papers which the Ralestones
had found in the storage-room. Ricky commented upon the fact that being
a publisher's scout was almost like being an antique buyer.

Holmes was a perfect foil for his laboring friend. He lounged away his
days draped across the settee on Charity's gallery or sitting down on
the bayou levee--after she had chased him away--pitching pebbles into
the water. He told all of them that it was his vacation, the first one
he had had in five years, and that he was going to make the most of it.
Companioned by Creighton, he usually enlarged the family circle in the
evenings. And the tales he could tell about the far corners of the earth
were as wildly romantic as Rupert's--though he did assure his listeners
that even Tibet was very tame and well behaved nowadays.

Charity had finished the first illustration and had started another.
This time Ricky and Val appeared polished and combed as if they had just
stepped out of a ball-room of a governor's palace--which they had,
according to the story. It was during her second morning's work upon
this that she threw down her brush with a snort of disgust.

"It's no use," she told her models, "I simply can't work on this now.
All I can see is that scene where the hero's mulatto half-brother
watches the ball from the underbrush. I've got to do that one first."

"Why don't you then?" Ricky stretched to relieve cramped muscles.

"I would if I could get Jeems. He's my model for the brother. He's
enough like you, Val, for the resemblance, and his darker tan is just
right for color. But he won't come back while Creighton's here. I could
wring that man's neck!"

"But Creighton left for Milneburg this morning," Val reminded her.
"Rupert told him about the old voodoo rites which used to be celebrated
there on June 24th, St. John's Eve, and he wanted to see if there were
any records--"

"Yes. But Jeems doesn't know he's gone. If we could only get in touch
with him--Jeems, I mean."

"Miss 'Chanda!"

Sam Two, as they had come to call Sam's eldest son and heir, was
standing on the lowest step of the terrace, holding a small covered
basket in his hands.

"Yes?"

"Letty-Lou done say dis am fo' yo'all, Miss 'Chanda."

"For me?" Ricky looked at the offering in surprise. "But what in the
world--Bring it here, Sam."

"Yas'm."

He laid the basket in Ricky's outstretched hands.

"I've never seen anything like this before." She turned it around. "It
seems to be woven of some awfully fine grass--"

"That's swamp work." Charity was peering over Ricky's shoulder. "Open
it."

Inside on a nest of raw wild cotton lay a bracelet of polished wood
carved with an odd design of curling lines which reminded Val of Spanish
moss. And with the circlet was a small purse of scaled hide.

"Swamp oak and baby alligator," burst out Charity. "Aren't they
beauties?"

"But who--" began Ricky.

Val picked up a scrap of paper which had fluttered to the floor. It was
cheap stuff, ruled with faint blue lines, but the writing was bold and
clear: "Miss Richanda Ralestone."

"It's yours all right." He handed her the paper.

"I know." She tucked the note away with the gifts. "It was Jeems."

"Jeems? But why?" her brother protested.

"Well, yesterday when I was down by the levee he was coming in and I
knew that Mr. Creighton was here and I told him. So," she colored
faintly, "then he took me across the bayou and I got some of those big
swamp lilies that I've always wanted. And we had a long talk. Val, Jeems
knows the most wonderful things about the swamps. Do you know that they
still have voodoo meetings sometimes--way back in there," she swept her
hand southward. "And the fur trappers live on house-boats, renting their
hunting rights. But Jeems owns his own land. Now some northerners are
prospecting for oil. They have a queer sort of car which can travel
either on land or water. And Pere Armand has church records that date
back to the middle of the eighteenth century. And--"

"So that's where you were from four until almost six," Val laughed. "I
don't know that I approve of this riotous living. Will Jeems take me to
pick the lilies too?"

"Maybe. He wanted to know why you always moved so carefully. And I told
him about the accident. Then he said the oddest thing--" She was staring
past Val at the oaks. "He said that to fly was worth being smashed up
for and that he envied you."

"Then he's a fool!" her brother said promptly. "Nothing is worth--" Val
stopped abruptly. Five months before he had made a bargain with himself;
he was not going to break it now.

"Do you know," Ricky said to Charity, "if you really need Jeems this
morning, I think I can get him for you. He told me yesterday how to find
his cabin."

"But why--" The objection came almost at once from Charity. Val thought
she was more than a little surprised that Jeems, who had steadfastly
refused to give her the same information, had supplied it so readily to
Ricky whom he hardly knew at all.

"I don't know," answered Ricky frankly. "He was rather queer about it.
Kept saying that the time might come when I would need help, and things
like that."

"Charity," Val was putting her brushes straight, "I learned long ago
that nothing can be kept from Ricky. Sooner or later one spills out his
secrets."

"Except Rupert!" Ricky aired her old grievance.

"Perhaps Rupert," her brother agreed.

"Anyway, I do know where Jeems lives. Do you want me to get him for you,
Charity?"

"Certainly not, child! Do you think that I'd let you go into the swamp?
Why, even men who know something of woodcraft think twice before
attempting such a trip without a guide. Of course you're not going! I
think," she put her paint-stained hand to her head, "that I'm going to
have one of my sick headaches. I'll have to go home and lie down for an
hour or two."

"I'm sorry." Ricky's sympathy was quick and warm. "Is there anything I
can do?"

Charity shook her head with a rueful smile. "Time is the only medicine
for one of these. I'll see you later."

"Just the same," Ricky stood looking after her, "I'd like to know just
what is going on in the swamp right now."

"Why?" Val asked lightly.

"Because--well, just because," was her provoking answer. "Jeems was so
odd yesterday. He talked as if--as if there were some threat to us or
him. I wonder if there is something wrong." She frowned.

"Of course not!" her brother made prompt answer. "He's merely gone off
on one of those mysterious trips of his."

"Just the same, what if there were something wrong? We might go and
see."

"Nonsense!" Val snapped. "You heard what Charity said about going into
the swamp alone. And there is nothing to worry about anyway. Come on,
let's change. And then I have something to show you."

"What?" she demanded.

"Wait and see." His ruse had succeeded. She was no longer looking
swampward with that gleam of purpose in her eye.

"Come on then," she said, prodding him into action.

Val changed slowly. If one didn't care about mucking around in the
garden, as Ricky seemed to delight in doing, there was so little in the
way of occupation. He thought of the days as they spread before him. A
little riding, a great amount of casual reading and--what else? Was the
South "getting" him as the tropics are supposed to "get" the
Northerners?

That unlucky meeting with a mountaintop had effectively despoiled him of
his one ambition. Soldiers with game legs are not wanted. He couldn't
paint like Charity, he couldn't spin yarns like Rupert, he possessed a
mind too inaccurate to cope with the intricacies of any science. And as
a business man he would probably be a good street cleaner.

What was left? Well, the surprise he had promised Ricky might cover the
problem. As he reached for a certain black note-book, someone knocked on
his door.

"Mistuh Val, wheah's Miss 'Chanda? She ain't up heah an' Ah wan's to--"

Lucy stood in the hall. The light from the round window was reflected
from every corrugated wave of her painfully marcelled hair. Her vast
flowered dress had been thriftily covered with a dull-green bib-apron
and she had changed her smart slippers for the shapeless gray relics she
wore indoors. Just now she looked warm and tired. After all, running two
households was something of a task even for Lucy.

"Why, she should be in her room. We came up to change. Miss Charity's
gone home with a headache. What was it you wanted her for?"

"Dese heah cu'ta'ns, Mistuh Val"--she thrust a mound of snowy and
beruffled white stuff at him--"dey has got to be hung. An' does Miss
'Chanda wan' dem in her room or does she not?"

"Better put them up. I'll tell her about it. Here wait, let me open that
door."

Val looked into Ricky's room. As usual, it appeared as though a
whirlwind, a small whirlwind but a thorough one, had passed through it.
Her discarded costume lay tumbled across the bed and her slippers lay on
