increased to three members. For it was then that Jerome returned from
Nevada, whence he had gone two weeks before on a case.

"Not at all surprised," he commented, when I told him of Harry's
disappearance. "Sorry I wasn't here. That crook, Rhamda Avec, in at the
end?"

He gnawed stolidly at his cigar as I told him the story. Then, after
briefly approving what I had done to brighten the house, he announced:

"Tell you what. I've got a little money out of that Nevada case; I'm
going to take another vacation and see this thing through."

We shook hands on this, and he moved right into his old room. I felt, in
fact, mighty glad to have Jerome with us. Although he lacked a regular
academic training, he was fifteen years my senior, and because of
contact with a wide variety of people in his work, both well-informed
and reserved in his judgment. He could not be stampeded; he had courage;
and, above everything else, he had the burning curiosity of which Harry
has written.

I was upstairs when he unpacked. And I noted among his belongings a
large, rather heavy automatic pistol. He nodded when I asked if he was
willing to use it in this case.

"Although"--unbuttoning his waistcoat--"I don't pin as much faith to
pistols as I used to.

"The Rhamda is, I'm convinced, the very cleverest proposition that
ever lived. He has means to handle practically anything in the way of
resistance." Jerome knew how the fellow had worsted Harry and me. "I
shouldn't wonder if he can read the mind to some extent; he might be
able to foresee that I was going to draw a gun, and beat me to it with
some new weapon of his own."

Having unbuttoned his waistcoat, Jerome then displayed a curious
contrivance mounted upon his breast. It consisted of a broad metal
plate, strapped across his shirt, and affixed to this plate was a
flat-springed arrangement for firing, simultaneously, the contents of
a revolver cylinder. To show how it worked, Jerome removed the five
cartridges and then faced me.

"Tell me to throw up my hands," directed he. I did so; his palms flew
into the air; and with a steely snap the mechanism was released.

Had there been cartridges in it, I should have been riddled, for I
stood right in front. And I shuddered as I noted the small straps around
Jerome's wrists, running up his sleeves, so disposed that the act of
surrendering meant instant death to him who might demand.

"May not be ethical, Fenton"--quietly--"but it certainly is good sense
to shoot first and explain later when you're handling a chap like Avec.
Better make preparations, too."

I objected. I pointed out what I have already mentioned; that, together
with the ring, the Rhamda offered our only clues to the Blind Spot.
Destroy the man and we would destroy one of our two hopes of rescuing
our friends from the unthinkable fate that had overtaken them.

"No"--decisively. "We don't want to kill; we want to KEEP him. Bullets
won't do. I see no reason, however, why you shouldn't load that thing
with cartridges containing chemicals which would have an effect similar
to that of a gas bomb. Once you can make him helpless, so that you can
put those steel bracelets on him, we'll see how dangerous he is with his
hands behind him!"

"I get you"--thoughtfully. "I know a chemist who will make up
'Paralysis' gas for me, in the form of gelatine capsules. Shoot 'em at
the Rhamda; burst upon striking. Safe enough for me, and yet put him out
of business long enough to fit him with the jewellery."

"That's the idea."

But I had other notions about handling the Rhamda. Being satisfied that
mere strength and agility were valueless against him, I concluded that
he, likewise realising this, would be on the lookout for any possible
trap.

Consequently, if I hoped to keep the man, and force him to tell us what
we wanted to know, then I must make use of something other than physical
means. Moreover, I gave him credit for an exceptional amount of insight.
Call it super-instinct, or what you will, the fellow's intellect was
transcendental.

Once having decided that it must be a battle of wits I took a step which
may seem, at first, a little peculiar.

I called upon a certain lady to whom I shall give the name of Clarke,
since that is not the correct one. I took her fully and frankly into my
confidence. It is the only way, when dealing with a practitioner. And
since, like most of my fellow citizens, she had heard something of
the come and go, elusive habits of our men, together with the Holcomb
affair, it was easy for her to understand just what I wanted.

"I see," she mused. "You wish to be surrounded by an influence that will
not so much protect you, as vitalise and strengthen you whenever you
come in contact with Avec. It will be a simple matter. How far do
you wish to go?" And thus it was arranged, the plan calling for the
co-operation of some twenty of her colleagues.

My fellow engineers may sneer, if they like. I know the usual notion:
that the "power of mind over matter" is all in the brain of the patient.
That the efforts of the practitioner are merely inductive, and so on.

But I think that the most sceptical will agree that I did quite right in
seeking whatever support I could get before crossing swords with a man
as keen as Avec.

Nevertheless, before an opportunity arrived to make use of the
intellectual machinery which my money had started into operation,
something occurred which almost threw the whole thing out of gear.

It was the evening after I had returned from Miss Clarke's office. Both
Charlotte and I had a premonition, after supper, that things were going
to happen. We all went into the parlour, sat down, and waited.

Presently we started the gramophone. Jerome sat nearest the instrument,
where he could without rising, lean over and change the records. And all
three of us recall that the selection being played at the moment was "I
Am Climbing Mountains," a sentimental little melody sung by a popular
tenor. Certainly the piece was far from being melancholy, mysterious, or
otherwise likely to attract the occult.

I remember that we played it twice, and it was just as the singer
reached the beginning of the final chorus that Charlotte, who sat
nearest the door, made a quick move and shivered, as though with cold.

From where I sat, near the dining-room door, I could see through into
the hall. Charlotte's action made me think that the door might have
become unlatched, allowing a draught to come through. Afterwards she
said that she had felt something rather like a breeze pass her chair.

In the middle of the room stood a long, massive table, of conventional
library type. Overhead was a heavy, burnished copper fixture, from which
a cluster of electric bulbs threw their brilliance upward, so that the
room was evenly lighted with the diffused rays as reflected from the
ceiling. Thus, there were no shadows to confuse the problem.

The chorus of the song was almost through when I heard from the
direction of the table a faint sound, as though someone had drawn
fingers lightly across the polished oak. I listened; the sound was not
repeated, at least not loud enough for me to catch it above the music.
Next moment, however, the record came to an end; Jerome leaned forward
to put on another, and Charlotte opened her mouth as though to suggest
what the new selection might be. But she never said the words.

It began with a scintillating iridescence, up on the ceiling, not eight
feet from where I sat. As I looked the spot grew, and spread, and flared
out. It was blue like the elusive blue of the gem; only, it was more
like flame--the flame of electrical apparatus.

Then, down from that blinding radiance there crept, rather than dropped
a single thread of incandescence, vivid, with a tinge of the colour
from which it had surged. Down it crept to the floor; it was like an
irregular streak of lightning, hanging motionless between ceiling and
floor, just for the fraction of a second. All in total silence.

And then the radiance vanished, disappeared, snuffed out as one might
snuff out a candle. And in its stead--

There appeared a fourth person in the room.




XXII

THE ROUSING OF A MIND


It was a girl. Not the Nervina. No; this girl was quite another person.

Even now I find it curiously hard to describe her. For me to say that
she was the picture of innocence, of purity, and of youth, is still to
leave unsaid the secret of her loveliness.

For this stranger, coming out of the thin air into our midst, held me
with a glorious fascination. From the first I felt no misgivings, such
as Harry confesses he experienced when he fell under the Nervina's
charm. I knew as I watched the stranger's wondering, puzzled features,
that I had never before seen anyone so lovely, so attractive, and so
utterly beyond suspicion.

It was only later that I noted her amazingly delicate complexion, fair
as her hair was golden; her deep blue eyes, round face, and the girlish
supple figure; or her robe-like garments of very soft, white material.
For she commenced almost instantly to talk.

But we understood only with the greatest of difficulty. She spoke as
might one who, after living in perfect solitude for a score of years, is
suddenly called upon to use language. And I remembered that Rhamda Avec
had told Jerome that he had only BEGUN the use of language.

"Who are you?" was her first remark, in the sweetest voice conceivable.
But there was both fear and anxiety in her manner. "How--did
I--get--here?"

"You came out of the Blind Spot!" I spoke, jerking out the words
nervously and, as I saw, too rapidly. I repeated them more slowly. But
she did not comprehend.

"The--Blind--Spot," she pondered. "What--is that?"

Next instant, before I could think to warn her, the room trembled with
the terrific clang of the Blind Spot bell. Just one overwhelming peal;
no more. At the same time there came a revival of the luminous spot in
the ceiling. But, with the last tones of the bell, the spot faded to
nothing.

The girl was pitifully frightened. I sprang to my feet and steadied her
with one hand--something that I had not dared to do as long as the Spot
remained open. The touch of my fingers, as she swayed, had the effect of
bringing her to herself. She listened intelligently to what I said.

"The Blind Spot"--speaking with the utmost care--"is the name we have
given to a certain mystery. It is always marked by the sound you have
just heard; that bell always rings when the phenomenon is at an end."

"And--the--phenomenon," uttering the word with difficulty, "what is
that?"

"You," I returned. "Up till now three human beings have disappeared into
what we call the Blind Spot. You are the first to be seen coming out of
it."

"Hobart," interrupted Charlotte, coming to my side. "Let me."

I stepped back, and Charlotte quietly passed an arm round the girl's
waist. Together they stepped over to Charlotte's chair.

I noted the odd way in which the newcomer walked, unsteadily,
uncertainly, like a child taking its first steps. I glanced at Jerome,
wondering if this tallied with what he recalled of the Rhamda; and he
gave a short nod.

"Don't be frightened," said Charlotte softly, "we are your friends. In
a way we have been expecting you, and we shall see to it that no harm
comes to you.

"Which would you prefer--to ask questions, or to answer them?"

"I"--the girl hesitated--"I--hardly--know. Perhaps--you had--better--ask
something first."

"Good. Do you remember where you came from? Can you recall the events
just prior to your arrival here?"

The girl looked helplessly from the one to the other of us. She seemed
to be searching for some clue. Finally she shook her head in a hopeless,
despairing fashion.

"I can't remember," speaking with a shade less difficulty. "The last
thing--I recall is--seeing--you three--staring--at me."

This was a poser. To think, a person who, before our very eyes, had
materialised out of the Blind Spot, was unable to tell us anything about
it!

Still this lack of memory might be only a temporary condition,
brought on by the special conditions under which she had emerged; an
after-effect, as it were, of the semi-electrical phenomena. And it
turned out that I was right.

"Then," suggested Charlotte, "suppose you ask us something."

The girl's eyes stopped roving and rested definitely, steadily, upon my
own. And she spoke; still a little hesitantly:

"Who are you? What is your name?"

"Name?" taken wholly by surprise. "Ah--it is Hobart Fenton.
And"--automatically--"this is my sister Charlotte. The gentleman over
there is Mr. Jerome."

"I am glad to know you, Hobart," with perfect simplicity and apparent
pleasure; "and you, Charlotte," passing an arm round my sister's neck;
"and you--Mister." Evidently she thought the title of "mister" to be
Jerome's first name.

Then she went on to say, her eyes coming back to mine:

"Why do you look at me that way, Hobart?"

Just like that! I felt my cheeks go hot and cold by turns. For a moment
I was helpless; then I made up my mind to be just as frank and candid as
she.

"Because you're so good to look at!" I blurted out. "I never appreciated
my eyesight as I do right now!"

"I am glad," she returned, simply and absolutely without a trace
of confusion or resentment. "I know that I rather like to look at
you--too."

Another stunned silence. And this time I didn't notice any change in the
temperature of my face; I was too busily engaged in searching the depths
of those warm blue eyes.

She didn't blush, or even drop her eyes. She smiled, however, a gentle,
tremulous smile that showed some deep feeling behind her unwavering
gaze.

I recovered myself with a start, drew my chair up in front of her and
took both her hands firmly in mine. Whereupon my resolution nearly
deserted me. How warm and soft, and altogether adorable they were. I
drew a long breath and began:

"My dear--By the way, what is your name?"

"I"--regretfully, after a moment's thought--"I don't know, Hobart."

"Quite so," as though the fact was commonplace. "We will have to provide
you with a name. Any suggestions?"

Charlotte hesitated only a second. "Let's call her Ariadne; it was
Harry's mother's name."

"That's so; fine! Do you like the name--Ariadne?"

"Yes," both pleased and relieved. At the same time she looked oddly
puzzled, and I could see her lips moving silently as she repeated the
name to herself.

Not for an instant did I let go of those wonderful fingers. "What I
want you to know, Ariadne, is that you have come into a world that is,
perhaps, more or less like the one that you have just left. For all
I know it is one and the same world, only, in some fashion not yet
understood, you may have transported yourself to this place. Perhaps
not.

"Now, we call this a room, a part of the house. Outside is a street.
That street is one of hundreds in a vast city, which consists of
a multitude of such houses together with other and vastly larger
structures. And these structures all rest upon a solid material which we
call the ground or earth.

"The fact that you understand our language indicates that either you
have fallen heir to a body and a brain which are thoroughly in tune with
ours, or else--and please understand that we know very little of this
mystery--or else your own body has somehow become translated into a
condition which answers the same purpose.

"At any rate, you ought to comprehend what I mean by the term 'earth.'
Do you?"

"Oh, yes," brightly. "I seem to understand everything you say, Hobart."

"Then there is a corresponding picture in your mind to each thought I
have given you?"

"I think so," not so positively.

"Well," hoping that I could make it clear, "this earth is formed in a
huge globe, part of which is covered by another material, which we term
water. And the portions which are not so covered, and are capable of
supporting the structures which constitute the city, we call by still
another name. Can you supply that name?"

"Continents," without hesitation.

"Fine!" This was a starter anyhow. "We'll soon have your memory working!

"However, what I really began to say is this; each of these
continents--and they are several in number--is inhabited by people more
or less like ourselves. There is a vast number, all told. Each is either
male or female, like ourselves--you seem to take this for granted,
however--and you will find them all exceedingly interesting.

"Now, in all fairness," letting go her hands at last "you must
understand that there are, among the people whom you have yet to see,
great numbers who are far more--well, attractive, than I am.

"And you must know," even taking my gaze away, "that not all persons are
as friendly as we. You will find some who are antagonistic to you, and
likely to take advantage of--well, your unsophisticated viewpoint. In
short"--desperately--"you must learn right away not to accept people
without question; you must form the habit of reserving judgment, of
waiting until you have more facts, before reaching an opinion of others.

"You must do this as a matter of self-protection, and in the interests
of your greatest welfare."

And I stopped.

She seemed to be thinking over what I said. In the end she observed:
"This seems reasonable. I feel sure that wherever I came from such
advice would have fitted.

"However"--smiling at me in a manner to which I can give no description
other than affectionate--"I have no doubts about you, Hobart. I know you
are absolutely all right."

And before I could recover from the bliss into which her statement threw
me, she turned to Charlotte with "You too, Charlotte; I know I can trust
you."

But when she looked at Jerome she commented: "I can trust you, Mister,
too; almost as much, but not quite. If you didn't suspect me I could
trust you completely."

Jerome went white. He spoke for the first time since the girl's coming.

"How--how did you know that I suspected you?"

"I can't explain; I don't know myself." Then wistfully: "I wish you
would stop suspecting me, Mister. I have nothing to conceal from you."

"I know it!" Jerome burst out, excitedly, apologetically. "I know it
now! You're all right, I'm satisfied of that from now on!"

She sighed in pure pleasure. And she offered one hand to Jerome. He took
it as though it were a humming-bird's egg, and turned almost purple. At
the same time the honest, fervid manliness which backed the detective's
professional nature shone through for the first time in my knowledge of
him. From that moment his devotion to the girl was as absolute as that
of the fondest father who ever lived.

Well, no need to detail all that was said during the next hour. Bit by
bit we added to the girl's knowledge of the world into which she had
emerged, and bit by bit there unfolded in her mind a corresponding image
of the world from which she had come. And when, for an experiment, we
took her out on the front porch and showed her the stars, we were fairly
amazed at the thoughts they aroused.

"Oh!" she cried, in sheer rapture. "I know what those are!" By now she
was speaking fairly well. "They are stars!" Then: "They don't look the
same. They're not outlined in the same way as I know. But they can't be
anything else!"

NOT OUTLINED THE SAME. I took this to be a very significant fact. What
did it mean?

"Look"--showing her the constellation Leo, on the ecliptic, and
therefore visible to both the northern and southern hemispheres--"do you
recognise that?"

"Yes," decisively. "That is, the arrangement; but not the appearance of
the separate stars."

And we found this to be true of the entire sky. Nothing was entirely
familiar to her; yet, she assured us, the stars could be nothing else.
Her previous knowledge told her this without explaining why, and without
a hint as to the reason for the dissimilarity.

"Is it possible," said I, speaking half to myself, "that she has come
from another planet?"

For we know that the sky, as seen from any of the eight planets in this
solar system, would present practically the same appearance; but if
viewed from a planet belonging to any other star-sun, the constellations
would be more or less altered in their arrangement, because of the
vast distance involved. As for the difference in the appearance of the
individual stars, that might be accounted for by a dissimilarity in the
chemical make-up of the atmosphere.

"Ariadne, it may be you've come from another world!"
