
The gospel had better claims than any furnished by equivocal miracles;
and, though it still encountered opposition, it now moved forward in a
triumphant career. In some districts it produced such an impression that
it threatened the speedy extinction of the established worship. In
Bithynia, early in the second century, the temples of the gods were
well-nigh deserted, and the sacrificial victims found very few
purchasers. [280:1] The pagan priests now took the alarm; the power of
the magistrate interposed to prevent the spread of the new doctrine; and
spies were found willing to dog the steps and to discover the
meeting-places of the converts. Many quailed before the prospect of
death, and purchased immunity from persecution by again repairing to the
altars of idolatry. But, notwithstanding all the arts of intimidation
and chicanery, the good cause continued to prosper. In Rome, in Antioch,
in Alexandria, and in other great cities, the truth steadily gained
ground; and, towards the end of the second century, it had acquired such
strength even in Carthage--a place far removed from the scene of its
original proclamation--that, according to the statement of one of its
advocates, its adherents amounted to a _tenth_ of the inhabitants.
[280:2] About the same period Churches were to be found in various parts
of the north of Africa between Egypt and Carthage; and, in the East,
Christianity soon acquired a permanent footing in the little state of
Edessa, [280:3] in Arabia, in Parthia, and in India. In the West, it
continued to extend itself throughout Greece and Italy, as well as in
Spain and France. In the latter country the Churches of Lyons and Vienne
attract attention in the second century; and in the third, seven eminent
missionaries are said to have formed congregations in Paris, Tours,
Arles, Narbonne, Toulouse, Limoges, and Clermont. [281:1] Meanwhile the
light of divine truth penetrated into Germany; and, as the third century
advanced, even the rude Goths inhabiting Moesia and Thrace were
partially brought under its influence. The circumstances which led to
the conversion of these barbarians are somewhat remarkable. On the
occasion of one of their predatory incursions into the Empire, they
carried away captive some Christian presbyters; but the parties thus
unexpectedly reduced to bondage did not neglect the duties of their
spiritual calling, and commended their cause so successfully to those by
whom they had been enslaved, that the whole nation eventually embraced
the gospel. [281:2] Even the barriers of the ocean did not arrest the
progress of the victorious faith. Before the end of the second century
the religion of the cross seems to have reached Scotland; for though
Tertullian certainly speaks rhetorically when he says that "the places
of Britain inaccessible to the Romans were subject to Christ," [281:3]
his language at least implies that the message of salvation had already
been proclaimed with some measure of encouragement in Caledonia.

Though no contemporary writer has furnished us with anything like an
ecclesiastical history of this period, it is very clear, from occasional
hints thrown out by the early apologists and controversialists, that the
progress of the Church must have been both extensive and rapid. A
Christian author, who flourished about the middle of the second century,
asserts that there was then "no race of men, whether of barbarians or of
Greeks, or bearing any other name, either because they lived in waggons
without fixed habitations, or in tents leading a pastoral life, among
whom prayers and thanksgivings were not offered up to the Father and
Maker of all things through the name of the crucified Jesus." [282:1]
Another father, who wrote shortly afterwards, observes that, "as in the
sea there are certain habitable and fertile islands, with wholesome
springs, provided with roadsteads and harbours, in which those who are
overtaken by tempests may find refuge--in like manner has God placed in
a world tossed by the billows and storms of sin, congregations or holy
churches, in which, as in insular harbours, the doctrines of truth are
sheltered, and to which those who desire to be saved, who love the
truth, and who wish to escape the judgment of God, may repair." [282:2]
These statements indicate that the gospel must soon have been very
widely disseminated. Within less than a hundred years after the
apostolic age places of Christian worship were to be seen in the chief
cities of the Empire; and early in the third century a decision of the
imperial tribunal awarded to the faithful in the great Western
metropolis a plot of ground for the erection of one of their religious
edifices. [282:3] At length about A.D. 260 the Emperor Gallienus issued
an edict of toleration in their favour; and, during the forty years
which followed, their numbers so increased that the ecclesiastical
buildings in which they had hitherto assembled were no longer sufficient
for their accommodation. New and spacious churches now supplanted the
old meeting-houses, and these more fashionable structures were soon
filled to overflowing. [282:4] But the spirit of the world now began to
be largely infused into the Christian communities; the Church was
distracted by its ministers struggling with each other for pre-eminence;
and even the terrible persecution of Diocletian which succeeded, could
neither quench the ambition, nor arrest the violence of contending
pastors.

If we stand, only for a moment, on the beach, we may find it impossible
to decide whether the tide is ebbing or flowing. But if we remain there
for a few hours, the question will not remain unsettled. The sea will
meanwhile either retire into its depths, or compel us to retreat before
its advancing waters. So it is with the Church. At a given date we may
be unable to determine whether it is aggressive, stationary, or
retrograde. But when we compare its circumstances at distant intervals,
we may easily form a judgment. From the first to the fourth century,
Christianity moved forward like the flowing tide; and yet, perhaps, its
advance, during any one year, was not very perceptible. When, however,
we contrast its weakness at the death of the Apostle John with its
strength immediately before the commencement of the last imperial
persecution, we cannot but acknowledge its amazing progress. At the
termination of the first century, its adherents were a little flock,
thinly scattered over the empire. In the reign of Diocletian, such was
even their numerical importance that no prudent statesman would have
thought it safe to overlook them in the business of legislation. They
held military appointments of high responsibility; they were to be found
in some of the most honourable civil offices; they were admitted to the
court of the sovereign; and in not a few cities they constituted a most
influential section of the population. The wife of Diocletian, and his
daughter Valeria, are said to have been Christians. The gospel had now
passed over the boundaries of the empire, and had made conquests among
savages, some of whom had, perhaps, scarcely ever heard of the majesty
of Rome. But it did not establish its dominion unopposed, and, in
tracing its annals, we must not neglect to notice the history of its
persecutions.





CHAPTER II.

THE PERSECUTIONS OF THE CHURCH.


The persecutions of the early Church form an important and deeply
interesting portion of its history. When its Great Author died on the
accursed tree, Christianity was baptized in blood; and for several
centuries its annals consist largely of details of proscription and of
suffering. God might have introduced the gospel amongst men amidst the
shouts of applauding nations, but "He doeth all things well;" and He
doubtless saw that the way in which its reign was actually inaugurated,
was better fitted to exhibit His glory, and to attest its excellence.
Multitudes, who might otherwise have trifled with the great salvation,
were led to think of it more seriously, when they saw that it prompted
its professors to encounter such tremendous sacrifices. As the heathen
bystanders gazed on the martyrdom of a husband and a master, and as they
observed the unflinching fortitude with which he endured his anguish,
they often became deeply pensive. They would exclaim--"The man has
children, we believe--a wife he has, unquestionably--and yet he is not
unnerved by these ties of kindred: he is not turned from his purpose by
these claims of affection. We must look into the affair--we must get at
the bottom of it. Be it what it may, it can be no trifle which makes one
ready to suffer and willing to die for it." [284:1] The effects produced
on spectators by the heroism of the Christians cannot have escaped the
notice of the heathen magistrates. The Church herself was well aware of
the credit she derived from these displays of the constancy of her
children; and hence, in an address to the persecutors which appeared
about the beginning of the third century, the ardent writer boldly
invites them to proceed with the work of butchery. "Go on," says he
tauntingly, "ye good governors, so much better in the eyes of the people
if ye sacrifice the Christians to them--rack, torture, condemn, grind us
to powder--our numbers increase in proportion as you mow us down. The
blood of Christians is their harvest seed--that very obstinacy with
which you upbraid us, is a teacher. For who is not incited by the
contemplation of it to inquire what there is in the core of the matter?
and who, that has inquired, does not join us? and who, that joins us,
does not long to suffer?" [285:1]

In another point of view the perils connected with a profession of the
gospel exercised a wholesome influence. Comparatively few undecided
characters joined the communion of the Church; and thus its members, as
a body, displayed much consistency and steadfastness. The purity of the
Christian morality was never seen to more advantage than in those days
of persecution, as every one who joined the hated sect was understood to
possess the spirit of a martyr. And never did the graces of the religion
of the cross appear in more attractive lustre than when its disciples
were groaning under the inflictions of imperial tyranny. As some plants
yield their choicest odours only under the influence of pressure, it
would seem as if the gospel reserved its richest supplies of patience,
strength, and consolation, for times of trouble and alarm. Piety never
more decisively asserts its celestial birth than when it stands
unblenched under the frown of the persecutor, or calmly awaits the shock
of death. In the second and third centuries an unbelieving world often
looked on with wonder as the Christians submitted to torment rather than
renounce their faith. Nor were spectators more impressed by the _amount_
of suffering sustained by the confessors and the martyrs, than by the
_spirit_ with which they endured their trials. They approached their
tortures in no temper of dogged obstinacy or sullen defiance. They
rejoiced that they were counted worthy to suffer in so good a cause.
They manifested a self-possession, a meekness of wisdom, a gentleness,
and a cheerfulness, at which the multitude were amazed. Nor were these
proofs of Christian magnanimity confined to any one class of the
sufferers. Children and delicate females, illiterate artisans and poor
slaves, sometimes evinced as much intrepidity and decision as
hoary-headed pastors. It thus appeared that the victims of intolerance
were upheld by a power which was divine, and of which philosophy could
give no explanation.

We form a most inadequate estimate of the trials of the early
Christians, if we take into account only those sufferings they endured
from the hands of the pagan magistrates. Circumstances which seldom came
under the eye of public observation not unfrequently kept them for life
in a state of disquietude. Idolatry was so interwoven with the very
texture of society that the adoption of the new faith sometimes abruptly
deprived an individual of the means of subsistence. If he was a
statuary, he could no longer employ himself in carving images of the
gods; if he was a painter, he could no more expend his skill in
decorating the high places of superstition. To earn a livelihood, he
must either seek out a new sphere for the exercise of his art, or betake
himself to some new occupation. If the Christian was a merchant, he was,
to a great extent, at the mercy of those with whom he transacted
business. When his property was in the hands of dishonest heathens, he
was often unable to recover it, as the pagan oaths administered in the
courts of justice prevented him from appealing for redress to the laws
of the empire. [287:1] Were he placed in circumstances which enabled him
to surmount this difficulty, he could not afford to exasperate his
debtors; as they could have so easily retaliated by accusing him of
Christianity. The wealthy disciple could not accept the office of a
magistrate, for he would have thus only betrayed his creed; neither
could he venture to aspire to any of the honours of the state, as his
promotion would most certainly have aggravated the perils of his
position. Our Saviour had said--"I am come to set a man at variance
against his father, and the daughter against her mother, and the
daughter-in-law against her mother-in-law; and a man's foes shall be
they of his own household." [287:2] These words were now verified with
such woeful accuracy that the distrust pervading the domestic circle
often imbittered the whole life of the believer. The slave informed
against his Christian master; the husband divorced his Christian wife;
and children who embraced the gospel were sometimes disinherited by
their enraged parents. [287:3] As the followers of the cross
contemplated the hardships which beset them on every side, well might
they have exclaimed in the words of the apostle--"If in this life only
we have hope in Christ, we are of all men most miserable." [287:4]

In the first century the very helplessness of the Church served
partially to protect it from persecution. Its adherents were then almost
all in very humble circumstances; and their numbers were not such as to
inspire the sovereign with any political anxiety. When they were
harassed by the unbelieving Jews, the civil magistrate sometimes
interposed, and spread over them the shield of toleration; and though
Nero and Domitian were their persecutors, the treatment they experienced
from two princes so generally abhorred for cruelty elicited a measure of
public sympathy. [288:1] At length, however, the Roman government, even
when administered by sovereigns noted for their political virtues, began
to assume an attitude of decided opposition; and, for many generations,
the disciples were constantly exposed to the hostility of their pagan
rulers.

The Romans acted so far upon the principle of toleration as to permit
the various nations reduced under their dominion to adhere to whatever
religion they had previously professed. They were, no doubt, led to
pursue this policy by the combined dictates of expediency and
superstition; for whilst they were aware that they could more easily
preserve their conquests by granting indulgence to the vanquished, they
believed that each country had its own tutelary guardians. But they
looked with the utmost suspicion upon all new systems of religion. Such
novelties, they conceived, might be connected with designs against the
state; and should, therefore, be sternly discountenanced. Hence it was
that Christianity so soon met with opposition from the imperial
government. For a time it was confounded with Judaism, and, as such, was
regarded as entitled to the protection of the laws; but when its true
character was ascertained, the disciples were involved in all the
penalties attached to the adherents of an unlicensed worship.

Very early in the second century the power of the State was turned
against the gospel. About A.D. 107, the far-famed Ignatius, the pastor
of Antioch, is said to have suffered martyrdom. Soon afterwards our
attention is directed to the unhappy condition of the Church by a
correspondence between the celebrated Pliny, and the Emperor Trajan. It
would seem that in Bithynia, of which Pliny was governor, the new faith
was rapidly spreading; and that those who derived their subsistence from
the maintenance of superstition, had taken the alarm. The proconsul had,
therefore, been importuned to commence a persecution; and as existing
statutes supplied him with no very definite instructions respecting the
method of procedure, he deemed it necessary to seek directions from his
Imperial master. He stated, at the same time, the course which he had
hitherto pursued. If individuals arraigned before his judgment-seat, and
accused of Christianity, refused to repudiate the obnoxious creed, they
were condemned to death; but if they abjured the gospel, they were
permitted to escape unscathed. Trajan approved of this policy, and it
now became the law of the Empire.

In his letter to his sovereign [289:1] Pliny has given a very favourable
account of the Christian morality, and has virtually admitted that the
new religion was admirably fitted to promote the good of the community,
he mentions that the members of the Church were bound by solemn
obligations to abstain from theft, robbery, and adultery; to keep their
promises, and to avoid every form of wickedness. When such was their
acknowledged character, it may appear extraordinary that a sagacious
prince and a magistrate of highly cultivated mind concurred in thinking
that they should be treated with extreme rigour. We have here, however,
a striking example of the military spirit of Roman legislation. The laws
of the Empire made no proper provision for the rights of conscience; and
they were based throughout upon the principle that implicit obedience is
the first duty of a subject. Neither Pliny nor Trajan could understand
why a Christian should not renounce his creed at the bidding of the
civil governor. In their estimation, "inflexible obstinacy" in
confessing the Saviour was a crime which deserved no less a penalty than
death.

Though the rescript of Trajan awarded capital punishment to the man who
persisted in acknowledging himself a Christian, it also required that
the disciples should not be inquisitively sought after. The zeal of many
of the enemies of the Church was, no doubt, checked by this provision;
as those who attempted to hunt down the faithful expressly violated the
spirit of the imperial enactment. But still, some Christians now
suffered the penalty of a good confession. Pliny himself admits that
individuals who were brought before his own tribunal, and who could not
be induced to recant, were capitally punished; and elsewhere the law was
not permitted to remain in abeyance. About the close of the reign of
Trajan, Simeon, the senior minister of Jerusalem, now in the hundred and
twentieth year of his age, fell a victim to its severity. This martyr
was, probably, the second son of Mary, the mother of our Lord. He is,
perhaps, the same who is enumerated in the Gospels [290:1] among the
brethren of Christ; and the chronology accords with the supposition that
he was a year younger than our Saviour. [290:2] His relationship to
Jesus, his great age, and his personal excellence secured for him a most
influential position in the mother Church of Christendom; and hence, by
writers who flourished afterwards, and who expressed themselves in the
language of their generation, he has been called the second bishop of
Jerusalem.

Though the rescript of Trajan served for a time to restrain the violence
of persecution, it pronounced the profession of Christianity illegal; so
that doubts, which had hitherto existed as to the interpretation of the
law, could no longer be entertained. The heathen priests, and others
interested in the support of idolatry, did not neglect to proclaim a
fact so discouraging to the friends of the gospel. The law, indeed,
still presented difficulties, for an accuser who failed to substantiate
his charge was liable to punishment; but the wily adversaries of the
Church soon contrived to evade this obstacle. When the people met
together on great public occasions, as at the celebration of their
games, or festivals, and when the interest in the sports began to flag,
attempts were often made to provide them with a new and more exciting
pastime by raising the cry of "The Christians to the Lions;" and as, at
such times, the magistrates had been long accustomed to yield to the
wishes of the multitude, many of the faithful were sacrificed to their
clamours. Here, no one was obliged to step forward and hold himself
responsible for the truth of an indictment; and thus, without incurring
any danger, personal malice and blind bigotry had free scope for their
indulgence. In the reign of Hadrian, the successor of Trajan, the
Christians were sadly harassed by these popular ebullitions; and at
length Quadratus and Aristides, two eminent members of the Church at
Athens, presented apologies to the Emperor in which they vividly
depicted the hardships of their position. Serenius Granianus, the
Proconsul of Asia, also complained to Hadrian of the proceedings of the
mob; and, in consequence, that Prince issued a rescript requiring that
the magistrates should in future refuse to give way to the extempore
clamours of public meetings.

Antoninus Pius, who inherited the throne on the demise of Hadrian, was a
mild Sovereign; and under him the faithful enjoyed comparative
tranquillity; but his successor Marcus Aurelius, surnamed the
Philosopher, pursued a very different policy. Marcus is commonly reputed
one of the best of the Roman Emperors; at a very early period of life he
gave promise of uncommon excellence; and throughout his reign he
distinguished himself as an able and accomplished monarch. But he was
proud, pedantic, and self-sufficient; and, like every other individual
destitute of spiritual enlightenment, his character presented the most
glaring inconsistencies; for he was at once a professed Stoic, and a
devout Pagan. This Prince could not brook the contempt with which the
Christians treated his philosophy; neither could he tolerate the idea
that they should be permitted to think for themselves. He could conceive
how an individual, yielding to the stern law of fate, could meet death
with unconcern; but he did not understand how the Christians could glory
in tribulation, and hail even martyrdom with a song of triumph. Had he
calmly reflected on the spirit displayed by the witnesses for the truth,
he might have seen that they were partakers of a higher wisdom than his
own; but the tenacity with which they adhered to their principles, only
mortified his self-conceit, and roused his indignation. It is remarkable
that this philosophic Emperor was the most systematic and heartless of
all the persecutors who had ever yet oppressed the Church. When Nero
lighted up his gardens with the flames which issued from the bodies of
the dying Christians, he wished to transfer to them the odium of the
burning of Rome, and he acted only with the caprice and cunning of a
tyrant; and when Domitian promulgated his cruel edicts, he was haunted
with the dread that the proscribed sect would raise up a rival
Sovereign; but Marcus Aurelius could not plead even such miserable
apologies. He hated the Christians with the cool acerbity of a Stoic;
and he took measures for their extirpation which betrayed at once his
folly and his malevolence. Disregarding the law of Trajan which required
that they should not be officiously sought after, he encouraged spies
and informers to harass them with accusations. He caused them to be
dragged before the tribunals of the magistrates; and, under pain of
death, to be compelled to conform to the rites of idolatry. With a
refinement of cruelty unknown to his predecessors, he employed torture
for the purpose of forcing them to recant. If, in their agony, they gave
way, and consented to sacrifice to the gods, they were released; if they
remained firm, they were permitted to die in torment. In his reign we
read of new and hideous forms of punishment--evidently instituted for
the purpose of aggravating pain and terror. The Christians were
stretched upon the rack, and their joints were dislocated; their bodies,
when lacerated with scourges, were laid on rough sea-shells, or on other
most uncomfortable supports; they were torn to pieces by wild beasts; or
they were roasted alive on heated iron chairs. Ingenuity was called to
the ignoble office of inventing new modes and new instruments of
torture.

One of the most distinguished sufferers of this reign was Justin,
surnamed the Martyr. [293:1] He was a native of Samaria; but he had
travelled into various countries, and had studied various systems of
philosophy, with a view, if possible, to discover the truth. His
attention had at length been directed to the Scriptures, and in them he
had found that satisfaction which he could not obtain elsewhere. When in
Rome about A.D. 165, he came into collision with Crescens, a Cynic
philosopher, whom he foiled in a theological discussion. His
unscrupulous antagonist, annoyed by this discomfiture, turned informer;
and Justin, with some others, was put to death. Shortly afterwards
Polycarp, the aged pastor of Smyrna, was committed to the flames.
[293:2] This venerable man, who had been acquainted in his youth with
the Apostle John, had long occupied a high position as a prudent,
exemplary, and devoted minister. Informations were now laid against him,
and orders were given for his apprehension. At first he endeavoured to
elude his pursuers; but when he saw that escape was impossible, he
surrendered himself a prisoner. After all, he would have been permitted
to remain unharmed had he consented to renounce the gospel. In the sight
of an immense throng who gloated over the prospect of his execution, the
good old man remained unmoved. When called on to curse Christ he
returned the memorable answer--"Eighty and six years have I served Him,
and He has done me nothing but good; and how could I curse Him my Lord
and Saviour?" "I will cast you to the wild beasts," said the Proconsul,
"if you do not change your mind." "Bring the wild beasts hither,"
replied Polycarp, "for change my mind from the better to the worse I
will not." "Despise you the wild beasts?" exclaimed the magistrate--"I
will subdue your spirit by the flames." "The flames which you menace
endure but for a time and are soon extinguished," calmly rejoined the
prisoner, "but there is a fire reserved for the wicked, whereof you know
not; the fire of a judgment to come and of punishment everlasting."
These answers put an end to all hope of pardon; a pile of faggots was
speedily collected; and Polycarp was burned alive.

Towards the end of the reign of Marcus Aurelius, or about A.D. 177, the
Churches of Lyons and Vienne [294:1] in France endured one of the most
horrible persecutions recorded in the annals of Christian martyrdom. A
dreadful pestilence, some years before, had desolated the Empire; and
the pagans seem to have been impressed with the conviction that the new
religion had provoked the visitation. The mob in various cities became,
in consequence, exasperated; and demanded, with loud cries, the
extirpation of the hated sectaries. In the south of France a
considerable time appears to have elapsed before the ill-will of the
multitude broke out into open violence. At first the disciples in Lyons
and Vienne were insulted in places of public concourse; they were then
pelted with stones and forced to shut themselves up in their own houses;
they were subsequently seized and thrown into prison; and afterwards
their slaves were put to the torture, and compelled to accuse them of
crimes of which they were innocent. Pothinus, the pastor of Lyons, now
upwards of ninety years of age, was brought before the governor, and so
roughly handled by the populace that he died two days after he was
thrown into confinement. The other prisoners were plied with hunger and
thirst, and then put to death with wanton and studied cruelty. Two of
the sufferers, Blandina, a female, and Ponticus, a lad of fifteen,
displayed singular calmness and intrepidity. For several days they were
obliged to witness the tortures inflicted on their fellow-disciples,
that they might, if possible, be intimidated by the appalling spectacle.
After passing through this ordeal, the torture was applied to
themselves. Ponticus soon sunk under his sufferings; but Blandina still
survived. When she had sustained the agony of the heated iron chair, she
was put into a net and thrown to a wild bull that she might be trampled
and torn by him; and she continued to breathe long after she had been
sadly mangled by the infuriated animal. While subjected to these
terrible inflictions, she exhibited the utmost patience; no boasts
escaped her lips; no murmurs were uttered by her; and even in the
paroxysms of her anguish she was seen to be full of faith and courage.
But such touching exhibitions of the spirit of the gospel failed to
repress the fury of the excited populace. Their hatred of the gospel was
so intense that they resolved to deprive the disciples who survived this
reign of terror of the melancholy satisfaction of paying the last
tribute of respect to the remains of their martyred brethren. They,
accordingly, burned the dead bodies, and then cast the ashes into the
Rhone. "Now," said they, "we will see whether they will rise again, and
whether God can help them, and deliver them out of our hands." [296:1]

Under the brutal and bloody Commodus, the son and heir of Marcus
Aurelius, the Christians had some repose. Marcia, his favourite
concubine, was a member of the Church; [296:2] and her influence was
successfully exerted in protecting her co-religionists. But the penal
statutes were still in force, and they were not everywhere permitted to
remain a dead letter. In this reign [296:3] we meet with some of the
earliest indications of that zeal for martyrdom which was properly the
spawn of the fanaticism of the Montanists. In a certain district of
Asia, a multitude of persons, actuated by this absurd passion, presented
themselves in a body before the proconsul Arrius Antoninus; and
proclaimed themselves Christians. The sight of such a crowd of victims
appalled the magistrate; and, after passing judgment on a few, he is
said to have driven the remainder from his tribunal, exclaiming--
"Miserable men, if you wish to kill yourselves, you have ropes or
precipices."

The reigns of Pertinax and Julian, the Emperors next in succession after
Commodus, amounted together only to a few months; and the faithful had
meanwhile to struggle with many discouragements; [296:4] but these
short-lived sovereigns were so much occupied with other matters, that
they could not afford time for legislation on the subject of religion.
Septimius Severus, who now obtained the Imperial dignity, was at first
not unfriendly to the Church; and a cure performed on him by Proculus, a
Christian slave, [297:1] has been assigned as the cause of his
forbearance; but, as his reign advanced, he assumed an offensive
attitude; and it cannot be denied that the disciples suffered
considerably under his administration. As the Christians were still
obliged to meet at night to celebrate their worship, they were accused
of committing unnatural crimes in their nocturnal assemblies; and though
these heartless calumnies had been triumphantly refuted fifty or sixty
years before, they were now revived and circulated with fresh industry.
[297:2] About this period, Leonides, the father of the learned Origen,
was put to death. By a law, promulgated probably in A.D. 202, the
Emperor interdicted conversions to Christianity; and at a time when the
Church was making vigorous encroachments on heathenism, this enactment
created much embarrassment and anxiety. Some of the governors of
provinces, as soon as they ascertained the disposition of the Imperial
court, commenced forthwith a persecution; and there were magistrates who
proceeded to enforce the laws for the base purpose of extorting money
from the parties obnoxious to their severity. Sometimes individuals, and
sometimes whole congregations purchased immunity from suffering by
entering into pecuniary contracts with corrupt and avaricious rulers;
and by the payment of a certain sum obtained certificates [297:3] which
protected them from all farther inquisition. [297:4] The purport of
these documents has been the subject of much discussion. According to
some they contained a distinct statement to the effect that those named
in them had sacrificed to the gods, and had thus satisfied the law;
whilst others allege that, though they guaranteed protection, they
neither directly stated an untruth, nor compromised the religious
consistency of their possessors. But it is beyond all controversy that
the more scrupulous and zealous Christians uniformly condemned the use
of such certificates. Their owners were known by the suspicious
designation of "Libellatici," or "the Certified;" and were considered
only less criminal than the "Thurificati," or those who had actually
apostatised by offering incense on the altars of paganism. [298:1]

About this time the enforcement of the penal laws in a part of North
Africa, probably in Carthage, led to a most impressive display of some
of the noblest features of the Christian character. Five catechumens, or
candidates for baptism, among whom were Perpetua and Felicitas, [298:2]
had been put under arrest. Perpetua, who was only two and twenty years
of age, was a lady of rank and of singularly prepossessing appearance.
Accustomed to all the comforts which wealth could procure, she was ill
fitted, with a child at the breast, to sustain the rigours of
confinement--more especially as she was thrown into a crowded dungeon
during the oppressive heat of an African summer. But, with her infant in
her arms, she cheerfully submitted to her privations; and the thought
that she was persecuted for Christ's sake, converted her prison into a
palace. Her aged father, who was a pagan, was overwhelmed with distress
because, as he conceived, she was bringing deep and lasting disgrace
upon her family by her attachment to a proscribed sect; and as she was
his favourite child, he employed every expedient which paternal
tenderness and anxiety could dictate to lead her to a recantation. When
she was conducted to the judgment-seat with the other prisoners, the old
gentleman appeared there, to try the effect of another appeal to her;
and the presiding magistrate, touched with pity, entreated her to listen
to his arguments, and to change her resolution. But, though deeply moved
by the anguish of her aged parent, all these attempts to shake her
constancy were in vain. At the place of execution she sung a psalm of
victory, and, before she expired, she exhorted her brother and another
catechumen, named Rusticus, to continue in the faith, to love each
other, and to be neither affrighted nor offended by her sufferings. Her
companion Felicitas exhibited quite as illustrious a specimen of
Christian heroism. When arrested, she was far advanced in pregnancy, and
during her imprisonment, the pains of labour came upon her. Her cries
arrested the attention of the jailer, who said to her--"If your present
sufferings are so great, what will you do when you are thrown to the
wild beasts? You did not consider this when you refused to sacrifice."
With undaunted spirit Felicitas replied--"It is _I_ that suffer _now_,
but _then_ there will be Another with me, who will suffer for me,
because I shall suffer for His sake." The prisoners were condemned to be
torn by wild beasts on the occasion of an approaching festival; and when
they had passed through this terrible ordeal, they were despatched with
the sword.

After the death of Septimius Severus, the Christians experienced some
abatement of their sufferings. Caracalla and Elagabalus permitted them
to remain almost undisturbed; and Alexander Severus has been supposed by
some to have been himself a believer. Among the images in his private
chapel was a representation of Christ, and he was obviously convinced
that Jesus possessed divine endowments; but there is no proof that he
ever accepted unreservedly the New Testament revelation. He was simply
an eclectic philosopher who held that a portion of truth was to be found
in each of the current systems of religion; and who undertook to analyse
them, and extract the spiritual treasure. The Emperor Maximin was less
friendly to the Church; and yet his enmity was confined chiefly to those
Christian ministers who had been favourites with his predecessor; so
that he cannot be said to have promoted any general persecution. Under
Gordian the disciples were free from molestation; and his successor,
Philip the Arabian, was so well affected to their cause that he has been
sometimes, though erroneously, represented as the first Christian
Emperor. [300:1] The death of this monarch in A.D. 249 was, however,
soon followed by the fiercest and the most extensive persecution under
which the faithful had yet groaned. The more zealous of the pagans, who
had been long witnessing with impatience the growth of Christianity, had
become convinced that, if the old religion were to be upheld, a mighty
effort must very soon be made to strangle its rival. Various expedients
were meanwhile employed to prejudice the multitude against the gospel.
Every disaster which occurred throughout the Empire was attributed to
its evil influence; the defeat of a general, the failure of a harvest,
the overflowing of the Tiber, the desolations of a hurricane, and the
appearance of a pestilence, were all ascribed to its most inauspicious
advancement. The public mind was thus gradually prepared for measures of
extreme severity; and Decius, who now became emperor, aimed at the utter
extirpation of Christianity. All persons suspected of attachment to the
gospel were summoned before the civil authorities; and if, regardless of
intimidation, they refused to sacrifice, attempts were made to overcome
their constancy by torture, by imprisonment, and by starvation. When all
such expedients failed, the punishment of death was inflicted. Those who
fled before the day appointed for their appearance in presence of the
magistrates, forfeited their property; and were forbidden, under the
penalty of death, to return to the district. The Church in many places
had now enjoyed peace for thirty years, and meanwhile the tone of
Christian principle had been considerably lowered. It was not strange,
therefore, that, in these perilous days, many apostatised. [301:1] The
conduct of not a few of the more opulent Christians of Alexandria has
been graphically described by a contemporary. "As they were severally
called by name, they approached the unholy offering; some, pale and
trembling, as if they were going, not to sacrifice, but to be sacrificed
to the gods; so that they were jeered by the mob who thronged around
them, as it was plain to all that they were equally afraid to sacrifice
and to die. Others advanced more briskly, carrying their effrontery so
far as to avow that they never had been Christians." [301:2] Multitudes
now withdrew into deserts or mountains, and there perished with cold and
hunger. The prisons were everywhere crowded with Christians; and the
magistrates were occupied with the odious task of oppressing and
destroying the most meritorious of their fellow-citizens. The disciples
were sent to labour in the mines, branded on the forehead, subjected to
mutilation, and reduced to the lowest depth of misery. In this
persecution the pastors were treated with marked severity, and during
its continuance many of them suffered martyrdom. Among the most
distinguished victims were Fabian bishop of Rome, Babylas bishop of
Antioch, and Alexander bishop of Jerusalem. [302:1]

The reign of Decius was short; [302:2] but the hardships of the Church
did not cease with its termination, as Gallus adopted the policy of his
predecessor. Though Valerian, the successor of Gallus, for a time
displayed much moderation, he eventually relinquished this pacific
course; and, instigated by his favourite Macrianus, an Egyptian
soothsayer, began about A.D. 257 to repeat the bloody tragedy which, in
the days of Decius, had filled the Empire with such terror and distress.
At first the pastors were driven into banishment, and the disciples
forbidden to meet for worship. But more stringent measures were soon
adopted. An edict appeared announcing that bishops, presbyters, and
deacons were to be put to death; that senators and knights, who were
Christians, were to forfeit their rank and property; and that, if they
still refused to repudiate their principles, they were to be capitally
punished; whilst those members of the Church who were in the service of
the palace, were to be put in chains, and sent to labour on the imperial
estates. [302:3] In this persecution, Sixtus bishop of Rome, and Cyprian
bishop of Carthage, [302:4] were martyred.

On the accession of Gallienus in A.D. 260, the Church was once more
restored to peace. Gallienus, though a person of worthless character,
was the first Emperor who protected the Christians by a formal edict of
toleration. He commanded that they should not only be permitted to
profess their religion unmolested, but that they should again be put in
possession of their cemeteries [303:1] and of all other property, either
in houses or lands, of which they had been deprived during the reign of
his predecessor. This decree was nearly as ample in its provisions as
that which was issued in their favour by the great Constantine upwards
of half a century afterwards.

But, notwithstanding the advantages secured by this imperial law, the
Church still suffered occasionally in particular districts. Hostile
magistrates might plead that certain edicts had not been definitely
repealed; and, calculating on the connivance of the higher
functionaries, might perpetrate acts of cruelty and oppression. The
Emperor Aurelian had even resolved to resume the barbarous policy of
Decius and Valerian; and, in A.D. 275, had actually prepared a
sanguinary edict; but, before it could be executed, death stepped in to
arrest his violence, and to prevent the persecution. Thus, as has
already been intimated, for the last forty years of the third century
the Christians enjoyed, almost uninterruptedly, the blessings of
toleration. Spacious edifices, frequented by crowds of worshippers, and
some of them furnished with sacramental vessels of silver or gold,
[303:2] were to be seen in all the great cities of the Empire. But,
about the beginning of the fourth century, the prospect changed. The
pagan party beheld with dismay the rapid extension of the Church, and
resolved to make a tremendous effort for its destruction. This faction,
pledged to the maintenance of idolatry, now caused its influence to be
felt in all political transactions; and the treatment of the Christians
once more became a question on which statesmen were divided. Diocletian,
who was made Emperor in A.D. 285, continued for many years afterwards to
act upon the principle of toleration; but at length he was induced,
partly by the suggestions of his own superstitious and jealous temper,
and partly by the importunities of his son-in-law Galerius, to enter
upon another course. The persecution commenced in the army, where all
soldiers refusing to sacrifice forfeited their rank, and were dismissed
the service. [304:1] But other hostile demonstrations soon followed. In
the month of February A.D. 303, the great church of Nicomedia, the city
in which the Emperor then resided, was broken open; the copies of the
Scriptures to be found in it were committed to the flames; and the
edifice itself was demolished. The next day an edict appeared
interdicting the religious assemblies of the faithful; commanding the
destruction of their places of worship; ordering all their sacred books
to be burned; requiring those who held offices of honour and emolument
to renounce their principles on pain of the forfeiture of their
appointments; declaring that disciples in the humbler walks of life, who
remained steadfast, should be divested of their rights as citizens and
free-men; and providing that even slaves, so long as they continued
Christians, should be incapable of manumission. [304:2] Some time
afterwards another edict was promulgated directing that all
ecclesiastics should be seized and put in chains. When the jails were
thus filled with Christian ministers, another edict made its appearance,
commanding that the prisoners should by all means be compelled to
sacrifice. At length a fourth edict, of a still more sweeping character
and extending to the whole body of Christians, was published. In
accordance with this decree proclamation was made throughout the streets
of the cities, and men, women, and children, were enjoined to repair to
the heathen temples. The city gates were guarded that none might escape;
and, from lists previously prepared, every individual was summoned by
name to present himself, and join in the performance of the rites of
paganism. [305:1] At a subsequent period all provisions sold in the
markets, in some parts of the empire, were sprinkled with the water or
the wine employed in idolatrous worship, that the Christians might
either be compelled to abstinence, or led to defile themselves by the
use of polluted viands. [305:2]

Throughout almost the whole Church the latter part of the third century
was a period of spiritual decay; and many returned to heathenism during
the sifting time which now followed. Not a few incurred the reproach of
their more consistent and courageous brethren by surrendering the
Scriptures in their possession; and those who thus purchased their
safety were stigmatised with the odious name of _traditors_. Had the
persecutors succeeded in burning all the copies of the Word of God, they
would, without the intervention of a miracle, have effectually secured
the ruin of the Church; but their efforts to destroy the sacred volume
proved abortive; for the faithful seized the earliest opportunity of
replacing the consumed manuscripts. The holy book was prized by them
more highly than ever, and Bible burning only gave a stimulus to Bible
transcription. Still, however, sacred literature sustained a loss of no
ordinary magnitude in this wholesale destruction of the inspired
writings, and there is not at present in existence a single codex of the
New Testament of higher antiquity than the Diocletian persecution.
[305:3]

It has been computed that a greater number of Christians perished under
Decius than in all the attacks which had previously been made upon them;
but their sufferings under Diocletian were still more formidable and
disastrous. Paganism felt that it was now engaged in a death struggle;
and this, its last effort to maintain its ascendency, was its most
protracted and desperate conflict. It has been frequently stated that
the Diocletian persecution was of ten years' duration; and, reckoning
from the first indications of hostility to the promulgation of an edict
of toleration, it may certainly be thus estimated; but all this time the
whole Church was not groaning under the pressure of the infliction. The
Christians of the west of Europe suffered comparatively little; as there
the Emperor Constantius Chlorus, and afterwards his son Constantine, to
a great extent, preserved them from molestation. In the East they passed
through terrific scenes of suffering; for Galerius and Maximin, the two
stern tyrants who governed that part of the empire on the abdication of
Diocletian, endeavoured to overcome their steadfastness by all the
expedients which despotic cruelty could suggest. A contemporary, who had
access to the best sources of information, has given a faithful account
of the torments they endured. Vinegar mixed with salt was poured on the
lacerated bodies of the dying; some were roasted on huge gridirons;
some, suspended aloft by one hand, were then left to perish in
excruciating agony; and some, bound to parts of different trees which
had been brought together by machinery, were torn limb from limb by the
sudden revulsion of the liberated branches. [306:1] But, even in the
East, this attempt to overwhelm Christianity was not prosecuted from its
commencement to its close with unabated severity. Sometimes the
sufferers obtained a respite; and again, the work of blood was resumed
with fresh vigour. Though many were tempted for a season to make a
hollow profession of paganism, multitudes met every effort to seduce
them in a spirit of indomitable resolution. At length tyranny became
weary of its barren office, and the Church obtained peace. In A.D. 311,
Galerius, languishing under a loathsome disease, and perhaps hoping that
he might be relieved by the God of the Christians, granted them
toleration. Maximin subsequently renewed the attacks upon them; but at
his death, which occurred in A.D. 313, the edict in favour of the
Church, which Constantine and his colleague Licinius had already
published, became law throughout the empire.

It is often alleged that the Church, before the conversion of
Constantine, passed through ten persecutions; but the statement gives a
very incorrect idea of its actual suffering. It would be more accurate
to say that, for between two and three hundred years, the faithful were
under the ban of imperial proscription. During all this period they were
liable to be pounced upon at any moment by bigoted, domineering, or
greedy magistrates. There were not, indeed, ten persecutions conducted
with the systematic and sanguinary violence exhibited in the times of
Diocletian or of Decius; but there were perhaps provinces of the empire
where almost every year for upwards of two centuries some Christians
suffered for the faith. [307:1] The friends of the confessors and the
martyrs were not slow to acknowledge the hand of Providence, as they
traced the history of the emperors by whom the Church was favoured or
oppressed. It was remarked that the disciples were not worn out by the
barbarities of a continuous line of persecutors; for an unscrupulous
tyrant was often succeeded on the throne by an equitable or an indulgent
sovereign. Thus, the Christians had every now and then a breathing-time
during which their hopes were revived and their numbers recruited. It
was observed, too, that the princes, of whose cruelty they had reason to
complain, generally ended their career under very distressing
circumstances. An ecclesiastical writer who is supposed to have
flourished towards the commencement of the fourth century has discussed
this subject in a special treatise, in which he has left behind him a
very striking account of "The Deaths of the Persecutors." [308:1] Their
history certainly furnishes a most significant commentary on the Divine
announcement that "the Lord is known by the judgment which he
executeth." [308:2] Nero, the first hostile emperor, perished
ignominiously by his own hand. Domitian, the next persecutor, was
assassinated. Marcus Aurelius died a natural death; but, during his
reign, the Empire suffered dreadfully from pestilence and famine; and
war raged, almost incessantly, from its commencement to its close. The
people of Lyons, who now signalised themselves by their cruelty to the
Christians, did not escape a righteous retribution; for about twenty
years after the martyrdom of Pothinus and his brethren, the city was
pillaged and burned. [308:3] Septimius Severus narrowly escaped murder
by the hand of one of his own children. Decius, whose name is associated
with an age of martyrdom, perished in the Gothic war. Valerian, another
oppressor, ended his days in Persia in degrading captivity. The Emperor
Aurelian was assassinated. Diocletian languished for years the victim of
various maladies, and is said to have abruptly terminated his life by
suicide. Galerius, his son-in-law, died of a most horrible distemper;
and Maximin took away his own life by poison. [308:4] The interpretation
of providences is not to be rashly undertaken; but the record of the
fate of persecutors forms a most extraordinary chapter in the history of
man; and the melancholy circumstances under which so many of the enemies
of religion have finished their career, have sometimes impressed those
who have been otherwise slow to acknowledge the finger of the Almighty.

The persecutions of the early Church originated partly in selfishness
and superstition. Idolatry afforded employment to tens of thousands of
artists and artisans--all of whom had thus a direct pecuniary interest
in its conservation; whilst the ignorant rabble, taught to associate
Christianity with misfortune, were prompted to clamour for its
overthrow. Mistaken policy had also some share in the sufferings of the
Christians; for statesmen, fearing that the disciples in their secret
meetings might be hatching treason, viewed them with suspicion and
treated them with severity. But another element of at least equal
strength contributed to promote persecution. The pure and spiritual
religion of the New Testament was distasteful to the human heart, and
its denunciations of wickedness in every form stirred up the malignity
of the licentious and unprincipled. The faithful complained that they
suffered for neglecting the worship of the gods, whilst philosophers,
who derided the services of the established ritual, escaped with
impunity. [309:1] But the sophists were not likely ever to wage an
effective warfare against immorality and superstition. Many of
themselves were persons of worthless character, and their speculations
were of no practical value. It was otherwise with the gospel. Its
advocates were felt to be in earnest; and it was quickly perceived that,
if permitted to make way, it would revolutionize society. Hence the
bitter opposition which it so soon awakened.

It might have been expected that the sore oppression which the Church
endured for so many generations would have indelibly imprinted on the
hearts of her children the doctrine of liberty of conscience. As the
early Christians expostulated with their pagan rulers, they often
described most eloquently the folly of persecution. "How unjust is it,"
said they, "that freemen should be driven to sacrifice to the gods, when
in all other instances a willing mind is required as an indispensable
qualification for any office of religion?" [310:1] "It appertains to
man's proper right and natural privilege that each should worship that
which he thinks to be God....Neither is it the part of religion to
compel men to religion, which ought to be adopted voluntarily, not of
compulsion, seeing that sacrifices are required of a willing mind. Thus,
even if you compel us to sacrifice, you shall render no sacrifice
thereby to your gods, for they will not desire sacrifices from unwilling
givers, unless they are contentious; but God is not contentious."
