It is said that the kingfisher always selects a hole that has an
upward slope, so that, though heavy rains may cause the water of the
river bank to rise into the hole, the eggs will be dry. Some
naturalists have said that kingfishers do not make their own holes,
but use those already made by other animals. Mr. Gould, however, is of
opinion that kingfishers drill their own holes. The tunnels always
slope upwards, as I said; at the further end of the tunnel is an
oven-like chamber where the nest is made. The fish-bone nest is
thought by Mr. Gould to be really a nest, and intended to keep the
eggs off the damp ground. However, there is difference of opinion on
this point, and I reserve my own. We will see if we cannot find a
kingfisher's nest some time this summer. Now, May, what little plant
have you got hold of? "Indeed I don't know, papa, but it is a very
curious little plant; I gathered it at the bottom of that hedge bank."
Ah, I know it well, and a little favorite it is too; it is the
moschatell. You see it is about five inches high, with pale green
flowers and leaves; the flowers are arranged in heads of five each,
namely, four on the side, and one on the top; it has a delicate
musk-like odour, very pleasant and refreshing. Take a few specimens
home and put them in water with your primroses. Mamma, I know, is very
fond of the pretty little moschatell.

"Oh, papa," exclaimed Willy, "look at the bottom of this drain; what
is that strange-looking insect crawling slowly about at the bottom?" I
see; it is a water-scorpion, a very common insect in these drains on
the moors,--indeed, it is common everywhere; let us catch him and take
him home for examination. He is a queer-looking creature, with a small
head and pointed beak; his forearms are something like lobster's
claws; his prevailing colour blackish-brown, like the mud upon which
he crawls; his body is very flat, and ends in two long stick-like
projections; underneath these horny covers of the creature may be seen
his two wings. He is an aquatic murderer; inserting that pointed beak
into the body of some other insect, and holding his victim in his
lobster-like forearms--oh! fatal embrace--he sucks out the juices of
the struggling prey. Kirby and Spence say that some of the tribe of
insects to which the water-scorpion belongs are so savage that they
seem to love destruction for its own sake. A water-scorpion which was
put into a basin of water with several young tadpoles killed them all
without attempting to eat one. The tail projections, I ought to tell
you, are connected with the insect's breathing; they are protruded out
of the water and conduct the air to the spiracles at the end of the
body, about which I must tell you more at another time. The eggs of
the water-scorpion I have frequently found; they are of an oval form,
with seven long hair-like projections at one end. But it is time to go
home, our walk to-day is over; let us look forward to another holiday
and another country ramble.

[Illustration]

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote A: 'Wild Sports of the Highlands,' p. 136.]




WALK II.

APRIL


We will walk to-day along the side of the canal bank as far as the
aqueduct, then take the Duke's Drive and home by Lubstree Park; we
shall find lots to see and to admire in the course of our ramble. We
notice plenty of those beautiful balls of green jelly (_Ophrydium
versatile_) in the clear water of the canal which, you know, we see
every spring. These balls vary in size from that of a pea to that of
Jack's fist; they are, you see, generally attached to some water-weed,
and consist of myriads of very minute creatures called _infusoria_,
which are imbedded in a mass of whitish jelly; these animals can
detach themselves from the jelly and swim freely about; of course it
requires a microscope to see the tiny green animalcules. If we examine
a single specimen under a high power of the microscope we shall see
its shape, which, when fully extended, is long and cylindrical, having
at one end a mouth surrounded, as is usually the case in the
_infusoria_, by a circle of very fine hairs, or _cilia_, as they are
called, from the Latin word _cilium_ an eyelash; the mouth opens into
a long narrow channel; the creature's throat, which leads to its
stomach; towards the opposite extremity the animal tapers, till it
ends in an extremely long fine hair-like tail which is fixed in the
jelly-like ball; when the little creature prefers to swim freely about
in the water it leaves its tail behind it, unlike, in this respect, to
little Bo-peep's sheep! These balls were once supposed to belong to
the vegetable kingdom, but there is no doubt about their animal
nature.

"Oh! papa, what is that bird with a black head that flew from the side
of the canal to the hedge?" said Willy. "There, don't you see it?"
Yes! I see, my boy, it is the black-headed Bunting or Reed Sparrow,
common on the sides of rivers, canals, and ponds. The specimen you see
on the hedge is a male bird, the females are a little smaller and have
not black heads. See how beautifully contrasted are the deep-black
head and white collar on the neck. In the spring and summer these
birds may be frequently seen, male and female together; in winter they
associate with others of the finch tribe, forming large flocks. The
nest is generally placed on the ground amongst the sedges and coarse
grass; the eggs, which are four or five in number, are laid in May
and, I believe, a second brood sometimes is produced in July. The
nests of the Reed-bunting are difficult to find, at least, I have
seldom been successful. You know how cunning the peewit is in trying
to lead people away from its nest or young ones. Well, some observers
have remarked the same thing in the case of the reed-bunting. One
writer says, "Walking last spring amongst some rushes growing near a
river my attention was arrested by observing a black-headed bunting
shuffling through the rushes and trailing along the ground, as if one
of her legs or wings was broken. I followed her to see the result, and
she, having led me to some considerable distance, took wing, no doubt
much rejoiced on return to find her stratagems had been successful in
preserving her young brood." "Ha! ha!" interrupted Jack, "the
gentleman was nicely deceived then." No, not entirely, because he goes
on to say he afterwards found the nest, which had five young ones in
it. One thing more I ought to tell you; not to confuse the
reed-bunting with the reed-warbler, a very different bird, which very
probably we may notice in to-day's ramble.

[Illustration: WHIRLIGIG BEETLE, MAGNIFIED.]

We now had another look into the canal, and saw numerous little
whirligig beetles, performing their merry-go-rounds on the top of the
water. With what amazing rapidity they skim along, to be sure! Some
diving beneath the surface, some resting on a water leaf. If we catch
one in our net and examine it more closely we shall see that, in form,
it is like a miniature boat. It seems surprising that these little
"whirligigs," "whirl-wigs," or "shiners," as they are called, should
perform their rounds so closely together, without sometimes coming
into collision. If you will look ever so long a time you will not see
one animated boat run foul of another. Just think of a couple of
hundred skaters on a small piece of ice playing at cros-stick. Oh!
would they not be constantly knocking one another over?

[Illustration: HEAD OF WHIRLIGIG BEETLE, MAGNIFIED.

_a._ Mouth. _b, c._ Eye.]


Now look at Mr. Whirligig's eyes, you see each is separated into two
parts by a division; the one is on the upper part of the head and
looks towards the sky, the other is on the under part of the head and
looks into the water. Now let us all keep quite still--the whirligigs
rest. Now let us move--just look, they see our motions and off they
start on their merry-go-rounds. It was with this upper part of the eye
they saw us; should some sly fish, from below the surface of the
water, make a rush at one, the beetle sees the enemy with his under
eye and avoids him. What have you caught now, Jack? fish him out
whatever it is. Oh! a fresh-water mussel, and a very fine specimen
too; there are plenty of these fellows in the canal all the way from
here to Newport. "Are they good to eat, papa?" asked Willy. I never
tried one, but, from having often dissected specimens, I should say
they were as tough as the sole of a boot. I never heard of anyone
eating them. These molluscs carry their eggs, myriads in number,
within their gills. The young, at the time they are ejected, are very
curious little animals with triangular shells, and, oddly enough, they
will fasten upon the fins or tails of fish, on which they will stick
for some time, but how long I do not know.

[Illustration: FRY OF SWAN-MUSSEL, PARASITIC ON A FISH'S FIN.]

[Illustration: FRY OF SWAN-MUSSEL, HIGHLY MAGNIFIED.]

This particular mollusc is known by the name of swan-mussel; the young
fry are sent into the water in April and May. There is another kind of
fresh-water mussel in rivers and streams, called the pearl-mussel,
pearls being occasionally found in them. I had one of these pearls
once given me by a lad, taken from a river in the Isle of Man. I took
it to a jeweller, in Liverpool, who valued it at a guinea. Your uncle
Arthur, to whom I gave it, had it set in gold as a pin "I wish," said
May, who had listened to this part of the story with great attention,
"I wish pearl-mussels would live in the canal, it would be so nice to
get the pearls out of them." Very few mussels are found to contain the
pearls; perhaps you might have to open many hundreds before you found
a single pearl, and I should not like to cause the death of so many
harmless animals for the sake of a single pearl.

[Illustration: FRESH-WATER MUSSEL.]

"Here is another swan-mussel, and, just look, papa," said Jack, "some
other shells are fastened on it." So there are; it is a lot of the
curious and pretty little zebra-mussel. How prettily they are marked
with zig-zag stripes of reddish brown, especially the young specimens.
The name of mussel is better suited to these molluscs than to the
large kinds upon which the "zebras" are often attached, because, like
the salt water mussel you have often seen at New Brighton, they have
the power of spinning, what is called, "a byssus"--here, you see, is
the substance I mean--by which they fasten themselves to shells, or to
stones, roots, and other things.

[Illustration: ZEBRA MUSSEL.--_b._ BYSSUS.]

There flies one of those pretty little birds, the long-tailed
titmouse; it is common enough, certainly, but I never fail to notice
several upon the hedges and poplar trees of the "Duke's drive." There
are several members of the titmouse family found in Great Britain;
let me count them. First we have the great tit, then the little
blue-tit, the long-tailed tit, the cole tit, the marsh, the crested
and the bearded tit. How many does that make? Seven; but the crested
tit is very uncommon, and the bearded tit does not occur in
Shropshire. The other five are quite common and we shall, I dare say,
be able to see all in the course of to-day's walk. The long-tailed
tit, so called on account of the great length of the tail feathers, is
a very active, lively little bird. Indeed, activity and liveliness
belong to all the tit family. See how the little fellow flits from
branch to branch, seldom remaining long on one spot. It is a very
small bird, almost the smallest British bird we have; of course I am
thinking of the tit's body and not taking into account its tail. The
skin is remarkably tender, and thin as tissue paper. Like all the
titmice, the long-tailed tit feeds on insects and their larvae. I do
not remember to have heard or seen this species tapping the bark of a
tree with its beak, as the great and the blue tit are frequently in
the habit of doing, but most probably they do the same. "What do they
tap for, papa?" asked May. I suppose for the purpose of frightening
the tiny insects, which lurk under the bark, from their hiding places,
when they quickly snap them up with their sharply-pointed bills and
devour them. "Is not this the tit which the people about here call a
bottle tit, and which makes a very beautiful nest?" asked Willy. Yes,
the nest is indeed a very pretty object, and one that you would never,
I think, confuse with the nest of any other bird. The outside is
formed of that white-coloured lichen, so pretty and so common, and
moss, and if you were to put your finger, May, into the inside, which
is full of the softest feathers, you would say it was as nice as your
own muff. The nest is oval, with a hole at the side. I believe that
sometimes two holes exist, but I have never seen two in a nest. The
eggs are very small, and are white with a few lilac spots. As many as
a dozen or more are sometimes found in a nest.

[Illustration: LONG-TAILED TIT.]

The little blue-tit, which has just fled across our path is a very
pretty active bird and common everywhere, in lanes, woods, and
gardens. The blue-tit makes its nest in a wall or a hole in a tree and
lays about nine or ten pretty little spotted eggs. How often I
remember, when I was a boy, to have been bitten rather sharply by this
little bird into whose nest I had placed my hand; I can fancy I hear
the snake-like hissing which the blue-tit utters when some rude hand
invades its home. Its food consists of various kinds of insects and
insect larvae, which it finds on the bark of trees and in fruit buds. I
think it does much good by destroying numbers of injurious insects,
though gardeners and others destroy this bird, because they say it
harms the fruit buds. Look at that little sprightly fellow, how
restless he is; in what curious attitudes he puts himself on yonder
branch. Hark! you hear him tapping quite distinctly. Besides insects,
blue-tit does not object to make a meal of dead mice or rats. Mr. St.
John tells us that a blue-tomtit once took up his abode in the
drawing-room, having been first attracted there by the house flies
which crawl on the window. "These he was most active in searching for
and catching, inserting his little bill into every corner and crevice
and detecting every fly which had escaped the brush of the housemaid."
He soon became more bold and came down to pick up crumbs which the
children placed for him on the table, looking up into Mr. St. John's
face without the least apparent fear. Boys sometimes call the little
blue-tit Billy Biter, no doubt from personal experience of the
sharpness of Mr. Tit's beak. The great tit which we can see under the
yew tree in our garden, almost any hour of the day, is very common in
the neighbourhood, and I dare say if we look well about us during our
walk we shall see some to-day.

"Oh! papa," exclaimed Willy, "there are some birds on the towing-path
of the canal, about sixty yards off; they seem to be breaking
something with their beaks by knocking it against the ground; just
look." Yes, they are thrushes, and I can tell you what they are doing
and what we shall find when we come up to the spot. We shall see
several broken snail shells (_Helix_), which the thrushes find on the
grassy slopes of the canal bank, and then bring up to the path in
order to get at the animals inside the shells by breaking them against
the hard ground and stones. There! as I told you, you see at least a
dozen broken snail shells. I am sure the thrushes do a great deal of
good by destroying both snails and young slugs, and it is a pity their
labours are not more appreciated than they are. Lads in the village,
and great grown men from the collieries, are continually hunting for
the nests, eggs, or young of thrushes, and many other useful birds,
which they wantonly destroy. Now we get on the Duke's Drive, and
there, on a branch of a poplar tree, I see the great tit. Look at him;
he is the king of the titmice, and he seems to know it. He is a
restless fellow, like tits in general. Look at his black head and
breast, white cheeks and greenish back. Now, by one of his hooked
claws, he hangs suspended from a branch; now again he is clinging by
both legs; see how busy he is, examining the leaves and bark in search
for insects. But Major Tit is a bit of a tyrant sometimes and uses
that sharp short straight bill of his with deadly effect upon some of
his feathered companions, on whose heads he beats repeated blows till
he cracks the skulls and eats the brains! The marsh-tit and the
cole-tit are pretty common in this neighbourhood, we may often notice
them in our walks.

If Willy were to get over the hedge with his net and dip it amongst
the weeds of the pool, I dare say he will succeed in catching a few
water-insects, which he can put in his bottle and bring to me. Of
course the boy was delighted at the idea of dabbling with his net in
the water--boys generally get immense fun from such amusement, and
their clothes frequently not a little dirt. A weedy pond is a grand
place for naturalists, and various are the beautiful and strange forms
of animal life which are found there. Dipping amongst the duckweed and
water-crowfoot is always attended with numerous captures, and Willy's
bottle was soon full of active little creatures. Let us see what it
contains. A large beetle is very conspicuous amongst the contents, now
rushing to the top of the water, now sinking to the bottom, scattering
far and wide the tiny water-fleas, and other little creatures by the
strong and rapid movements of his swimming legs. This is the great
water beetle; we will sit down on this clump of poplar tree by the
side of the road, and take the beetle out and examine him; we must
take care he does not bite our fingers as we hold him, for his jaws
are powerful and sharp. Mr. _Dyticus_, for that is his learned
name--from a Greek word which means "fond of diving"--is one of the
most voracious of water-insects, but let us first examine his form.
You see it is well adapted for the kind of life the beetle leads; look
at that long oar-shaped pair of feet, what a broad fringe of hairs
besets them, how admirably fitted they are for swimming; the
wing-covers are smooth and glossy, without any furrows; by this I know
the specimen to be a male, for the wing-covers of the female are
furrowed. The structure of the forefeet is very curious; you observe
its under portion forms a broad circular shield, covered with a number
of sucking-cups, two or three being much larger than the rest; by
means of these sucking-cups the beetle can attach itself securely to
any object it wishes. The wings are large and strong, and situated, as
in all the beetle tribe, under the horny wing-covers. I will put this
bit of stick near his mouth; there, Jack, you see his strong jaws, and
great use he can make of them I can tell you. If Willy were to put one
of these beetles into his aquarium with his favourite sticklebacks, he
would soon have cause to lament the untimely loss of some of them; woe
betide the unfortunate fish or newt that is once caught by the strong
jaws of this fresh-water tyrant! I have seen Mr. Dyticus rush upon a
full-grown newt, and no twistings and writhings could free the victim
from the fatal embrace. They will attack young gold and silver fish,
and Mr. Frank Buckland has told us of the sad havoc these
water-beetles do to young salmon, as witnessed by himself in a pond in
Ireland. The forefeet you see are strong but small; the beetle uses
them as claws in seizing its prey and conveying it to the mouth. A
young and tender fish, you can easily imagine, Mr. Dyticus would very
readily devour, but he will attack beetles as large and even larger
than himself, seizing them on the under side where the head joins the
body, the only soft place in a beetle. Dr. Burmeister, a naturalist
who paid great attention to insects, tells us that he once kept a
beetle related to the great water-beetle, and saw it devour two frogs
in the space of forty hours. After the eggs are laid, which always
takes place in the water, the larvae are hatched in about a fortnight.
In time--I do not know how long--these larvae grow to the size of about
two inches in length, and queer fellows they are, and very voracious
and formidable-looking. Now, Willy, lend me your net, and I dare say
we shall soon secure a specimen. What have we here? how the pond
swarms with water-fleas! Oh! here is a treasure! What can it be? a
long animated thread of glass--we will put it into a bottle by itself
and I will tell you about it afterwards. Splash goes the net again,
but no water-beetle larvae. Never mind; what does the child's songbook
say--

    "If at once you don't succeed,
    Try, try, try again."

[Illustration: GREAT WATER-BEETLE, LARVA AND PUPA.]

A capital little verse to remember, so we will try again; and there
now we are rewarded by the capture of a dyticus larva--a creature with
a long body--in some respects reminding one of a shrimp. Oh! look at
his jaws, how wide he opens them! You see that the last segment of the
body is provided with a long pair of bristly tails, by means of which
the creature can suspend itself at the top of the water. I have often
kept specimens of these larvae in vessels of water and noticed their
predaceous habits; they feed on the larvae of other water insects, but
are not able to destroy fish, not being furnished with jaws or bodies
nearly so strong as the perfect insect itself possesses. When the
larva wishes to turn into its pupa state, it makes a round hole in the
bank of the pond it inhabits, and there undergoes its change, turning
into a full-grown beetle in about three weeks' time. "Papa," said
Willy, "I have often caught beetles that remind me of the great
water-beetle, but they are not so large; what are they?" They belong
to the same family as the great water-beetles, and are called
_Colymbetes_, _Acilius_, _Cybister_; I do not know that they have any
English names. Come, we have dabbled in this pond long enough for the
present, let us proceed on our walk. "Well, but, papa," said May, "you
have not told us what that long worm-like creature is in the separate
bottle; do let us look at it again. Oh! really it is a curious
creature, why it is as transparent as glass, now it jerks itself
about, now it floats without motion in mid-water. What is it?" "I am
inclined to think," said Willy, "judging from its wriggling, jerking
motions that it must be the larva of some kind of gnat." Right again,
my boy, it _is_ the larva of a gnat, and one known to naturalists by
the name of _Corethra_; you see there are eleven divisions or segments
in the body; the head is of strange form, and near the mouth are two
hooked arms which spring from the middle of the forehead and bend down
in front of the mouth; with these weapons the _Corethra_ larva seizes
its prey and crushes it between two rows of sharp spikes placed under
the mouth; after being bruised and mangled by this apparatus the prey
is ready to be swallowed.

[Illustration: CORETHRA LARVA, MAGNIFIED.]

"But what," asked Jack, "are those four curious black bodies; one pair
near the head, the other pair near the tail of the animal?" They are
air-sacs, and are connected with the breathing or respiration of the
larvae. Some have supposed that they serve the same office as the
swimming bladder of certain fish, which being compressed or dilated at
will enables the creature to remain still in mid-water or to rise or
sink in it. After a time the larva changes to a pupa, in which state
it lives without eating for a few days, and then turns into a gnat. We
now proceed on our walk and come to a part of the road which has a
plantation on either side; we see a little active creature crossing
the road and at once recognise a weasel. Let us keep quite still and
silent, and we shall, I dare say, have an opportunity of watching it
for a short time. Just look at him! how nimbly the little creature
runs along; now he stops and raises his head as if listening for
something, now off he starts again; he is evidently hunting, and
probably is on the scent of a young rabbit, rat, or field-mouse. Ah!
see he has caught something on the grass near the hedge; what has he
got in his mouth? it is a small rat, I think; now he throws his
flexible body over it and gives it one or two bites. Now, Jack, run up
and catch him. Ah! he is off like a shot; you must not think to "catch
a weasel asleep." I often see these little animals in my rambles, and
always stop to witness their extraordinary activity. Weasels will
sometimes climb trees and surprise some unfortunate bird on her nest;
they are fond of eggs, and a bird's young brood are very dainty
morsels; they will also eat moles and are sometimes caught in
mole-traps. An excellent observer mentions a case of a mole-trap
having been found many years ago with two weasels in it; they had been
hunting in the mole's runs, had come in opposite directions, and "by a
curious coincidence, must have both sprung the trap at the same
instant." Weasels are generally classed as vermin and killed on all
possible occasions; I think it is often a mistake to destroy them; no
doubt they will occasionally catch a young rabbit or a leveret or suck
a few partridges' eggs, but the common food of the weasel consists of
such small animals as mice, moles, rats, small birds. In wheat or
other grain ricks, they ought to be encouraged, as they enter them
for the sake of the rats and mice they find there. I have been told by
a friend that in some parts of Wales the farmers look upon the weasel
as a friend, in consideration of the destruction it causes to mice and
rats. A gentleman living near Corwen killed a weasel, and expected to
receive the thanks of the farmer on whose land it had been killed; he
was surprised to find that the farmer was by no means grateful. In
this respect I think the Welsh farmers are wiser than the English
ones. Hawks sometimes prey upon weasels.

[Illustration: STOAT AND EGGS.]

Mr. Bell tells a story of a gentleman who was riding over his grounds,
once having seen a kite pounce upon some object on the ground and rise
with it in his talons. "In a few moments the kite began to show signs
of great uneasiness, rising rapidly in the air, or as quickly falling,
and wheeling irregularly round, whilst it was evidently trying to
force some hurtful thing from it with its feet." After a short but
sharp contest the kite fell suddenly to the ground, not far from where
the gentleman was watching the proceeding. On riding up to the spot
"pop goes the weasel," none the worse for his aerial journey, but the
kite was dead, for the weasel had eaten a hole under the wing. The
weasel makes its nest in a bank or in loosely-constructed stone walls;
three or four young ones are generally produced. Some years ago I
remember seeing a mother-weasel and three young playing about on a
bank. It was a most interesting sight. The weasel is much smaller than
the stoat, and you can tell it at once by its tail, which is entirely
red; that of the stoat has a black tip. But it is getting late and we
must hasten home.

[Illustration]




WALK III.

MAY.


To-day we will go and hunt for sticklebacks' nests; as it is calm I
think we shall have very little trouble in finding a few; a calm day
should always be chosen, because to find the nests of these little
fish it is necessary to have very sharp eyes, and to look very
closely, and you know if there is much wind the water is ruffled, and
then it is not easy to see objects in it. Let us start off, then, with
bait-can, canvass-net, and two or three large-mouthed bottles, to that
small, clear, shallow pond in Mr. Jervis's field, and see if we can
bring home a few fish and eggs. "It will be great fun," said Willy,
"and when we have caught the little fish we will bring them home and
put them in my aquarium." There are three species of sticklebacks
found in this country, the three-spined, the ten-spined, and the
fifteen-spined--this last inhabits salt water. All three build nests,
and show great care for their little brood. The nests of the
three-spined species are those most generally known, though I dare
say, if we search carefully in the drains on the moors, we shall be
successful in finding a nest of the ten-spined fellow, or tinker, as
he is sometimes called.

[Illustration: THREE-SPINED STICKLEBACK AND NEST.]

Here we are at the pond, how clear it is, and how beautifully green
are the few patches of star-wort in the water! As the grass is quite
dry we can all sit down so as to get our eyes as near to the water as
possible; never mind a few crawling ants, May; if they bite you, I
shall not feel it. Ah! do you see that little fellow with crimson
breast and eyes like emeralds? He sees us, for look how disturbed he
seems; now he darts away and hides under a weed, but soon returns to
the same spot; it is pretty certain he has a nest close by. I will put
my walking-stick into the water near him. Well, actually, the brave
little fellow is not the least frightened; see, he bunts his nose
against the stick, and is very angry; he is afraid of some danger to
his nest--this makes him so bold. Now I have made out where the nest
is, it is close under him; do you see a few small holes in the mud at
the bottom of the water? No, you don't see anything; well, then, give
me my stick and I will point them out. There now, do you see what I
mean? Yes, you do; that is all right. "Let us get the nest out of the
water," said Jack. Have patience; let us watch what the fish is doing;
see, he is busy fanning away with his tiny fins directly over the
nest. "What is he doing that for?" said Willy. The quick movements of
his fins bring fresh currents of water to the eggs or little fry that
may be within. Ah! did you see that? another fish came near the nest;
how furiously our brave "soldier" charged him; how quickly the
intruder retired! I do not think he will dare to approach so near
again for a long time, for those sharp spines on the under side of the
soldier are like a couple of bayonets and can inflict serious wounds.
Let us leave this nest for a time and try to find some more. Now that
you have once seen a nest, you will not have much difficulty in
finding others. Willy soon found another nest; "just look," he said,
"there are a lot of the tiniest little things close to the nest." Yes,
indeed, so there are; the eggs have hatched, and these are the little
fry; there is Father Stickles quite proud of his numerous family, and
quite ready to fight for them should any enemy be rash enough to
intrude, for you must know that sticklebacks, like many other fish, do
not object to eat the young fry of their neighbours, and if the parent
