cowardly manner without first considering if in any possible manner
he could guard against the danger which menaced him. Fatigued as he
was by the day's ride, he would, under ordinary circumstances, have
fallen asleep quickly; but now anxiety and apprehension kept him
broad awake.

"If I could only rouse Bradley," he said to himself, "I should feel
more comfortable. I don't like the responsibility of deciding what
is best to be done."

His thoughts were interrupted by the sound of low voices below.
Evidently Carter and his wife were conversing, and probably about
them. Anxious to hear what was said, as this might give him a clue
to their plans, Ben rose softly from his low couch, and drew near
the edge of the opening through which he had mounted into the loft.
In this position he was able to hear what was said.

"They must have money," said Carter. "They would need it to get them
out to the mines. Whatever it is, I am bound to have it."

"The man seems strong," replied the wife. "You may not find it an
easy task to master him."

"What can he do?" returned Carter contemptuously. "He is in a dead
sleep. I put enough stuff into his wine to keep him in a stupor for
twelve good hours. If I'm not a match for a sleeping man, I'll go
and hang myself."

"But the boy-he took no wine."

"No; he's one of them temperance sneaks. But he's only a baby. I
could lay him out with one hand."

"Don't harm him, Jack!" said the woman. "I can't help feeling kindly
to him. Our boy, had he lived, would have been about his age. I
can't help thinking of that."

"Don't be silly! Because we had a boy once, mustn't interfere with
business."

"But you won't hurt him, Jack?" pleaded the woman, who, hard as she
seemed, appeared to have a soft side to her nature.

"No; I won't hurt the brat if he behaves himself and doesn't get
bumptious. Likely enough he'll be fast asleep. Boys at his age
generally sleep well."

"In the morning they will discover that they have been robbed. What
will you say to them?"

"Tell them it's none of my business; that I know nothing about it."

"But if the boy is awake, and sees you at work, Jack?"

"Then it will be different. It would have been better for him to
have taken the wine."

"Do you think he suspected anything?"

"No; how could he suspect that the wine was drugged? He is one of
them temperance sneaks, I tell you."

"How soon are you going up, Jack?"

"In half an hour. I want to give the boy time enough to get asleep.
That will make matters easy."

"Don't you think I had better go up, Jack?"

"Why should you? Why should I let a woman do my work?"

"Then I should know the boy would receive no harm."

"Oh, that's it, is it? You make a great fuss about the boy."

"Yes; I can't help thinking about my own boy."

"Oh, drop that! It makes me sick. Wasn't he my boy as well as yours?
I'm sorry he's gone. I could have brought him up to be a help to us
in our business."

"Never, Jack, never!" exclaimed his wife fervently.

"Hello! what's that?"

"I mean that I should have been unwilling to have our son grow up no
better than we are. He, at any rate, should have been a good man."

"What's up now, old woman? You haven't been attending Sunday-school
lately, have you?" demanded Jack, with a sneer.

"I did once, Jack, and I haven't quite forgotten what I learned
there, though it don't look like it now."

"Are you going back on me?" demanded Jack fiercely.

"No, Jack, it's too late for that. I have helped you, and I mean to
help you, but to-night the sight of that boy, and the thought of our
son, who died so long ago, have given me a turn. If it was a man, it
would be different. But you have promised you won't harm him, and no
more need be said."

"Too much has been said already, to my thinkin'," growled Jack.
"However, that's over, and I expect you to help me if I need help."

Ben heard every word that was said, and it confirmed his suspicions.
There was no doubt that an attempt would be made to rob him and his
companion before morning, and the prospect was not pleasant. By
submitting quietly he would come to no harm, and the loss of the
money would not be irreparable. He and Bradley had each started with
a hundred dollars, supplied by Miss Doughlas, and thus far but
little of this sum had been spent. Their employer would doubtless
send them a further supply if they were robbed, but they would be
reluctant to apply to her, since the loss would be partly the result
of their imprudence.

Ben felt that he was in a tight place, and he was not quite certain
what he should or could do.




CHAPTER XVIII.

AN EVENING CALL.


To lie awake in momentary expectation of a hostile attack, from
which there is apparently no escape, is by no means a comfortable
position. The cabin was in the heart of the woods, with no other
dwelling within twenty miles, so far as Ben knew. In fact, if it
were true, as Jack had said, that there were no mines near at hand,
there were probably no neighbors, except, possibly, of Jack's kind.

The question recurred to Ben: Was he willing to surrender his money,
and go forth penniless, or should he attempt to escape or resist?

"If Jake would only wake up!" he thought, surveying, with
perplexity, the recumbent form at his side.

But Jake was as senseless as a log, and the attempt to rouse him
would inevitably attract attention below and precipitate the attack,
besides leaving them utterly penniless.

There was another idea which occurred to our hero: Could he secrete
his own money and Jake's, or the greater part of it, and thus save
it from the clutches of his dishonest host?

If it had been in the form of bank-bills, there might have been some
chance of doing this, but it was not so easy to conceal gold pieces.
While considering this question, Ben rose softly and looked out of
the window. Strictly speaking, there was no window, but a hole about
fifteen inches square, screened by a curtain of coarse cotton cloth.
This Ben moved aside, and looked out.

It was not a very dark night. In the half-light Ben was able to see
a considerable distance. The height of the opening from the ground
was probably not much over twelve feet, as well as the boy could
estimate. There would have been no difficulty in his getting out and
swinging to the ground, but to this move there were two objections:
First, he would be sure to be heard by his enemy below; and,
secondly, he was unwilling to leave Jake in the power of the enemy.

While he was standing at the window he heard the noise of some one
moving below. The heavy step convinced him that it was Jack. He
could not leave his place and lie down without being detected, and
he hastily decided to remain where he was.

In this way he might possibly gain time.

Jack softly stepped from round to round of the ladder, and presently
his head peered above the floor. He started angrily when he saw the
boy at the window.

"What are you about there, boy?" he demanded roughly.

Ben turned, and said composedly: "I am looking out."

"Why are you not in bed and asleep, like your friend?"

"I tried to sleep, sir, but I couldn't."

"Do you expect to get to sleep looking out of that hole?"

"I thought I'd see how light it was."

"Well, I can't have you trampin' round, keepin' the old woman and me
awake. I wouldn't have let you sleep here ef I had known that's the
way you spend the night."

"I beg pardon if I disturbed you," said Ben politely.

"Well, that don't do no good, your apologizin'. Jest lay down and
get to sleep in a hurry, or I'll know the reason why."

"All right, sir," said Ben submissively.

"What's the name of that chap that's with you?" continued Jack.

"It's Jake Bradley."

"He's a sensible man, he is. He lays down and goes to sleep, while
you're trampin' round the room and lookin' out of doors. You won't
see nothin' to pay you."

"I think you're right, sir. I'll lie down and go to sleep."

"You'd better. Me and the old woman can't be kept awake all night."

When Ben had resumed his place on the floor, the intruder descended
the ladder. Though it would have been easy enough to execute his
plan of robbery now, he evidently preferred to wait till both the
travelers should be asleep.

It was not true, as he had said, that he had heard Ben moving about.
In fact, it had been a surprise to him to find the boy up, but this
afforded a convenient and plausible pretext for his intrusion, and
he had availed himself of it.




CHAPTER XIX.

BEN'S MIDNIGHT EXCURSION.


When Jack Carter went downstairs it was his intention to wait from
half an hour to an hour, and then to make another visit to his
lodgers. This would allow time for Ben to fall asleep, and, although
Jack would have had no difficulty in overcoming his resistance, he
preferred to commit the robbery when both the travelers were in a
state of unconsciousness.

But he overestimated his ability to keep awake. Usually he was a
sound sleeper, and during the day preceding he had taken a long walk
across the mountains. The natural result followed. While he was
waiting for Ben to fall asleep, he fell asleep himself. Ben was not
long in ascertaining this welcome fact. A series of noises, not very
musical, announced that Jack was asleep. He had a confirmed habit of
snoring, to which, fortunately, his wife had become accustomed, so
that it did not disturb her rest.

Ben crept near the edge of the loft and looked over. The bed on
which his amiable host reposed was in full view. Both husband and
wife were fast asleep, and their sleep was likely to be protracted.

Under this change of circumstances, what was Ben to do?

This was the question which he anxiously asked himself.

Now there would be no difficulty in escaping, if he saw fit. But
here there was a difficulty. Jake could not be roused, and, if he
could, it would not be very agreeable to lose a night's sleep, for
Ben, as well as his host, felt very sleepy. Yet if he allowed
himself to remain in the loft, the danger of robbery would recur in
the morning, for Jack would be sure to wake earlier than Bradley,
who had been drugged, as Ben was convinced.

Sometimes, in the midst of perplexity, a way of relief is suddenly
opened. A lucky suggestion, sent, perhaps, by an overruling
Providence, provides a path of escape from some menacing evil. This
happened in the present instance.

"Why," thought Ben, "can't I take our money, steal downstairs and
out of the cabin, and hide it in some secure place where we can find
it in the morning? Then I can sleep in security for the remainder of
the night, and my thievish friend will be disappointed."

No sooner did the idea occur to Ben than he prepared to carry it
out.

As has already been said, Bradley had about a hundred dollars in
gold pieces, and Ben as much more. This would have made a very good
haul for Jack, who did not anticipate obtaining so much. It was more
than our young hero felt willing to lose, and he was prepared to run
a large risk in the effort to save it.

The risk, of course, was that he might wake Jack or his wife in
coming downstairs. There would be no difficulty in opening the door,
for it was not fastened in any way. As to the danger of rousing his
entertainers, Ben was not much afraid of waking Jack, for he was
evidently in a sound sleep. His wife was more likely to be
disturbed, and, in that case, Ben was provided with an excuse. He
would say that he was thirsty, and in search of some water, which
would have been true enough, though this was not the main object of
his expedition.

Ben had not taken off his shoes and stockings, and began to descend
the ladder with his shoes on, but it occurred to him that his steps
might be audible, and he quietly removed both shoes and stockings.
He had previously taken Bradley's money, with the exception of a few
dollars, without in the least arousing his sleepy comrade, who, in
consequence of the potion he had unsuspiciously taken, was still
wrapped in unconscious slumber.

"Now," thought Ben, "I must do my work as quickly as I can."

He was not insensible to the risk he ran, and it was not without a
thrill of excitement that he set foot on the floor of the cabin, and
looked at the sleeping faces of Jack Carter and his wife. But there
was no time to waste. He stepped softly to the door and opened it.

Just then the woman stirred in her sleep, and uttered something
unintelligible. Ben was alarmed lest she were about to wake up, and
stood stock-still, with his fingers on the latch. But there was no
further sound. The woman partially turned over, and soon her quiet,
regular breathing notified Ben that sleep had resumed its power over
her. Probably she had stirred in consequence of some uneasy dream.

With a deep breath of relief, Ben opened the door, passed out, and
closed it softly after him.

He was out of the house, and in the freedom of the woods. Before
morning he might have put fifteen miles between him and the cabin of
his foes. He would have felt disposed to do so, and avoid all
further trouble, if Bradley had been with him, and in condition to
travel. As this was not to be thought of, he proceeded to search for
a suitable place to secrete his troublesome treasure.

The cabin stood in a valley, or canon, in the shadow of gigantic
pine-trees, rising straight as a flagpole to the altitude of nearly
two hundred feet. They were forest giants, impressive in their lofty
stature, and Ben regarded them with wonder and awe. They were much
smaller in every way than the so-called big trees to be found in the
Calaveras and Mariposa groves; but these had not at that time been
discovered, and the pines were the largest trees our hero had ever
encountered.

Ben looked about him in vain to find a suitable hiding-place in the
immediate neighborhood of the cabin. If there had been a large flat
rock under which he could have placed the gold pieces, that would
have suited him; but there was absolutely nothing of the kind in
sight.

So Ben wandered away, hardly knowing whither his steps were carrying
him, till he must have been at least a quarter of a mile distant
from the cabin.

Here his attention was attracted by a tree of larger circumference
than any he had seen nearer, which showed the ravages of time. The
bark was partly worn away, and, approaching nearer, Ben saw that it
had begun to decay from within. There was an aperture about a foot
above the ground through which he could readily thrust his hand.

"That's the very thing!" exclaimed Ben, his eyes lighting up with
pleasure. "Nobody would ever think of looking for money there. Here
I can hide our gold, and to-morrow, when we set out on our journey,
we can take this tree on our way."

Ben took from his pockets the gold which belonged to Bradley and
himself, and wrapping them securely in a paper which he happened to
have with him, he thrust the whole into the cavity in the tree.

