
The canoe behaved much better under sail than I had hoped--infinitely
better than the battle-ship Sari had--and we made good progress almost
due west across the gulf, upon the opposite side of which I hoped to
find the mouth of the river of which Juag had told me.

The islander was much interested and impressed by the sail and its
results.  He had not been able to understand exactly what I hoped to
accomplish with it while we were fitting up the boat; but when he saw
the clumsy dugout move steadily through the water without paddles, he
was as delighted as a child.  We made splendid headway on the trip,
coming into sight of land at last.

Juag had been terror-stricken when he had learned that I intended
crossing the ocean, and when we passed out of sight of land he was in a
blue funk.  He said that he had never heard of such a thing before in
his life, and that always he had understood that those who ventured far
from land never returned; for how could they find their way when they
could see no land to steer for?

I tried to explain the compass to him; and though he never really
grasped the scientific explanation of it, yet he did learn to steer by
it quite as well as I. We passed several islands on the
journey--islands which Juag told me were entirely unknown to his own
island folk.  Indeed, our eyes may have been the first ever to rest
upon them.  I should have liked to stop off and explore them, but the
business of empire would brook no unnecessary delays.

I asked Juag how Hooja expected to reach the mouth of the river which
we were in search of if he didn't cross the gulf, and the islander
explained that Hooja would undoubtedly follow the coast around.  For
some time we sailed up the coast searching for the river, and at last
we found it.  So great was it that I thought it must be a mighty gulf
until the mass of driftwood that came out upon the first ebb tide
convinced me that it was the mouth of a river.  There were the trunks
of trees uprooted by the undermining of the river banks, giant
creepers, flowers, grasses, and now and then the body of some land
animal or bird.

I was all excitement to commence our upward journey when there
occurred that which I had never before seen within Pellucidar--a really
terrific wind-storm.  It blew down the river upon us with a ferocity
and suddenness that took our breaths away, and before we could get a
chance to make the shore it became too late.  The best that we could do
was to hold the scud-ding craft before the wind and race along in a
smother of white spume.  Juag was terrified.  If Dian was, she hid it;
for was she not the daughter of a once great chief, the sister of a
king, and the mate of an emperor?

Raja and Ranee were frightened.  The former crawled close to my side
and buried his nose against me.  Finally even fierce Ranee was moved to
seek sympathy from a human being.  She slunk to Dian, pressing close
against her and whimpering, while Dian stroked her shaggy neck and
talked to her as I talked to Raja.

There was nothing for us to do but try to keep the canoe right side up
and straight before the wind.  For what seemed an eternity the tempest
neither increased nor abated.  I judged that we must have blown a
hundred miles before the wind and straight out into an unknown sea!

As suddenly as the wind rose it died again, and when it died it veered
to blow at right angles to its former course in a gentle breeze.  I
asked Juag then what our course was, for he had had the compass last.
It had been on a leather thong about his neck.  When he felt for it,
the expression that came into his eyes told me as plainly as words what
had happened--the compass was lost!  The compass was lost!

And we were out of sight of land without a single celestial body to
guide us! Even the pendent world was not visible from our position!

Our plight seemed hopeless to me, but I dared not let Dian and Juag
guess how utterly dismayed I was; though, as I soon discovered, there
was nothing to be gained by trying to keep the worst from Juag--he knew
it quite as well as I. He had always known, from the legends of his
people, the dangers of the open sea beyond the sight of land.  The
compass, since he had learned its uses from me, had been all that he
had to buoy his hope of eventual salvation from the watery deep.  He
had seen how it had guided me across the water to the very coast that I
desired to reach, and so he had implicit confidence in it.  Now that it
was gone, his confidence had departed, also.

There seemed but one thing to do; that was to keep on sailing straight
before the wind--since we could travel most rapidly along that
course--until we sighted land of some description.  If it chanced to be
the mainland, well and good; if an island--well, we might live upon an
island.  We certainly could not live long in this little boat, with
only a few strips of dried thag and a few quarts of water left.

Quite suddenly a thought occurred to me.  I was surprised that it had
not come before as a solution to our problem.  I turned toward Juag.

"You Pellucidarians are endowed with a wonderful instinct," I reminded
him, "an instinct that points the way straight to your homes, no matter
in what strange land you may find yourself.  Now all we have to do is
let Dian guide us toward Amoz, and we shall come in a short time to the
same coast whence we just were blown."

As I spoke I looked at them with a smile of renewed hope; but there was
no answering smile in their eyes.  It was Dian who enlightened me.

"We could do all this upon land," she said.  "But upon the water that
power is denied us.  I do not know why; but I have always heard that
this is true--that only upon the water may a Pellucidarian be lost.
This is, I think, why we all fear the great ocean so--even those who go
upon its surface in canoes.  Juag has told us that they never go beyond
the sight of land."

We had lowered the sail after the blow while we were discussing the
best course to pursue.  Our little craft had been drifting idly, rising
and falling with the great waves that were now diminishing.  Sometimes
we were upon the crest--again in the hollow.  As Dian ceased speaking
she let her eyes range across the limitless expanse of billowing
waters.  We rose to a great height upon the crest of a mighty wave.  As
we topped it Dian gave an exclamation and pointed astern.

"Boats!" she cried.  "Boats! Many, many boats!"

Juag and I leaped to our feet; but our little craft had now dropped to
the trough, and we could see nothing but walls of water close upon
either hand.  We waited for the next wave to lift us, and when it did
we strained our eyes in the direction that Dian had indicated.  Sure
enough, scarce half a mile away were several boats, and scattered far
and wide behind us as far as we could see were many others! We could
not make them out in the distance or in the brief glimpse that we
caught of them before we were plunged again into the next wave canon;
but they were boats.

And in them must be human beings like ourselves.



CHAPTER XIII

RACING FOR LIFE

At last the sea subsided, and we were able to get a better view of the
armada of small boats in our wake.  There must have been two hundred of
them.  Juag said that he had never seen so many boats before in all his
life.  Where had they come from? Juag was first to hazard a guess.

"Hooja," he said, "was building many boats to carry his warriors to the
great river and up it toward Sari.  He was building them with almost
all his warriors and many slaves upon the Island of Trees.  No one else
in all the history of Pellucidar has ever built so many boats as they
told me Hooja was building.  These must be Hooja's boats."

"And they were blown out to sea by the great storm just as we were,"
suggested Dian.

"There can be no better explanation of them," I agreed.

"What shall we do?" asked Juag.

"Suppose we make sure that they are really Hooja's people," suggested
Dian.  "It may be that they are not, and that if we run away from them
before we learn definitely who they are, we shall be running away from
a chance to live and find the mainland.  They may be a people of whom
we have never even heard, and if so we can ask them to help us--if they
know the way to the mainland."

"Which they will not,' interposed Juag.

"Well," I said, "it can't make our predicament any more trying to wait
until we find out who they are.  They are heading for us now.
Evidently they have spied our sail, and guess that we do not belong to
their fleet."

"They probably want to ask the way to the mainland themselves," said
Juag, who was nothing if not a pessimist.

"If they want to catch us, they can do it if they can paddle faster
than we can sail," I said.  "If we let them come close enough to
discover their identity, and can then sail faster than they can paddle,
we can get away from them anyway, so we might as well wait."

And wait we did.

The sea calmed rapidly, so that by the time the foremost canoe had come
within five hundred yards of us we could see them all plainly.  Every
one was headed for us.  The dugouts, which were of unusual length, were
manned by twenty paddlers, ten to a side.  Besides the paddlers there
were twenty-five or more warriors in each boat.

When the leader was a hundred yards from us Dian called our attention
to the fact that several of her crew were Sagoths.  That convinced us
that the flotilla was indeed Hooja's.  I told Juag to hail them and get
what information he could, while I remained in the bottom of our canoe
as much out of sight as possible.  Dian lay down at full length in the
bottom; I did not want them to see and recognize her if they were in
truth Hooja's people.

"Who are you?" shouted Juag, standing up in the boat and making a
megaphone of his palms.

A figure arose in the bow of the leading canoe--a figure that I was
sure I recognized even before he spoke.

"I am Hooja!" cried the man, in answer to Juag.

For some reason he did not recognize his former prisoner and
slave--possibly because he had so many of them.

"I come from the Island of Trees," he continued.  "A hundred of my
boats were lost in the great storm and all their crews drowned.  Where
is the land? What are you, and what strange thing is that which
flutters from the little tree in the front of your canoe?"

He referred to our sail, flapping idly in the wind.

"We, too, are lost," replied Juag.  "We know not where the land is.  We
are going back to look for it now."

So saying he commenced to scull the canoe's nose before the wind, while
I made fast the primitive sheets that held our crude sail.  We thought
it time to be going.

There wasn't much wind at the time, and the heavy, lumbering dugout was
slow in getting under way.  I thought it never would gain any momentum.
And all the while Hooja's canoe was drawing rapidly nearer, propelled
by the strong arms of his twenty paddlers.  Of course, their dugout was
much larger than ours, and, consequently, infinitely heavier and more
cumbersome; nevertheless, it was coming along at quite a clip, and ours
was yet but barely moving.  Dian and I remained out of sight as much as
possible, for the two craft were now well within bow-shot of one
another, and I knew that Hooja had archers.

Hooja called to Juag to stop when he saw that our craft was moving.  He
was much interested in the sail, and not a little awed, as I could tell
by his shouted remarks and questions.  Raising my head, I saw him
plainly.  He would have made an excellent target for one of my guns,
and I had never been sorrier that I had lost them.

We were now picking up speed a trifle, and he was not gaining upon us
so fast as at first.  In consequence, his requests that we stop
suddenly changed to commands as he became aware that we were trying to
escape him.

"Come back!" he shouted.  "Come back, or I'll fire!"

I use the word fire because it more nearly translates into English the
Pellucidarian word trag, which covers the launching of any deadly
missile.

But Juag only seized his paddle more tightly--the paddle that answered
the purpose of rudder, and commenced to assist the wind by vigorous
strokes.  Then Hooja gave the command to some of his archers to fire
upon us.  I couldn't lie hidden in the bottom of the boat, leaving Juag
alone exposed to the deadly shafts, so I arose and, seizing another
paddle, set to work to help him.  Dian joined me, though I did my best
to persuade her to remain sheltered; but being a woman, she must have
her own way.

The instant that Hooja saw us he recognized us.  The whoop of triumph
he raised indicated how certain he was that we were about to fall into
his hands.  A shower of arrows fell about us.  Then Hooja caused his
men to cease firing--he wanted us alive.  None of the missiles struck
us, for Hooja's archers were not nearly the marksmen that are my
Sarians and Amozites.

We had now gained sufficient headway to hold our own on about even
terms with Hooja's paddlers.  We did not seem to be gaining, though;
and neither did they.  How long this nerve-racking experience lasted I
cannot guess, though we had pretty nearly finished our meager supply of
provisions when the wind picked up a bit and we commenced to draw away.

Not once yet had we sighted land, nor could I understand it, since so
many of the seas I had seen before were thickly dotted with islands.
Our plight was anything but pleasant, yet I think that Hooja and his
forces were even worse off than we, for they had no food nor water at
all.

Far out behind us in a long line that curved upward in the distance, to
be lost in the haze, strung Hooja's two hundred boats.  But one would
have been enough to have taken us could it have come alongside.  We had
drawn some fifty yards ahead of Hooja--there had been times when we
were scarce ten yards in advance-and were feeling considerably safer
from capture.  Hooja's men, working in relays, were commencing to show
the effects of the strain under which they had been forced to work
without food or water, and I think their weakening aided us almost as
much as the slight freshening of the wind.

Hooja must have commenced to realize that he was going to lose us, for
he again gave orders that we be fired upon.  Volley after volley of
arrows struck about us. The distance was so great by this time that
most of the arrows fell short, while those that reached us were
sufficiently spent to allow us to ward them off with our paddles.
However, it was a most exciting ordeal.

Hooja stood in the bow of his boat, alternately urging his men to
greater speed and shouting epithets at me.  But we continued to draw
away from him.  At last the wind rose to a fair gale, and we simply
raced away from our pursuers as if they were standing still.  Juag was
so tickled that he forgot all about his hunger and thirst.  I think
that he had never been entirely reconciled to the heathenish invention
which I called a sail, and that down in the bottom of his heart he
believed that the paddlers would eventually overhaul us; but now he
couldn't praise it enough.

We had a strong gale for a considerable time, and eventually dropped
Hooja's fleet so far astern that we could no longer discern them.  And
then--ah, I shall never forget that moment--Dian sprang to her feet
with a cry of "Land!"

Sure enough, dead ahead, a long, low coast stretched across our bow.
It was still a long way off, and we couldn't make out whether it was
island or mainland; but at least it was land.  If ever shipwrecked
mariners were grateful, we were then.  Raja and Ranee were commencing
to suffer for lack of food, and I could swear that the latter often
cast hungry glances upon us, though I am equally sure that no such
hideous thoughts ever entered the head of her mate.  We watched them
both most closely, however.  Once while stroking Ranee I managed to get
a rope around her neck and make her fast to the side of the boat.  Then
I felt a bit safer for Dian.  It was pretty close quarters in that
little dugout for three human beings and two practically wild,
man-eating dogs; but we had to make the best of it, since I would not
listen to Juag's suggestion that we kill and eat Raja and Ranee.

We made good time to within a few miles of the shore.  Then the wind
died suddenly out.  We were all of us keyed up to such a pitch of
anticipation that the blow was doubly hard to bear.  And it was a blow,
too, since we could not tell in what quarter the wind might rise again;
but Juag and I set to work to paddle the remaining distance.

Almost immediately the wind rose again from precisely the opposite
direction from which it had formerly blown, so that it was mighty hard
work making progress against it.  Next it veered again so that we had
to turn and run with it parallel to the coast to keep from being
swamped in the trough of the seas.

And while we were suffering all these disappointments Hooja's fleet
appeared in the distance!

They evidently had gone far to the left of our course, for they were
now almost behind us as we ran parallel to the coast; but we were not
much afraid of being overtaken in the wind that was blowing.  The gale
kept on increasing, but it was fitful, swooping down upon us in great
gusts and then going almost calm for an instant.  It was after one of
