not occur, as in Scotland, this convolvulus is seldom found wild;
whereas in Italy Delpino tells of catching numbers of the moths
in hedges overgrown with the common plant, by standing with thumb
and forefinger over a flower, ready to close it when the insect
has entered. We know that every floral clock is regulated by the
hours of flight of its insect friends. When they have retired,
the flowers close to protect nectar and pollen from useless
pilferers. In this country various species of bees chiefly
fertilize the bindweed blossoms. Guided by the white streaks, or
pathfinders, they crawl into the deep tube and sip through one of
the five narrow passages leading to the nectary. A transverse
section of the flower cut to show these five passages standing in
a circle around the central ovary looks like the end of a
five-barreled revolver. Insects without a suitably long proboscis
are, of course, excluded by this arrangement.

>From July until hard frost look for that exquisite little beetle,
Cassida aurichalcea, like a drop of molten gold, clinging beneath
the bindweed's leaves. The small perforations reveal his hiding
places. "But you must be quick if you would capture him," says
William Hamilton Gibson, "for he is off in a spangling streak of
glitter. Nor is this golden sheen all the resource of the little
insect; for in the space of a few seconds, as you hold him in
your hand, he has become a milky, iridescent opal, and now
mother-of-pearl, and finally crawls before you in a coat of dull
orange." A dead beetle loses all this wonderful luster. Even on
the morning-glory in our gardens we may sometimes find these
jeweled mites, or their fork-tailed, black larvae, or the tiny
chrysalids suspended by their tails, although it is the wild
bindweed that is ever their favorite abiding place.

The small FIELD BINDWEED (C. arvensis), a common immigrant from
Europe, which has taken up its abode from Nova Scotia and Ontario
southward to New Jersey, and westward to Kansas, trails over the
ground with a deathless persistency which fills farmers with
dismay. It is like a small edition of the hedge bind weed, only
its calyx lacks the leaf-like bracts at its base, its slender
stem rarely exceeds two feet in length, and the little pink and
white flowers often grow in pairs. Their habit of closing both in
the evening and in rainy weather indicates that they are adapted
for diurnal insects only; but if the bell hang down, or if the
corolla drop off, the pollen must fall on the stigma and effect
self-fertilization. Many more insects visit this flower than the
large bindweed, attracted by the peculiar fragrance, and led by
the white streaks to the orange-colored under surface of the
ovary, where the nectar lies concealed. Stigmas and anthers
mature at the same time; but as the former are slightly the
longer, they receive pollen brought from another flower before
the visitor gets freshly dusted.


GROUND OR MOSS PINK
  (Phlox subulata)  Phlox family

Flowers - Very numerous, small, deep purplish pink, lavender or
rose, varying to white, with a darker eye, growing in simple
cymes, or solitary in a Western variety. Calyx with 5 slender
teeth; corolla salver-form with 5 spreading lobes; 5 stamens
inserted on corolla tube; style 3-lobed. Stems: Rarely exceeding
6 in. in height, tufted like mats, much branched, plentifully set
with awl-shaped, evergreen leaves barely 1/2 in. long, growing in
tufts at joints of stem.
Preferred Habitat - Rocky ground, hillsides.
Flowering Season - April-June
Distribution - Southern New York to Florida, westward to Michigan
and Kentucky.

A charming little plant, growing in dense evergreen mats with
which Nature carpets dry, sandy, and rocky hillsides, is often
completely hidden beneath its wealth of flowers. Far beyond its
natural range, as well as within it, the moss pink glows in
gardens, cemeteries and parks, wherever there are rocks to
conceal or sterile wastes to beautify. Very slight encouragement
induces it to run wild. There are great rocks in Central Park,
New York, worth travelling miles to see in early May, when their
stern faces are flushed and smiling with these blossoms.

Another low ground species is the CRAWLING PHLOX (P. reptans). It
rarely exceeds six inches in height; nevertheless its larger
pink, purple, or white flowers, clustered after the manner of the
tall garden phloxes, are among the most showy to be found in the
spring woods. A number of sterile shoots with obovate leaves,
tapering toward the base, rise from the runners and set off the
brilliant blossoms among their neat foliage. From Pennsylvania
southward and westward is its range, especially in mountainous
regions; but this plant, too, was long ago transplanted from
Nature's gardens into man's.

Large patches of the DOWNY PHLOX (P. pilosa) brighten dry prairie
land with its pinkish blossoms in late spring. Britton and
Brown's botany gives its range as "Ontario to Manitoba, New
Jersey, Florida, Arkansas, and Texas." The plant does its best to
attain a height of two feet; usually its flowers are much nearer
the ground. Butterflies, the principal visitors of most phloxes,
although long-tongued bees and even flies can sip their nectar,
are ever seen hovering above them and transferring pollen,
although in this species the style is so short pollen must often
fall into the tube and self-fertilize the stigma. To protect the
flowers from useless crawling visitors, the calices are coated
with sticky matter, and the stems are downy.


OBEDIENT PLANT; FALSE DRAGONHEAD; LION'S HEART
  (Physostegia Virginiana)  Mint family

Flowers - Pale magenta, purplish rose, or flesh-colored, often
variegated with white, 1 in. long or over, in dense spikes from 4
to 8 in. long. Calyx a 5-toothed oblong bell, swollen and
remaining open in fruit, held up by lance-shaped bracts. Corolla
tubular and much enlarged where it divides into 2 lips, the upper
lip concave, rounded, entire, the lower lip 3 lobed. Stamens 4,
in two pairs under roof of upper lip, the filaments hairy; 1
pistil. Stem: 1 to 4 ft. high, simple or branched above, leafy.
Leaves: Opposite, firm, oblong to oblong-lanceolate, narrowing at
base, deeply saw-edged.
Preferred Habitat - Moist soil.
Flowering Season - July-September.
Distribution - Quebec to the Northwest Territory, southward to
the Gulf of Mexico as far west as Texas.

Bright patches of this curious flower enliven railroad ditches,
gutters, moist meadows and brooksides - curious, for it has the
peculiarity of remaining in any position in which it is placed.
With one puff a child can easily blow the blossoms to the
opposite side of the spike, there to stay in meek obedience to
his will. "The flowers are made to assume their definite
position," says Professor W. W. Bailey in the "Botanical
Gazette," "by friction of the pedicels against the subtending
bracts. Remove the bracts, and they at once fall limp."

Qf course the plant has some better reason for this peculiar
obedience to every breath that blows than to amuse windy-cheeked
boys and girls. Is not the ready movement useful during stormy
weather in turning the mouth of the flower away from driving
rain, and in fair days, when insects are abroad, in presenting
its gaping lips where they can best alight? We all know that
insects, like birds, make long flights most easily with the wind,
but in rising and alighting it is their practice to turn against
it. When bees, for example, are out for food on windy days, and
must make frequent stops for refreshment among the flowers, they
will be found going against the wind, possibly to catch the
whiffs of fragrance borne on it that guide them to feast, but
more likely that they may rise and alight readily. One always
sees bumblebees conspicuous among the obedient plant's visitors.
After the anthers have shed their pollen - and tiny teeth at the
edges of the outer pair aid its complete removal by insects - the
stigma comes up to occupy their place under the roof. Certainly
this flower; which is so ill-adapted to fertilize itself, has
every reason to court insect messengers in fair and stormy
'weather.


MOTHERWORT
  (Leonurus Cardiaca)  Mint family.

Flowers - Dull purple pink, pale purple, or white, small,
clustered in axils of upper leaves. Calyx tubular, bell-shaped,
with 5 rigid awl-like teeth; corolla 2-lipped, upper lip arched,
woolly without; lower lip 3-lobed, spreading, mottled; the tube
with oblique ring of hairs inside. Four twin-like stamens,
anterior pair longer, reaching under upper lip; style 2-cleft at
summit. Stem: 2 to 5 ft. tall, straight, branched, leafy,
purplish. Leaves: Opposite, on slender petioles; lower ones
rounded, 2 to 4 in. broad, palmately cut into 2 to 5 lobes; upper
leaves narrower, 3-cleft or 3- toothed.
Preferred Habitat - Waste places near dwellings.
Flowering Season - June-September.
Distribution - Nova Scotia southward to North Carolina, west to
Minnesota and Nebraska. Naturalized from Europe and Asia.

"One is tempted to say that the most human plants, after all, are
the weeds," says John Burroughs. "How they cling to man and
follow him around the world, and spring up wherever he sets foot
How they crowd around his barns and dwellings, and throng his
garden, and jostle and override each other in their strife to be
near him! Some of them are so domestic and familiar, and so
harmless withal, that one comes to regard them with positive
affection. Motherwort, catnip, plantain, tansy, wild mustard -
what a homely, human look they have! They are an integral part of
every old homestead. Your smart, new place will wait long before
they draw near it."

How the bees love this generous, old-fashioned entertainer! One
nearly always sees them clinging to the close whorls of flowers
that are strung along the stem, and of course transferring
pollen, in recompense, as they journey on. A more credulous
generation imported the plant for its alleged healing virtues.
What is the significance of its Greek name, meaning a lion's
tail? Let no one suggest, by a far-stretched metaphor, that our
grandmothers, in Revolutionary days, enjoyed pulling it to vent
their animosity against the British.


WILD BERGAMOT
  (Monarda fisiulosa)  Mint family

Flowers - Extremely variable, purplish, lavender, magenta, rose,
pink, yellowish pink, or whitish, dotted; clustered in a
solitary, nearly flat terminal head. Calyx tubular, narrow,
5-toothed, very hairy within. Corolla 1 to 1 1/2 in. long,
tubular, 2-lipped, upper lip erect, toothed; lower lip spreading,
3-lobed, middle lobe longest; 2 anther-bearing stamens
protruding; 1 pistil; the style 2-lobed. Stem: 2 to 3 ft. high,
rough, branched. Leaves: Opposite, lance-shaped, saw-edged, on
slender petioles, aromatic, bracts and upper leaves whitish or
the color of flower.
Preferred Habitat - Open woods, thickets, dry rocky hills.
Flowering Season - June-September.
Distribution - Eastern Canada and Maine, westward to Minnesota,
south to Gulf of Mexico.

Half a dozen different shades of bloom worn by this handsome,
robust perennial afford an excellent illustration of the trials
that beset one who would arbitrarily group flowers according to
color. If the capricious blossom shows a decided preference for
any shade, it is for magenta, the royal purple of the ancients,
scarcely tolerated now except by Hoboken Dutch and the belles of
the kitchen, whose Sunday hats are resplendent with intense
effects.

Only a few bergamot flowers open at a time; the rest of the
slightly rounded head, thickly set with hairy calices, looks as
if it might be placed in a glass cup and make an excellent pen
wiper. If the cultivated human eye (and stomach) revolt at
magenta, It is ever a favorite shade with butterflies. They
flutter in ecstasy over the gay flowers; indeed, they are the
principal visitors and benefactors, for the erect corollas,
exposed organs, and level-topped heads are well adapted to their
requirements. That exquisite little feathered jewel, the
ruby-throated hummingbird, flashes about the bright patches an
instant, and is gone; but he too has paid for his feast in
transferring pollen. Insects which land anywhere they please on
the flowers, receive pollen on various places, just as in the
case of the scarlet Oswego tea, of similar formation. Small bees,
which if unable to drain the brimming tubes of nectar, at least
sip from them and help themselves to pollen also, without paying
the flower's price; and certain mischievous wasps, forever bent
on nipping holes in tubes they cannot honestly drain, give a
score of other pilferers an opportunity to steal sweets.


SNAKE-HEAD; TURTLE-HEAD; BALMONY; SHELL-FLOWER; COD-HEAD
  (Chelone glabra)  Figwort family

Flowers - White tinged with pink, or all white, about 1 in. long,
growing in a dense terminal cluster. Calyx 5-parted, bracted at
base; corolla irregular, broadly tubular, 2-lipped; upper lip
arched, swollen, slightly notched; lower lip 3-lobed, spreading,
woolly within; 5 stamens, sterile, 4 in pairs, anther-bearing,
woolly; 1 pistil. Stem: 1 to 3 ft. high, erect, smooth, simple,
leafy. Leaves: Opposite, lance-shaped, saw-edged.
Preferred Habitat - Ditches, beside streams, swamps.
Flowering Season - July-September.
Distribution - Newfoundland to Florida, and half way across the
continent.

It requires something of a struggle for even so strong and
vigorous an insect as the bumblebee to gain admission to this
inhospitable-looking flower before maturity; and even he abandons
the attempt over and over again in its earliest stage before the
little heart-shaped anthers are prepared to dust him over. As
they mature, it opens slightly, but his weight alone is
insufficient to bend down the stiff, yet elastic, lower lip.
Energetic prying admits first his head, then he squeezes his body
through, brushing past the stamens as he finally disappears
inside. At the moment when he is forcing his way in, causing the
lower lip to spring up and down, the eyeless turtle seems to chew
and chew until the most sedate beholder must smile at the
paradoxical show. Of course it is the bee that is feeding, though
the flower would seem to be masticating the bee with the keenest
relish The counterfeit tortoise soon disgorges its lively
mouthful, however, and away flies the bee, carrying pollen on his
velvety back to rub on the stigma of an older flower. After the
anthers have shed their pollen and become effete, the stigma
matures, and occupies their place. By this time the flower
presents a wider entrance, and as the moisture-loving plant keeps
the nectaries abundantly filled, what is to prevent insects too
small to come in contact with anthers and stigma in the roof from
pilfering to their heart's content? The woolly throat discourages
many, to be sure; but the turtle-head, like its cousins the
beard-tongues, has a sterile fifth stamen, whose greatest use is
to act as a drop-bar across the base of the flower. The
long-tongued bumblebee can get his drink over the bar, but
smaller, unwelcome visitors are literally barred out.

If bees are the preferred visitors of the turtle-head, why do we
find the Baltimore butterfly, that very beautiful, but freaky,
creature (Melitaea phaeton) hovering near? - that is, when we
find it at all; for where it is present, it swarms, and keeps
away from other localities altogether. On the under side of the
leaves we shall often see patches of its crimson eggs. Later the
caterpillars use the plant as their main, if not exclusive, food
store. They are the innocent culprits which nine times out of ten
mutilate the foliage.


LARGE PURPLE GERARDIA
  (Gerardia purpurea)  Figwort family

Flowers - Bright purplish pink, deep magenta, or pale to whitish,
about 1 in. long and broad, growing along the rigid, spreading
branches. Calyx 5-toothed; corolla funnel-form, the tube much
inflated above and spreading into 5 unequal, rounded lobes,
spotted within, or sometimes downy; 4 stamens in pairs, the
filaments hairy; 1 pistil. Stem: 1 to 2 1/2 ft. high, slender,
branches erect or spreading. Leaves: Opposite, very narrow, 1 to
1 1/2 in. long.
Preferred Habitat - Low fields and meadows; moist, sandy soil.
Flowering Season - August-October.
Distribution - Northern United States to Florida, chiefly along
Atlantic coast.

Low-lying meadows gay with gerardias were never seen by that
quaint old botanist and surgeon, John Gerarde, author of the
famous "Herball or General Historie of Plants," a folio of nearly
fourteen hundred pages, published in London toward the close of
Queen Elizabeth's reign. He died without knowing how much he was
to be honored by Linnaeus in giving his name to this charming
American genus.

Large patches of the lavender-pink gerardia, peeping above the
grass, make the wayfarer pause to feast his eyes, while the
practical bee, meanwhile, takes a more substantial meal within
the spreading funnels. It is his practice to hang upside down
while sucking, using the hairs on the filaments as footholds.
Naturally he receives the pollen on his underside - just where it
will be rubbed off against the stigma impeding his entrance to
the next funnel visited. Any of the very dry pollen that may have
fallen on the hairy filaments drops upon him.

    "And 'tis my faith that every flower
     Enjoys the air it breathes,"

chanted Wordsworth. It is a special pity to gather the gerardias,
which, as they grow, seem to enjoy life to the full, and when
picked, to be so miserable they turn black as they dry. Like
their relatives the foxgloves, they are difficult to transplant,
because it is said they are more or less parasitic, fastening
their roots on those of other plants. When robbery becomes
flagrant, Nature brands sinners in the vegetable kingdom by
taking away their color, and perhaps their leaves, as in the case
of the broom-rape and Indian pipe; but the fair faces of the
gerardias and foxgloves give no hint of the petty thefts
committed under cover of darkness in the soil below.

The SMALL-FLOWERED GERARDIA (G. Paupercula) so like the preceding
species it was once thought to be a mere variety, ranges westward
as far as Wisconsin, especially about the Great Lakes. But it is
a lower plant, with more erect branches, smaller flowers, quite
woolly within, and with a decided preference for bogs as well as
low meadows.

In salt marshes along the Atlantic Coast and the Gulf of Mexico,
from Maine to Louisiana, the SEA-SIDE GERARDIA (G. maritima)
flowers in midsummer, or a few weeks ahead of the autumnal,
upland species. The plant, which rarely exceeds a foot in height,
is sometimes only four inches above ground; and although at the
North the paler magenta blossoms are only about half the length
of the purple gerardias, in the South they are sometimes quite as
long.

In dry woods and thickets, on banks and hills from Quebec to
Georgia, and westward to the Mississippi we find the SLENDER
GERARDIA (G. tenuifolia), its pale magenta, spotted, compressed
corolla about half an inch long; its very slender, low stem set
with exceedingly narrow leaves.


TWIN-FLOWER; GROUND VINE
  (Linnaea borealis)  Honeysuckle family

Flowers - Delicate pink or white tinged with rose, bell-shaped,
about 1/2 in. long, fragrant, nodding in pairs on slender, curved
pedicels from an erect peduncle, 2-bracted where they join. Calyx
5-toothed, sticky; corolla 5-lobed, bell-shaped, hairy within; 4
stamens in pairs inserted near base of tube; 1 pistil. Stem:
Trailing, 6 in. to 2 ft. long; the branches erect. Leaves:
Opposite, rounded, petioled, evergreen.
Preferred Habitat - Deep, cool, mossy woods.
Flowering Season - May-July.
Distribution - Northern parts of America, Europe, and Asia. In
the United States southward as far as the mountains of Maryland,
and the Sierra Nevadas in California.

With the consent of modest Linnaeus himself, Dr. Gronovius
selected this typical woodland blossom to transmit the great
master's flame to posterity -

    "Monument of the man of flowers."

But small and shy as it is, does Nature's garden contain a
lovelier sight than scores of these deliciously fragrant pink
bells swaying above a carpet of the little evergreen leaves in
the dim aisle of some deep, cool, lonely forest? Trailing over
prostrate logs and mossy rocks, racing with the partridge vine
among the ferns and dwarf cornels, the plant sends up "twin-born
heads" that seem more fair and sweet than the most showy pampered
darlings of the millionaire's conservatory. Little wonder that
Linnaeus loved these little twin sisters, or that Emerson
enshrined them in his verse.

Contrary to popular impression, this vine, that suggests the dim
old forest and exhales the very breath of the spring woods, will
consent to run about our rock gardens, although it seems almost a
sacrilege to move it from natural surroundings so impressively
beautiful. Unlike the arbutus, which remains ever a wildling,
pining slowly to death on close contact with civilization, the
twin-flower thrives in light, moist garden soil where the sun
peeps for a little while only in the morning. By nodding its head
the flower protects its precious contents from rain, the hairs
inside exclude small pilferers; but bees, attracted by the
fragrance and color, are guided to the nectary by five dark lines
and a patch of orange color near it.


JOE-PYE WEED; TRUMPET WEED; PURPLE THOROUGHWORT; GRAVEL or
KIDNEY-ROOT; TALL or PURPLE BONESET
  (Eupatorium purpureum)  Thistle family

Flower-heads - Pale or dull magenta or lavender pink, slightly
fragrant, of tubular florets only, very numerous, in large,
terminal, loose, compound clusters, generally elongated. Several
series of pink overlapping bracts form the oblong involucre from
which the tubular floret and its protruding fringe of
style-branches arise. Stem: 3 to 10 ft. high, green or purplish,
leafy, usually branching toward top. Leaves: In whorls of 3 to 6
(usually 4), oval to lance-shaped, saw-edged, petioled, thin,
rough.
Preferred Habitat - Moist soil, meadows, woods, low ground.
Flowering Season - August-September.
Distribution - New Brunswick to the Gulf of Mexico, westward to
Manitoba and Texas.

Towering above the surrounding vegetation of low-lying meadows,
this vigorous composite spreads clusters of soft, fringy bloom
that, however deep or pale of tint, are ever conspicuous
advertisements, even when the goldenrods, sunflowers, and asters
enter into close competition for insect trade. Slight fragrance,
which to the delicate perception of butterflies is doubtless
heavy enough, the florets' color and slender tubular form
indicate an adaptation to them, and they are by far the most
abundant visitors, which is not to say that long-tongued bees and
flies never reach the nectar and transfer pollen, for they do.
But an excellent place for the butterfly collector to carry his
net is to a patch of Joe-Pye weed in September. As the spreading
style-branches that fringe each tiny floret are furnished with
hairs for three-quarters of their length, the pollen caught in
them comes in contact with the alighting visitor. Later, the
lower portion of the style-branches, that is covered with
stigmatic papillae along the edge, emerges from the tube to
receive pollen carried from younger flowers when the visitor sips
his reward. If the hairs still contain pollen when the stigmatic
part of the style is exposed, insects self-fertilize the flower;
and if in stormy, weather no insects are flying, the flower is
nevertheless able to fertilize itself, because the hairy fringe
must often come in contact with the stigmas of neighboring
florets. It is only when we study flowers with reference to their
motives and methods that we understand why one is abundant and
another rare. Composites long ago utilized many principles of
success in life that the triumphant Anglo-Saxon carries into
larger affairs today.

Joe-Pye, an Indian medicine-man of New England, earned fame and
fortune by curing typhus fever and other horrors with decoctions
made from this plant.


COMMON BURDOCK; COCKLE-BUR; BEGGARS BUTTONS; CLOT-BUR; CUCKOO
BUTTON
  (Arctium minus; Lappa officinalis: var. minor of Gray)  Thistle
family

Flower-heads - Composite of tubular florets only, about 1/2 in.
broad; magenta varying to purplish or white; the prominent round
involucre of many overlapping leathery bracts, tipped with hooked
bristles. Stem: 2 to 5 ft. high, simple or branching, coarse.
Leaves: Large, the lower ones often 1 ft. long, broadly ovate,
entire edged, pale or loosely cottony beneath, on hollow
petioles.
Preferred Habitat - Waste ground, waysides, fields, barnyards.
Flowering Season - July-October.
Distribution - Common throughout our area. Naturalized from
Europe.

A larger burdock than this (A. Lappa) may be more common in a few
localities of the East, but wherever one wanders, this plebeian
boldly asserts itself. In close-cropped pastures it still
flourishes with the well-armed thistles and mulleins, for the
great leaves contain an exceedingly bitter, sour juice,
distasteful to grazers. Nevertheless the unpaid cattle, like
every other beast and man, must nolens volens transplant the burs
far away from the parent plant to found new colonies. Literally
by hook or by crook they steal a ride on every switching tail,
every hairy dog and woolly sheep, every trouser-leg or petticoat.
Even the children, who make dolls and baskets of burdock burs,
aid them in their insatiate love of travel. Wherever man goes,
they follow, until, having crossed Europe - with the Romans? -
they are now at home throughout this continent. Their vitality is
amazing; persecution with scythe and plow may retard, but never
check their victorious march. Opportunity for a seed to germinate
may not come until late in the summer; but at once the plant sets
to work putting forth flowers and maturing seed, losing no time
in developing superfluous stalk and branches. Butterflies, which,
like the Hoboken Dutch, ever delight in magenta, and bees of
various kinds, find these flowers, with a slight fragrance as an
additional attraction, generous entertainers.

Pink, of all colors, is the most unstable in our flora, and the
most likely to fade. Magentas incline to purple, on the one hand,
or to pure pink on the other, and delicate shades quickly blanch
when long exposed to the sun's rays. Thus we frequently find
white blossoms of the once pink rhododendron, laurel, azalea,
bouncing Bet, and turtle-head. Albinos, too, regularly occur in
numerous species. Many colored flowers show a tendency among
individuals to revert to the white type of their ancestors. The
reader should bear these facts in mind, and search for his
unidentified flower in the previous section or in the following
one if this group does not contain it.



WHITE AND GREENISH FLOWERS

"The transition from wind-fertilization to insect-fertilization
and the first traces of adaptation to insects, could only be due
to the influence of quite short-lipped insects with feebly
developed color sense. The most primitive flowers are therefore
for the most part simple, widely open, regular, devoid of nectar
or with their nectar unconcealed and easily accessible, and
greenish, white, or yellow in color.... Lepidoptera, by the
thinness, sometimes by the length, of their tongues, were able to
produce special modifications. Through their agency were
developed flowers with long and narrow tubes, whose colors and
time of opening were in relation to the tastes and habits of
their visitors." - Hermann Muller.

"Of all colors, white is the prevailing one; and of white flowers
a considerably larger proportion smell sweetly than of any other
color, namely, 14.6 per cent; of red only 8.2 per cent are
odoriferous. The fact of a large proportion of white flowers
smelling sweetly may depend in part on those which are fertilized
by moths requiring the double aid of conspicuousness in the dusk
and of odor. So great is the economy of Nature, that most flowers
which are fertilized by crepuscular or nocturnal insects emit
their odor chiefly or exclusively in the evening." - Charles
Darwin.


WATER-PLANTAIN
  (Alisma Plantago-aquatica)  Water-plantain family

Flowers - Very small and numerous, white, or pale pink, whorled
in bracted clusters forming a large, loose panicle 6 to 15 in.
long on a usually solitary scape 1/2 to 3 ft. high. Calyx of 3
sepals corolla of 3 deciduous petals; 6 or more stamens; many
carpels in a ring on a small flat receptacle. Leaves: Erect or
floating, oblong or ovate, with several ribs, or lance-shaped or
grass-like, petioled, all from root.
Perferred Habitat - Shallow water, mud, marshes.
Flowering Season - June-September.
Distribution - North America, Europe, Asia.

Unlike its far more showy, decorative cousin the arrow-head, this
wee-blossomed plant, whose misty white panicles rise with
compensating generosity the world around, bears only perfect,
regular flowers. Twelve infinitesimal drops of nectar, secreted
in a fleshy ring around the center, are eagerly sought by flies.
As the anthers point obliquely outward and away from the stigmas,
an incoming fly, bearing pollen on his under side, usually
alights in the center, and leaves some of the vitalizing dust
just where it is most needed. But a "fly starting from a petal,"
says Muller, "usually applies its tongue to the nectar-drops one
by one, and after each it strokes an anther with its labellae; in
so doing it may bring various parts of its body in contact with
the anthers. As a rule, however, the parts which come in contact
with the anthers are not those which come in contact with the
stigmas in the same flower." Any plant that lives in shallow
water, which may dry up as summer advances, is under special
necessity to produce an extra quantity of cross-fertilized seed
to guard against extinction during drought. For the same reason
it bears several kinds of leaves adapted to its environment:
broad ones that spread their surfaces to the sunshine, and long
grass-like ones to glide through currents of water that would
tear those of any other shape. What diversity of leaf-form and
structure we meet daily, and yet how very little does the wisest
man of science understand of the reasons underlying such
marvellous adaptability!


BROAD-LEAVED ARROWHEAD
  (Sagittaria latifolia; S. variabilis of Gray)  Water-plantain
family

Flowers - White, 1 to 1 1/2 in. wide, in 3-bracted whorls of 3,
borne near the summit of a leafless scape 4 in. to 4 ft. tall.
Calyx of 3 sepals corolla of 3 rounded, spreading petals. Stamens
and pistils numerous, the former yellow in upper flowers usually
absent or imperfect in lower pistillate flowers. Leaves:
Exceedingly variable; those under water usually long and
grasslike; upper ones sharply arrow-shaped or blunt and broad,
spongy or leathery, on long petioles.
Preferred Habitat - Shallow water and mud.
Flowering Season - July-September.
Distribution - From Mexico northward throughout our area to the
circumpolar regions.

Wading into shallow water or standing on some muddy shore, like a
heron, this striking plant, so often found in that bird's haunts,
is quite as decorative in a picture, and, happily, far more
approachable in life. Indeed, one of the comforts of botany as
compared with bird study is that we may get close enough to the
flowers to observe their last detail, whereas the bird we have
followed laboriously over hill and dale, through briers and
swamps, darts away beyond the range of field-glasses with
tantalizing swiftness.

While no single plant is yet thoroughly known to scientists, in
spite of the years of study devoted by specialists to separate
groups, no plant remains wholly meaningless. When Keppler
discovered the majestic order of movement of the heavenly bodies,
he exclaimed, "Oh God, I think Thy thoughts after Thee!" - the
expression of a discipleship every reverent soul must be
conscious of in penetrating, be it ever so little a way, into the
inner meaning of the humblest wayside weed.

Fragile, delicate, pure white, golden-centered flowers of the
arrowhead, usually clustered about the top of the scape,
naturally are the first to attract the attention whether of man
or insect. Below these, dull green, unattractive collections of
pistils, which by courtesy only may be called flowers, also form
little groups of three. Like the Quakers at meeting, the male and
female arrowhead flowers are separated, often on distinct plants.
Of course the insect visitors - bees and flies chiefly - alight
on the showy staminate blossoms first, and transfer pollen from
them to the dull pistillate ones later, as it was intended they
should, to prevent self-fertilization. How endless are the
devices of the flowers to guard against this evil and to compel
insects to cross-pollinate them! The most minute detail of the
mechanism involved, which the microscope reveals, only increases
our interest and wonder.

Any plant which elects to grow in shallow water must be
amphibious; it must be able to breathe beneath the surface as the
fish do, and also be adapted to thrive without those parts that
correspond to gills; for ponds and streams have an unpleasant way
of drying up in summer, leaving it stranded on the shore. This
accounts in part for the variable leaves on the arrowhead, those
underneath the water being long and ribbon-like, to bring the
