passed away, dying from sheer old age. True they had fought on as long
as they could to save their kind from utter extinction but the comet
that had trailed its poisoning wake across space to leave behind it,
upon Earth, a noxious, lethal gas vapor, had done its work too well."

No living soul breathed upon the Earth. No one lived here now, but Kiron
and his kind.

"And," so thought Kiron to himself, "he might as well be a great
unthinking robot able to do only one thing instead of the mental giant
he was, so obsessed had he become with the task he had set himself to
do."

Yet, in spite of a great loneliness and a strong fear of a final
frustration, he worked on with the others of his people, hardly stopping
for anything except the very necessities needed to keep his big body
working in perfect coordination.

Tirelessly he worked, for The Masters had bred, if that is the word to
use, fatigue and the need for restoration out of his race long decades
ago.

Sometimes, though, he would stop his work when the great red dying sun
began to fade into the west and his round eyes would grow wistful as he
looked out over the great city that stretched in towering minarets and
lofty spires of purest crystal blue for miles on every side. A fairy
city of rarest hue and beauty. A city for the Gods and the Gods were
dead. Kiron felt, at such times, the great loneliness that the last
Master must have known.

They had been kind, The Masters, and Kiron knew that his people, as they
went about their eternal tasks of keeping the great city in perfect
shape for The Masters who no longer needed it, must miss them as he did.

Never to hear their voices ringing, never to see them again gathered in
groups to witness some game or to play amid the silver fountains and
flowery gardens of the wondrous city, made him infinitely saddened. It
would always be like this, unless....

But thinking, dreaming, reminiscing would not bring it all back for
there was only one answer to still the longing: work. The others worked
and did not dream, but instead kept busy tending to the thousand and one
tasks The Masters had set them to do--had left them doing when the last
Master perished. He too must remember the trust they had placed in his
hands and fulfill it as best he could.

From the time the great red eye of the sun opened itself in the East
until it disappeared in the blue haze beyond the crysolite city, Kiron
labored with his fellows. Then, at the appointed hour, the musical
signals would peal forth their sweet, sad chimes, whispering goodnight
to ears that would hear them no more and all operations would halt for
the night, just as it had done when The Masters were here to supervise
it.

Then when morning came he would start once more trying, testing,
experimenting with his chemicals and plastics, forever following
labyrinth of knowledge, seeking for the great triumph that would make
