The Project Gutenberg eBook, The Black Arrow, by Robert Louis Stevenson


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: The Black Arrow
       a Tale of Two Roses


Author: Robert Louis Stevenson



Release Date: August 7, 2008  [eBook #848]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE BLACK ARROW***


Transcribed from the 1899 Charles Scribner's Sons edition by David Price,
email ccx074@pglaf.org





THE BLACK ARROW--A TALE OF THE TWO ROSES


Critic on the Hearth:


No one but myself knows what I have suffered, nor what my books have
gained, by your unsleeping watchfulness and admirable pertinacity.  And
now here is a volume that goes into the world and lacks your
_imprimatur_: a strange thing in our joint lives; and the reason of it
stranger still! I have watched with interest, with pain, and at length
with amusement, your unavailing attempts to peruse _The Black Arrow_; and
I think I should lack humour indeed, if I let the occasion slip and did
not place your name in the fly-leaf of the only book of mine that you
have never read--and never will read.

That others may display more constancy is still my hope.  The tale was
written years ago for a particular audience and (I may say) in rivalry
with a particular author; I think I should do well to name him, Mr.
Alfred R. Phillips.  It was not without its reward at the time.  I could
not, indeed, displace Mr. Phillips from his well-won priority; but in the
eyes of readers who thought less than nothing of _Treasure Island_, _The
Black Arrow_ was supposed to mark a clear advance.  Those who read
volumes and those who read story papers belong to different worlds.  The
verdict on _Treasure Island_ was reversed in the other court; I wonder,
will it be the same with its successor?

                                                                _R. L. S._

SARANAC LAKE, April 8, 1888.




PROLOGUE--JOHN AMEND-ALL


On a certain afternoon, in the late springtime, the bell upon Tunstall
Moat House was heard ringing at an unaccustomed hour.  Far and near, in
the forest and in the fields along the river, people began to desert
their labours and hurry towards the sound; and in Tunstall hamlet a group
of poor country-folk stood wondering at the summons.

Tunstall hamlet at that period, in the reign of old King Henry VI., wore
much the same appearance as it wears to-day.  A score or so of houses,
heavily framed with oak, stood scattered in a long green valley ascending
from the river.  At the foot, the road crossed a bridge, and mounting on
the other side, disappeared into the fringes of the forest on its way to
the Moat House, and further forth to Holywood Abbey.  Half-way up the
village, the church stood among yews.  On every side the slopes were
crowned and the view bounded by the green elms and greening oak-trees of
the forest.

Hard by the bridge, there was a stone cross upon a knoll, and here the
group had collected--half a dozen women and one tall fellow in a russet
smock--discussing what the bell betided.  An express had gone through the
hamlet half an hour before, and drunk a pot of ale in the saddle, not
daring to dismount for the hurry of his errand; but he had been ignorant
himself of what was forward, and only bore sealed letters from Sir Daniel
Brackley to Sir Oliver Oates, the parson, who kept the Moat House in the
master's absence.

But now there was the noise of a horse; and soon, out of the edge of the
wood and over the echoing bridge, there rode up young Master Richard
Shelton, Sir Daniel's ward.  He, at the least, would know, and they
hailed him and begged him to explain.  He drew bridle willingly enough--a
young fellow not yet eighteen, sun-browned and grey-eyed, in a jacket of
deer's leather, with a black velvet collar, a green hood upon his head,
and a steel cross-bow at his back.  The express, it appeared, had brought
great news.  A battle was impending.  Sir Daniel had sent for every man
that could draw a bow or carry a bill to go post-haste to Kettley, under
pain of his severe displeasure; but for whom they were to fight, or of
where the battle was expected, Dick knew nothing.  Sir Oliver would come
shortly himself, and Bennet Hatch was arming at that moment, for he it
was who should lead the party.

"It is the ruin of this kind land," a woman said.  "If the barons live at
war, ploughfolk must eat roots."

"Nay," said Dick, "every man that follows shall have sixpence a day, and
archers twelve."

"If they live," returned the woman, "that may very well be; but how if
they die, my master?"

"They cannot better die than for their natural lord," said Dick.

"No natural lord of mine," said the man in the smock.  "I followed the
Walsinghams; so we all did down Brierly way, till two years ago, come
Candlemas.  And now I must side with Brackley!  It was the law that did
it; call ye that natural?  But now, what with Sir Daniel and what with
Sir Oliver--that knows more of law than honesty--I have no natural lord
but poor King Harry the Sixt, God bless him!--the poor innocent that
cannot tell his right hand from his left."

"Ye speak with an ill tongue, friend," answered Dick, "to miscall your
good master and my lord the king in the same libel.  But King
Harry--praised be the saints!--has come again into his right mind, and
will have all things peaceably ordained.  And as for Sir Daniel, y' are
very brave behind his back.  But I will be no tale-bearer; and let that
suffice."

"I say no harm of you, Master Richard," returned the peasant.  "Y' are a
lad; but when ye come to a man's inches, ye will find ye have an empty
pocket.  I say no more: the saints help Sir Daniel's neighbours, and the
Blessed Maid protect his wards!"

"Clipsby," said Richard, "you speak what I cannot hear with honour.  Sir
Daniel is my good master, and my guardian."

"Come, now, will ye read me a riddle?" returned Clipsby.  "On whose side
is Sir Daniel?"

"I know not," said Dick, colouring a little; for his guardian had changed
sides continually in the troubles of that period, and every change had
brought him some increase of fortune.

"Ay," returned Clipsby, "you, nor no man.  For, indeed, he is one that
goes to bed Lancaster and gets up York."

Just then the bridge rang under horse-shoe iron, and the party turned and
saw Bennet Hatch come galloping--a brown-faced, grizzled fellow, heavy of
hand and grim of mien, armed with sword and spear, a steel salet on his
head, a leather jack upon his body.  He was a great man in these parts;
Sir Daniel's right hand in peace and war, and at that time, by his
master's interest, bailiff of the hundred.

"Clipsby," he shouted, "off to the Moat House, and send all other
laggards the same gate.  Bowyer will give you jack and salet.  We must
ride before curfew.  Look to it: he that is last at the lych-gate Sir
Daniel shall reward.  Look to it right well!  I know you for a man of
naught.  Nance," he added, to one of the women, "is old Appleyard up
town?"

"I'll warrant you," replied the woman.  "In his field, for sure."

So the group dispersed, and while Clipsby walked leisurely over the
bridge, Bennet and young Shelton rode up the road together, through the
village and past the church.

"Ye will see the old shrew," said Bennet.  "He will waste more time
grumbling and prating of Harry the Fift than would serve a man to shoe a
horse.  And all because he has been to the French wars!"

The house to which they were bound was the last in the village, standing
alone among lilacs; and beyond it, on three sides, there was open meadow
rising towards the borders of the wood.

Hatch dismounted, threw his rein over the fence, and walked down the
field, Dick keeping close at his elbow, to where the old soldier was
digging, knee-deep in his cabbages, and now and again, in a cracked
voice, singing a snatch of song.  He was all dressed in leather, only his
hood and tippet were of black frieze, and tied with scarlet; his face was
like a walnut-shell, both for colour and wrinkles; but his old grey eye
was still clear enough, and his sight unabated.  Perhaps he was deaf;
perhaps he thought it unworthy of an old archer of Agincourt to pay any
heed to such disturbances; but neither the surly notes of the alarm bell,
nor the near approach of Bennet and the lad, appeared at all to move him;
and he continued obstinately digging, and piped up, very thin and shaky:

    "Now, dear lady, if thy will be,
    I pray you that you will rue on me."

"Nick Appleyard," said Hatch, "Sir Oliver commends him to you, and bids
that ye shall come within this hour to the Moat House, there to take
command."

The old fellow looked up.

"Save you, my masters!" he said, grinning.  "And where goeth Master
Hatch?"

"Master Hatch is off to Kettley, with every man that we can horse,"
returned Bennet.  "There is a fight toward, it seems, and my lord stays a
reinforcement."

"Ay, verily," returned Appleyard.  "And what will ye leave me to garrison
withal?"

"I leave you six good men, and Sir Oliver to boot," answered Hatch.

"It'll not hold the place," said Appleyard; "the number sufficeth not.
It would take two score to make it good."

"Why, it's for that we came to you, old shrew!" replied the other.  "Who
else is there but you that could do aught in such a house with such a
garrison?"

"Ay! when the pinch comes, ye remember the old shoe," returned Nick.
"There is not a man of you can back a horse or hold a bill; and as for
archery--St. Michael! if old Harry the Fift were back again, he would
stand and let ye shoot at him for a farthen a shoot!"

"Nay, Nick, there's some can draw a good bow yet," said Bennet.

"Draw a good bow!" cried Appleyard.  "Yes!  But who'll shoot me a good
shoot?  It's there the eye comes in, and the head between your shoulders.
Now, what might you call a long shoot, Bennet Hatch?"

"Well," said Bennet, looking about him, "it would be a long shoot from
here into the forest."

"Ay, it would be a longish shoot," said the old fellow, turning to look
over his shoulder; and then he put up his hand over his eyes, and stood
staring.

"Why, what are you looking at?" asked Bennet, with a chuckle.  "Do, you
see Harry the Fift?"

The veteran continued looking up the hill in silence.  The sun shone
broadly over the shelving meadows; a few white sheep wandered browsing;
all was still but the distant jangle of the bell.

"What is it, Appleyard?" asked Dick.

"Why, the birds," said Appleyard.

And, sure enough, over the top of the forest, where it ran down in a
tongue among the meadows, and ended in a pair of goodly green elms, about
a bowshot from the field where they were standing, a flight of birds was
skimming to and fro, in evident disorder.

"What of the birds?" said Bennet.

"Ay!" returned Appleyard, "y' are a wise man to go to war, Master Bennet.
Birds are a good sentry; in forest places they be the first line of
battle.  Look you, now, if we lay here in camp, there might be archers
skulking down to get the wind of us; and here would you be, none the
wiser!"

"Why, old shrew," said Hatch, "there be no men nearer us than Sir
Daniel's, at Kettley; y' are as safe as in London Tower; and ye raise
scares upon a man for a few chaffinches and sparrows!"

"Hear him!" grinned Appleyard.  "How many a rogue would give his two crop
ears to have a shoot at either of us?  Saint Michael, man! they hate us
like two polecats!"

"Well, sooth it is, they hate Sir Daniel," answered Hatch, a little
sobered.

"Ay, they hate Sir Daniel, and they hate every man that serves with him,"
said Appleyard; "and in the first order of hating, they hate Bennet Hatch
and old Nicholas the bowman.  See ye here: if there was a stout fellow
yonder in the wood-edge, and you and I stood fair for him--as, by Saint
George, we stand!--which, think ye, would he choose?"

"You, for a good wager," answered Hatch.

"My surcoat to a leather belt, it would be you!" cried the old archer.
"Ye burned Grimstone, Bennet--they'll ne'er forgive you that, my master.
And as for me, I'll soon be in a good place, God grant, and out of
bow-shoot--ay, and cannon-shoot--of all their malices.  I am an old man,
and draw fast to homeward, where the bed is ready.  But for you, Bennet,
y' are to remain behind here at your own peril, and if ye come to my
years unhanged, the old true-blue English spirit will be dead."

"Y' are the shrewishest old dolt in Tunstall Forest," returned Hatch,
visibly ruffled by these threats.  "Get ye to your arms before Sir Oliver
come, and leave prating for one good while.  An ye had talked so much
with Harry the Fift, his ears would ha' been richer than his pocket."

An arrow sang in the air, like a huge hornet; it struck old Appleyard
between the shoulder-blades, and pierced him clean through, and he fell
forward on his face among the cabbages.  Hatch, with a broken cry, leapt
into the air; then, stooping double, he ran for the cover of the house.
And in the meanwhile Dick Shelton had dropped behind a lilac, and had his
crossbow bent and shouldered, covering the point of the forest.

Not a leaf stirred.  The sheep were patiently browsing; the birds had
settled.  But there lay the old man, with a cloth-yard arrow standing in
his back; and there were Hatch holding to the gable, and Dick crouching
and ready behind the lilac bush.

"D'ye see aught?" cried Hatch.

"Not a twig stirs," said Dick.

