ad-hocs passed their loads around in clear embarrassment, knowing that they
were violating every principle they cared about.

As I watched, gaps appeared in the bucket-brigade as castmembers slipped
away, faces burning scarlet with shame. At the Hall of Presidents, Debra
presided over an orderly relocation of her things, a cheerful cadre of
her castmembers quickly moving it all offstage. I didn't have to look at
my handheld to know what was happening to our Whuffie.

#

By evening, we were back on schedule. Suneep supervised the placement of
his telepresence rigs and Lil went over every system in minute detail,
bossing a crew of ad-hocs that trailed behind her, double- and triple-
checking it all.

Suneep smiled at me when he caught sight of me, hand-scattering dust in
the parlor.

"Congratulations, sir," he said, and shook my hand. "It was masterfully
done."

"Thanks, Suneep. I'm not sure how masterful it was, but we got the job
done, and that's what counts."

"Your partners, they're happier than I've seen them since this whole
business started. I know how they feel!"

My partners? Oh, yes, Dan and Lil. How happy were they, I wondered.
Happy enough to get back together? My mood fell, even though a part of
me said that Dan would never go back to her, not after all we'd been
through together.

"I'm glad you're glad. We couldn't have done it without you, and it
looks like we'll be open for business in a week."

"Oh, I should think so. Are you coming to the party tonight?"

Party? Probably something the Liberty Square ad-hocs were putting on. I
would almost certainly be persona non grata. "I don't think so," I said,
carefully. "I'll probably work late here."

He chided me for working too hard, but once he saw that I had no
intention of being dragged to the party, he left off.

And that's how I came to be in the Mansion at 2 a.m. the next morning,
dozing in a backstage break room when I heard a commotion from the
parlor. Festive voices, happy and loud, and I assumed it was Liberty
Square ad-hocs coming back from their party.

I roused myself and entered the parlor.

Kim and her friends were there, pushing hand-trucks of Debra's gear. I
got ready to shout something horrible at them, and that's when Debra
came in. I moderated the shout to a snap, opened my mouth to speak,
stopped.

Behind Debra were Lil's parents, frozen these long years in their
canopic jars in Kissimmee.

========= CHAPTER 9 =========

Lil's parents went into their jars with little ceremony. I saw them just
before they went in, when they stopped in at Lil's and my place to kiss
her goodbye and wish her well.

Tom and I stood awkwardly to the side while Lil and her mother held an
achingly chipper and polite farewell.

"So," I said to Tom. "Deadheading."

He cocked an eyebrow. "Yup. Took the backup this morning."

Before coming to see their daughter, they'd taken their backups. When
they woke, this event -- everything following the backup -- would never
have happened for them.

God, they were bastards.

"When are you coming back?" I asked, keeping my castmember face on,
carefully hiding away the disgust.

"We'll be sampling monthly, just getting a digest dumped to us. When
things look interesting enough, we'll come on back." He waggled a finger
at me. "I'll be keeping an eye on you and Lillian -- you treat her
right, you hear?"

"We're sure going to miss you two around here," I said.

He pishtoshed and said, "You won't even notice we're gone. This is your
world now -- we're just getting out of the way for a while, letting
you-all take a run at it. We wouldn't be going down if we didn't have
faith in you two."

Lil and her mom kissed one last time. Her mother was more affectionate
than I'd ever seen her, even to the point of tearing up a little. Here
in this moment of vanishing consciousness, she could be whomever she
wanted, knowing that it wouldn't matter the next time she awoke.

"Julius," she said, taking my hands, squeezing them. "You've got some
wonderful times ahead of you -- between Lil and the Park, you're going
to have a tremendous experience, I just know it." She was infinitely
serene and compassionate, and I knew it didn't count.

Still smiling, they got into their runabout and drove away to get the
lethal injections, to become disembodied consciousnesses, to lose their
last moments with their darling daughter.

#

They were not happy to be returned from the dead. Their new bodies were
impossibly young, pubescent and hormonal and doleful and kitted out in
the latest trendy styles. In the company of Kim and her pals, they made
a solid mass of irate adolescence.

"Just what the hell do you think you're doing?" Rita asked, shoving me
hard in the chest. I stumbled back into my carefully scattered dust,
raising a cloud.

Rita came after me, but Tom held her back. "Julius, go away. Your
actions are totally indefensible. Keep your mouth shut and go away."

I held up a hand, tried to wave away his words, opened my mouth to
speak.

"Don't say a word," he said. "Leave. Now."

"_Don't stay here and don't come back. Ever_," Kim said, an evil look on
her face.

"No," I said. "No goddamn it no. You're going to hear me out, and then
I'm going to get Lil and her people and they're going to back me up.
That's not negotiable."

We stared at each other across the dim parlor. Debra made a twiddling
motion and the lights came up full and harsh. The expertly crafted gloom
went away and it was just a dusty room with a fake fireplace.

"Let him speak," Debra said. Rita folded her arms and glared.

"I did some really awful things," I said, keeping my head up, keeping my
eyes on them. "I can't excuse them, and I don't ask you to forgive them.
But that doesn't change the fact that we've put our hearts and souls
into this place, and it's not right to take it from us. Can't we have
one constant corner of the world, one bit frozen in time for the people
who love it that way? Why does your success mean our failure?

"Can't you see that we're carrying on your work? That we're tending a
legacy you left us?"

"Are you through?" Rita asked.

I nodded.

"This place is not a historical preserve, Julius, it's a ride. If you
don't understand that, you're in the wrong place. It's not my goddamn
fault that you decided that your stupidity was on my behalf, and it
doesn't make it any less stupid. All you've done is confirm my worst
fears."

Debra's mask of impartiality slipped. "You stupid, deluded asshole," she
said, softly. "You totter around, pissing and moaning about your little
murder, your little health problems -- yes, I've heard -- your little
fixation on keeping things the way they are. You need some perspective,
Julius. You need to get away from here: Disney World isn't good for you
and you're sure as hell not any good for Disney World."

It would have hurt less if I hadn't come to the same conclusion myself,
somewhere along the way.

#

I found the ad-hoc at a Fort Wilderness campsite, sitting around a fire
and singing, necking, laughing. The victory party. I trudged into the
circle and hunted for Lil.

She was sitting on a log, staring into the fire, a million miles away.
Lord, she was beautiful when she fretted. I stood in front of her for a
minute and she stared right through me until I tapped her shoulder. She
gave an involuntary squeak and then smiled at herself.

"Lil," I said, then stopped. _Your parents are home, and they've joined
the other side_.

For the first time in an age, she looked at me softly, smiled even. She
patted the log next to her. I sat down, felt the heat of the fire on my
face, her body heat on my side. God, how did I screw this up?

Without warning, she put her arms around me and hugged me hard. I hugged
her back, nose in her hair, woodsmoke smell and shampoo and sweat. "We
did it," she whispered fiercely. I held onto her. _No, we didn't_.

"Lil," I said again, and pulled away.

"What?" she said, her eyes shining. She was stoned, I saw that now.

"Your parents are back. They came to the Mansion."

She was confused, shrinking, and I pressed on.

"They were with Debra."

She reeled back as if I'd slapped her.

"I told them I'd bring the whole group back to talk it over."

She hung her head and her shoulders shook, and I tentatively put an arm
around her. She shook it off and sat up. She was crying and laughing at
the same time. "I'll have a ferry sent over," she said.

#

I sat in the back of the ferry with Dan, away from the confused and
angry ad-hocs. I answered his questions with terse, one-word answers,
and he gave up. We rode in silence, the trees on the edges of the Seven
Seas Lagoon whipping back and forth in an approaching storm.

The ad-hoc shortcutted through the west parking lot and moved through
the quiet streets of Frontierland apprehensively, a funeral procession
that stopped the nighttime custodial staff in their tracks.

As we drew up on Liberty Square, I saw that the work-lights were blazing
and a tremendous work-gang of Debra's ad-hocs were moving from the Hall
to the Mansion, undoing our teardown of their work.

Working alongside of them were Tom and Rita, Lil's parents, sleeves
rolled up, forearms bulging with new, toned muscle. The group stopped in
its tracks and Lil went to them, stumbling on the wooden sidewalk.

I expected hugs. There were none. In their stead, parents and daughter
stalked each other, shifting weight and posture to track each other,
maintain a constant, sizing distance.

"What the hell are you doing?" Lil said, finally. She didn't address her
mother, which surprised me. It didn't surprise Tom, though.

He dipped forward, the shuffle of his feet loud in the quiet night.
"We're working," he said.

"No, you're not," Lil said. "You're destroying. Stop it."

Lil's mother darted to her husband's side, not saying anything, just
standing there.

Wordlessly, Tom hefted the box he was holding and headed to the Mansion.
Lil caught his arm and jerked it so he dropped his load.

"You're not listening. The Mansion is _ours_. _Stop_. _It_."

Lil's mother gently took Lil's hand off Tom's arm, held it in her own.
"I'm glad you're passionate about it, Lillian," she said. "I'm proud of
your commitment."

Even at a distance of ten yards, I heard Lil's choked sob, saw her
collapse in on herself. Her mother took her in her arms, rocked her. I
felt like a voyeur, but couldn't bring myself to turn away.

"Shhh," her mother said, a sibilant sound that matched the rustling of
the leaves on the Liberty Tree. "Shhh. We don't have to be on the same
side, you know."

They held the embrace and held it still. Lil straightened, then bent
again and picked up her father's box, carried it to the Mansion. One at
a time, the rest of her ad-hoc moved forward and joined them.

#

This is how you hit bottom. You wake up in your friend's hotel room and
you power up your handheld and it won't log on. You press the call-
button for the elevator and it gives you an angry buzz in return. You
take the stairs to the lobby and no one looks at you as they jostle past
you.

You become a non-person.

Scared. I trembled when I ascended the stairs to Dan's room, when I
knocked at his door, louder and harder than I meant, a panicked banging.

Dan answered the door and I saw his eyes go to his HUD, back to me.
"Jesus," he said.

I sat on the edge of my bed, head in my hands.

"What?" I said, what happened, what happened to me?

"You're out of the ad-hoc," he said. "You're out of Whuffie. You're
bottomed-out," he said.

This is how you hit bottom in Walt Disney World, in a hotel with the
hissing of the monorail and the sun streaming through the window, the
hooting of the steam engines on the railroad and the distant howl of the
recorded wolves at the Haunted Mansion. The world drops away from you,
recedes until you're nothing but a speck, a mote in blackness.

I was hyperventilating, light-headed. Deliberately, I slowed my breath,
put my head between my knees until the dizziness passed.

"Take me to Lil," I said.

Driving together, hammering cigarette after cigarette into my face, I
remembered the night Dan had come to Disney World, when I'd driven him
to my -- _Lil's_ -- house, and how happy I'd been then, how secure.

I looked at Dan and he patted my hand. "Strange times," he said.

It was enough. We found Lil in an underground break-room, lightly dozing
on a ratty sofa. Her head rested on Tom's lap, her feet on Rita's. All
three snored softly. They'd had a long night.

Dan shook Lil awake. She stretched out and opened her eyes, looked
sleepily at me. The blood drained from her face.

"Hello, Julius," she said, coldly.

Now Tom and Rita were awake, too. Lil sat up.

"Were you going to tell me?" I asked, quietly. "Or were you just going
to kick me out and let me find out on my own?"

"You were my next stop," Lil said.

"Then I've saved you some time." I pulled up a chair. "Tell me all about
it."

"There's nothing to tell," Rita snapped. "You're out. You had to know it
was coming -- for God's sake, you were tearing Liberty Square apart!"

"How would you know?" I asked. I struggled to remain calm. "You've been
asleep for ten years!"

