ray-like, daisy heads, and soft muddy tubes. They are _Sabellae_.

Have you ever see a "sea-mouse"? Probably you have: preserved in a
bottle. It is only like a mouse from being about the size of a mouse's
body, without legs, and with a lot of rainbow-coloured hairs. You may be
astonished to hear that it is classed among the worms. There is a
sea-mouse in the Great Aquarium. I did not see him; perhaps because he
is given to burrowing. If he is not in one of the two tanks just named
he is probably in No. 21 or No. 25. He is so handsome dead and in a
bottle, that he must be gorgeous to behold alive and in a pool. You
should look out for him.

It is a disappointing feature of this water wonderland that some of the
"sea-gentlemen" are apt to hide, like hobbledehoy children, when
visitors call. Indeed, a good many of them--such as the swimming-crabs,
the burrowing-crabs, the sea-scorpions, and the eels--are night-feeders,
and one cannot expect them to change their whole habits and customs to
be seen of the British public. Anyhow, whether they hide from custom or
caprice, they are quite safe from interference. Much happier, in this
respect, than the beasts in the Zoological Gardens. One may disturb the
big elephant's repose with umbrella-points, or throw buns at the brown
bear, but the "sea-gentlemen" are safe in their caves, and humanity
flattens its nose against the glass wall of separation in vain.

When I looked into Tank No. 5, however, there were several
swimming-crabs and sea-scorpions to be seen. The sea-scorpions are fish,
but bold-faced, fiery, greedy little fellows. The swimming-crabs are
said to be "the largest, strongest, and _hungriest_" of English crabs.
What a thought for those they live on! Let us picture to ourselves the
largest, strongest, and _hungriest_ of cannibals! Doubtless he would
make short work even of the American Giant, as the swimming-crabs, by
night, devour other crabs, larger but milder-tempered than themselves.
It speaks volumes for the sea-scorpions, who are small fish, that they
can hold their own in the same pool with the swimming-crabs.

Tank 4 contains big spider-crabs, who sit with their knees above their
heads, winking at you with their eyes and feelers; or scramble out
unexpectedly from dens and caves here and there, high up in the rocky
sides of the pool.

Nos. 6, 7, and 8 contain fish.

It really is sad to think how completely our ideas on the subject of cod
spring from the kitchen and the fish-kettle. (As to our cod-liver oil,
we know no more how much of it has anything to do with cod-fish than we
can guess where our milk and port-wine come from.) Poor cod! If of a
certain social standing, it's odds if we will recognize any of him but
his head and shoulders. I have seen him served up in country inns with a
pickled walnut in the socket of each eye; and in life, and at home, he
has the attentive, inquisitive, watchful, humorous eyes common to all
fishes.

Fishes remind me rather of Chinese, who are also a cold-blooded race:
slow, watchful, inquisitive, acquisitive, and full of the sense of
humour. There are fishes in the Great Aquarium whose faces twinkle again
with quiet fun.

The cod here seemed quite as much interested in looking at us through a
glass window as we were in looking at them. They are tame, and have
very large appetites--so tame, and so hungry, that the fish who live
with them are at a disadvantage at meal-times, and it is feared that
they must be removed.

These other fish are plaice, soles, brill, turbot, and skate. The skate
love to lie buried over head and ears in the sand. The faintest outline
of tail or a flapping fin betrays the spot, and you long for an
umbrella-poke from some Zoological-Garden-frequenting old lady, to stir
the lazy creature up; but it is impossible.

Suddenly, when you are as tired of waiting as Jack was when Coomara was
"engaged thinking," the fin movement becomes more distinct, a cloud of
sand rises into the water, and a grey-coated skate, with two ornamental
knobs upon his tail, flaps slowly away across the pool.

Sometimes these flat-fish flap upwards to the surface, poke their noses
into the other world, and then, like larks, having gone up with effort,
let themselves easily down again to the ground.

As we were looking into No. 7, an ambitious little sole took into his
head to climb up the rocks, in the caves of which dwell crusty crabs. By
marvellously agile doubles of his flat little body, he scrambled a good
way up. Then he fell, and two or three valiant efforts still proving
vain, he gave it up.

"He's turned giddy!" shouted a man beside us, who, like every one else,
was watching the sea-gentlemen with rapt interest.

Why the little sole tried rock climbing I don't know, and I doubt if he
knew himself.

Tank 7 is full of Basse--glittering fish who keep their silver armour
clean by scrubbing it among the stones. Like other prettily-dressed
people, they look out of the window all along.

At Tanks 1, 2, and 3, your chief feelings will be curiosity and
admiration. The sea-flowers and the worms are rather low in the scale of
living things. Far be it from you to decide that there are any living
creatures with whom a loving and intelligent patience will not at last
enable us to hold communion. But though, when you put the point of your
little finger towards a Crassy, he gives it a very affectionate squeeze,
and seems rather anxious to detain it permanently, the balance of
evidence favours the idea that his appetite rather than his affections
are concerned, and that he has only mistaken you for his dinner.

At present our intercourse is certainly limited, and though the
_Serpulae_ and _Sabellae_ have their heads out of their chimneys all
along, there is no reason to suppose that they take the slightest
interest in the human beings who peer at them through the glass.

But with the fishes it is quite another thing. When you can fairly look
into eyes as bright and expressive as your own, a long stride has been
taken towards friendly relations. You flatten your nose on one side of
the glass, and Mr. Fish flattens his on the other. If you have the
stoniest of British stares he will outstare you. You long to scratch his
back, or show him some similar attention, and (if he be a cod) to ask
him, as between friends, why on earth (I mean in sea) he wears that
queer horn under his chin.

Now with the _Crustaceans_(hard-shelled sea-gentlemen) it is different
again. So far as one feels friendly towards a fish it is a fellow
feeling. You know people like this or that cod, as one knows people like
certain sheep, dogs, and horses. And a very short acquaintance with fish
convinces you that not only is there a type of face belonging to each
species, but that individual countenances vary, as with us. It is said
that shepherds know the faces of their sheep as well as of their other
friends, and I have no doubt that the keeper of the Great Aquarium knows
his cod apart quite well.

And if one's feeling for the _Crustaceans_--the crabs, lobsters, prawns,
&c.--is different, it is not because one feels them to be less
intelligent than fishes, but because their intelligence is altogether a
mysterious, unfathomable, unmeasurable quantity. There's no saying what
they don't know. There is no telling how much they can see. And the
great puzzle is what they can be thinking of. For that the spiny
lobsters are thinking, and "thinking very seriously about something,"
you can no more doubt than Jack did about the Merrow.

The spiny lobsters (commonly, but erroneously called craw-fish or
cray-fish) and the common lobsters are in Tank No. 9.

Ah! that is a wonderful pool. The first glimpse of the spiny lobsters is
enough for any one who has read of Coomara. We are among the Merrows at
last.

I don't know that Coomara was a lobster, but I think he must have been a
crustacean. Even his green hair reminds one of the spider-crabs; though
matter-of-fact naturalists tell us that _their_ green hair is only
seaweed which grows luxuriantly on their shells from their quiet habits,
and because they are not given to burrowing, or cleaning themselves
among the stones like the silver-coated basse. At one time, by the bye,
it was supposed that they dressed themselves in weeds, whence they were
called "vanity-crabs."

But the spiny lobsters--please to look at them, and see if you can so
much as guess their age, their capabilities, or their intentions. I
fancy that the difference between the feelings with which they and the
fishes inspire us is much the same as that between our mental attitude
towards hill-men or house-elves, and towards men and women.

The spiny lobsters are red. The common lobsters are blue. The spiny
lobsters are large, their eyes are startlingly prominent, their powerful
antennae are longer and redder than Coomara's nose, and wave about in an
inquisitive and somewhat threatening manner. When four or five of them
are gathered together in the centre of the pool, sitting solemnly on
their tails, which are tucked neatly under them, each with his ten sharp
elbows a-kimbo "engaged thinking" (and perhaps talking) "very seriously
about something," it is an impressive but _uncanny_ sight.

We witnessed such a conclave, sitting in a close circle, face to face,
waving their long antennae; and as we watched, from the shadowy caves
above another merrow appeared. How he ever got his cumbersome coat of
mail, his stiff legs, and long spines safely down the face of the cliff
is a mystery. But he scrambled down ledge by ledge, bravely, and in some
haste. He knew what the meeting was about, though we did not, and soon
took his place, arranged his tail, his scales, his elbows, his
cocked-hat, and what not, and fell a-thinking, like the rest. We left
them so.

Most of the common lobsters were in their caves, from which they
watched this meeting of the reds with fixed attention.

In their dark-blue coats, peering with their keen eyes from behind
jutting rocks and the mouths of sea caverns, they looked somewhat like
smuggler sailors!

Tanks 10 to 13 have fish in them. The Wrasses are very beautiful in
colour. Most gorgeous indeed, if you can look at them in a particular
way. Tank 32 has been made on purpose to display them. It is in another
room.

No tank in the Aquarium is more popular than Tank 14. Enthusiastic
people will sit down here with needlework or luncheon, and calmly wait
for a good view of--the cuttle-fish!

Cuttle is the name for the whole race of cephalopods, and is supposed to
be a corruption of the word cuddle, in the sense of hugging.

They are curious creatures, the one who favoured us with a good view of
him being very like a loose red velvet pincushion with eight legs, and
most of the bran let out.

Yet this strange, unshapely creature has a distinct brain in a soft kind
of skull, mandibles like a parrot, and plenty of sense. His sight,
hearing, touch, taste, and smell are acute. He lies kicking his legs in
the doorway of his favourite cavern, which he selected for himself and
is attached to, for a provokingly long time before he will come out.
When he does appear, a subdued groan of gratified expectation runs
through the crowd in front of his window, as head over heels, hand over
hand, he sprawls downwards, and moves quickly away with the peculiar
gait induced by having suckers instead of feet to walk with.

Tank 15 contains eels. It seems to be a curious fact that fresh-water
eels will live in sea-water. I should think, when they have once got
used to the salt, they must find a pond very tasteless afterwards. They
are night-feeders, as school-boys know well.

Tank 16. Fish--grey mullet. Tank 17. Prawns.

If with the fishes we had felt with friends, and with the lobsters as if
with hobgoblins, with the prawns we seemed to find ourselves among
ghosts.

A tank that seems only a pool for a cuttle-fish, or a cod, is a vast
region where prawns and shrimps are the inhabitants. The caves look
huge, and would hold an army of them. The rocks jut boldly out, and
throw strange shadows on the pool. The light falls effectively from
above, and in and out and round about go the prawns, with black eyes
glaring from their diaphanous helmets, in colourless, translucent, if
not transparent armour, and bristling with spears.

"They are like disembodied spirits," said my husband.

But in a moment more we exclaimed, "It's like a scene from Martin's
mezzo-tint illustrations of the _Paradise Lost_. They are ghostly hosts
gathering for battle."

This must seem a most absurd idea in connection with prawns; but if you
have never seen prawns except at the breakfast-table, you must go to the
Great Aquarium to learn how impressive is their appearance in real life.

The warlike group which struck us so forcibly had gathered rapidly from
all parts of the pool upon a piece of flat table-rock that jutted out
high up. Some unexplained excitement agitated the host; their
innumerable spear-like antennae moved ceaselessly. From above a ray of
light fell just upon the table-rock where they were gathered, making the
waving spears glitter like the bayonet points of a body of troops, and
forming a striking contrast with the dark cliffs and overshadowed water
below, from which stragglers were quickly gathering, some paddling
across the deep pool, others scrambling up the rocks, and all with the
same fierce and restless expression.

How I longed for a chance of sketching the scene!

Prawns are not quite such colourless creatures in the sea as they are
here. Why they lose their colour and markings in captivity is not known.
They seem otherwise well.

They are hungry creatures, and their scent is keen.

The shrimps keep more out of sight; they burrow in the sand a good deal.
You know one has to look for fresh-water shrimps in a brook if one wants
to find them.

In Tank 18 are our old friends the hermit-crabs. As a child, I think I
believed that these curious creatures killed the original inhabitants of
the shells which they take for their own dwelling. It is pleasant to
know that this is not the case. The hermit-crab is in fact a
sea-gentleman, who is so unfortunate as to be born naked, and quite
unable to make his own clothes, and who goes nervously about the world,
trying on other people's cast-off coats till he finds one to fit him.

They are funnily fastidious about their shells, feeling one well inside
and out before they decide to try it, and hesitating sometimes between
two, like a lady between a couple of becoming bonnets. They have been
said to be pugnacious; but I fancy that the old name of soldier-crabs
was given to them under the impression that they killed the former
proprietors of their shells.

With No. 18 the window tanks come to an end.

In two other rooms are a number of shallow tanks open at the top, in
which are smaller sea-anemones, star-fish, more crabs, fishes, &c., &c.

Blennies are quaint, intellectual-looking little fish; friendly too,
and easy to be tamed. In one of Major Holland's charming papers in
_Science Gossip_ he speaks of a pet blenny of his who was not only tame
but musical. "He was exceedingly sensitive to the vibrations of stringed
instruments; the softest note of a violin threw him into a state of
agitation, and a harsh scrape or a vigorous _staccato_ drove him wild."

In Tank 34 are gurnards, fish-gentlemen, with exquisite blue fins, like
peacock's feathers.

No. 35 contains dragonets and star-fish. The dragonets are quaint,
wide-awake little fish. I saw one snap at a big, fat, red star-fish, who
was sticking to the side of a rock. Why the dragonet snapped at him I
have no idea. I do not believe he hurt him; but the star-fish gradually
relaxed his hold, and fell slowly and helplessly on to his back; on
which the dragonet looked as silly as the Sultan of Casgar's purveyor
when the hunchback fell beneath his blows. Another dragonet came hastily
up to see what was the matter; but prudently made off again, and left
the star-fish and his neighbour as they were. I waited a long time by
