The Project Gutenberg EBook of Ernest Bracebridge, by William H. G. Kingston

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Ernest Bracebridge
       School Days

Author: William H. G. Kingston

Illustrator: W Thomas

Release Date: May 15, 2007 [EBook #21452]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ERNEST BRACEBRIDGE ***




Produced by Nick Hodson of London, England




Ernest Bracebridge, School Days, by William H G Kingston.

________________________________________________________________________

A very well-written book--one of Kingston's best.  It is about various
events and personalities in a Victorian school.  The boy after whom the
book is named is such a heroic character that one can't help wondering
if he is really either Kingston's own son, or maybe the son whom
Kingston would have liked to have.

In one of the last chapters it so happens that some of the boys pay a
visit to another school, which happens to be the one your reviewer was
at.  It was astonishing to me to read of institutions and customs at
that school just exactly as they were in my day, seventy years and more
later.

It makes a very good audiobook.

________________________________________________________________________

ERNEST BRACEBRIDGE, SCHOOL DAYS, BY WILLIAM H G KINGSTON.



CHAPTER ONE.

THE SCHOOL, THE MASTER, AND HIS BOYS.

It was a half-holiday.  One of our fellows who had lately taken his
degree and passed as Senior Wrangler had asked it for us.  He had just
come down for a few hours to see the Doctor and the old place.  How we
cheered him!  How proudly the Doctor looked at him!  What a great man we
thought him!  He was a great man! for he had won a great victory,--not
only over his fellow-men, not only over his books, by compelling them to
give up the knowledge they contained,--but over his love of pleasure;
over a tendency to indolence; over his temper and passions; and now
Henry Martin was able to commence the earnest struggle of life with the
consciousness, which of itself gives strength, that he had obtained the
most important of all victories--that over self.

There he stood, surrounded by some of the bigger boys who had been at
school with him; a pleasant smile on his countenance as he looked about
him on the old familiar scenes.  Then he shook hands with the fellows
standing near him, and we all cheered again louder than ever.  He
thanked us, and said that he hoped he should often meet many of us in
the world, and that he should always look back with pleasure to the days
he had spent in that place.  At last he once more waved his hand and
went back into the house.

The instant dinner was over, out we all rushed into the playground.
Those were happy times when, directly after it, we could stand on our
heads, play high-cock-o'lorum, or hang by our heels from the cross-bars
of our gymnastic poles without the slightest inconvenience.

Our school was a good one; I ought to speak well of it.  I have, indeed,
a very small opinion of a boy who does not think highly and speak highly
of his own school, and feel thoroughly identified with it, provided it
is a good one.  Our school, at all events, was first-rate, and so was
our master.  We were proud of him, and believed firmly that there were
very few men in England, or in the world, for that matter, who were
equal to him.  He won the affections of all of us, and as it seemed,
with wonderful ease.  How he did it we did not trouble ourselves to
consider.  I have since, however, often thought over the subject, and
have had no difficulty in guessing the cause of his influence.  He was a
ripe scholar, and thoroughly understood what he professed to teach: then
he was always just, and although he was strict, and could be very severe
on occasions, he was one of the kindest-hearted men I ever met.  We all
thought so; and boys are not bad judges of their elders.  He was a tall,
fine man, with a florid complexion.  His eyes were large and clear, and
full of intelligence and expression.  And then his voice!--how rich and
mellow it sounded when he exerted it.  His smile, too, was particularly
pleasing; and, old as he was, at least as we thought him, he entered
heartily into many of our games and amusements; and it was a fine thing
to see him stand up with a bat in his hand, and send the ball flying
over the hedge into the other field.  He had been a great cricketer at
College, and had generally been one of the eleven when any University
match was played, so we heard; and that made him encourage all sorts of
sports and pastimes.  He pulled a capital oar; and we heard that he had
been very great at football, though he had long since given up playing:
indeed, I doubt if there was any game which he had not played well, and
could not still play better than most people, had he chosen.  Such was
Doctor Carr--the Doctor, as we called him--of Grafton Hall.

Grafton Hall was a fine old place, situated on a healthy spot, and
surrounded by good-sized grounds: indeed, no place could be more
admirably fitted for a first-rate gentleman's school.

The house was a large Elizabethan building, with a number of good-sized
airy rooms, and passages, and staircases.  The hall served, for what it
was originally intended, as a dining-hall.

The Doctor had built a wing, in which was situated our school-room, and
a lofty, well-ventilated room it was.  We had several lecture-rooms
besides; and then the large old courtyard served as a capital playground
in wet weather, as well as a racket-court; and in one corner of it we
had our gymnasium, which was one of the many capital things belonging to
the school.

A fine wide glade in the park, which had been thoroughly drained, served
us as a magnificent cricket-ground; and there was, not far from it, a
good-sized pond, through which ran a stream of clear water, where we
bathed in the summer.  It was kept clean and free from weeds, and even
in the deepest parts we could, on a sunny day, see the bright pebbles
shining at the bottom.

I need not now give a further description of the dear old place.  We
were most of us as fond of it as if it had been our father's property.
I do not mean to say that it was a perfect paradise.  I do not fancy
such a place exists in the world; and if it did, I must own that
schoolboys are not, as a rule, much like angels.  Still the Doctor did
_his_ best to make it a happy place, and an abode fit for boys of
refined minds and gentlemanly habits and ideas.  It was generally our
own faults if anything went wrong.

When a new boy arrived, the Doctor took him into the school-room, and
lecture-rooms, and dining-hall, and through the sleeping-rooms, and
playground, and gardens; indeed, all round the place.

"Now, my lad," he used to say, "you will remark that everything is well
arranged, and clean, and neat.  I trust to your honour to refrain from
injuring anything in any way, and to do your best to keep the place in
the good order in which you see it."

On no occasion had he ever to speak again on the subject; for we all
took a pride in the handsome, gentlemanly appearance of the house and
grounds, and effectually prevented any mischievously inclined boy from
injuring them.  All the other arrangements of the establishment were
equally good with those I have described.

The Doctor's wife was a first-rate person; so kind, and gentle, and
considerate.  We were all very fond of her; and so we were of the good
matron, Mrs Smith, who kept all the people under her in such excellent
order.

The ushers, too, were all very good in their way, for the Doctor seldom
made a mistake in selecting them.  They were good scholars and
gentlemen, and generally entered with zest into most of our sports and
games.  But it is time that I should return to that memorable
half-holiday.

The Doctor had not long before erected a gymnasium, which was at this
time all the rage among us.  We never grew tired of practising on it.
The moment we came out of the dining-hall the greater number of us
assembled round it.

Some swarmed up the poles; others the ropes which hung from the bars
above; several performed various exercises on the parallel bars; while
four seized the ropes which hung from a long perpendicular pole, and
were soon seen, with giant strides, rotating round it, till they
scarcely touched the ground with their feet.

Numbers were likewise hanging on to the horizontal bar; sitting on it,
swinging by it, circling it, kicking it, hanging to it by the legs or
the feet, performing, indeed, more movements than I can well describe.

There were also several wooden horses, or rather logs of wood on legs,
on which the boys were mounting and dismounting, vaulting on to them,
leaping along them or over them, kneeling on them, jumping off them,
and, indeed, going through a variety of movements which might give them
confidence on horseback.

Several swings were in full action.  Very few boys were sitting on them;
most of them were standing upright; some were holding on with two hands,
others only with one; some standing on one foot, and holding on by one
rope; others leaning with perfect composure against one rope; but all
were moving rapidly in one way or another; indeed, the effect to a
person unaccustomed to the scene must have been very curious.

One of the most active fellows we had at that time was Richard Blackall.
He was not quite the cock of the school, though, for his size, he was
very strong; but at all gymnastic feats he beat nearly everybody.  His
chief rival was Miles Lemon, who could perform most of the exercises he
could, and did some of them better.  Lemon was not so strong as
Blackall, but he had a more correct eye, and a calmer temper; both very
important qualifications, especially in most athletic exercises.  He
was, in consequence, a better cricketer, and a still better fencer.
Even at the broadsword exercise, although at first it might appear that
Blackall was far superior to Miles, the latter had more than once given
proof that it was hard work for any one to gain a victory over him.

Blackall's great fault was a strong inclination to bully.  He was a
tyrant, and utterly indifferent to the feelings of others.  If he wanted
a thing done, he did not consider what trouble and annoyance it might
give others, but, confiding in his strength, he made all the smaller
boys do what he wanted.  If they refused, he thrashed them till they
promised to obey him.  He was a great talker, and a never-ceasing
boaster of what he had done, and of what he could do and would do.  As
he certainly could do many of the things he talked about, it was
believed that he could do everything.  Some believed in him, but others
did not.  Such a person was, however, sure to have a number of followers
and ardent admirers, who quoted him on all occasions,--stuck by him
through thick or thin, right or wrong, and looked upon him as one of the
finest fellows in existence.

Among the most constant of his followers was Robert Dawson--Bobby Dawson
he was always called.  He was not a badly inclined little fellow, but he
had no confidence in himself, and, consequently, wanted to lean on
somebody else.  Unfortunately he chose Blackall as his supporter.

Among the smaller boys who aspired to be considered something above the
common was Tommy Bouldon.  He was a determined, independent little
fellow.  He was very active, and could perform more feats of activity
than any other boy of his size.  He was a fair cricketer, and was
sometimes chosen by some of the bigger fellows to play in their matches.
This made Tommy rather cocky at times; but he was a good-natured chap,
and managed to live on good terms with everybody.

Tommy, like Blackall, was rather apt to boast of what he had done, or he
purposed doing; but in one respect he was different;--he never
exaggerated in his descriptions of his past exploits, and seldom failed
to perform whatever he undertook to do.

The boys I have described were among the many who were exercising away
with all their might and main on the gymnastic poles.

Blackall was going up a ladder hand over hand, without using his feet,
while Lemon was swarming up a pole.  When they reached the top, giddy as
was the height, they crossed each other and descended, one by the pole
and the other by the rope, head foremost; then, without stopping, each
climbed on some horizontal bars.

Lemon first hung by his hands to the bar he had seized, and then he drew
himself up until his chest touched the bar; then, lowering himself, he
passed one of his feet through his hands, and hitched his knee over the
bar; then he swung backwards, and came up sitting on the bar with one
leg; it was easy enough to draw the other leg after him.  Throwing
himself off, he caught the bar again by his hands, and curled his body
over it.

"That's all very fine," exclaimed Blackall, who had been sitting on a
bar observing him; "but, old fellow, can you do this?"

Blackall, as he spoke, threw himself off the bar, grasping it with both
hands; then he passed the left knee through the right arm, so as to let
the knee rest in the elbow; then he passed the right knee over the
instep of the left foot, and letting go his left hand, he grasped his
right foot with it.  Thus he hung, suspended by his right hand, and
coiled up like a ball.  After hanging thus for a couple of minutes, he
caught the bar by his other hand, and, uncoiling himself, brought his
feet between his arms and allowed them to drop till they nearly touched
the ground.  Then he turned back the same way.  Once more lifting
himself up, he threw his legs over the bar, and dropping straight down,
hung by his bent knees, with his head towards the ground.  A little
fellow passing at the moment, he called him, and lifted him off the
ground; a feat which called forth the loud applause of all his admirers.
This excited him to further efforts, and he was induced to continue
still longer when he found that Lemon did not seem inclined to vie with
him.

While the exercises I have described were going forward, the Doctor made
his appearance at the door of the yard, accompanied by a boy who looked
curiously round at what was taking place.  After waiting a minute or so,
the Doctor led him on through the grounds.

"I wonder who that chap is!" observed Tommy Bouldon.  "He looks a
regular-built sawney."

"Oh, don't you know?  He's the new fellow," answered Bobby Dawson.  "I
heard something about him from Sandon, who lives in the same county, ten
or a dozen miles from his father's house.  The families visit,--that is
to say, the elders go and stay at each other's houses,--but Sandon has
never met this fellow himself, so he could only tell me what he had
heard.  One thing he knows for certain, that he has never been at school
before, so he must be a regular muff, don't you see.  His father is a
sort of philosopher--brings up his children unlike anybody else; makes
them learn all about insects and flowers, and birds and beasts, and
astronomy, and teaches them to do all sorts of things besides, but
nothing that is of any use in the world that I know of.  Now I'll wager
young Hopeful has never played football or cricket in his life, and
couldn't if he was to try.  Those sort of fellows, in my opinion, are
only fit to keep tame rabbits and silkworms."

Master Bobby did not exactly define to what sort of character he
alluded; and it is possible he might have been mistaken as to his
opinion of the new boy.

"Well, I agree with you," observed Tommy Bouldon, drawing himself up to
his full height of three feet seven inches, and looking very
consequential.  "I hate those home-bred, missy, milk-and-water chaps.
It is a pity they should ever come to school at all.  They are more fit
to be turned into nursery-maids, and to look after their little brothers
and sisters."

This sally of wit drew forth a shout of laughter from Bobby Dawson, who
forthwith settled in his mind that he would precious soon take the shine
out of the new boy.

"But, I say, what is the fellow's name?" asked Tommy.

"Oh, didn't I tell you?" answered Bobby.  "It's Bracebridge; his
