
"Vrihadaswa said, 'Having heard the words of the leader of that caravan,
Damayanti of faultless limbs proceeded with that caravan itself anxious
to behold her lord. And after having proceeded for many days the
merchants saw a large lake fragrant with lotuses in the midst of that
dense and terrible forest. And it was beautiful all over, and
exceedingly delightful, (with banks) abounding in grass and fuel and
fruits and flowers. And it was inhabited by various kinds of fowls and
birds, and full of water that was pure and sweet. And it was cool and
capable of captivating the heart. And the caravan, worn out with toil,
resolved to halt there. And with the permission of their leader, they
spread themselves around those beautiful woods. And that mighty caravan
finding it was evening halted at that place. And (it came to pass that)
at the hour of midnight when everything was hushed and still and the
tired caravan had fallen asleep, a herd of elephants in going towards a
mountain stream to drink of its water befouled by their temporal juice,
saw that caravan as also the numerous elephants belonging to it. And
seeing their domesticated fellows the wild elephants infuriated and with
the temporal juice trickling down rushed impetuously on the former, with
the intention of killing them. And the force of the rush of those
elephants was hard to bear, like the impetuosity of peaks lessened from
mountain summits rolling towards the plain. The rushing elephants found
the forest paths to be all blocked up, for the goodly caravan was
sleeping obstructing the paths around that lake of lotuses. And the
elephants all of a sudden, began to crush the men lying insensible on
the ground. And uttering cries of "_Oh!_" and "_Alas!_" the merchants,
blinded by sleep, fled, in order to escape that danger, to copses and
woods for refuge. And some were slain by the tusks, and some by the
trunks, and some by the legs of those elephants. And innumerable camels
and horses were killed, and crowds of men on foot, running in fright,
killed one another. And uttering loud cries some fell down on the
ground, and some in fear climbed on trees, and some dropped down on
uneven ground. And, O king, thus accidentally attacked by that large herd
of elephants, that goodly caravan suffered a great loss. And there arose
a tremendous uproar calculated to frighten the three worlds, "Lo! a
great fire hath broken out. Rescue us. Do ye speedily fly away. Why do
ye fly? Take the heaps of jewels scattered around. All this wealth is a
trifle. I do not speak falsely, I tell you again, (exclaimed some one)
think on my words, O ye distracted one!" With such exclamation they ran
about in fright. And Damayanti awoke in fear and anxiety, while that
terrible slaughter was raging there. And beholding slaughter capable of
awaking the fear of all the worlds, and which was so unforeseen, the
damsel of eyes like lotus leaves rose up, wild with fright, and almost
out of breath. And those of the caravan that had escaped unhurt, met
together, and asked one another, "Of what deed of ours is this the
consequence? Surely, we have failed to worship the illustrious
Manibhadras, and likewise the exalted and graceful Vaisravana, the king
of the Yaksha. Perhaps, we have not worshipped the deities that cause
calamities, or perhaps, we have not paid them the first homage. Or,
perhaps, this evil is the certain consequence of the birds (we saw). Our
stars are not unpropitious. From what other cause, then hath this
disaster come?" Others, distressed and bereft of wealth and relatives,
said, "That maniac-like woman who came amongst this mighty caravan in
guise that was strange and scarcely human, alas, it is by her that this
dreadful illusion had been pre-arranged. Of a certainty, she is a
terrible Rakshasa or a Yaksha or a Pisacha woman. All this evil is her
work, what need of doubts? If we again see that wicked destroyer of
merchants, that giver of innumerable woes, we shall certainly slay that
injurer of ours, with stones, and dust, and grass, and wood, and cuffs."
And hearing these dreadful words of the merchants, Damayanti, in terror
and shame and anxiety, fled into the woods apprehensive of evil. And
reproaching herself she said, "Alas! fierce and great is the wrath of
God on me. Peace followeth not in my track. Of what misdeed is this the
consequence? I do not remember that I did ever so little a wrong to any
one in thought, word, or deed. Of what deed, then, is this the
consequence? Certainly, it is on account of the great sins I had
committed in a former life that such calamity hath befallen me, _viz_.,
the loss of my husband's kingdom, his defeat at the hands of his own
kinsmen, this separation from my lord and my son and daughter, this my
unprotected state, and my presence in this forest abounding in
innumerable beasts of prey!"

"'The next day, O king, the remnant of that caravan left the place
bewailing the destruction that had overtaken them and lamenting for
their dead brothers and fathers and sons and friends. And the princess
of Vidarbha began to lament, saying, "Alas! What misdeed have I
perpetrated! The crowd of men that I obtained in this lone forest, hath
been destroyed by a herd of elephants, surely as a consequence of my ill
luck. Without doubt, I shall have to suffer misery for a long time. I
have heard from old men that no person dieth ere his time; it is for
this that my miserable self hath not been trodden to death by that herd
of elephants. Nothing that befalleth men is due to anything else than
Destiny, for even in my childhood I did not commit any such sin in
thought, word, or deed, whence might come this calamity. Methinks, I
suffer this severance from my husband through the potency of those
celestial _Lokapalas_, who had come to the Swayamvara but whom I
disregarded for the sake of Nala." Bewailing thus, O tiger among kings,
that excellent lady, Damayanti, devoted to her husband, went, oppressed
with grief and (pale) as the autumnal moon, with those Brahmanas versed
in the Vedas that had survived the slaughter of the caravan. And
departing speedily, towards evening, the damsel came to the mighty city
of the truth-telling Suvahu, the king of the Chedis. And she entered
that excellent city clad in half a garment. And the citizens saw her as
she went, overcome with fear, and lean, melancholy, her hair dishevelled
and soiled with dust, and maniac-like. And beholding her enter the city
of the king of the Chedis, the boys of the city, from curiosity, began
to follow her. And surrounded by them, she came before the palace of the
king. And from the terrace the queen-mother saw her surrounded by the
crowd. And she said to her nurse, "Go and bring that woman before me.
She is forlorn and is being vexed by the crowd. She hath fallen into
distress and standeth in need of succour. I find her beauty to be such
that it illumineth my house. The fair one, though looking like a maniac,
seemeth a very _Sree_ with her large eyes." Thus commanded, the nurse
went out and dispersing the crowd brought Damayanti to that graceful
terrace. And struck with wonder, O king, she asked Damayanti, saying,
"Afflicted though thou art with such distress, thou ownest a beautiful
form. Thou shinest like lightning in the midst of the clouds. Tell me
who thou art, and whose, O thou possessed of celestial splendour,
surely, thy beauty is not human, bereft though thou art of ornaments.
And although thou art helpless, yet thou art unmoved under the outrage
of these men." Hearing these words of the nurse, the daughter of Bhima
said, "Know that I am a female belonging to the human species and
devoted to my husband. I am a serving woman of good lineage. I live
wherever I like, subsisting on fruit and roots, and whom a companion,
and stay where evening overtaketh me. My husband is the owner of
countless virtues and was ever devoted to me. And I also, on my part,
was deeply attached to him, following him like his shadow. It chanced
that once he became desperately engaged at dice. Defeated at dice, he
came alone into the forest. I accompanied my husband into the woods,
comforting the hero clad in a single piece of cloth and maniac-like and
overwhelmed with calamity. Once on a time for some cause, that hero,
afflicted with hunger and thirst and grief, was forced to abandon that
sole piece of covering in the forest. Destitute of garment and
maniac-like and deprived of his senses as he was, I followed him, myself
in a single garment. Following him, I did not sleep for nights together.
Thus passed many days, until at last while I was sleeping, he cut off
half of my cloth, and forsook me who had done him no wrong. I am seeking
my husband but unable to find him who is of hue like the filaments of
the lotus, without being able to cast my eyes on that delight of my
heart, that dear lord who owneth my heart and resembleth the celestials
in mien, day and night do I burn in grief."

"'Unto Bhima's daughter thus lamenting with tearful eyes, and afflicted
and speaking in accents choked in grief, the queen-mother herself said,
"O blessed damsel, do thou stay with me. I am well pleased with thee. O
fair lady, my men shall search for thy husband. Or, perhaps he may come
here of his own accord in course of his wanderings. And, O beautiful
lady, residing here thou wilt regain thy (lost) lord." Hearing these
words of the queen mother, Damayanti replied, "O mother of heroes, I may
stay with thee on certain conditions. I shall not eat the leavings on
any dish, nor shall I wash anybody's feet, nor shall I have to speak
with other men. And if anybody shall seek me (as a wife or mistress) he
should be liable to punishment at thy hands. And, further, should he
solicit me over and over again, that wicked one should be punished with
death. This is the vow I have made. I intend to have an interview with
those Brahmanas that will set out to search for my husband. If thou
canst do all this, I shall certainly live with thee. If it is otherwise,
I cannot find it in my heart to reside with thee." The queen-mother
answered her with a glad heart, saying, "I will do all this. Thou hast
done well in adopting such a vow!"'

"Vrihadaswa continued, 'O king, having spoken so unto the daughter of
Bhima, the queen-mother, O Bharata, said to her daughter named Sunanda,
"O Sunanda, accept this lady like a goddess as thy _Sairindhri_! Let her
be thy companion, as she is of the same age with thee. Do thou, with
heart free from care, always sport with her in joy." And Sunanda
cheerfully accepted Damayanti and led her to her own apartment
accompanied by her associates. And treated with respect, Damayanti was
satisfied, and she continued to reside there without anxiety of any
kind, for all her wishes were duly gratified.'"


SECTION LXVI

"Vrihadaswa said, 'O monarch, having deserted Damayanti, king Nala saw a
mighty conflagration that was raging in that dense forest. And in the
midst of that conflagration, he heard the voice of some creature,
repeatedly crying aloud, "O righteous Nala, come hither." And answering,
"Fear not," he entered into the midst of the fire and beheld a mighty
_Naga_ lying in coils. And the Naga with joined hands, and trembling,
spake unto Nala, saying, "O king, I am a snake, Karkotaka by name. I had
deceived the great Rishi Narada of high ascetic merit, and by him have I
been cursed in wrath, O king of men, even in words such as these: 'Stay
thou here like an immobile thing, until one Nala taketh thee hence. And,
indeed, on the spot to which he will carry thee, there shalt thou be
freed from my curse.' It is for that curse of his that I am unable to
stir one step. I will instruct thee in respect of thy welfare. It
behoveth thee to deliver me. I will be thy friend. There is no snake
equal to me. I will be light in thy hands. Taking me up, do thou
speedily go hence." Having said this, that prince of snakes became as
small as the thumb. And taking him up, Nala went to a spot free from
fire. Having reached an open spot where there was no fire, Nala intended
to drop the serpent, upon which Karkotaka again addressed him, saying,
"O king of the Nishadhas, proceed thou yet, counting a few steps of
thine; meanwhile, O mighty-armed one, I will do thee great good." And as
Nala began to count his steps, the snake bit him at the tenth step. And,
lo! As he was bit, his form speedily underwent a change. And beholding
his change of form, Nala was amazed. And the king saw the snake also
assume his own form. And the snake Karkotaka, comforting Nala, spake
unto him, "I have deprived thee of thy beauty, so that people may not
recognise thee. And, O Nala, he by whom thou hast been deceived and cast
into distress, shall dwell in thee tortured by my venom. And, O monarch,
as long as he doth not leave thee, he will have to dwell in pain in thy
body with thine every limb filled with my venom. And, O ruler of men I
have saved from the hands of him who from anger and hate deceived thee,
perfectly innocent though thou art and undeserving of wrong. And, O
tiger among men, through my grace, thou shalt have (no longer) any fear
from animals with fangs, from enemies, and from Brahmanas also versed in
the Vedas, O king! Nor shalt thou, O monarch, feel pain on account of my
poison. And, O foremost of kings, thou shalt be ever victorious in
battle. This very day, O prince, O lord of Nishadhas, go to the
delightful city of Ayodhya, and present thyself before Rituparna skilled
in gambling, saying, '_I am a charioteer, Vahuka by name_.' And that
king will give thee his skill in dice for thy knowledge of horses.
Sprung from the line of Ikswaku, and possessed of prosperity, he will be
thy friend. When thou wilt be an adept at dice, thou shalt then have
prosperity. Thou wilt also meet with thy wife and thy children, and
regain thy kingdom. I tell thee this truly. Therefore, let not thy mind
be occupied by sorrow. And, O lord of men, when thou shouldst desire to
behold thy proper form, thou shouldst remember me, and wear this
garment. Upon wearing this, thou shalt get back thy own form." And
saying this, that Naga then gave unto Nala two pieces of celestial
cloth. And, O son of the Kuru race, having thus instructed Nala, and
presented him with the attire, the king of snakes, O monarch, made
himself invisible there and then!'"


SECTION LXVII

"Vrihadaswa said, 'After the snake had vanished, Nala, the ruler of the
Nishadhas, proceeded, and on the tenth day entered the city of
Rituparna. And he approached the king, saying, "My name is Vahuka. There
is no one in this world equal to me in managing steeds. My counsel also
should be sought in matters of difficulty and in all affairs of skill. I
also surpass others in the art of cooking. In all those arts that exist
in this world, and also in every thing difficult of accomplishment, I
will strive to attain success, O Rituparna, do thou maintain me." And
Rituparna replied, "O Vahuka, stay with me! May good happen to thee.
Thou wilt even perform all this. I have always particularly desired to
be driven fast. Do thou concert such measures that my steeds may become
fleet. I appoint thee the superintendent of my stables. Thy pay shall be
ten thousand (coins). Both Varshneya and Jivala shall always be under
thy direction. Thou wilt live pleasantly in their company. Therefore, O
Vahuka, stay thou with me."'

"Vrihadaswa continued, 'Thus addressed by the king, Nala began to dwell
in the city of Rituparna, treated with respect and with Varshneya and
Jivala as his companions. And residing there, the king (Nala),
remembering the princess of Vidarbha, recited every evening the
following _sloka_: "_Where lieth that helpless one afflicted with hunger
and thirst and worn with toil, thinking of that wretch? And upon whom
also doth she now wait?_" And once as the king was reciting this in the
night, Jivala asked him saying, "O Vahuka, whom dost thou lament thus
daily? I am curious to hear it. O thou blest with length of days, whose
spouse is she whom thus lamentest?" Thus questioned, king Nala answered
him, saying, "A certain person devoid of sense had a wife well-known to
many. That wretch was false in his promises. For some reason that wicked
person was separated from her. Separated from her, that wretch wandered
about oppressed with woe, and burning with grief he resteth not by day
or night. And at night, remembering her, he singeth this _sloka_. Having
wandered over the entire world, he hath at last found a refuge, and
undeserving of the distress that hath befallen him, passeth his days,
thus remembering his wife. When calamity had overtaken this man, his
wife followed him into the woods. Deserted by that man of little virtue,
her life itself is in danger. Alone, without knowledge of ways, ill able
to bear distress, and fainting with hunger and thirst, the girl can
hardly protect her life. And, O friend, she hath been deserted by that
man of small fortune and having little sense, with the wide and terrible
forest, ever abounding in beasts of prey."

"'Thus remembering Damayanti, the king of the Nishadhas continued to
live unknown in the abode of that monarch!'"


SECTION LXVIII

"Vrihadaswa said, 'After Nala, despoiled of his kingdom, had, with his
wife, become a bondsman, Bhima with the desire of seeing Nala sent out
Brahmanas to search for him. And giving them profuse wealth, Bhima
enjoined on them, saying, "Do ye search for Nala, and also for my
daughter Damayanti. He who achieveth this task, _viz_., ascertaining
where the ruler of the Nishadhas is, bringeth him and my daughter
hither, will obtain from me a thousand kine, and fields, and a village
resembling a town. Even if failing to bring Damayanti and Nala here, he
that succeeds learning their whereabouts, will get from me the wealth
represented by a thousand kine." Thus addressed, the Brahmanas
cheerfully went out in all directions seeking Nala and his wife in
cities and provinces. But Nala or his spouse they found not anywhere.
Until at length searching in the beautiful city of the Chedis, a
Brahmana named Sudeva, during the time of the king's prayers, saw the
princess of Vidarbha in the palace of the king, seated with Sunanda. And
her incomparable beauty was slightly perceptible, like the brightness of
a fire enveloped in curls of smoke. And beholding that lady of large
eyes, soiled and emaciated he decided her to be Damayanti, coming to
that conclusion from various reasons. And Sudeva said, "As I saw her
before, this damsel is even so at present. O, I am blest, by casting my
eyes on this fair one, like _Sree_ herself delighting the worlds!
Resembling the full moon, of unchanging youth, of well-rounded breasts,
illumining all sides by her splendour, possessed of large eyes like
beautiful lotuses, like unto Kama's Rati herself the delight of all the
worlds like the rays of the full moon, O, she looketh like a lotus-stalk
transplanted by adverse fortune from the Vidarbha lake and covered with
mire in the process. And oppressed with grief on account of her husband,
and melancholy, she looketh like the night of the full moon when Rahu
hath swallowed that luminary, or like a stream whose current hath dried
up. Her plight is very much like that of a ravaged lake with the leaves
of its lotuses crushed by the trunks of elephants, and with its birds
and fowls affrighted by the invasion. Indeed, this girl, of a delicate
frame and of lovely limbs, and deserving to dwell in a mansion decked
with gems, is (now) like an uprooted lotus-stalk scorched by the sun.
Endued with beauty and generosity of nature, and destitute of ornaments,
though deserving of them, she looketh like the moon 'new bent in heaven'
but covered with black clouds. Destitute of comforts and luxuries,
separated from loved ones and friends, she liveth in distress, supported
by the hope of beholding her lord. Verily, the husband is the best
ornament of a woman, however destitute of ornaments. Without her husband
beside her, this lady, though beautiful, shineth not. It is a hard feat
achieved by Nala in that he liveth without succumbing to grief, though
separated from such a wife. Beholding this damsel possessed of black
hair and of eyes like lotus-leaves, in woe though deserving of bliss,
even my heart is pained. Alas! when shall this girl graced with
auspicious marks and devoted to her husband, crossing this ocean of woe,
regain the company of her lord, like Rohini regaining the Moon's?
Surely, the king of the Nishadhas will experience in regaining her the
delight that a king deprived of his kingdom experienceth in regaining
his kingdom. Equal to her in nature and age and extraction, Nala
deserveth the daughter of Vidarbha, and this damsel of black eyes also
deserveth him. It behoveth me to comfort the queen of that hero of
immeasurable prowess and endued with energy and might, (since) she is so
eager to meet her husband. I will console this afflicted girl of face
like the full moon, and suffering distress that she had never before
endured, and ever meditating on her lord."'

"Vrihadaswa continued, 'Having thus reflected on these various
circumstances and signs, the Brahmana, Sudeva, approached Damayanti, and
addressed her, saying, "O princess of Vidarbha, I am Sudeva, the dear
friend of thy brother. I have come here, seeking thee, at the desire of
king Bhima. Thy father is well, and also thy mother, and thy brothers.
And thy son and daughter, blessed with length of days, are living in
peace. Thy relatives, though alive, are almost dead on thy account, and
hundreds of Brahmanas are ranging the world in search of thee."'

"Vrihadaswa continued, 'O Yudhishthira, Damayanti recognising Sudeva,
asked him respecting all her relatives and kinsmen one after another.
And, O monarch, oppressed with grief, the princess of Vidarbha began to
weep bitterly, at the unexpected sight of Sudeva, that foremost of
Brahmanas and the friend of her brother. And, O Bharata, beholding
Damayanti weeping, and conversing in private with Sudeva, Sunanda was
distressed, and going to her mother informed her, saying, "_Sairindhri_
is weeping bitterly in the presence of a Brahmana. If thou likest,
satisfy thyself." And thereupon the mother of the king of the Chedis,
issuing from the inner apartments of the palace, came to the place where
the girl (Damayanti) was with that Brahmana. Then calling Sudeva, O
king, the queen-mother asked him, "Whose wife is this fair one, and
whose daughter? How hath this lady of beautiful eyes been deprived of
the company of her relatives and of her husband as well? And how also
hast thou come to know this lady fallen into such a plight? I wish to
hear all this in detail from thee. Do truly relate unto me who am asking
thee about this damsel of celestial beauty." Then, O king, thus
addressed by the queen-mother, Sudeva, that best of Brahmanas, sat at
his ease, and began to relate the true history of Damayanti.'"


SECTION LXIX

"'Sudeva said, "There is a virtuous and illustrious ruler of the
Vidarbhas, Bhima by name. This blessed lady is his daughter, and widely
known by the name of Damayanti. And there is a king ruling the
Nishadhas, named Nala, the son of Virasena. This blessed lady is the
wife of that wise and righteous monarch. Defeated at dice by his
brother, and despoiled of his kingdom, that king, accompanied by
Damayanti, went away without the knowledge of any one. We have been
wandering over the whole earth in search of Damayanti. And that girl is
at last found in the house of thy son. No woman existeth that is her
rival in beauty. Between the eye-brows of this ever-youthful damsel,
there is an excellent mole from birth, resembling a lotus. Noticed by us
(before) it seems to have disappeared, covered, (as her forehead is)
with (a coat of) dust even like the moon hid in clouds. Placed there by
the Creator himself as an indication of prosperity and wealth, that mole
is visible faintly, like the cloud-covered lunar crescent of the first
day of the lighted fortnight. And covered as her body is with dust, her
beauty hath not disappeared. Though careless of her person, it is still
manifest, and shineth like gold. And this girl--goddess-like--capable of
being identified by this form of hers and that mole, hath been
discovered by me as one discovereth a fire that is covered, by its
heat!"

"'O king, hearing these words of Sudeva, Sunanda washed the dust that
covered the mole between Damayanti's eye-brows. And thereupon it became
visible like the moon in the sky, just emerged from the clouds. And
seeing that mole, O Bharata, Sunanda and the queen-mother began to weep,
and embracing Damayanti stood silent for a while. And the queen-mother,
shedding tears as she spoke, said in gentle accents, "By this thy mole,
I find that thou art the daughter of my sister. O beauteous girl, thy
mother and I are both daughters of the high-souled Sudaman, the ruler of
the Dasarnas. She was bestowed upon king Bhima, and I on Viravahu. I
witnessed thy birth at our father's palace in the country of the
Dasarnas. O beautiful one, my house is to thee even as thy father's. And
this wealth, O Damayanti, is thine as much as mine." At this, O king,
Damayanti bowing down to her mother's sister with a glad heart, spake
unto her these words, "Unrecognised, I have still lived happily with
thee, every want of mine satisfied and myself cared for by thee. And
happy as my stay hath been, it would, without doubt, be happier still.
But, mother, I have long been an exile. It behoveth thee, therefore, to
grant me permission (to depart). My son and daughter, sent to my
father's palace, are living there. Deprived of their father, and of
their mother also, how are they passing their days stricken with sorrow.
If thou wishest to do what is agreeable to me, do thou without loss of
time, order a vehicle, for I wish to go to the Vidarbhas." At this, O
king, the sister to (Damayanti's) mother, with a glad heart, said, "_So
be it._" And the queen-mother with her son's permission, O chief of the
Bharatas, sent Damayanti in handsome litter carried by men, protected by
a large escort and provided with food and drink and garments of the
first quality. And soon enough she reached the country of the Vidarbhas.
And all her relatives, rejoicing (in her arrival) received her with
respect. And seeing her relatives, her children, both her parents, and
all her maids, to be well, the illustrious Damayanti, O king, worshipped
the gods and Brahmanas according to the superior method. And the king
rejoiced at beholding his daughter, and gave unto Sudeva a thousand kine
and much wealth and a village. And, O king, having spent that night at
her father's mansion and recovered from fatigue, Damayanti addressed her
mother, saying, "O mother, if thou wishest me to live, I tell thee
truly, do thou endeavour to bring Nala, that hero among men." Thus
addressed by Damayanti, the venerable queen became filled with sorrow.
And bathed in tears, she was unable to give any answer. And beholding
her in that plight, all the inmates of the inner apartments broke out
into exclamation of "_Oh!_" and "_Alas!_" and began to cry bitterly. And
then the queen addressed the mighty monarch Bhima, saying, "Thy daughter
Damayanti mourneth on account of her husband. Nay, banishing away all
bashfulness, she hath herself, O king, declared her mind to me. Let thy
men strive to find out (Nala) the righteous." Thus informed by her the
king sent the Brahmanas under him in all directions, saying, "Exert ye
to discover Nala." And those Brahmanas, commanded by the ruler of the
Vidarbhas (to seek Nala) appeared before Damayanti and told her of the
journey they were about to undertake. And Bhima's daughter spake unto
them saying, "Do ye cry in every realm and in every assembly, 'O beloved
gambler, where hast thou gone cutting off half of my garment, and
deserting the dear and devoted wife asleep in the forest? And that girl,
as commanded by thee stayeth expecting thee, clad in half a piece of
cloth and burning with grief! O king, O hero, relent towards, and
answer, her who incessantly weepeth for that grief.' This and more ye
will say, so that he may be inclined to pity me. Assisted by the wind,
fire consumeth the forest. (Further, ye will say that) 'the wife is
always to be protected and maintained by the husband. Why then, good as
thou art and acquainted with every duty, hast thou neglected both thy
duties? Possessed of fame and wisdom, and lineage, and kindness, why
hast thou be unkind? I fear, this is owing to the loss of my good luck!
Therefore, O tiger among men, have pity on me. O bull among men! I have
heard it from thee that kindness is the highest virtue.' Speaking so, if
anybody answereth you, that person should by all means, be known, and ye
should learn who he is, and where he dwelleth. And ye foremost of
regenerate ones, do ye bring me the words of him who hearing this your
speech will chance to answer. Ye should also act with such care that no
one may know the words ye utter to be at my command, nor that ye will
come back to me. And ye should also learn whether that answers is
wealthy, or poor, or destitute of power, in fact all about him."

"'Thus instructed by Damayanti, O king, the Brahmanas set out in all
directions in search of Nala overtaken with such disaster. And the
Brahmanas, O king, searched for him in cities and kingdoms and villages,
and retreats of ascetics, and places inhabited by cow-herds. And, O
monarch, wherever they went they recited the speeches that Damayanti had
directed them to do.'"


SECTION LXX

"Vrihadaswa said, 'After a long time had passed away, a Brahmana named
Parnada returned to the city (of the Vidarbhas), and said unto the
daughter of Bhima, "O Damayanti, seeking Nala, the king of Nishaidhas, I
came to the city of Ayodhya, and appeared before the son of Bhangasura.
And, O best of women, I repeated those words of thine in the presence of
the blessed Rituparna. But hearing them neither that ruler of men, nor
his courtiers, answered anything, although I uttered them repeatedly.
Then, after I had been dismissed by the monarch, I was accosted by a
person in the service of Rituparna, named Vahuka. And Vahuka is the
charioteer of that king, of unsightly appearance and possessed of short
arms. And he is skillful in driving with speed, and well acquainted with
the culinary art. And sighing frequently, and weeping again and again,
he inquired about my welfare and afterwards said these words, 'Chaste
