old how to stoop on his foes. I will purchase for his sake my life and
my freedom, by discovering my secret to the Knight of Ardenvohr."

"You may attain your end more easily," said a third voice, mingling in
the conference, "by entrusting it to me."

All Highlanders are superstitious. "The Enemy of Mankind is among us!"
said Ranald MacEagh, springing to his feet. His chains clattered as he
rose, while he drew himself as far as they permitted from the
quarter whence the voice appeared to proceed. His fear in some degree
communicated itself to Captain Dalgetty, who began to repeat, in a sort
of polyglot gibberish, all the exorcisms he had ever heard of, without
being able to remember more than a word or two of each.

"IN NOMINE DOMINI, as we said at Mareschal-College--SANTISSMA MADRE DI
DIOS, as the Spaniard has it--ALLE GUTEN GEISTER LOBEN DEN HERRN, saith
the blessed Psalmist, in Dr. Luther's translation--"

"A truce with your exorcisms," said the voice they had heard before;
"though I come strangely among you, I am mortal like yourselves, and my
assistance may avail you in your present streight, if you are not too
proud to be counselled."

While the stranger thus spoke, he withdrew the shade of a dark lantern,
by whose feeble light Dalgetty could only discern that the speaker who
had thus mysteriously united himself to their company, and mixed in
their conversation, was a tall man, dressed in a livery cloak of the
Marquis. His first glance was to his feet, but he saw neither the cloven
foot which Scottish legends assign to the foul fiend, nor the horse's
hoof by which he is distinguished in Germany. His first enquiry was, how
the stranger had come among them?

"For," said he, "the creak of these rusty bars would have been heard had
the door been made patent; and if you passed through the keyhole, truly,
sir, put what face you will on it, you are not fit to be enrolled in a
regiment of living men."

"I reserve my secret," answered the stranger, "until you shall merit the
discovery by communicating to me some of yours. It may be that I shall
be moved to let you out where I myself came in."

"It cannot be through the keyhole, then," said Captain Dalgetty, "for my
corslet would stick in the passage, were it possible that my head-piece
could get through. As for secrets, I have none of my own, and but few
appertaining to others. But impart to us what secrets you desire
to know; or, as Professor Snufflegreek used to say at the
Mareschal-College, Aberdeen, speak that I may know thee."

"It is not with you I have first to do," replied the stranger, turning
his light full on the mild and wasted features, and the large limbs of
the Highlander, Ranald MacEagh, who, close drawn up against the walls of
the dungeon, seemed yet uncertain whether his guest was a living being.

"I have brought you something, my friend," said the stranger, in a more
soothing tone, "to mend your fare; if you are to die to-morrow, it is no
reason wherefore you should not live to-night."

"None at all--no reason in the creation," replied the ready Captain
Dalgetty, who forthwith began to unpack the contents of a small basket
which the stranger had brought under his cloak, while the Highlander,
either in suspicion or disdain, paid no attention to the good cheer.

"Here's to thee, my friend," said the Captain, who, having already
dispatched a huge piece of roasted kid, was now taking a pull at the
wine-flask. "What is thy name, my good friend?"

"Murdoch Campbell, sir," answered the servant, "a lackey of the Marquis
of Argyle, and occasionally acting as under-warden."

"Then here is to thee once more, Murdoch," said Dalgetty, "drinking to
you by your proper name for the better luck sake. This wine I take to be
Calcavella. Well, honest Murdoch, I take it on me to say, thou deservest
to be upper-warden, since thou showest thyself twenty times better
acquainted with the way of victualling honest gentlemen that are under
misfortune, than thy principal. Bread and water? out upon him! It was
enough, Murdoch, to destroy the credit of the Marquis's dungeon. But I
see you would converse with my friend, Ranald MacEagh here. Never mind
my presence; I'll get me into this corner with the basket, and I will
warrant my jaws make noise enough to prevent my ears from hearing you."

Notwithstanding this promise, however, the veteran listened with all
the attention he could to gather their discourse, or, as he described it
himself, "laid his ears back in his neck, like Gustavus, when he heard
the key turn in the girnell-kist." He could, therefore, owing to the
narrowness of the dungeon, easily overhear the following dialogue.

"Are you aware, Son of the Mist," said the Campbell, "that you will
never leave this place excepting for the gibbet?"

"Those who are dearest to me," answered MacEagh, "have trode that path
before me."

"Then you would do nothing," asked the visitor, "to shun following
them?"

The prisoner writhed himself in his chains before returning an answer.

"I would do much," at length he said; "not for my own life, but for the
sake of the pledge in the glen of Strath-Aven."

"And what would you do to turn away the bitterness of the hour?" again
demanded Murdoch; "I care not for what cause ye mean to shun it."

"I would do what a man might do, and still call himself a man."

"Do you call yourself a man," said the interrogator, "who have done the
deeds of a wolf?"

"I do," answered the outlaw; "I am a man like my forefathers--while
wrapt in the mantle of peace, we were lambs--it was rent from us, and ye
now call us wolves. Give us the huts ye have burned, our children whom
ye have murdered, our widows whom ye have starved--collect from the
gibbet and the pole the mangled carcasses, and whitened skulls of our
kinsmen--bid them live and bless us, and we will be your vassals and
brothers--till then, let death, and blood, and mutual wrong, draw a dark
veil of division between us."

"You will then do nothing for your liberty," said the Campbell.

"Anything--but call myself the friend of your tribe," answered MacEagh.

"We scorn the friendship of banditti and caterans," retorted Murdoch,
"and would not stoop to accept it.--What I demand to know from you, in
exchange for your liberty, is, where the daughter and heiress of the
Knight of Ardenvohr is now to be found?"

"That you may wed her to some beggarly kinsman of your great master,"
said Ranald, "after the fashion of the Children of Diarmid! Does not
the valley of Glenorquhy, to this very hour, cry shame on the violence
offered to a helpless infant whom her kinsmen were conveying to the
court of the Sovereign? Were not her escort compelled to hide her
beneath a cauldron, round which they fought till not one remained to
tell the tale? and was not the girl brought to this fatal castle, and
afterwards wedded to the brother of M'Callum More, and all for the sake
of her broad lands?" [Such a story is told of the heiress of the clan
of Calder, who was made prisoner in the manner described, and afterwards
wedded to Sir Duncan Campbell, from which union the Campbells of Cawdor
have their descent.]

"And if the tale be true," said Murdoch, "she had a preferment beyond
what the King of Scots would have conferred on her. But this is far
from the purpose. The daughter of Sir Duncan of Ardenvohr is of our own
blood, not a stranger; and who has so good a right to know her fate as
M'Callum More, the chief of her clan?"

"It is on his part, then, that you demand it!" said the outlaw. The
domestic of the Marquis assented.

"And you will practise no evil against the maiden?--I have done her
wrong enough already."

"No evil, upon the word of a Christian man," replied Murdoch.

"And my guerdon is to be life and liberty?" said the Child of the Mist.

"Such is our paction," replied the Campbell.

"Then know, that the child whom I saved our of compassion at the
spoiling of her father's tower of strength, was bred as an adopted
daughter of our tribe, until we were worsted at the pass of
Ballenduthil, by the fiend incarnate and mortal enemy of our tribe,
Allan M'Aulay of the Bloody hand, and by the horsemen of Lennox, under
the heir of Menteith."

"Fell she into the power of Allan of the Bloody hand," said Murdoch,
"and she a reputed daughter of thy tribe? Then her blood has gilded the
dirk, and thou hast said nothing to rescue thine own forfeited life."

"If my life rest on hers," answered the outlaw, "it is secure, for she
still survives; but it has a more insecure reliance--the frail promise
of a son of Diarmid."

"That promise shall not fail you," said the Campbell, "if you can assure
me that she survives, and where she is to be found."

"In the Castle of Darlinvarach," said Ranald MacEagh, "under the name
of Annot Lyle. I have often heard of her from my kinsmen, who have again
approached their native woods, and it is not long since mine old eyes
beheld her."

"You!" said Murdoch, in astonishment, "you, a chief among the Children
of the Mist, and ventured so near your mortal foe?"

"Son of Diarmid, I did more," replied the outlaw; "I was in the hall of
the castle, disguised as a harper from the wild shores of Skianach. My
purpose was to have plunged my dirk in the body of the M'Aulay with the
Bloody hand, before whom our race trembles, and to have taken thereafter
what fate God should send me. But I saw Annot Lyle, even when my hand
was on the hilt of my dagger. She touched her clairshach [Harp] to
a song of the Children of the Mist, which she had learned when her
dwelling was amongst us. The woods in which we had dwelt pleasantly,
rustled their green leaves in the song, and our streams were there with
the sound of all their waters. My hand forsook the dagger; the fountains
of mine eyes were opened, and the hour of revenge passed away.--And now,
Son of Diarmid, have I not paid the ransom of my head?"

"Ay," replied Murdoch, "if your tale be true; but what proof can you
assign for it?"

"Bear witness, heaven and earth," exclaimed the outlaw, "he already
looks how he may step over his word!"

"Not so," replied Murdoch; "every promise shall be kept to you when I am
assured you have told me the truth.--But I must speak a few words with
your companion in captivity."

"Fair and false--ever fair and false," muttered the prisoner, as he
threw himself once more on the floor of his dungeon.

Meanwhile, Captain Dalgetty, who had attended to every word of this
dialogue, was making his own remarks on it in private. "What the HENKER
can this sly fellow have to say to me? I have no child, either of my
own, so far as I know, or of any other person, to tell him a tale about.
But let him come on--he will have some manoeuvring ere he turn the flank
of the old soldier."

Accordingly, as if he had stood pike in hand to defend a breach, he
waited with caution, but without fear, the commencement of the attack.

"You are a citizen of the world, Captain Dalgetty," said Murdoch
Campbell, "and cannot be ignorant of our old Scotch proverb, GIF-GAF,
[In old English, KA ME KA THEE, i.e. mutually serving each other.] which
goes through all nations and all services."

"Then I should know something of it," said Dalgetty; "for, except the
Turks, there are few powers in Europe whom I have not served; and I have
sometimes thought of taking a turn either with Bethlem Gabor, or with
the Janizaries."

"A man of your experience and unprejudiced ideas, then, will understand
me at once," said Murdoch, "when I say, I mean that your freedom shall
depend on your true and up right answer to a few trifling questions
respecting the gentlemen you have left; their state of preparation; the
number of their men, and nature of their appointments; and as much as
you chance to know about their plan of operations."

"Just to satisfy your curiosity," said Dalgetty, "and without any
farther purpose?"

"None in the world," replied Murdoch; "what interest should a poor devil
like me take in their operations?"

"Make your interrogations, then," said the Captain, "and I will answer
them PREREMTORIE."

"How many Irish may be on their march to join James Graham the
delinquent?"

"Probably ten thousand," said Captain Dalgetty.

"Ten thousand!" replied Murdoch angrily; "we know that scarce two
thousand landed at Ardnamurchan."

"Then you know more about them than I do," answered Captain Dalgetty,
with great composure. "I never saw them mustered yet, or even under
arms."

"And how many men of the clans may be expected?" demanded Murdoch.

"As many as they can make," replied the Captain.

"You are answering from the purpose, sir," said Murdoch "speak plainly,
will there be five thousand men?"

"There and thereabouts," answered Dalgetty.

"You are playing with your life, sir, if you trifle with me," replied
the catechist; "one whistle of mine, and in less than ten minutes your
head hangs on the drawbridge."

"But to speak candidly, Mr. Murdoch," replied the Captain "do you think
it is a reasonable thing to ask me after the secrets of our army, and I
engaged to serve for the whole campaign? If I taught you how to defeat
Montrose, what becomes of my pay, arrears, and chance of booty?"

"I tell you," said Campbell, "that if you be stubborn, your campaign
shall begin and end in a march to the block at the castle-gate, which
stands ready for such land-laufers; but if you answer my questions
faithfully, I will receive you into my--into the service of M'Callum
More."

"Does the service afford good pay?" said Captain Dalgetty.

"He will double yours, if you will return to Montrose and act under his
direction."

"I wish I had seen you, sir, before taking on with him," said Dalgetty,
appearing to meditate.

"On the contrary, I can afford you more advantageous terms now," said
the Campbell; "always supposing that you are faithful."

"Faithful, that is, to you, and a traitor to Montrose," answered the
Captain.

"Faithful to the cause of religion and good order," answered Murdoch,
"which sanctifies any deception you may employ to serve it."

"And the Marquis of Argyle--should I incline to enter his service, is he
a kind master?" demanded Dalgetty.

"Never man kinder," quoth Campbell.

"And bountiful to his officers?" pursued the Captain.

"The most open hand in Scotland," replied Murdoch.

"True and faithful to his engagements?" continued Dalgetty.

"As honourable a nobleman as breathes," said the clansman.

"I never heard so much good of him before," said Dalgetty; "you must
know the Marquis well,--or rather you must be the Marquis himself!--Lord
of Argyle," he added, throwing himself suddenly on the disguised
nobleman, "I arrest you in the name of King Charles, as a traitor. If
you venture to call for assistance, I will wrench round your neck."

The attack which Dalgetty made upon Argyle's person was so sudden and
unexpected, that he easily prostrated him on the floor of the dungeon,
and held him down with one hand, while his right, grasping the Marquis's
throat, was ready to strangle him on the slightest attempt to call for
assistance.

"Lord of Argyle," he said, "it is now my turn to lay down the terms
