not here!"

"That is a lie!  He is in that room behind you!"  the prudent gentleman
in the background called out.  "Give him up!"

"Ay, give him up!"  echoed the man of the pole-axe almost good
humouredly, "or it will be the worse for you.  Let us have at him and
get you gone!"

This with an air of much reason, while a growl as of a chained beast
ran through the crowd, mingled with cries of "A MORT LES HUGUENOTS!
VIVE LORRAINE!"--cries which seemed to show that all did not approve of
the indulgence offered us.

"Beware, gentlemen, beware," I urged, "I swear he is not here!  I swear
it, do you hear?"

A howl of impatience and then a sudden movement of the crowd as though
the rush were coming warned me to temporize no longer. "Stay!  Stay!"
I added hastily.  "One minute!  Hear me!  You are too many for us.
Will you swear to let us go safe and untouched, if we give you passage?"

A dozen voices shrieked assent.  But I looked at the butcher only.  He
seemed to be an honest man, out of his profession.

"Ay, I swear it!"  he cried with a nod.

"By the Mass?"

"By the Mass."

I twitched Croisette's sleeve, and he tore the fuse from his weapon,
and flung the gun--too heavy to be of use to us longer--to the ground.
It was done in a moment.  While the mob swept over the barricade, and
smashed the rich furniture of it in wanton malice, we filed aside, and
nimbly slipped under it one by one.  Then we hurried in single file to
the end of the room, no one taking much notice of us.  All were
pressing on, intent on their prey.  We gained the door as the butcher
struck his first blow on that which we had guarded--on that which we
had given up. We sprang down the stairs with bounding hearts, heard as
we reached the outer door the roar of many voices, but stayed not to
look behind--paused indeed for nothing.  Fear, to speak candidly, lent
us wings.  In three seconds we had leapt the prostrate gates, and were
in the street.  A cripple, two or three dogs, a knot of women looking
timidly yet curiously in, a horse tethered to the staple--we saw
nothing else.  No one stayed us.  No one raised a hand, and in another
minute we had turned a corner, and were out of sight of the house.

"They will take a gentleman's word another time," I said with a quiet
smile as I put up my sword.

"I would like to see her face at this moment," Croisette replied. "You
saw Madame d'O?"

I shook my head, not answering.  I was not sure, and I had a queer,
sickening dread of the subject.  If I had seen her, I had seen oh!  it
was too horrible, too unnatural!  Her own sister! Her own brother
in-law!

I hastened to change the subject.  "The Pavannes," I made shift to say,
"must have had five minutes' start."

"More," Croisette answered, "if Madame and he got away at once. If all
has gone well with them, and they have not been stopped in the streets
they should be at Mirepoix's by now.  They seemed to be pretty sure
that he would take them in."

"Ah!"  I sighed.  "What fools we were to bring madame from that place!
If we had not meddled with her affairs we might have reached Louis long
ago our Louis, I mean."

"True," Croisette answered softly, "but remember that then we should
not have saved the other Louis as I trust we have.  He would still be
in Pallavicini's hands.  Come, Anne, let us think it is all for the
best," he added, his face shining with a steady courage that shamed me.
"To the rescue!  Heaven will help us to be in time yet!"

"Ay, to the rescue!"  I replied, catching his spirit.  "First to the
right, I think, second to the left, first on the right again. That was
the direction given us, was it not?  The house opposite a book-shop
with the sign of the Head of Erasmus.  Forward, boys! We may do it yet."

But before I pursue our fortunes farther let me explain.  The room we
had guarded so jealously was empty!  The plan had been mine and I was
proud of it.  For once Croisette had fallen into his rightful place.
My flight from the gate, the vain attempt to close the house, the
barricade before the inner door--these were all designed to draw the
assailants to one spot.  Pavannes and his wife--the latter hastily
disguised as a boy--had hidden behind the door of the hutch by the
gates--the porter's hutch, and had slipped out and fled in the first
confusion of the attack.

Even the servants, as we learned afterwards, who had hidden themselves
in the lower parts of the house got away in the same manner, though
some of them--they were but few in all were stopped as Huguenots and
killed before the day ended.  I had the more reason to hope that
Pavannes and his wife would get clear off, inasmuch as I had given the
Duke's ring to him, thinking it might serve him in a strait, and
believing that we should have little to fear ourselves once clear of
his house; unless we should meet the Vidame indeed.

We did not meet him as it turned out; but before we had traversed a
quarter of the distance we had to go we found that fears based on
reason were not the only terrors we had to resist.  Pavannes' house,
where we had hitherto been, stood at some distance from the centre of
the blood-storm which was enwrapping unhappy Paris that morning.  It
was several hundred paces from the Rue de Bethisy where the Admiral
lived, and what with this comparative remoteness and the excitement of
our own little drama, we had not attended much to the fury of the
bells, the shots and cries and uproar which proclaimed the state of the
city.  We had not pictured the scenes which were happening so near.
Now in the streets the truth broke upon us, and drove the blood from
our cheeks.  A hundred yards, the turning of a corner, sufficed.  We
who but yesterday left the country, who only a week before were boys,
careless as other boys, not recking of death at all, were plunged now
into the midst of horrors I cannot describe.  And the awful contrast
between the sky above and the things about us! Even now the lark was
singing not far from us; the sunshine was striking the topmost storeys
of the houses; the fleecy clouds were passing overhead, the freshness
of a summer morning was--

Ah! where was it?  Not here in the narrow lanes surely, that echoed and
re-echoed with shrieks and curses and frantic prayers: in which bands
of furious men rushed up and down, and where archers of the guard and
the more cruel rabble were breaking in doors and windows, and hurrying
with bloody weapons from house to house, seeking, pursuing, and at last
killing in some horrid corner, some place of darkness--killing with
blow on blow dealt on writhing bodies!  Not here, surely, where each
minute a child, a woman died silently, a man snarling like a
wolf--happy if he had snatched his weapon and got his back to the wall:
where foul corpses dammed the very blood that ran down the kennel, and
children--little children--played with them!

I was at Cahors in 1580 in the great street fight; and there women were
killed, I was with Chatillon nine years later, when he rode through the
Faubourgs of Paris, with this very day and his father Coligny in his
mind, and gave no quarter.  I was at Courtas and Ivry, and more than
once have seen prisoners led out to be piked in batches--ay, and by
hundreds!  But war is war, and these were its victims, dying for the
most part under God's heaven with arms in their hands:  not men and
women fresh roused from their sleep.  I felt on those occasions no such
horror, I have never felt such burning pity and indignation as on the
morning I am describing, that long-past summer morning when I first saw
the sun shining on the streets of Paris.  Croisette clung to me, sick
and white, shutting his eyes and ears, and letting me guide him as I
would.  Marie strode along on the other side of him, his lips closed,
his eyes sinister.  Once a soldier of the guard whose blood-stained
hands betrayed the work he had done, came reeling--he was drunk, as
were many of the butchers--across our path, and I gave way a little.
Marie did not, but walked stolidly on as if he did not see him, as if
the way were clear, and there were no ugly thing in God's image
blocking it.

Only his hand went as if by accident to the haft of his dagger. The
archer--fortunately for himself and for us too--reeled clear of us.  We
escaped that danger.  But to see women killed and pass by--it was
horrible!  So horrible that if in those moments I had had the
wishing-cap, I would have asked but for five thousand riders, and leave
to charge with them through the streets of Paris!  I would have had the
days of the Jacquerie back again, and my men-at-arms behind me!

For ourselves, though the orgy was at its height when we passed, we
were not molested.  We were stopped indeed three times--once in each of
the streets we traversed--by different bands of murderers.  But as we
wore the same badges as themselves, and cried "VIVE LA MESSE!"  and
gave our names, we were allowed to proceed.  I can give no idea of the
confusion and uproar, and I scarcely believe myself now that we saw
some of the things we witnessed.  Once a man gaily dressed, and
splendidly mounted, dashed past us, waving his naked sword and crying
in a frenzied way "Bleed them!  Bleed them!  Bleed in May, as good
to-day!" and never ceased crying out the same words until he passed
beyond our hearing.  Once we came upon the bodies of a father and two
sons, which lay piled together in the kennel; partly stripped already.
The youngest boy could not have been more than thirteen, I mention this
group, not as surpassing others in pathos, but because it is well known
now that this boy, Jacques Nompar de Caumont, was not dead, but lives
to-day, my friend the Marshal de la Force.

This reminds me too of the single act of kindness we were able to
perform.  We found ourselves suddenly, on turning a corner, amid a gang
of seven or eight soldiers, who had stopped and surrounded a handsome
boy, apparently about fourteen.  He wore a scholar's gown, and had some
books under his arm, to which he clung firmly--though only perhaps by
instinct--notwithstanding the furious air of the men who were
threatening him with death.  They were loudly demanding his name, as we
paused opposite them.  He either could not or would not give it, but
said several times in his fright that he was going to the College of
Burgundy.  Was he a Catholic?  they cried.  He was silent.  With an
oath the man who had hold of his collar lifted up his pike, and
naturally the lad raised the books to guard his face.  A cry broke from
Croisette. We rushed forward to stay the blow.

"See!  see!"  he exclaimed loudly, his voice arresting the man's arm in
the very act of falling.  "He has a Mass Book!  He has a Mass Book!  He
is not a heretic!  He is a Catholic!"

The fellow lowered his weapon, and sullenly snatched the books. He
looked at them stupidly with bloodshot wandering eyes, the red cross on
the vellum bindings, the only thing he understood.  But it was enough
for him; he bid the boy begone, and released him with a cuff and an
oath.

Croisette was not satisfied with this, though I did not understand his
reason; only I saw him exchange a glance with the lad.  "Come, come!"
he said lightly.  "Give him his books!  You do not want them!"

But on that the men turned savagely upon us.  They did not thank us for
the part we had already taken; and this they thought was going too far.
They were half drunk and quarrelsome, and being two to one, and two
over, began to flourish their weapons in our faces.  Mischief would
certainly have been done, and very quickly, had not an unexpected ally
appeared on our side.

"Put up! put up!" this gentleman cried in a boisterous voice--he was
already in our midst.  "What is all this about?  What is the use of
fighting amongst ourselves, when there is many a bonny throat to cut,
and heaven to be gained by it!  put up, I say!"

"Who are you?"  they roared in chorus.

"The Duke of Guise!"  he answered coolly.  "Let the gentlemen go, and
be hanged to you, you rascals!"

The man's bearing was a stronger argument than his words, for I am sure
that a stouter or more reckless blade never swaggered in church or
street.  I knew him instantly, and even the crew of butchers seemed to
see in him their master.  They hung back a few curses at him, but
having nothing to gain they yielded.  They threw down the books with
contempt--showing thereby their sense of true religion; and trooped off
roaring, "TUES!  TUES!  Aux Huguenots!"  at the top of their voices.

The newcomer thus left with us was Bure--Blaise Bure--the same who only
yesterday, though it seemed months and months back, had lured us into
Bezers' power.  Since that moment we had not seen him.  Now he had
wiped off part of the debt, and we looked at him, uncertain whether to
reproach him or no.  He, however, was not one whit abashed, but
returned our regards with a not unkindly leer.

"I bear no malice, young gentlemen," he said impudently.

"No, I should think not," I answered.

"And besides, we are quits now," the knave continued.

"You are very kind," I said.

"To be sure.  You did me a good turn once," he answered, much to my
surprise.  He seemed to be in earnest now.  "You do not remember it,
young gentleman, but it was you and your brother here"--he pointed to
Croisette--"did it!  And by the Pope and the King of Spain I have not
forgotten it!"

"I have," I said.

"What!  You have forgotten spitting that fellow at Caylus ten days ago?
CA!  SA!  You remember.  And very cleanly done, too! A pretty stroke!
Well, M. Anne, that was a clever fellow, a very clever fellow.  He
thought so and I thought so, and what was more to the purpose the most
noble Raoul de Bezers thought so too. You understand!"

He leered at me and I did understand.  I understood that unwittingly I
had rid Blaise Bure of a rival.  This accounted for the respectful,
almost the kindly way in which he had--well, deceived us.

"That is all," he said.  "If you want as much done for you, let me
know.  For the present, gentlemen, farewell!"

He cocked his hat fiercely, and went off at speed the way we had
ourselves been going; humming as he went,

  "Ce petit homme tant joli,
   Qui toujours cause et toujours rit,
   Qui toujours baise sa mignonne
   Dieu gard' de mal ce petit homme!"

His reckless song came back to us on the summer breeze.  We watched him
make a playful pass at a corpse which some one had propped in ghastly
fashion against a door--and miss it--and go on whistling the same
air--and then a corner hid him from view.

We lingered only a moment ourselves; merely to speak to the boy we had
befriended.

"Show the books if anyone challenges you," said Croisette to him
shrewdly.  Croisette was so much of a boy himself, with his fair hair
like a halo about his white, excited face, that the picture of the two,
one advising the other, seemed to me a strangely pretty one.  "Show the
books and point to the cross on them.  And Heaven send you safe to your
college."

"I would like to know your name, if you please," said the boy. His
coolness and dignity struck me as admirable under the circumstances.
"I am Maximilian de Bethune, son of the Baron de Rosny."

"Then," said Croisette briskly, "one good turn has deserved another.
Your father, yesterday, at Etampes--no it was the day before, but we
have not been in bed--warned us--"

He broke off suddenly; then cried, "Run!  run!"

The boy needed no second warning indeed.  He was off like the wind down
the street, for we had seen and so had he, the stealthy approach of two
or three prowling rascals on the look out for a victim.  They caught
sight of him and were strongly inclined to follow him; but we were
their match in numbers.  The street was otherwise empty at the moment:
and we showed them three excellent reasons why they should give him a
clear start.

His after adventures are well-known:  for he, too, lives.  He was
stopped twice after he left us.  In each case he escaped by showing his
book of offices.  On reaching the college the porter refused to admit
