parading proudly across the heavens as though they truly belonged among
the stars.

The night the Russian protest crossed trails with the Palomar report,
Washington looked like a kid with chicken pox, as dozens of spotty
yellow windows marked midnight meetings of the nation's greatest minds.
The military denied responsibility for cars older than 1942. Civil
aviation proved they had no projects involving motor vehicles. Central
Intelligence swore on their classification manual they were not dropping
junk over Cuba in an attempt to hit Castro. Disgusted, the President
established a civilian commission which soon located three more reports.

Two were from fliers. The pilot of Flight 26, New York to Los Angeles,
had two weeks before reported a strange object rising over Southern
California about ten the evening of April 3rd. A week after this report,
a private pilot on his way from Las Vegas claimed seeing an old car
flying over Los Angeles. His statement was ignored, as he was arrested
later while trying to drink himself silly because no one believed his
story.

Fortunately, at the approximate times both pilots claimed sighting
unknown objects, radar at Los Angeles International recorded something
rising from earth's surface into the stratosphere. Within hours after
the three reports met, in the President's commission's office, mobile
radar was spotted on Southern California hilltops in twenty-four-hour
watches for unscheduled flights not involving aircraft.

Number Seven, stationed in the Mount Wilson television tower parking
lot, caught one first. "Hey fellows," came his excited voice, "check 124
degrees, vector 62 now ... rising ... 124 degrees ... vector 66 ...
rising--"

_Nine_ and _Four_ caught it moments later. Then _Three_, Army long-range
radar, picked it up. "O.K., we're on. It's still rising ... leaving the
atmosphere ... gone. Anyone else catch it?" Negative responses came from
all but _Seven_, _Nine_ and _Four_. So well spread were they, that
within minutes headquarters had laid four lines over Southern
California. They crossed where the unsuspecting community of Fullerton
was more or less sound asleep, totally unaware of the making of history
in its back yard.

       *       *       *       *       *

The history of what astronomers call Solomon's Orbit had its beginning
about three months ago. Solomon, who couldn't remember his first name,
was warming tired bones in the sun, in front of his auto-wrecking yard a
mile south of Fullerton. Though sitting, he was propped against the
office; a tin shed decorated like a Christmas tree with hundreds of hub
caps dangling from sagging wooden rafters. The back door opened on two
acres of what Solomon happily agreed was the finest junk in all
California. Fords on the left, Chevys on the right, and across the
sagging back fence, a collection of honorable sedans whose makers left
the business world years ago. They were known as Solomon's "Classics."

The bright sun had Solomon's tiny eyes burrowed under a shaggy brow
which, added to an Einstein-like shock of white hair, gave him the
appearance of a professor on sabbatical. Eyes closed, Solomon was
fondling favorite memories, when as a lad he repaired steam tractors and
followed wheat across central plains of the United States. Happiness
faded as the reverie was broken by spraying gravel signaling arrival of
a customer's car.

"There's Uncle Solomon, Dad," a boy's voice was saying. "He gives us
kids good deals on hot-rod parts. You've just gotta take a look at his
old cars, 'cause if you want a classic Uncle Solomon would make you a
good deal, too. I just know he would."

"Sure, Son, let's go in and see what he's got," replied a man's voice.
As Solomon opened his eyes, the two popped into reality. Heaving himself
out of the sports car bucket seat that was his office chair, Solomon
stood awaiting approach of the pair.

"Mr Solomon, Georgie here tells me you have some fine old cars for
sale?"

"Sure have. Sure have. They're in back. Come along. I'll show you the
short cuts." Without waiting for a reply, Solomon started, head bent,
white hair blowing; through the office, out the back door and down
passages hardly wide enough for a boy, let alone a man. He disappeared
around a hearse, and surfaced on the other side of a convertible,
leading the boy and his father a chase that was more a guided tour of
Solomon's yard than a short cut. "Yes, sir, here they are," announced
