hundred large quarto pages, profusely illustrated, embracing: (1.)
Most of the plates and pages of the four preceding weekly issues of
the SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN, with its splendid engravings and valuable
information; (2.) Commercial, trade, and manufacturing announcements
of leading houses. Terms for Export Edition, $5.00 a year,
sent prepaid to any part of the world. Single copies 50 cents.
-->Manufacturers and others who desire to secure foreign trade may
have large, and handsomely displayed announcements published in this
edition at a very moderate cost.


The SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN Export Edition has a large guaranteed
circulation in all commercial places throughout the world. Address
MUNN & CO., 37 Park Row, New York.

       *       *       *       *       *

VOL. XXXIX., No. 24. [NEW SERIES.] Thirty-third Year. NEW YORK,
SATURDAY, DECEMBER 14, 1878.

       *       *       *       *       *




TABLE OF CONTENTS OF

THE SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN SUPPLEMENT

No. 154,

For the Week ending December 14, 1878.

Price 10 cents. For sale by all newsdealers.


I. ENGINEERING AND MECHANICS.--Portable Steam Pumping Engine, 1
  engraving.--New Bone Crushing Mill, 2 engravings.--Picard's Boiler.
  Extraction of Salt from Salt Water.--Compressed Air Machines.
  Hydraulic vs. air pressure. Causes of the losses of power.
  Estimates of useful effects obtainable.--The St. Gothard Tunnel.
  By GEO. J. SPECHT, C.E.--Apparatus for Lifting Sunken Vessels,
  with 8 figures.--Russia Sheet Iron.--Manufacture of Artificial
  Stone.--Compressed Fuel.--The New Magnesi Process for Boiler Feed
  Water.

II. FRENCH INTERNATIONAL EXHIBITION OF 1878.--Wine Presses.
  Description of sixteen new and peculiar wine presses at the
  Exhibition, with 31 figures and 9 engravings. The Press Primat;
  Press Mabille; Press David; Samain Press; Marchand, Maupre,
  Boyries, Chapellier, Marmonier, Nogues, Mailhe, Moreau, Piquet,
  Delperoux, Terrel des Chenes, and Cassan fils Presses.

  The Algerian Exhibit. The street of Algiers, with 1
  illustration.--Woolen Fabrics.

III. ELECTRICITY, LIGHT, HEAT, ETC.--Electric Lighting. Estimate
  of the comparative heating effect in gas and electric lighting,
  and the consequent loss of power.--The Electric Light. Remarks on
  its economy.--The Present Bugbear of French Savants.

  New Planets.

  The Dutch Arctic Expedition. The Peak of Beerenburg, Spitzbergen,
  with 1 illustration.

IV. CHEMISTRY AND METALLURGY.--New Process for Separating Iodine
  and Bromine from Kelp.--Inoffensive Colors for Toys.--New Coloring
  Matters.--Tungsten.

  Ozone and the Atmosphere. By ALBERT R. LEEDS, Ph.D. Table of
  percentage of ozone contained in the atmosphere at various
  localities in the United States. Register of ozone observations
  for one month at Upper Saranac Lake, N. Y., giving thermometric
  and barometric observations, and full record of weather.
  Examination of methods in ozonometry. Preparation of ozone by
  electrolysis of water containing sulphuric acid, with 1 engraving.
  Preparation by electricity, with 1 engraving. Does the electric
  spark decompose potassium iodide? Collection and preservation of
  ozone. Preparation by chemical methods. Critical examination of
  ozonoscopes. Potassium iodide; starch; paper classification of
  ozonoscopes. Examination of ozonoscopes under certain conditions.

  Limits of the Combustibility of Gases.--The Diffusion of
  Salicylate of Soda.--Singular use of Fluorescein.--New Metal.
  Philippium By M. MARC DELAFONTAINE.--Better Pharmaceutical
  Education. By RICHARD V. MATTISON, Ph. G.--An El Dorado for
  Apothecaries.

V. MEDICINE AND HYGIENE.--The Science of Easy Chairs. The muscular
  conditions of fatigue, and how to obtain the greatest rest. How
  easy chairs should be made.

  Prof. Huxley on the Hand. Abstract of his inaugural lecture before
  the South London Workingmen's College.

  Paint from a Sanitary Point of View. The required abolition of
  absorbent surfaces in dwellings. Lead poisoning from paint not
  thoroughly dry. Cases described in which white lead paint in
  dwellings never dries, but gives off poisonous particles, which
  are inhaled by the inmates, causing depression, weakness headache,
  and loss of appetite. Zinc recommended in paint to avoid lead
  poisoning, and the new oxy-sulphide of Zinc described, with
  covering qualities equal to white lead.

  The Purification of Sewage. By HENRY ROBINSON, F.R.S. Paper
  read before the Sanitary Institute of Great Britain. Progress
  in purifying sewage by precipitation. The use of chemicals for
  precipitating, deodorizing, and disinfecting. Practical data on
  a large scale, with cost. Average number of gallons per head of
  population, etc., of the successful system now in operation at
  Coventry and Hertford. How the water is removed from the sludge by
  filter presses. Drying and removal of the sludge. Theoretical and
  actual values of the sludge for fertilizing.

VI. AGRICULTURE, HORTICULTURE, ETC.--The Broadside Steam Digger,
  with 1 engraving.--Shall I Plow the Lawn?--Bee Culture.

       *       *       *       *       *




PROGRESS OF PETROLEUM.


The efforts of the great majority of the Western Pennsylvania
petroleum producers to obtain relief from what they deem the
oppressive acts of the Standard Oil Company and the unjust
discriminations of the United Pipe Lines, and the various railroads
traversing the oil regions, have attracted more than usual attention
to the present condition of this industry and its possible future.

We would here explain that the Standard Oil Company originated in
Cleveland, Ohio, about twelve years ago, and was incorporated under
the laws of Ohio, with a nominal capital now, we are informed, of
$3,000,000, which, however, very inadequately represents the financial
strength of its members. It is now a combination of the most
prominent refiners in the country, and has before been credited with
manipulating the transportation lines to its own special advantage.

We can recall no instance of such serious hostility between parties
whose interests are at the same time of such magnitude and so nearly
identical; nor can we see what substantial, enduring benefit would
accrue to the producers in the event of their victory in the struggle.

They charge that the Standard Oil Company has become the controlling
power to fix prices and to determine the avenues by which the oil
shall be transported eastward for home consumption and for foreign
exportation; that the railway companies have given this company lower
rates than other parties for transporting the oil; and that through
the rates given to it by the railways the value of their property is
destroyed.

The reply, in effect, is, Granting all this to be true, what does
it amount to? Neither more nor less than that the managers of the
Standard Oil Company, by combination of capital, by intelligence and
shrewdness in the management of their operations, have built up a
successful business, and that they have so extended it by the use of
all practicable appliances, and by the purchase of the property of
competitors, that they do practically control the prices of oil, both
crude and refined, and that the uncombined capital of the other oil
producers, lacking the power, the intelligence, and the business skill
which combined capital can secure, cannot compete with the Standard
Oil Company. Now, is there any great wrong or injustice in this?

When brains can command capital it is always more successful in
business matters than any amount of brains without capital or capital
without brains. This result is the natural working out of the same
principle that is everywhere to be seen--some men are successful and
others are not.

It is the essence of communism to drag down those who succeed to the
level of the unsuccessful.

If men cannot compete with others in any business they must accept the
fact, and try some other employment.

If, through superior intelligence and capital, the Standard Oil
Company can control the oil business of Pennsylvania, then, according
to the principles of common sense, it must be permitted to do so.

What right, then, has the oil producer to complain? Why, if all that
is alleged is true, will they persist in sinking more wells, when,
as they say, they are controlled by the Standard Oil Company? No one
forces them to lose money by continuing in the business. Let them find
other employment. They do not show that the Standard Oil Company
does anything that combined capital on their part and equal business
ability could not effect.

The cry of monopoly in this case is altogether unfounded, those
opposed to the Standard Oil Company having just as much right to do
all that that company does, and, therefore, there can be no monopoly,
because they have no exclusive powers.

As to the railway companies, they can afford and have a right to
transport the tonnage offered them by the Standard Oil Company at less
cost, because it costs them less to do a regular and large business
than an irregular and smaller one. They would simply be acting in
accordance with business principles the world over.

These are the arguments, the statement of the position of a successful
combination confident in its resources and of victory in the coming
struggle. The justness, the correctness of the doctrines enunciated,
and the wisdom of so doing at this crisis, we do not propose to
criticise; but it is very safe to say that if the prosperity of the
complainants depends upon relief in this direction they may as well
cease producing.

There are too many of them for harmonious and concerted action against
the powerful corporations they complain of; and if they should succeed
in securing equal transportation facilities the prices would still be
regulated by the monopolists, who carry more than four-fifths of the
accumulated stock of the oil regions.

The proposed appeal to Congress to pass some law whereby each producer
can compel railroad companies to carry his produce at regular rates,
amounts to a confession of the desperate straits of the producers
and of their weakness as well; and even if successful, which is most
improbable, would not remedy the deplorable existing state of things.

Still lower rates would fail to give relief, with all the present
avenues of trade filled to repletion and with an increasing output
at the wells. Relief and permanent relief can be found only in the
direction we have before indicated: in the general application of
petroleum and its products to the manufacture of gas for illuminating
and heating purposes, and its substitution for coal in the metallurgic
and other prominent industries of the world.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE LIMIT OF WORK.


In distributing the prizes to workmen at the Paris Exhibition, Louis
Blanc, the leader of the French Republican Socialist party, quoted
approvingly these words of Simonde de Sismondi:

"If the workman were his own master, when he had done in two hours
with the aid of machinery what would have taken him twelve hours to do
without it, he would stop at the end of the two."

M. Blanc had been discussing very eloquently, but also very
fallaciously, the relations of machinery to labor. If men were
properly united in the bonds of association, he said, if the
solidarity of interests were realized, "the happy result of the
application of mechanical power to industry would be equal production,
with less of effort, for all. The discovery of an economic method
would never have the lamentable consequence of robbing men of the work
by which they live. Unfortunately, we are far from this ideal. Under
the empire of that universal antagonism which is the very essence of
the economic constitution of modern societies, and which too often
only profits one man by ruining another, machinery has been employed
to make the rule of the strong weigh more heavily on the weak. There
is not a single mechanical invention which has not been a subject of
anguish and a cause of distress to thousands of fathers of families
from the moment it began to work."

If all this, and much else that M. Blanc alleges, were true, then the
condition of all workingmen to-day should be in every way worse than
that of their fathers, in anti-machinery days. But such is not the
case. There never was a time when the laborer toiled less or enjoyed
more than in these days of machinery; and the laborer's condition is
best where the machinery is best and most used.

A hundred years ago the laborer toiled long, produced little, and
enjoyed less. To-day, thanks to the victories of invention, machinery
does the heaviest of the work; the workman's hours of labor are fewer
than formerly; his wages are greater; and his earnings will buy vastly
more, dollar for dollar, than in any previous age in the world's
history.

What laborer of to-day would be satisfied with the remuneration, the
food, the shelter, the clothing of the laboring classes of one hundred
years ago? The wants of men, as well as their thoughts, are widened by
the process of the suns. And in no section of society have the daily
wants been more markedly increased, or the facilities for gratifying
them either, than among those that live by labor.

"If the workman were his own master, when he had done in two hours
with the aid of machinery what it would have taken him twelve hours to
do without it, he would stop at the end of the two."

So says the theoretical socialist. The practical workman never has,
nor, we believe, ever will, act so foolishly; certainly not until the
limit of man's capacity to enjoy has been reached. When the united
products of manual and mechanical effort fully satisfy the desires of
all men, and leave no margin of want unfilled, then and then only
will men be satisfied with the reduction of effort demanded by the
socialists. Until then the larger part of every increase in production
by mechanical improvements will go to swell the volume of good things
for human use and enjoyment. Our machinery enables our thousands of
busy workers to accomplish what millions could not have done years
ago, and a very large part of the aggregate increase of product
comes back to them in conveniences and luxuries surpassing those
the wealthiest could enjoy were machinery not employed, or were it
employed, as the socialist advocates, without increasing the aggregate
of production. The laziness of the savage and the advantages of
civilization are incompatible. The chief merit of machinery lies in
its enabling us to multiply constantly the scope and variety of our
enjoyments without a corresponding increase of toil.

       *       *       *       *       *




IRIDESCENT GLASS.


Ornamental glassware in many styles, tinted with the glowing colors
of the rainbow, is now making its appearance in the shop windows
of Broadway and Fifth Avenue. This is one of those brilliant little
achievements of science that delights the eye and pleases the
imagination. To produce the colors, the glass, while in a heated
state, is subjected to the vapor of chloride of tin. Shades of more or
less depth or intensity are imparted by adding to the tin chloride a
little nitrate of strontium or barium.
