Project Gutenberg's The Fairy-Faith in Celtic Countries, by W. Y. Evans Wentz

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Fairy-Faith in Celtic Countries

Author: W. Y. Evans Wentz

Release Date: January 5, 2011 [EBook #34853]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FAIRY-FAITH IN CELTIC COUNTRIES ***




Produced by Ted Garvin and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









[Illustration: _From Photograph by the Author_

  THE MYSTIC CENTRE OF THE CELTIC WORLD
  CARNAC IN A. D. 1909
  LOOKING TOWARD THE SUNRISE, FROM WITHIN THE CROMLECH,
    _LES ALIGNEMENTS DU MENEC_]




  THE FAIRY-FAITH IN
  CELTIC COUNTRIES


  BY W. Y. EVANS WENTZ

  M.A. STANFORD UNIVERSITY CALIFORNIA U.S.A.
  DOCTEUR-ES-LETTRES UNIVERSITY OF RENNES BRITTANY
  B.SC. JESUS COLLEGE OXON.


  HENRY FROWDE
  OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS
  LONDON, NEW YORK, TORONTO AND MELBOURNE
  1911




  OXFORD: HORACE HART
  PRINTER TO THE UNIVERSITY




  THIS BOOK DEPENDS CHIEFLY UPON THE ORAL AND WRITTEN TESTIMONY
  SO FREELY CONTRIBUTED BY ITS MANY CELTIC AUTHORS,--
  THE PEASANT AND THE SCHOLAR, THE PRIEST AND THE SCIENTIST,
  THE POET AND THE BUSINESS MAN, THE SEER AND THE NON-SEER,--
  AND IN HONOUR OF THEM I DEDICATE IT TO
  TWO OF THEIR BRETHREN IN IRELAND:

  A. E.,
  WHOSE UNWAVERING LOYALTY TO THE FAIRY-FAITH
  HAS INSPIRED MUCH THAT I HAVE HEREIN WRITTEN,
  WHOSE FRIENDLY GUIDANCE IN MY STUDY OF IRISH MYSTICISM
  I MOST GRATEFULLY ACKNOWLEDGE;

  AND

  WILLIAM BUTLER YEATS,
  WHO BROUGHT TO ME AT MY OWN ALMA MATER IN CALIFORNIA
  THE FIRST MESSAGE FROM FAIRYLAND,
  AND WHO AFTERWARDS IN HIS OWN COUNTRY
  LED ME THROUGH THE HAUNTS OF FAIRY KINGS AND QUEENS.

  OXFORD
    _November_ 1911.




'It remains for ever true that the proper study of mankind is man; and
even early man is not beneath contempt, especially when he proves to
have had within him the makings of a great race, with its highest
notions of duty and right, and all else that is noblest in the human
soul.'

The Right Hon. SIR JOHN RHYS.




CONTENTS


                                                                 PAGES

  PREFACE                                                      xi-xiii

  INTRODUCTION                                               xv-xxviii


  SECTION I

  THE LIVING FAIRY-FAITH

  CHAPTER I

  ENVIRONMENT                                                     1-16

  Psychical Interpretation--The Mysticism of Erin and
  Armorica--In Ireland--In Scotland--In the Isle of Man--In
  Wales--In Cornwall--In Brittany.

  CHAPTER II

  THE TAKING OF EVIDENCE                                        17-225

  Method of Presentation--The Logical Verdict--Trustworthiness
  of Legends--The Fairy-Faith held by the highly educated Celt
  as well as by the Celtic Peasant--The Evidence is complete
  and adequate--Its Analysis--The Fairy Tribes dealt with--
  Witnesses and their Testimony: from Ireland, with
  Introduction by Dr. Douglas Hyde; from Scotland, with
  Introduction by Dr. Alexander Carmichael; from the Isle of
  Man, with Introduction by Miss Sophia Morrison; from Wales,
  with Introduction by the Right Hon. Sir John Rhys; from
  Cornwall, with Introduction by Mr. Henry Jenner; and from
  Brittany, with Introduction by Professor Anatole Le Braz.

  CHAPTER III

  AN ANTHROPOLOGICAL EXAMINATION OF THE EVIDENCE                226-82

  The Celtic Fairy-Faith as Part of a World-wide Animism--
  Shaping Influence of Social Psychology--Smallness of Elvish
  Spirits and Fairies, according to Ethnology, Animism, and
  Occult Sciences--The Changeling, Belief and its Explanation
  according to the Kidnap, Human-Sacrifice, Soul-Wandering,
  and Demon-Possession Theory--Ancient and Modern Magic and
  Witchcraft shown to be based on definite psychological
  laws--Exorcisms--Taboos, of Name, Food, Iron, Place--Taboos
  among Ancient Celts--Food-Sacrifice--Legend of the Dead--
  Conclusion: the Background of the Modern Belief in Fairies
  is Animistic.


  SECTION II

  THE RECORDED FAIRY-FAITH

  CHAPTER IV

  THE PEOPLE OF THE GODDESS DANA OR THE _SIDHE_                283-307

  The Goddess Dana and the Modern Cult of St. Brigit--The
  Tuatha De Danann or _Sidhe_ conquered by the Sons of Mil--
  But Irish Seers still see the _Sidhe_--Old Irish Manuscripts
  faithfully represent the Tuatha De Danann--The _Sidhe_ as a
  Spirit Race--_Sidhe_ Palaces--The 'Taking' of Mortals--Hill
  Visions of _Sidhe_ Women--_Sidhe_ Minstrels and Musicians--
  Social Organization and Warfare among the _Sidhe_--The
  _Sidhe_ War-Goddesses, the _Badb_--The _Sidhe_ at the Battle
  of Clontarf, A. D. 1014--Conclusion.

  CHAPTER V

  BRYTHONIC DIVINITIES AND THE BRYTHONIC FAIRY-FAITH            308-31

  The God Arthur and the Hero Arthur--Sevenfold Evidence to
  show Arthur as an Incarnate Fairy King--Lancelot the
  Foster-son of a Fairy Woman--Galahad, the Offspring of
  Lancelot and the Fairy Woman Elayne--Arthur as a Fairy King
  in _Kulhwch and Olwen_--Gwynn ab Nudd--Arthur like Dagda,
  and like Osiris--Brythonic Fairy Romances: their Evolution
  and Antiquity--Arthur in Nennius, Geoffrey, Wace, and in
  Layamon--Cambrensis' Otherworld Tale--Norman-French writers
  of the twelfth and thirteenth centuries--_Romans d'Aventure_
  and _Romans Bretons_--Origins of the 'Matter of Britain'--
  Fairy Romance Episodes in Welsh Literature--Brythonic
  Origins.

  CHAPTER VI

  THE CELTIC OTHERWORLD                                         332-57

  General Ideas of the Otherworld; its Location; its
  Subjectivity; its Names; its Extent; Tethra one of its
  kings--The Silver Branch and the Golden Bough; and
  Initiations--The Otherworld the Heaven-World of all
  Religions--Voyage of Bran--Cormac in the Land of Promise--
  Magic Wands--Cuchulainn's Sick-Bed--Ossian's Return from
  Fairyland--Lanval's going to Avalon--Voyage of Mael-Duin--
  Voyage of Teigue--Adventures of Art--Cuchulainn's and
  Arthur's Otherworld Quests--Literary Evolution of idea of
  Happy Otherworld.

  CHAPTER VII

  THE CELTIC DOCTRINE OF RE-BIRTH                               358-96

  Re-birth and Otherworld--As a Christian Doctrine--General
  Historical Survey--According to the Barddas MSS.; according
  to Ancient and Modern Authorities--Re-incarnation of the
  Tuatha De Danann--King Mongan's Re-birth--Etain's Birth--
  Dermot's Pre-existence--Tuan's Re-birth--Re-birth among
  Brythons--Arthur as a Re-incarnate Hero--Non-Celtic
  Parallels--Re-birth among Modern Celts: in Ireland; in
  Scotland; in the Isle of Man; in Wales; in Cornwall; in
  Brittany--Origin and Evolution of Celtic Re-birth Doctrine.


  SECTION III

  THE CULT OF GODS, SPIRITS, FAIRIES, AND THE DEAD

  CHAPTER VIII

  THE TESTIMONY OF ARCHAEOLOGY                                 397-426

  Inadequacy of Pygmy Theory--According to the Theories
  concerning Divine Images and Fetishes, Gods, Daemons, and
  Ancestral Spirits haunt Megaliths--Megaliths are religious
  and funereal, as shown chiefly by _Cenn Cruaich_,
  Stonehenge, Guernsey menhirs, Monuments in Brittany, by the
  Circular Fairy-Dance as an Ancient Initiatory Sun-Dance, by
  Breton Earthworks, Archaeological Excavations generally, and
  by present-day Worship at Indian Dolmens--New Grange and
  Celtic Mysteries: Evidence of manuscripts; Evidence of
  Tradition--The Aengus Cult--New Grange compared with Great
  Pyramid: both have Astronomical Arrangement and same
  Internal Plan--Why they open to the Sunrise--Initiations in
  both--Great Pyramid as Model for Celtic Tumuli--Gavrinis and
  New Grange as Spirit Temples.

  CHAPTER IX

  THE TESTIMONY OF PAGANISM                                     427-41

  Edicts against Pagan Cults--Cult of Sacred Waters and its
  Absorption by Christianity--Celtic Water Divinities--Druidic
  Influence on Fairy-Faith--Cult of Sacred Trees--Cult of
  Fairies, Spirits, and the Dead--Feasts of the Dead--
  Conclusion.

  CHAPTER X

  THE TESTIMONY OF CHRISTIANITY                                 442-55

  Lough Derg a Sacred Lake originally--Purgatorial Rites as
  Christianized Survivals of Ancient Celtic Rites--Purgatory
  as Fairyland--Purgatorial Rites parallel to Pagan Initiation
  Ceremonies--The Death and Resurrection Rite--Breton Pardons
  compared--Relation to Aengus Cult and Celtic Cave-Temples--
  Origin of Purgatorial Doctrine pre-Christian--Celtic and
  Roman Feasts of dead shaped Christian ones--Fundamental
  Unity of Mythologies, Religions, and the Fairy-Faith.


  SECTION IV

  MODERN SCIENCE AND THE FAIRY-FAITH; AND CONCLUSIONS

  CHAPTER XI

  SCIENCE AND FAIRIES                                           456-91

  Method of Examination: Exoteric and Esoteric aspects--The
  X-quantity--Scientific attitudes toward the Animistic
  Hypothesis: Materialistic Theory; Pathological Theory;
  Delusion and Imposture Theory; Problems of Consciousness:
  Dreams; Supernormal Lapse of Time--Psychical Research and
  Fairies: Myers's researches--Present Position of Psychical
  Research--Psychical Research and Anthropology in Relation to
  the Fairy-Faith, according to a special contribution from
  Mr. Andrew Lang--Final Testing of the X-quantity--Conclusion:
  the Celtic Belief in Fairies and in Fairyland is scientific.

  CHAPTER XII

  THE CELTIC DOCTRINE OF RE-BIRTH AND OTHERWORLD
  SCIENTIFICALLY EXAMINED                                      492-515

  The Extension of the Terms Fairy and Fairyland--The Real
  Man as an Invisible Force acting through a Body-Conductor--
  A Psychical Organ essential for Memory--Pre-existence a
  Scientific Necessity--The Vitalistic View of Evolution--Old
  Theory of Heredity disproved--Embryology supports Re-birth
  Doctrine--Psycho-physical Evolution--Memory of previous
  Existences in Subconsciousness--Examples--Dream Psychology
  furnishes clearest Illustrations--No Post-existence without
  Pre-existence--Resurrection as Re-birth--The Circle of
  Life--The Mystical Corollary--Conclusion: the Celtic
  Doctrine of Re-birth and Otherworld is essentially
  scientific.


  INDEX                                                         516-24




PREFACE


During the years 1907-9 this study first took shape, being then based
mainly on literary sources; and during the latter year it was
successfully presented to the Faculty of Letters of the University of
Rennes, Brittany, for the Degree of _Docteur-es-Lettres_. Since then I
have re-investigated the whole problem of the Celtic belief in Fairies,
and have collected very much fresh material. Two years ago the scope of
my original research was limited to the four chief Celtic countries, but
now it includes all of the Celtic countries.

In the present study, which has profited greatly by criticisms of the
first passed by scholars in Britain and in France, the original literary
point of view is combined with the broader point of view of
anthropology. This study, the final and more comprehensive form of my
views about the 'Fairy-Faith', would never have been possible had I not
enjoyed during many months the kindly advice and constant encouragement
of Mr. R. R. Marett, Reader in Social Anthropology in the University of
Oxford, and Fellow of Exeter College.

During May 1910 the substance of this essay in its pan-Celtic form was
submitted to the Board of the Faculty of Natural Science of Oxford
University for the Research Degree of Bachelor of Science, which was
duly granted. But the present work contains considerable material not
contained in the essay presented to the Oxford examiners, the Right Hon.
Sir John Rhys and Mr. Andrew Lang; and, therefore, I alone assume
entire responsibility for all its possible shortcomings, and in
particular for some of its more speculative theories, which to some
minds may appear to be in conflict with orthodox views, whether of the
theologian or of the man of science. These theories, however venturesome
they may appear, are put forth in almost every case with the full
approval of some reliable, scholarly Celt; and as such they are chiefly
intended to make the exposition of the belief in fairies as completely
and as truly Celtic as possible, without much regard for non-Celtic
opinion, whether this be in harmony with Celtic opinion or not.

As the new manuscript of the 'Fairy-Faith' lies before me revised and
finished, I realize even more fully than I did two years ago with
respect to the original study, how little right I have to call it mine.
Those to whom the credit for it really belongs are my many kind friends
and helpers in Ireland, Scotland, Isle of Man, Wales, Cornwall, and
Brittany, and many others who are not Celts, in the three great
nations--happily so intimately united now by unbreakable bonds of
goodwill and international brotherhood--Britain, France, and the United
States of America; for without the aid of all these Celtic and
non-Celtic friends the work could never have been accomplished. They
have given me their best and rarest thoughts as so many golden threads;
I have only furnished the mental loom, and woven these golden threads
together in my own way according to what I take to be the psychological
pattern of the Fairy-Faith.

I am under a special obligation to the following six distinguished
Celtic scholars who have contributed, for my second chapter, the six
introductions to the fairy-lore collected by me in their respective
countries:--Dr. Douglas Hyde (Ireland); Dr. Alexander Carmichael
(Scotland); Miss Sophia Morrison (Isle of Man); the Right Hon. Sir John
Rhys (Wales); Mr. Henry Jenner (Cornwall); Professor Anatole Le Braz
(Brittany).

I am also greatly indebted to the Rev. J. Estlin Carpenter, Principal of
Manchester College, for having aided me with the parts of this book
touching Christian theology; to Mr. R. I. Best, M.R.I.A., Assistant
Librarian, National Library, Dublin, for having aided me with the parts
devoted to Irish mythology and literature; and to Mr. William McDougall,
Wilde Reader in Mental Philosophy in the University of Oxford, for a
similar service with respect to Section IV, entitled 'Science and
Fairies'. And to these and to all the other scholars whose names appear
in this preface, my heartiest thanks are due for the assistance which
they have so kindly rendered in reading different parts of the
_Fairy-Faith_ when in proof.

With the deep spirit of reverence which a student feels towards his
preceptors, I acknowledge a still greater debt to those among my friends
and helpers who have been my Celtic guides and teachers. Here in Oxford
University I have run up a long account with the Right Hon. Sir John
Rhys, the Professor of Celtic, who has introduced me to the study of
Modern Irish, and of Arthurian romance and mythology, and has guided me
both during the year 1907-8 and ever since in Celtic folk-lore
generally. To Mr. Andrew Lang, I am likewise a debtor, more especially
in view of the important suggestions which he has given me during the
past two years with respect to anthropology and to psychical research.
In my relation to the Faculty of Letters of the University of Rennes, I
shall always remember the friendly individual assistance offered to me
there during the year 1908-9 by Professor Joseph Loth, then Dean in that
University, but now of the College of France, in Paris, particularly
with respect to Brythonic mythology, philology, and archaeology; by
Professor Georges Dottin, particularly with respect to Gaelic matters;
and by Professor Anatole Le Braz, whose continual good wishes towards my
work have been a constant source of inspiration since our first meeting
during March 1908, especially in my investigation of _La Legende de la
Mort_, and of the related traditions and living folk-beliefs in
Brittany--Brittany with its haunted ground of Carnac, home of the
ancient Brythonic Mysteries.

W. Y. E. W.

  JESUS COLLEGE, OXFORD.
    _All Saints' Day_, 1911.




'There, neither turmoil nor silence....

'Though fair the sight of Erin's plains, hardly will they seem so after
you have known the Great Plain....

'A wonder of a land the land of which I speak; no youth there grows to
old age....

'We behold and are not beheld.'--The God Midir, in _Tochmarc Etaine_.




INTRODUCTION

     'I have told what I have seen, what I have thought, and what I have
     learned by inquiry.'--HERODOTUS.


I. THE RELIGIOUS NATURE OF THE FAIRY-FAITH

There is probably no other place in Celtic lands more congenial, or more
inspiring for the writing down of one's deeper intuitions about the
Fairy-Faith, than Carnac, under the shadow of the pagan tumulus and
mount of the sacred fire, now dedicated by triumphant Christianity to
the Archangel Michael. The very name of Carnac is significant;[1] and in
two continents, Africa and Europe--to follow the certain evidence of
archaeology alone[2]--there seem to have been no greater centres for
ancient religion than Karnak in Egypt and Carnac in Brittany. On the
banks of the Nile the Children of Isis and Osiris erected temples as
perfect as human art can make them; on the shores of the Morbihan the
mighty men who were, as it seems, the teachers of our own Celtic
forefathers, erected temples of unhewn stone. The wonderful temples in
Yucatan, the temple-caves of prehistoric India, Stonehenge in England,
the Parthenon, the Acropolis, St. Peter's at Rome, Westminster Abbey, or
Notre-Dame, and the Pyramids and temples of Egypt, equally with the
Alignements of Carnac, each in their own way record more or less
perfectly man's attempt to express materially what he feels spiritually.
Perfected art can beautify and make more attractive to the eye and mind,
but it cannot enhance in any degree the innate spiritual ideals which
men in all ages have held; and thus it is that we read amid the rough
stone menhirs and dolmens in Brittany, as amid the polished granite
monoliths and magnificent temples in Egypt, the same silent message from
the past to the present, from the dead to the living. This message, we
think, is fundamentally important in understanding the Celtic
Fairy-Faith; for in our opinion the belief in fairies has the same
origin as all religions and mythologies.

And there seems never to have been an uncivilized tribe, a race, or
nation of civilized men who have not had some form of belief in an
unseen world, peopled by unseen beings. In religions, mythologies, and
the Fairy-Faith, too, we behold the attempts which have been made by
different peoples in different ages to explain in terms of human
experience this unseen world, its inhabitants, its laws, and man's
relation to it. The Ancients called its inhabitants gods, genii,
daemons, and shades; Christianity knows them as angels, saints, demons,
and souls of the dead; to uncivilized tribes they are gods, demons, and
spirits of ancestors; and the Celts think of them as gods, and as
fairies of many kinds.


II. THE INTERPRETATION OF THE FAIRY-FAITH

By the Celtic Fairy-Faith we mean that specialized form of belief in a
spiritual realm inhabited by spiritual beings which has existed from
prehistoric times until now in Ireland, Scotland, Isle of Man, Wales,
Cornwall, Brittany, or other parts of the ancient empire of the Celts.
In studying this belief, we are concerned directly with living Celtic
folk-traditions, and with past Celtic folk-traditions as recorded in
literature. And if fairies actually exist as invisible beings or
intelligences, and our investigations lead us to the tentative
hypothesis that they do, they are natural and not supernatural, for
nothing which exists can be supernatural; and, therefore, it is our duty
to examine the Celtic Fairy Races just as we examine any fact in the
visible realm wherein we now live, whether it be a fact of chemistry,
of physics, or of biology. However, as we proceed to make such an
examination, we shall have to remember constantly that there is a new
set of ideas to work with, entirely different from what we find in
natural sciences, and often no adequate vocabulary based on common human
experiences. An American who has travelled in Asia and an Englishman who
has travelled in Australia may meet in Paris and exchange travelling
experiences with mutual understanding, because both of them have
experienced travel; and they will have an adequate vocabulary to
describe each experience, because most men have also experienced travel.
But a saint who has known the spiritual condition called ecstasy cannot
explain ecstasy to a man who has never known it, and if he should try to
do so would discover at once that no modern language is suitable for the
purpose. His experience is rare and not universal, and men have
developed no complete vocabulary to describe experiences not common to
the majority of mankind, and this is especially true of psychical
experiences. It is the same in dealing with fairies, as these are
hypothetically conceived, for only a few men and women can assert that
they have seen fairies, and hence there is no adequate vocabulary to
describe fairies. Among the Ancients, who dealt so largely with
psychical sciences, there seems to have been a common language which
could be used to explain the invisible world and its inhabitants; but we
of this age have not yet developed such a language. Consequently, men
who deny human immortality, as well as men with religious faith who have
not through personal psychical experiences transformed that faith into a
fact, nowadays when they happen to read what Plato, Iamblichus, or any
of the Neo-Platonists have written, or even what moderns have written in
attempting to explain psychic facts, call it all mysticism. And to the
great majority of Europeans and Americans, mysticism is a most
convenient noun, applicable to anything which may seem reasonable yet
wholly untranslatable in terms of their own individual experience; and
mysticism usually means something quite the reverse of scientific
simply because we have by usage unwisely limited the meaning of the word
_science_ to a knowledge of things material and visible, whereas it
really means a knowing or a knowledge of everything which exists. We
have tried to deal with the rare psychical experiences of Irish, Scotch,
Manx, Welsh, or Breton seers, and psychics generally, in the clearest
language possible; but if now and then we are charged with being
mystical, this is our defence.


III. THE METHOD OF STUDYING THE FAIRY-FAITH

In this study, which is first of all a folk-lore study, we pursue
principally an anthropo-psychological method of interpreting the Celtic
belief in fairies, though we do not hesitate now and then to call in the
aid of philology; and we make good use of the evidence offered by
mythologies, religions, metaphysics, and physical sciences. Folk-lore, a
century ago was considered beneath the serious consideration of
scholars; but there has come about a complete reversal of scholarly
opinion, for now it is seen that the beliefs of the people, their
legends, and their songs are the source of nearly all literatures, and
that their institutions and customs are the origin of those of modern
times. And, to-day, to the new science of folk-lore,--which, as Mr.
Andrew Lang says, must be taken to include psychical research or
psychical sciences,--archaeology, anthropology, and comparative
mythology and religion are indispensable. Thus folk-lore offers the
scientific means of studying man in the sense meant by the poet who
declared that the proper study of mankind is man.


IV. DIVISIONS OF THE STUDY

This study is divided into four sections or parts. The first one deals
with the living Fairy-Faith among the Celts themselves; the second, with
the recorded and ancient Fairy-Faith as we find it in Celtic literature
and mythology; the third, with the Fairy-Faith in its religious aspects;
and in the fourth section an attempt has been made to suggest how the
theories of our newest science, psychical research, explain the belief
in fairies.

I have set forth in the first section in detail and as clearly as
possible the testimony communicated to me by living Celts who either
believe in fairies, or else say that they have seen fairies; and
throughout other sections I have preferred to draw as much as possible
of the material from men and women rather than from books. Books too
often are written out of other books, and too seldom from the life of
man; and in a scientific study of the Fairy-Faith, such as we have
undertaken, the Celt himself is by far the best, in fact the only
authority. For us it is much less important to know what scholars think
of fairies than to know what the Celtic people think of fairies. This is
especially true in considering the Fairy-Faith as it exists now.


V. THE COLLECTING OF MATERIAL

In June, 1908, after a year's preparatory work in things Celtic under
the direction of the Oxford Professor of Celtic, Sir John Rhys, I
began to travel in Wales, Ireland, Scotland, and Brittany, and to
collect material there at first hand from the people who have shaped and
who still keep alive the Fairy-Faith; and during the year 1909-10 fresh
folk-lore expeditions were made into Brittany, Ireland, and Wales, and
then, finally, the study of the Fairy-Faith was made pan-Celtic by
similar expeditions throughout the Isle of Man, and into Cornwall. Many
of the most remote parts of these lands were visited; and often there
was no other plan to adopt, or any method better, or more natural, than
to walk day after day from one straw-thatched cottage to another, living
on the simple wholesome food of the peasants. Sometimes there was the
picturesque mountain-road to climb, sometimes the route lay through
marshy peat-lands, or across a rolling grass-covered country; and with
each change of landscape came some new thought and some new impression
of the Celtic life, or perhaps some new description of a fairy.

This immersion in the most striking natural and social environment of
the Celtic race, gave me an insight into the mind, the religion, the
mysticism, and the very heart of the Celt himself, such as no mere study
in libraries ever could do. I tried to see the world as he does; I
participated in his innermost thoughts about the great problem of life
and death, with which he of all peoples is most deeply concerned; and
thus he revealed to me the source of his highest ideals and
inspirations. I daily felt the deep and innate seriousness of his
ancestral nature; and, living as he lives, I tried in all ways to be
like him. I was particularly qualified for such an undertaking: partly
Celtic myself by blood and perhaps largely so by temperament, I found it
easy to sympathize with the Celt and with his environments. Further,
being by birth an American, I was in many places privileged to enter
where an Englishman, or a non-Celt of Europe would not be; and my
education under the free ideals of a new-world democracy always made it
possible for me to view economic, political, religious, and racial
questions in Celtic lands apart from the European point of view, and
without the European prejudices which are so numerous and so greatly to
be regretted. But without any doubt, during my sojourn, extending over
three years, among the Celts, these various environments shaped my
thoughts about fairies and Fairyland--as they ought to have done if
truth is ever to be reached by research.

These experiences of mine lead me to believe that the natural aspects of
Celtic countries, much more than those of most non-Celtic countries,
impress man and awaken in him some unfamiliar part of himself--call it
the Subconscious Self, the Subliminal Self, the Ego, or what you
will--which gives him an unusual power to know and to feel invisible, or
psychical, influences. What is there, for example, in London, or Paris,
or Berlin, or New York to awaken the intuitive power of man, that
subconsciousness deep-hidden in him, equal to the solitude of those
magical environments of Nature which the Celts enjoy and love?

In my travels, when the weather was too wild to venture out by day, or
when the more favourable hours of the night had arrived, with fires and
candles lit, or even during a road-side chat amid the day's journey,
there was gathered together little by little, from one country and
another, the mass of testimony which chapter ii contains. And with all
this my opinions began to take shape; for when I set out from Oxford in
June, I had no certain or clear ideas as to what fairies are, nor why
there should be belief in them. In less than a year afterwards I found
myself committed to the Psychological Theory, which I am herein setting
forth.


VI. THEORIES OF THE FAIRY-FAITH

We make continual reference throughout our study to this Psychological
Theory of the Nature and Origin of the Celtic Fairy-Faith, and it is one
of our purposes to demonstrate that this is the root theory which
includes or absorbs the four theories already advanced to account for
the belief in fairies. To guide the reader in his own conclusions, we
shall here briefly outline these four theories.

The first of them may be called the Naturalistic Theory, which is, that
in ancient and in modern times man's belief in gods, spirits, or fairies
has been the direct result of his attempts to explain or to rationalize
natural phenomena. Of this theory we accept as true that the belief in
fairies often anthropomorphically reflects the natural environment as
well as the social condition of the people who hold the belief. For
example, amid the beautiful low-lying green hills and gentle dells of
Connemara (Ireland), the 'good people' are just as beautiful, just as
gentle, and just as happy as their environment; while amid the
dark-rising mountains and in the mysterious cloud-shadowed lakes of the
Scotch Highlands there are fiercer kinds of fairies and terrible
water-kelpies, and in the Western Hebrides there is the much-dreaded
'spirit-host' moving through the air at night.

The Naturalistic Theory shows accurately enough that natural phenomena
and environment have given direction to the anthropomorphosing of gods,
spirits, or fairies, but after explaining this external aspect of the
Fairy-Faith it cannot logically go any further. Or if illogically it
does attempt to explain the belief in gods, spirits, or fairies as due
entirely to material causes, it becomes, in our opinion, like the
psychology of fifty years ago, obsolete; for now the new psychology or
psychical research has been forced to admit--if only as a working
hypothesis--the possibility of invisible intelligences or entities able
to influence man and nature. We seem even to be approaching a scientific
proof of the doctrines of such ancient philosophical scientists as
Pythagoras and Plato,--that all external nature, animated throughout and
controlled in its phenomena by daemons acting by the will of gods, is to
men nothing more than the visible effects of an unseen world of causes.

In the internal aspects of the Fairy-Faith the fundamental fact seems
clearly to be that there must have been in the minds of prehistoric men,
as there is now in the minds of modern men, a germ idea of a fairy for
environment to act upon and shape. Without an object to act upon,
environment can accomplish nothing. This is evident. The Naturalistic
Theory examines only the environment and its effects, and forgets
altogether the germ idea of a fairy to be acted upon; but the
Psychological Theory remembers and attempts to explain the germ idea of
a fairy and the effect of nature upon it.

The second theory may be called the Pygmy Theory, which Mr. David
MacRitchie, who is definitely committed to it, has so clearly set forth
in his well-known work, entitled _The Testimony of Tradition_. This
theory is that the whole fairy-belief has grown up out of a folk-memory
of an actual Pygmy race. This race is supposed to have been a very
early, prehistoric, probably Mongolian race, which inhabited the British
Islands and many parts of Continental Europe. When the Celtic nations
appeared, these pygmies were driven into mountain fastnesses and into
the most inaccessible places, where a few of them may have survived
until comparatively historical times.

Over against the champions of the Pygmy Theory may be set two of its
opponents, Dr. Bertram C. A. Windle and Mr. Andrew Lang.[3] Dr. Windle,
in his Introduction to Tyson's _Philological Essay concerning the
Pygmies of the Ancients_, makes these six most destructive criticisms or
points against the theory: (1) So far as our present knowledge teaches
us, there never was a really Pygmy race inhabiting the northern parts of
Scotland; (2) the mounds with which the tales of little people are
associated have not, in many cases, been habitations, but were natural
or sepulchral in their nature; (3) little people are not by any means
associated entirely with mounds; (4) the association of giants and
dwarfs in traditions confuses the theory; (5) there are fairies where no
pygmies ever were, as, for example, in North America; (6) even Eskimos
and Lapps have fairy beliefs, and could not have been the original
fairies of more modern fairy-lore. Altogether, as we think our study
will show, the evidence of the Fairy-Faith itself gives only a slender
and superficial support to the Pygmy Theory. We maintain that the
theory, so far as it is provable, and this is evidently not very far, is
only one strand, contributed by ethnology and social psychology, in the
complex fabric of the Fairy-Faith, and is, as such, woven round a
psychical central pattern--the fundamental pattern of the Fairy-Faith.
Therefore, from our point of view, the Pygmy Theory is altogether
inadequate, because it overlooks or misinterprets the most essential and
prominent elements in the belief which the Celtic peoples hold
concerning fairies and Fairyland.

The Druid Theory to account for fairies is less widespread. It is that
the folk-memory of the Druids and their magical practices is alone
responsible for the Fairy-Faith. The first suggestion of this theory
seems to have been made by the Rev. Dr. Cririe, in his _Scottish
Scenery_, published in 1803.[4] Three years later, the Rev. Dr. Graham
published an identical hypothesis in his _Sketches Descriptive of
Picturesque Scenery on the Southern Confines of Perthshire_. Mr.
MacRitchie suggests, with all reason, that the two writers probably had
discussed together the theory, and hence both put it forth. Alfred
Maury, in _Les Fees du Moyen-Age_, published in 1843 at Paris, appears
to have made liberal use of Patrick Graham's suggestions in propounding
his theory that the _fees_ or fairy women of the Middle Ages are due to
a folk-memory of Druidesses. Maury seems to have forgotten that
throughout pagan Britain and Ireland, both much more important for the
study of fairies than Celtic Europe during the Middle Ages, Druids
rather than Druidesses had the chief influence on the people, and that
yet, despite this fact, Irish and Welsh mythology is full of stories
about fairy women coming from the Otherworld; nor is there any proof, or
even good ground for argument, that the Irish fairy women are a
folk-memory of Druidesses, for if there ever were Druidesses in Ireland
they played a subordinate and very insignificant role. As in the case of
the Pygmy Theory, we maintain that the Druid Theory, also, is
inadequate. It discovers a real anthropomorphic influence at work on the
outward aspects of the Fairy-Faith, and illogically takes that to be the
origin of the Fairy-Faith.

The fourth theory, the Mythological Theory, is of very great importance.
It is that fairies are the diminished figures of the old pagan
divinities of the early Celts; and many modern authorities on Celtic
mythology and folk-lore hold it. To us the theory is acceptable so far
as it goes. But it is not adequate in itself nor is it the root theory,
because a belief in gods and goddesses must in turn be explained; and in
