"Joanna!" repeated Dick.  "Why, who the murrain should this be?  Here is
no Joanna, nor ever hath been.  What meaneth it?"

Matcham was silent.  He seemed to have drawn further away.  But only a
little faint starlight entered by the window, and at the far end of the
apartment, where the pair were, the darkness was complete.

"Jack," said Dick, "I wot not where ye were all day.  Saw ye this
Joanna?"

"Nay," returned Matcham, "I saw her not."

"Nor heard tell of her?" he pursued.

The steps drew nearer.  Sir Daniel was still roaring the name of Joanna
from the courtyard.

"Did ye hear of her?" repeated Dick.

"I heard of her," said Matcham.

"How your voice twitters!  What aileth you?" said Dick.  "'Tis a most
excellent good fortune, this Joanna; it will take their minds from us."

"Dick," cried Matcham, "I am lost; we are both lost.  Let us flee if
there be yet time.  They will not rest till they have found me.  Or, see!
let me go forth; when they have found me, ye may flee.  Let me forth,
Dick--good Dick, let me away!"

She was groping for the bolt, when Dick at last comprehended.

"By the mass!" he cried, "y' are no Jack; y' are Joanna Sedley; y' are
the maid that would not marry me!"

The girl paused, and stood silent and motionless.  Dick, too, was silent
for a little; then he spoke again.

"Joanna," he said, "y' 'ave saved my life, and I have saved yours; and we
have seen blood flow, and been friends and enemies--ay, and I took my
belt to thrash you; and all that time I thought ye were a boy.  But now
death has me, and my time's out, and before I die I must say this: Y' are
the best maid and the bravest under heaven, and, if only I could live, I
would marry you blithely; and, live or die, I love you."

She answered nothing.

"Come," he said, "speak up, Jack.  Come, be a good maid, and say ye love
me!"

"Why, Dick," she cried, "would I be here?"

"Well, see ye here," continued Dick, "an we but escape whole we'll marry;
and an we're to die, we die, and there's an end on't.  But now that I
think, how found ye my chamber?"

"I asked it of Dame Hatch," she answered.

"Well, the dame's staunch," he answered; "she'll not tell upon you.  We
have time before us."

And just then, as if to contradict his words, feet came down the
corridor, and a fist beat roughly on the door.

"Here!" cried a voice.  "Open, Master Dick; open!"  Dick neither moved
nor answered.

"It is all over," said the girl; and she put her arms about Dick's neck.

One after another, men came trooping to the door.  Then Sir Daniel
arrived himself, and there was a sudden cessation of the noise.

"Dick," cried the knight, "be not an ass.  The Seven Sleepers had been
awake ere now.  We know she is within there.  Open, then, the door, man."

Dick was again silent.

"Down with it," said Sir Daniel.  And immediately his followers fell
savagely upon the door with foot and fist.  Solid as it was, and strongly
bolted, it would soon have given way; but once more fortune interfered.
Over the thunderstorm of blows the cry of a sentinel was heard; it was
followed by another; shouts ran along the battlements, shouts answered
out of the wood.  In the first moment of alarm it sounded as if the
foresters were carrying the Moat House by assault.  And Sir Daniel and
his men, desisting instantly from their attack upon Dick's chamber,
hurried to defend the walls.

"Now," cried Dick, "we are saved."

He seized the great old bedstead with both hands, and bent himself in
vain to move it.

"Help me, Jack.  For your life's sake, help me stoutly!" he cried.

Between them, with a huge effort, they dragged the big frame of oak
across the room, and thrust it endwise to the chamber door.

"Ye do but make things worse," said Joanna, sadly.  "He will then enter
by the trap."

"Not so," replied Dick.  "He durst not tell his secret to so many.  It is
by the trap that we shall flee.  Hark!  The attack is over.  Nay, it was
none!"

It had, indeed, been no attack; it was the arrival of another party of
stragglers from the defeat of Risingham that had disturbed Sir Daniel.
They had run the gauntlet under cover of the darkness; they had been
admitted by the great gate; and now, with a great stamping of hoofs and
jingle of accoutrements and arms, they were dismounting in the court.

"He will return anon," said Dick.  "To the trap!"

He lighted a lamp, and they went together into the corner of the room.
The open chink through which some light still glittered was easily
discovered, and, taking a stout sword from his small armoury, Dick thrust
it deep into the seam, and weighed strenuously on the hilt.  The trap
moved, gaped a little, and at length came widely open.  Seizing it with
their hands, the two young folk threw it back.  It disclosed a few steps
descending, and at the foot of them, where the would-be murderer had left
it, a burning lamp.

"Now," said Dick, "go first and take the lamp.  I will follow to close
the trap."

So they descended one after the other, and as Dick lowered the trap, the
blows began once again to thunder on the panels of the door.



CHAPTER IV--THE PASSAGE


The passage in which Dick and Joanna now found themselves was narrow,
dirty, and short.  At the other end of it, a door stood partly open; the
same door, without doubt, that they had heard the man unlocking.  Heavy
cobwebs hung from the roof; and the paved flooring echoed hollow under
the lightest tread.

Beyond the door there were two branches, at right angles.  Dick chose one
of them at random, and the pair hurried, with echoing footsteps, along
the hollow of the chapel roof.  The top of the arched ceiling rose like a
whale's back in the dim glimmer of the lamp.  Here and there were
spyholes, concealed, on the other side, by the carving of the cornice;
and looking down through one of these, Dick saw the paved floor of the
chapel--the altar, with its burning tapers--and stretched before it on
the steps, the figure of Sir Oliver praying with uplifted hands.

At the other end, they descended a few steps.  The passage grew narrower;
the wall upon one hand was now of wood; the noise of people talking, and
a faint flickering of lights, came through the interstices; and presently
they came to a round hole about the size of a man's eye, and Dick,
looking down through it, beheld the interior of the hall, and some half a
dozen men sitting, in their jacks, about the table, drinking deep and
demolishing a venison pie.  These were certainly some of the late
arrivals.

"Here is no help," said Dick.  "Let us try back."

"Nay," said Joanna; "maybe the passage goeth farther."

And she pushed on.  But a few yards farther the passage ended at the top
of a short flight of steps; and it became plain that, as long as the
soldiers occupied the hall, escape was impossible upon that side.

They retraced their steps with all imaginable speed, and set forward to
explore the other branch.  It was exceedingly narrow, scarce wide enough
for a large man; and it led them continually up and down by little
break-neck stairs, until even Dick had lost all notion of his
whereabouts.

At length it grew both narrower and lower; the stairs continued to
descend; the walls on either hand became damp and slimy to the touch; and
far in front of them they heard the squeaking and scuttling of the rats.

"We must be in the dungeons," Dick remarked.

"And still there is no outlet," added Joanna.

"Nay, but an outlet there must be!" Dick answered.  Presently, sure
enough, they came to a sharp angle, and then the passage ended in a
flight of steps.  On the top of that there was a solid flag of stone by
way of trap, and to this they both set their backs.  It was immovable.
"Some one holdeth it," suggested Joanna.

"Not so," said Dick; "for were a man strong as ten, he must still yield a
little.  But this resisteth like dead rock.  There is a weight upon the
trap.  Here is no issue; and, by my sooth, good Jack, we are here as
fairly prisoners as though the gyves were on our ankle bones.  Sit ye
then down, and let us talk.  After a while we shall return, when
perchance they shall be less carefully upon their guard; and, who
knoweth? we may break out and stand a chance.  But, in my poor opinion,
we are as good as shent."

"Dick!" she cried, "alas the day that ever ye should have seen me!  For
like a most unhappy and unthankful maid, it is I have led you hither."

"What cheer!" returned Dick.  "It was all written, and that which is
written, willy nilly, cometh still to pass.  But tell me a little what
manner of a maid ye are, and how ye came into Sir Daniel's hands; that
will do better than to bemoan yourself, whether for your sake or mine."

"I am an orphan, like yourself, of father and mother," said Joanna; "and
for my great misfortune, Dick, and hitherto for yours, I am a rich
marriage.  My Lord Foxham had me to ward; yet it appears Sir Daniel
bought the marriage of me from the king, and a right dear price he paid
for it.  So here was I, poor babe, with two great and rich men fighting
which should marry me, and I still at nurse!  Well, then the world
changed, and there was a new chancellor, and Sir Daniel bought the
warding of me over the Lord Foxham's head.  And then the world changed
again, and Lord Foxham bought my marriage over Sir Daniel's; and from
then to now it went on ill betwixt the two of them.  But still Lord
Foxham kept me in his hands, and was a good lord to me.  And at last I
was to be married--or sold, if ye like it better.  Five hundred pounds
Lord Foxham was to get for me.  Hamley was the groom's name, and
to-morrow, Dick, of all days in the year, was I to be betrothed.  Had it
not come to Sir Daniel, I had been wedded, sure--and never seen thee,
Dick--dear Dick!"

And here she took his hand, and kissed it, with the prettiest grace; and
Dick drew her hand to him and did the like.

"Well," she went on, "Sir Daniel took me unawares in the garden, and made
me dress in these men's clothes, which is a deadly sin for a woman; and,
besides, they fit me not.  He rode with me to Kettley, as ye saw, telling
me I was to marry you; but I, in my heart, made sure I would marry Hamley
in his teeth."

"Ay!" cried Dick, "and so ye loved this Hamley!"

"Nay," replied Joanna, "not I.  I did but hate Sir Daniel.  And then,
Dick, ye helped me, and ye were right kind, and very bold, and my heart
turned towards you in mine own despite; and now, if we can in any way
compass it, I would marry you with right goodwill.  And if, by cruel
destiny, it may not be, still ye'll be dear to me.  While my heart beats,
it'll be true to you."

"And I," said Dick, "that never cared a straw for any manner of woman
until now, I took to you when I thought ye were a boy.  I had a pity to
you, and knew not why.  When I would have belted you, the hand failed me.
But when ye owned ye were a maid, Jack--for still I will call you Jack--I
made sure ye were the maid for me.  Hark!" he said, breaking off--"one
cometh."

And indeed a heavy tread was now audible in the echoing passage, and the
rats again fled in armies.

Dick reconnoitred his position.  The sudden turn gave him a post of
vantage.  He could thus shoot in safety from the cover of the wall.  But
it was plain the light was too near him, and, running some way forward,
he set down the lamp in the middle of the passage, and then returned to
watch.

Presently, at the far end of the passage, Bennet hove in sight.  He
seemed to be alone, and he carried in his hand a burning torch, which
made him the better mark.

"Stand, Bennet!" cried Dick.  "Another step, and y' are dead."

"So here ye are," returned Hatch, peering forward into the darkness.  "I
see you not.  Aha! y' 'ave done wisely, Dick; y' 'ave put your lamp
before you.  By my sooth, but, though it was done to shoot my own knave
body, I do rejoice to see ye profit of my lessons!  And now, what make
ye? what seek ye here?  Why would ye shoot upon an old, kind friend?  And
have ye the young gentlewoman there?"

"Nay, Bennet, it is I should question and you answer," replied Dick.
"Why am I in this jeopardy of my life?  Why do men come privily to slay
me in my bed?  Why am I now fleeing in mine own guardian's strong house,
and from the friends that I have lived among and never injured?"

"Master Dick, Master Dick," said Bennet, "what told I you?  Y' are brave,
but the most uncrafty lad that I can think upon!"

"Well," returned Dick, "I see ye know all, and that I am doomed indeed.
It is well.  Here, where I am, I stay.  Let Sir Daniel get me out if he
be able!"

Hatch was silent for a space.

"Hark ye," he began, "return to Sir Daniel, to tell him where ye are, and
how posted; for, in truth, it was to that end he sent me.  But you, if ye
are no fool, had best be gone ere I return."

"Begone!" repeated Dick.  "I would be gone already, an' I wist how.  I
cannot move the trap."

"Put me your hand into the corner, and see what ye find there," replied
Bennet.  "Throgmorton's rope is still in the brown chamber.  Fare ye
well."

And Hatch, turning upon his heel, disappeared again into the windings of
the passage.

Dick instantly returned for his lamp, and proceeded to act upon the hint.
At one corner of the trap there was a deep cavity in the wall.  Pushing
his arm into the aperture, Dick found an iron bar, which he thrust
vigorously upwards.  There followed a snapping noise, and the slab of
stone instantly started in its bed.

They were free of the passage.  A little exercise of strength easily
raised the trap; and they came forth into a vaulted chamber, opening on
one hand upon the court, where one or two fellows, with bare arms, were
rubbing down the horses of the last arrivals.  A torch or two, each stuck
in an iron ring against the wall, changefully lit up the scene.



CHAPTER V--HOW DICK CHANGED SIDES


Dick, blowing out his lamp lest it should attract attention, led the way
up-stairs and along the corridor.  In the brown chamber the rope had been
made fast to the frame of an exceeding heavy and ancient bed.  It had not
been detached, and Dick, taking the coil to the window, began to lower it
slowly and cautiously into the darkness of the night.  Joan stood by; but
as the rope lengthened, and still Dick continued to pay it out, extreme
fear began to conquer her resolution.
