The Project Gutenberg EBook of Through Space to Mars, by Roy Rockwood

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Through Space to Mars

Author: Roy Rockwood

Posting Date: August 29, 2012 [EBook #6717]
Release Date: October, 2004
First Posted: January 19, 2003
Last Updated: May 16, 2003

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THROUGH SPACE TO MARS ***




Produced by Sean Pobuda









THROUGH SPACE TO MARS

Or the Longest Journey on Record

By Roy Rockwood

#4 in the "Great Marvel Series"




CHAPTER I

TWO CHUMS


"Mark, hand me that test tube, will you, please?"

The lad who had made the request looked over at his companion, a
boy of about his own age, who was on the other side of the
laboratory table.

"The big one, or the small one?" questioned Mark Sampson.

"The large one," answered Jack Darrow.  "I want to put plenty of
the chemical in this time and give it a good try."

"Now be careful, Jack.  You know what happened the last time."

"You mean what nearly happened.  The tube burst, but we didn't
get hurt.  I have to laugh when I think of the way you ducked
under the table.  Ha, ha!  It was awfully funny!"

"Humph!  Maybe you think so, but I don't," responded Mark with
rather a serious air.  "I noticed that you got behind a chair."

"Well, of course.  I didn't want broken glass in my eyes.  Come
on, are you going to hand me that test tube, or will I have to
come and get it?  We haven't much more time to-day."

"Oh, here's the tube," said Mark as he passed it over.  "But
please be careful, Jack."

Jack measured out some black chemical that resembled gunpowder,
and poured it into the test tube which Mark handed him.  Then he
inserted in the opening a cork, from which extended a glass tube,
to the outer end of which was fastened a rubber pipe.

He paused in his experiment to laugh again.

"What are you making--laughing gas?" asked Mark.

"No.  But--excuse me--ha, ha!  I can't help laughing when I
think of the way you ducked under the table the other day."

"Maybe you'll laugh on the other side of your countenance, as
Washington White would say," commented Mark; "especially if that
big tube bursts."

"But it isn't going to burst."

"How do you know?"

"Well, I worked out this experiment carefully.  I've calculated
just how strong the new gas will be, and--"

"Ah, that's just it.  It's a new gas, and you've never yet
succeeded in making it, have you?"

"No; but--"

"And it takes a different combination of chemicals to make it
from any you ever experimented with before, doesn't it?" asked
Mark.

"It does.  But--"

"Yes, and I don't see how you can tell, with any amount of
calculation, just how much force will develop from those
chemicals, as no one ever put them together before."

"Well, maybe I can't," admitted Jack.  "But this tube is very
strong, and even if it does break nothing very serious can
happen."

"Unless the gas you expect to generate is stronger than you have
any idea of."

"Well, I'm going to do it.  I've got half an hour before
Professor Lenton and his class comes in, and that's time enough.
Here, just hold this rubber tube under this jar, will you?  And
be sure to keep the edge of the jar below the surface of the
water.  I don't want any of the gas to escape."

He handed Mark the end of the rubber tube, and the somewhat
nervous student, who was helping his chum Jack in the experiment,
inserted it under the edge of a large bell-glass, the open mouth
of which was placed just under the surface of water in a shallow
pan.

The two lads were students at the Universal Electrical and
Chemical College.  They stood high in their classes, and were
often allowed to conduct experiments on their own responsibility,
this being one of those occasions.  Jack, who was somewhat older
than his companion, was of a more adventurous turn of mind, and
was constantly trying new things.  Not always safe ones, either,
for often he had produced small explosions in the laboratory of
the college.  Only minor damage had been done thus far, but, as
Mark said, one could never tell what was going to happen when
Jack mixed certain things in test tubes and placed them over a
spirit lamp, or the flame of a Bunsen burner.

"Have you got that tube under the jar?" asked Jack as he lighted
a large Bunsen flame.

"It's under," answered Mark.  "But say, what are you going to do
in case you prove that your theory is right, and that you can
make a new kind of gas?  What good will it be?"

"Lots of good.  If I'm right, this will be the lightest gas ever
made.  Much lighter than hydrogen--"

"Lighter than the kind Professor Henderson made for use in the
Flying Mermaid, in which we went to the center of the earth?"

"No, I'm afraid I can't equal his gas; but then, no one can ever
hope to.  I'm going to make a new gas, though, and I'll show you
that it will be much lighter and more powerful than hydrogen."

"More powerful, eh?  Then I wish you'd have some one else hold
this.  I'm afraid the test tube will burst."

"What if it does?  It can't hurt you--very much.  But here, since
you're so nervous, I'll put a pile of books all around the tube
and the burner.  Then, if it bursts, the books will prevent the
pieces of glass from flying all about.  Does that satisfy you?"
and Jack began heaping some books about the burner, over which he
was about to suspend the test tube containing the queer chemical.

"Yes," returned Mark doubtfully.  "I suppose it's all right--unless
the books will be blown all over."

"Well, I'll be jig-sawed!" exclaimed Jack with a laugh.  "There's
no satisfying you.  You're too particular, Mark."

"Maybe; but I don't want to get hurt."

"You'll not be injured in the least.  Look, you're quite a
distance away, and even if it does explode and the books are
scattered away, it can't hurt much to be hit by one of these
volumes.  There, I'm all ready now.  Hold the tube firmly."

He placed the test tube in a support, clamping it fast, so that
it would be held steady over the flame.  Then he turned on more
of the illuminating gas, which, coming through the Bunsen burner,
was made intensely hot.  A little column of flame now enveloped
the big test tube containing the powder.

There was a little crackling sound as the heat expanded the
powder, and the end of the test tube became quite red from the
flame.

"That tube'll melt!" exclaimed Mark, peering over the pile of
books.  "It's too near the flame."

"Guess you're right," admitted Jack.  "I'll raise it up a bit."

He turned down the flame and elevated the tube slightly.  Then he
took a position where he could watch the process of making what
he hoped would be a new kind of gas.  He wanted to be where he
could see the vapor beginning to collect in the top of the tube,
pass off through the glass in the cork, and then through the
little rubber hose to the bell glass held by Mark.  If the gas
was generated too quickly, Jack knew he would have to turn down
the heat slightly.

The crackling sound continued.  Then, as Jack watched, he saw a
thick, yellowish vapor collecting in the top of the test tube
near the cork.

"It's coming!" he cried.  "There's my new gas!"

"What's the name of it?" asked Mark.

"I haven't named it yet.  I want to collect it in the jar and
show it to Professor Lenton.  He said he didn't believe I could
make it."

The boys resumed their careful watching of the experiment.  It
was a nervous moment, for, from experience, Mark knew you never
could tell what would happen when Jack began to try new
combinations of chemicals.  He was ready to drop down on an
instant's warning, out of the way of flying missiles.

"See any bubbles in that pan of water yet?" cried Jack.

"No, not yet."

"That's queer.  The test tube is full of the yellow gas, and some
ought to be over to where you are now.  I'm going to turn on some
more heat."

He increased the Bunsen flame.  The crackling noise was louder.
The test tube became a fiery red.

"It's bubbling now!" suddenly called Mark.

"That's good!  The experiment is a success!  I knew I could make
it.  Is any of the gas coming up in the glass jar?"

Mark bent over to make a closer examination.  There were a few
seconds of silence, broken only by the roaring of the burner and
the crackling of the black powder.

"Yes, there is vapor in the jar," he said.

"Good!  That's the stuff!" cried Jack.  "Now I guess Professor
Lenton will admit that I'm right."

He turned the Bunsen flame up higher.  A moment later he uttered
a cry, for he saw the cork being forced from the test tube.  The
pressure of the new gas was too much for it.

"Lookout!" cried Jack.  "She's going up!"

Then followed a sharp explosion, and the laboratory seemed filled
with fragments of broken glass and torn books.




CHAPTER II

JACK MAKES OXYGEN


"There it goes!  There it goes!" cried Mark, making a dive for
the laboratory door, but slipping and sprawling on the floor.
"There it goes, Jack!"

"No; it's gone already!" cried Jack, who, even in the midst of
danger and excitement, seemed to remain calm and still to have
his appreciation of it joke.

"Come on!" cried Mark as he scrambled to his feet.  "We must get
out of here, Jack!"

"What's the use now?  It's all over."

There was a tinkling sound, as fragments of the broken test tube,
the bell-jar and other things began falling about the room.

Mark was fumbling at the door of the laboratory, seeking to
escape.

"Come on back," said Jack.  "It's all over.  There's no more
danger.  We'll try it again."

Just then one of the pile of books, that had been blown on an
upper shelf, came down, landing on Mark's head.

"No danger?" cried Mark, trembling from excitement.  "No danger?
What do you call that?" and he pointed to the books at his feet,
while he rubbed his head ruefully.

"Well, there aren't any more," observed Jack, with a look upward.

Just then the door opened, and an elderly gentleman, wearing
spectacles, entered the laboratory.  He seemed much excited.

"What happened?  Is any one hurt?  Was there an explosion here?"
he asked.

Then he saw the devastation on all sides--the broken glass, the
scattered and torn books--and he noticed Mark rubbing his head.

"There was--er--a slight explosion," replied Jack, a faint smile
spreading over his face.

"Are you hurt?" the professor asked quickly, stepping over to
Mark.  "Shall I get a doctor?"

"A book hit him," explained Jack.

"A book!  Did a book explode?"

"No, sir.  You see, I was making a new kind of gas, and Mark was
helping me.  He was afraid the test tube would explode, so I
piled books around it, and--"

"And it did blow up!" cried Mark, still rubbing his head.  "The
test tube, and the other tube, and the rubber hose, and the
bell-jar.  I told you it would, Jack."

"Then you weren't disappointed," retorted Jack, this time with a
broad smile.  "I don't like to disappoint people," he added.

"What kind of gas was it, Darrow?" asked Professor Lenton.

"Well, I hadn't exactly named it yet," answered the young
inventor.  "I was going to show it to you, and see what you
thought of it.  It's the kind you said I couldn't make."

"And did you make it?" asked the instructor grimly.

"Yes, sir--some."

"Where is it?"

"It's--er--well, you can smell it," replied Jack.

Sure enough, there was a strong, unpleasant odor in the
laboratory, but that was usual in the college where all sorts of
experiments were constantly going on.

"Hum--yes," admitted the professor.  "I do perceive a new odor.
But I'm glad neither of you was hurt, and the damage doesn't seem
to be great."

"No, sir.  It was my own apparatus I was using," explained Jack.
"I'll be more careful next time.  I'll not put in so much of the
chemical."

