The second great principle, which has conferred immortal glory on
Copernicus, assigned to the earth its true position in the universe.
Copernicus transferred the centre, about which all the planets revolve,
from the earth to the sun; and he established the somewhat humiliating
truth, that our earth is merely a planet pursuing a track between the
paths of Venus and of Mars, and subordinated like all the other planets
to the supreme sway of the Sun.

This great revolution swept from astronomy those distorted views of the
earth's importance which arose, perhaps not unnaturally, from the fact
that we happen to be domiciled on that particular planet. The
achievements of Copernicus were soon to be followed by the invention of
the telescope, that wonderful instrument by which the modern science of
astronomy has been created. To the consideration of this important
subject we shall devote the first chapter of our book.

[Illustration: PLATE II.

A TYPICAL SUN-SPOT.

(AFTER LANGLEY.)]




CHAPTER I.

THE ASTRONOMICAL OBSERVATORY.


     Early Astronomical Observations--The Observatory of Tycho
     Brahe--The Pupil of the Eye--Vision of Faint Objects--The
     Telescope--The Object-Glass--Advantages of Large Telescopes--The
     Equatorial--The Observatory--The Power of a Telescope--Reflecting
     Telescopes--Lord Rosse's Great Reflector at Parsonstown--How the
     mighty Telescope is used--Instruments of Precision--The Meridian
     Circle--The Spider Lines--Delicacy of pointing a
     Telescope--Precautions necessary in making Observations--The Ideal
     Instrument and the Practical One--The Elimination of
     Error--Greenwich Observatory--The ordinary Opera-Glass as an
     Astronomical Instrument--The Great Bear--Counting the Stars in the
     Constellation--How to become an Observer.

The earliest rudiments of the Astronomical Observatory are as little
known as the earliest discoveries in astronomy itself. Probably the
first application of instrumental observation to the heavenly bodies
consisted in the simple operation of measuring the shadow of a post cast
by the sun at noonday. The variations in the length of this shadow
enabled the primitive astronomers to investigate the apparent movements
of the sun. But even in very early times special astronomical
instruments were employed which possessed sufficient accuracy to add to
the amount of astronomical knowledge, and displayed considerable
ingenuity on the part of the designers.

Professor Newcomb[2] thus writes: "The leader was Tycho Brahe, who was
born in 1546, three years after the death of Copernicus. His attention
was first directed to the study of astronomy by an eclipse of the sun on
August 21st, 1560, which was total in some parts of Europe. Astonished
that such a phenomenon could be predicted, he devoted himself to a study
of the methods of observation and calculation by which the prediction
was made. In 1576 the King of Denmark founded the celebrated observatory
of Uraniborg, at which Tycho spent twenty years assiduously engaged in
observations of the positions of the heavenly bodies with the best
instruments that could then be made. This was just before the invention
of the telescope, so that the astronomer could not avail himself of that
powerful instrument. Consequently, his observations were superseded by
the improved ones of the centuries following, and their celebrity and
importance are principally due to their having afforded Kepler the means
of discovering his celebrated laws of planetary motion."

The direction of the telescope to the skies by Galileo gave a wonderful
impulse to the study of the heavenly bodies. This extraordinary man is
prominent in the history of astronomy, not alone for his connection with
this supreme invention, but also for his achievements in the more
abstract parts of astronomy. He was born at Pisa in 1564, and in 1609
the first telescope used for astronomical observation was constructed.
Galileo died in 1642, the year in which Newton was born. It was Galileo
who laid with solidity the foundations of that science of Dynamics, of
which astronomy is the most splendid illustration; and it was he who, by
promulgating the doctrines taught by Copernicus, incurred the wrath of
the Inquisition.

The structure of the human eye in so far as the exquisite adaptation of
the pupil is concerned presents us with an apt illustration of the
principle of the telescope. To see an object, it is necessary that the
light from it should enter the eye. The portal through which the light
is admitted is the pupil. In daytime, when the light is brilliant, the
iris decreases the size of the pupil, and thus prevents too much light
from entering. At night, or whenever the light is scarce, the eye often
requires to grasp all it can. The pupil then expands; more and more
light is admitted according as the pupil grows larger. The illumination
of the image on the retina is thus effectively controlled in accordance
with the requirements of vision.

A star transmits to us its feeble rays of light, and from those rays
the image is formed. Even with the most widely-opened pupil, it may,
however, happen that the image is not bright enough to excite the
sensation of vision. Here the telescope comes to our aid: it catches all
the rays in a beam whose original dimensions were far too great to allow
of its admission through the pupil. The action of the lenses
concentrates those rays into a stream slender enough to pass through the
small opening. We thus have the brightness of the image on the retina
intensified. It is illuminated with nearly as much light as would be
collected from the same object through a pupil as large as the great
lenses of the telescope.

[Illustration: Fig. 1.--Principle of the Refracting Telescope.]

In astronomical observatories we employ telescopes of two entirely
different classes. The more familiar forms are those known as
_refractors_, in which the operation of condensing the rays of light is
conducted by refraction. The character of the refractor is shown in Fig.
1. The rays from the star fall upon the object-glass at the end of the
telescope, and on passing through they become refracted into a
converging beam, so that all intersect at the focus. Diverging from
thence, the rays encounter the eye-piece, which has the effect of
restoring them to parallelism. The large cylindrical beam which poured
down on the object-glass has been thus condensed into a small one, which
can enter the pupil. It should, however, be added that the composite
nature of light requires a more complex form of object-glass than the
simple lens here shown. In a refracting telescope we have to employ what
is known as the achromatic combination, consisting of one lens of flint
glass and one of crown glass, adjusted to suit each other with extreme
care.

[Illustration: Fig. 2.--The Dome of the South Equatorial at Dunsink
Observatory Co Dublin.]

[Illustration: Fig. 3.--Section of the Dome of Dunsink Observatory.]

The appearance of an astronomical observatory, designed to accommodate
an instrument of moderate dimensions, is shown in the adjoining figures.
The first (Fig. 2) represents the dome erected at Dunsink Observatory
for the equatorial telescope, the object-glass of which was presented to
the Board of Trinity College, Dublin, by the late Sir James South. The
main part of the building is a cylindrical wall, on the top of which
reposes a hemispherical roof. In this roof is a shutter, which can be
opened so as to allow the telescope in the interior to obtain a view of
the heavens. The dome is capable of revolving so that the opening may be
turned towards that part of the sky where the object happens to be
situated. The next view (Fig. 3) exhibits a section through the dome,
showing the machinery by which the attendant causes it to revolve, as
well as the telescope itself. The eye of the observer is placed at the
eye-piece, and he is represented in the act of turning a handle, which
has the power of slowly moving the telescope, in order to adjust the
instrument accurately on the celestial body which it is desired to
observe. The two lenses which together form the object-glass of this
instrument are twelve inches in diameter, and the quality of the
telescope mainly depends on the accuracy with which these lenses have
been wrought. The eye-piece is a comparatively simple matter. It
consists merely of one or two small lenses; and various eye-pieces can
be employed, according to the magnifying power which may be desired. It
is to be observed that for many purposes of astronomy high magnifying
powers are not desirable. There is a limit, too, beyond which the
magnification cannot be carried with advantage. The object-glass can
only collect a certain quantity of light from the star; and if the
magnifying power be too great, this limited amount of light will be
thinly dispersed over too large a surface, and the result will be found
unsatisfactory. The unsteadiness of the atmosphere still further limits
the extent to which the image may be advantageously magnified, for every
increase of power increases in the same degree the atmospheric
disturbance.

A telescope mounted in the manner here shown is called an _equatorial_.
The convenience of this peculiar style of supporting the instrument
consists in the ease with which the telescope can be moved so as to
follow a star in its apparent journey across the sky. The necessary
movements of the tube are given by clockwork driven by a weight, so
that, once the instrument has been correctly pointed, the star will
remain in the observer's field of view, and the effect of the apparent
diurnal movement will be neutralised. The last refinement in this
direction is the application of an electrical arrangement by which the
driving of the instrument is controlled from the standard clock of the
observatory.

[Illustration: Fig. 4.--The Telescope at Yerkes Observatory, Chicago.

(_From the Astrophysical Journal, Vol. vi., No. 1._)]

The power of a refracting telescope--so far as the expression has any
definite meaning--is to be measured by the diameter of its object-glass.
There has, indeed, been some honourable rivalry between the various
civilised nations as to which should possess the greatest refracting
telescope. Among the notable instruments that have been successfully
completed is that erected in 1881 by Sir Howard Grubb, of Dublin, at the
splendid observatory at Vienna. Its dimensions may be estimated from the
fact that the object-glass is two feet and three inches in diameter.
Many ingenious contrivances help to lessen the inconvenience incident to
the use of an instrument possessing such vast proportions. Among them we
may here notice the method by which the graduated circles attached to
the telescope are brought within view of the observer. These circles are
necessarily situated at parts of the instrument which lie remote from
the eye-piece where the observer is stationed. The delicate marks and
figures are, however, easily read from a distance by a small auxiliary
telescope, which, by suitable reflectors, conducts the rays of light
from the circles to the eye of the observer.

[Illustration: Fig. 5.--Principle of Herschel's Refracting Telescope.]

Numerous refracting telescopes of exquisite perfection have been
produced by Messrs. Alvan Clark, of Cambridgeport, Boston, Mass. One of
their most famous telescopes is the great Lick Refractor now in use on
Mount Hamilton in California. The diameter of this object-glass is
thirty-six inches, and its focal length is fifty-six feet two inches. A
still greater effort has recently been made by the same firm in the
refractor of forty inches aperture for the Yerkes Observatory of the
University of Chicago. The telescope, which is seventy-five feet in
length, is mounted under a revolving dome ninety feet in diameter, and
in order to enable the observer to reach the eye-piece without using
very large step-ladders, the floor of the room can be raised and lowered
through a range of twenty-two feet by electric motors. This is shown in
Fig. 4, while the south front of the Yerkes Observatory is represented
in Fig. 6.

[Illustration: Fig. 6.--South Front of the Yerkes Observatory, Chicago.

(_From the Astrophysical Journal, Vol. vi., No. 1._)]

[Illustration: Fig. 7.--Lord Rosse's Telescope.]

Within the last few years two fine telescopes have been added to the
instrumental equipment of the Royal Observatory, Greenwich, both by Sir
H. Grubb. One of these, containing a 28-inch object-glass, has been
erected on a mounting originally constructed for a smaller instrument by
Sir G. Airy. The other, presented by Sir Henry Thompson, is of 26 inches
aperture, and is adapted for photographic work.

There is a limit to the size of the refractor depending upon the
material of the object-glass. Glass manufacturers seem to experience
unusual difficulties in their attempts to form large discs of optical
glass pure enough and uniform enough to be suitable for telescopes.
These difficulties are enhanced with every increase in the size of the
discs, so that the cost has a tendency to increase at a very much
greater rate. It may be mentioned in illustration that the price paid
for the object-glass of the Lick telescope exceeded ten thousand pounds.

There is, however, an alternative method of constructing a telescope, in
which the difficulty we have just mentioned does not arise. The
principle of the simplest form of _reflector_ is shown in Fig. 5, which
represents what is called the Herschelian instrument. The rays of light
from the star under observation fall on a mirror which is both carefully
shaped and highly polished. After reflection, the rays proceed to a
focus, and diverging from thence, fall on the eye-piece, by which they
are restored to parallelism, and thus become adapted for reception in
the eye. It was essentially on this principle (though with a secondary
flat mirror at the upper end of the tube reflecting the rays at a right
angle to the side of the tube, where the eye-piece is placed) that Sir
Isaac Newton constructed the little reflecting telescope which is now
treasured by the Royal Society. A famous instrument of the Newtonian
type was built, half a century ago, by the late Earl of Rosse, at
Parsonstown. It is represented in Fig. 7. The colossal aperture of this
instrument has never been surpassed; it has, indeed, never been
rivalled. The mirror or speculum, as it is often called, is a thick
metallic disc, composed of a mixture of two parts of copper with one of
tin. This alloy is so hard and brittle as to make the necessary
mechanical operations difficult to manage. The material admits, however,
of a brilliant polish, and of receiving and retaining an accurate
figure. The Rosse speculum--six feet in diameter and three tons in
weight--reposes at the lower end of a telescope fifty-five feet long.
The tube is suspended between two massive castellated walls, which form
an imposing feature on the lawn at Birr Castle. This instrument cannot
be turned about towards every part of the sky, like the equatorials we
have recently been considering. The great tube is only capable of
elevation in altitude along the meridian, and of a small lateral
movement east and west of the meridian. Every star or nebula visible in
the latitude of Parsonstown (except those very near the pole) can,
however, be observed in the great telescope, if looked for at the right
time.

[Illustration: Fig. 8.--Meridian Circle.]

Before the object reaches the meridian, the telescope must be adjusted
at the right elevation. The necessary power is transmitted by a chain
from a winch at the northern end of the walls to a point near the upper
end of the tube. By this contrivance the telescope can be raised or
lowered, and an ingenious system of counterpoises renders the movement
equally easy at all altitudes. The observer then takes his station in
one of the galleries which give access to the eye-piece; and when the
right moment has arrived, the star enters the field of view. Powerful
mechanism drives the great instrument, so as to counteract the diurnal
movement, and thus the observer can retain the object in view until he
has made his measurements or finished his drawing.

Of late years reflecting telescopes have been generally made with
mirrors of glass covered with a thin film of silver, which is capable of
reflecting much more light than the surface of a metallic mirror. Among
great reflectors of this kind we may mention two, of three and five feet
aperture respectively, with which Dr. Common has done valuable work.

We must not, however, assume that for the general work in an observatory
a colossal instrument is the most suitable. The mighty reflector, or
refractor, is chiefly of use where unusually faint objects are being
examined. For work in which accurate measurements are made of objects
not particularly difficult to see, telescopes of smaller dimensions are
more suitable. The fundamental facts about the heavenly bodies have been
chiefly learned from observations obtained with instruments of moderate
optical power, specially furnished so as to enable precise measures of
position to be secured. Indeed, in the early stages of astronomy,
important determinations of position were effected by contrivances
which showed the direction of the object without any telescopic aid.

Perhaps the most valuable measurements obtained in our modern
observatories are yielded by that instrument of precision known as the
_meridian circle_. It is impossible, in any adequate account of the
Story of the Heavens, to avoid some reference to this indispensable aid
to astronomical research, and therefore we shall give a brief account of
one of its simpler forms, choosing for this purpose a great instrument
in the Paris Observatory, which is represented in Fig. 8.

The telescope is attached at its centre to an axis at right angles to
its length. Pivots at each extremity of this axis rotate upon fixed
bearings, so that the movements of the telescope are completely
restricted to the plane of the meridian. Inside the eye-piece of the
telescope extremely fine vertical fibres are stretched. The observer
watches the moon, or star, or planet enter the field of view; and he
notes by the clock the exact time, to the fraction of a second, at which
the object passes over each of the lines. A silver band on the circle
attached to the axis is divided into degrees and subdivisions of a
degree, and as this circle moves with the telescope, the elevation at
which the instrument is pointed will be indicated. For reading the
delicately engraved marks and figures on the silver, microscopes are
necessary. These are shown in the sketch, each one being fixed into an
aperture in the wall which supports one end of the instrument. At the
opposite side is a lamp, the light from which passes through the
perforated axis of the pivot, and is thence ingeniously deflected by
mirrors so as to provide the requisite illumination for the lines at the
focus.

The fibres which the observer sees stretched over the field of view of
the telescope demand a few words of explanation. We require for this
purpose a material which shall be very fine and fairly durable, as well
as somewhat elastic, and of no appreciable weight. These conditions
cannot be completely fulfilled by any metallic wire, but they are
exquisitely realised in the beautiful thread which is spun by the
spider. The delicate fibres are stretched with nice skill across the
field of view of the telescope, and cemented in their proper places.
With instruments so beautifully appointed we can understand the
precision attained in modern observations. The telescope is directed
towards a star, and the image of the star is a minute point of light.
When that point coincides with the intersection of the two central
spider lines the telescope is properly sighted. We use the word sighted
designedly, because we wish to suggest a comparison between the sighting
of a rifle at the target and the sighting of a telescope at a star.
Instead of the ordinary large bull's-eye, suppose that the target only
consisted of a watch-dial, which, of course, the rifleman could not see
at the distance of any ordinary range. But with the telescope of the
meridian circle the watch-dial would be visible even at the distance of
a mile. The meridian circle is indeed capable of such precision as a
sighting instrument that it could be pointed separately to each of two
stars which subtend at the eye an angle no greater than that subtended
by an adjoining pair of the sixty minute dots around the circumference
of a watch-dial a mile distant from the observer.

This power of directing the instrument so accurately would be of but
little avail unless it were combined with arrangements by which, when
once the telescope has been pointed correctly, the position of the star
can be ascertained and recorded. One element in the determination of the
position is secured by the astronomical clock, which gives the moment
when the object crosses the central vertical wire; the other element is
given by the graduated circle which reads the angular distance of the
star from the zenith or point directly overhead.

Superb meridian instruments adorn our great observatories, and are
nightly devoted to those measurements upon which the great truths of
astronomy are mainly based. These instruments have been constructed with
refined skill; but it is the duty of the painstaking astronomer to
distrust the accuracy of his instrument in every conceivable way. The
great tube may be as rigid a structure as mechanical engineers can
produce; the graduations on the circle may have been engraved by the
most perfect of dividing machines; but the conscientious astronomer will
not be content with mere mechanical precision. That meridian circle
which, to the uninitiated, seems a marvellous piece of workmanship,
possessing almost illimitable accuracy, is viewed in a very different
light by the astronomer who makes use of it. No one can appreciate more
fully than he the skill of the artist who has made that meridian circle,
and the beautiful contrivances for illumination and reading off which
give to the instrument its perfection; but while the astronomer
recognises the beauty of the actual machine he is using, he has always
before his mind's eye an ideal instrument of absolute perfection, to
which the actual meridian circle only makes an approximation.

Contrasted with the ideal instrument, the finest meridian circle is
little more than a mass of imperfections. The ideal tube is perfectly
rigid, the actual tube is flexible; the ideal divisions of the circle
are perfectly uniform, the actual divisions are not uniform. The ideal
instrument is a geometrical embodiment of perfect circles, perfect
straight lines, and perfect right angles; the actual instrument can only
show approximate circles, approximate straight lines, and approximate
right angles. Perhaps the spider's part of the work is on the whole the
best; the stretched web gives us the nearest mechanical approach to a
perfectly straight line; but we mar the spider's work by not being able
to insert those beautiful threads with perfect uniformity, while our
attempts to adjust two of them across the field of view at right angles
do not succeed in producing an angle of exactly ninety degrees.

Nor are the difficulties encountered by the meridian observer due solely
to his instrument. He has to contend against his own imperfections; he
has often to allow for personal peculiarities of an unexpected nature;
the troubles that the atmosphere can give are notorious; while the
levelling of his instrument warns him that he cannot even rely on the
solid earth itself. We learn that the earthquakes, by which the solid
ground is sometimes disturbed, are merely the more conspicuous
instances of incessant small movements in the earth which every night in
the year derange the delicate adjustment of the instrument.

When the existence of these errors has been recognised, the first great
step has been taken. By an alliance between the astronomer and the
mathematician it is possible to measure the discrepancies between the
actual meridian circle and the instrument that is ideally perfect. Once
this has been done, we can estimate the effect which the irregularities
produce on the observations, and finally, we succeed in purging the
observations from the grosser errors by which they are contaminated. We
thus obtain results which are not indeed mathematically accurate, but
are nevertheless close approximations to those which would be obtained
by a perfect observer using an ideal instrument of geometrical accuracy,
standing on an earth of absolute rigidity, and viewing the heavens
without the intervention of the atmosphere.

In addition to instruments like those already indicated, astronomers
have other means of following the motions of the heavenly bodies. Within
the last fifteen years photography has commenced to play an important
part in practical astronomy. This beautiful art can be utilised for
representing many objects in the heavens by more faithful pictures than
the pencil of even the most skilful draughtsman can produce. Photography
is also applicable for making charts of any region in the sky which it
is desired to examine. When repeated pictures of the same region are
made from time to time, their comparison gives the means of ascertaining
whether any star has moved during the interval. The amount and direction
of this motion may be ascertained by a delicate measuring apparatus
under which the photographic plate is placed.

If a refracting telescope is to be used for taking celestial
photographs, the lenses of the object-glass must be specially designed
for this purpose. The rays of light which imprint an image on the
prepared plate are not exactly the same as those which are chiefly
concerned in the production of the image on the retina of the human eye.
A reflecting mirror, however, brings all the rays, both those which are
chemically active and those which are solely visual, to one and the
same focus. The same reflecting instrument may therefore be used either
for looking at the heavens or for taking pictures on a photographic
plate which has been substituted for the observer's eye.

A simple portrait camera has been advantageously employed for obtaining
striking photographs of larger areas of the sky than can be grasped in a
long telescope; but for purposes of accurate measurement those taken
with the latter are incomparably better.

It is needless to say that the photographic apparatus, whatever it may
be, must be driven by delicately-adjusted clockwork to counteract the
apparent daily motion of the stars caused by the rotation of the earth.
The picture would otherwise be spoiled, just as a portrait is ruined if
the sitter does not remain quiet during the exposure.

Among the observatories in the United Kingdom the Royal Observatory at
Greenwich is of course the most famous. It is specially remarkable among
all the similar institutions in the world for the continuity of its
labours for several generations. Greenwich Observatory was founded in
1675 for the promotion of astronomy and navigation, and the observations
have from the first been specially arranged with the object of
determining with the greatest accuracy the positions of the principal
fixed stars, the sun, the moon, and the planets. In recent years,
however, great developments of the work of the Observatory have been
witnessed, and the most modern branches of the science are now
assiduously pursued there.

The largest equatorial at Greenwich is a refractor of twenty-eight
inches aperture and twenty-eight feet long, constructed by Sir Howard
Grubb. A remarkable composite instrument from the same celebrated
workshop has also been recently added to our national institution. It
consists of a great refractor specially constructed for photography, of
twenty-six inches aperture (presented by Sir Henry Thompson) and a
reflector of thirty inches diameter, which is the product of Dr.
Common's skill. The huge volume published annually bears witness to the
assiduity with which the Astronomer Royal and his numerous staff of
assistant astronomers make use of the splendid means at their disposal.

The southern part of the heavens, most of which cannot be seen in this
country, is watched from various observatories in the southern
hemisphere. Foremost among them is the Royal Observatory at the Cape of
Good Hope, which is furnished with first-class instruments. We may
mention a great photographic telescope, the gift of Mr. M'Clean.
Astronomy has been greatly enriched by the many researches made by Dr.
Gill, the director of the Cape Observatory.

[Illustration: Fig. 9.--The Great Bear.]

It is not, however, necessary to use such great instruments to obtain
some idea of the aid the telescope will afford. The most suitable
instrument for commencing astronomical studies is within ordinary reach.
It is the well-known binocular that a captain uses on board ship; or if
that cannot be had, then the common opera-glass will answer nearly as
well. This is, no doubt, not so powerful as a telescope, but it has some
compensating advantages. The opera-glass will enable us to survey a
large region of the sky at one glance, while a telescope, generally
speaking, presents a much smaller field of view.

Let us suppose that the observer is provided with an opera-glass and is
about to commence his astronomical studies. The first step is to become
acquainted with the conspicuous group of seven stars represented in Fig.
9. This group is often called the Plough, or Charles's Wain, but
astronomers prefer to regard it as a portion of the constellation of the
Great Bear (Ursa Major). There are many features of interest in this
constellation, and the beginner should learn as soon as possible to
identify the seven stars which compose it. Of these the two marked
a and b, at the head of the Bear, are generally called the
"pointers." They are of special use, because they serve to guide the eye
to that most important star in the whole sky, known as the "pole star."

Fix the attention on that region in the Great Bear, which forms a sort
of rectangle, of which the stars a b g d are the corners. The next fine
night try to count how many stars are visible within that rectangle. On
a very fine night, without a moon, perhaps a dozen might be perceived,
or even more, according to the keenness of the eyesight. But when the
opera-glass is directed to the same part of the constellation an
astonishing sight is witnessed. A hundred stars can now be seen with the
greatest ease.

But the opera-glass will not show nearly all the stars in this region.
Any good telescope will reveal many hundreds too faint for the feebler
instrument. The greater the telescope the more numerous the stars: so
that seen through one of the colossal instruments the number would have
to be reckoned in thousands.

We have chosen the Great Bear because it is more generally known than
any other constellation. But the Great Bear is not exceptionally rich in
stars. To tell the number of the stars is a task which no man has
accomplished; but various estimates have been made. Our great telescopes
can probably show at least 50,000,000 stars.

The student who uses a good refracting telescope, having an object-glass
not less than three inches in diameter, will find occupation for many a
fine evening. It will greatly increase the interest of his work if he
have the charming handbook of the heavens known as Webb's "Celestial
Objects for Common Telescopes."




CHAPTER II.

THE SUN.


     The vast Size of the Sun--Hotter than Melting Platinum--Is the Sun
     the Source of Heat for the Earth?--The Sun is 92,900,000 miles
     distant--How to realise the magnitude of this distance--Day and
     Night--Luminous and Non-Luminous Bodies--Contrast between the Sun
     and the Stars--The Sun a Star--Granulated Appearance of the
     Sun--The Spots on the Sun--Changes in the Form of a Spot--The
     Faculae--The Rotation of the Sun on its Axis--View of a Typical
     Sun-Spot--Periodicity of the Sun-Spots--Connection between the
     Sun-Spots and Terrestrial Magnetism--Principles of Spectrum
     Analysis--Substances present in the Sun--Spectrum of a Spot--The
     Prominences surrounding the Sun--Total Eclipse of the Sun--Size and
     Movement of the Prominences--Their connection with the
     Spots--Spectroscopic Measurement of Motion on the Sun--The Corona
     surrounding the Sun--Constitution of the Sun.

In commencing our examination of the orbs which surround us, we
naturally begin with our peerless sun. His splendid brilliance gives him
the pre-eminence over all other celestial bodies.

The dimensions of our luminary are commensurate with his importance.
Astronomers have succeeded in the difficult task of ascertaining the
exact figures, but they are so gigantic that the results are hard to
realise. The diameter of the orb of day, or the length of the axis,
passing through the centre from one side to the other, is 866,000 miles.
Yet this bare statement of the dimensions of the great globe fails to
convey an adequate idea of its vastness. If a railway were laid round
the sun, and if we were to start in an express train moving sixty miles
an hour, we should have to travel for five years without intermission
night or day before we had accomplished the journey.

When the sun is compared with the earth the bulk of our luminary becomes
still more striking. Suppose his globe were cut up into one million
parts, each of these parts would appreciably exceed the bulk of our
earth. Fig. 10 exhibits a large circle and a very small one, marked S
and E respectively. These circles show the comparative sizes of the two
bodies. The mass of the sun does not, however, exceed that of the earth
in the same proportion. Were the sun placed in one pan of a mighty
weighing balance, and were 300,000 bodies as heavy as our earth placed
in the other, the luminary would turn the scale.

[Illustration: Fig. 10.--Comparative Size of the Earth and the Sun.]

The sun has a temperature far surpassing any that we artificially
produce, either in our chemical laboratories or our metallurgical
establishments. We can send a galvanic current through a piece of
platinum wire. The wire first becomes red hot, then white hot; then it
glows with a brilliance almost dazzling until it fuses and breaks. The
temperature of the melting platinum wire could hardly be surpassed in
the most elaborate furnaces, but it does not attain the temperature of
the sun.

It must, however, be admitted that there is an apparent discrepancy
between a fact of common experience and the statement that the sun
possesses the extremely high temperature that we have just tried to
illustrate. "If the sun were hot," it has been said, "then the nearer we
approach to him the hotter we should feel; yet this does not seem to be
the case. On the top of a high mountain we are nearer to the sun, and
yet everybody knows that it is much colder up there than in the valley
beneath. If the mountain be as high as Mont Blanc, then we are certainly
two or three miles nearer the glowing globe than we were at the
sea-level; yet, instead of additional warmth, we find eternal snow." A
simple illustration may help to lessen this difficulty. In a greenhouse
on a sunshiny day the temperature is much hotter than it is outside. The
glass will permit the hot sunbeams to enter, but it refuses to allow
them out again with equal freedom, and consequently the temperature
rises. The earth may, from this point of view, be likened to a
greenhouse, only, instead of the panes of glass, our globe is enveloped
by an enormous coating of air. On the earth's surface, we stand, as it
were, inside the greenhouse, and we benefit by the interposition of the
atmosphere; but when we climb very high mountains, we gradually pass
through some of the protecting medium, and then we suffer from the cold.
If the earth were deprived of its coat of air, it seems certain that
eternal frost would reign over whole continents as well as on the tops
of the mountains.

The actual distance of the sun from the earth is about 92,900,000 miles;
but by merely reciting the figures we do not receive a vivid impression
of the real magnitude. It would be necessary to count as quickly as
possible for three days and three nights before one million was
completed; yet this would have to be repeated nearly ninety-three times
before we had counted all the miles between the earth and the sun.

Every clear night we see a vast host of stars scattered over the sky.
Some are bright, some are faint, some are grouped into remarkable forms.
With regard to this multitude of brilliant points we have now to ask an
important question. Are they bodies which shine by their own light like
the sun, or do they only shine with borrowed light like the moon? The
answer is easily stated. Most of those bodies shine by their own light,
and they are properly called _stars_.

Suppose that the sun and the multitude of stars, properly so called, are
each and all self-luminous brilliant bodies, what is the great
distinction between the sun and the stars? There is, of course, a vast
and obvious difference between the unrivalled splendour of the sun and
the feeble twinkle of the stars. Yet this distinction does not
necessarily indicate that our luminary has an intrinsic splendour
superior to that of the stars. The fact is that we are nestled up
comparatively close to the sun for the benefit of his warmth and light,
while we are separated from even the nearest of the stars by a mighty
abyss. If the sun were gradually to retreat from the earth, his light
would decrease, so that when he had penetrated the depths of space to a
distance comparable with that by which we are separated from the stars,
his glory would have utterly departed. No longer would the sun seem to
be the majestic orb with which we are familiar. No longer would he be a
source of genial heat, or a luminary to dispel the darkness of night.
Our great sun would have shrunk to the insignificance of a star, not so
bright as many of those which we see every night.

Momentous indeed is the conclusion to which we are now led. That myriad
host of stars which studs our sky every night has been elevated into
vast importance. Each one of those stars is itself a mighty sun,
actually rivalling, and in many cases surpassing, the splendour of our
own luminary. We thus open up a majestic conception of the vast
dimensions of space, and of the dignity and splendour of the myriad
globes by which that space is tenanted.

There is another aspect of the picture not without its utility. We must
from henceforth remember that our sun is only a star, and not a
particularly important star. If the sun and the earth, and all which it
contains, were to vanish, the effect in the universe would merely be
that a tiny star had ceased its twinkling. Viewed simply as a star, the
sun must retire to a position of insignificance in the mighty fabric of
the universe. But it is not as a star that we have to deal with the sun.
To us his comparative proximity gives him an importance incalculably
transcending that of all the other stars. We imagined ourselves to be
withdrawn from the sun to obtain his true perspective in the universe;
let us now draw near, and give him that attention which his supreme
importance to us merits.

[Illustration: Fig. 11.--The Sun, photographed on September 22, 1870.]

To the unaided eye the sun appears to be a flat circle. If, however, it
be examined with the telescope, taking care of course to interpose a
piece of dark-coloured glass, or to employ some similar precaution to
screen the eye from injury, it will then be perceived that the sun is
not a flat surface, but a veritable glowing globe.

The first question which we must attempt to answer enquires whether the
glowing matter which forms the globe is a solid mass, or, if not solid,
which is it, liquid or gaseous? At the first glance we might think that
the sun cannot be fluid, and we might naturally imagine that it was a
solid ball of some white-hot substance. But this view is not correct;
for we can show that the sun is certainly not a solid body in so far at
least as its superficial parts are concerned.

A general view of the sun as shown by a telescope of moderate dimensions
may be seen in Fig. 11, which is taken from a photograph obtained by Mr.
Rutherford at New York on the 22nd of September, 1870. It is at once
seen that the surface of the luminary is by no means of uniform texture
or brightness. It may rather be described as granulated or mottled. This
appearance is due to the luminous clouds which float suspended in a
