and I tasted our first triumph in her cellar, whither we conducted Sir
Peter Grebe, the Crown-Prince of Monaco, Baron de Becasse, and his
Majesty King Christian of Finland.

Scepticism and incredulity gave place to excitement and unbounded
enthusiasm. The old King embraced the Countess; Baron de Becasse
attempted to kiss me; Sir Peter Grebe made a handsome apology for his
folly and vowed that he would do open penance for his sins. The poor
Crown-Prince, who was of a nervous temperament, sat on the
cellar-stairs and wept like a child.

His grief at his own pig-headedness touched us all profoundly.

So it happened that these gentlemen were coming to-night to give their
aid to us in moving the priceless eggs, and lend their countenance and
enthusiastic support to the young Countess in her maiden effort.

Sir Peter Grebe arrived first, all covered with orders and
decorations, and greeted us affectionately, calling the Countess the
"sweetest lass in France," and me his undutiful Yankee cousin who had
landed feet foremost at the expense of the British Empire.

The King of Finland, the Crown-Prince, and Baron de Becasse arrived
together, a composite mass of medals, sashes, and academy palms. To
see them moving boxes about, straightening chairs, and pulling out
rugs reminded me of those golden-embroidered gentlemen who run out
into the arena and roll up carpets after the acrobats have finished
their turn in the Nouveau Cirque.

I was aiding the King of Finland to move a heavy keg of nails, when
the Countess called out to me in alarm, saying that the thermometers
had dropped to 80 deg. Fahrenheit.

I spoke sharply to the plumbers, who were standing in a circle behind
the dressing-rooms; but they answered sullenly that they could do no
more work that day.

Indignant and alarmed, I ordered them to come out to the stage, and,
after some hesitation, they filed out, a sulky, silent lot of workmen,
with their tools already gathered up and tied in their kits. At once I
noticed that a new man had appeared among them--a red-faced, stocky
man wearing a frock-coat and a shiny silk hat.

"Who is the master-workman here?" I asked.

"I am," said a man in blue overalls.

"Well," said I, "why don't you fix those steam-fittings?"

There was a silence. The man in the silk hat smirked.

"Well?" said I.

"Come, come, that's all right," said the man in the silk hat. "These
men know their business without you tellin' them."

"Who are you?" I demanded, sharply.

"Oh, I'm just a walkin' delegate," he replied, with a sneer. "There's
a strike in New York and I come over here to tie this here exposition
up. See?"

"You mean to say you won't let these men finish their work?" I asked,
thunderstruck.

"That's about it, young man," he said, coolly.

Furious, I glanced at my watch, then at the thermometers, which now
registered only 75 deg.. Already I could hear the first-comers of the
audience arriving in the body of the hall. Already a stage-hand was
turning up the footlights and dragging chairs and tables hither and
thither.

"What will you take to stay and attend to those steam-pipes?" I
demanded, desperately.

"It can't be done nohow," observed the man in the silk hat. "That New
York strike is good for a month yet." Then, turning to the workmen, he
nodded and, to my horror, the whole gang filed out after him, turning
deaf ears to my entreaties and threats.

There was a deathly silence, then Sir Peter exploded into a vivid
shower of words. The Countess, pale as a ghost, gave me a
heart-breaking look. The Crown-Prince wept.

"Great Heaven!" I cried; "the thermometers have fallen to 70 deg.!"

The King of Finland sat down on a chair and pressed his hands over his
eyes. Baron de Becasse ran round and round, uttering subdued and
plaintive screams; Sir Peter swore steadily.

"Gentlemen," I cried, desperately, "we must save those eggs! They are
on the very eve of hatching! Who will volunteer?"

"To do what?" moaned the Crown-Prince.

"I'll show you," I exclaimed, running to the incubators and beckoning
to the Baron to aid me.

In a moment we had rolled out the great egg, made a nest on the stage
floor with the bales of cotton-wool, and placed the egg in it. One
after another we rolled out the remaining eggs, building for each its
nest of cotton; and at last the five enormous eggs lay there in a row
behind the green curtain.

"Now," said I, excitedly, to the King, "you must get up on that egg
and try to keep it warm."

The King began to protest, but I would take no denial, and presently
his Majesty was perched up on the great egg, gazing foolishly about at
the others, who were now all climbing up on their allotted eggs.

"Great Heaven!" muttered the King, as Sir Peter settled down
comfortably on his egg, "I am willing to give life and fortune for the
sake of science, but I can't bear to hatch out eggs like a bird!"

The Crown-Prince was now sitting patiently beside the Baron de
Becasse.

"I feel in my bones," he murmured, "that I'm about to hatch something.
Can't you hear a tapping on the shell of your egg, Baron?"

"Parbleu!" replied the Baron. "The shell is moving under me."

It certainly was; for, the next moment, the Baron fell into his egg
with a crash and a muffled shriek, and floundered out, dripping,
yellow as a canary.

"N'importe!" he cried, excitedly. "Allons! Save the eggs! Hurrah! Vive
la science!" And he scrambled up on the fourth egg and sat there, arms
folded, sublime courage transfiguring him from head to foot.

We all gave him a cheer, which was hushed as the stage-manager ran in,
warning us that the audience was already assembled and in place.

"You're not going to raise the curtain while we're sitting, are you?"
demanded the King of Finland, anxiously.

"No, no," I said; "sit tight, your Majesty. Courage, gentlemen! Our
vindication is at hand!"

The Countess glanced at me with startled eyes; I took her hand,
saluted it respectfully, and then quietly led her before the curtain,
facing an ocean of upturned faces across the flaring footlights.

She stood a moment to acknowledge the somewhat ragged applause, a calm
smile on her lips. All her courage had returned; I saw that at once.

Very quietly she touched her lips to the _eau-sucree_, laid her
manuscript on the table, raised her beautiful head, and began:

"That the ux is a living bird I am here before you to prove--"

A sharp report behind the curtain drowned her voice. She paled; the
audience rose amid cries of excitement.

"What was it?" she asked, faintly.

"Sir Peter has hatched out his egg," I whispered. "Hark! There goes
another egg!" And I ran behind the curtain.

Such a scene as I beheld was never dreamed of on land or sea. Two
enormous young uxen, all over gigantic pin-feathers, were wandering
stupidly about. Mounted on one was Sir Peter Grebe, eyes starting from
his apoplectic visage; on the other, clinging to the bird's neck, hung
the Baron de Becasse.

Before I could move, the two remaining eggs burst, and a pair of huge,
scrawny fledglings rose among the debris, bearing off on their backs
the King and Crown-Prince.

"Help!" said the King of Finland, faintly. "I'm falling off!"

I sprang to his aid, but tripped on the curtain-spring. The next
instant the green curtain shot up, and there, revealed to that vast
and distinguished audience, roamed four enormous chicks, bearing on
their backs the most respected and exclusive aristocracy of Europe.

The Countess Suzanne turned with a little shriek of horror, then sat
down in her chair, laid her lovely head on the table, and very quietly
fainted away, unconscious of the frantic cheers which went roaring to
the roof.

       *       *       *       *       *

This, then, is the _true_ history of the famous exposition scandal.
And, as I have said, had it not been for the presence in that audience
of two American reporters nobody would have known what all the world
now knows--nobody would have read of the marvellous feats of bareback
riding indulged in by the King of Finland--nobody would have read how
Sir Peter Grebe steered his mount safely past the footlights only to
come to grief over the prompter's box.

But this _is_ scandal. And, as for the charming Countess Suzanne
d'Alzette, the public has heard all that it is entitled to hear, and
much that it is not entitled to hear.

However, on second thoughts, perhaps the public is entitled to hear a
little more. I will therefore say this much--the shock of astonishment
which stunned me when the curtain flew up, revealing the
King-bestridden uxen, was nothing to the awful blow which smote me
when the Count d'Alzette leaped from the orchestra, over the
footlights, and bore away with him the fainting form of his wife, the
lovely Countess d'Alzette.

I sometimes wonder--but, as I have repeatedly observed, this dull and
pedantic narrative of fact is no vehicle for sentimental soliloquy. It
is, then, merely sufficient to say that I took the earliest steamer
for kinder shores, spurred on to haste by a venomous cable-gram from
the Smithsonian, repudiating me, and by another from Bronx Park,
ordering me to spend the winter in some inexpensive, poisonous, and
unobtrusive spot, and make a collection of isopods. The island of Java
appeared to me to be as poisonously unobtrusive and inexpensive a
region as I had ever heard of; a steamer sailed from Antwerp for
Batavia in twenty-four hours. Therefore, as I say, I took the
night-train for Brussels, and the steamer from Antwerp the following
evening.

Of my uneventful voyage, of the happy and successful quest, there is
little to relate. The Javanese are frolicsome and hospitable. There
was a girl there with features that were as delicate as though
chiselled out of palest amber; and I remember she wore a most
wonderful jewelled, helmet-like head-dress, and jingling bangles on
her ankles, and when she danced she made most graceful and poetic
gestures with her supple wrists--but that has nothing to do with
isopods, absolutely nothing.

Letters from home came occasionally. Professor Farrago had returned to
the Bronx and had been re-elected to the high office he had so nobly
held when I first became associated with him.

Through his kindness and by his advice I remained for several years in
the Far East, until a letter from him arrived recalling me and also
announcing his own hurried and sudden departure for Florida. He also
mentioned my promotion to the office of subcurator of department; so I
started on my homeward voyage very much pleased with the world, and
arrived in New York on April 1, 1904, ready for a rest to which I
believed myself entitled. And the first thing that they handed me was
a letter from Professor Farrago, summoning me South.




XIII


The letter that started me--I was going to say startled me, but only
imaginative people are startled--the letter, then, that started me
from Bronx Park to the South I print without the permission of my
superior, Professor Farrago. I have not obtained his permission, for
the somewhat exciting reason that nobody knows where he is. Publicity
being now recognized as the annihilator of mysteries, a benevolent
purpose alone inspires me to publish a letter so strange, so
pathetically remarkable, in view of what has recently occurred.

As I say, I had only just returned from Java with a valuable
collection of undescribed isopods--an order of edriophthalmous
crustaceans with seven free thoracic somites furnished with fourteen
legs--and I beg my reader's pardon, but my reader will see the
necessity for the author's absolute accuracy in insisting on detail,
because the story that follows is a dangerous story for a scientist to
tell, in view of the vast amount of nonsense and fiction in
circulation masquerading as stories of scientific adventure.

I was, therefore, anticipating a delightful summer's work with pen and
microscope, when on April 1st I received the following extraordinary
letter from Professor Farrago:


            "IN CAMP, LITTLE SPRITE LAKE,

          "EVERGLADES, FLORIDA, _March 15, 1902._

    "MY DEAR MR. GILLAND,--On receipt of this communication you
    will immediately secure for me the following articles:

    "One complete outfit of woman's clothing.
    "One camera.
    "One light steel cage, large enough for you to stand in.
    "One stenographer (male sex).
    "One five-pound steel tank, with siphon and hose attachment.
    "One rifle and ammunition.
    "Three ounces rosium oxyde.
    "One ounce chlorate strontium.

    "You will then, within twenty-four hours, set out with the
    stenographer and the supplies mentioned and join me in camp on
    Little Sprite Lake. This order is formal and admits of no
    delay. You will appreciate the necessity of absolute and
    unquestioning obedience when I tell you that I am practically
    on the brink of the most astonishing discovery recorded in
    natural history since Monsieur Zani discovered the
    purple-spotted zoombok in Nyanza; and that I depend upon you
    and your zeal and fidelity for success.

    "I dare not, lest my letter fall into unscrupulous hands,
    convey to you more than a hint of what lies before us in these
    uncharted solitudes of the Everglades.

    "You must read between the lines when I say that because one
    can see through a sheet of glass, the glass is none the less
    solid and palpable. One can see _through_ it--if that is also
    seeing it; but one can nevertheless hold it and feel it and
    receive from it sensations of cold or heat according to its
    temperature.

    "Certain jellyfish are absolutely transparent when in the
    water, and one can only know of their presence by accidental
    contact, not by sight.

    "_Have you ever thought that possibly there might exist larger
    and more highly organized creatures transparent to eyesight,
    yet palpable to touch?_

    "Little Sprite Lake is the jumping-off place; beyond lie the
    Everglades, the outskirts of which are haunted by the
    Seminoles, the interior of which have never been visited by
    man, as far as we know.

    "As you are aware, no general survey of Florida has yet been
    made; there exist no maps of the Everglades south of
    Okeechobee; even Little Sprite Lake is but a vague blot on our
    maps. We know, of course, that south of the eleven thousand
    square miles of fresh water which is called Lake Okeechobee
    the Everglades form a vast, delta-like projection of thousands
    and thousands of square miles. Darkest Africa is no longer a
    mystery; but the Everglades to-day remain the sombre secret of
    our continent. And, to-day, this unknown expanse of swamps,
    barrens, forests, and lagoons is greater than in the days of
    De Soto, because the entire region has been slowly rising.

    "All this, my dear sir, you already know, and I ask your
    indulgence for recalling the facts to your memory. I do it for
    this reason--the search for _what I am seeking_ may lead us to
    utter destruction; and therefore my formal orders to you
    should be modified to this extent:--do you volunteer? If you
    volunteer, my orders remain; if not, turn this letter over to
    Mr. Kingsley, who will find for me the companion I require.

    "In the event of your coming, you must break your journey at
    False Cape and ask for an old man named Slunk. He will give
