the heart of a secluded dell, under a clump of trees, were the long
sought and much-desired vines!

For some time Tyrker stood gazing at them in silent admiration and
delight.  He rubbed his eyes and looked again.  Yes; there could be no
question as to their reality.  There hung the rich purple clusters such
as he had seen on his first visit to Vinland, and such as he had been
wont to see in his own land in days long gone by.  He pinched himself,
pulled his hair, punched his eyeballs, but no--all that failed to awaken
him; from which circumstance he naturally came to the conclusion that he
was awake already.  He then uttered a wild, probably a Turkish, cheer,
and rushed upon the spoil.

Filling both hands with the fruit he crammed his mouth full.  Then he
raised his eyes upwards in ecstasy and did it again.  He repeated it!
After which he paused to sigh, and leaped up to cheer and sat down again
to--guzzle!  Pardon the word, good reader, it is appropriate, for there
is no disguising the fact that Tyrker was a tremendous glutton, and did
not care a fig--or a grape--for appearances.

After eating for a long time he was satisfied and sat down to rest.  By
that time the shades of evening were falling.  They proved to be
soporific, for he gradually reclined backwards on the green turf and
fell asleep, surrounded by and partially covered with grapes, like a
drunken and disorderly Bacchus.

Now Tyrker was a man in robust health; full of energy and high spirits.
Sleep therefore was to him a process which, once begun, continued till
morning.  Even the puckered little Snorro did not rest more soundly in
his kneading-trough crib than did Tyrker on the greensward under his
vinous canopy.

When next he opened his eyes, groaned, rolled over, sat up, and yawned,
the sun was beginning to peep above the eastern sea.

"Ho!" exclaimed Tyrker.  "I have forgot myself."  To refresh his memory
he scratched his head and shook it; then he raised his eyes, saw the
grapes, leaped up and burst into a fit of joyous laughter.

Thereafter he again sat down and breakfasted, after which he filled his
cap, his wallet, his various pockets, the breast of his coat--every
available compartment, in fact, outside as well as in--with grapes, and
hastened homeward at his utmost speed in order to communicate the joyful
news to his comrades.

Now the disappearance of Tyrker had caused no small amount of anxiety to
his friends at the hamlet, especially to Karlsefin, who was very fond of
him, and who feared that his strength might have given way, or that he
had fallen into the hands of savages or under the paws of bears.  He sat
up the greater part of the night watching and hoping for his return, and
when the first grey light of dawn appeared he called up a number of the
men, and, dividing them into several bands, organised a systematic
search.

Placing himself at the head of one band he went off in the direction in
which, from Krake's account of what had taken place, it seemed most
probable that Tyrker might be found.  They advanced so rapidly that when
the sun rose they had got to within a mile or so of the spot where Krake
and his party had given up their search on the previous evening.  Thus
it came to pass that before the red sun had ascended the eastern sky by
much more than his own height, Karlsefin and Tyrker met face to face in
a narrow gorge.

They stopped and gazed at each other for a few moments in silence,
Karlsefin in astonishment as well--and no wonder, for the figure that
stood before him was a passing strange one.  To behold Tyrker thus
dishevelled and besmeared was surprising enough, but to see him with
grapes and vine-leaves stuffed all about him and twined all round him
was absolutely astounding.  His behaviour was little less so, for,
clapping his hands to his sides, he shut his eyes, opened his big mouth,
and burst into an uproarious fit of laughter.

The men who came up at that moment did so also for laughter is catching.

"Why, Tyrker, where have you been?" demanded Karlsefin.

"Grapes!" shouted Tyrker, and laughed again.

"Are these grapes?" asked Karlsefin, regarding the fruit with much
interest.

"Ay, grapes! vines!  Vinland! hurrah!"

"But are you sure?"

Instead of answering, Tyrker laughed again and began to talk, as he
always did when greatly moved, in Turkish.  Altogether he was so much
excited that Krake said he was certainly drunk.

"Drunk!" exclaimed Tyrker, again using the Norse language; "no, that is
not possible.  A man could not get drunk on grapes if he were to eat a
ship-load of them.  I am only joyful--happy, happy as I can be.  It
seems as if my young days had returned again with these grapes.  I am
drunk with old thoughts and memories.  I am back again in Turkey!"

"Ye couldn't be in a worse place if all accounts be true," said Krake,
with a grin.  "Come, don't keep all the grapes to yourself; let us taste
them."

"Ay, let us taste them," said Karlsefin, advancing and plucking a bunch
from Tyrker's shoulders.

The others did the same, tasted them, and pronounced the fruit
excellent.

"Now, lads, we will make the strong drink from the grapes," said Tyrker.
"I don't know quite how to do it, but we will soon find out."

"That you certainly shall not if I can prevent it," said Karlsefin
firmly.

Tyrker looked a little surprised, and asked why not.

"Because if the effect of eating grapes is so powerful, drinking the
strong drink of the grape must be dangerous.  Why do you wish to make
it?"

"Why? because--because--it _does_ make one so happy."

"You told us just now," returned Karlsefin, "that you were _as happy as
you could be_, did you not?  You cannot be happier than that--therefore,
according to your own showing, Tyrker, there is no need of strong
drink."

"That's for you," whispered Krake to Tyrker, with a wink, as he poked
him in the side.  "Go to sleep upon that advice, man, and it'll do ye
good--if it don't do ye harm!"

"Ease him of part of his load, boys, and we shall go back the way we
came as fast as may be."

Each man relieved Tyrker of several bunches of grapes, so that in a few
minutes he resumed his own ordinary appearance.  They then retraced
their steps, and soon afterwards presented to the women the first grapes
of Vinland.  Karlsefin carried a chosen bunch to Gudrid, who, after
thanking him heartily, stuffed a grape into the hole in Snorro's
puckered visage and nearly choked him.  Thus narrowly did the first
Yankee (for such one of his own countrymen has claimed him to be) escape
being killed by the first-fruits of his native land!



CHAPTER FIFTEEN.

GREENLAND AGAIN--FLATFACE TURNS UP, ALSO THORWARD, WHO BECOMES ELOQUENT
AND SECURES RECRUITS FOR VINLAND.

Who has not heard of that solitary step which lies between the sublime
and the ridiculous?  The very question may seem ridiculous.  And who has
not, at one period or another of life, been led to make comparisons to
that step?  Why then should we hesitate to confess that the step in
question has been suggested by the brevity of that other step which lies
between the beautiful and the plain, the luxuriant and the barren, the
fruitful and the sterile--which step we now call upon the reader to
take, by accompanying us from Vinland's shady groves to Greenland's
rocky shores.

Leif Ericsson is there, standing on the end of the wharf at Brattalid--
bold, stalwart, and upright, as he was when, some years before, he
opened up the way to Vinland.  Flatface the Skraelinger is there too--
stout, hairy, and as suggestive of a frying-pan as he was when, on
murderous deeds intent, not very long before, he had led his hairy
friends on tiptoe to the confines of Brattalid, and was made almost to
leap out of his oily skin with terror.

But his terror by this time was gone.  He and the Norsemen had been
reconciled, very much to the advantage of both, and his tribe was, just
then, encamped on the other side of the ridge.

Leif had learned a little of the Skraelinger tongue; Flatface had
acquired a little less of the Norse language--and a pretty mess they
made of it between them!  As we are under the necessity of rendering
both into English, we beg the reader's forbearance and consideration.

"So you are going off on a sealing expedition, are you?" said Leif,
turning from the contemplation of the horizon, and regarding the
Skraelinger with a comical smile.

"Yis, yo, ha, hooroo!" said Flatface, waving his arms violently to add
force to his reply.

"And when do you go?" asked Leif.

"W'en?  E go skrumch en cracker smorrow."

"Just so," replied Leif, "only I can't quite make that cracker out
unless you mean _to-morrow_."

"Yis, yo, ha!" exclaimed the hairy man.  "Kite right, kite right,
smorrow, yis, to-morrow."

"You're a wonderful man," remarked Leif, with a smile.  "You'll speak
Norse like a Norseman if you live long enough."

"Eh!" exclaimed the Skraelinger, with a perplexed look.

"When are you to be back?" asked Leif.

Flatface immediately pointed to the moon, which, although it was broad
daylight at the time, showed a remarkably white face in the blue sky,
and, doubling his fist, hit himself four blows on the bridge of his
nose, or rather on the spot where the bridge of that feature should have
been, but where, as it happened, there was only a hollow in the
frying-pan, with a little blob below it.

"Ha, four months.  Very good.  It will be a good riddance; for, to say
truth, I'm tired of you and your noisy relations."

Leif said this more as a soliloquy than a remark, for he had no
intention of hurting the feelings of the poor savage, who, he was aware,
could not understand him.  Turning again to him, he said--"You know the
kitchen, Flatface?"  Flatface said nothing, but rolled his eyes, nodded
violently, and rubbed that region which is chiefly concerned with food.

"Go," said Leif, "tell Anders to give you food--food--food!"

At each mention of the word Flatface retreated a step and nodded.  When
Leif stopped he turned about, and with an exclamation of delight,
trundled off to the kitchen like a good-natured polar bear.

For full half an hour after that Leif walked up and down the wharf with
his eyes cast down; evidently he was brooding over something.  Presently
Anders came towards him.

Anders was a burly middle-aged Norseman, with a happy-looking
countenance; he was also cook, steward, valet, and general factotum to
Leif.

"Well, Anders, hast had a visit from Flatface?" asked Leif.

"Ay--he is in the kitchen now."

"Hast fed him?"

"Ay, gorged him," replied Anders, with a grin.

"Good," said Leif, laughing; "he goes off to-morrow, it seems, for four
months, which I'm right glad to hear, for we have had him and his
kindred long enough beside us for this time.  I am sorry on account of
the Christian teachers, however, because they were making some progress
with the language, and this will throw them back."

Leif here referred to men who had recently been sent to Greenland by
King Olaf Tryggvisson of Norway, with the design of planting
Christianity there, and some of whom appeared to be very anxious to
acquire the language of the natives.  Leif himself had kept somewhat
aloof from these teachers of the new faith.  He had indeed suffered
himself to be baptized, when on a visit to Norway, in order to please
the King; but he was a very reserved man, and no one knew exactly what
opinions he held in regard to religion.  Of course he had been
originally trained in the Odin-worship of his forefathers, but he was a
remarkably shrewd man, and people said that he did not hold by it very
strongly.  No one ever ventured to ask him what he held until the
teachers above mentioned came.  When they tried to find out his opinions
he quietly, and with much urbanity, asked to be informed as to some of
the details of that which they had come to teach, and so managed the
conversation that, without hurting their feelings, he sent them away
from him as wise as they came.  But although Leif was silent he was very
observant, and people said that he noted what was going on keenly--which
was indeed the case.

"I know not what the teachers think," said Anders, with a careless air,
"but it is my opinion that they won't make much of the Skraelingers, and
the Skraelingers are not worth making much of."

"There thou art wrong, Anders," said Leif, with much gravity; "does not
Flatface love his wife and children as much as you love yours?"

"I suppose he does."

"Is not his flesh and blood the same as thine, his body as well knit
together as thine, and as well suited to its purposes?"

"Doubtless it is, though somewhat uglier."

"Does he not support his family as well as thou dost, and labour more
severely than thou for that purpose?  Is he not a better hunter, too,
and a faster walker, and fully as much thought of and prized by his
kindred?"

"All that may be very true," replied Anders carelessly.

"Then," pursued Leif, "if the Skraelingers be apparently as good as thou
art, how can ye say that they are not worth making much of?"

"Truly, on the same ground that I say that I myself am not worth making
much of.  I neither know nor care anything about the matter.  Only this
am I sure of, that the Skraelingers do not serve you, master, as well as
I do."

"Anders, thou art incorrigible!" said Leif, smiling; "but I admit the
truth of your last remark; so now, if ye will come up to the house and
do for me, to some extent, what ye have just done to Flatface, ye will
add greatly to the service of which thou hast spoken."

"I follow, master," said Anders; "but would it not be well, first, to
wait and see which of our people are returning to us, for, if I mistake
not, yonder is a boat's sail coming round the ness."

"A _boat's_ sail!" exclaimed Leif eagerly, as he gazed at the sail in
question; "why, man, if your eyes were as good as those of Flatface, ye
would have seen that yonder sail belongs to a ship.  My own eyes have
been turned inward the last half hour, else must I have observed it
sooner."

"It seems to me but a boat," said Anders.

"I tell thee it is a ship!" cried Leif; "ay, and if my eyes do not
deceive, it is the ship of Karlsefin.  Go, call out the people quickly,
and see that they come armed.  There is no saying who may be in
possession of the ship now."

Anders hastened away, and Leif, after gazing at the approaching vessel a
little longer, walked up to the house, where some of his house-carls
were hastily arming, and where he received from the hands of an old
female servant his sword, helmet, and shield.

The people of Brattalid were soon all assembled on the shore, anxiously
awaiting the arrival of the ship, and an active boy was sent round to
Heriulfness, to convey the news to the people there--for in Greenland
the arrival of a ship was of rare occurrence in those days.

As the ship drew near, all doubt as to her being Karlsefin's vessel was
removed, and, when she came close to land, great was the anxiety of the
people to make out the faces that appeared above the bulwarks.

"That is Karlsefin," said one.  "I know his form of face well."

"No, it is Biarne," cried another.  "Karlsefin is taller by half a
foot."

"'Tis Thorward," said a third.  "I'd know his face among a thousand."

"There seem to be no women with them," observed Anders, who stood at the
end of the wharf near his master.

"Does any one see Olaf?" asked Leif.

"No--no," replied several voices.

When the ship was near enough Leif shouted--"Is Olaf on board?"

"No!" replied Thorward, in a stentorian voice.

Leif's countenance fell.

"Is all well in Vinland?" he shouted.
