the old lady sitting at her parlor window looking out as usual for him.
She was dressed in rusty black; she had a front of stiff curls on her
forehead, a white widow's-cap over it, and a small black crape
handkerchief crossed on her breast. Mrs. Church was a little woman; she
had very tiny feet and hands, and was very proud of them. She never
thought of buying any new clothes, and her black bombazine dress was
more brown than black now; so was her shawl, and so was the handkerchief
which she wore round her neck. Her cap was tied with ribbons which had
been washed so often that they were no longer white, but yellow.

She came to the door to greet Tom when he arrived, and called him in.

"Ah, Tom!" she said, "I have got a piece of plumcake waiting for you;
and if you are a really good boy, and will shoo the fowls into my
backyard and shut the gate on them, you may look into my microscope."

"Thank you, Aunt Church," said Tom. "Shall I go at once and shoo the
fowls?"

"You had best give me my money first. Here is the box; you drop it in:
two pounds in gold--I hope to goodness your mother has sent the money in
gold--two pounds in gold and the rest in silver. Now then, here is the
box. Drop it in like a good child, and then you shall shoo the fowls,
and have your plumcake, and look in the microscope."

"But, Aunt Church--" said Tom. He planted himself right in front of the
old lady. He was a tall boy, well set up, with a sandy head, and a face
covered with freckles. He had rather shallow blue eyes and a wide mouth,
but his whole expression was honest and full of fun. "I am desperately
sorry, and so is mother."

"Eh! What?" said the old lady. She put her hand to her ear. "I am a bit
hard of hearing, my dear; come close to me."

"Mother's awfully sorry, but she can't pay you to-day."

"Oh!" said Mrs. Church; "can't pay me to-day! But it's the first of the
month, and she was never behindhand--I will say that--in her payments
before."

"She's fretting past bearing," said Tom. "She'd give all the world to be
able to pay you up, but she ain't got the money, and that's a fact. We
have had a robbery in the shop, Aunt Church, and mother has took on
dreadful."

"A burglary?" said Mrs. Church. "Now tell me all about it. Stand here
and pour your words into my ear. I am very much interested about
burglaries. Was there attempted murder? Speak up, boy--speak up."

Tom quite longed to say that there was. Had he been able to assure Mrs.
Church that burglars with masks on their faces had burst into the shop
at dead of night and penetrated to his mother's bedroom, and had held
pistols to her throat and Susy's throat, and a great bare, glittering
knife to his; and had he been further able to tell her that he himself,
unaided, had grappled with the enemy, had wrested the knife from the
hand of one, and knocked the loaded pistols from the hands of the
others--then, indeed, he would have felt himself a hero, and the mere
fact of not being able to return the money on the appointed day would
not have signified.

But Tom was truthful, and he had but a lame story to tell.
Nineteen-and-sixpence had been abstracted from the till. Nobody knew how
it had been done, and nobody had the least idea who was the thief. Mrs.
Church, who would have given her niece unlimited time to return the
money had there been a real, proper, bloodthirsty burglary, was not at
all inclined to show mercy when the affair dwindled down into an unknown
thief taking a small sum of money out of the till.

"Why didn't you get it back?" she said. "Why didn't you send for the
police? My word, this is a nice state of things! And me to be out of my
money that I counted upon. Why, Tom, boy, I spend that money on my food,
rent, and the little expenses I have to go to. I made up my mind when I
drew that hundred pounds from my dear husband's hard-earned savings
that, whatever happened, I'd make that sum last me for all expenses for
three years. And I have done it, Tom--I have done it. I am in low water,
Tom. I want the money; I want it just as much as your poor mother does."

"But you have money in the bank, haven't you?"

"That is no affair of yours, Tom Hopkins. Don't talk in that silly way
to me. No, I don't want you to shoo the fowls into the yard, and I don't
mean to give you any plumcake. I shall have to eat it myself, for I have
no money to buy anything else. And I won't show you the beautiful wings
of the beetle in the microscope. You can go home to your mother and tell
her I am very much annoyed indeed."

"But, Aunt Church," said Tom, "if you were to see poor mother you
wouldn't blame her. She looks, oh, so thin and so tired! She's terribly
unhappy, and she will be certain sure to pay you next week. It was silly
of her, I will own, not to think of the police sooner; but she's gone to
them to-day, ordered by me to do that same."

"That was thoughtful enough of you, Tom, and I don't object to giving
you a morsel of the stalest cake. I always keep three cakes in three tin
boxes, and you can have a morsel of the stalest; it is more than two
months old, but you won't mind that."

"Not me," said Tom, "I like stale cakes best," he added, determined to
show his aunt that he was ready to be pleased with everything. He was a
very knowing boy, and spoke up so well, and was so evidently sorry
himself, and so positive that as soon as ever the police were told they
would simply lay their hands on the thief and the thief would disgorge
his spoils, that Aunt Church was fain to believe him.

In the end she and he made a compact.

"I tell you what it is," he said. "You haven't been to see mother for a
long time, and if you ain't got any money to buy a dinner for yourself,
it is but fair you should have a slice off our Sunday joint."

"Sunday joint, indeed!" snapped Mrs. Church.

"You couldn't expect us not to have a bit of meat on Sunday," said Tom.
"Why, we'd get so weak that mother couldn't earn the money she sends you
every month."

"And you couldn't do your lessons and be the fine big boy that I am
proud of," said Mrs. Church. "Now, to tell the truth, I can't bear that
sister of yours--Susy, you call her--but I have a liking for you, Tom
Hopkins. What is it you want me to do?"

"If you will let me come here to-morrow, I'll push you all the way to
Merrifield in time for our dinner. Wouldn't you like that? And I'd bring
you back again in the evening. There's your own old bath-chair that
Uncle Church used to be moved about in before he died."

"To be sure, there is," said Mrs. Church, her eyes brightening. "But the
lining has got moth-eaten."

"Who minds that?" said Tom. "I'll go and clean it after you have given
me that bit of cake you promised me."

Everything ended quite satisfactorily as far as Tom was concerned, for
Mrs. Church forgot her anger in the interest that the boy's visit gave
her. She consulted him about her fowls, and gave him a new-laid egg to
slip into his pocket for his own supper. Later on she allowed him to
munch some very poor and very stale plumcake. Finally she gave him his
heart's delight, for he was allowed to peer into the old microscope and
revel in the sight of the beetle's wings with thin, sweeping plumes, as
he afterwards described them.

It was rather late when Tom returned home. He burst into the parlor
where his mother and Susy were sitting.

"Mother," he said, "I have done everything splendidly; and she's coming
to dine with us to-morrow."

"She's what?" said Mrs. Hopkins.

"Aunt Church is coming to dine with us. She was mad about the money, and
nobody could have been nastier than she might have turned out but for
me. But it's all right now. We must have a nice dinner for her. She is
very fond of good things, and as she never gives them to herself, she
will enjoy ours all the more."

"She'll think that I am rich, when I am as poor as a church mouse," said
Mrs. Hopkins. "But I suppose you have done everything for the best, Tom,
and I must go around to the butcher's for a little addition to the
dinner."

Mrs. Hopkins left the house, and Tom sank into a chair by his sister.

"It's golloptious for me," he said. "She's taking no end of a fancy to
me. See this egg? She gave it to me for my supper. Mother shall have it.
Mother is looking very white about the gills; a new-laid egg that she
hasn't to pay for will nourish her up like anything."

"So it will," said Susy. "We'll boil it and say nothing about it, and
just pop it on her plate when she's having her supper. All the same,
Tom, I wish you hadn't asked old Aunt Church here. She is such a queer
old body; and the neighbors sometimes drop in on Sundays. And I have
asked Miss Kathleen O'Hara to come in to-morrow, and she has promised
to."

"What?" said Tom. "That grand beauty of a young lady, the pride of the
school? Why, everybody is talking about her. At the boys' school they've
caught sight of her, and there isn't a boy that hasn't fallen in love
with her. They all slink behind the wall, and bob up as she comes by.
You don't mean that _she's_ coming here?"

"Yes; why not? She's very fond of me."

"But she's no end of a howler. They say she's worth her weight in gold,
and that her father is a sort of king in Ireland. Why should she take up
with a little girl like you?"

"Well, Tom, some people like me, although you think but little of your
sister. Kathleen is very fond of me. I invited her to have tea with us
to-morrow, and she is coming."

"My word!" said Tom. "To think that I shall be sitting at the same table
with her! I'll be able to make my own terms now with John Short and
Harry Reid and the rest of the chaps. Why, Susy, you must be a genius,
and I thought you weren't much of a sort."

"I am better than you think; and she is fond of me."

"And you really and truly call her by her Christian name?"

"Of course I do."

Susy longed to tell Tom about the wonderful society; but its strictest
rule was that it was never to be spoken about to outsiders. Susy, as a
member of the Cabinet, must certainly be one of the last to break the
rules.

Mrs. Hopkins came back at that moment. She had added a pound of sausage
and a little piece of pork to their usual Sunday fare. She had also
brought sixpennyworth of apples with her.

"These are to make a pudding," she said. "I think we shall do now very
well."

Susy and Tom quite agreed with their mother. Susy rose and prepared
supper, and at the crucial moment the new-laid egg was laid on Mrs.
Hopkins's plate. It takes, perhaps, a great deal of poverty to truly
appreciate a new-laid egg. Mrs. Hopkins was delighted with hers; she
thought Tom the noblest boy in the world for having denied himself in
order to give it to her. Tears filled her tired eyes as she thanked God
for her good children.

Susy and Tom watched her as she ate the egg, and thought how delicious
it must taste, but were glad she had it.

The following day dawned bright and clear, with a suspicion of frost in
the air. It was, as Tom expressed it, a perfect day. Susy went to church
with her mother in the morning, the dinner being all prepared and left
to cook itself in the oven. Tom started at about eleven o'clock on his
walk to the tiny village where Mrs. Church lived.

As soon as Susy returned from her place of worship she helped her mother
to get the little parlor ready. She put some autumn leaves in a jug on
the center of the table. Her mother brought out the best china, which
had not been used since her husband's death. The best china was very
pretty, and Susy thought that no table could look more elegant than
theirs. The best china was accompanied by some quite good knives and
forks. The forks were real silver; Mrs. Hopkins regarded them with
pride.

"If the worst--the very worst--comes," she said to Susy, "we can sell
them; but I cling to them as a piece of respectability that I never want
to part from. Your dear father gave them to me on our wedding-day--a
whole dozen of beautiful silver forks with the hall-mark on them, and
his initials on the handle of each. I want them to be Tom's some day.
Silver should always be handed on to the eldest son."

Susy felt that she was almost worthy of Kathleen's friendship as she
regarded the silver forks.

"You must never part with them, mother," she said--until Tom is married.
Then, of course, they will belong to him."

"You are a good little girl, Susy," said her mother. "Of course, there
never was a boy like Tom. It was sweet of him to give up his egg to me
last night."

Having seen that the table was in perfect order, and that the dinner was
cooking as well as dinner could in the oven, Mrs. Hopkins went upstairs
to put on a lace collar and a neat black silk apron.

Meanwhile Susy had locked herself into her own room. The crowning moment
of her life had arrived. She had made up her mind that she would wear
her new blouse at dinner that day. Susy's stockings were coarse, and
showed darns here and there; Susy's shoes were rough, and could not
altogether hide the disfiguring patches on the toes of each; Susy's
skirt was dark-blue serge, fairly neat in its way. Altogether Susy from
her waist down was a very ordinary little girl--the little daughter of
poor people; but from her waist up she was resplendent.

"Oh! if I could only show my sweet, sweet little badge," she thought,
"it would make me perfect. But I daren't. The queen commands that it
should be hidden, and the queen's commands must be obeyed."

Susy slipped into her blouse. She fastened it; she put a belt round her
waist. She curtsied before her little glass. She bobbed here; she
bobbed there. She looked at herself front view, then over her shoulder,
then, with a morsel of glass, at her back; she surveyed herself, as far
as the limited accommodation of her room afforded, from every point of
view. Finally, with flushed cheeks and a very proud expression on her
face, she tripped downstairs. The pale-blue cashmere blouse, with its
real lace and embroidered trimmings, might have been worn by any girl,
even in the highest station of life.

Mrs. Hopkins was busy in the kitchen. She called to Susy:

"Come and hold the vegetable dish, child. I hear Tom pushing Aunt Church
in at the gate; I know he is doing it by the creak of the bath-chair.
There never was a bath-chair that creaked like that. Hold this while
I--Why, sakes alive, Susy! wherever did you get--"

"Oh, it's my new blouse, mother."

"Your new what?"

"What you see, mother--my new blouse. Don't you admire it?"

Mrs. Hopkins was so stunned that she could not speak for a moment. Her
face, which had been quite florid, turned pale. She suddenly put up her
hand and caught Susy by the arm.

"Oh, mother, don't!" said the little girl. "Your hand isn't clean. Oh,
you have made a stain! Oh, mother, how could you?"

"Run upstairs at once, child, and take it off. For the life of you don't
let _her_ see it; she'd never forgive me. It isn't fit for you, Susy; it
really isn't. Wherever did you get it from? Where did you buy it?"

Now Susy had really no intention of making a secret with regard to the
blouse. She meant to tell her mother frankly that it was a present from
Miss Kathleen O'Hara, but Mrs. Hopkins's manner and words put the little
girl into a passion, and she was determined now not to say a word.

"It is my secret," she said. "I won't tell you how I got it, nor who
gave it to me. And I won't take it off."

Just then there were voices, and Aunt Church called out:

"Where are you, Mary Hopkins? Why don't you show yourself? Fussing over
fine living, I suppose. Oh, there is your daughter. My word! Fine
feathers make fine birds.--Come over and speak to me, my dear, and help
me out of this chair. Now then, give me your hand. Be quick!"

Susy put out her hand and helped Mrs. Church as well as she could out of
the bath-chair. Tom winked when he saw the splendid apparition; then he
stuck his tongue into his cheek, and coming close to his sister, he
whispered:

"Wherever did you get that toggery?"

"That's nothing to you," said Susy.

Mrs. Church glanced over her shoulder and looked solemnly at Susy.

"It's my opinion," she said, speaking in a slow, emphatic, rather awful
voice, "that you are a very, very bad little girl. You will come to no
good. Mark my words. I prophesy a bad end for you, and trouble for your
unfortunate mother. You will remember my words when the prophecy comes
true. Help me now into the parlor. I cannot stay long, but I will have a
morsel of your grand dinner before I leave."




CHAPTER XIII.

AUNT CHURCH AT DINNER AND THE CONSEQUENCES THEREOF.


When Mrs. Church was comfortably established in the easy-chair in the
little parlor, with her feet on the fender, and a nice view of the
street from the window near by--when her best widow's-cap was perched
upon her head, and her little black mitts were drawn over her delicate,
small hands--she looked around her and gave a brief sigh of
satisfaction.

"Upon my word," she said, "I'm not at all sorry I came. There's nothing
like seeing things for yourself. Most elegant damask on the table. Mary
Hopkins, where did you get that damask?"

Mrs. Hopkins, whose cheeks were flushed, and who looked considerably
worried, replied that it had been left to her by her own mother.

"My mother was a housekeeper in a nobleman's family," she said, "and she
was given that cloth and two or three more like it. I have 'em in the
linen-chest upstairs, and I wouldn't part with 'em to anybody."

"I admire your pride," said Mrs. Church. "Next door to pride comes
honesty. I am sometimes inclined to believe that it comes afore pride;
but we needn't dispute that delicate point at present. And the silver
forks. My word!--Tom, my boy, pass me a fork to examine."

Tom took up a fork and handed it to Mrs. Church.

"Hall-marked and all!" she said.

She laid it down with emphasis.

"Perhaps you know," she said, fixing her beady black eyes upon Mrs.
Hopkins's face, "that I'll be very low as regards victuals for the rest
of this week. But never mind; I am never one to press what it ain't
convenient to return. Ah! and here comes the dinner. Well, I will say
that I have a good appetite.--You can push me right up to the table,
Tom, my boy."

Tom did push the old lady into the most comfortable seat. She now
removed her mittens, put a napkin on her lap, and bent forward with a
look of appetite to regard the different dishes which Ellen, the tiny
twelve-year-old servant, brought in. Ellen trembled very much in the
company of the old lady, and Mrs. Hopkins trembled still more. But Susy,
who saw no reason why she should bow down before Aunt Church, ate her
good dinner with appetite, tossed her little head, and felt that she was
making a sensation. Tom was very attentive to Mrs. Church, and helped
her to a large glass of ginger-wine. She thoroughly enjoyed her dinner,
and, while she was eating it, forgot all about Susy and the pale-blue
cashmere blouse.

But when the meat had been followed by the apple-pudding, and the
apple-pudding by some coffee which was served in real china cups, and
Mrs. Church had folded her napkin and swept the crumbs from her
bombazine dress, and Mrs. Hopkins, assisted by Susy, had removed the
cloth, and the little maid had swept up the hearth, Mrs. Church began to
recollect herself. It is true she was no longer hungry nor cold, for the
fire was plentiful, and the sun also poured in at the small window. But
Mrs. Church had a memory and, as she believed, a grievance. In her tiny
house on the common four miles away firing was scarce, and food was
