It was while Winklemann was busily engaged on the stage that the storm
broke forth which compelled the clergyman to spend the night on the
islet, as already described.  Of course the storm also forced Winklemann
to remain at the station.  But that impulsive youth's regard for his
"moder" would not permit of his giving in without a struggle.  When he
saw that the gale increased rapidly, he resolved to start off without
delay.  He launched his canoe; a half-breed in his employment managed
the bow paddle, but they found that their united strength was
insufficient to drive the craft more than a hundred yards against wind
and waves.  Returning to the station, Winklemann engaged two additional
men to aid him, but the increasing gale neutralised the extra force.
After a vain struggle the canoe was hurled back on the knoll, a wave
caught the bow, overturned it, and threw the men into the water at the
very door of the parsonage.

The canoe was partially broken.  Time was required to repair it.  Time
also gave the gale opportunity to gather power, and thus the chafing
German was compelled to spend the night at the station.

Meanwhile, those men whom he had left behind him spent a terrible night,
but the brunt of the trouble fell upon old Liz.

Poor old Liz!  She was a squat piece of indomitable energy, utterly
regardless of herself and earnestly solicitous about every one else.

When the storm commenced, her dwelling had begun to show symptoms of
instability.  This fact she carefully concealed from Daddy and old Mrs
Winklemann, who remained in their respective chairs smiling at each
other, for both were accustomed to good treatment from their children,
and regarded life in general from a sunny point of view.  They knew that
something very unusual was going on, but the old frau said--or thought--
to herself, "My boy will look after me!" while Daddy said, or thought,
"Liz knows all about it."  Happy trustful spirits!  Enviable pair!

Having informed the pair that she was going away for a minute or two to
look after something outside, old Liz left them.  She found herself up
to the knees in water, of course, the moment she passed the doorway.
From an outhouse she procured a strong rope.  This she fastened to a
large iron ring in the side of the hut, and attached the other end to a
thick tree whose branches overshadowed it.  Even during the brief time
she was thus engaged the flood increased so rapidly, and the rising wind
blew so wildly, that the poor creature was almost carried off her short
legs.  But old Liz had a powerful will, and was strong-hearted.  Having
accomplished her object, and lost for ever her frilled cap in so doing,
she struggled back towards the door of the hut.  A passing billet of
firewood tripped her up and sent her headlong into the flood.  She
disappeared, but emerged instantly, with glaring eyes, gasping mouth,
and streaming hair.  A resolute rush brought her to the door-step; she
seized the door-post, and was saved.

"Hech! but it's an awfu' time," gasped old Liz, as she wrung the water
from her garments.--"Comin', Daddy!  I'll be their this meenit.  I've
gotten mysel' a wee wat."

"What's wrang?" asked Daddy, in a feeble voice, as his ancient daughter
entered.

"It's only a bit spate, Daddy.  The hoose is a'maist soomin', but ye've
nae need to fear."

"I'm no' feared, Liz.  What wad I be feared o' whan ye're there?"

"Ver is mine boy?" demanded old Mrs Winklemann, looking round.

"He's gane to the kirk for floor.  Ne'er fash yer heed aboot _him_.
He'll be back afore lang."

The old woman seemed content, though she did not understand a word of
Liz's Scotch.

"Bless mine boy," she said, with a mild smile at Daddy, who replied with
an amiable nod.

But this state of comparative comfort did not last long.  In half an
hour the water came over the threshold of the door and flooded the
floor.  Fortunately the old couple had their feet on wooden stools and
thus escaped the first rush, but old Liz now felt that something must be
done to keep them dry.  There was a low table in the room.  She dragged
it out and placed it between the couple, who smiled, under the
impression, no doubt, that they were about to have their evening meal.

"Daddy, I'm gaun to pit yer legs on the table.  It'll be mair
comfortabler, an'll keep ye oot o' the wat."

Daddy submitted with a good grace, and felt more easy than usual, the
table being very little higher than his chair.  Mrs Winklemann was
equally submissive and pleased.  Covering the two pairs of legs with a
blanket, old Liz produced some bread and cheese, and served out rations
thereof to keep their minds engaged.  She plumed herself not a little on
the success of the table-and-legs device, but as the water rose rapidly
she became anxious again, though not for herself.  She waded about the
hut with supreme indifference to the condition of her own lower limbs.
At last she mounted upon the bed and watched, as the water rose inch by
inch on the legs of the two chairs.

"What _wull_ I do whan it grups them?" she muttered, experiencing that
deep feeling of anticipation with which one might watch the gradual
approach of fire to gunpowder.

The objects of her solicitude snored pleasantly in concert.

"It'll kill them wi' the cauld, to say naething o' the start," continued
the old woman with deepening, almost desperate, anxiety.  "Oh man, man,
what for did ye leave us?"

This apostrophe was addressed to the absent Winklemann.

One inch more, five minutes longer, and the flood would reach the bodies
of the old couple.  Liz looked round wildly for some mode of delivering
them, but looked in vain.  Even if her strength had been adequate, there
was no higher object in the room to which she could have lifted them.
The bed, being a truckle one, and lower than the chairs, was already
submerged, and old Liz herself was coolly, if not calmly, seated in two
inches of water.  At the very last moment deliverance came in an
unexpected manner.  There was a slight vibration in the timbers of the
hut, then a sliding of the whole edifice.  This was followed by a snap
and a jolt: the ring-bolt or the rope had gone, and old Liz might, with
perfect propriety, have exclaimed, in the words of the sea song, "I'm
afloat!  I'm afloat! and the Rover is free!"

For one moment her heart failed; she had read of Noah's ark, but had
never quite believed in the stability of that mansion.  Her want of
faith was now rebuked, for the old hut floated admirably, as seamen
might say, on an even keel.  True, it committed a violent assault on a
tree at starting, which sent it spinning round, and went crashing
through a mass of drowned bushes, which rendered it again steady; but
these mishaps only served to prove the seaworthiness of her ark, and in
a few minutes the brave little woman revived.  Splashing off the bed and
spluttering across the room, she tried to open the door with a view to
see what had happened and whither they were bound, for the two windows
of the mansion were useless in this respect, being fitted with parchment
instead of glass.  But the door was fast, and refused to open.

"We'll a' be lost!" exclaimed Daddy, in alarm, for he had been awakened
by the shock against the tree, and was now slightly alive to their
danger.

"Ver is mine boy?" asked the old frau, in a whimpering voice.

"Nae fear o' 'ee," said Liz, in a soothing tone.  "Him that saved Noah
can save us."

"Open the door an' see where we are, lassie," said the old man.

"It'll no' open, Daddy."

"Try the wundy, then."

"I'm sweer'd to break the wundy," said Liz.  "Losh, man, I'll try the
lum!"

The chimney, to which old Liz referred, was capacious enough to admit a
larger frame than hers.  Moreover, it was a short one, and the fire had
long ago been drowned out.  With the enthusiasm of an explorer, the
little woman stooped and entered the fireplace.  She felt about inside
for a few moments, and in doing so brought down an enormous quantity of
soot.  Immediately there was a tremendous coughing in the chimney.

"Lassie! lassie! come oot!  Ve'll be chokit," cried Daddy, in alarm.

"Hoots, man, hand yer gab," was the polite reply.

Liz was not to be easily turned from her purpose.  Raising one leg up
she found a crevice for her right foot, and the aged couple beheld the
old creature, for the first time, in the attitude of a _danseuse_,
standing on one toe.  Next moment the remaining leg went up, and she
disappeared from view.  If there had been any one outside, the old woman
would have been seen, two minutes later, to emerge from the chimney-top
with the conventional aspect of a demon--as black as a Zulu chief,
choking like a chimpanzee with influenza, and her hair blowing freely in
the wind.  Only those who have intelligently studied the appearance of
chimney-sweeps can form a proper idea of her appearance, especially when
she recovered breath and smiled, as she thought of her peculiar
position.

But that position was one which would have damped the courage of any one
except old Liz.  The storm was beginning to grow furious; the sun, which
had already set, was tingeing the black and threatening clouds with
dingy red.  Far as the eye could reach, the once green prairie presented
an angry sea, whose inky waves were crested and flecked with foam, and
the current was drifting the hut away into the abyss of blackness that
seemed to gape on the horizon.

"What see ye, Liz?" cried Daddy, bending a little, so as to send his
voice up the chimney.

"I see naethin' but watter; watter everywhere," said Liz, unconsciously
quoting the Ancient Mariner, and bending so as to send her reply down.
She did more; she lost her balance, and sent herself down to the bottom
of the chimney, where she arrived in a sitting posture with a flop,
perhaps we should say a squash, seeing that she alighted in water, which
squirted violently all over her sooty person.

This sudden reappearance astonished the aged couple almost more than it
surprised Liz herself, for she could not see herself as they saw her.

"Hech! but that _was_ a klyte; but ne'er heed, Daddy.  I'm nane the
waur.  Eh, but I'll ha'e to clean mysel'," said old Liz, rising slowly
and going straight to a corner cupboard, whence she took a slab of soap,
and began to apply it vigorously, using the entire room, so to speak, as
a wash-tub.  The result was unsatisfactory; beginning the process as a
pure black, she only ended it as an impure mulatto, but she was content,
and immediately after set herself to fasten the aged pair more securely
in their chairs, and to arrange their limbs more comfortably on the
table; after that she lighted a candle and sat down on the sloppy bed to
watch.

Thus that household spent the night, rocked, as it were, on the cradle
of the deep.

At daylight Herr Winklemann rose from his sleepless couch at the
parsonage, and finding that the wind had moderated, launched his canoe.
He left the mission station just an hour before Mr Cockran returned to
it.

Anxious was the heart of the poor youth as he wielded the paddle that
morning, and many were the muttered remarks which he made to himself, in
German, as he urged the canoe against wind and current.  As he neared
home his fears increased.  On reaching a certain part from which he had
been wont to descry the chimney of old Liz's hut, he perceived that the
familiar object was gone, and uttered a mighty roar of horror.

The half-breed in the bow ceased paddling, and looked back in alarm.

"Git on, you brute!" shouted Winklemann, at the same time exerting his
great strength as though he meant to urge the light craft out of the
water into the air.

A few minutes more and they swept round into the space where the hut had
once stood.  There was nothing left but the bit of rope that had been
made fast to the ring-bolt.  Poor Winklemann let his paddle drop and
sank almost double with his face in his hands.

"Mine moder," was all he could say, as he groaned heavily.  In a few
seconds he recovered with a start and bade the man in the bow paddle for
his life.

Winklemann, of course, knew that the house must have floated downwards
with the current, if it had not been utterly overwhelmed.  He directed
his search accordingly, but the breadth of land now covered by the flood
caused the currents to vary in an uncertain manner, as every ridge, or
knoll, or hollow in the plains modified them.  Still, there could be
only one general direction.  After a few minutes of anxious reflection
the bereaved man resolved to keep by the main current of the river.  He
was unfortunate in this, for the hut, in commencing its adventurous
career, had gone off in the direction of the plains.  All day he and his
companion paddled about in search of the lost family, but in vain.  At
night they were forced to return to the parsonage for a little food and
rest, so as to fit them for a renewal of the search on the following
morning.

At the mission station they found Mr Cockran, with his wife and forty
of his people, established on the stage.  Early in the day the water had
burst into the parsonage, and soon stood a foot deep on the floor, so
that the pastor deemed it high time to forsake it and take to the last
refuge.  It was a crowded stage, and great was the anxiety of many of
the mothers upon it lest their little ones should be thrust over the
edge into the water.  No such anxiety troubled the little ones
themselves.  With that freedom from care which is their high privilege,
they even gambolled on the brink of destruction.

Next day was the Sabbath.  To go to church was impossible.  There were
three and a half feet of water in that building.  The day was fine,
however, and sunny.  The pastor, therefore, had service on the stage,
and being an earnest, intelligent man, he made good use of the floods
and the peculiarity of their circumstances to illustrate and enforce his
discourse.

Long before the hour of worship had arrived, however, poor Winklemann
went off in his canoe, and spent the whole of that day, as he spent
several succeeding days, in anxious, diligent, hopeful, but finally
despairing search for his lost old "moder."



CHAPTER SEVENTEEN.

THE WAVES STILL RISE, AND MISS TRIM COMES TO GRIEF.

On the night of the 15th the gale broke out again with redoubled fury,
and the stage at the mission station was shaken so much by the violence
of the waves and wind that fears were entertained of its stability,
despite its great strength.  The water rose six inches during that
night, and when the vast extent of the floods is taken into account,
this rise was prodigious.  The current was also so strong that it was
feared the church itself, with the property and people in its loft,
would be swept away.

Towards daylight a boat was seen approaching.  It turned out to be that
of Mr Ravenshaw, containing himself and Lambert, with a crew from
Willow Creek.  The house of the old gentleman had, he said, much water
in the lower rooms, so that he had been driven to its upper floor; but
he felt sure of its strength, having himself helped to lay its
foundations.  Knowing the danger of those who dwelt in the parsonage, he
had come to offer an asylum to as many as his house would hold.  But Mr
Cockran declined to quit his post.  The gale was by that time abating,
the cheering daylight increasing; and as he had a large boat of his own
moored to a neighbouring post, he preferred to remain where he was.  Mr
Ravenshaw therefore ordered Louis to hoist the sail, and bidding adieu
to the clerical party, returned to Willow Creek.

Of all the household there, Miss Trim had viewed the approach of the
water with the greatest anxiety and Mrs Ravenshaw with the greatest
philosophy.  Miss Trim, being an early riser, was the first to observe
the enemy on the morning of its entrance.  She came down-stairs and
found the water entering the house quietly by the sides, oozing from
under the boards and secretly creeping along till it covered the floors.
She rushed up-stairs to alarm Mr Ravenshaw, and met that active old
gentleman coming down.  He set to work at once to rescue his goods on
the lower floor, while Miss Trim, in great excitement, went and roused
the girls, who leaped up at once.  Then she went to Mrs Ravenshaw's
room.

"Oh, Mrs Ravenshaw, get up quick; the flood is coming in at last--over
the floors--through the chinks--up the seams--everywhere--do--do get up!
We shall all be--"

She stopped.  A long-drawn sigh and a gentle "hush!" was all the reply
vouchsafed by Mrs Ravenshaw.

A quarter of an hour later Miss Trim came nervously back.  "It's
_rushing_ in now like anything!  Oh, _do_ get up!  We may have to fly!
The boards of the floor have been forced up, and they've had to take the
door off its hinges--"

She stopped again.  Mrs Ravenshaw, with placid face and closed eyes,
had replied with another gentle "hush-sh!"

Descending once more, Miss Trim was met by a sudden stream, which had
burst in the back door.  Rushing again into the old lady's bedroom, she
cried vehemently, "Woman! _won't_ you get up?"

"Why should I?" asked the other in a sleepy tone.  "Isn't Samuel looking
after it?"

"Of course he is, but--"

"Well, well," interrupted the old lady, a little testily, "if _he's_
there it's all right.  _He_ knows what to do, I don't.  Neither do you,
Miss Trim; so pray go away and let me sleep."

Poor Miss Trim retired discomfited.  Afterwards when the family were
driven to the upper storey of the dwelling she learned to regard things
with something of Mrs Ravenshaw's philosophy.

One morning at daylight there was a calm so profound that the sleepers
at Willow Creek were not awakened until the sun rose in a cloudless sky
and glittered over the new-born sea with ineffable splendour.  It was a
strange and sad though beautiful sight.  Where these waters lay like a
sheet of glass, spreading out to the scarce visible horizon, the
grass-waves of the prairie had rolled in days gone by.  There were still
some knolls visible, some tops of trees and bushes, like islets on the
sea, and one or two square masses of drift-wood floating slowly along
with the now imperceptible current, like boats under full sail.  Here
and there could be seen several wooden houses and barns, some of which
had come down from the upper parts of the settlement, like the hut of
old Liz, and were stranded awkwardly on shoals, while others were still
drifting over the watery waste.

All this was clearly visible from the windows of the upper room, in
which slept the sisters Elsie and Cora, and presented itself to the
former when she awoke like a vision of fairyland.  Unable to believe her
eyes, she rubbed them with her pretty little knuckles, and gazed again.

"How beautiful!" she exclaimed.

The exclamation awoke Cora, who sat up and yawned.  Then she looked at
her sister, and being only half-awake, smiled in an imbecile manner.

"Isn't it?" asked Elsie.

"Splendid!" replied Cora, turning to the windows.  "Oh, I'm _so_
sleepy!"

She sank on the pillow again and shut her eyes.

"Come, Cora, let us finish the discussion we began last night about
Louis Lambert," said Elsie, with an arch smile.

"No, I won't!  Let me sleep.  I hate Louis Lambert!" said Cora, with a
shake of her uppermost shoulder.

Elsie laughed and rose; she was already dressed.  Mr Ravenshaw had on
the previous night ordered both his daughters to lie down in their
clothes, as no one could tell what might happen to the house at any
moment.  The flood had not yet begun to abate; Elsie could tell that, as
she sat arranging her hair, from the sound of water gurgling through the
lower rooms.

We have said that the Ravenshaws had been driven by the floods to the
upper floor of their residence.  This floor consisted of three bedrooms
and a lumber-room.  One of the bedrooms was very small and belonged to
the sisters, to whose sole use it was apportioned.  For convenience, the
other two rooms were set apart on this occasion as the male and the
female rooms of the establishment, one being used by as many of the
women as could get comfortably into it, the other by the men.  The
overflow of the household, including those neighbours who had sought
refuge with the family, were accommodated in the adjoining barn, between
which and the main building communication was kept up by means of a
canoe, with Peegwish and Wildcat as the ferrymen.  The lumber-room
having had most of its lumber removed, was converted into a general
hall, or _salon_, where the imprisoned family had their meals, received
their friends, and discussed their trials.  It was a rather dusty place,
with sloping roof, no ceiling, and cross-beams, that caused cross
tempers in those who ran against them.  In one corner a door, removed
from its hinges, did duty as a dresser.  In another Mr Ravenshaw had
erected a small stove, on which, being rather proud of his knowledge of
cookery, he busied himself in spoiling a good deal of excellent food.  A
couple of planks, laid on two trunks, served for a table.  Such cooking
utensils and such portions of light furniture as were required had been
brought up from the rooms below, that which was left having been
weighted with large stones to prevent its being carried away, for the
lower doors and windows had been removed to prevent their being driven
in or out, as the case might be.

So complete was the destruction everywhere, that Samuel Ravenshaw had
passed into a gleeful state of recklessness, and appeared to enjoy the
