The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Flag-raising, by Kate Douglas Wiggin

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Flag-raising

Author: Kate Douglas Wiggin

Posting Date: November 4, 2008 [EBook #2315]
Release Date: September, 2000

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE FLAG-RAISING ***




Produced by Susan L. Farley.  HTML version by Al Haines.










THE FLAG-RAISING


by

KATE DOUGLAS WIGGIN




CONTENTS

   I. A DIFFERENCE IN HEARTS
  II. REBECCA'S POINT OF VIEW
 III. WISDOM'S WAYS
  IV. THE SAVING OF THE COLORS
   V. THE STATE O' MAINE




I

A DIFFERENCE IN HEARTS

"I DON' know as I cal'lated to be the makin' of any child," Miranda had
said as she folded Aurelia's letter and laid it in the light-stand
drawer.  "I s'posed of course Aurelia would send us the one we asked
for, but it's just like her to palm off that wild young one on somebody
else."

"You remember we said that Rebecca, or even Jenny might come, in case
Hannah could n't," interposed Jane.

"I know we did, but we hadn't any notion it would turn out that way,"
grumbled Miranda.

"She was a mite of a thing when we saw her three years ago," ventured
Jane; "she's had time to improve."

"And time to grow worse!"

"Won't it be kind of a privilege to put her on the right track?" asked
Jane timidly.

"I don' know about the privilege part; it'll be considerable work, I
guess. If her mother hasn't got her on the right track by now, she
won't take to it herself all of a sudden."

This depressed and depressing frame of mind had lasted until the
eventful day dawned on which Rebecca was to arrive.

"If she makes as much work after she comes as she has before, we might
as well give up hope of ever gettin' any rest," sighed Miranda as she
hung the dish towels on the barberry bushes at the side door.

"But we should have had to clean house, Rebecca or no Rebecca," urged
Jane; "and I can't see why you've scrubbed and washed and baked as you
have for that one child, nor why you've about bought out Watson's stock
of dry goods."

"I know Aurelia if you don't," responded Miranda. "I've seen her house,
and I've seen that batch o' children, wearin' one another's clothes and
never carin' whether they had 'em on right side out or not; I know what
they've had to live and dress on, and so do you. That child will like
as not come here with a bundle o' things borrowed from the rest o' the
family. She'll have Hannah's shoes and John's undershirts and Mark's
socks most likely. I suppose she never had a thimble on her finger in
her life, but she'll know the feelin' o' one before she's been here
many days. I've bought a piece of unbleached muslin and a piece o'
brown gingham for her to make up; that'll keep her busy. Of course she
won't pick up anything after herself; she probably never saw a duster,
and she'll be as hard to train into our ways as if she was a heathen."

"She'll make a dif'rence," acknowledged Jane, "but she may turn out
more biddable than we think."

"She'll mind when she's spoken to, biddable or not," remarked Miranda
with a shake of the last towel.

Miranda Sawyer had a heart, of course, but she had never used it for
any other purpose than the pumping and circulating of blood. She was
just, conscientious, economical, industrious; a regular attendant at
church and Sunday-school, and a member of the State Missionary and
Bible societies, but in the presence of all these chilly virtues you
longed for one warm little fault, or lacking that, one likable failing,
something to make you sure that she was thoroughly alive. She had never
had any education other than that of the neighborhood district school,
for her desires and ambitions had all pointed to the management of the
house, the farm, and the dairy. Jane, on the other hand, had gone to an
academy, and also to a boarding-school for young ladies; so had
Aurelia; and after all the years that had elapsed there was still a
slight difference in language and in manner between the elder and the
two younger sisters.

Jane, too, had had the inestimable advantage of a sorrow; not the
natural grief at the loss of her aged father and mother, for she had
been resigned to let them go; but something far deeper. She was engaged
to marry young, Tom Carter, who had nothing to marry on, it is true,
but who was sure to have, some time or other. Then the war broke out.
Tom enlisted at the first call. Up to that time Jane had loved him with
a  quiet, friendly sort of affection, and had given her country a mild
emotion of the same sort. But the strife, the danger, the anxiety of
the time, set new currents of feeling in motion. Life became something
other than the three meals a day, the round of cooking, washing,
sewing, and churchgoing. Personal gossip vanished from the village
conversation. Big things took the place of trifling ones,--sacred
sorrows of wives and mothers, pangs of fathers and husbands,
self-denials, sympathies, new desire to bear one another's burdens. Men
and women grew fast in those days of the nation's trouble and danger,
and Jane awoke from the vague dull dream she had hitherto called life
to new hopes, new fears, new purposes. Then after a year's anxiety, a
year when one never looked in the newspaper without dread and sickness
of suspense, came the telegram saying that Tom was wounded; and without
so much as asking Miranda's leave, she packed her trunk and started for
the South. She was in time to hold Tom's hand through hours of pain; to
show him for once the heart of a prim New England girl when it is
ablaze with love and grief; to put her arms about him so that he could
have a home to die in, and that was all;--all, but it served.

It carried her through weary months of nursing--nursing of other
soldiers for Tom's dear sake; it sent her home a better woman; and
though she had never left Riverboro in all the years that lay between,
and had grown into the counterfeit presentment of her sister and of all
other thin, spare, New England spinsters, it was something of a
counterfeit, and underneath was still the faint echo of that wild
heartbeat of her girlhood. Having learned the trick of beating and
loving and suffering, the poor faithful heart persisted, although it
lived on memories and carried on its sentimental operations mostly in
secret.

"You're soft, Jane," said Miranda once; "you allers was soft, and you
allers will be. If't wa'n't for me keeping you stiffened up, I b'lieve
you'd leak out o' the house into the dooryard."

It was already past the appointed hour for Mr. Cobb and his coach to be
lumbering down the street.

"The stage ought to be here," said Miranda, glancing nervously at the
tall clock for the twentieth time. "I guess everything's done. I've
tacked up two thick towels back of her washstand and put a mat under
her slop-jar; but children are awful hard on furniture. I expect we
sha'n't know this house a year from now." Jane's frame of mind was
naturally depressed and timorous, having been affected by Miranda's
gloomy presages of evil to come. The only difference between the
sisters in this matter was that while Miranda only wondered how they
could endure Rebecca, Jane had flashes of inspiration in which she
wondered how Rebecca would endure them. It was in one of these flashes
that she ran up the back stairs to put a vase of apple blossoms and a
red tomato-pincushion on Rebecca's bureau.

The stage rumbled to the side door of the brick house, and Mr. Cobb
handed Rebecca out like a real lady passenger. She alighted with great
circumspection, put a bunch of flowers in her aunt Miranda's hand, and
received her salute; it could hardly be called a kiss without injuring
the fair name of that commodity. "You need n't 'a'bothered to bring
flowers," remarked that gracious and tactful lady; "the garden's always
full of 'em here when it comes time."

Jane then kissed Rebecca, giving a somewhat better imitation of the
real thing than her sister.

"Put the trunk in the entry, Jeremiah, and we'll get it carried
upstairs this afternoon," she said.

"I'll take it up for ye now, if ye say the word, girls."

"No, no; don't leave the horses; somebody'll be comin' past, and we can
call 'em in."

"Well, good-by, Rebecca; good-day, Mirandy 'n' Jane.  You've got a
lively little girl there. I guess she'll be a first-rate company
keeper."

Miss Sawyer shuddered openly at the adjective "lively" as applied to a
child; her belief being that though children might be seen, if
absolutely necessary, they certainly should never be heard if she could
help it. "We're not much used to noise, Jane and me," she remarked
acidly.

Mr. Cobb saw that he had spoken indiscreetly, but he was too unused to
argument to explain himself readily, so he drove away, trying to think
by what safer word than "lively" he might have described his
interesting little passenger.

"I'll take you up and show you your room, Rebecca," Miss Miranda said.
