The men ran forward, scaled the wall and were quickly inside. They were
only thirty-two. Ned had thought that the Panther, Obed, and Will Allen
might be among them, but they were not there. The new men were shaking
hands with the others and were explaining that they had come from
Gonzales with Captain Smith at their head. They were all well armed,
carried much ammunition, and were sure that other parties would arrive
from different points.

The thirty-two were full of rejoicings over their successful entry, but
they were worn, nevertheless, and they were taken into one of the
buildings, where food and water were set before them. Ned stood by, an
eager auditor, as they told of their adventures.

"We had a hard time to get in here to you," said Captain Smith, "and
from the looks of things I reckon we'll have as hard a time to get out.
There must be a million Mexicans around the Alamo. We tried to get up a
bigger force, but we couldn't gather any more without waiting, and we
thought if you needed us at all you needed us in a hurry."

"Reckon you're right about the need of bein' in a hurry," said Crockett.
"When you want help you want it right then an' there."

"So you do," said Smith, as he took a fresh piece or steak, "and we had
it in mind all the time. The wind was blowing our way, and in the
afternoon we heard the roaring of cannon a long distance off. Then as we
came closer we heard Mexicans buzzing all around the main swarm, scouts
and skirmishers everywhere.

"We hid in an arroyo and waited until dark. Then we rode closer and
found that there would never be any chance to get into the Alamo on
horseback. We took the saddles and bridles off our horses, and turned
them loose on the prairie. Then we undertook to get in here, but it was
touch and go. I tell you it was touch and go. We wheeled and twisted and
curved and doubled, until our heads got dizzy. Wherever we went we found
Mexicans, thousands of 'em."

"We've noticed a few ourselves," said Crockett.

"It was pretty late when we struck an opening, and then not being sure
we whistled. When we heard you whistle back we made straight for the
wall, and here we are."

"We're mighty glad to see you," said Crockett, "but we ain't welcomin'
you to no picnic, I reckon you understand that, don't you, Jim Smith?"

"We understand it, every one of us," replied Smith gravely. "We heard
before we started, and now we've seen. We know that Santa Anna himself
is out there, and that the Mexicans have got a big army. That's the
reason we came, Davy Crockett, because the odds are so heavy against
you."

"You're a true man," said Crockett, "and so is every one of these with
you."

The new force was small--merely a few more for the trap--but they
brought with them encouragement. Ned shared in the general mental
uplift. These new faces were very welcome, indeed. They gave fresh vigor
to the little garrison, and they brought news of that outside world from
which he seemed to have been shut off so long. They told of numerous
parties sure to come to their relief, but he soon noticed that they did
not particularize. He felt with certainty that the Alamo now had all the
defenders that it would ever have.

Repeated examinations from the walls of the church confirmed Ned in his
belief. The Mexican circle was complete, and their sheltered batteries
were so near that they dropped balls and shells whenever they pleased
inside the Alamo. Duels between the cannon and the Texan sharpshooters
were frequent. The gunners as they worked their guns were forced to show
themselves at times, and every exposure was instantly the signal for a
Texan bullet which rarely missed. But the Mexicans kept on. It seemed
that they intended to wear out the defenders by the sheer persistency
of their cannon fire.

Ned became so hardened to the bombardment that he paid little attention
to it. Even when a ball fell inside the Alamo the chances were several
hundred to one that it would not hit him. He had amused himself with a
mathematical calculation of the amount of space he occupied compared
with the amount of space in the Alamo. Thus he arrived at the result,
which indicated comparatively little risk for himself.

The shrewdest calculations are often wrong. As he passed through the
convent yard he met Crockett, and the two walked on together. But before
they had gone half a dozen steps a bomb hissed through the air, fell and
rolled to their feet. It was still hissing and smoking, but Ned, driven
by some unknown impulse, seized it and with a mighty effort hurled it
over the wall, where it burst. Then he stood licking his burned fingers
and looking rather confusedly at Crockett. He felt a certain shyness
over what he had done.

The veteran frontiersman had already formed a great affection for the
boy. He knew that Ned's impulse had come from a brave heart and a quick
mind, and that he had probably saved both their lives. He took a great
resolution that this boy, the youngest of all the defenders, should be
saved.

"That was done well, Ned," he said quietly. "I'm glad, boy, that I've
known you. I'd be proud if you were a son of mine. We can talk plainly
here with death all around us. You've got a lot in that head of yours.
You ought to make a great man, a great man for Texas. Won't you do what
I say and slip out of the Alamo while there's still a chance?"

Ned was much moved, but he kept his resolution as he had kept it before.
He shook his head.

"You are all very good to me here," he said. "Mr. Bowie, too, has asked
me to go, but if I should do so and the rest of you were to fall I'd be
ashamed of myself all the rest of my life. I'm a Texan now, and I'm
going to see it through with the rest of you."

"All right," said Crockett lightly. "I've heard that you can lead a
horse to the water, but you can't make him drink, an' if a boy don't
want to go you can't make him go. So we'll just go into this little
improvised armory of ours, an' you an' I will put in our time moldin'
bullets."

They entered one of the adobe buildings. A fire had been built on the
hearth, and a half dozen Texans were already busy there. But they
quickly made room for Crockett and Ned. Crockett did not tell Ned that
their supplies of powder and lead were running low, and that they must
reduce their fire from the walls in order that they might have
sufficient to meet an attack in force.

But it was a cheerful little party that occupied itself with molding
bullets. Ned put a bar of lead into a ladle, and held it over the fire
until the bar became molten. Then he poured it into the mold until it
was full, closed it, and when he opened it again a shining bullet
dropped out. He worked hour after hour. His face became flushed with the
heat, but with pride he watched his heap of bullets grow.

Crockett at last said they had done enough for one day, and Ned was glad
when they went outside and breathed the fresh air again. There was no
firing at that time, and they climbed once more upon the church wall.
Ned looked out upon the scene, every detail of which was so familiar to
him now. But conspicuous, and seeming to dominate all, was the blood-red
flag of no quarter floating from the tower of the church of San
Fernando. Wind and rain had not dimmed its bright color. The menace in
its most vivid hue was always there.

Travis, who was further along the wall with a pair of strong field
glasses, came back and joined Ned and Crockett.

"If you would like to see Santa Anna you can," he said to Ned. "He is on
the church of San Fernando now with his generals looking at us. Take
these glasses and your gaze may meet his."

Ned took the glasses, and there was Santa Anna standing directly under
the folds of the banner with his own glasses to his eyes, studying the
Alamo and its defenders. About him stood a half dozen generals. Ned's
heart swelled with anger. The charm and genius of Santa Anna made him
all the more repellent now. Ned knew that he would break any promise if
it suited him, and that cunning and treachery were his most potent
tools.

Santa Anna, at that very moment, was discussing with Sesma, Cos, Gaona
and others the question of an immediate assault with his whole army upon
the Alamo. They had heard rumors of an advance by Fannin with help for
the Texans, but, while some of the younger spirits wished prompt attack,
Santa Anna decided on delay.

The dictator doubted whether Fannin would come up, and if he did he
would merely put so many more rats in the trap. Santa Anna felt secure
in his vast preponderance of numbers. He would take the Texans in his
own good time, that is, whenever he felt like it. He did not care to
hurry, because he was enjoying himself greatly in San Antonio. Capable
of tremendous energy at times, he gave himself up at other times to
Babylonian revels.

Ned handed the glasses to Crockett, who also took a long look.

"I've heard a lot of Santa Anna," he said, "an' maybe I'll yet meet him
eye to eye."

"It's possible," said Travis, "but, Davy, we've got to wait on the
Mexicans. It's always for them to make the move, and then we'll meet it
if we can. I wish we could hear from Bonham. I'm afraid he's been
taken."

"Not likely," said Crockett. "One man, all alone, an' as quick of eye
an' foot as Bonham, would be pretty sure to make his way safely."

"I certainly hope so," said Travis. "At any rate, I intend to send out
another letter soon. If the Texans are made to realize our situation
they will surely come, no matter how far away they may be."

"I hope they will," said Crockett. But Ned noticed that he did not seem
to speak with any great amount of confidence. Balancing everything as
well as he could, he did not see how much help could be expected. The
Texan towns were tiny. The whole fringe of Texan settlements was small.
The Texans were but fifty or sixty thousands against the seven or eight
millions of Mexico, and now that they knew a great Mexican army was in
Texas the scattered borderers would be hard put to it to defend
themselves. He did not believe that in any event they could gather a
force great enough to cut its way through the coil of Santa Anna's
multitude.

But Travis' faith in Bonham, at least, was justified. The next night,
about halfway between midnight and morning, in the darkest hour, a man
scaled the wall and dropped inside the plaza. It proved to be Bonham
himself, pale, worn, covered with mud and dust, but bringing glad
tidings. Ned was present when he came into the church and was met by
Travis. Bowie, Crockett and Smith. Only a single torch lighted up the
grim little group.

"Fannin has left Goliad with 300 men and four cannon to join us," Bonham
said. "He started five days ago, and he should be here soon. With his
rifles and big guns he'll be able to cut his way through the Mexicans
and enter the Alamo."

"I think so, too," said Travis, with enthusiasm.

But Ned steadily watched Bowie and Crockett. They were the men of
experience, and in matters such as these they had minds of uncommon
penetration. He noticed that neither of them said anything, and that
they showed no elation.

Everybody in the Alamo knew the next day that Bonham had come from
Fannin, and the whole place was filled with new hope. As Ned reckoned,
it was about one hundred and fifty miles from San Antonio de Bexar to
Goliad; but, according to Bonham, Fannin had already been five days on
the way, and they should hear soon the welcome thunder of his guns. He
eagerly scanned the southeast, in which direction lay Goliad, but the
only human beings he saw were Mexicans. No sound came to his ears but
the note of a Mexican trumpet or the crack of a vaquero's whip.

He was not the only one who looked and listened. They watched that day
and the next through all the bombardment and the more dangerous rifle
fire. But they never saw on the horizon the welcome flash from any of
Fannin's guns. No sound that was made by a friend reached their ears.
The only flashes of fire they saw outside were those that came from the
mouths of Mexican cannon, and the only sounds they heard beyond the
Alamo were made by the foe. The sun, huge, red and vivid, sank in the
prairie and, as the shadows thickened over the Alamo, Ned was sure in
his heart that Fannin would never come.

       *       *       *       *       *

A few days before the defenders of the Alamo had begun to scan the
southeast for help a body of 300 men were marching toward San Antonio de
Bexar. They were clad in buckskin and they were on horseback. Their
faces were tanned and bore all the signs of hardship. Near the middle of
the column four cannon drawn by oxen rumbled along, and behind them came
a heavy wagon loaded with ammunition.

It was raining, and the rain was the raw cold rain of early spring in
the southwest. The men, protecting themselves as well as they could with
cloaks and serapes, rarely spoke. The wheels of the cannon cut great
ruts in the prairie, and the feet of the horses sank deep in the mud.

Two men and a boy rode near the head of the column. One of these would
have attracted attention anywhere by his gigantic size. He was dressed
completely in buckskin, save for the raccoon skin cap that crowned his
thick black hair. The rider on his right hand was long and thin with the
calm countenance of a philosopher, and the one on his left was an eager
and impatient boy.

"I wish this rain would stop," said the Panther, his ensanguined eye
expressing impatience and anger. "I don't mind gettin' cold an' I don't
mind gettin' wet, but there is nothin' stickier or harder to plough
through than the Texas mud. An' every minute counts. Them boys in that
Alamo can't fight off thousands of Mexicans forever. Look at them
steers! Did you ever see anything go as slow as they do?"

"I'd like to see Ned again," said Will Allen. "I'd be willing to take my
chance with him there."

"That boy of ours is surely with Crockett and Bowie and Travis and the
others, helping to fight off Santa Anna and his horde," said Obed White.
"Bonham couldn't have made any mistake about him. If we had seen Bonham
himself we could have gone with him to the Alamo."

"But he gave Ned's name to Colonel Fannin," said Will, "and so it's sure
to be he."

"Our comrade is certainly there," said Obed White, "and we've got to
help rescue him as well as help rescue the others. It's hard not to
hurry on by ourselves, but we can be of most help by trying to push on
this force, although it seems as if everything had conspired against
us."

"It shorely looks as if things was tryin' to keep us back," exclaimed
the Panther angrily. "We've had such a hard time gettin' these men
together, an' look at this rain an' this mud! We ought to be at Bexar
right now, a-roarin', an' a-t'arin', an' a-rippin', an' a-chawin' among
them Mexicans!"

"Patience! Patience!" said Obed White soothingly. "Sometimes the more
haste the oftener you trip."

"Patience on our part ain't much good to men sixty or eighty miles away,
who need us yelling' an' shootin' for them this very minute."

"I'm bound to own that what you say is so," said Obed White.

They relapsed into silence. The pace of the column grew slower. The men
were compelled to adapt themselves to the cannon and ammunition wagon,
which were now almost mired. The face of the Panther grew black as
thunder with impatience and anger, but he forced himself into silence.

They stopped a little while at noon and scanty rations were doled out.
They had started in such haste that they had only a little rice and
dried beef, and there was no time to hunt game.

They started again in a half hour, creeping along through the mud, and
the Panther was not the only man who uttered hot words of impatience
under his breath. They were nearing the San Antonio River now, and
Fannin began to show anxiety about the fort. But the Panther was
watching the ammunition wagon, which was sinking deeper and deeper into
the mire. It seemed to him that it was groaning and creaking too much
even for the deep mud through which it was passing.

The driver of the ammunition wagon cracked his long whip over the oxen
and they tugged at the yoke. The wheels were now down to the hub, and
the wagon ceased to move. The driver cracked his whip again and again,
and the oxen threw their full weight into the effort. The wheels slowly
rose from their sticky bed, but then something cracked with a report
like a pistol shot. The Panther groaned aloud, because he knew what had
happened.

The axle of the wagon had broken, and it was useless. They distributed
the ammunition, including the cannon balls, which they put in sacks, as
well as they could, among the horsemen, and went on. They did not
complain, but every one knew that it was a heavy blow. In two more hours
they came to the banks of the muddy San Antonio, and stared in dismay at
the swollen current. It was evident at once to everybody that the
passage would be most difficult for the cannon, which, like the
ammunition wagon, were drawn by oxen.

The river was running deep, with muddy banks, and a muddy bottom, and,
taking the lightest of the guns, they tried first to get it across. Many
of the men waded neck deep into the water and strove at the wheels. But
the stream went completely over the cannon, which also sank deeper and
deeper in the oozy bottom. It then became an effort to save the gun. The
Panther put all his strength at the wheel, and, a dozen others helping,
they at last got it back to the bank from which they had started.

Fannin, not a man of great decision, looked deeply discouraged, but the
Panther and others urged him on to new attempts. The Panther, himself,
as he talked, bore the aspect of a huge river god. Yellow water streamed
from his hair, beard, and clothing, and formed a little pool about him.
But he noticed it not at all, urging the men on with all the fiery
energy which a dauntless mind had stored in a frame so great and
capable.

"If it can be done the Panther will get the guns across," said Will to
Obed.

"That's so," said Obed, "but who'd have thought of this? When we started
out we expected to have our big fight with an army and not with a
river."

They took the cannon into the water a second time, but the result was
the same. They could not get it across, and with infinite exertion they
dragged it back to the bank. Then they looked at one another in despair.
They could ford the river, but it seemed madness to go on without the
cannon. While they debated there, a messenger came with news that the
investment of the Alamo by Santa Anna was now complete. He gave what
rumor said, and rumor told that the Mexican army numbered ten or twelve
thousand men with fifty or sixty guns. Santa Anna's force was so great
that already he was sending off large bodies to the eastward to attack
Texan detachments wherever they could be found.

Fannin held an anxious council with his officers. It was an open talk on
the open prairie, and anybody who chose could listen. Will Allen and
Obed White said nothing, but the Panther was vehement.

"We've got to get there!" he exclaimed. "We can't leave our people to
die in the Alamo! We've got to cut our way through, an', if the worst
comes to the worst, die with them!"

"That would benefit nobody," said Fannin. "We've made every human effort
to get our cannon across the river, and we have failed. It would not
profit Texas for us to ride on with our rifles merely to be slaughtered.
There will be other battles and other sieges, and we shall be needed."

"Does that mean we're not goin' on?" asked the Panther.

"We can't go on."

Fannin waved his hand at the yellow and swollen river.

"We must return to Goliad," he said, "I have decided. Besides, there is
nothing else for us to do. About face, men, and take up the march."

The men turned slowly and reluctantly, and the cannon began to plough
the mud on the road to Goliad, from which they had come.

The Panther had remounted, and he drew to one side with Will and Obed,
who were also on their horses. His face was glowing with anger. Never
had he looked more tremendous as he sat on his horse, with the water
still flowing from him.

"Colonel Fannin," he called out, "you can go back to Goliad, but as for
me an' my pardners, Obed White an' Will Allen, we're goin' to Bexar, an'
the Alamo."

"I have no control over you," said Fannin, "but it would be much better
for you three to keep with us."

"No," said the Panther firmly. "We hear the Alamo callin'. Into the
river, boys, but keep your weapons an' ammunition dry."

Their horses, urged into the water, swam to the other bank, and, without
