Daoud wondered if the cardinal would consider having him killed here in
public. Daoud stared at him through the smoky air, measuring him,
looking for those small signs of tension to be found in a man about to
order an attack. The man seemed too relaxed for that.

"No, Your Eminence, we only stone our heretics to death."

De Verceuil smiled. "That may be a better way of disposing of them.
After a burning, the unpleasant thought always occurs to me that I am
carrying the heretic away in my nostrils and lungs."

Sickened inwardly at this reminder of the rancid smell that had come
from the heretic's pyre, Daoud smiled at the grisly jest, as he assumed
the cardinal expected him to. He remained silent, waiting for de
Verceuil to reveal the reason for this encounter.

"Ordinarily we merely burn heretics," the cardinal went on. "We had this
man tormented first because he threatened our guests, the Tartar
ambassadors, and disturbed a service in the cathedral with the pope
himself present. We had to be severe with him."

"Assuredly," said Daoud, still smiling. De Verceuil's Italian sounded
strange to him. He must be speaking it with a French accent.

"But perhaps, since you seem to think the Tartars are such a danger to
Christendom," said de Verceuil in a voice that was lower and more
menacing, "you approve of what that man did." He gestured toward the
burning scaffold. The stake and whatever was left of the body bound to
it had fallen through the platform into the pile of faggots. A breeze
had sprung up and was blowing the smoke away from Daoud and the
cardinal, for which Daoud thanked God.

"I came here today to see justice done," Daoud said firmly.

"You profess the Greek Church," said de Verceuil, eyeing him coldly.
"That makes you a heretic yourself."

The men-at-arms behind the cardinal shifted restlessly, and Daoud
wondered again if de Verceuil meant to provoke a fight leading to a
killing. Or perhaps have him arrested. He looked past de Verceuil and
his men and saw that some curious citizens had formed a circle around
himself and the cardinal. And there was de Gobignon, standing watchfully
only a short distance away at the foot of the cathedral steps. Was his
sword, too, at the cardinal's command?

"If you are concerned about justice, it is too bad you chose to be
Cardinal Ugolini's guest during your stay in Orvieto," de Verceuil said.
"You will hear only a corrupt Italian point of view in his household."

Praise God, de Verceuil was not pursuing the matter of Daoud's heresy.

Daoud shrugged. "I have seen what devastation the Tartars do, Your
Eminence. With respect, let me say to you that they are as much a danger
to your country, France, as to Italy."

De Verceuil essayed what he may have thought was an ingratiating smile,
but his small mouth made him look sly and sour.

"I invite you to come to live at the Palazzo Monaldeschi. I have spoken
to the contessa, and she would be most happy to receive you. The
Monaldeschi are the wealthiest family in Orvieto, and they have
connections with other great families in the Papal States. If you wish
to find good customers for your silks and spices here, it is the
contessa you should see. And if you would trade with France, perhaps I
can help you there."

The possibility of spending some days and nights in enemy headquarters
was intriguing. But would it be prudent to put himself into de
Verceuil's and de Gobignon's hands?

Daoud shook his head with what he hoped was a regretful smile. "Forgive
me, Your Eminence. Your offer of the contessa's hospitality overwhelms
me, but I have already promised to remain with Cardinal Ugolini, and he
would be deeply offended if I were to leave him."

De Verceuil glowered. "Ugolini is from Hohenstaufen territory. The
Monaldeschi have always been loyal to the pope and have great influence
with him. Just as I have with King Louis of France and his brother,
Count Charles. Come to us, and when you go back to your own land you
will be a wealthy man."

"Could it be that Your Eminence hopes I might change my testimony about
the Tartars?"

Daoud felt close to laughter as the cardinal's cheeks reddened.

De Verceuil shot back, "Could it be that your enmity to the Tartars is
more important to you than your profit as a merchant?"

Daoud's heart beat harder. That was too close to the mark. It was
foolish of him to jest with a man who had the power to condemn him and
his friends to be tortured and burned like that poor madman.

"I regret that I have offended Your Eminence," he said. "I have seen
what I have seen, and I am honor bound to speak the truth. And profit
will do me no good if the Tartars slaughter us all."

"You are ignorant of our ways," de Verceuil said ominously, after a long
pause during which Daoud felt raindrops strike his face. "Have a care
that you do not slip into pitfalls you cannot possibly foresee."

First de Verceuil joked, then he threatened, then he offered
hospitality, then he threatened again. He seemed to have no sense of how
to deal with men.

_Even if we were on the same side, I would hate him. What a trial he
must be for his allies._

But Daoud was eager to get away without creating any deeper enmity
between himself and the cardinal. "I thank you again for your offer of
hospitality, Your Eminence. Even if I cannot come to live at the
Monaldeschi palace, I do hope to meet the contessa. She has graciously
invited Cardinal Ugolini to her reception for the Tartar ambassadors,
and I shall accompany him."

"Do not think you are free to do as you please in Orvieto," said de
Verceuil angrily. "You are being closely watched." He turned abruptly
and strode off. Daoud bowed politely to his scarlet back. Casting ugly
looks at Daoud, the cardinal's men followed.

Daoud told himself that it would be wise to be frightened. But what he
felt was more a profound disdain for Paulus de Verceuil.

_As a man of religion or of power, how can this squawking bird in red
plumage compare with Sheikh Saadi and the Imam Fayum of the
Hashishiyya?_

The rain was coming down harder. It hissed in the still-burning heap of
wood and bones.

A movement near the cathedral steps caught Daoud's eye. He turned and
saw Simon de Gobignon looking at him. Why was he alone? Had he, like
Daoud, not wanted any of his comrades to see this horror?

How infuriating it must be for that proud young Frank to have to work
closely with a man like Cardinal de Verceuil. The cardinal was so
arrogant, so overbearing, so crude as to turn people _against_ any cause
he might support, no matter how worthy.

As the rain fell on him, Daoud hardly noticed it. He saw a new plan
shimmering like a mirage on the horizon of his mind.




XXI


"Bonsoir, Messire. I have not seen you since the day the heretic was
burned. I trust the spectacle did not disturb you?"

Simon had deliberately addressed David of Trebizond in French, to find
out whether the trader spoke that language in addition to Greek and
Italian. He might be from the other side of the earth, but there was
something very French-looking about him.

They stood facing each other a little apart from the crowd gathered in
the sala maggiore, the great hall of the Palazzo Monaldeschi. The large
room was lit by hundreds of candles. Four musicians in a distant corner
sawed away energetically at vielles of different sizes held between
their knees, while two others blew on hautboys. Tables were piled high
with meat and pastry along the sides of the hall. Servants circulated,
refilling goblets from pitchers of wine. Neither Simon nor David was
holding a goblet.

The big blond man, who had not been looking at Simon, turned and stared
at him. Simon detected a pallor under his tan. David did not react to
the sound of French like a man who had heard an unfamiliar language. He
looked more as if he had heard the voice of a ghost.

David bowed. "Pardonnez-moi, Monseigneur. I had not expected to be
addressed in French."

Simon was surprised to hear in David's northern French the harsh accents
of the English Channel coast.

"Where did you learn my tongue, Messire?" Simon asked.

David shrugged. "Since the Crusades began, many of your countrymen have
passed through Trebizond."

Many Crusaders had been Normans, Simon thought. It made sense. But it
was odd that this man David, who claimed to be a Greek, not only spoke
like a Norman, but looked like nothing so much as a big, blond Norman
knight. Simon had seen just such faces--square, with long, straight
noses and cold gray-blue eyes--everywhere in Normandy and in England
when he had accompanied King Louis on a state visit to the realm of his
vassal, King Henry of England.

But David did not dress like a Norman, Simon noted. His apparel was
gaudy in the extreme. He wore a white cap with a blood-red feather, a
short cloth-of-gold cape, particolored hose--light green and peach--and
forest-green boots.

Simon, who, in emulation of King Louis preferred somber colors, had
chosen for tonight a brown velvet singlet and maroon hose. The brightest
thing about him was the jeweled handle of his prized scimitar.

"I hope that you were not upset by the bloody execution of that heretic
last week," Simon said once again.

"Oh, no." David smiled. "But I saw you there, and you seemed to be."

_God's wounds, how true that is!_ was Simon's first thought. He had held
himself rigid throughout the heretic's horrible death, afraid that he
would throw up.

But how disturbing to discover that this Greek merchant, apparently an
enemy, had seen right through Simon's effort to appear imperturbable. Of
all the people in Orvieto, this man was the last Simon would want to
reveal himself to. He cursed himself for giving David such a perfect
opening.

_How could I be such a fool? And I thought I was so clever, addressing
him in French._

Simon had been anticipating his next encounter with David with a mixture
of eagerness, fear, and anger, almost as if it were to be a battle. Now
he wished he had stayed away from the man.

"I felt sorry for the poor devil, as I believe a Christian should,"
Simon said. "Did you not?"

There was a baleful look in David's eyes, as if he hated Simon for his
answer.

But the man from Trebizond only shrugged and said, "I have seen much
blood and pain in my life."

A broad figure in a white robe billowed up to Simon and David. Simon
remembered him from the pope's council--Fra Tomasso d'Aquino, the
distinguished Dominican. The friar's belt of rosary beads rattled as he
walked. It would take a week, Simon thought, to recite all the Our
Fathers and Hail Marys that encircled Fra Tomasso.

"Count, I trust you will forgive my interrupting you. I have already had
the pleasure of meeting Messer David of Trebizond, but I have wanted to
speak to you ever since you arrived in Orvieto. As a seminarian I
studied for a year in Paris under your uncle, Hugues de Gobignon. A
friar of great renown. His murder was such a tragedy."

Simon felt uneasy at reminiscence about the uncle who was not really his
uncle. As he chatted with Fra Tomasso, his eyes roved through the large
room. He noticed the crowd gathered around the Tartars, John and Philip,
who were seated in large, comfortable-looking chairs placed near a
crowned swan at the center of a serving table. He saw a servant pour
wine into a silver cup John held out to him. More of that wonderful wine
of Montefiascone?

Beside the Tartars stood a woman named Ana from the land of the Bulgars,
territory now ruled by the Tartars. Anything, thought Simon bitterly, to
keep Friar Mathieu from achieving too much importance. De Verceuil had
found her and had taken her along as interpreter when the Tartars had
their first private audience with the pope.

Another group stood around the seated Pope Urban, many of them in the
red and purple of cardinals, archbishops, and bishops. There was de
Verceuil, of course, as near to the pope as he could get. The cardinal's
vanity, as usual, had made him choose layman's garb, a tunic of
gold-braided silk and a cape of aquamarine satin trimmed with red-dyed
squirrel fur. And between two prelates' shoulders Simon could just make
out the top of Cardinal Ugolini's fuzzy gray head.

If Ugolini was here, had his niece Sophia come tonight as well? Yes,
there she was, halfway across the hall, talking to the Contessa di
Monaldeschi. The pale violet of Sophia's gown made her skin look darker.
The poets always sang of _fair_ ladies, but Simon found her dark
complexion wondrously attractive. She had let her embroidered silk shawl
fall away from her bare shoulders, and he marveled at their sweet
delicacy. Under her gauze veil the pearls in her headdress twinkled like
stars against hair that was black as night.

"Excuse me, Fra Tomasso, Messer David. I have promised to deliver a most
urgent message to the contessa."

Fra Tomasso, in the middle of an anecdote about Friar Hugues's subtlety
as an inquisitor, gave Simon leave to go. As David bowed, his eyes met
Simon's, and his look was at once both knowing and bitter. He, too, was
a guest in Ugolini's house, thought Simon. Was he, too, attracted to
Sophia? Who would not be?

As Simon moved toward Sophia, the contessa's majordomo strode to the
center of the sala maggiore and called in a deep voice, "Signori e
madonne, tables, game boards, and cards are set for your amusement in
the inner galleria."

Then Simon was bowing before the contessa, acutely aware of Sophia
standing beside her. He kissed the old lady's shiny knuckles, hoping he
would have an opportunity to kiss Sophia's hand as well.

"My dear boy, did you hear the announcement? Do you enjoy cards or
backgammon? I understand your pious king forbids such amusements at his
court. And yet our Holy Father himself loves to play alii." She saw
Simon staring at Sophia and smiled.

"You see, my dear?" the contessa said to Sophia. "Does this splendid
young Frenchman look as if he is interested in cards or dice? Or in you?
Enough of your modesty."

Sophia lowered her eyelids and blushed. How beautiful her olive
complexion was, tinted with rose!

"The contessa is merciless," she said in a low voice.

"Merciless!" the contessa cackled. "My dear, if I were the envious sort,
then indeed would I show you no mercy. By San Giorgio, I would have you
poisoned. But I made up my mind many, many years ago, when I saw my
looks beginning to fade, that I had to choose between hating the beauty
of other women or enjoying it. I was already spending all my hatred on
the odious Filippeschi. So I decided that when I saw beautiful women I
would rejoice at their presence in the world and delight myself by
remembering my own youth and imagining the pleasures they must be
experiencing."

She put her hand on Simon's arm. "What do you think, Count Simon? Would
you like me to present this young lady to you?"

"A thousand thanks, Contessa," said Simon, falling into the extravagant
style of speaking the occasion seemed to call for. "I have already had
the great pleasure of meeting Madonna Sophia at her uncle's mansion."

The contessa nodded. "Ah, you have called upon Cardinal Ugolini. I am
glad to hear that. I would have told you to if you had not done it on
your own." She turned again to Sophia. "Your uncle and I have been
friends ever since the Holy Father moved the papal household to Orvieto.
I deeply admire and respect him. When he reads the stars for me, his
insights and predictions are remarkably accurate. His remedies for my
body's complaints always achieve their purpose, which is more than I can
say for other physicians I have consulted. And best of all, he finds
time for a lonely old lady, when others who should be more attentive
make excuses."

"My uncle is a marvelous man, Your Signory," Sophia murmured. "I am most
fortunate to be his niece. Otherwise I could never hope to be present on
this magnificent occasion, to meet and talk with you."

"And to be waited upon by this handsome cavaliere," the contessa
finished for her, smiling broadly.

_The contessa really is enjoying this_, Simon thought. The old lady was
beaming with pleasure.

Sophia turned to Simon.

"I am most pleased to see you again, Count." Her eyes seemed to shine at
him. Was it his imagination?

She held out her hand. His whole body felt more intensely alive as his
fingers touched hers. He noticed as he bent over her hand that she wore
one ring, a garnet of a red so deep as to be almost black. His lips
touched the creamy skin of the back of her hand, and he thought he felt
her tremble slightly.

Contessa Elvira eyed both of them, sighed happily, and said, "I think it
is time for me to find someone to play rota with. Perhaps I will ask
your uncle to tell my fortune with the cards. He reads the cards as well
as he reads the stars."

They bowed as she moved off. As she turned her back, Simon noticed that
her long blue velvet gown had threadbare patches in the rear. She was so
old and so powerful, Simon thought, that such things did not matter to
her. Perhaps it was a favorite gown from the days when she was young and
beautiful, like Sophia.

But he doubted that she had ever been as beautiful as Sophia.

"May I bring you some wine or something to eat, Madonna?" he asked
Sophia.

"Thank you, I am not hungry. But"--she gestured as if to free him from
obligation to stand with her--"perhaps you--"

"Oh, no, I am quite content. A hand of cards, then?" Simon hoped she
would see that he was making it his responsibility to entertain her.

She took a deep breath, and Simon felt a small thrill as he watched her
bosom rise and fall under the fine silk of her violet gown. "What I
would really like, Count, would be a stroll in the garden. This room,
big as it is, is so hot and crowded. And even though it is September,
this evening it is very warm, do you not think so?"

"Very warm," said Simon, delightedly taking her arm.

       *       *       *       *       *

As Fra Tomasso chatted with him, Daoud watched de Gobignon and Sophia
stroll across the brightly candlelit hall to the door leading to the
inner galleria.

_De Gobignon spoke to me in the language of my parents._

Sire Geoffrey and Dame Evelyn Langmuir, he knew, were of English stock.
But Daoud's father had once told him that all the English nobility spoke
French.

Tonight was the first time since Daoud landed in Italy that he had heard
French or had spoken it. When he first heard himself addressed in
French, he had experienced a strange and frightening sensation, as if
his dead father were speaking to him. He hated de Gobignon for doing
that to him.

_And I hate him because he will enjoy the woman I want for myself._

The voice of Fra Tomasso faded away. Black rage filled Daoud's skull,
deafening and blinding him. He pictured Sophia naked in Simon de
Gobignon's arms, and his body trembled.

And when he did become Sophia's lover, the puppy would have no
understanding of how much of a woman he was possessing. To him she would
be the sweet Sicilian niece of a cardinal. He would have no idea of the
woman behind that mask.

Sophia, Daoud had come to realize, had known suffering and loss. She had
survived at the very bottom of the world, and she had risen to be the
intimate of an emperor and a king.

She occupied his thoughts, Daoud sensed with some uneasiness, far more
often than did Blossoming Reed back in El Kahira.

Simon would know Sophia Orfali, not Sophia Karaiannides, who had told
Daoud more than once, he thought with a grim smile, how much she hated
Franks. She would make a fool of this Frank.

Fra Tomasso was rambling on about the one sea voyage he had ever taken,
from Normandy to Naples. "One would think going around the continent of
Europe like that would take much longer than making the same journey
overland. It took us only a month, whereas on land it would have taken
at least three. The sea is a two-dimensional surface. On land one is
traveling over a three-dimensional surface and can encounter many
obstacles."

_Yes, and a carrier pigeon travels much faster than a ship._ In a month
or two Daoud's request for the book Fra Tomasso wanted would have
reached Baibars, and a few months after that, if Baibars could obtain
the book, the Friar's pudgy hands would be holding it.

Listening with half an ear, Daoud looked about him at the marble pillars
that ran up to the gilded beams of the ceiling, at the paintings of
angels and saints on the plaster walls, at the fragments of old Roman
statues that stood here and there--mostly nude torsos. Idolatry, yes,
but beautifully done. The arts of the Christians and their pagan
predecessors were not altogether as barbaric as he had imagined them.

Ugolini suddenly appeared at Daoud's elbow to interrupt his thoughts and
Fra Tomasso's discourse. "Excuse me, Fra Tomasso, but His Holiness
wishes a word with David."

The little cardinal's eyes darted about nervously. Obviously, the idea
of a conversation between Daoud and the pope terrified him.

"Have you had any wine?" said Ugolini in a low voice as they crossed the
room to where Urban, in his white cassock, a red cloak wrapped around
his shoulders, was sitting in a large, high-backed chair. The spiritual
father of all Christians was dressed heavily for such a warm evening,
Daoud thought. A sign of ill health.

"I never drink wine if I can avoid it," he answered Ugolini.

"Well, you will not be able to avoid it tonight. But remember, you have
no head for it."

Daoud was about to retort sharply, but he swallowed the impulse. Such
unnecessary advice was the cardinal's way of allaying his terror. He had
never told Ugolini about the training in resistance to drugs he had
undergone with Sheikh Saadi. Al-koahl, the intoxicating element in wine,
could affect his body but not his mind.

       *       *       *       *       *

"This is a very dangerous practice," Sheikh Saadi said as he crouched
over a small cooking pot suspended on a tripod above a low fire. "But it
is now a necessary one for you."

Whatever was bubbling in the pot gave off a strange, cloying odor that
Daoud found frightening and seductive at the same time. They were in the
inner garden of Saadi's small house in al-Fustat, the oldest quarter of
El Kahira.

Daoud half sat, half reclined on a pile of cushions. He leaned back and
saw that the stars were fewer and the sky was lighter. They had been up
all night drinking kaviyeh.

The liquid Saadi was brewing now smelled nothing like kaviyeh. Studying
the simmering, sweet-smelling liquid, Saadi seemed satisfied. He took
the pot off the fire and set it on a stone.

Still on his knees, the sheikh swung around to smile at Daoud. In the
firelight his face was many shades of brown and black. But his beard, in
the years Daoud had known him, had gone from gray to a white as pure as
the wool from which the Sufi took their name.

"Kneel and compose your mind," said Saadi.

Daoud rose from a sitting position to his knees. As Saadi had taught
him, and as he had practiced for many years, he visualized his mind as
an empty pool, walled with tiles. A fountain sprang up in the center of
the pool and filled it slowly with clear water. The walls of the pool
disappeared, and there was nothing but clear water in all directions,
stretching away to infinity.

Saadi seemed to know when Daoud had reached the vision of infinity, and
he spoke again.

"Think of God."

Daoud saw a mountain, a flame, the sun. None of those were God. At last
he saw the blackness of the spaces between the stars. There in the
infinite lightlessness was the dwelling place of God, like the Black
Stone in the Qa'aba. He saw the darkness that veiled God, and he locked
the idea of God in his mind.

"Now, hold the thought of God, and drink."

Saadi held a silver cup to his lips. The liquid was sweet and thick. He
swallowed, and it burned the lining of his stomach.

"What is it?"

"Wine mixed with hashish."

Daoud was shocked.

_Filth, spiritual poison!_

Saadi himself had taught him that. And now Saadi had tricked him into
sipping the vile stuff.

He swayed on his knees, feeling dizzy and angry. Saadi held up a warning
hand.

"Remain in the Presence of God. He will protect you from the ill effects
of the poison. This is the practice."

Daoud struggled back to the infinite emptiness that hid God, and as he
did so he felt his mind clear. The drugs were spreading like tiny flames
through his body, but his body was far away. Too far away for him to
feel the heat.

Beside him, Saadi said, "Everything made by God has two sides, a useful
side and a harmful side. That which is sometimes a poison can at other
times be a medicine. Even kaviyeh, which we drink in such great
quantities to give vigor to our minds, can be a poison. If a substance
is taken in the right amount, on the right occasion, with the right
attitude, it can unlock doors in the mind. Our lord Baibars, peace be
upon him, has told me he plans to send you to the Hashishiyya for
further training. This practice will help you to gain more from their
teachings--and protect you from being corrupted by them. In the months
to come you will learn to take in every kind of intoxicating substance
and keep your mind free. This is not magic. This is a power of the
spirit. What are you feeling?"

"The drug devours my body, but my mind is in the Presence of God."

"One day, when you have learned all you can from the Hashishiyya, I will
teach you the secret of the most powerful drug of all--soma, the drug
that is made by the mind and does not harm the body at all."

       *       *       *       *       *

_No head for wine? No man in this room is less susceptible to wine._

De Verceuil still stood beside the white-bearded pope. His gloomy face
tightened as his eyes met Daoud's.

Daoud dropped to one knee before the pope and kissed the heavy gold ring
that bore a tiny engraving of a man in a boat. He saw that the old man
was wearing white satin slippers.

Daoud felt so dizzied by the wonder of this moment that the tiled floor
seemed to shake under him. He held in his hand the hand of the Pope of
Rome, successor to those popes who had sent wave after wave of crusaders
crashing against the walls of Islam, whose words had caused the deaths
of thousands and thousands of the faithful. He, Daoud ibn Abdallah, once
David Langmuir, had penetrated to the very center of Christian power.

_Was there ever a moment like this before in all of time, when a servant
of the true God and a believer in the word of the Prophet held the hand
of a pope in his?_

"Messer David of Trebizond, the Venetians have just raised the prices of
saffron, curry, ginger, and cardamom," said the pontiff in a deep voice.
"All of which are indispensable to my kitchen. Can you furnish me with
spices more cheaply?"

It took all of Daoud's self-control to hold in a burst of laughter. A
Mameluke comes face-to-face with the pope, and what do they discuss? The
price of spices!

But he sobered as he realized how useful the pope's interest in spices
could be to him. As a purveyor of spices to the papal palace, his
position in Orvieto would be more respected and more secure.

"If you deal with us, Holy Father, you are dealing with the people from
whom the Venetians get those spices," said Daoud with a smile as he
stood up. "This is exactly the purpose of my visit."

"Good, good. Have Cardinal Ugolini arrange an appointment for you with
my steward."

As they walked away, Daoud said softly to Ugolini, "Would it not be
amusing if the Sultan of Cairo were to furnish the spices for the pope's
kitchen?" The irony of it once again struck him as funny. What a tale
for the bazaars of El Kahira.

Ugolini stared at him, side whiskers quivering. "Not amusing at all."

_Ugolini is right to be afraid. I saw what they did to that man in the
piazza. I must not make jokes. Ugolini needs to feel he can rely on me._

Celino emerged from the circle around the Tartars to stand before Daoud.
At Daoud's insistence the Sicilian wore garments tailored specially for
this evening, mostly in white, with gold embroidery on the edges of his
waist-length ermine-trimmed cape and his satin tunic.

"What are the Tartars doing?" Daoud asked.

"Sitting and drinking and mostly talking to each other," said Celino.
"There is a crowd of curious people around them, asking them questions."

"Where is that Friar Mathieu who interprets for them?"

Celino shrugged. "Not here. There is a woman from some eastern country
translating."

Daoud felt a tingle of excitement, like a hunter who had sighted prey.

He surveyed the room. Simon de Gobignon--_may his right hand rot and
wither_--had already left with Sophia, as Daoud and Sophia had planned.
De Verceuil still hovered near the pope.

"Celino, you heard the contessa's servant announcing games in the next
room? See if you can draw Cardinal de Verceuil into a game with you."

"He favors backgammon," said Ugolini.

"All the French dote on backgammon," said Celino.

"Keep him entertained," said Daoud.

"To entertain de Verceuil you will have to bore yourself," said Ugolini.
"He prefers a game whose outcome is never in doubt."

Daoud and Ugolini turned to the serving table, and Daoud began
methodically to work his way through the various dishes the contessa's
servants had set out for her guests. There were eels steeped in a
strange, almost rotten-smelling sauce, there were small, tender lobsters
and large, meaty ones. There were baby birds meant to be eaten bones and
all. There was white bread and there were fine cakes. Daoud filled his
stomach, forcing himself to eat even those foods that repelled him,
while he watched Celino join the group gathered with the pope.

Daoud used his dagger to cut himself a slice of roast veal. It was juicy
and tender, and he cut himself another. The meat tasted as if the calf
had been killed that same day; it was not heavily spiced. How pleasant
to dine at the home of a wealthy woman. By the time he finished his
fourth slice, Celino and de Verceuil were in conversation.

Daoud chatted with Ugolini about astrology. In the cardinal's opinion it
was an auspicious night, and that assessment of the heavens helped calm
the bewhiskered little man somewhat.

It being harvest season, the contessa's tables were laden with fresh
fruits. Daoud enjoyed apricots and grapes, and sliced open an orange. He
watched Celino and de Verceuil move toward the galleria, where the
contessa's guests were playing games.

Daoud eyed the two brown-skinned men in their shimmering robes sitting
at their ease in the sala maggiore in the midst of a circle of curious
people. Their chief guardians, de Verceuil, de Gobignon, and Friar
Mathieu, were all elsewhere.

Daoud, as was customary among these people, dipped his hands in a basin
of water and wiped them on the table linen. Then he began to push his
way into the ring of people around the Tartars.

After a few moments he found himself staring down at them. They were
laughing together over some private joke, speaking to each other in
their chirping language.

Fra Tomasso was part of the group around the Tartars, as were several
bishops and two cardinals. A stout, middle-aged woman stood beside John,
the older of the two. She wore a stiff, brocaded blue gown, and her hair
was tightly wrapped in a net of gold thread.

"Madonna Ana," said Fra Tomasso, "ask Messer John Chagan for me whether
the city called Karakorum is still the capital of the Tartar empire."

The woman turned to the white-bearded John and repeated the question in
rapid-flowing Tartar speech.

John bowed and smiled to Fra Tomasso and spoke to the woman. Daoud
almost felt envy at the sight of John's gorgeous ankle-length silk
robe--white, printed with flowers having massive, many-petaled crimson
and purple heads, along with clusters of green leaves and wispy gold
clouds. He gestured as he spoke, and his hands were square,
short-nailed, and hard-looking. Daoud had no doubt that those hands had
taken many lives.

"Messer John says the capital of their empire is wherever the Great Khan
makes his home," said the Bulgarian woman in a flat tone. "It used to be
Karakorum. But now the Great Khan is building a city in the land of
Cathay. The city is called--Xanadu."

"And how long would it take to travel from Baghdad to this Xanadu?" Fra
Tomasso asked.

"Messer John says for a party of Christians to go to Xanadu from Baghdad
might take as long as a year. But for the Tartar post riders it takes
two months."

"Two months!" exclaimed Fra Tomasso. "For a journey that would take
ordinary men a year? How far is it?"

"Permit me to answer that, Father," Daoud interrupted, "because the
Tartars do not know your system of measurements. The roads between
Baghdad and the great cities of Cathay are tortuous, and vast deserts
and huge mountains stand in the way. But our geographers in Trebizond
estimate that a caravan going over that route would travel a distance of
three thousand leagues."

"And the Tartars cover that in two months? Do they fly?" The fat monk's
jowls quivered. Daoud noticed that the front of his white tunic was
stained with what appeared to be spots of gravy and wine.

Daoud turned to Ana. "Kindly ask the ambassadors to explain to Fra
Tomasso how their riders cover such a distance so quickly."

After some conversation between Ana and the Tartars, Fra Tomasso had his
answer. "The fastest riders and horses in our empire carry messages in
relays over the major routes. A message never stops traveling, night and
day, until it reaches its destination. At night, runners with torches
guide the riders."

The Italians looked awed. Daoud felt unimpressed. The Mamelukes also had
post riders. They could carry a message from El Kahira to Damascus in
four days.

"How intelligent!" said Fra Tomasso. "I will warrant we would be better
governed here in Europe if we had such a system."

The note of admiration in Fra Tomasso's voice made Daoud uneasy. A
servant passed, offering cups of wine on a tray. Daoud took a goblet.
John and Philip raised the empty cups they held, and Ana refilled them
from a pitcher on the table.

"Your empire is so vast, is it not," Daoud said to the Tartars through
Ana, "that even messages that travel swiftly cannot hold it together?"

Philip, the black-bearded Tartar, answered that, smiling. "Fear of the
Great Khan holds our empire together," Ana translated.

"Is the Great Khan feared even in the lands of Kaidu Khan and Baraka
Khan?" Daoud asked, naming the two rebels who did not recognize Hulagu
Khan's brother Kublai. He strove for a tone of innocent curiosity.

The faces of the two Tartars remained expressionless, but Daoud,
schooled by his Hashishiyya masters to notice signs of emotion in the
most guarded of men, observed the flush creeping into their brown
cheeks, the slight quickening of their breathing, and the twitching of
their fingers. Until he asked his disturbing question they had answered
Daoud readily, almost casually, as they would any of the contessa's
other guests. Now, in silence, they studied him. Waiting for them to
finish their inspection, Daoud held out his wine cup to Ana, who filled
it from the pitcher on the table. The pitcher was almost empty, and she
signaled to a servant to bring another.

John Chagan said, and Ana translated, "I do not believe we have had the
honor of being presented to you, Messere."

Daoud turned to Fra Tomasso, who was following the conversation closely.
"Will you be good enough to introduce us, Your Reverence?" Any
opportunity to involve himself with the Dominican philosopher could be
useful.

While Fra Tomasso presented him and Ana translated, Daoud stared at the
Tartars with deliberate challenge, draining his wine cup. Philip caught
the meaning of the gesture at once, and drank deep from his silver
goblet as well. John followed suit.

"Trebizond," said John. "Not far from our borders." Daoud had wondered
whether any of the Tartars' sponsors had told them of David of Trebizond
and his testimony against them at the pope's council.

"Your khan, Hulagu, has already pressed our emperor for tribute and
