As we were ready to start, John said to me: "Paulus, we are soon to come
to the most dangerous part of the journey; we are to descend the western
slopes of the mountains, which at times are very abrupt, to the sea. We
will go over mountain tops and descend their steep declivities. We shall
have to drive twice along the sides of deep ravines; all that are here
are going together, so that we may help each other. Get into your sleigh
and follow us closely. I will lead, and my brother will be behind you."

We set forth, and soon afterwards I noticed that our reindeer went much
faster than at the start. I knew by this that we were approaching the
slope of a mountain. I was right. Next we came to the brink of a hill,
and descended with a rapidity of at least twenty-five miles an hour. The
animals simply flew.

When my reindeer reached the bottom of the hill he made the usual sudden
curve to the left to keep the sleigh, which had a tremendous momentum,
from striking against his legs. I had prepared myself for the sudden
motion; I had been there before! I bent my body almost out of the sleigh
in the opposite direction, and succeeded in keeping in. It was a fine
sight to see sleigh after sleigh coming down the hill, but no man
followed exactly in the track of the others, so that in case of accident
the one behind would not pitch headlong into the sleigh ahead.

I thought this was lots of fun. But ascending the hill on the opposite
side was no fun at all. It was indeed hard work for the reindeer and for
the men. The snow had drifted on one side of the hill and was very deep,
and in many places very soft. The poor reindeer spread their hoofs as
wide as they could, so as not to sink too deeply. But in many places it
was of no avail; they would sink to their flanks and even deeper; but it
was wonderful to see how quickly they sprang out.

We should never have been able to ascend the hill without going in
zigzag. We had often to get out of our sleighs and take to our skees.
One Finn lent me a pair of them that were much shorter than mine, to
ascend the hills. I should never have been able to do it had I not
followed the track of those ahead. Though it was 43 degrees below zero,
I was in a profuse perspiration.

[Illustration: "Once in a while I gave a look towards the ugly
precipice."]

At times the poor reindeer panted; their tongues protruded. They would
fall down on their backs, breathing heavily. My reindeer was so
exhausted and breathed so hard, with protruding tongue and mouth wide
open, that I thought he was going to die. "Don't be afraid," said
John to me with a smile, as he saw my anxious face, "reindeer often act
like this when they are exhausted; yours will soon be all right."

John was not mistaken.

It was wonderful how quickly they all recovered, and after eating plenty
of snow they went on as if nothing had happened to them, until they
again became exhausted and powerless. When we reached the top of a
mountain, we waited for those of our party that lagged behind. I said to
John, "I hope we have not many more of these hills to ascend." "We have
none so steep; but, Paulus, now we have come to the most dangerous part
of our whole journey; we are going to run along the brink of one of the
ravines of which I spoke to you. Look ahead," said he, pointing to the
deep ravine.

When all the men of our party had arrived at the top of the hill, every
one began to make careful preparations for the descent, and I watched
with great earnestness what was done. Once in a while I gave a look
towards the ugly precipice. I did not like the sight a bit. The men were
anxious, and showed this in the care and pains they took in testing
every plaited leather cord, and those were especially strong that were
to be used for such an emergency. They knew how dangerous was the ride
and that no cord must snap.

A number of sleighs were lashed with mine by a very strong plaited
leather cord. When John was through he said to me: "This cord cannot
break."

Behind each sleigh a reindeer was fastened, the cord being attached at
the base of his horns. John said to me: "Reindeer cannot bear to be
pulled quickly, and make every effort to disengage themselves, and by
doing so act as a drag." All the sleighs had been lashed together by
fours, sixes, eights, or tens. We had plenty of spare reindeer with us,
and at the end of each set of sleighs two or three reindeer were made
fast to the last one. A man was in the front sleigh of the set to lead,
and another man in the last one. John was to lead the set in which I
was, and his brother was to be in the last. As usual each man rode his
sleigh with his legs outside, turned back somewhat, or reversed, with
the top of his shoes touching the snow, the feet to act as rudder.

When I did the same a great cry went up. I heard, "No! No! Paulus, your
legs will surely be broken; put them inside your sleigh, as you have
always done!" and before I could say a word in reply John and a Finn
were by me, each taking one of my legs and putting it inside.

A short time was to elapse between the start of each set of sleighs, so
that there would be no chance of their coming in contact. The signal was
given, and one set after another started with great speed. It was one of
the grandest and most dangerous sights I had ever seen, but the Lapps
and Finns were accustomed to this, for they generally went twice every
winter to the Arctic Sea with their produce for sale.

Then my turn came. John started and off we went.

As the sleighs swerved in the descent the tension was very great. I said
to myself, "If the cord that keeps our sleighs together breaks we shall
be pitched far below and be dashed against the rocks with incredible
force."

In the mean time every reindeer was holding back with all his power,
making efforts to disengage himself, and by doing this acted as a brake
on the sleighs in front. If they had not done so the descent would have
been impossible.

What speed! I had never seen anything like this descent before. Here was
a terrifying precipice, the sloping rocks leading towards the chasm. I
was afraid the reindeer would miss their footing. I hoped that no bare
ice would be met. At any moment we might have been thrown out headlong.
After we reached the dale, which closed abruptly at the head of the
ravine, I was breathless from excitement. I had just ended one of two of
the most exciting rides I had ever taken. We waited for those that were
behind, and when they had arrived we rested for a while.

I asked John what would have happened if one of the cords had snapped.
He did not answer my question, but simply looked at me with a serious
expression. I knew what it would have meant. Death!

Further on we had another descent of the same character, but not so
dangerous.

We were all glad when we reached the station of refuge; we were so tired
from the excitement of the day.

We had crossed the backbone of the mountain, and had come down the
western slope. Each stream now flowed to the Arctic Sea.

The next day we continued the descent. The day before we had come to the
zone where the juniper grew; to-day we passed the birch. Then came the
fir trees. Darkness overtook us, and I could not make out what sort of
land it was, but soon we came to the house of a fisherman, where we all
spent the night.

When I awoke in the morning and looked out I found that I was at the
bottom of a great chasm with towering mountains on each side. I had
never seen the like. It seemed to me that I had come to a world unknown
before. Looking towards the west I saw a long dark green line of water,
sunk deeply into the ragged and precipitous mountains. I had come to the
Ulf Fjord. The water was the Arctic Sea. I was on the shores of grand
old Norway.

The fjord was frozen at its inner extremity for about one mile with
thick solid ice. At the inner end of every fjord there is a river,
flowing through a valley, which is the continuation of the fjord;
consequently the water is only brackish and freezes more easily than
salt water. Further on the fjord is free of ice, for in this part of the
world, though so far north, the sea is made warm by the Gulf Stream, the
very same Gulf Stream that starts from West Africa and flows westward to
the coast of Brazil, then branches off northward and runs close to our
American shores. Without the Gulf Stream this part of Norway would be a
land of ice, just as the land of North-west America is, in the same
latitude.

I remembered that I had sailed over the Gulf Stream waters near the
African coast, and it had come to meet the same stream again on that
far-away northern shore--beyond the Arctic Circle.

My journey over mountains 5,000 feet high, between the 69th and 70th
degrees of north latitude, was over.

I saw a vessel in the distance, and with one of the fishermen living on
this inhospitable shore we went on board. It was good luck the vessel
was going to sail north. The captain was willing to take me with him on
his voyage.

I thanked John and my other travelling companions for the kindness they
had shown me. We parted with great tokens of friendship.




CHAPTER XXVI

 SAIL ON THE ARCTIC OCEAN.--THE BRIG _RAGNILD_.--AEGIR AND RAN, THE GOD
     AND GODDESS OF THE SEA.--THE NINE DAUGHTERS OF AEGIR AND RAN.--GREAT
     STORMS.--COMPELLED TO HEAVE TO.


As I stepped on board I said farewell to my dear skees and sleigh, as
they were put into the hold. "I shall miss you very much," I said, "for
we have had happy times together." Then we sailed away. Now I have laid
aside my Lapp costume, and I am clad in the garb of a fisherman. I am
clothed in a suit of oilskin garments, over my woollens, to protect me
from the wet. I wear a big sou'wester, instead of a cap, to keep the
rain and the spray from running down my neck, and huge sea-boots to keep
my legs and feet dry. In these I am ready to brave the storms of the
Arctic Ocean. Now a boat will be my sleigh, its sail my reindeer: these
will carry me onward on the sea, as the others have done on the snow.

As I stood quietly on deck looking at the sea, the captain said to me,
"For a wonder we have pleasant weather. This winter we have had nothing
but a succession of gales or terrific squalls, and what is worse,
blinding snowstorms, when we could not even see each other on deck."

[Illustration: "I am clad in the garb of a fisherman."]

The _Ragnild_--such was the name of our vessel--was a staunch Norwegian
brig that had weathered many a gale on the stormy coast of Norway and
the Arctic Sea. She was bound for the coast of Finmarken, on the east
side of North Cape, to buy codfish. On board were provisions and
clothing, boots, etc., for sale to the fishermen we were to meet in the
coast settlements.

Our crew was composed of most sturdy seafaring men. The name of the
captain was Ole Petersen, a real old salt who had been at sea for nearly
fifty years and was part owner of the craft.

John Andersen was the first mate; the sailors were Lars, Evert, Ivor,
Hakon, Pehr, and Harald. All of these men had encountered many a gale,
and two had been wrecked.

Towards nine o'clock that evening, the captain and I went to our bunks,
the captain leaving the first mate and three men on the watch.

When I awoke in the morning the _Ragnild_ was rolling heavily; we were
in the midst of an angry sea and of a great gale, and while I was
dressing I was thrown from one side of my little stateroom to the other,
and it was no fun. I came on deck, and as I looked at the big waves I
said, "The wind and the waves are in their ugly mood." The wind howled
and shrieked through the rigging, and waves were like big hills. I
thought of the many wrecks of ships and boats, and of the multitude of
passengers and seafaring men that have been drowned since people have
sailed on the seas.

The captain murmured to me, "This is ugly weather indeed. We must employ
all the skill we have to fight against the storm. Our sails are new, our
rigging is strong, and our vessel is staunch, and we are all valiant men
on board who have gone through many such a storm before."

That morning as I watched the coast, I remembered that the Vikings
believed and worshipped AEgir as the god of the sea. AEgir ruled over the
sea and the wind. Ran was his wife, and she had a net in which she
caught all those who were lost at sea; her Hall was at the bottom of the
ocean, and there she welcomed all the shipwrecked people.

AEgir and Ran had nine daughters, and their names were emblematic of the
waves. They were called _Hefring_ the Hurling, _Hroenn_ the Towering,
_Bylgja_ the Upheaving, _Bara_ the Lashing.

The five other daughters were called _Himinglaefa_ the Heaven Glittering,
_Bloedughadda_ the Bloody Haired, _Kolga_ the Cooling, _Unn_ the Loving,
_Dufa_ the Dove.

The Vikings dreaded Hefring, Hroenn, and Bylgja when far out at sea, and
Bara when they were approaching the shore. These four waves are those
the mariners dread to-day.

They believed that these daughters of AEgir and Ran were seldom partial
to men, that the wind awakened them and made them angry and fierce. They
called them "The white-hooded daughters of AEgir and Ran." They called
the spray their hair. They believed that in calm weather they walked on
the reefs and wandered gently along the shores, and that their beds
were rocks, stone-heaps, pebbles, and sands.

I had not been long on the sea before I found that I had exchanged the
terrific winds of Arctic "Snow Land" for the gales of the Arctic Ocean.
The weather was fearful! Snow, sleet, hurricanes, treacherous heavy
squalls, followed each other in succession.

"This is the winter weather we have here," said the captain; "we do not
expect any better at this time of the year. When there is a lull, it is
only to deceive us; then it blows harder than ever, and the snow or the
sleet falls thicker than before."

My fancy recalled again to me the words of the "Long Night": "I send
terrific gales and mighty snowstorms over oceans and lands."

As I looked at the ocean I saw a big towering wave rolling up towards
the stern of the ship and apparently gaining upon us. It was transparent
and of a deep green color. I imagined I could see Hefring with
glittering eyes, one of her arms directing the wave against us.

The men looked anxiously towards the wave, which was steadily advancing,
but our ship rode over it as if she were a gull resting on the ocean.
Then the ugly wave formed a crest, curled upon itself, and with a heavy
boom broke into fragments of snowy foam.

I said to the men: "This wave has missed us." They answered in serious
voices, "And we must watch, for a more towering one will follow, as
there are always three of them going together, and this second one may
come and break over us."

These words were hardly uttered when I saw far off another mountainous
wave rolling up. I imagined it was Hroenn. It was so high as it neared us
that we could not see the horizon beyond; it looked fierce and
dangerous. Its crest gradually rose higher and higher, as if getting
ready to strike. Steadily Hroenn advanced. We are lost, and our ship is
sure to founder if her wave breaks over our stern. The faces of the
captain and men were serious. I said to myself: "If we get into the
whirlpool of its crest there will be no escape; we are sure to founder."

The wave broke about fifty yards before reaching us. It had become
harmless, but the foaming, scattered billows enveloped the ship in their
thick spray. It was a narrow escape; but we were saved thus far! Then in
the wake of the imaginary Hroenn rose another wave. I imagined Bylgja was
coming. It advanced slowly and angrily towards us, ready to sweep our
deck and to do the work the two others had tried to do and
missed--demolish our ship. It broke before reaching us with a loud boom,
making the sea a surging sheet of foam as white as snow for a long
distance. This was a beautiful sight. We gave a great shout of joy; we
had had a narrow escape.

After these three heavy seas came a lull. The captain said thoughtfully,
"Those are the waves that disable or founder ships and send them to the
bottom of the sea!"

[Illustration: "I saw a big towering wave rolling towards the stern of
the ship."]

We were indeed still in the midst of a great gale. But the captain and
our crew had thus far fought against the storm successfully. I thought
of the great Viking Half, and of his champions. It was their custom
always to lie before capes, never to put up a tent on board, and never
to reef a sail in a storm. Half had never more than sixty men on board
of his ship, nor could any one go with him who was not so hardy that he
never was afraid or changed countenance on account of his wounds. I
wondered if Half and his men had ever encountered such a storm as we
were having. If so his ship must have been a staunch vessel indeed.

As the hours passed the storm continued, the Daughters of AEgir and Ran
rose again and again, trying to strike our ship; when their hoods were
rent asunder, their long hair streamed on the gale.

In the afternoon the dark clouds were lower than usual and moved rapidly
over our heads. The wind howled and hissed through the rigging. Wave
after wave struck against the ship's side and deluged the deck with
water. One of them took me off my feet and pitched me to the other side
against the bulwarks, almost washing me overboard.

"You had better go into the cabin," said the captain; "this is no
weather for you." But I replied, "Yes, captain, it is; I want to see
this big storm with its mighty sea." I had hardly said these words when
another wave came aboard of us. Two men were nearly washed overboard;
fortunately they held fast to the rigging.

Soon after another big wave struck our port side, and carried away a
part of our bulwarks, swamping our decks with a huge mass of water; this
time nearly washing overboard all of us who were on deck. Looking at the
havoc the wave had wrought, I remembered the saga which tells of the
storm the celebrated Viking Fridthjof encountered at sea, and which
says:

"Then came a wave breaking so strongly that it carried away the gunwales
and part of the bow, and flung four men overboard, who were lost.

"'Now it is likely,' said Fridthjof, 'that some of our men will visit
Ran. We shall not be thought fit to go there unless we prepare ourselves
well. I think it is right that every man should carry some gold with
him!' He cut asunder the arm ring of his sweetheart Ingibjoerg, and
divided it among his men."

We had been running before the wind with all the sails we could carry
safely, so that the ship might not be overtaken and swamped. As long as
the ship can sail faster or quite as fast as the waves, it is all right;
but if the waves go faster then there is great danger that the ship will
be pooped by the sea,--that is, that the seas may come over the stern,
and sweep over the deck, carrying everything away. In such a case it
happens sometimes that all those who are on deck are swept overboard.

The sea finally became so high and so threatening that the captain
ordered that we should heave to and wait for the storm to abate. To
heave a ship to before the wind is a dangerous manoeuvre. We waited
until three big seas had passed. There is generally a lull after that,
and then is the time to bring the ship's head to the wind. During the
evolution the ship is liable to get in the trough of the sea, when she
rolls heavily, and has her deck swept by the waves. The dangerous
operation in our case proved successful.

While our ship lay to we had just sail enough to keep her head to the
wind, and she rode like a big albatross on the water, drifting a little
to leeward. When she was in the hollow of two waves, these seemed like
mountains ready to engulf us, but we rode safely over every one. As we
lay to we felt perfectly secure. Our ship did not roll as if broadside
to the seas, but pitched, rising slowly, over every wave.

After lying to for over six hours, the storm having somewhat moderated,
we sailed east towards the shore; but before the day was over we
encountered a cross-sea, the waves coming in every direction and
striking against each other. The man at the helm had to watch them.
Evidently there had been two or three heavy storms blowing in different
directions. A cross-sea is very dangerous, for the man at the helm never
knows where the wave will strike. After a while the wind shifted and was
ahead, and now we had to beat against it and we sailed under close
reefed sails. The wind seemed ten times stronger than before, for when a
ship runs before the wind, the wind is not felt so much, as it goes with
the ship.
