before they are half through. The pace quickens into a sharp run, the
tail hounds all straining to get up to the lucky leaders. They are
gallant hares, and the scent lies thick right across another meadow and
into a ploughed field, where the pace begins to tell; then over a good
wattle with a ditch on the other side, and down a large pasture studded
with old thorns, which slopes down to the first brook. The great
Leicestershire sheep charge away across the field as the pack comes
racing down the slope. The brook is a small one, and the scent lies
right ahead up the opposite slope, and as thick as ever--not a turn or
a check to favour the tail hounds, who strain on, now trailing in a long
line, many a youngster beginning to drag his legs heavily, and feel his
heart beat like a hammer, and the bad-plucked ones thinking that after
all it isn't worth while to keep it up.

Tom, East, and the Tadpole had a good start, and are well up for such
young hands, and after rising the slope and crossing the next field,
find themselves up with the leading hounds, who have overrun the scent,
and are trying back. They have come a mile and a half in about eleven
minutes, a pace which shows that it is the last day. About twenty-five
of the original starters only show here, the rest having already given
in; the leaders are busy making casts into the fields on the left and
right, and the others get their second winds.

Then comes the cry of "Forward" again from young Brooke, from the
extreme left, and the pack settles down to work again steadily and
doggedly, the whole keeping pretty well together. The scent, though
still good, is not so thick; there is no need of that, for in this part
of the run every one knows the line which must be taken, and so there
are no casts to be made, but good downright running and fencing to be
done. All who are now up mean coming in, and they come to the foot of
Barby Hill without losing more than two or three more of the pack. This
last straight two miles and a half is always a vantage ground for the
hounds, and the hares know it well; they are generally viewed on the
side of Barby Hill, and all eyes are on the lookout for them to-day. But
not a sign of them appears, so now will be the hard work for the hounds,
and there is nothing for it but to cast about for the scent, for it is
now the hares' turn, and they may baffle the pack dreadfully in the next
two miles.

Ill fares it now with our youngsters, that they are School-house boys,
and so follow young Brooke, for he takes the wide casts round to the
left, conscious of his own powers, and loving the hard work. For if you
would consider for a moment, you small boys, you would remember that the
Cock, where the run ends and the good ale will be going, lies far out to
the right on the Dunchurch road, so that every cast you take to the left
is so much extra work. And at this stage of the run, when the evening is
closing in already, no one remarks whether you run a little cunning or
not; so you should stick to those crafty hounds who keep edging away to
the right, and not follow a prodigal like young Brooke, whose legs are
twice as long as yours and of cast-iron, wholly indifferent to one or
two miles more or less. However, they struggle after him, sobbing and
plunging along, Tom and East pretty close, and Tadpole, whose big head
begins to pull him down, some thirty yards behind.

Now comes a brook, with stiff clay banks, from which they can hardly
drag their legs, and they hear faint cries for help from the wretched
Tadpole, who has fairly stuck fast. But they have too little run left
in themselves to pull up for their own brothers. Three fields more, and
another check, and then "Forward" called away to the extreme right.

The two boys' souls die within them; they can never do it. Young Brooke
thinks so too, and says kindly, "You'll cross a lane after next field;
keep down it, and you'll hit the Dunchurch road below the Cock," and
then steams away for the run in, in which he's sure to be first, as
if he were just starting. They struggle on across the next field, the
"forwards" getting fainter and fainter, and then ceasing. The whole hunt
is out of ear-shot, and all hope of coming in is over.

"Hang it all!" broke out East, as soon as he had got wind enough,
pulling off his hat and mopping at his face, all spattered with dirt and
lined with sweat, from which went up a thick steam into the still, cold
air. "I told you how it would be. What a thick I was to come! Here we
are, dead beat, and yet I know we're close to the run in, if we knew the
country."

"Well," said Tom, mopping away, and gulping down his disappointment,
"it can't be helped. We did our best anyhow. Hadn't we better find this
lane, and go down it, as young Brooke told us?"

"I suppose so--nothing else for it," grunted East. "If ever I go out
last day again." Growl, growl, growl.

So they tried back slowly and sorrowfully, and found the lane, and went
limping down it, plashing in the cold puddly ruts, and beginning to feel
how the run had taken it out of them. The evening closed in fast, and
clouded over, dark, cold, and dreary.

"I say, it must be locking-up, I should think," remarked East, breaking
the silence--"it's so dark."

"What if we're late?" said Tom.

"No tea, and sent up to the Doctor," answered East.

The thought didn't add to their cheerfulness. Presently a faint halloo
was heard from an adjoining field. They answered it and stopped, hoping
for some competent rustic to guide them, when over a gate some twenty
yards ahead crawled the wretched Tadpole, in a state of collapse. He had
lost a shoe in the brook, and had been groping after it up to his elbows
in the stiff, wet clay, and a more miserable creature in the shape of
boy seldom has been seen.

The sight of him, notwithstanding, cheered them, for he was some degrees
more wretched than they. They also cheered him, as he was no longer
under the dread of passing his night alone in the fields. And so, in
better heart, the three plashed painfully down the never-ending lane. At
last it widened, just as utter darkness set in, and they came out on
a turnpike road, and there paused, bewildered, for they had lost all
bearings, and knew not whether to turn to the right or left.

Luckily for them they had not to decide, for lumbering along the road,
with one lamp lighted and two spavined horses in the shafts, came a
heavy coach, which after a moment's suspense they recognized as the
Oxford coach, the redoubtable Pig and Whistle.

It lumbered slowly up, and the boys, mustering their last run, caught
it as it passed, and began clambering up behind, in which exploit East
missed his footing and fell flat on his nose along the road. Then the
others hailed the old scarecrow of a coachman, who pulled up and agreed
to take them in for a shilling; so there they sat on the back seat,
drubbing with their heels, and their teeth chattering with cold, and
jogged into Rugby some forty minutes after locking-up.

Five minutes afterwards three small, limping, shivering figures steal
along through the Doctor's garden, and into the house by the servants'
entrance (all the other gates have been closed long since), where the
first thing they light upon in the passage is old Thomas, ambling along,
candle in one hand and keys in the other.

He stops and examines their condition with a grim smile. "Ah! East,
Hall, and Brown, late for locking-up. Must go up to the Doctor's study
at once."

"Well but, Thomas, mayn't we go and wash first? You can put down the
time, you know."

"Doctor's study d'rectly you come in--that's the orders," replied old
Thomas, motioning towards the stairs at the end of the passage which led
up into the Doctor's house; and the boys turned ruefully down it, not
cheered by the old verger's muttered remark, "What a pickle they boys be
in!" Thomas referred to their faces and habiliments, but they construed
it as indicating the Doctor's state of mind. Upon the short flight of
stairs they paused to hold counsel.

"Who'll go in first?" inquires Tadpole.

"You--you're the senior," answered East.

"Catch me. Look at the state I'm in," rejoined Hall, showing the arms of
his jacket. "I must get behind you two."

"Well, but look at me," said East, indicating the mass of clay behind
which he was standing; "I'm worse than you, two to one. You might grow
cabbages on my trousers."

"That's all down below, and you can keep your legs behind the sofa,"
said Hall.

"Here, Brown; you're the show-figure. You must lead."

"But my face is all muddy," argued Tom.

"Oh, we're all in one boat for that matter; but come on; we're only
making it worse, dawdling here."

"Well, just give us a brush then," said Tom. And they began trying to
rub off the superfluous dirt from each other's jackets; but it was not
dry enough, and the rubbing made them worse; so in despair they pushed
through the swing-door at the head of the stairs, and found themselves
in the Doctor's hall.

"That's the library door," said East in a whisper, pushing Tom forwards.
The sound of merry voices and laughter came from within, and his first
hesitating knock was unanswered. But at the second, the Doctor's voice
said, "Come in;" and Tom turned the handle, and he, with the others
behind him, sidled into the room.

The Doctor looked up from his task; he was working away with a great
chisel at the bottom of a boy's sailing boat, the lines of which he was
no doubt fashioning on the model of one of Nicias's galleys. Round him
stood three or four children; the candles burnt brightly on a large
table at the farther end, covered with books and papers, and a great
fire threw a ruddy glow over the rest of the room. All looked so kindly,
and homely, and comfortable that the boys took heart in a moment, and
Tom advanced from behind the shelter of the great sofa. The Doctor
nodded to the children, who went out, casting curious and amused glances
at the three young scarecrows.

"Well, my little fellows," began the Doctor, drawing himself up with
his back to the fire, the chisel in one hand and his coat-tails in the
other, and his eyes twinkling as he looked them over; "what makes you so
late?"

"Please, sir, we've been out big-side hare-and-hounds, and lost our
way."

"Hah! you couldn't keep up, I suppose?"

"Well, sir," said East, stepping out, and not liking that the Doctor
should think lightly of his running powers, "we got round Barby all
right; but then--"

"Why, what a state you're in, my boy!" interrupted the Doctor, as the
pitiful condition of East's garments was fully revealed to him.

"That's the fall I got, sir, in the road," said East, looking down at
himself; "the Old Pig came by--"

"The what?" said the Doctor.

"The Oxford coach, sir," explained Hall.

"Hah! yes, the Regulator," said the Doctor.

"And I tumbled on my face, trying to get up behind," went on East.

"You're not hurt, I hope?" said the Doctor.

"Oh no, sir."

"Well now, run upstairs, all three of you, and get clean things on, and
then tell the housekeeper to give you some tea. You're too young to try
such long runs. Let Warner know I've seen you. Good-night."

"Good-night, sir." And away scuttled the three boys in high glee.

"What a brick, not to give us even twenty lines to learn!" said the
Tadpole, as they reached their bedroom; and in half an hour afterwards
they were sitting by the fire in the housekeeper's room at a sumptuous
tea, with cold meat--"Twice as good a grub as we should have got in the
hall," as the Tadpole remarked with a grin, his mouth full of buttered
toast. All their grievances were forgotten, and they were resolving to
go out the first big-side next half, and thinking hare-and-hounds the
most delightful of games.

A day or two afterwards the great passage outside the bedrooms was
cleared of the boxes and portmanteaus, which went down to be packed by
the matron, and great games of chariot-racing, and cock-fighting, and
bolstering went on in the vacant space, the sure sign of a closing
half-year.

Then came the making up of parties for the journey home, and Tom joined
a party who were to hire a coach, and post with four horses to Oxford.

Then the last Saturday, on which the Doctor came round to each form to
give out the prizes, and hear the master's last reports of how they
and their charges had been conducting themselves; and Tom, to his huge
delight, was praised, and got his remove into the lower fourth, in which
all his School-house friends were.

On the next Tuesday morning at four o'clock hot coffee was going on in
the housekeeper's and matron's rooms; boys wrapped in great-coats and
mufflers were swallowing hasty mouthfuls, rushing about, tumbling over
luggage, and asking questions all at once of the matron; outside the
School-gates were drawn up several chaises and the four-horse coach
which Tom's party had chartered, the postboys in their best jackets and
breeches, and a cornopean player, hired for the occasion, blowing away
"A southerly wind and a cloudy sky," waking all peaceful inhabitants
half-way down the High Street.

Every minute the bustle and hubbub increased: porters staggered about
with boxes and bags, the cornopean played louder. Old Thomas sat in
his den with a great yellow bag by his side, out of which he was paying
journey-money to each boy, comparing by the light of a solitary dip the
dirty, crabbed little list in his own handwriting with the Doctor's list
and the amount of his cash; his head was on one side, his mouth screwed
up, and his spectacles dim from early toil. He had prudently locked the
door, and carried on his operations solely through the window, or he
would have been driven wild and lost all his money.

"Thomas, do be quick; we shall never catch the Highflyer at Dunchurch."

"That's your money all right, Green."

"Hullo, Thomas, the Doctor said I was to have two pound ten; you've only
given me two pound." (I fear that Master Green is not confining himself
strictly to truth.) Thomas turns his head more on one side than ever,
and spells away at the dirty list. Green is forced away from the window.

"Here, Thomas--never mind him; mine's thirty shillings." "And mine too,"
"And mine," shouted others.

One way or another, the party to which Tom belonged all got packed and
paid, and sallied out to the gates, the cornopean playing frantically
"Drops of Brandy," in allusion, probably, to the slight potations in
which the musician and postboys had been already indulging. All luggage
was carefully stowed away inside the coach and in the front and hind
boots, so that not a hat-box was visible outside. Five or six small
boys, with pea-shooters, and the cornopean player, got up behind; in
front the big boys, mostly smoking, not for pleasure, but because they
are now gentlemen at large, and this is the most correct public method
of notifying the fact.

"Robinson's coach will be down the road in a minute; it has gone up to
Bird's to pick up. We'll wait till they're close, and make a race of
it," says the leader. "Now, boys, half a sovereign apiece if you beat
'em into Dunchurch by one hundred yards."

"All right, sir," shouted the grinning postboys.

Down comes Robinson's coach in a minute or two, with a rival cornopean,
and away go the two vehicles, horses galloping, boys cheering, horns
playing loud. There is a special providence over school-boys as well
as sailors, or they must have upset twenty times in the first five
miles--sometimes actually abreast of one another, and the boys on the
roofs exchanging volleys of peas; now nearly running over a post-chaise
which had started before them; now half-way up a bank; now with a wheel
and a half over a yawning ditch: and all this in a dark morning, with
nothing but their own lamps to guide them. However, it's all over at
last, and they have run over nothing but an old pig in Southam Street.
The last peas are distributed in the Corn Market at Oxford, where they
arrive between eleven and twelve, and sit down to a sumptuous breakfast
at the Angel, which they are made to pay for accordingly. Here the party
breaks up, all going now different ways; and Tom orders out a chaise and
pair as grand as a lord, though he has scarcely five shillings left in
his pocket, and more than twenty miles to get home.

"Where to, sir?"

"Red Lion, Farringdon," says Tom, giving hostler a shilling.

"All right, sir.--Red Lion, Jem," to the postboy; and Tom rattles away
towards home. At Farringdon, being known to the innkeeper, he gets that
worthy to pay for the Oxford horses, and forward him in another chaise
at once; and so the gorgeous young gentleman arrives at the paternal
mansion, and Squire Brown looks rather blue at having to pay two pound
ten shillings for the posting expenses from Oxford. But the boy's
intense joy at getting home, and the wonderful health he is in, and the
good character he brings, and the brave stories he tells of Rugby, its
doings and delights, soon mollify the Squire, and three happier people
didn't sit down to dinner that day in England (it is the boy's first
dinner at six o'clock at home--great promotion already) than the Squire
and his wife and Tom Brown, at the end of his first half-year at Rugby.



CHAPTER VIII--THE WAR OF INDEPENDENCE.

     "They are slaves who will not choose
     Hatred, scoffing, and abuse,
     Rather than in silence shrink
     From the truth they needs must think;
     They are slaves who dare not be
     In the right with two or three."
     --LOWELL, Stanzas on Freedom.

The lower-fourth form, in which Tom found himself at the beginning
of the next half-year, was the largest form in the lower school, and
numbered upwards of forty boys. Young gentlemen of all ages from nine to
fifteen were to be found there, who expended such part of their energies
as was devoted to Latin and Greek upon a book of Livy, the "Bucolics"
of Virgil, and the "Hecuba" of Euripides, which were ground out in small
daily portions. The driving of this unlucky lower-fourth must have been
grievous work to the unfortunate master, for it was the most unhappily
constituted of any in the school. Here stuck the great stupid boys,
who, for the life of them, could never master the accidence--the objects
alternately of mirth and terror to the youngsters, who were daily taking
