[Footnote 444: Job: 38.]

[Footnote 445: Proverbs.]

THEODORE. I have learned in the schools that the spheres are not moved
of themselves but that they have separate intelligences who incite
them to movement.

MYST. That is the doctrine of Aristotle. But Theophrastus and
Alexander,[446] (when they teach that the spheres are animated bodies)
explain adequately that the spheres are agitated by their own
coessential soul. For if the sky were turned by an intelligence
external to it, its movement would be accidental with the result that
it, and the stars with it, would not be moved otherwise, than as a
body without soul. But accidental motion is violent. And nothing
violent in nature can be of long duration. On the contrary there is
nothing of longer duration, nor more constant, than the movement of
the heavens.

[Footnote 446: Metaphysics: II. c. 6, de Coelo. I. c. 6.]

THEO. What do you call fixed stars?

MYST. Celestial beings who are gifted with intelligence and with
light, and who are in continual motion. This is sufficiently indicated
by the words of Daniel[447] when he wrote, that the souls of those who
have walked justly in this life, and who have brought men back to the
path of virtue, all have their seat and dwelling (like the gleaming
stars) among the heavens. By these words one can plainly understand
the essence and figure of the angels as well as of the celestial
beings; for while other beings have their places in this universe
assigned to them for their habitation, as the fish the sea, the cattle
the fields, and the wild beasts the mountains and forests, even as
Origen,[448] Eusebius, and Diodorus say, so the stars are assigned
positions in the heavens. This can also be understood by the curtains
of the tabernacle which Moses, the great Lawgiver, had ornamented with
the images of cherubim showing that the heavens were indicated by the
angelic faces of the stars. While St. Augustine,[449] Jerome,[450]
Thomas Aquinas[451] and Scotus most fitly called this universe a
being, nevertheless Albertus, Damascenus, and Thomas Aquinas deny that
the heavenly bodies are animated. But Thomas Aquinas shows himself in
this inconsistent and contradictory, for he confesses that spiritual
substances are united with the heavenly bodies, which could not be
unless they were united in the same hypostasis of an animated body. If
this body is animated, it must necessarily be living and either
rational or irrational. If, on the other hand, this spiritual
substance does not make the same hypostasis with the celestial body,
it will necessarily be that the movement of the sky is accidental, as
coming from the mover outside to the thing moved, no more nor less
than the movement of a wheel comes from the one who turns it: As this
is absurd, what follows from it is necessarily absurd also.

[Footnote 447: In his last chapter.]

[Footnote 448: Which is confirmed by Pico of Mirandola: Heptaplus: Bk.
V.]

[Footnote 449: Enchiridion: cap. 43; Gen.: 2 and 18.]

[Footnote 450: On Psalm: Audite coeli.]

[Footnote 451: Summa: pt. 1, art. 3, ques. 70.]

THEO. How many spheres are there?

MYST. It is difficult to determine their number because of the variety
of opinions among the authorities, each differing from the other, and
because of the inadequacy of the proofs of such things. For Eudoxus
has stated that the spheres with their deferents are not more than
three and twenty in number. Calippus has put it at thirty, and
Aristotle[452] at forty-seven, which Alexander Aphrodisiensis[453] has
amended by adding to it two more on the advice of Sosigenes. Ptolemy
holds that there are 31 celestial spheres not including the bodies of
the planets. Johan Regiomontanus says 33, an opinion which is followed
by nearly all, because in the time of Ptolemy they did not yet know
that the eighth sphere and all the succeeding ones are carried around
by the movement of the trepidation. Thus he held that the moon has
five orbits, Mercury six, Venus, Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn each four,
aside from the bodies of the planets themselves, for beyond these are
still the spheres and deferents of the eighth and ninth spheres. But
Copernicus, reviving Eudoxus' idea, held that the earth moved around
the motionless sun; and he has also removed the epicycles with the
result that he has greatly reduced their number, so that one can
scarcely find eight spheres remaining.

[Footnote 452: Metaphy. XII.]

[Footnote 453: In his commentaries on Book XII of Metaph. where he
gives the opinion of Calippus and Eudoxus.]

THEO. What should one do with such a variety of opinions?

MYST. Have recourse to the sacred fountain of the Hebrews to search
out the mysteries of a thing so deeply hidden from man; for from them
we may obtain an absolutely certain decision. The Tabernacle which the
great Lawgiver Moses ordered to be made[454] was like the Archetype of
the universe, with its ten curtains placed around it each decorated
with the figures of cherubim thus representing the ten heavens with
the beauty of their resplendent stars. And even though Aben-Ezra did
not know of the movement of trepidation, nevertheless he interpreted
this passage, "The heavens are the work of Thy fingers" as indicating
the number of the ten celestial spheres. The Pythagoreans seem also to
have agreed upon the same number since, besides the earth and the
eight heavens, they imagine a sphere Anticthon because they did not
then clearly understand the celestial movements. They thought however,
all should be embraced in the tenth.

[Footnote 454: Ex. XVIII and following. Philo Judaeus in the
Allegories.]

THEO. The authority of such writers has indeed so great weight with me
that I place their statements far in advance of the arguments of all
others. Nevertheless if it can be done, I should wish to have this
illustrated and confirmed by argument in order to satisfy those who
believe nothing except on absolute proof.

MYST. It can indeed be proved that there are ten mobile spheres in
which the fiery bodies accomplish their regular courses. Yet by these
arguments that ultimate, motionless sphere which embraces and
encircles all from our terrestial abode to its circumference within
its crystalline self, encompassing plainly the utmost shores and
limits of the universe, cannot be proved. For as it has been shown
before [in Book I] the elemental world was inundated by celestial
waters from above. Nor can it apparently be included in the number of
the spheres since (as we will point out later) as great a distance
exists between it and the nearest sphere as between the ocean and the
starry heaven. Furthermore it has been said before that the essence
of the spheres consists of fire and water which is not fitting for the
celestial waters above.

THEO. By what arguments then can it be proved there are ten spheres?

MYST. The ancients knew well that there were the seven spheres of the
planets, and an eighth sphere of the fixed stars which, down to the
time of Eudoxus and Meto, they thought had but one simple movement.
These men were the first who perceived by observation that the fixed
stars were carried backward quite contrary to the movement of the
Primum Mobile. After them came Timochares, Hipparchus, and Menelaus,
and later Ptolemy, who confirmed these observations perceiving that
the fixed stars (which people had hitherto thought were fixed in their
places) had been separated from their station. For this reason they
thought best to add a ninth sphere to the eight inferior ones. Much
later an Arabian and a Spanish king, Mensor and Alphonse, great
students of the celestial sciences, in their observations noticed that
the eighth sphere with the seven following moved in turning from the
north to the east, then towards the south, and so to the west, finally
returning to the north, and that such a movement was completed in 7000
years. This Johannus Regiomontanus, a Franconian, has proved, with a
skill hitherto equalled only by that of those who proved the ninth
sphere, which travels from west to east. From this it is necessarily
concluded that there are ten spheres.

THEO. Why so?

MYST. Because every natural body[455] has but one movement which is
its own by nature; all others are either voluntary or through
violence, contrary to the nature of a mobile object; for just as a
stone cannot of its own impulse ascend and descend, so one and the
same sphere cannot of itself turn from the east to the west and from
the west to the east and still less from the north to the south and
south to north.

[Footnote 455: Aristotle: Metaph. II and XII and de Coelo I.]

THEO. What then?

MYST. It follows from this that the extremely rapid movement by which
all the spheres are revolved in twenty-four hours, belongs to the
Primum Mobile, which we call the tenth sphere, and which carries with
it all the nine lesser spheres; that the second or planetary movement,
that is, from west to east, is communicated to the lesser spheres and
belongs to the ninth sphere; that the third movement, resembling a
person staggering, belongs to the eighth sphere with which it affects
the other lesser spheres and makes them stagger in a measure outside
of the poles, axes and centres of the greater spheres.


_Section 10_: On the position of the universe according to its
divisions.

* * * *

THEO. Does it not also concern Physics to discuss those things that
lie outside the universe?

MYST. If there were any natural body beyond the heavens, most
assuredly it would concern Physics, that is, the observer and student
of nature. But in the book of Origins,[456] the Master workman is said
to have separated the waters and placed the firmament in between them.
The Hebrew philosophers declare that the crystalline sphere which
Ezekiel[457] called the great crystal and upon which he saw God
seated, as he wrote, is as far beyond the farthermost heaven as our
ocean is far from that heaven, and that this orb is motionless and
therefore is called God's throne. For "seat" implies quiet and
tranquility which could be proper for none other than the one immobile
and immutable God. This is far more probable and likely than
Aristotle's absurd idea, unworthy the name of a philosopher, by which
he placed the eternal God in a moving heaven as if He were its source
of motion and in such fashion that He was constrained of necessity to
move it. We have already refuted this idea. It has also been shown
that these celestial waters full of fertility and productiveness
sometimes are spread abroad more widely and sometimes less so, as
though obviously restrained, whence the heavens are said to be
closed[458] and roofed[459] with clouds or that floods burst forth out
of the heaven to inundate the earth. Finally we read in the Holy
Scriptures that the eternal God is seated upon the flood.

[Footnote 456: Gen.: 1.]

[Footnote 457: Chap. 1 and 10. Exod.: 24.]

[Footnote 458: I Kings: 8. Deut.: 28.]

[Footnote 459: Psalm 146.]

THEO. Why then are not eleven spheres counted?

MYST. Because the crystalline sphere is said to have been separated
from the inferior waters by the firmament, and it therefore cannot be
called a heaven. Furthermore motion is proper to all the heavens, but
the crystalline one is stationary. That is why Rabi Akiba called[460]
it a marble counterpart of the universe. This also is signified in the
construction of the altar which was covered with a pavilion in
addition to its ten curtains for, as it is stated elsewhere,[461] God
covers the heavens with clouds, and the Scriptures often make mention
of the waters beyond the heavens.[462] There are those, however, who
teach that the Hebrew word _Scamajim_ may be applied only to a dual
number, so that they take it to mean the crystalline sphere and the
starry one. But I think those words in Solomon's speech[463] "the
heaven of heaven, and the heavens of the heavens" refer in the
singular to the crystalline sphere, in the plural to the ten lesser
spheres.

[Footnote 460: According to Maymon: Perplexorum, III.]

[Footnote 461: Psalm 147.]

[Footnote 462: Psalm 148. Gen. 1 and 7.]

[Footnote 463: Also in Psalm 67 and 123.]

THEO. It does not seem so marvelous to me that an aqueous or
crystalline sphere exists beyond the ten spheres, as that it is as far
beyond the furthermost sphere as the ocean is far this side of it,
that is, as astrologists teach, 1040 terrestrial diameters.

MYST. It is written most plainly that the firmament holds the middle
place between the two waters. Therefore God is called[464] in Hebrew
_Helion_, the Sun, that is, the Most High, and under His feet the
heaven is spread like a crystal,[465] although He is neither excluded
nor included in any part of the universe, it is however consistent
with His Majesty to be above all the spheres and to fill heaven and
earth with His infinite power as Isaiah[466] indicated when he writes:
"His train filled the temple;" it is the purest and simplest act, the
others are brought about by forces and powers. He alone is
incorporeal, others are corporeal or joined to bodies. He alone is
eternal, others according to their nature are transitory and fleeting
unless they are strengthened by the Creator's might; wherefore the
Chaldean interpreter is seen everywhere to have used the words,
Majesty, Glory or Power in place of the presence of God.

[Footnote 464: Psalm 92.]

[Footnote 465: Exod. 24. Ezek. 1, 10.]

[Footnote 466: Isa. 6.]

THEO. Nevertheless so vast and limitless a space must be filled with
air or fire, since there are no spheres there, nor will nature suffer
any vacuum.

MYST. If then the firmament occupies the middle position between the
two waters, then by this hypothesis you must admit that the space
beyond the spheres is empty of elemental and celestial bodies;
otherwise you would have to admit that the last sphere extends on even
to the crystalline orb, which can in no way be reconciled with the
Holy Scriptures and still less with reason because of the incredible
velocity of this sphere. Therefore it is far more probable that this
space is filled with angels.

THEO. Is there some medium between God and the angels which shares in
the nature of both?

MYST. What is incorporeal and indivisible cannot communicate any part
of its essence to another; for if a creature had any part of the
divine essence, it would be all God, since God neither has parts nor
can be divided, therefore He must be separated from all corporeal
contact or intermixture.


_Section 12_: On guardian angels.

THEO. What then in corporeal nature is closest to God?

MYST. The two Seraphim, who stand near the eternal Creator,[467] and
who are said to have six wings, two wherewith to fly, the others to
cover head and feet. By this is signified the admirable swiftness with
which they fulfill His commands, yet head and feet are veiled for so
the purpose of their origin and its earliest beginning are not known
to us. Also they have eyes scattered in all parts of their bodies to
indicate that nothing is hidden from them. And they also pour oil for
lighting through a funnel into the seven-branched candlestick; that
is, strength and power are poured forth by the Creator to the seven
planets, so that we should turn from created things to the worship and
love of the Creator.

[Footnote 467: Isa. 6. Ezek. 1 and 10. Zach. 4. Exod. 24, 25.]

THEO. Since nothing is more fitting for the Divine goodness than to
create, to generate, and to pile up good things for all, whence comes
the destruction of the world and the ruin of all created things?

MYST. It is true Plato and Aristotle attributed the cause of all ills
to the imperfection of matter in which they thought was some
_kakopoion_,[468] but that is absurd since it is distinctly written:
All that God had made was good, or as the Hebrews express it,
beautiful,--so evil is nothing-else than the absence[469] or privation
of good.

[Footnote 468: Maleficium quidam, _i.e._, some evil-power. Job 5.]

[Footnote 469: Augustine against Faustus wrote that vanity is not
produced from the dust, nor evil from the earth.]

THEO. Can not wicked angels be defined without privation since they
are corporeal essences?

MYST. Anything that exists is said to be good and to be a participant
by its existence in the divine goodness; and even as in a well
regulated Republic, executioners, lictors, and corpse-bearers are no
less necessary than magistrates, judges and overseers; so in the
Republic of this world, for the generation, management and
guardianship of things God has gathered together angels as leaders and
directors for all the celestial places, for the elements, for living
beings, for plants, for minerals, for states, provinces, families and
individuals. And not only has He done this, but He has also assigned
His servants, lictors, avengers and others to places where they may do
nothing without His order, nor inflict any punishment upon wicked men
unless the affair has been known fully and so decided. Thus God is
said[470] to have made Leviathan, which is the outflow of Himself,
that is, the natural rise and fall of all things. "I have created a
killer,"[471] He said, "to destroy," and so also Behemoth, and the
demons cleaving to him, which are often called ravens, eagles and
lions, and which are said to beg their food of God, that is, the
taking of vengeance upon the wicked whose punishment and death they
feed upon as upon ordinary fare. From these, therefore, or rather from
