The Project Gutenberg eBook, Subspace Survivors, by E. E. Smith


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: Subspace Survivors


Author: E. E. Smith



Release Date: May 30, 2007  [eBook #21647]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SUBSPACE SURVIVORS***


E-text prepared by Robert Cicconetti, L. N. Yaddanapudi, and the Project
Gutenberg Online Distributed Proofreading Team (http://www.pgdp.net)



Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original illustrations.
      See 21647-h.htm or 21647-h.zip:
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/2/1/6/4/21647/21647-h/21647-h.htm)
      or
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/2/1/6/4/21647/21647-h.zip)


      +--------------------------------------------------------------+
      | Transcriber's Notes and Errata                               |
      |                                                              |
      | This e-text was produced from Astounding Science Fact and    |
      | Fiction, July 1960. Extensive research did not uncover any   |
      | evidence that the U. S. copyright on this publication was    |
      | renewed.                                                     |
      |                                                              |
      | A few typographical errors have been marked in the text with |
      | a nearby footnote.                                           |
      |                                                              |
      | There was one instance each of 'hyperspace' and              |
      | 'hyper-space'. There was one instance of 'hook-up' and one   |
      | of 'hookups'. These hyphenations were not changed.           |
      +--------------------------------------------------------------+





SUBSPACE SURVIVORS

by

EDWARD E. SMITH, Ph. D.

Illustrated by van Dongen







  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  | _There has always been, and will always be, the problem of   |
  | surviving the experience that any trained expert can handle  |
  | ... when there hasn't been any first survivor to be an       |
  | expert! When no one has ever gotten back to explain what     |
  | happened...._                                                |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+


I.

"All passengers, will you[1] pay attention, please?" All the
high-fidelity speakers of the starship _Procyon_ spoke as one, in the
skillfully-modulated voice of the trained announcer. "This is the fourth
and last cautionary announcement. Any who are not seated will seat
themselves at once. Prepare for take-off acceleration of one and
one-half gravities; that is, everyone will weigh one-half again as much
as his normal Earth weight for about fifteen minutes. We lift in twenty
seconds; I will count down the final five seconds.... Five ... Four ...
Three ... Two ... One ... Lift!"

    [1] Transcriber's Note: The original read "will pay attention,
    please?"

[Illustration]

The immense vessel rose from her berth; slowly at first, but with
ever-increasing velocity; and in the main lounge, where many of the
passengers had gathered to watch the dwindling Earth, no one moved for
the first five minutes. Then a girl stood up.

She was not a startlingly beautiful girl; no more so than can be seen
fairly often, of a summer afternoon, on Seaside Beach. Her hair was an
artificial yellow. Her eyes were a deep, cool blue. Her skin, what could
be seen of it--she was wearing breeches and a long-sleeved shirt--was
lightly tanned. She was only about five-feet-three, and her build was
not spectacular. However, every ounce of her one hundred fifteen pounds
was exactly where it should have been.

First she stood tentatively, flexing her knees and testing her weight.
Then, stepping boldly out into a clear space, she began to do a
high-kicking acrobatic dance; and went on doing it as effortlessly and
as rhythmically as though she were on an Earthly stage.

"You mustn't _do_ that, Miss!" A stewardess came bustling up. Or,
rather, not exactly bustling. Very few people, and almost no
stewardesses, either actually bustle in or really enjoy one point five
gees. "You really _must_ resume your seat, Miss. I must insist.... Oh,
you're Miss Warner...."

She paused.

"That's right, Barbara Warner. Cabin two eight one."

"But really, Miss Warner, it's regulations, and if you should fall...."

"Foosh to regulations, and _pfui_ on 'em. I won't fall. I've been
wondering, every time out, if I could do a thing, and now I'm going to
find out."

Jackknifing double, she put both forearms flat on the carpet and lifted
both legs into the vertical. Then, silver slippers pointing motionlessly
ceilingward, she got up onto her hands and walked twice around a vacant
chair. She then performed a series of flips that would have done credit
to a professional acrobat; the finale of which left her sitting calmly
in the previously empty seat.

"See?" she informed the flabbergasted stewardess. "I _could_ do it, and
I didn't...."

Her voice was drowned out in a yell of approval as everybody who could
clap their hands did so with enthusiasm. "More!" "Keep it up, gal!" "Do
it again!"

"Oh, I didn't do that to show off!" Barbara Warner flushed hotly as she
met the eyes of the nearby spectators. "Honestly I didn't--I just _had_
to know if I could." Then, as the applause did not die down, she fairly
scampered out of the room.

       *       *       *       *       *

For one hour before the _Procyon's_ departure from Earth and for three
hours afterward, First Officer Carlyle Deston, Chief Electronicist, sat
attentively at his board. He was five feet eight inches tall and weighed
one hundred sixty-two pounds net. Just a little guy, as spacemen go.
Although narrow-waisted and, for his heft, broad-shouldered, he was
built for speed and maneuverability, not to haul freight.

Watching a hundred lights and half that many instruments, listening to
two phone circuits, one with each ear, and hands moving from switches to
rheostats to buttons and levers, he was completely informed as to the
instant-by-instant status of everything in his department.

Although attentive, he was not tense, even during the countdown. The
only change was that at the word "Two" his right forefinger came to rest
upon a red button and his eyes doubled their rate of scan. If anything
in his department had gone wrong, the _Procyon_'s departure would have
been delayed.

And again, well out beyond the orbit of the moon, just before the
starship's mighty Chaytor engines hurled her out of space as we know it
into that unknowable something that is hyperspace, he poised a finger.
But Immergence, too, was normal; all the green lights except one went
out, needles dropped to zero, both phones went dead, all signals
stopped. He plugged a jack into a socket below the one remaining green
light and spoke:

"Procyon One to Control Six. Flight Eight Four Nine. Subspace Radio Test
One. How do you read me, Control Six?"

"Control Six to Procyon One. I read you ten and zero. How do you read
me, Procyon One?"

"Ten and zero. Out." Deston flipped a toggle and the solitary green
light went out.

Perfect signal and zero noise. That was that. From now until
Emergence--unless something happened--he might as well be a passenger.
Everything was automatic, unless and until some robot or computer yelled
for help. Deston leaned back in his bucket seat and lighted a cigarette.
He didn't need to scan the board constantly now; any trouble signal
would jump right out at him.

Promptly at Dee plus Three Zero Zero--three hours, no minutes, no
seconds after departure--his relief appeared.

"All black, Babe?" the newcomer asked.

"As the pit, Eddie. Take over." Eddie did so. "You've picked out your
girl friend for the trip, I suppose?"

"Not yet. I got sidetracked watching Bobby Warner. She was doing
handstands and handwalks and forward and back flips in the lounge--under
one point five gees yet. _Wow!_ And after that all the other women
