
This compost when cooked in a frying-pan is exceedingly rich and
satisfying--not to say heavy--food, but it does not incommode such as La
Certe and his wife.  It even made the latter feel amiably disposed to
Cloudbrow.

This _sobriquet_ had been given by the half-breeds to a young Scotch
settler named Duncan McKay, in consequence of the dark frown which had
settled habitually on his brow--the result of bad temper and unbridled
passion.  He was younger brother to that Fergus who has already been
introduced to the reader.  Having been partially trained, while in
Scotland, away from the small farm-house of his father, and having
received a better education, Duncan conceived himself to stand on a
higher level than the sedate and uneducated Fergus.  Thus pride was
added to his bad temper.  But he was not altogether destitute of good
points.  What man is?  One of these was a certain reckless
open-handedness, so that he was easily imposed on by the protestations
and assurances of the sly, plausible, and lazy La Certe.

The couple were still engaged in smoking, quaffing tea, and other
intellectual pursuits, when they heard sounds outside as of some one
approaching.  Another moment, and the door burst open, and a man in
white stepped in.  He saluted them with a familiar and hasty
"_bonjour_," as he stamped and beat the snow vigorously from his
garments.

"What?  Antoine Dechamp!" exclaimed La Certe, rising slowly to welcome
his friend; "you seem in hurry?"

"Ay--in great hurry!  They are starving on the plains!  Many are dead!
Davidson has come in!  He is more than half-dead!  Can hardly tell the
news!  Drops asleep when he is speaking!  Luckily I met him when going
home in my cariole!  Okematan, the Indian, was with me.  So he got out,
and said he would pilot Davidson safe home!  He said something about
Fergus McKay, which I could not understand, so I have come on, and will
drive to Fort Garry with the news!  But my horse has broke down!  Is
yours in the stable?"

Dechamp was a sturdy young half-breed and an old playmate of La Certe.
He spoke with obvious impatience at the delay caused by having so much
to tell.

"Is your horse in the stable?" he demanded sharply a second time, while
his friend began, with exasperating composure, to assure him that it
was, but that the horse was not his.

"Cloudbrow is its owner," he said, "and you know if anything happens to
it he will ---.  Stay, I will get you lantern--"

He stopped, for Dechamp, observing a large key hanging on the wall, had
seized it and rushed out of the hut without waiting for a lantern.

"Strange, how easy some men get into a fuss!" remarked La Certe to his
surprised, but quiet, spouse as he lighted a large tin lantern, and went
to the door.  Looking out with an expression of discomfort, he put on
his cap, and prepared to face the storm in the cause of humanity.  He
held the lantern high up first, however, and peered under it as if to
observe the full extent of the discomfort before braving it.  Just then
a furious gust blew out the light.

"Ha!  I expected that," he said, with a sigh that was strongly
suggestive of relief, as he returned to the fire to relight the lantern.

On going the second time to the door he observed the form of his friend
leading the horse past--both of them looking dim and spectral through
the driving snow.

"Dechamp have good eyes!" he remarked, halting on the threshold.  "There
is light enough without the lantern; besides--ha! there, it is out
again!  What a trouble it is!  Impossible to keep it in--such a night!"

"Hee! hee!" giggled Slowfoot, who was busy refilling her pipe.

La Certe was still standing in a state of hesitancy, troubled by a
strong desire to help his friend, and a stronger desire to spare
himself, when he was thrown somewhat off his wonted balance by the
sudden reappearance of Dechamp, leading, or rather supporting, a man.

Need we say that it was Fergus McKay, almost blind and dumb from
exhaustion, for the parting from Dan Davidson which we have mentioned
had proved to be the last straw which broke them both down, and it is
probable that the frozen corpse of poor Dan would have been found next
day on the snow, had he not been accidentally met by Dechamp, and taken
in charge by the Indian Okematan.  Fergus, having a shorter way to go,
and, perhaps, possessing a little more vitality or endurance, had just
managed to stagger to La Certe's hut when he encountered the same man
who, an hour previously, had met and saved his companion further down
the Settlement.

The moment Fergus entered the hut, he looked wildly round, and opened
his mouth as if to speak.  Then he suddenly collapsed, and fell in a
heap upon the floor, scattering flakes of snow from his person in all
directions.

La Certe and his wife, though steeped in selfishness, were by no means
insensible to the sufferings of humanity when these were actually made
visible to their naked eyes.  Like many--too many--people, they were
incapable of being impressed very deeply through their ears, but could
be keenly touched through the eyes.  No sooner did they behold the
condition of Fergus--who was well-known to them--than they dropped their
apathetic characters as though they had been garments.

In her haste Slowfoot let fall her pipe, which broke to atoms on the
floor--but she heeded it not.  La Certe capsized his mug of tea--but
regarded it not; and while the former proceeded to remove the shawl from
Fergus's neck and chafe his cold hands, the latter assisted Dechamp to
drag the exhausted man a little nearer to the fire, and poured a cup of
warm tea down his throat.

Their efforts, though perchance not as wisely directed as they might
have been, were so vigorously conducted that success rewarded them.
Fergus soon began to show signs of returning animation.  A hunter of the
western wilderness is not easily overcome, neither is he long of
reviving, as a rule, if not killed outright.

They set him up in a sitting posture with his back against a box, and
his feet towards the fire.  Heaving a deep sigh, Fergus looked round
with a bewildered, anxious expression.  In a moment intelligence
returned to his eyes, and he made a violent attempt to rise, but Dechamp
held him down.

"Let me up!" he gasped, "life and death are in the matter--if it iss not
death already--"

"Be still, Fergus McKay," said Dechamp, with that firmness of manner and
tone which somehow command respect; "I know all about it.  Take one bit
of bread, one swig more of tea, and you go with me to Fort Garry, to
tell the Gov'nor what you know.  He will send help at once."

Great was the relief of Fergus when he heard this.  Submitting to
treatment like an obedient child, he was soon fit to stagger to the
sleigh or cariole, into which he was carefully stuffed and packed like a
bale of goods by La Certe and his wife, who, to their credit be it
recorded, utterly ignored, for once, the discomforts of the situation.

Fergus was asleep before the packing was quite done.  Then Dechamp
jumped in beside him, and drove off in the direction of the Hudson's Bay
Company's establishment, Fort Garry, while our worthy couple returned to
their hut to indulge in a final and well-earned pipe and a mug of the
strongest possible tea.



CHAPTER THREE.

TO THE RESCUE.

Winnipeg city, with its thousands of inhabitants, now covers the spot to
which Antoine Dechamp drove his friend Fergus McKay.

At the time we write of, the only habitation there was Fort Garry, a
solitary stone building of some strength, but without regular troops of
any kind, and held only by a few employes of the Hudson's Bay Company,
who were there only in the capacity of fur-traders.

Here the Governor of the colony received the unexpected guests with
hospitality; heard the tale of Fergus with a sympathetic ear, and at
once organised a rescue-expedition with dog-sledges and provisions.

While this was being done at the fort, Dan Davidson was similarly
employed at Prairie Cottage, the residence of his mother, who, since the
death of her husband--a farmer from the Scottish Lowlands--had managed
her farm with the aid of her two sons, Dan and Peter; the latter being a
youth of seventeen.  She was also assisted by her only daughter, Jessie,
who was over thirteen years of age, and already esteemed an authority on
the subjects of poultry, cookery, and dairy produce.  A small servant--a
French half-breed named Louise--completed the household of the widow
Davidson.

On reaching home, Dan, like Fergus McKay, experienced difficulties that
he had not counted on, for his overtaxed strength fairly broke down, and
he found himself almost incapable at first of telling his tale of
disaster.  Then, when he tried to go about the needful preparations for
rescue, he found himself unable to resist drowsiness, and if he ventured
to sit down for a moment he fell sound asleep at once.

Those who have experienced this condition know how overwhelming and
intensely disagreeable it is, especially if resistance to it is rendered
imperative by a matter of life or death.  Davidson struggled bravely
against it of course, but the struggle had already been so long
continued that his efforts were now in vain.

Starting up from the supper which Jessie had spread before him, and
which he was languidly attempting to eat, he said, almost fiercely,
"Where is the wash-tub, Louise?"

The surprised little domestic pointed to the article in question.

"Here; fetch some cold water."

"It is full," said Louise with a strong French accent and a pretty lisp.

Without the ceremony even of throwing back his collar Dan plunged his
head into the water, and, after steeping it for a few seconds, drew it
out refreshed.

His younger brother entered the room at that moment.

"Peter," he said, drying his head violently with a jack-towel, "have you
got the sledge ready, and the provisions packed, and the empty sledge
wi' the buffalo-robes?"

"Ay--all ready," answered the other, for he was a sprightly, willing
youth, who rejoiced in any unexpected demand on his superabundant
energies.  "But I say, Dan, you are quite unfit to start off again
without rest."

He looked in his brother's face anxiously, for Dan had seated himself
once more to his food, but seemed unable to deal with it properly.
"Why, you've got the knife and fork in the wrong hands, Dan!  You _must_
have an hour's rest before we start."

"Impossible," returned the other with a dazed look, as he seized a mug
of water and drank it off.  "An hour's delay may mean death to Elspie
and old Duncan McKay."

"But let _me_ start off at once," returned Peter, eagerly.  "I've a
pretty good guess, from your description, where you left them.  Besides,
the gale is not so bad now.  After an hour's sleep you will be able to
start fresh, maybe overtake me.  Jess will be sure to waken you in--"

He stopped, for his brother's head had bent slowly forward while he was
speaking, and now rested on his arms on the table.  The worn-out man was
sound asleep.

"Just leave him, Peter, and be off wi' the dogs," said Mrs Davidson.
"Okematan will keep you in the right track.  I'll be sure to wake him in
time to catch you up."

"No, mother, not without his leave," said the youth, firmly.  "Dan!
Dan! rouse up, old boy!  Shall we start without you?"

"Yes, yes--I'm ready," said the poor fellow, starting up and swaying to
and fro like a drunken man; "but--I say, Peter, I'm done for.  I depend
on you, lad, to keep me up to the scratch.  Lay the dog-whip across my
shoulders if I try to lie down.  Promise me that.  D'ee hear!"

"Yes, I understand," returned the youth with intense earnestness.  "Now
look here, Dan, you know me: will you trust me?"

"Of course I will," answered Dan with a languid smile.

"Well, then; come along, we'll rescue Elspie--you may depend on that.
Okematan and I will look after you and see that all goes right.  Come."

He took his brother by the arm, and led him unresistingly away, followed
by the dark-skinned Indian, who, with the usual reticence of his race,
had stood like a brown statue, silently observing events.

Jessie Davidson, who was a fair and comely maiden, touched him on the
arm as he was passing out--

"Oh! take care of him, Okematan," she said, anxiously.

Okematan replied "Ho!" in a sort of grunt.  It was an expressively
uttered though not very comprehensible reply; but Jessie was satisfied,
for she knew the man well, as he had for a considerable time been, not
exactly a servant of the house, but a sort of self-appointed hanger-on,
or unpaid retainer.  For an Indian, he was of a cheerful disposition and
made himself generally useful.

When they were outside, it was found that the gale had abated
considerably, and that the moon was occasionally visible among the
clouds which were driving wildly athwart the heavens, as though the
elemental war which had ceased to trouble the earth were still raging in
the sky.

"Peter," said the brother, as they stood for a moment beside two Indian
sledges, one of which was laden with provisions, the other
empty--"Peter, don't forget your promise.  Lay the whip on heavy.
Nothing else will keep me awake!"

"All right!  Sit down there for a moment.  We're not quite ready yet."

"I'd better not.  No!  I will stand till it's time to start," returned
Dan with a dubious shake of his head.

"Didn't you say you would trust me?"

"Yes, I did, old boy."

"Does it look like trusting me to refuse the very first order I give
you?  What an example to Okematan!  I am in command, Dan.  Do as you're
bid, sir, and sit down."

With a faint smile, and a still more dubious shake of the head, Dan
obeyed.  He sat down on the empty sledge and the expected result
followed.  In a few seconds he was asleep.

"Now we'll pack him in tight," observed his brother, as he and the
Indian stretched the sleeper at full length on the sledge, wrapped him
completely up in the warm buffalo-robes, and lashed him down in such a
way that he resembled a mummy, with nothing visible of him except his
mouth and nose.

Four strong large dogs were attached to each sledge in tandem fashion,
each dog having a little collar and harness of its own.  No reins were
necessary.  A track beaten in the soft snow with his snow-shoes by the
Indian, who stepped out in front, was guide enough for them; and a
tail-line attached to the rear of each sledge, and held by the drivers,
sufficed to restrain them when a stretch of hard snow or ice tempted
them to have a scamper.

The road thus beaten over the prairie by Okematan, though a
comparatively soft one, was by no means smooth, and the rough motion
would, in ordinary circumstances, have rendered sleep impossible to our
hero; but it need hardly be said that it failed to disturb him on the
present occasion.  He slept like an infant throughout the whole night;
cared nothing for the many plunges down the prairie waves, and recked
not of the frequent jerks out of the hollows.

Hour after hour did Peter Davidson with his silent companion trudge over
the monotonous plains--hope in the ascendant, and vigour, apparently,
inexhaustible.  The dogs, too, were good and strong.  A brief halt now
and then of a few minutes sufficed to freshen them for every new start.
Night passed away, and daylight came in with its ghostly revelations of
bushes that looked like bears or buffaloes, and snow-wreaths that
suggested the buried forms of frozen men.

Then the sun arose and scattered these sombre visions of early morning
with its gladdening, soul-reviving rays.

At this point the rescue-party chanced to have reached one of those
bluffs of woodland which at that time speckled the plains--though they
were few indeed and far between.

"Breakfast," said Peter, heaving a profound sigh as he turned about and
checked the teams, for at that point he happened to be in advance
beating the track.

Okematan expressed his entire concurrence with an emphatic "Ho!"  The
wearied dogs lay down in their tracks, shot out their tongues, panted,
and looked amiable, for well they knew the meaning of the word
"breakfast" and the relative halt.

The sudden stoppage awoke the sleeper, and he struggled to rise.

"Hallo!  What's wrong?  Where am I?  Have the Redskins got hold o' me at
last?"

"Ay, that they have.  At least one Red-skin has got you," said Peter.
"Have a care, man, don't struggle so violently.  Okematan won't scalp
you."

The sound of his brother's voice quieted Davidson, and at once restored
his memory.

"Cast me loose, Peter," he said; "you're a good fellow.  I see you have
brought me along wi' you, and I feel like a giant refreshed now, tho'
somewhat stiff.  Have we come far?"

"I don't know how far we've come, but I know that we've been pegging
along the whole night, and that we must have breakfast before we take
another step.  It's all very well for you, Dan, to lie there all night
like a mere bag o' pemmican enjoying yourself, but you must remember
that your brother is mortal, and so are the dogs, to say nothing o' the
Red-skin."

While he was speaking, the youth undid the fastenings, and set his
brother free, but Dan was far too anxious to indulge in pleasantries
just then.  After surveying the landscape, and coming to a conclusion as
to where they were, he took a hurried breakfast of dried meat--cold.
The dogs were also treated to a hearty feed, and then, resuming the
march, the rescuers pushed on with renewed vigour--Dan Davidson now
beating the track, and thus rendering it more easy for those who came
behind him.

All that day they pushed on almost without halt, and spent the next
night in a clump of willows; but Dan was too anxious to take much rest.
They rose at the first sign of daybreak, and pushed on at their utmost
speed, until the poor dogs began to show signs of breaking down; but an
extra hour of rest, and a full allowance of food kept them up to the
