The Project Gutenberg EBook of What Katy Did, by Susan Coolidge

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: What Katy Did

Author: Susan Coolidge

Posting Date: January 31, 2012 [EBook #8994]
Release Date: September, 2005
First Posted: August 31, 2003
Last Updated: July 31, 2006

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WHAT KATY DID ***




Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Suzanne L. Shell, Charles
Franks and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team










WHAT KATY DID

By

SUSAN COOLIDGE

With Frontispiece in Color by Ralph Pallen Coleman





TO FIVE.


  Six of us once, my darlings, played together
    Beneath green boughs, which faded long ago,
  Made merry in the golden summer weather,
    Pelted each other with new-fallen snow.

  Did the sun always shine? I can't remember
    A single cloud that dimmed the happy blue,--
  A single lightning-bolt or peal of thunder,
    To daunt our bright, unfearing lives: can you?

  We quarrelled often, but made peace as quickly,
    Shed many tears, but laughed the while they fell,
  Had our small woes, our childish bumps and bruises,
    But Mother always "kissed and made them well."

  Is it long since?--it seems a moment only:
    Yet here we are in bonnets and tail-coats,
  Grave men of business, members of committees,
    Our play-time ended: even Baby votes!

  And star-eyed children, in whose innocent faces
    Kindles the gladness which was once our own,
  Crowd round our knees, with sweet and coaxing voices,
    Asking for stories of that old-time home.

  "Were _you_ once little too?" they say, astonished;
    "Did you too play? How funny! tell us how."
  Almost we start, forgetful for a moment;
    Almost we answer, "We are little _now!_"

  Dear friend and lover, whom to-day we christen,
    Forgive such brief bewilderment,--thy true
  And kindly hand we hold; we own thee fairest.
    But ah! our yesterday was precious too.

  So, darlings, take this little childish story,
    In which some gleams of the old sunshine play,
  And, as with careless hands you turn the pages,
    Look back and smile, as here I smile to-day.




CONTENTS


CHAPTER

I THE LITTLE CARRS

II PARADISE

III THE DAY OF SCRAPES

IV KIKERI

V IN THE LOFT

VI INTIMATE FRIENDS

VII COUSIN HELEN'S VISIT

VIII TO-MORROW

IX DISMAL DAYS

X ST. NICHOLAS AND ST. VALENTINE

XI A NEW LESSON TO LEARN

XII TWO YEARS AFTERWARD

XIII AT LAST






CHAPTER I

THE LITTLE CARRS


I was sitting in the meadows one day, not long ago, at a place where
there was a small brook. It was a hot day. The sky was very blue, and
white clouds, like great swans, went floating over it to and fro. Just
opposite me was a clump of green rushes, with dark velvety spikes, and
among them one single tall, red cardinal flower, which was bending over
the brook as if to see its own beautiful face in the water. But the
cardinal did not seem to be vain.

The picture was so pretty that I sat a long time enjoying it. Suddenly,
close to me, two small voices began to talk--or to sing, for I couldn't
tell exactly which it was. One voice was shrill; the other, which was a
little deeper, sounded very positive and cross. They were evidently
disputing about something, for they said the same words over and over
again. These were the words--"Katy did." "Katy didn't." "She did." "She
didn't." "She did." "She didn't." "Did." "Didn't." I think they must
have repeated them at least a hundred times.

I got up from my seat to see if I could find the speakers; and sure
enough, there on one of the cat-tail bulrushes, I spied two tiny
pale-green creatures. Their eyes seemed to be weak, for they both wore
black goggles. They had six legs apiece,--two short ones, two not so
short, and two very long. These last legs had joints like the springs to
buggy-tops; and as I watched, they began walking up the rush, and then I
saw that they moved exactly like an old-fashioned gig. In fact, if I
hadn't been too big, I _think_ I should have heard them creak as they
went along. They didn't say anything so long as I was there, but the
moment my back was turned they began to quarrel again, and in the same
old words--"Katy did." "Katy didn't." "She did." "She didn't."

As I walked home I fell to thinking about another Katy,--a Katy I once
knew, who planned to do a great many wonderful things, and in the end
did none of them, but something quite different,--something she didn't
like at all at first, but which, on the whole, was a great deal better
than any of the doings she had dreamed about. And as I thought, this
little story grew in my head, and I resolved to write it down for you. I
have done it; and, in memory of my two little friends on the bulrush, I
give it their name. Here it is--the story of What Katy Did.

Katy's name was Katy Carr. She lived in the town of Burnet, which wasn't
a very big town, but was growing as fast as it knew how. The house she
lived in stood on the edge of the town. It was a large square house,
white, with green blinds, and had a porch in front, over which roses and
clematis made a thick bower. Four tall locust trees shaded the gravel
path which led to the front gate. On one side of the house was an
orchard; on the other side were wood piles and barns, and an ice-house.
Behind was a kitchen garden sloping to the south; and behind that a
pasture with a brook in it, and butternut trees, and four cows--two red
ones, a yellow one with sharp horns tipped with tin, and a dear little
white one named Daisy.

There were six of the Carr children--four girls and two boys. Katy, the
oldest, was twelve years old; little Phil, the youngest, was four, and
the rest fitted in between.

Dr. Carr, their Papa, was a dear, kind, busy man, who was away from home
all day, and sometimes all night, too, taking care of sick people. The
children hadn't any Mamma. She had died when Phil was a baby, four years
before my story began. Katy could remember her pretty well; to the rest
she was but a sad, sweet name, spoken on Sunday, and at prayer-times, or
when Papa was especially gentle and solemn.

In place of this Mamma, whom they recollected so dimly, there was Aunt
Izzie, Papa's sister, who came to take care of them when Mamma went away
on that long journey, from which, for so many months, the little ones
kept hoping she might return. Aunt Izzie was a small woman, sharp-faced
and thin, rather old-looking, and very neat and particular about
everything. She meant to be kind to the children, but they puzzled her
much, because they were not a bit like herself when she was a child.
Aunt Izzie had been a gentle, tidy little thing, who loved to sit as
Curly Locks did, sewing long seams in the parlor, and to have her head
patted by older people, and be told that she was a good girl; whereas
Katy tore her dress every day, hated sewing, and didn't care a button
about being called "good," while Clover and Elsie shied off like
restless ponies when any one tried to pat their heads. It was very
perplexing to Aunt Izzie, and she found it hard to quite forgive the
children for being so "unaccountable," and so little like the good boys
and girls in Sunday-school memoirs, who were the young people she liked
best, and understood most about.

Then Dr. Carr was another person who worried her. He wished to have the
children hardy and bold, and encouraged climbing and rough plays, in
spite of the bumps and ragged clothes which resulted. In fact, there was
just one half-hour of the day when Aunt Izzie was really satisfied about
her charges, and that was the half-hour before breakfast, when she had
made a law that they were all to sit in their little chairs and learn
the Bible verse for the day. At this time she looked at them with
pleased eyes, they were all so spick and span, with such nicely-brushed
jackets and such neatly-combed hair. But the moment the bell rang her
comfort was over. From that time on, they were what she called "not fit
to be seen." The neighbors pitied her very much. They used to count the
sixty stiff white pantalette legs hung out to dry every Monday morning,
and say to each other what a sight of washing those children made, and
what a chore it must be for poor Miss Carr to keep them so nice. But
poor Miss Carr didn't think them at all nice; that was the worst of it.

"Clover, go up stairs and wash your hands! Dorry, pick your hat off the
floor and hang it on the nail! Not that nail--the third nail from the
corner!" These were the kind of things Aunt Izzie was saying all day
long. The children minded her pretty well, but they didn't exactly love
her, I fear. They called her "Aunt Izzie" always, never "Aunty." Boys
and girls will know what _that_ meant.

I want to show you the little Carrs, and I don't know that I could ever
have a better chance than one day when five out of the six were perched
on top of the ice-house, like chickens on a roost. This ice-house was
one of their favorite places. It was only a low roof set over a hole in
the ground, and, as it stood in the middle of the side-yard, it always
seemed to the children that the shortest road to every place was up one
of its slopes and down the other. They also liked to mount to the
ridge-pole, and then, still keeping the sitting position, to let go, and
scrape slowly down over the warm shingles to the ground. It was bad for
their shoes and trousers, of course, but what of that? Shoes and
trousers, and clothes generally, were Aunt Izzie's affair; theirs was to
slide and enjoy themselves.

Clover, next in age to Katy, sat in the middle. She was a fair, sweet
dumpling of a girl, with thick pig-tails of light brown hair, and
short-sighted blue eyes, which seemed to hold tears, just ready to fall
from under the blue. Really, Clover was the jolliest little thing in the
world; but these eyes, and her soft cooing voice, always made people
feel like petting her and taking her part. Once, when she was very
small, she ran away with Katy's doll, and when Katy pursued, and tried
to take it from her, Clover held fast and would not let go. Dr. Carr,
who wasn't attending particularly, heard nothing but the pathetic tone
of Clover's voice, as she said: "Me won't! Me want dolly!" and, without
stopping to inquire, he called out sharply: "For shame, Katy! give your
sister _her_ doll at once!" which Katy, much surprised, did; while
Clover purred in triumph, like a satisfied kitten. Clover was sunny and
sweet-tempered, a little indolent, and very modest about herself,
though, in fact, she was particularly clever in all sorts of games, and
extremely droll and funny in a quiet way. Everybody loved her, and she
loved everybody, especially Katy, whom she looked up to as one of the
wisest people in the world.

Pretty little Phil sat next on the roof to Clover, and she held him
tight with her arm. Then came Elsie, a thin, brown child of eight, with
beautiful dark eyes, and crisp, short curls covering the whole of her
small head. Poor little Elsie was the "odd one" among the Carrs. She
didn't seem to belong exactly to either the older or the younger
children. The great desire and ambition of her heart was to be allowed
to go about with Katy and Clover and Cecy Hall, and to know their
secrets, and be permitted to put notes into the little post-offices they
were forever establishing in all sorts of hidden places. But they didn't
want Elsie, and used to tell her to "run away and play with the
children," which hurt her feelings very much. When she wouldn't run
away, I am sorry to say they ran away from her, which, as their legs
were longest, it was easy to do. Poor Elsie, left behind, would cry
bitter tears, and, as she was too proud to play much with Dorry and
John, her principal comfort was tracking the older ones about and
discovering their mysteries, especially the post-offices, which were her
greatest grievance. Her eyes were bright and quick as a bird's. She
would peep and peer, and follow and watch, till at last, in some odd,
unlikely place, the crotch of a tree, the middle of the asparagus bed,
or, perhaps, on the very top step of the scuttle ladder, she spied the
little paper box, with its load of notes, all ending with: "Be sure and
not let Elsie know." Then she would seize the box, and, marching up to
wherever the others were, she would throw it down, saying, defiantly:
"There's your old post-office!" but feeling all the time just like
crying. Poor little Elsie! In almost every big family, there is one of
these unmated, left-out children. Katy, who had the finest plans in the
world for being "heroic," and of use, never saw, as she drifted on her
heedless way, that here, in this lonely little sister, was the very
chance she wanted for being a comfort to somebody who needed comfort
very much. She never saw it, and Elsie's heavy heart went uncheered.

