furfuroid disappearing in a normal fermentation.

(2) The quantitative methods above described were employed in
investigating the barley plant at different stages of its growth. The
green plant was extracted with alcohol, the residue freed from alcohol
and subjected to acid hydrolysis.

The hydrolysed extract was neutralised and fermented. In the early
stages of growth the furfuroids were completely fermented, i.e.
disappeared in the fermentation. In the later stages this proportion
fell to 50 p.ct. In the earlier stages, moreover, the normal hexose
constituents of the permanent tissue were hydrolysed in large proportion
by the acid, whereas in the matured straw the hydrolysis is chiefly
confined to the furfuroids. In the early stages also the permanent
tissue yields an extract with relatively low cupric reduction, showing
that the carbohydrates are dissolved by the acid in a more complex
molecular condition.

These observations confirm the view that the furfuroids take origin in a
hexose-pentose series of transformations. The proportion of furfuroid
groups to total carbohydrates varies but little, viz. from 1/3 in the
early stages to a maximum of 1/4 at the flowering period. At this period
the differentiation of the groups begins to be marked.

Taking all the facts of (1) and (2), they are not inconsistent with the
hypothesis of an internal transformation of a hexose to a
pentose-monoformal. Such a change of position and function of oxygen
from OH to CO within the group --CH.OH-- is a species of internal
oxidation which reverses the reduction of formaldehyde groups in
synthesising to sugars, and appears therefore of probable occurrence.

These constitutional problems are followed up in (3) by the indirect
method of differentiating the relationships of these furfuroids to yeast
fermentation, from those of the pentoses. Straw and esparto celluloses
are subjected to the processes of acid hydrolysis, and the neutralised
extracts fermented. With high furfural numbers indicating that the
furfuroids are the chief constituents of the extract, there is an active
fermentation with production of alcohol. The cupric reduction falls in
greater ratio to the original (unfermented) than the furfural.
Observations on the pure pentoses--xylose and arabinose added to
dextrose solutions, and then exposed to yeast action--show that in a
vigorous fermentation not unduly prolonged the pentoses are unaffected,
but that they do come within the influence of the yeast-cell when the
latter is in a less vigorous condition, and when the hexoses are not
present in relatively large proportion.

(4) The observations on the growing plant were resumed with the view of
artificially increasing the differentiation of the two main groups of
carbohydrates. From a portion of a barley crop the inflorescence was
removed as soon as it appeared. The crop was allowed to mature, and a
full comparison instituted between the products of normal and abnormal
growth. With a considerable difference in 'permanent tissue' (13 p.ct.
less) and a still greater defect in cellulose (24 p.ct.), the constants
for the furfuroids in relation to total carbohydrates were unaffected by
the arrested development. This was also true of the behaviour of the
hydrolysed extracts (acid processes) to yeast fermentation.

(5) The extract obtained from the brewers' grains by the process
described in (2) was investigated in relation to animal digestion. It
has been now generally established that the furfuroids as constituents
of fodder plants are digested and assimilated in large proportion in
passing through animal digestive tracts, and in this respect behave
differently from the pentoses. The furfuroids being obtained, as
described, in a fully hydrolysed condition (monoses) the digestion
problem presented itself in a new aspect, and was therefore attacked.

The result of the comparative feeding experiments upon rabbits was to
show that in this previously hydrolysed form the furfuroids are almost
entirely digested and assimilated, no pentoses, moreover, appearing in
the urine.

Generally we may sum up the present solution of the problem of the
relationship of the furfuroids to plant assimilation and growth as
follows:--The pentoses are not produced as such in the process of
assimilation; but furfural-yielding carbohydrates are produced directly
and in approximately constant ratio to the total carbohydrates; they are
mainly located in the permanent tissue; in the secondary changes of
dehydration, &c., accompanying maturation they undergo such
differentiation that they become readily separable by processes of acid
hydrolysis from the more resistant normal celluloses; but in relation to
alkaline treatments they maintain their intimate union with the latter.
They are finally converted into pentoses by artificial treatments, and
into pentosanes in the plant, with loss of 1 C atom in an oxidised form.
The mechanism of this transformation of hexoses into pentoses is not
cleared up. It is independent of external conditions, e.g.
fertilisation and atmospheric oxidations, and is probably therefore a
process of internal rearrangement of the character of an oxidation.


ZUR KENNTNISS DER IN DEN MEMBRANEN DER PILZE ENTHALTENEN BESTANDTHEILE.

E. WINTERSTEIN (Ztschr. Physiol. Chem., 1894, 521; 1895, 134).

~ON THE CONSTITUENTS OF THE TISSUE OF FUNGI.~

(p. 87) These two communications are a contribution of fundamental
importance, and may be regarded as placing the question of the
composition of the celluloses of these lowest types on a basis of
well-defined fact. In the first place the author gives an exhaustive
bibliography, beginning with the researches of Braconnot (1811), who
regarded the cellular tissue of these organisms as a specialised
substance, which he termed 'fungin.' Payen rejects this view, and
regards the tissue, fully purified by the action of solvents, as a
cellulose (C_{6}H_{10}O_{5}). This view is successively supported by
Fromberg [Mulder, Allg. Phys. Chem., Braunschweig, 1851], Schlossberger
and Doepping [Annalen, 52, 106], and Kaiser. De Bary, on a review of the
evidence, adopts this view, but, as the purified substance fails to give
the characteristic colour-reactions with iodine, he uses the qualifying
term 'pilzcellulose' [Morph. u. Biol. d. Pilze u. Flechten, Leipzig,
1884].

C. Richter, on the other hand, shows that these reactions are merely a
question of methods of purification or preparation [Sitzungsber. Acad.
Wien, 82, 1, 494], and considers that the tissue-substance is an
ordinary cellulose, with the ordinary reactions masked by the presence
of impurities. In regard to the lower types of fungoid growth, such as
yeast, the results of investigators are more at variance. The researches
of Salkowski (p. 113) leave little doubt, however, that the
cell-membrane is of the cellulosic type.

The author's researches extend over a typical range of products obtained
from _Boletus edulis, Agaricus campestris, Cantharellus cibarius,
Morchella esculenta, Polyporus officinalis, Penicillium glaucum_, and
certain undetermined species. The method of purification consisted
mainly in (a) exhaustive treatments with ether and boiling alcohol,
(b) digestion with alkaline hydrate (1-2 p.ct. NaOH) in the cold,
(c) acid hydrolysis (2-3 p.ct. H_{2}SO_{4}) at 95 deg.-100 deg., followed by a
chloroxidation treatment by the processes of Schulze or Hoffmeister, and
final alkaline hydrolysis.

The products, i.e. residues, thus obtained were different in essential
points from the celluloses isolated from the tissues of phanerogams
similarly treated. Only in exceptional cases do they give blue reactions
with iodine in presence of zinc chloride or sulphuric acid. The
colourations are brown to red. They resist the action of cuprammonium
solutions. They are for the most part soluble in alkaline hydrate
solution (5-10 p.ct. NaOH) in the cold. They give small yields (1-2
p.ct.) of furfural on boiling with 10 p.ct. HCl.Aq.

Elementary analyses gave the following results, which are important in
establishing the presence of a notable proportion of nitrogen, which has
certainly been overlooked by the earlier observers:--

 _________________________________________________________
|                                      |      |     |     |
|     'Cellulose' or residue from      |  C   |  H  |  N  |
|______________________________________|______|_____|_____|
|                                      |      |     |     |
| Boletus edulis (Schulze process)     | 42.4 | 6.5 | 3.9 |
| Boletus edulis (Hoffmeister process) | 44.6 | 6.3 | 3.6 |
| Polyporus off.                       | 43.7 | 6.5 | 0.7 |
| Cantharellus cib.                    | 44.9 | 6.8 | 3.0 |
| Agaricus campestris                  | 44.3 | 6.6 | 3.6 |
| Botrytis                             | 42.1 | 6.3 | 3.9 |
| Penicillium glaucum                  |      |     | 3.3 |
| Morchella esculenta                  |      |     | 2.5 |
|______________________________________|______|_____|_____|

It is next shown that this residual nitrogen is not in the form of
residual proteids (1) by direct tests, all of which gave negative
results, and (2) indirectly by the high degree of resistance to both
alkaline and acid hydrolysis. The 'celluloses' are attacked by boiling
dilute acids (1 p.ct. H_{2}SO_{4}), losing in weight from 10 to 23
p.ct., the dissolved products having a cupric reduction value about 50
p.ct. that of an equal weight of dextrose. As an extreme hydrolytic
treatment the products were dissolved in 70 p.ct. H_{2}SO_{4}, allowed
to stand 24 hours, then considerably diluted (to 3 p.ct. H_{2}SO_{4})
and boiled to complete the inversion. The yields of glucose, calculated
from the cupric reduction, were as follows:--

     Boletus edulis       65.2 p.ct.
     Polyporus off.       94.7   "
     Agaricus campestris  59.1   "
     Morchella esculenta  60.1   "
     Cantharellus cib.    64.9   "
     Botrytis             60.8   "

It will be noted that the exceptionally high yield from the Polyporus
cellulose is correlated with its exceptionally low nitrogen. By actual
isolation of a crystalline dextrorotary sugar, by preparations of
osazone and conversion into saccharic acid, it was proved that dextrose
was the main product of hydrolysis. The second main product was shown to
be acetic acid, the yield of which amounted to 8 p.ct. in several cases.

Generally, therefore, it is proved that the more resistant tissue
constituents of the fungi are not cellulose, but a complex of
carbohydrates and nitrogenous groups in combination, the former being
resolved into glucoses by acid hydrolysis, and the latter yielding
acetic acid as a characteristic product of resolution together with the
nitrogenous groups in the form of an uncrystallisable syrup.

In the further prosecution of these investigations (2) the author
proceeded from the supposition of the identity of the nitrogenous
complex of the original with chitin, and adopted the method of
Ledderhose (Ztschr. Physiol. Chem. 2, 213) for the isolation of
glucosamin hydrochloride, which he succeeded in obtaining in the
crystalline form. In the meantime E. Gilson had shown that these tissue
substances in 'fusion' with alkaline hydrates yield a residue of a
nitrogenous product (C_{14}H_{28}N_{2}O_{10}), which is soluble in
dilute acids [Recherches Chim. sur la Membrane Cellulaire des
Champignons, La Cellule, v. II, pt. 1]. This residue, which was termed
mycosin by Gilson, has been similarly isolated by the author. It is
proved, therefore, that the tissues of the fungi do contain a product
resembling chitin. [See also Gilson, Compt. Rend. 120, 1000.] This
constituent is in intimate union with the carbohydrate complex, which is
resolved similarly to the hemicelluloses. Various intermediate terms of
the hydrolytic series have been isolated. But the only fully identified
product of resolution is the dextrose which finally results.


UEBER DIE KOHLENHYDRATE D. HEFE.

E. SALKOWSKI (Berl. Ber., 27, 3325).

~ON THE CARBOHYDRATES OF YEAST.~

The author has isolated the more resistant constituents of the
cell-membrane by boiling with dilute alkalis, and exhaustively purifying
with alcohol and ether.

The residue was only a small percentage (3-4 p.ct) of the original, and
retained only 0.45 p.ct. N.

It was heated in a digester with water at 2-3 atm. steam-pressure, and
thus resolved into approximately equal portions of soluble cellulose
(a) and insoluble (b). The latter, giving no colour-reaction with
iodine, is termed achroocellulose; the former reacts, and is therefore
termed erythrocellulose. The former is easily separated from its
opalescent solution. It has the empirical composition of cellulose. In
the soluble form it resembles glycogen. The achroocellulose is isolated
in the form of horny or agglomerated masses. It appears to be resolved
by ultimate hydrolysis into dextrose and mannose.




SECTION V. FURFUROIDS, i.e. PENTOSANES AND FURFURAL-YIELDING
CONSTITUENTS GENERALLY


(1) ~Reactions of the Carbohydrates with Hydrogen Peroxide.~

C. F. CROSS, E. J. BEVAN, and CLAUD SMITH (J. Chem. Soc., 1898, 463).


(2) ~Action of Hydrogen Peroxide on Carbohydrates in the Presence of
Ferrous Salts.~

R. S. MORRELL and J. M. CROFTS (J. Chem. Soc., 1899, 786).


(3) ~Oxidation of Furfuraldehyde by Hydrogen Peroxide.~

C. F. CROSS, E. J. BEVAN, and T. HEIBERG (J. Ch. Soc., 1899, 747).


(4) EINWIRKUNG VON WASSERSTOFFHYPEROXID AUF UNGESAeTTIGTE
KOHLENWASSERSTOFFE.

C. F. CROSS, E. J. BEVAN, and T. HEIBERG (Berl. Ber., 1900, 2015).

~ACTION OF HYDROGEN PEROXIDE ON UNSATURATED HYDROCARBONS.~

The above series of researches grew out of the observations incidental
to the use of the peroxide on an oxidising agent in investigating the
hydrolysed furfuroids (102). Certain remarkable observations had
previously been made by H. J. H. Fenton (Ch. Soc. J., 1894, 899; 1895,
774; 1896, 546) on the oxidation of tartaric acid by the peroxide,
acting in presence of ferrous salts, the --CHOH--CHOH-- residue losing
H_{2} with production of the unsaturated group, --OH.C=C.OH--. These
investigations have subsequently been considerably developed and
generalised by Fenton, but as the results have no immediate bearing on
our main subject we must refer readers to the J. Chem. Soc., 1896-1900.

From the mode of action diagnosed by Fenton it was to be expected that
the CHOH groups of the carbohydrates would be oxidised to CO groups, and
it has been established by the above investigations (1) and (2) that the
particular group to be so affected in the hexoses is that contiguous to
the typical

        |
     --CO

group. There results, therefore, a dicarbonyl derivative ('osone'),
which reacts directly with 2 mol. phenyl hydrazine in the cold to form
an osazone. This was directly established for glucose, laevulose,
galactose, and arabinose (2). While this is the main result, the general
study of the product shows that the oxidation is not simple nor in
direct quantitative relationship to the H_{2}O_{2} employed. The
molecular proportion of the aldoses affected appears to be in
considerable excess, and the reaction is probably complicated by
interior rearrangement.

In the main, the original aldehydic group resists the oxidation. But a
certain proportion of acid products are formed, probably tartronic acid.
On distillation with condensing acids a large proportion of volatile
monobasic acids (chiefly formic) are obtained. The proportion of
furfural obtained amounts to 3-4 per cent. of the weight of the original
carbohydrate.

Since the general result of these oxidations is the substitution of an
OH group for an H atom, it was of interest to determine the behaviour of
furfural with the peroxide. The oxidation was carried out in dilute
aqueous solution of the aldehyde at 20 deg.-40 deg., using 2-3 mols. H_{2}O_{2}
per 1 mol. C_{5}H_{4}O_{2}. The main product is a hydroxyfurfural, which
was separated as a hydrazone. A small quantity of a monobasic acid was
formed, which was identified as a hydroxypyromucic acid. Both aldehyde
and acid appear to be the alpha beta derivatives. The aldehyde gives
very characteristic colour reactions with phloroglucinol and resorcinol
in presence of hydrochloric acid, which so closely resemble those of the
lignocelluloses that there is little doubt that these particular
reactions must be referred to the presence of the hydroxyfurfural as a
normal constituent.

The study of these oxidations was then extended to typical unsaturated
hydrocarbons--viz. acetylene and benzene. (4) From the former the main
product was acetic acid, but the attendant formation of traces of ethyl
alcohol indicates that the hydrogen of the peroxide may take a direct
part in this and other reactions. This view receives some support from
the fact that the interaction of the H_{2}O_{2} with permanganates has
now been established to be an oxidation of the H_{2} of the peroxide by
the permanganate oxidation, with liberation, therefore, of the O_{2} of
the peroxide as an unresolved molecule [Baeyer].

Benzene itself is also powerfully attacked by the peroxide when shaken
with a dilute solution in presence of iron salts. The products are
phenol and pyrocatechol, with some quantity of an amorphous product
probably formed by condensation of a quinone with the phenolic products
of reaction.

       *       *       *       *       *

These types of oxidation effects now established give a definite
significance to the physiological functions of the peroxide, which is a
form of 'active oxygen' of extremely wide distribution. It would have
been difficult _a priori_ to devise an oxidant without sensible action
on aldehydic groups, yet delivering a powerful attack on hydrocarbon
rings; or to have suggested a synthesis of the sugars from tartaric acid
with a powerful oxidising treatment as the first and essential stage in
the transformation.

Our present knowledge of such actions and effects suggests a number of
new clues to genetic relationships of carbon compounds within the plant.
The conclusion is certainly justified that the origin of the pentoses is
referable to oxidations of the hexoses, in which this form of 'active
oxygen' plays an important part.

We must note here the researches of O. Ruff, who has applied these
oxidations with important results in the systematic investigation of the
carbohydrates.


UEBER DIE VERWANDLUNG DER _D_-GLUCONSAeURE IN _D_-ARABINOSE (Berl. Ber.,
1898, 1573).

~CONVERSION OF _D_-GLUCONIC ACID INTO _D_-ARABINOSE.~

       *       *       *       *       *

_D_ UND _L_ ARABINOSE (_Ibid._ 1899, 550).

       *       *       *       *       *

ZUR KENNTNISS DER OXYGLUCONSAeURE (_Ibid._ 1899, 2269).

~ON OXYGLUCONIC ACID.~

Ruff in these researches has realised a simple and direct transition
