       *       *       *       *       *

Bert Sokolski signed the morning report and dropped it into the
transmitter. He swung around on his desk stool; he was a big man, and
the stool squealed in sharp protest to his shifting weight.

Joe Gaines, who was as short and skinny and dark-haired as his
colleague was tall and heavily muscled and blond, shuddered at the
sound. Sokolski grinned wickedly at his flinching.

"Check-up time, I suppose," muttered Gaines without looking up from
the magazine he held propped on his knees. He finished the paragraph,
snapped the magazine shut, and swung his legs down from the railing
that ran along in front of the data board. "Dirty work for
white-collar men like us."

Sokolski snorted. "You haven't worn a white shirt in the last six
years," he growled, rising and going to the supply closet. He swung
open the door and began pulling out equipment. "C'mon, you lazy runt,
hoist your own leadbox."

Gaines grinned and slouched over to the big man's side. "Think of how
much more expensive you are to the government than me," he chortled as
he bent over to strap on heavy, leaded shoes. "Big fellow like you
must cost 'em twice as much to outfit for this job."

Sokolski grunted and struggled into the thick, radiation-resistant
suit. "Think how lucky _you_ are, runt," he responded as he wriggled
his right arm down the sleeve, "that they've got those little
servomechs in there to do the real dirty work. If it weren't for them,
they'd have all the shrimps like you crawling down pipes and around
dampers and generally playing filing cabinet for loose neutrons." He
shook himself. "Thanks, Joe," he growled as Gaines helped him with a
reluctant zipper.

Gaines checked the big man's oxygen equipment and turned his back so
that Sokolski could okay his own. "You're set," said Sokolski, and
they snapped on their helmets, big inverted lead buckets with narrow
strips of shielded glass providing strictly minimal fields of view.
Gaines plugged one end of the thickly insulated intercom cable into
the socket beneath his armpit, then handed the other end to Sokolski,
who followed suit.

Sokolski checked out the master controls on the data board and nodded.
He clicked on the talkie. "Let's go," he said, his voice, echoing
inside the helmet before being transmitted, sounding distant and
hollow.

Gaines leading, the cable sliding and coiling snakelike between them,
they passed through the doorway, over which huge red letters shouted
ANYONE WHO WALKS THROUGH THIS DOOR UNPROTECTED WILL DIE, and clomped
down the zigzagging corridor toward the uranium pile that crouched
within the heart of the plant.

Gaines moaned, "It gets damned hot inside these suits."

They had reached the end of the trap, and Sokolski folded a thick
mittened hand around one handle on the door to the Hot Room. "Not half
so hot as it gets outside it, sweetheart, where we're going." He
jerked on the handle and Gaines seized the second handle and added his
own strength. The huge door slid unwillingly back.

The silent sound of the Hot Room surged out over them--the breathless
whisper of chained power struggling to burst its chains. Sokolski
checked his neutron tab and his gamma reader and they stepped over the
threshold. They leaned into the door until it had slid shut again.

"I'll take the servomechs, Bert," piped Gaines, tramping clumsily
toward the nearest of the gyro-balanced single-wheeled robots.

"You always do, it being the easiest job. Okay, I'll work the board."

Gaines nodded, a gesture invisible to his partner. He reached the
first servo, a squat, gleaming creature with the symbol M-11 etched
across its rotund chest, and deactivated it by the simple expedient of
pulling from its socket the line running from the capacitor unit in
the lower trunk of its body to the maze of equipment that jammed its
enormous chest. The instant M-11 ceased functioning, the other two
servomechs were automatically activated to cover that section of the
controls with which M-11 was normally integrated.

This was overloading their individual capacities, but it was an
inherent provision designed to cover the emergency that would follow
any accidental deactivation of one of them. It was also the only way
in which they could be checked. You couldn't bring them outside to a
lab; they were _hot_. After all, they spent their lives under a
ceaseless fusillade of neutrons, washed eternally with the deadly
radiations pouring incessantly from the pile whose overlords they
were. Indeed, next to the pile itself, they were the hottest things in
the plant.

"Nice job these babies got," commented Gaines as he checked the
capacitor circuits. He reactivated the servo and went on to M-19.

"If you think it's so great, why don't you volunteer?" countered
Sokolski, a trifle sourly. "Incidentally, it's a good thing we came
in, Joe. There's half a dozen units here working on reserve
transistors."

Their sporadic conversation lapsed; it was exacting work and they
could remain for only a limited time under that lethal radiation.
Then, almost sadly, Gaines said, "Looks like the end of the road for
M-75."
