hoard, and from him or his servant Martin that secret must be won.
So once again he was destined to match himself against Lysbeth--the
wronged, the dreaded, the victorious Lysbeth, whose voice of
denunciation still rang in his ear, whose eyes of fire still scorched
his soul, the woman whom he feared above everything on earth. He fought
her once for money, and, although he won the money, it had done him
little good, for in the end she worsted him. Now, if he went to Leyden,
he must fight her again for money, and what would be the issue of that
war? Was it worth while to take the risk? Would not history repeat
itself? If he hurt her, would she not crush him? But the treasure, that
mighty treasure, which could give him so much, and, above all, could
restore to him the rank and station he had forfeited, and which he
coveted more than anything in life. For, low as he had fallen, Montalvo
could not forget that he had been born a gentleman.

He would take his chance; he would go to Leyden. Had he weighed the
matter in the gloom of night, or even in a dull and stormy hour,
perhaps--nay probably--he would have decided otherwise. But this morning
the sun shone brightly, the wind made a merry music in the reeds; on the
rippling surface of the lake the marsh-birds sang, and from the shore
came a cheerful lowing of kine. In such surroundings his fears and
superstitions vanished. He was master of himself, and he knew that all
depended upon himself, the rest was dream and nonsense. Behind him lay
the buried gold; before him rose the towers of Leyden, where he could
find its key. A God! that haunting legend of a God of vengeance, in
which priests and others affected to believe? Now that he came to think
of it, what rubbish was here, for as any agent of the Inquisition knew
well, the vengeance always fell upon those who trusted in this same God;
a hundred torture dens, a thousand smoking fires bore witness to the
fact. And if there was a God, why, recognising his personal merits,
only this morning He had selected him out of many to live on and be the
inheritor of the wealth of Hendrik Brant. Yes, he would go to Leyden and
fight the battle out.



At the entry of the gut the Senor Ramiro landed from his boat. At first
he had thought of killing his companion, so that he might remain the
sole survivor of the catastrophe, but on reflection he abandoned this
idea, as the man was a faithful creature of his own who might be useful.
So he bade him return to The Hague to tell the story of the destruction
of the ship _Swallow_ with the treasure, her attackers and her crew,
whoever they might have been. He was to add, moreover, that so far as
he knew the Captain Ramiro had perished also, as he, the steersman, was
left alone in charge of the boat when the vessel blew up. Then he was to
come to Leyden, bringing with him certain goods and papers belonging to
him, Ramiro.

This plan seemed to have advantages. No one would continue to hunt for
the treasure. No one except himself and perhaps Black Meg would know
that Foy van Goorl and Martin had been on board the _Swallow_ and
escaped; indeed as yet he was not quite sure of it himself. For the rest
he could either lie hidden, or if it proved desirable, announce that he
still lived. Even if his messenger should prove faithless and tell the
truth, it would not greatly matter, seeing that he knew nothing which
could be of service to anybody.

And so the steersman sailed away, while Ramiro, filled with memories,
reflections, and hopes, walked quietly through the Morsch Poort into the
good city of Leyden.



That evening, but not until dark had fallen, two other travellers
entered Leyden, namely, Foy and Martin. Passing unobserved through
the quiet streets, they reached the side door of the house in the Bree
Straat. It was opened by a serving-woman, who told Foy that his mother
was in Adrian's room, also that Adrian was very much better. So thither,
followed more slowly by Martin, went Foy, running upstairs three steps
at a time, for had he not a great story to tell!

The interior of the room as he entered it made an attractive picture
which even in his hurry caught Foy's eye and fixed itself so firmly in
his mind that he never forgot its details. To begin with, the place
was beautifully furnished, for his brother had a really good taste in
tapestry, pictures, and other such adornments. Adrian himself lay upon a
richly carved oak bed, pale from loss of blood, but otherwise little the
worse. Seated by the side of the bed, looking wonderfully sweet in the
lamplight, which cast shadows from the curling hair about her brows on
to the delicate face beneath, was Elsa Brant. She had been reading to
Adrian from a book of Spanish chivalry such as his romantic soul loved,
and he, resting on his elbow in the snowy bed, was contemplating her
beauty with his languishing black eyes. Yet, although he only saw her
for a moment before she heard his entry and looked up, it was obvious
to Foy that Elsa remained quite unconscious of the handsome Adrian's
admiration, indeed, that her mind wandered far away from the magnificent
adventures and highly coloured love scenes of which she was reading in
her sweet, low voice. Nor was he mistaken, for, in fact, the poor child
was thinking of her father.

At the further end of the room, talking together earnestly in the deep
and curtained window-place, stood his mother and his father. Clearly
they were as much preoccupied as the younger couple, and it was not
difficult for Foy to guess that fears for his own safety upon his
perilous errand were what concerned them most, and behind them other
unnumbered fears. For the dwellers in the Netherlands in those days
must walk from year to year through a valley of shadows so grim that our
imagination can scarcely picture them.

"Sixty hours and he is not back," Lysbeth was saying.

"Martin said we were not to trouble ourselves before they had been gone
for a hundred," answered Dirk consolingly.

Just then Foy, surveying them from the shadowed doorway, stepped
forward, saying in his jovial voice:

"Sixty hours to the very minute."

Lysbeth uttered a little scream of joy and ran forward. Elsa let the
book fall on to the floor and rose to do the same, then remembered and
stood still, while Dirk remained where he was till the women had done
their greetings, betraying his delight only by a quick rubbing of his
hands. Adrian alone did not look particularly pleased, not, however,
because he retained any special grudge against his brother for his share
in the fracas of a few nights before, since, when once his furious gusts
of temper had passed, he was no malevolently minded man. Indeed he was
glad that Foy had come back safe from his dangerous adventure, only
he wished that he would not blunder into the bedroom and interrupt his
delightful occupation of listening, while the beautiful Elsa read him
romance and poetry.

Since Foy was gone upon his mission, Adrian had been treated with the
consideration which he felt to be his due. Even his stepfather had taken
the opportunity to mumble some words of regret for what had happened,
and to express a hope that nothing more would be said about the matter,
while his mother was sympathetic and Elsa most charming and attentive.
Now, as he knew well, all this would be changed. Foy, the exuberant,
unrefined, plain-spoken, nerve-shaking Foy, would become the centre of
attention, and overwhelm them with long stories of very dull exploits,
while Martin, that brutal bull of a man who was only fit to draw a cart,
would stand behind and play the part of chorus, saying "Ja" and "Neen"
at proper intervals. Well, he supposed that he must put up with it, but
oh! what a weariness it was.

Another minute, and Foy was wringing him by the hand, saying in his loud
voice, "How are you, old fellow? You look as well as possible, what are
you lying in this bed for and being fed with pap by the women?"

"For the love of Heaven, Foy," interrupted Adrian, "stop crushing my
fingers and shaking me as though I were a rat. You mean it kindly, I
know, but--" and Adrian dropped back upon the pillow, coughed and looked
hectic and interesting.

Then both the women fell upon Foy, upbraiding him for his roughness,
begging him to remember that if he were not careful he might kill his
brother, whose arteries were understood to be in a most precarious
condition, till the poor man covered his ears with his hands and waited
till he saw their lips stop moving.

"I apologise," he said. "I won't touch him, I won't speak loud near him.
Adrian, do you hear?"

"Who could help it?" moaned the prostrate Adrian.

"Cousin Foy," interrupted Elsa, clasping her hands and looking up into
his face with her big brown eyes, "forgive me, but I can wait no longer.
Tell me, did you see or hear anything of my father yonder at The Hague?"

"Yes, cousin, I saw him," answered Foy presently.

"And how was he--oh! and all the rest of them?"

"He was well."

"And free and in no danger?"

"And free, but I cannot say in no danger. We are all of us in danger
nowadays, cousin," replied Foy in the same quiet voice.

"Oh! thank God for that," said Elsa.

"Little enough to thank God for," muttered Martin, who had entered the
room and was standing behind Foy looking like a giant at a show. Elsa
had turned her face away, so Foy struck backwards with all his force,
hitting Martin in the pit of the stomach with the point of his elbow.
Martin doubled himself up, recoiled a step and took the hint.

"Well, son, what news?" said Dirk, speaking for the first time.

"News!" answered Foy, escaping joyfully from this treacherous ground.
"Oh! lots of it. Look here," and plunging his hands into his pockets he
produced first the half of the broken dagger and secondly a long skinny
finger of unwholesome hue with a gold ring on it.

"Bah!" said Adrian. "Take that horrid thing away."

"Oh! I beg your pardon," answered Foy, shuffling the finger back into
his pocket, "you don't mind the dagger, do you? No? Well, then, mother,
that mail shirt of yours is the best that was ever made; this knife
broke on it like a carrot, though, by the way, it's uncommonly sticky
wear when you haven't changed it for three days, and I shall be glad
enough to get it off."

"Evidently Foy has a story to tell," said Adrian wearily, "and the
sooner he rids his mind of it the sooner he will be able to wash. I
suggest, Foy, that you should begin at the beginning."

So Foy began at the beginning, and his tale proved sufficiently moving
to interest even the soul-worn Adrian. Some portions of it he softened
down, and some of it he suppressed for the sake of Elsa--not very
successfully, indeed, for Foy was no diplomatist, and her quick
imagination filled the gaps. Another part--that which concerned her
future and his own--of necessity he omitted altogether. He told them
very briefly, however, of the flight from The Hague, of the sinking of
the Government boat, of the run through the gale to the Haarlem Mere
with the dead pilot on board and the Spanish ship behind, and of the
secret midnight burying of the treasure.

"Where did you bury it?" asked Adrian.

"I have not the slightest idea," said Foy. "I believe there are about
three hundred islets in that part of the Mere, and all I know is that
we dug a hole in one of them and stuck it in. However," he went on in
a burst of confidence, "we made a map of the place, that is--" Here he
broke off with a howl of pain, for an accident had happened.

While this narrative was proceeding, Martin, who was standing by him
saying "Ja" and "Neen" at intervals, as Adrian foresaw he would, had
unbuckled the great sword Silence, and in an abstracted manner was
amusing himself by throwing it towards the ceiling hilt downwards, and
as it fell catching it in his hand. Now, most unaccountably, he looked
the other way and missed his catch, with the result that the handle of
the heavy weapon fell exactly upon Foy's left foot and then clattered to
the ground.

"You awkward beast!" roared Foy, "you have crushed my toes," and he
hopped towards a chair upon one leg.

"Your pardon, master," said Martin. "I know it was careless; my mother
always told me that I was careless, but so was my father before me."

Adrian, overcome by the fearful crash, closed his eyes and sighed.

"Look," said Lysbeth in a fury, "he is fainting; I knew that would be
the end of all your noise. If you are not careful we shall have him
breaking another vessel. Go out of the room, all of you. You can finish
telling the story downstairs," and she drove them before her as a
farmer's wife drives fowls.

"Martin," said Foy on the stairs, where they found themselves together
for a minute, for at the first signs of the storm Dirk had preceded
them, "why did you drop that accursed great sword of yours upon my
foot?"

"Master," counted Martin imperturbably, "why did you hit me in the pit
of the stomach with your elbow?"

"To keep your tongue quiet."

"And what is the name of my sword?"

"Silence."

"Well, then, I dropped the sword 'Silence' for the same reason. I hope
it hasn't hurt you much, but if it did I can't help it."

Foy wheeled round. "What do you mean, Martin?"

"I mean," answered the great man with energy, "that you have no right to
tell what became of that paper which Mother Martha gave us."

"Why not? I have faith in my brother."

"Very likely, master, but that isn't the point. We carry a great secret,
and this secret is a trust, a dangerous trust; it would be wrong to lay
its burden upon the shoulders of other folk. What people don't know they
can't tell, master."

Foy still stared at him, half in question, half in anger, but Martin
made no further reply in words. Only he went through certain curious
motions, motions as of a man winding slowly and laboriously at something
like a pump wheel. Foy's lips turned pale.

"The rack?" he whispered. Martin nodded, and answered beneath his
breath,

"They may all of them be on it yet. You let the man in the boat escape,
and that man was the Spanish spy, Ramiro; I am sure of it. If they don't
know they can't tell, and though we know we shan't tell; we shall die
first, master."

Now Foy trembled and leaned against the wall. "What would betray us?" he
asked.

"Who knows, master? A woman's torment, a man's--" and he put a strange
meaning into his voice, "a man's--jealousy, or pride, or vengeance. Oh!
bridle your tongue and trust no one, no, not your father or mother,
or sweetheart, or--" and again that strange meaning came into Martin's
voice, "or brother."

"Or you?" queried Foy, looking up.

"I am not sure. Yes, I think you may trust me, though there is no
knowing how the rack might change a man's mind."

"If all this be so," said Foy, with a flush of sudden passion, "I have
said too much already."

"A great deal too much, master. If I could have managed it I should have
dropped the sword Silence on your toe long before. But I couldn't, for
the Heer Adrian was watching me, and I had to wait till he closed his
eyes, which he did to hear the better without seeming to listen."

"You are unjust to Adrian, Martin, as you always have been, and I am
angry with you. Say, what is to be done now?"

"Now, master," replied Martin cheerfully, "you must forget the teaching
of the Pastor Arentz, and tell a lie. You must take up your tale where
you left it off, and say that we made a map of the hiding-place, but
that--I--being a fool--managed to drop it while we were lighting the
fuses, so that it was blown away with the ship. I will tell the same
story."

"Am I to say this to my father and mother?"

"Certainly, and they will quite understand why you say it. My mistress
was getting uneasy already, and that was why she drove us from the room.
You will tell them that the treasure is buried but that the secret of
its hiding-place was lost."

"Even so, Martin, it is not lost; Mother Martha knows it, and they all
will guess that she does know it."

"Why, master, as it happened you were in such a hurry to get on with
your story that I think you forgot to mention that she was present at
the burying of the barrels. Her name was coming when I dropped the sword
upon your foot."

"But she boarded and fired the Spanish ship--so the man Ramiro and his
companion would probably have seen her."

"I doubt, master, that the only person who saw her was he whose gizzard
she split, and he will tell no tales. Probably they think it was you or
I who did that deed. But if she was seen, or if they know that she
has the secret, then let them get it from Mother Martha. Oh! mares can
gallop and ducks can dive and snakes can hide in the grass. When they
can catch the wind and make it give up its secrets, when they can charm
from sword Silence the tale of the blood which it has drunk throughout
the generations, when they can call back the dead saints from heaven and
stretch them anew within the torture-pit, then and not before, they will
win knowledge of the hoard's hiding-place from the lips of the witch of
Haarlem Meer. Oh! master, fear not for her, the grave is not so safe."

"Why did you not caution me before, Martin?"

"Because, master," answered Martin stolidly, "I did not think that you
would be such a fool. But I forgot that you are young--yes, I forget
that you are young and good, too good for the days we live in. It is my
fault. On my head be it."



CHAPTER XVI

THE MASTER

In the sitting-room, speaking more slowly and with greater caution, Foy
continued the story of their adventures. When he came to the tale of
how the ship _Swallow_ was blown up with all the Spanish boarders,
Elsa clasped her hands, saying, "Horrible! Horrible! Think of the poor
creatures hurled thus into eternity."

"And think of the business they were on," broke in Dirk grimly, adding,
"May God forgive me who cannot feel grieved to hear of the death of
Spanish cut-throats. It was well managed, Foy, excellently well managed.
But go on."

"I think that is about all," said Foy shortly, "except that two of the
Spaniards got away in a boat, one of whom is believed to be the head spy
and captain, Ramiro."

"But, son, up in Adrian's chamber just now you said something about
having made a map of the hiding-place of the gold. Where is it, for it
should be put in safety?"

"Yes, I know I did," answered Foy, "but didn't I tell you?" he went
on awkwardly. "Martin managed to drop the thing in the cabin of the
_Swallow_ while we were lighting the fuses, so it was blown up with the
ship, and there is now no record of where the stuff was buried."

"Come, come, son," said Dirk. "Martha, who knows every island on the
great lake, must remember the spot."

"Oh! no, she doesn't," answered Foy. "The truth is that she didn't come
with us when we buried the barrels. She stopped to watch the Spanish
ship, and just told us to land on the first island we came to and dig a
hole, which we did, making a map of the place before we left, the same
that Martin dropped."

All this clumsy falsehood Foy uttered with a wooden face and in a voice
which would not have convinced a three-year-old infant, priding himself
the while upon his extraordinary cleverness.

"Martin," asked Dirk, suspiciously, "is this true?"

"Absolutely true, master," replied Martin; "it is wonderful how well he
remembers."

"Son," said Dirk, turning white with suppressed anger, "you have always
been a good lad, and now you have shown yourself a brave one, but I pray
God that I may not be forced to add that you are false-tongued. Do you
not see that this looks black? The treasure which you have hidden is the
greatest in all the Netherlands. Will not folk say, it is not wonderful
that you should have forgotten its secret until--it suits you to
remember?"

Foy took a step forward, his face crimson with indignation, but the
heavy hand of Martin fell upon his shoulder and dragged him back as
though he were but a little child.

"I think, Master Foy," he said, fixing his eyes upon Lysbeth, "that your
lady mother wishes to say something."

"You are right, Martin; I do. Do you not think, husband, that in these
days of ours a man might have other reasons for hiding the truth than a
desire to enrich himself by theft?"

"What do you mean, wife?" asked Dirk. "Foy here says that he has buried
this great hoard with Martin, but that he and Martin do not know where
they buried it, and have lost the map they made. Whatever may be the
exact wording of the will, that hoard belongs to my cousin here, subject
to certain trusts which have not yet arisen, and may never arise, and I
am her guardian while Hendrik Brant lives and his executor when he dies.
Therefore, legally, it belongs to me also. By what right, then, do my
son and my servant hide the truth from me, if, indeed, they are hiding
the truth? Say what you have to say straight out, for I am a plain man
and cannot read riddles."

"Then I will say it, husband, though it is but my guess, for I have had
no words with Foy or Martin, and if I am wrong they can correct me. I
know their faces, and I think with you that they are not speaking the
truth. I think that they do not wish us to know it--not that they may
keep the secret of this treasure for themselves, but because such a
secret might well bring those who know of it to the torment and the
stake. Is it not so, my son?"

"Mother," answered Foy, almost in a whisper, "it is so. The paper is not
lost, but do not seek to learn its hiding-place, for there are wolves
who would tear your bodies limb from limb to get the knowledge out of
you; yes, even Elsa's, even Elsa's. If the trial must come let it fall
on me and Martin, who are fitter to bear it. Oh! father, surely you know
that, whatever we may be, neither of us is a thief."

Dirk advanced to his son, and kissed him on the forehead.

"My son," he said, "pardon me, and you, Red Martin, pardon me also. I
spoke in my haste. I spoke as a fool, who, at my age, should have known
better. But, oh! I tell you that I wish that this cursed treasure, these
cases of precious gems and these kegs of hoarded gold, had been shivered
to the winds of heaven with the timbers of the ship _Swallow_. For, mark
you, Ramiro has escaped, and with him another man, and they will know
well that having the night to hide it, you did not destroy those jewels
with the ship. They will track you down, these Spanish sleuthhounds,
filled with the lust of blood and gold, and it will be well if the
lives of every one of us do not pay the price of the secret of the
burying-place of the wealth of Hendrik Brant."

He ceased, pale and trembling, and a silence fell upon the room and all
in it, a sad and heavy silence, for in his voice they caught the note of
prophecy. Martin broke it.

"It may be so, master," he said; "but, your pardon, you should have
thought of that before you undertook this duty. There was no call upon
you to send the Heer Foy and myself to The Hague to bring away this
trash, but you did it as would any other honest man. Well, now it is
done, and we must take our chance, but I say this--if you are wise, my
masters, yes, and you ladies also, before you leave this room you
will swear upon the Bible, every one of you, never to whisper the word
treasure, never to think of it except to believe that it is gone--lost
beneath the waters of the Haarlemer Meer. Never to whisper it, no,
mistress, not even to the Heer Adrian, your son who lies sick abed
upstairs."

"You have learnt wisdom somewhere of late years, Martin, since you
stopped drinking and fighting," said Dirk drily, "and for my part before
God I swear it."

"And so do I." "And I." "And I." "And I," echoed the others, Martin,
who spoke last, adding, "Yes, I swear that I will never speak of it; no,
_not even to my young master, Adrian, who lies sick abed upstairs._"



Adrian made a good, though not a very quick recovery. He had lost
a great deal of blood, but the vessel closed without further
complications, so that it remained only to renew his strength by rest
and ample food. For ten days or so after the return of Foy and Martin,
he was kept in bed and nursed by the women of the house. Elsa's share
in this treatment was to read to him from the Spanish romances which he
admired. Very soon, however, he found that he admired Elsa herself even
more than the romances, and would ask her to shut the book that he might
talk to her. So long as his conversation was about himself, his dreams,
plans and ambitions, she fell into it readily enough; but when he began
to turn it upon _herself_, and to lard it with compliment and amorous
innuendo, then she demurred, and fled to the romances for refuge.

Handsome as he might be, Adrian had no attractions for Elsa. About
him there was something too exaggerated for her taste; moreover he was
Spanish, Spanish in his beauty, Spanish in the cast of his mind, and all
Spaniards were hateful to her. Deep down in her heart also lay a second
reason for this repugnance; the man reminded her of another man who for
months had been a nightmare to her soul, the Hague spy, Ramiro. This
Ramiro she had observed closely. Though she had not seen him very often
his terrible reputation was familiar to her. She knew also, for her
father had told her as much, that it was he who was drawing the nets
about him at The Hague, and who plotted day and night to rob him of his
wealth.

At first sight there was no great resemblance between the pair. How
could there be indeed between a man on the wrong side of middle age,
one-eyed, grizzled, battered, and bearing about with him an atmosphere
of iniquity, and a young gentleman, handsome, distinguished, and
wayward, but assuredly no criminal? Yet the likeness existed. She
had seen it first when Adrian was pointing out to her how, were he a
general, he would dispose his forces for the capture of Leyden, and from
that moment her nature rose in arms against him. Also it came out in
other ways, in little tricks of voice and pomposities of manner which
Elsa caught at unexpected moments, perhaps, as she told herself, because
she had trained her mind to seek these similarities. Yet all the while
she knew that the fancy was ridiculous, for what could these two men
have in common with each other?

In those days, however, Elsa did not think much of Adrian, or of anybody
except her beloved father, whose only child she was, and whom she adored
with all the passion of her heart. She knew the terrible danger in which
he stood, and guessed that she had been sent away that she should not
share his perils. Now she had but one desire and one prayer--that he
might escape in safety, and that she might return to him again. Once
only a message came from him, sent through a woman she had never seen,
the wife of a fisherman, who delivered it by word of mouth. This was the
message:

"Give my love and blessing to my daughter Elsa, and tell her that so far
I am unharmed. To Foy van Goorl say, I have heard the news. Well done,
thou good and faithful servant! Let him remember what I told him, and be
sure that he will not strive in vain, and that he shall not lack for his
reward here or hereafter."

That was all. Tidings reached them that the destruction of so many men
by the blowing up of the _Swallow_, and by her sinking of the Government
boat as she escaped, had caused much excitement and fury among the
Spaniards. But, as those who had been blown up were free-lances, and as
the boat was sunk while the _Swallow_ was flying from them, nothing had
been done in the matter. Indeed, nothing could be done, for it was not
known who manned the _Swallow_, and, as Ramiro had foreseen, her crew
were supposed to have been destroyed with her in the Haarlemer Meer.

Then, after a while, came other news that filled Elsa's heart with a
wild hope, for it was reported that Hendrik Brant had disappeared, and
was believed to have escaped from The Hague. Nothing more was heard of
him, however, which is scarcely strange, for the doomed man had
gone down the path of rich heretics into the silent vaults of the
Inquisition. The net had closed at last, and through the net fell the
sword.

But if Elsa thought seldom of Adrian, except in gusts of spasmodic
dislike, Adrian thought of Elsa, and little besides. So earnestly did
he lash his romantic temperament, and so deeply did her beauty and charm
appeal to him, that very soon he was truly in love with her. Nor did the
fact that, as he believed, she was, potentially, the greatest heiress
in the Netherlands, cool Adrian's amorous devotion. What could suit him
better in his condition, than to marry this rich and lovely lady?

So Adrian made up his mind that he would marry her, for, in his vanity,
it never occurred to him that she might object. Indeed, the only thought
that gave him trouble was the difficulty of reducing her wealth into
possession. Foy and Martin had buried it somewhere in the Haarlemer
Meer. But they said, for this he had ascertained by repeated inquiries,
although the information was given grudgingly enough, that the map of
the hiding-place had been destroyed in the explosion on the _Swallow_.
Adrian did not believe this story for a moment. He was convinced that
they were keeping the truth from him, and as the prospective master of
that treasure he resented this reticence bitterly. Still, it had to be
overcome, and so soon as he was engaged to Elsa he intended to speak
very clearly upon this point. Meanwhile, the first thing was to find a
