youngster's face revealed that he had said the right thing.

He followed the lad's rapt gaze to a shelf he had not yet studied. The
name on its cardboard label read _MacReedy_ and as soon as he saw the
tiny figures it supported, his interest became focused upon it to the
exclusion of all other shelves and their fascinating displays.

MacReedy was very evidently a specialist. His subject was American
soldiery, with its chief emphasis on artillery--from early Colonial
times to the present. As one of the highest-ranking officers in the
Ordnance Department of the United States Army, the General's critical
interest was aroused.

Here were the demi-culverins of the Manhattan Dutch, the brass
field-pieces and mortars of the French wars and the Revolution, the
light horse artillery cannon of the Mexican and Civil Wars, along with
pear-shaped Dahlgren and Parrot siege-guns, each piece with its crew of
aimers, loaders, rammers and ammunition bearers.

Here were the crowbar-like dynamite guns that protected New York and
Boston and Baltimore against threatened British invasion during the
Newfoundland fisheries disputes, back in the 1880's; and the complex
disappearing cannon that followed them. Here was the old standard
three-inch fieldpiece on which the General had cut his own eyeteeth;
here the French 75 and 155, long and short, and the mammoth railway guns
of World War One. Here was even a model of the postwar American 75--the
ill-fated cannon that had proved so accurate on the firing-range, and so
utterly useless after a half-mile over a bumpy road.

Here were the weapons of World War Two, from M-7 105 self-propelled
howitzer to the 240-millimetre tractor-borne cannon. And here were more
recent weapons, the 120-millimetre radar-aimed anti-aircraft cannon; its
newer automatic 75-millimetre cousin; the new 90-millimetre turret-mount
for the Walker Bulldog, the 105-gpf in the turret of its new heavy tank.

       *       *       *       *       *

The General felt a stir of alarm. There had been a leak somewhere;
release on this model was not scheduled for another month. He would have
to report it, of course. Then he shrugged, inwardly. Leak or not there
was small cause for alarm; _They_ must long-since have managed to
scrounge test-run photographs, if not copies of the blueprints
themselves.

Still, a leak was bad business with the country so precariously balanced
in a combustible world-situation. He looked at the next weapon, the last
in the line.

And froze....

Here was the XT-101, with its rear-mounted turret and twin dual-purpose
automatic 75-millimetre cannon. Here was a weapon, complete, that had
not been completed in actuality--there was trouble with the turret, of
course, there always was....

It couldn't be--but it was. The General discovered that his mouth had
slackened in surprise; he closed it firmly. He eyed the turret of the
miniature, noted how the automatic range-finding devices, that were
causing trouble at Aberdeen, were incorporated into the turret itself,
in a neat armored sheath.

He thought, _Lord! I wonder if that's the answer...._ Then he thought
that, if it were, the whole world would soon know it.

"A honey, isn't it?" said the curly-headed lad. He added, wistfully, "It
costs twelve dollars and eighty-six cents, with tax."

"It's a honey, all right," said the General automatically. Actually, he
was appalled--a possibly decisive weapon on sale to all and sundry for
twelve dollars and eighty-six cents! Of course the intricate inner
workings weren't there. But _They_ knew enough about radar and automatic
cannon to be able to figure it out from the model.

The General took direct action. He went to the clerk and said, "How many
have you?" pointing to the subject of his question.

"Neat--perfect workmanship," said the clerk, donning his selling
clothes.

"How many?" the General repeated.

"Only the one in the case left," the clerk replied. "I just sold the
last one in stock a moment ago. We've only had four delivered so far."

"I'll take it," said the General in a fever of impatience. He _had_ to
get it out of public view at once--although he had a sick sensation of
already being too late. He recalled the Slavic appearance, the accent of
the man who had made the last purchase.

When the clerk had wrapped it up, and he had paid for it, the General
asked to see the manager, who proved to be a pleasantly tweedy
individual. He produced his card and said, "I'm afraid this man MacReedy
has violated security-regulations. Where else is his stuff marketed?"

The manager's expression was not friendly. He said, "Mr. MacReedy's
_miniatures_ are marketed nowhere else; he has an exclusive contract
with us." He evidently resented the General's gruff approach as much as
the General resented not being addressed by title.

_Civilians!_ the General thought. _The damned fools don't
understand--they haven't the slightest idea...._

Aloud he said, "Where can I find Mr. MacReedy? I'm afraid I'm going to
have to talk to him."

"Uncle Angus? He lives next door. I'm going home now--I can show you."

The General had forgotten the male moppet. He looked down in surprise,
then up at the manager, who said, "It's quite true. This is Toby. He
helps Mr. MacReedy; he's a collector himself in a small way."

The General took Toby back with him to the hotel. He knew he should be
burning up the wires to Washington with news of his horrendous
discovery, but somehow he wanted to see it through himself--as far as he
was able. Besides, there were certain puzzling facets that would
scarcely look plausible in the dehydrated prose of an official report to
Security.

It smacked almost of the supernatural. Eyeing his small guest, who was
happily and rather messily devouring a piece of French pastry,
accompanied by a bottle of ginger-ale--sent up by room service--the
General suppressed a chill that rose from his coccyx to his cervical
vertebrae.

Like most veteran men of action, the General did not decry the
supernatural--such decrying was the property of armchair logicians. In
the course of his long career he had seen too many things that defied
logic or logical explanation. He said, "Ready to take off, Toby?"

"Yes, sir," said the lad. He was properly impressed with the General's
rank--revealed to him by the assistant manager in the lobby. Then, with
a sudden shadow of anxiety, "You aren't going to arrest Uncle Angus, are
you, sir?"

The General managed a chuckle. No sense in getting the lad scared. "No,
I just want to talk to him."

