venture to tell you so, I also feel anxious. It seemed to me as if you
were yourself preparing for some dangerous undertaking, about which I
did not dare to question you, since you told me nothing. I have,
therefore, as you see, great need of hearing from you. Now that you are
no longer beside me I am afraid every moment of erring. You sustained me
powerfully, sir, and I protest to you that to-day I feel very lonely.
Will you have the goodness, sir, should you receive news from Blois, to
send me a few lines about my little friend Mademoiselle de la Valliere,
about whose health, when we left, so much anxiety was felt? You can
understand, honored and dear guardian, how precious and indispensable to
me is the remembrance of the years that I have passed with you. I hope
that you will sometimes, too, think of me, and if at certain hours you
should miss me, if you should feel any slight regret at my absence, I
shall be overwhelmed with joy at the thought that you appreciate my
affection for and my devotion to yourself, and that I have been able to
prove them to you whilst I had the happiness of living with you."

After finishing this letter Raoul felt more composed; he looked well
around him to see if Olivain and the host might not be watching him,
whilst he impressed a kiss upon the paper, a mute and touching caress,
which the heart of Athos might well divine on opening the letter.

During this time Olivain had finished his bottle and eaten his pie; the
horses were also refreshed. Raoul motioned to the host to approach,
threw a crown upon the table, mounted his horse, and posted his letter
at Senlis. The rest that had been thus afforded to men and horses
enabled them to continue their journey at a good round pace. At
Verberie, Raoul desired Olivain to make some inquiry about the young man
who was preceding them; he had been observed to pass only three-quarters
of an hour previously, but he was well mounted, as the tavern-keeper had
already said, and rode at a rapid pace.

"Let us try and overtake this gentleman," said Raoul to Olivain; "like
ourselves he is on his way to join the army and may prove agreeable
company."

It was about four o'clock in the afternoon when Raoul arrived at
Compiegne; there he dined heartily and again inquired about the young
gentleman who was in advance of them. He had stopped, like Raoul, at the
Hotel of the Bell and Bottle, the best at Compiegne; and had started
again on his journey, saying that he should sleep at Noyon.

"Well, let us sleep at Noyon," said Raoul.

"Sir," replied Olivain, respectfully, "allow me to remark that we have
already much fatigued the horses this morning. I think it would be well
to sleep here and to start again very early to-morrow. Eighteen leagues
is enough for the first stage."

"The Comte de la Fere wished me to hasten on," replied Raoul, "that I
might rejoin the prince on the morning of the fourth day; let us push
on, then, to Noyon; it will be a stage similar to those we traveled from
Blois to Paris. We shall arrive at eight o'clock. The horses will have a
long night's rest, and at five o'clock to-morrow morning we can be again
on the road."

Olivain dared offer no opposition to this determination but he followed
his master, grumbling.

"Go on, go on," said he, between his teeth, "expend your ardor the first
day; to-morrow, instead of journeying twenty leagues, you will travel
ten, the day after to-morrow, five, and in three days you will be in
bed. There you must rest; young people are such braggarts."

It was easy to see that Olivain had not been taught in the school of the
Planchets and the Grimauds. Raoul really felt tired, but he was desirous
of testing his strength, and, brought up in the principles of Athos and
certain of having heard him speak a thousand times of stages of
twenty-five leagues, he did not wish to fall far short of his model.
D'Artagnan, that man of iron, who seemed to be made of nerve and muscle
only, had struck him with admiration. Therefore, in spite of Olivain's
remarks, he continued to urge his steed more and more, and following a
pleasant little path, leading to a ferry, and which he had been assured
shortened the journey by the distance of one league, he arrived at the
summit of a hill and perceived the river flowing before him. A little
troop of men on horseback were waiting on the edge of the stream, ready
to embark. Raoul did not doubt this was the gentleman and his escort; he
called out to him, but they were too distant to be heard; then, in spite
of the weariness of his beast, he made it gallop but the rising ground
soon deprived him of all sight of the travelers, and when he had again
attained a new height, the ferryboat had left the shore and was making
for the opposite bank. Raoul, seeing that he could not arrive in time to
cross the ferry with the travelers, halted to wait for Olivain. At this
moment a shriek was heard that seemed to come from the river. Raoul
turned toward the side whence the cry had sounded, and shaded his eyes
from the glare of the setting sun with his hand.

"Olivain!" he exclaimed, "what do I see below there?"

A second scream, more piercing than the first, now sounded.

"Oh, sir!" cried Olivain, "the rope which holds the ferryboat has broken
and the boat is drifting. But what do I see in the water--something
struggling?"

"Oh, yes," exclaimed Raoul, fixing his glance on one point in the
stream, splendidly illumined by the setting sun, "a horse, a rider!"

"They are sinking!" cried Olivain in his turn.

It was true, and Raoul was convinced that some accident had happened and
that a man was drowning; he gave his horse its head, struck his spurs
into its sides, and the animal, urged by pain and feeling that he had
space open before him, bounded over a kind of paling which inclosed the
landing place, and fell into the river, scattering to a distance waves
of white froth.

"Ah, sir!" cried Olivain, "what are you doing? Good God!"

Raoul was directing his horse toward the unhappy man in danger. This
was, in fact, a custom familiar to him. Having been brought up on the
banks of the Loire, he might have been said to have been cradled on its
waves; a hundred times he had crossed it on horseback, a thousand times
had swum across. Athos, foreseeing the period when he should make a
soldier of the viscount, had inured him to all kinds of arduous
undertakings.

"Oh, heavens!" continued Olivain, in despair, "what would the count say
if he only saw you now!"

"The count would do as I do," replied Raoul, urging his horse vigorously
forward.

"But I--but I," cried Olivain, pale and disconsolate rushing about on
the shore, "how shall I cross?"

"Leap, coward!" cried Raoul, swimming on; then addressing the traveler,
who was struggling twenty yards in front of him: "Courage, sir!" said
he, "courage! we are coming to your aid."

Olivain advanced, retired, then made his horse rear--turned it and then,
struck to the core by shame, leaped, as Raoul had done, only repeating:

"I am a dead man! we are lost!"

In the meantime, the ferryboat had floated away, carried down by the
stream, and the shrieks of those whom it contained resounded more and
more. A man with gray hair had thrown himself from the boat into the
river and was swimming vigorously toward the person who was drowning;
but being obliged to go against the current he advanced but slowly.
Raoul continued his way and was visibly gaining ground; but the horse
and its rider, of whom he did not lose sight, were evidently sinking.
The nostrils of the horse were no longer above water, and the rider, who
had lost the reins in struggling, fell with his head back and his arms
extended. One moment longer and all would disappear.

"Courage!" cried Raoul, "courage!"

"Too late!" murmured the young man, "too late!"

The water closed above his head and stifled his voice.

Raoul sprang from his horse, to which he left the charge of its own
preservation, and in three or four strokes was at the gentleman's side;
he seized the horse at once by the curb and raised its head above water;
the animal began to breathe again and, as if he comprehended that they
had come to his aid, redoubled his efforts. Raoul at the same time
seized one of the young man's hands and placed it on the mane, which it
grasped with the tenacity of a drowning man. Thus, sure that the rider
would not release his hold, Raoul now only directed his attention to the
horse, which he guided to the opposite bank, helping it to cut through
the water and encouraging it with words.

All at once the horse stumbled against a ridge and then placed its foot
on the sand.

"Saved!" exclaimed the man with gray hair, who also touched bottom.

"Saved!" mechanically repeated the young gentleman, releasing the mane
and sliding from the saddle into Raoul's arms; Raoul was but ten yards
from the shore; there he bore the fainting man, and laying him down upon
the grass, unfastened the buttons of his collar and unhooked his
doublet. A moment later the gray-headed man was beside him. Olivain
managed in his turn to land, after crossing himself repeatedly; and the
people in the ferryboat guided themselves as well as they were able
toward the bank, with the aid of a pole which chanced to be in the boat.

Thanks to the attentions of Raoul and the man who accompanied the young
gentleman, the color gradually returned to the pale cheeks of the dying
man, who opened his eyes, at first entirely bewildered, but who soon
fixed his gaze upon the person who had saved him.

"Ah, sir," he exclaimed, "it was you! Without you I was a dead
man--thrice dead."

"But one recovers, sir, as you perceive," replied Raoul, "and we have
but had a little bath."

"Oh! sir, what gratitude I feel!" exclaimed the man with gray hair.

"Ah, there you are, my good D'Arminges; I have given you a great fright,
have I not? but it is your own fault. You were my tutor, why did you not
teach me to swim?"

"Oh, monsieur le comte," replied the old man, "had any misfortune
happened to you, I should never have dared to show myself to the marshal
again."

"But how did the accident happen?" asked Raoul.

"Oh, sir, in the most natural way possible," replied he to whom they had
given the title of count. "We were about a third of the way across the
river when the cord of the ferryboat broke. Alarmed by the cries and
gestures of the boatmen, my horse sprang into the water. I cannot swim,
and dared not throw myself into the river. Instead of aiding the
movements of my horse, I paralyzed them; and I was just going to drown
myself with the best grace in the world, when you arrived just in time
to pull me out of the water; therefore, sir, if you will agree,
henceforward we are friends until death."

"Sir," replied Raoul, bowing, "I am entirely at your service, I assure
you."

"I am called the Count de Guiche," continued the young man; "my father
is the Marechal de Grammont; and now that you know who I am, do me the
honor to inform me who you are."

"I am the Viscount de Bragelonne," answered Raoul, blushing at being
unable to name his father, as the Count de Guiche had done.

"Viscount, your countenance, your goodness and your courage incline me
toward you; my gratitude is already due. Shake hands--I crave your
friendship."

"Sir," said Raoul, returning the count's pressure of the hand, "I like
you already, from my heart; pray regard me as a devoted friend, I
beseech you."

"And now, where are you going, viscount?" inquired De Guiche.

"To join the army, under the prince, count."

"And I, too!" exclaimed the young man, in a transport of joy. "Oh, so
much the better, we will fire the first shot together."

"It is well; be friends," said the tutor; "young as you both are, you
were perhaps born under the same star and were destined to meet. And
now," continued he, "you must change your clothes; your servants, to
whom I gave directions the moment they had left the ferryboat, ought to
be already at the inn. Linen and wine are both being warmed; come."

The young men had no objection to this proposition; on the contrary,
they thought it very timely.

They mounted again at once, whilst looks of admiration passed between
them. They were indeed two elegant horsemen, with figures slight and
upright, noble faces, bright and proud looks, loyal and intelligent
smiles.

De Guiche might have been about eighteen years of age, but he was
scarcely taller than Raoul, who was only fifteen.




30. Skirmishing.


The halt at Noyon was but brief, every one there being wrapped in
profound sleep. Raoul had desired to be awakened should Grimaud arrive,
but Grimaud did not arrive. Doubtless, too, the horses on their part
appreciated the eight hours of repose and the abundant stabling which
was granted them. The Count de Guiche was awakened at five o'clock in
the morning by Raoul, who came to wish him good-day. They breakfasted in
haste, and at six o'clock had already gone ten miles.

The young count's conversation was most interesting to Raoul, therefore
he listened much, whilst the count talked well and long. Brought up in
Paris, where Raoul had been but once; at the court, which Raoul had
never seen; his follies as page; two duels, which he had already found
the means of fighting, in spite of the edicts against them and, more
especially, in spite of his tutor's vigilance--these things excited the
greatest curiosity in Raoul. Raoul had only been at M. Scarron's house;
he named to Guiche the people whom he had seen there. Guiche knew
everybody--Madame de Neuillan, Mademoiselle d'Aubigne, Mademoiselle de
Scudery, Mademoiselle Paulet, Madame de Chevreuse. He criticised
everybody humorously. Raoul trembled, lest he should laugh among the
rest at Madame de Chevreuse, for whom he entertained deep and genuine
sympathy, but either instinctively, or from affection for the duchess,
he said everything in her favor. His praises increased Raoul's
friendship twofold. Then came the question of gallantry and love
affairs. Under this head, also, Bragelonne had much more to hear than to
tell. He listened attentively and fancied that he discovered through
three or four rather frivolous adventures, that the count, like himself,
had a secret to hide in the depths of his heart.

De Guiche, as we have said before, had been educated at the court, and
the intrigues of this court were not unknown to him. It was the same
court of which Raoul had so often heard the Comte de la Fere speak,
except that its aspect had much changed since the period when Athos had
himself been part of it; therefore everything which the Count de Guiche
related was new to his traveling companion. The young count, witty and
caustic, passed all the world in review; the queen herself was not
spared, and Cardinal Mazarin came in for his share of ridicule.

The day passed away as rapidly as an hour. The count's tutor, a man of
the world and a bon vivant, up to his eyes in learning, as his pupil
described him, often recalled the profound erudition, the witty and
caustic satire of Athos to Raoul; but as regarded grace, delicacy, and
nobility of external appearance, no one in these points was to be
compared to the Comte de la Fere.

The horses, which were more kindly used than on the previous day,
stopped at Arras at four o'clock in the evening. They were approaching
the scene of war; and as bands of Spaniards sometimes took advantage of
the night to make expeditions even as far as the neighborhood of Arras,
they determined to remain in the town until the morrow. The French army
held all between Pont-a-Marc as far as Valenciennes, falling back upon
Douai. The prince was said to be in person at Bethune.

The enemy's army extended from Cassel to Courtray; and as there was no
species of violence or pillage it did not commit, the poor people on the
frontier quitted their isolated dwellings and fled for refuge into the
strong cities which held out a shelter to them. Arras was encumbered
with fugitives. An approaching battle was much spoken of, the prince
having manoeuvred, until that movement, only in order to await a
reinforcement that had just reached him.

The young men congratulated themselves on having arrived so opportunely.
The evening was employed in discussing the war; the grooms polished
their arms; the young men loaded the pistols in case of a skirmish, and
they awoke in despair, having both dreamed that they had arrived too
late to participate in the battle. In the morning it was rumored that
Prince de Conde had evacuated Bethune and fallen back on Carvin,
leaving, however, a strong garrison in the former city.

But as there was nothing positively certain in this report, the young
warriors decided to continue their way toward Bethune, free on the road
to diverge to the right and march to Carvin if necessary.

The count's tutor was well acquainted with the country; he consequently
proposed to take a crossroad, which lay between that of Lens and that of
Bethune. They obtained information at Ablain, and a statement of their
route was left for Grimaud. About seven o'clock in the morning they set
out. De Guiche, who was young and impulsive, said to Raoul, "Here we
are, three masters and three servants. Our valets are well armed and
yours seems to be tough enough."

"I have never seen him put to the test," replied Raoul, "but he is a
Breton, which promises something."

"Yes, yes," resumed De Guiche; "I am sure he can fire a musket when
required. On my side I have two sure men, who have been in action with
my father. We therefore represent six fighting men; if we should meet a
little troop of enemies, equal or even superior in number to our own,
shall we charge them, Raoul?"

"Certainly, sir," replied the viscount.

"Holloa! young people--stop there!" said the tutor, joining in the
conversation. "Zounds! how you manoeuvre my instructions, count! You
seem to forget the orders I received to conduct you safe and sound to
his highness the prince! Once with the army you may be killed at your
good pleasure; but until that time, I warn you that in my capacity of
general of the army I shall order a retreat and turn my back on the
first red coat we come across." De Guiche and Raoul glanced at each
other, smiling.

They arrived at Ablain without accident. There they inquired and learned
that the prince had in reality quitted Bethune and stationed himself
between Cambria and La Venthie. Therefore, leaving directions at every
place for Grimaud, they took a crossroad which conducted the little
troop by the bank of a small stream flowing into the Lys. The country
was beautiful, intersected by valleys as green as the emerald. Here and
there they passed little copses crossing the path which they were
following. In anticipation of some ambuscade in each of these little
woods the tutor placed his two servants at the head of the band, thus
forming the advance guard. Himself and the two young men represented the
body of the army, whilst Olivain, with his rifle upon his knee and his
eyes upon the watch, protected the rear.

They had observed for some time before them, on the horizon, a rather
thick wood; and when they had arrived at a distance of a hundred steps
from it, Monsieur d'Arminges took his usual precautions and sent on in
advance the count's two grooms. The servants had just disappeared under
the trees, followed by the tutor, and the young men were laughing and
talking about a hundred yards off. Olivain was at the same distance in
the rear, when suddenly there resounded five or six musket-shots. The
tutor cried halt; the young men obeyed, pulling up their steeds, and at
the same moment the two valets were seen returning at a gallop.

The young men, impatient to learn the cause of the firing, spurred on
toward the servants. The tutor followed them.

"Were you stopped?" eagerly inquired the two youths.

"No," replied the servants, "it is even probable that we have not been
seen; the shots were fired about a hundred paces in advance of us, in
the thickest part of the wood, and we returned to ask your advice."

"My advice is this," said Monsieur d'Arminges, "and if needs be, my
will, that we beat a retreat. There may be an ambuscade concealed in
this wood."

"Did you see nothing there?" asked the count.

"I thought I saw," said one of the servants, "horsemen dressed in
yellow, creeping along the bed of the stream.

"That's it," said the tutor. "We have fallen in with a party of
Spaniards. Come back, sirs, back."

The two youths looked at each other, and at this moment a pistol-shot
and cries for help were heard. Another glance between the young men
convinced them both that neither had any wish to go back, and as the
tutor had already turned his horse's head, they both spurred forward,
Raoul crying: "Follow me, Olivain!" and the Count de Guiche: "Follow,
Urban and Planchet!" And before the tutor could recover from his
surprise they had both disappeared into the forest. Whilst they spurred
their steeds they held their pistols ready also. In five minutes they
arrived at the spot whence the noise had proceeded, and then restraining
their horses, they advanced cautiously.

"Hush," whispered De Guiche, "these are cavaliers."

"Yes, three on horseback and three who have dismounted."

"Can you see what they are doing?"

"Yes, they appear to be searching a wounded or dead man."

"It is some cowardly assassination," said De Guiche.

"They are soldiers, though," resumed De Bragelonne.

"Yes, skirmishers; that is to say, highway robbers."

"At them!" cried Raoul. "At them!" echoed De Guiche.

"Oh! gentlemen! gentlemen! in the name of Heaven!" cried the poor tutor.

But he was not listened to, and his cries only served to arouse the
attention of the Spaniards.

The men on horseback at once rushed at the two youths, leaving the three
others to complete the plunder of the dead or wounded travelers; for on
approaching nearer, instead of one extended figure, the young men
discovered two. De Guiche fired the first shot at ten paces and missed
his man; and the Spaniard, who had advanced to meet Raoul, aimed in his
turn, and Raoul felt a pain in the left arm, similar to that of a blow
from a whip. He let off his fire at but four paces. Struck in the breast
and extending his arms, the Spaniard fell back on the crupper, and the
terrified horse, turning around, carried him off.

Raoul at this moment perceived the muzzle of a gun pointed at him, and
remembering the recommendation of Athos, he, with the rapidity of
lightning, made his horse rear as the shot was fired. His horse bounded
to one side, losing its footing, and fell, entangling Raoul's leg under
its body. The Spaniard sprang forward and seized the gun by its muzzle,
in order to strike Raoul on the head with the butt. In the position in
which Raoul lay, unfortunately, he could neither draw his sword from the
scabbard, nor his pistols from their holsters. The butt end of the
musket hovered over his head, and he could scarcely restrain himself
from closing his eyes, when with one bound Guiche reached the Spaniard
and placed a pistol at his throat. "Yield!" he cried, "or you are a dead
man!" The musket fell from the soldier's hands, who yielded on the
instant. Guiche summoned one of his grooms, and delivering the prisoner
into his charge, with orders to shoot him through the head if he
attempted to escape, he leaped from his horse and approached Raoul.

"Faith, sir," said Raoul, smiling, although his pallor betrayed the
excitement consequent on a first affair, "you are in a great hurry to
pay your debts and have not been long under any obligation to me.
Without your aid," continued he, repeating the count's words "I should
have been a dead man--thrice dead."

"My antagonist took flight," replied De Guiche "and left me at liberty
to come to your assistance. But are you seriously wounded? I see you are
covered with blood!"

"I believe," said Raoul, "that I have got something like a scratch on
the arm. If you will help me to drag myself from under my horse I hope
nothing need prevent us continuing our journey."

Monsieur d'Arminges and Olivain had already dismounted and were
attempting to raise the struggling horse. At last Raoul succeeded in
drawing his foot from the stirrup and his leg from under the animal, and
in a second he was on his feet again.

"Nothing broken?" asked De Guiche.

"Faith, no, thank Heaven!" replied Raoul; "but what has become of the
poor wretches whom these scoundrels were murdering?"

"I fear we arrived too late. They have killed them, I think, and taken
flight, carrying off their booty. My servants are examining the bodies."

"Let us go and see whether they are quite dead, or if they can still be
helped," suggested Raoul. "Olivain, we have come into possession of two
horses, but I have lost my own. Take for yourself the better of the two
and give me yours."

They approached the spot where the unfortunate victims lay.




31. The Monk.


Two men lay prone upon the ground, one bathed in blood and motionless,
with his face toward the earth; this one was dead. The other leaned
against a tree, supported there by the two valets, and was praying
fervently, with clasped hands and eyes raised to Heaven. He had received
a ball in his thigh, which had broken the bone. The young men first
approached the dead man.

"He is a priest," said Bragelonne, "he has worn the tonsure. Oh, the
scoundrels! to lift their hands against a minister of God."

"Come here, sir," said Urban, an old soldier who had served under the
cardinal duke in all his campaigns; "come here, there is nothing to be
done with him, whilst we may perhaps be able to save the other."

The wounded man smiled sadly. "Save me! Oh, no!" said he, "but help me
to die, if you can."

"Are you a priest?" asked Raoul.

"No sir."

"I ask, as your unfortunate companion appeared to me to belong to the
church."

"He is the curate of Bethune, sir, and was carrying the holy vessels
belonging to his church, and the treasure of the chapter, to a safe
place, the prince having abandoned our town yesterday; and as it was
known that bands of the enemy were prowling about the country, no one
dared to accompany the good man, so I offered to do so.

"And, sir," continued the wounded man, "I suffer much and would like, if
possible, to be carried to some house."

"Where you can be relieved?" asked De Guiche.

"No, where I can confess."

"But perhaps you are not so dangerously wounded as you think," said
Raoul.

"Sir," replied the wounded man, "believe me, there is no time to lose;
the ball has broken the thigh bone and entered the intestines."

"Are you a surgeon?" asked De Guiche.

"No, but I know a little about wounds, and mine, I know, is mortal. Try,
therefore, either to carry me to some place where I may see a priest or
take the trouble to send one to me here. It is my soul that must be
saved; as for my body, it is lost."

"To die whilst doing a good deed! It is impossible. God will help you."

"Gentlemen, in the name of Heaven!" said the wounded man, collecting all
his forces, as if to get up, "let us not lose time in useless words.
Either help me to gain the nearest village or swear to me on your
salvation that you will send me the first monk, the first cure, the
first priest you may meet. But," he added in a despairing tone, "perhaps
no one will dare to come for it is known that the Spaniards are ranging
through the country, and I shall die without absolution. My God! my God!
Good God! good God!" added the wounded man, in an accent of terror which
made the young men shudder; "you will not allow that? that would be too
terrible!"

"Calm yourself, sir," replied De Guiche. "I swear to you, you shall
receive the consolation that you ask. Only tell us where we shall find a
house at which we can demand aid and a village from which we can fetch a
priest."

"Thank you, and God reward you! About half a mile from this, on the same
road, there is an inn, and about a mile further on, after leaving the
inn, you will reach the village of Greney. There you must find the
curate, or if he is not at home, go to the convent of the Augustines,
which is the last house on the right, and bring me one of the brothers.
Monk or priest, it matters not, provided only that he has received from
holy church the power of absolving in articulo mortis."

"Monsieur d'Arminges," said De Guiche, "remain beside this unfortunate
man and see that he is removed as gently as possible. The vicomte and
myself will go and find a priest."

"Go, sir," replied the tutor; "but in Heaven's name do not expose
yourself to danger!"

"Do not fear. Besides, we are safe for to-day; you know the axiom, 'Non
bis in idem.'"

"Courage, sir," said Raoul to the wounded man. "We are going to execute
your wishes."

"May Heaven prosper you!" replied the dying man, with an accent of
gratitude impossible to describe.

The two young men galloped off in the direction mentioned and in ten
minutes reached the inn. Raoul, without dismounting, called to the host
and announced that a wounded man was about to be brought to his house
and begged him in the meantime to prepare everything needful. He desired
him also, should he know in the neighborhood any doctor or chirurgeon,
to fetch him, taking on himself the payment of the messenger.

The host, who saw two young noblemen, richly clad, promised everything
they required, and our two cavaliers, after seeing that preparations for
the reception were actually begun, started off again and proceeded
rapidly toward Greney.

They had gone rather more than a league and had begun to descry the
first houses of the village, the red-tiled roofs of which stood out from
the green trees which surrounded them, when, coming toward them mounted
on a mule, they perceived a poor monk, whose large hat and gray worsted
dress made them take him for an Augustine brother. Chance for once
seemed to favor them in sending what they were so assiduously seeking.
He was a man about twenty-two or twenty-three years old, but who
appeared much older from ascetic exercises. His complexion was pale, not
of that deadly pallor which is a kind of neutral beauty, but of a
bilious, yellow hue; his colorless hair was short and scarcely extended
beyond the circle formed by the hat around his head, and his light blue
eyes seemed destitute of any expression.

"Sir," began Raoul, with his usual politeness, "are you an
ecclesiastic?"

"Why do you ask me that?" replied the stranger, with a coolness which
was barely civil.

"Because we want to know," said De Guiche, haughtily.

The stranger touched his mule with his heel and continued his way.

In a second De Guiche had sprung before him and barred his passage.
"Answer, sir," exclaimed he; "you have been asked politely, and every
question is worth an answer."

"I suppose I am free to say or not to say who I am to two strangers who
take a fancy to ask me."

It was with difficulty that De Guiche restrained the intense desire he
had of breaking the monk's bones.

"In the first place," he said, making an effort to control himself, "we
are not people who may be treated anyhow; my friend there is the
Viscount of Bragelonne and I am the Count de Guiche. Nor was it from
caprice we asked the question, for there is a wounded and dying man who
demands the succor of the church. If you be a priest, I conjure you in
the name of humanity to follow me to aid this man; if you be not, it is
a different matter, and I warn you in the name of courtesy, of which you
appear profoundly ignorant, that I shall chastise you for your
insolence."

The pale face of the monk became so livid and his smile so strange, that
Raoul, whose eyes were still fixed upon him, felt as if this smile had
struck to his heart like an insult.

"He is some Spanish or Flemish spy," said he, putting his hand to his
pistol. A glance, threatening and transient as lightning, replied to
Raoul.

"Well, sir," said De Guiche, "are you going to reply?"

"I am a priest," said the young man.

"Then, father," said Raoul, forcing himself to convey a respect by
speech that did not come from his heart, "if you are a priest you have
an opportunity, as my friend has told you, of exercising your vocation.
At the next inn you will find a wounded man, now being attended by our
servants, who has asked the assistance of a minister of God."

"I will go," said the monk.

And he touched his mule.

"If you do not go, sir," said De Guiche, "remember that we have two
steeds able to catch your mule and the power of having you seized
wherever you may be; and then I swear your trial will be summary; one
can always find a tree and a cord."

The monk's eye again flashed, but that was all; he merely repeated his
phrase, "I will go,"--and he went.

"Let us follow him," said De Guiche; "it will be the surest plan."

"I was about to propose so doing," answered De Bragelonne.

In the space of five minutes the monk turned around to ascertain whether
he was followed or not.

"You see," said Raoul, "we have done wisely."

"What a horrible face that monk has," said De Guiche.

"Horrible!" replied Raoul, "especially in expression."

"Yes, yes," said De Guiche, "a strange face; but these monks are subject
to such degrading practices; their fasts make them pale, the blows of
the discipline make them hypocrites, and their eyes become inflamed
through weeping for the good things of this life we common folk enjoy,
but they have lost."

"Well," said Raoul, "the poor man will get his priest, but, by Heaven,
the penitent appears to me to have a better conscience than the
confessor. I confess I am accustomed to priests of a very different
appearance."

"Ah!" exclaimed De Guiche, "you must understand that this is one of
those wandering brothers, who go begging on the high road until some day
a benefice falls down from Heaven on them; they are mostly
foreigners--Scotch, Irish or Danish. I have seen them before."

"As ugly?"

"No, but reasonably hideous."

"What a misfortune for the wounded man to die under the hands of such a
friar!"

"Pshaw!" said De Guiche. "Absolution comes not from him who administers
it, but from God. However, for my part, I would rather die unshriven
than have anything to say to such a confessor. You are of my opinion,
are you not, viscount? and I see you playing with the pommel of your
sword, as if you had a great inclination to break the holy father's
head."

"Yes, count, it is a strange thing and one which might astonish you, but
I feel an indescribable horror at the sight of yonder man. Have you ever
seen a snake rise up on your path?"

"Never," answered De Guiche.

"Well, it has happened to me to do so in our Blaisois forests, and I
remember that the first time I encountered one with its eyes fixed upon
me, curled up, swinging its head and pointing its tongue, I remained
fixed, pale and as though fascinated, until the moment when the Comte de
la Fere----"

"Your father?" asked De Guiche.

"No, my guardian," replied Raoul, blushing.

"Very well----"

"Until the moment when the Comte de la Fere," resumed Raoul, "said,
'Come, Bragelonne, draw your sword;' then only I rushed upon the reptile
and cut it in two, just at the moment when it was rising on its tail and
hissing, ere it sprang upon me. Well, I vow I felt exactly the same
sensation at sight of that man when he said, 'Why do you ask me that?'
and looked so strangely at me."

"Then you regret that you did not cut your serpent in two morsels?"

"Faith, yes, almost," said Raoul.

They had now arrived within sight of the little inn and could see on the
opposite side the procession bearing the wounded man and guided by
Monsieur d'Arminges. The youths spurred on.

"There is the wounded man," said De Guiche, passing close to the
Augustine brother. "Be good enough to hurry yourself a little, monsieur
monk."

As for Raoul, he avoided the monk by the whole width of the road and
passed him, turning his head away in repulsion.

The young men rode up to the wounded man to announce that they were
followed by the priest. He raised himself to glance in the direction
which they pointed out, saw the monk, and fell back upon the litter, his
face illumined by joy.

"And now," said the youths, "we have done all we can for you; and as we
are in haste to rejoin the prince's army we must continue our journey.
You will excuse us, sir, but we are told that a battle is expected and
we do not wish to arrive the day after it."

"Go, my young sirs," said the sick man, "and may you both be blessed for
your piety. You have done for me, as you promised, all that you could
do. As for me I can only repeat, may God protect you and all dear to
you!"

"Sir," said De Guiche to his tutor, "we will precede you, and you can
rejoin us on the road to Cambrin."

The host was at his door and everything was prepared--bed, bandages, and
lint; and a groom had gone to Lens, the nearest village, for a doctor.

"Everything," said he to Raoul, "shall be done as you desire; but you
will not stop to have your wound dressed?"

"Oh, my wound--mine--'tis nothing," replied the viscount; "it will be
time to think about it when we next halt; only have the goodness, should
you see a cavalier who makes inquiries about a young man on a chestnut
horse followed by a servant, to tell him, in fact, that you have seen
me, but that I have continued my journey and intend to dine at
Mazingarbe and to stop at Cambrin. This cavalier is my attendant."

"Would it not be safer and more certain if I should ask him his name and
tell him yours?" demanded the host.

"There is no harm in over-precaution. I am the Viscount de Bragelonne
and he is called Grimaud."

At this moment the wounded man arrived from one direction and the monk
from the other, the latter dismounting from his mule and desiring that
it should be taken to the stables without being unharnessed.

"Sir monk," said De Guiche, "confess well that brave man; and be not
concerned for your expenses or for those of your mule; all is paid."

"Thanks, monsieur," said the monk, with one of those smiles that made
Bragelonne shudder.

"Come, count," said Raoul, who seemed instinctively to dislike the
vicinity of the Augustine; "come, I feel ill here," and the two young
men spurred on.

The litter, borne by two servants, now entered the house. The host and
his wife were standing on the steps, whilst the unhappy man seemed to
suffer dreadful pain and yet to be concerned only to know if he was
followed by the monk. At sight of this pale, bleeding man, the wife
grasped her husband's arm.

"Well, what's the matter?" asked the latter, "are you going to be ill
just now?"

"No, but look," replied the hostess, pointing to the wounded man; "I ask
you if you recognize him?"

"That man--wait a bit."

"Ah! I see you know him," exclaimed the wife; "for you have become pale
in your turn."

"Truly," cried the host, "misfortune is coming on our house; it is the
former executioner of Bethune."

"The former executioner of Bethune!" murmured the young monk, shrinking
back and showing on his countenance the feeling of repugnance which his
penitent inspired.

Monsieur d'Arminges, who was at the door, perceived his hesitation.

"Sir monk," said he, "whether he is now or has been an executioner, this
unfortunate being is none the less a man. Render to him, then, the last
service he can by any possibility ask of you, and your work will be all
the more meritorious."

The monk made no reply, but silently wended his way to the room where
the two valets had deposited the dying man on a bed. D'Arminges and
Olivain and the two grooms then mounted their horses, and all four
started off at a quick trot to rejoin Raoul and his companion. Just as
the tutor and his escort disappeared in their turn, a new traveler
stopped on the threshold of the inn.

"What does your worship want?" demanded the host, pale and trembling
from the discovery he had just made.

The traveler made a sign as if he wished to drink, and then pointed to
his horse and gesticulated like a man who is brushing something.

"Ah, diable!" said the host to himself; "this man seems dumb. And where
will your worship drink?"

"There," answered the traveler, pointing to the table.

"I was mistaken," said the host, "he's not quite dumb. And what else
does your worship wish for?"

"To know if you have seen a young man pass, fifteen years of age,
mounted on a chestnut horse and followed by a groom?"

"The Viscount de Bragelonne?

"Just so."

"Then you are called Monsieur Grimaud?"

The traveler made a sign of assent.

"Well, then," said the host, "your young master was here a quarter of an
hour ago; he will dine at Mazingarbe and sleep at Cambrin."

"How far is Mazingarbe?"

"Two miles and a half."

"Thank you."

Grimaud was drinking his wine silently and had just placed his glass on
the table to be filled a second time, when a terrific scream resounded
from the room occupied by the monk and the dying man. Grimaud sprang up.

"What is that?" said he; "whence comes that cry?"

"From the wounded man's room," replied the host.

"What wounded man?"

"The former executioner of Bethune, who has just been brought in here,
assassinated by Spaniards, and who is now being confessed by an
Augustine friar."

"The old executioner of Bethune," muttered Grimaud; "a man between
fifty-five and sixty, tall, strong, swarthy, black hair and beard?"

"That is he, except that his beard has turned gray and his hair is
white; do you know him?" asked the host.

"I have seen him once," replied Grimaud, a cloud darkening his
countenance at the picture so suddenly summoned to the bar of
recollection.

At this instant a second cry, less piercing than the first, but followed
by prolonged groaning, was heard.

The three listeners looked at one another in alarm.

"We must see what it is," said Grimaud.

"It sounds like the cry of one who is being murdered," murmured the
host.

"Mon Dieu!" said the woman, crossing herself.

If Grimaud was slow in speaking, we know that he was quick to act; he
sprang to the door and shook it violently, but it was bolted on the
other side.

"Open the door!" cried the host; "open it instantly, sir monk!"

No reply.

"Unfasten it, or I will break it in!" said Grimaud.

The same silence, and then, ere the host could oppose his design,
Grimaud seized a pair of pincers he perceived in a corner and forced the
bolt. The room was inundated with blood, dripping from the mattresses
upon which lay the wounded man, speechless; the monk had disappeared.

"The monk!" cried the host; "where is the monk?"

Grimaud sprang toward an open window which looked into the courtyard.

"He has escaped by this means," exclaimed he.

"Do you think so?" said the host, bewildered; "boy, see if the mule
belonging to the monk is still in the stable."

"There is no mule," cried he to whom this question was addressed.

The host clasped his hands and looked around him suspiciously, whilst
Grimaud knit his brows and approached the wounded man, whose worn, hard
features awoke in his mind such awful recollections of the past.

"There can be no longer any doubt but that it is himself," said he.

"Does he still live?" inquired the innkeeper.

Making no reply, Grimaud opened the poor man's jacket to feel if the
heart beat, whilst the host approached in his turn; but in a moment they
both fell back, the host uttering a cry of horror and Grimaud becoming
pallid. The blade of a dagger was buried up to the hilt in the left side
of the executioner.

"Run! run for help!" cried Grimaud, "and I will remain beside him here."

The host quitted the room in agitation, and as for his wife, she had
fled at the sound of her husband's cries.




32. The Absolution.


This is what had taken place: We have seen that it was not of his own
free will, but, on the contrary, very reluctantly, that the monk
attended the wounded man who had been recommended to him in so strange a
manner. Perhaps he would have sought to escape by flight had he seen any
possibility of doing so. He was restrained by the threats of the two
gentlemen and by the presence of their attendants, who doubtless had
received their instructions. And besides, he considered it most
expedient, without exhibiting too much ill-will, to follow to the end
his role as confessor.

The monk entered the chamber and approached the bed of the wounded man.
The executioner searched his face with the quick glance peculiar to
those who are about to die and have no time to lose. He made a movement
of surprise and said:

"Father, you are very young."

"Men who bear my robe have no age," replied the monk, dryly.

"Alas, speak to me more gently, father; in my last moments I need a
friend."

"Do you suffer much?" asked the monk.

"Yes, but in my soul much more than in my body."

"We will save your soul," said the young man; "but are you really the
executioner of Bethune, as these people say?"

"That is to say," eagerly replied the wounded man, who doubtless feared
that the name of executioner would take from him the last help that he
could claim--"that is to say, I was, but am no longer; it is fifteen
years since I gave up the office. I still assist at executions, but no
longer strike the blow myself--no, indeed."

"You have, then, a repugnance to your profession?"

"So long as I struck in the name of the law and of justice my profession
allowed me to sleep quietly, sheltered as I was by justice and law; but
since that terrible night when I became an instrument of private
vengeance and when with personal hatred I raised the sword over one of
God's creatures--since that day----"

The executioner paused and shook his head with an expression of despair.

"Tell me about it," said the monk, who, sitting on the foot of the bed,
began to be interested in a story so strangely introduced.

"Ah!" cried the dying man, with all the effusiveness of a grief declared
after long suppression, "ah! I have sought to stifle remorse by twenty
years of good deeds; I have assuaged the natural ferocity of those who
shed blood; on every occasion I have exposed my life to save those who
were in danger, and I have preserved lives in exchange for that I took
away. That is not all; the money gained in the exercise of my profession
I have distributed to the poor; I have been assiduous in attending
church and those who formerly fled from me have become accustomed to
seeing me. All have forgiven me, some have even loved me; but I think
that God has not pardoned me, for the memory of that execution pursues
me constantly and every night I see that woman's ghost rising before
me."

"A woman! You have assassinated a woman, then?" cried the monk.

"You also!" exclaimed the executioner, "you use that word which sounds
ever in my ears--'assassinated!' I have assassinated, then, and not
executed! I am an assassin, then, and not an officer of justice!" and he
closed his eyes with a groan.

The monk doubtless feared that he would die without saying more, for he
exclaimed eagerly:

"Go on, I know nothing, as yet; when you have finished your story, God
and I will judge."

"Oh, father," continued the executioner, without opening his eyes, as if
he feared on opening them to see some frightful object, "it is
especially when night comes on and when I have to cross a river, that
this terror which I have been unable to conquer comes upon me; it then
seems as if my hand grew heavy, as if the cutlass was still in its
grasp, as if the water had the color of blood, and all the voices of
nature--the whispering of the trees, the murmur of the wind, the lapping
of the wave--united in a voice tearful, despairing, terrible, crying to
me, 'Place for the justice of God!'"

"Delirium!" murmured the monk, shaking his head.

The executioner opened his eyes, turned toward the young man and grasped
his arm.

"'Delirium,'" he repeated; "'delirium,' do you say? Oh, no! I remember
too well. It was evening; I had thrown the body into the river and those
words which my remorse repeats to me are those which I in my pride
pronounced. After being the instrument of human justice I aspired to be
that of the justice of God."

"But let me see, how was it done? Speak," said the monk.

"It was at night. A man came to me and showed me an order and I followed
him. Four other noblemen awaited me. They led me away masked. I reserved
the right of refusing if the office they required of me should seem
unjust. We traveled five or six leagues, serious, silent, and almost
without speaking. At length, through the window of a little hut, they
showed me a woman sitting, leaning on a table, and said, 'there is the
person to be executed.'"

"Horrible!" said the monk. "And you obeyed?"

"Father, that woman was a monster. It was said that she had poisoned her
second husband; she had tried to assassinate her brother-in-law; she had
just poisoned a young woman who was her rival, and before leaving
England she had, it was believed, caused the favorite of the king to be
murdered."

"Buckingham?" cried the monk.

"Yes, Buckingham."

"The woman was English, then?"

"No, she was French, but she had married in England."

The monk turned pale, wiped his brow and went and bolted the door. The
executioner thought that he had abandoned him and fell back, groaning,
upon his bed.

"No, no; I am here," said the monk, quickly coming back to him. "Go on;
who were those men?"

"One of them was a foreigner, English, I think. The four others were
French and wore the uniform of musketeers."

"Their names?" asked the monk.

"I don't know them, but the four other noblemen called the Englishman
'my lord.'"

"Was the woman handsome?"

"Young and beautiful. Oh, yes, especially beautiful. I see her now, as
on her knees at my feet, with her head thrown back, she begged for life.
I have never understood how I could have laid low a head so beautiful,
with a face so pale."

The monk seemed agitated by a strange emotion; he trembled all over; he
seemed eager to put a question which yet he dared not ask. At length,
with a violent effort at self-control:

"The name of that woman?" he said.

"I don't know what it was. As I have said, she was twice married, once
in France, the second time in England."

"She was young, you say?"

"Twenty-five years old."

"Beautiful?"

"Ravishingly."

"Blond?"

"Yes."

"Abundance of hair--falling over her shoulders?"

"Yes."

"Eyes of an admirable expression?"

"When she chose. Oh, yes, it is she!"

"A voice of strange sweetness?"

"How do you know it?"

The executioner raised himself on his elbow and gazed with a frightened
air at the monk, who became livid.

"And you killed her?" the monk exclaimed. "You were the tool of those
cowards who dared not kill her themselves? You had no pity for that
youthfulness, that beauty, that weakness? you killed that woman?"

"Alas! I have already told you, father, that woman, under that angelic
appearance, had an infernal soul, and when I saw her, when I recalled
all the evil she had done to me----"

"To you? What could she have done to you? Come, tell me!"

"She had seduced and ruined my brother, a priest. She had fled with him
from her convent."

"With your brother?"

"Yes, my brother was her first lover, and she caused his death. Oh,
father, do not look in that way at me! Oh, I am guilty, then; you will
