
So Jimmy and Peter joined Unc' Billy, and Jimmy told the story about Old
Mr. Toad all over again. Unc' Billy chuckled and laughed just as they had
at the idea of Old Mr. Toad's saying he had a beautiful voice. But Unc'
Billy has a shrewd little head on his shoulders. After a few minutes he
stopped laughing.

"Ah done learn a right smart long time ago that Ah don' know all there is
to know about mah neighbors," said he. "We-uns done think of Brer Toad as
ugly-lookin' fo' so long that we-uns may have overlooked something. Ah don'
reckon Brer Toad can sing, but Ah 'lows that perhaps he thinks he can. What
do you-alls say to we-uns going down to the Smiling Pool and finding out
what he really is up to?"

"The very thing!" cried Peter, kicking up his heels. You know Peter is
always ready to go anywhere or do anything that will satisfy his curiosity.

Jimmy Skunk thought it over for a few minutes, and then he decided that as
he hadn't anything in particular to do, and as he might find some fat
beetles on the way, he would go too. So off they started after Old Mr.
Toad, Peter Rabbit in the lead as usual, Unc' Billy Possum next, grinning
as only he can grin, and in the rear Jimmy Skunk, taking his time and
keeping a sharp eye out for fat beetles.




III


THE HUNT FOR OLD MR. TOAD

Now, though Old Mr. Toad was hurrying as fast as ever he could and was
quite out of breath, he wasn't getting along very fast compared with the
way Peter Rabbit or Jimmy Skunk or Unc' Billy Possum could cover the
ground. You see he cannot make long jumps like his cousin, Grandfather
Frog, but only little short hops.

So Peter and Jimmy and Unc' Billy took their time about following him. They
stopped to hunt for fat beetles for Jimmy Skunk, and at every little patch
of sweet clover for Peter Rabbit to help himself. Once they wasted a lot of
time while Unc' Billy Possum hunted for a nest of Carol the Meadow Lark, on
the chance that he would find some fresh eggs there. He didn't find the
nest for the very good reason that Carol hadn't built one yet. Peter was
secretly glad. You know he doesn't eat eggs, and he is always sorry for his
feathered friends when their eggs are stolen.

Half way across the Green Meadows they stopped to play with the Merry
Little Breezes, and because it was very pleasant there, they played longer
than they realized. When at last they started on again, Old Mr. Toad was
out of sight. You see all the time he had kept right on going, hop, hop,
hipperty-hop.

"Never mind," said Peter, "we can catch up with him easy enough, he's such
a slow-poke."

But even a slow-poke who keeps right on doing a thing without wasting any
time always gets somewhere sooner or later, very often sooner than those
who are naturally quicker, but who waste their time. So it was with Old Mr.
Toad. He kept right on, hop, hop, hipperty-hop, while the others were
playing, and so it happened that when at last Peter and Jimmy and Unc'
Billy reached the Smiling Pool, they hadn't caught another glimpse of Old
Mr. Toad.

"Do you suppose he hid somewhere, and we passed him?" asked Peter.

Unc' Billy shook his head. "Ah don' reckon so," said he. "We-uns done been
foolin' away our time, an' Brer Toad done stole a march on us. Ah reckons
we-uns will find him sittin' on the bank here somewhere."

So right away the three separated to look for Old Mr. Toad. All along the
bank of the Smiling Pool they looked. They peeped under old leaves and
sticks. They looked in every place where Old Mr. Toad might have hidden,
but not a trace of him did they find.

  "Tra-la-la-lee! Oka-chee! Oka-chee!
  Happy am I as I can be!"

sang Mr. Redwing, as he swayed to and fro among the bulrushes.

"Say, Mr. Redwing, have you seen Old Mr. Toad?" called Peter Rabbit.

"No," replied Mr. Redwing. "Is that whom you fellows are looking for? I
wondered if you had lost something. What do you want with Old Mr. Toad?"

Peter explained how they had followed Old Mr. Toad just to see what he
really was up to. "Of course we know that he hasn't any more voice than I
have," declared Peter, "but we are curious to know if he really thinks he
has, and why he should be in such a hurry to reach the Smiling Pool. It
looks to us as if the spring has made Old Mr. Toad crazy."

"Oh, that's it, is it?" replied Mr. Redwing, his bright eyes twinkling.
"Some people don't know as much as they might. I've been wondering where
Old Mr. Toad was, and I'm ever so glad to learn that he hasn't forgotten
that he has a very important part in our beautiful spring chorus." Then
once more Mr. Redwing began to sing.




IV


PETER RABBIT FINDS OLD MR. TOAD

It isn't often that Peter Rabbit is truly envious, but sometimes in the
joyousness of spring he is. He envies the birds because they can pour out
in beautiful song the joy that is in them. The only way he can express his
feelings is by kicking his long heels, jumping about, and such foolish
things. While that gives Peter a great deal of satisfaction, it doesn't add
to the joy of other people as do the songs of the birds, and you know to
give joy to others is to add to your own joy. So there are times when Peter
wishes he could sing.

He was wishing this very thing now, as he sat on the bank of the Smiling
Pool, listening to the great spring chorus.

  "Tra-la-la-lee! Oka-chee! Oka-chee!
  There's joy in the spring for you and for me."

sang Redwing the Blackbird from the bulrushes.

From over in the Green Meadows rose the clear lilt of Carol the Meadow
Lark, and among the alders just where the Laughing Brook ran into the
Smiling Pool a flood of happiness was pouring from the throat of Little
Friend the Song Sparrow. Winsome Bluebird's sweet, almost plaintive,
whistle seemed to fairly float in the air, so that it was hard to say just
where it did come from, and in the top of the Big Hickory-tree, Welcome
Robin was singing as if his heart were bursting with joy. Even Sammy Jay
was adding a beautiful, bell-like note instead of his usual harsh scream.
As for the Smiling Pool, it seemed as if the very water itself sang, for a
mighty chorus of clear piping voices from unseen singers rose from all
around its banks. Peter knew who those singers were, although look as he
would he could see none of them. They were hylas, the tiny cousins of
Stickytoes the Tree Toad.

Listening to all these joyous voices, Peter forgot for a time what had
brought him to the Smiling Pool. But Jimmy Skunk and Unc' Billy Possum
didn't forget. They were still hunting for Old Mr. Toad.

"Well, old Mr. Dreamer, have you found him yet?" asked Jimmy Skunk,
stealing up behind Peter and poking him in the back.

Peter came to himself with a start. "No," said he. "I was just listening
and wishing that I could sing, too. Don't you ever wish you could sing,
Jimmy?"

"No," replied Jimmy. "I never waste time wishing I could do things it was
never meant I should do. It's funny where Old Mr. Toad is. He said that he
was coming down here to sing, and Redwing the Blackbird seemed to be
expecting him. I've looked everywhere I can think of without finding him,
but I don't believe in giving up without another try. Stop your dreaming
and come help us hunt."

So Peter stopped his dreaming and joined in the search. Now there was one
place where neither Peter nor Jimmy nor Unc' Billy had thought of looking.
That was in the Smiling Pool itself. They just took it for granted that Old
Mr. Toad was somewhere on the bank. Presently Peter came to a place where
the bank was very low and the water was shallow for quite a little distance
out in the Smiling Pool. From out of that shallow water came the piping
voice of a hyla, and Peter stopped to stare, trying to see the tiny singer.

Suddenly he jumped right up in the air with surprise. There was a
familiar-looking head sticking out of the water. Peter had found Old Mr.
Toad!




V


OLD MR. TOAD'S MUSIC BAG

  Never think that you have learned
    All there is to know.
  That's the surest way of all
    Ignorance to show.

"I've found Old Mr. Toad!" cried Peter Rabbit, hurrying after Jimmy Skunk.

"Where?" demanded Jimmy.

"In the water," declared Peter. "He's sitting right over there where the
water is shallow, and he didn't notice me at all. Let's get Unc' Billy, and
then creep over to the edge of the Smiling Pool and watch to see if Old Mr.
Toad really does try to sing."

So they hunted up Unc' Billy Possum, and the three stole very softly over
to the edge of the Smiling Pool, where the bank was low and the water
shallow. Sure enough, there sat Old Mr. Toad with just his head out of
water. And while they were watching him, something very strange happened.

"What--what's the matter with him?" whispered Peter, his big eyes looking
as if they might pop out of his head.

"If he don't watch out, he'll blow up and bust!" exclaimed Jimmy.

[Illustration: "If he don't watch out, he'll blow up and bust!" exclaimed
Jimmy.]

"Listen!" whispered Unc' Billy Possum. "Do mah ol' ears hear right? 'Pears
to me that that song is coming right from where Brer Toad is sitting."

It certainly did appear so, and of all the songs that glad spring day there
was none sweeter. Indeed there were few as sweet. The only trouble was the
song was so very short. It lasted only for two or three seconds. And when
it ended, Old Mr. Toad looked quite his natural self again; just as
commonplace, almost ugly, as ever. Peter looked at Jimmy Skunk, Jimmy
looked at Unc' Billy Possum, and Unc' Billy looked at Peter. And no one had
a word to say. Then all three looked back at Old Mr. Toad.

And even as they looked, his throat began to swell and swell and swell,
until it was no wonder that Jimmy Skunk had thought that he was in danger
of blowing up. And then, when it stopped swelling, there came again those
beautiful little notes, so sweet and tremulous that Peter actually held his
