together in families or tribes, each having a chief who led in war and
in the chase.

There were other far more civilized nations in those days. Among these
were the E-gyp'tians, who lived in Africa. They had long known the use
of fire, had good tools, and were much further advanced than the
Pelasgians. They had learned not only to build houses, but to erect the
most wonderful monuments in the world,--the Pyr'a-mids, of which you
have no doubt heard.

In Egypt there were at that time a number of learned men. They were
acquainted with many of the arts and sciences, and recorded all they
knew in a peculiar writing of their own invention. Their neighbors, the
Phoe-ni'-cians, whose land also bordered on the Mediterranean Sea,
were quite civilized too; and as both of these nations had ships, they
soon began to sail all around that great inland sea.

As they had no compass, the Egyptian and Phoenician sailors did not
venture out of sight of land. They first sailed along the shore, and
then to the islands which they could see far out on the blue waters.

When they had come to one island, they could see another still farther
on; for, as you will see on any map, the Mediterranean Sea, between
Greece and Asia, is dotted with islands, which look like stepping-stones
going from one coast to the other.

Advancing thus carefully, the Egyptians and Phoenicians finally came
to Greece, where they made settlements, and began to teach the
Pelasgians many useful and important things.




II. THE DELUGE OF OGYGES.


The first Egyptian who thus settled in Greece was a prince called
In'a-chus. Landing in that country, which has a most delightful climate,
he taught the Pelasgians how to make fire and how to cook their meat. He
also showed them how to build comfortable homes by piling up stones one
on top of another, much in the same way as the farmer makes the stone
walls around his fields.

The Pelasgians were intelligent, although so uncivilized; and they soon
learned to build these walls higher, in order to keep the wild beasts
away from their homes. Then, when they had learned the use of bronze and
iron tools, they cut the stones into huge blocks of regular shape.

These stone blocks were piled one upon another so cleverly that some of
the walls are still standing, although no mortar was used to hold the
stones together. Such was the strength of the Pelasgians, that they
raised huge blocks to great heights, and made walls which their
descendants declared must have been built by giants.

As the Greeks called their giants Cy'clops, which means "round-eyed,"
they soon called these walls Cy-clo-pe'an; and, in pointing them out to
their children, they told strange tales of the great giants who had
built them, and always added that these huge builders had but one eye,
which was in the middle of the forehead.

Some time after Inachus the Egyptian had thus taught the Pelasgians the
art of building, and had founded a city called Ar'gos, there came a
terrible earthquake. The ground under the people's feet heaved and
cracked, the mountains shook, the waters flooded the dry land, and the
people fled in terror to the hills.

In spite of the speed with which they ran, the waters soon overtook
them. Many of the Pelasgians were thus drowned, while their terrified
companions ran faster and faster up the mountain, nor stopped to rest
until they were quite safe.

Looking down upon the plains where they had once lived, they saw them
all covered with water. They were now forced to build new homes; but
when the waters little by little sank into the ground, or flowed back
into the sea, they were very glad to find that some of their thickest
walls had resisted the earthquake and flood, and were still standing
firm.

The memory of the earthquake and flood was very clear, however. The poor
Pelasgians could not forget their terror and the sudden death of so many
friends, and they often talked about that horrible time. As this flood
occurred in the days when Og'y-ges was king, it has generally been
linked to his name, and called the Deluge (or flood) of Ogyges.




III. THE FOUNDING OF MANY IMPORTANT CITIES.


Some time after Inachus had built Argos, another Egyptian prince came to
settle in Greece. His name was Ce'crops, and, as he came to Greece after
the Deluge of Ogyges, he found very few inhabitants left. He landed, and
decided to build a city on a promontory northeast of Argos. Then he
invited all the Pelasgians who had not been drowned in the flood to join
him.

The Pelasgians, glad to find such a wise leader, gathered around him,
and they soon learned to plow the fields and to sow wheat. Under
Cecrops' orders they also planted olive trees and vines, and learned how
to press the oil from the olives and the wine from the grapes. Cecrops
taught them how to harness their oxen; and before long the women began
to spin the wool of their sheep, and to weave it into rough woolen
garments, which were used for clothing, instead of the skins of wild
beasts.

After building several small towns in At'ti-ca, Cecrops founded a larger
one, which was at first called Ce-cro'pi-a in honor of himself. This
name, however, was soon changed to Ath'ens to please A-the'ne (or
Mi-ner'va), a goddess whom the people worshiped, and who was said to
watch over the welfare of this her favorite city.

[Illustration: Athene.]

When Cecrops died, he was followed by other princes, who continued
teaching the people many useful things, such as the training and
harnessing of horses, the building of carts, and the proper way of
harvesting grain. One prince even showed them how to make beehives, and
how to use the honey as an article of food.

As the mountain sides in Greece are covered with a carpet of wild,
sweet-smelling herbs and flowers, the Greek honey is very good; and
people say that the best honey in the world is made by the bees on Mount
Hy-met'tus, near Athens, where they gather their golden store all summer
long.

Shortly after the building of Athens, a Phoenician colony, led by
Cad'mus, settled a neighboring part of the country, called Boe-o'tia,
where they founded the city which was later known as Thebes. Cadmus also
taught the people many useful things, among others the art of trade (or
commerce) and that of navigation (the building and using of ships); but,
best of all, he brought the alphabet to Greece, and showed the people
how to express their thoughts in writing.

Almost at the same time that Cadmus founded Thebes, an Egyptian called
Dan'a-us came to Greece, and settled a colony on the same spot where
that of Inachus had once been. The new Argos rose on the same place as
the old; and the country around it, called Ar'go-lis, was separated from
Boeotia and Attica only by a long narrow strip of land, which was
known as the Isthmus of Cor'-inth.

Danaus not only showed the Pelasgians all the useful arts which Cadmus
and Cecrops had taught, but also helped them to build ships like that in
which he had come to Greece. He also founded religious festivals or
games in honor of the harvest goddess, De-me'ter. The women were invited
to these games, and they only were allowed to bear torches in the public
processions, where they sang hymns in honor of the goddess.

The descendants of Danaus long ruled over the land; and one member of
his family, Per'seus, built the town of My-ce'nae on a spot where many
of the Pelasgian stone walls can still be seen.

The Pelasgians who joined this young hero helped him to build great
walls all around his town. These were provided with massive gateways and
tall towers, from which the soldiers could overlook the whole country,
and see the approach of an enemy from afar.

[Illustration: The Lion Gate, Mycenae.]

This same people built tombs for some of the ancient kings, and many
treasure and store houses. These buildings, buried under earth and
rubbish, were uncovered a few years ago. In the tombs were found swords,
spears, and remains of ancient armor, gold ornaments, ancient pieces of
pottery, human bones, and, strangest of all, thin masks of pure gold,
which covered the faces of some of the dead.

Thus you see, the Pelasgians little by little joined the new colonies
which came to take possession of the land, and founded little states or
countries of their own, each governed by its own king, and obeying its
own laws.




IV. STORY OF DEUCALION.


The Greeks used to tell their children that Deu-ca'li-on, the leader of
the Thes-sa'li-ans, was a descendant of the gods, for each part of the
country claimed that its first great man was the son of a god. It was
under the reign of Deucalion that another flood took place. This was
even more terrible than that of Ogyges; and all the people of the
neighborhood fled in haste to the high mountains north of Thes'sa-ly,
where they were kindly received by Deucalion.

When all danger was over, and the waters began to recede, they followed
their leader down into the plains again. This soon gave rise to a
wonderful story, which you will often hear. It was said that Deucalion
and his wife Pyr'rha were the only people left alive after the flood.
When the waters had all gone, they went down the mountain, and found
that the temple at Del'phi, where they worshiped their gods, was still
standing unharmed. They entered, and, kneeling before the altar, prayed
for help.

A mysterious voice then bade them go down the mountain, throwing their
mother's bones behind them. They were very much troubled when they heard
this, until Deucalion said that a voice from heaven could not have
meant them to do any harm. In thinking over the real meaning of the
words he had heard, he told his wife, that, as the Earth is the mother
of all creatures, her bones must mean the stones.

Deucalion and Pyrrha, therefore, went slowly down the mountain, throwing
the stones behind them. The Greeks used to tell that a sturdy race of
men sprang up from the stones cast by Deucalion, while beautiful women
came from those cast by Pyrrha.

The country was soon peopled by the children of these men, who always
proudly declared that the story was true, and that they sprang from the
race which owed its birth to this great miracle. Deucalion reigned over
this people as long as he lived; and when he died, his two sons,
Am-phic'ty-on and Hel'len, became kings in his stead. The former staid
in Thessaly; and, hearing that some barbarians called Thra'cians were
about to come over the mountains and drive his people away, he called
the chiefs of all the different states to a council, to ask their advice
about the best means of defense. All the chiefs obeyed the summons, and
met at a place in Thessaly where the mountains approach the sea so
closely as to leave but a narrow pass between. In the pass are hot
springs, and so it was called Ther-mop'y-lae, or the Hot Gateway.

The chiefs thus gathered together called this assembly the
Am-phic-ty-on'ic Council, in honor of Amphictyon. After making plans to
drive back the Thracians, they decided to meet once a year, either at
Thermopylae or at the temple at Delphi, to talk over all important
matters.




V. STORY OF DAEDALUS AND ICARUS.


Hellen, Deucalion's second son, finding Thessaly too small to give homes
to all the people, went southward with a band of hardy followers, and
settled in another part of the country which we call Greece, but which
was then, in honor of him, called Hellas, while his people were called
Hel-le'nes, or subjects of Hellen.

When Hellen died, he left his kingdom to his three sons, Do'rus,
AE'o-lus, and Xu'thus. Instead of dividing their father's lands fairly,
the eldest two sons quarreled with the youngest, and finally drove him
away. Homeless and poor, Xuthus now went to Athens, where he was warmly
welcomed by the king, who not only treated him very kindly, but also
gave him his daughter in marriage, and promised that he should inherit
the throne.

This promise was duly kept, and Xuthus the exile ruled over Athens. When
he died, he left the crown to his sons, I'on and A-chae'us.

As the A-the'ni-ans had gradually increased in number until their
territory was too small to afford a living to all the inhabitants, Ion
and Achaeus, even in their father's lifetime, led some of their followers
along the Isthmus of Corinth, and down into the peninsula, where they
founded two flourishing states, called, after them, A-cha'ia and
I-o'ni-a. Thus, while northern Greece was pretty equally divided between
the Do'ri-ans and AE-o'li-ans, descendants and subjects of Dorus and
AEolus, the peninsula was almost entirely in the hands of the I-o'ni-ans
and A-chae'ans, who built towns, cultivated the soil, and became bold
navigators. They ventured farther and farther out at sea, until they
were familiar with all the neighboring bays and islands.

Sailing thus from place to place, the Hellenes came at last to Crete, a
large island south of Greece. This island was then governed by a very
wise king called Mi'nos. The laws of this monarch were so just that all
the Greeks admired them very much. When he died, they even declared that
the gods had called him away to judge the dead in Ha'des, and to decide
what punishments and rewards the spirits deserved.

Although Minos was very wise, he had a subject named Daed'a-lus who was
even wiser than he. This man not only invented the saw and the potter's
wheel, but also taught the people how to rig sails for their vessels.

As nothing but oars and paddles had hitherto been used to propel ships,
this last invention seemed very wonderful; and, to compliment Daedalus,
the people declared that he had given their vessels wings, and had thus
enabled them to fly over the seas.

Many years after, when sails were so common that they ceased to excite
any wonder, the people, forgetting that these were the wings which
Daedalus had made, invented a wonderful story, which runs as follows.

Minos, King of Crete, once sent for Daedalus, and bade him build a maze,
or labyrinth, with so many rooms and winding halls, that no one, once in
it, could ever find his way out again.

Daedalus set to work and built a maze so intricate that neither he nor
his son Ic'a-rus, who was with him, could get out. Not willing to
remain there a prisoner, Daedalus soon contrived a means of escape.

[Illustration: Daedalus and Icarus.]

He and Icarus first gathered together a large quantity of feathers, out
of which Daedalus cleverly made two pairs of wings. When these were
fastened to their shoulders by means of wax, father and son rose up like
birds and flew away. In spite of his father's cautions, Icarus rose
higher and higher, until the heat of the sun melted the wax, so that his
wings dropped off, and he fell into the sea and was drowned. His father,
more prudent than he, flew low, and reached Greece in safety. There he
went on inventing useful things, often gazing out sadly over the waters
in which Icarus had perished, and which, in honor of the drowned youth,
were long known as the I-ca'ri-an Sea.




VI. THE ADVENTURES OF JASON.


