The doctors have left and I am told that in a few hours I shall die. In
my lifetime the world has progressed from the chaotic turmoil of the
early Atomic era to the peacefulness and tranquility of our present age,
and I die content.

For ten years I have instructed you in all that you will need for the
future. One final lesson remains to be taught.

       *       *       *       *       *

On the wall of my bedchamber hangs a citation "from a grateful
government for services too secret to be herein set forth." In past
years you have asked me repeatedly about this citation, but each time I
have taken pains to avoid a direct answer. Now it is proper that you
should know.

Forty years ago I was an obscure Army captain stationed at the Armed
Forces Language School in Monterey, California. I had at that time just
completed a tour of duty in Korea, a minor skirmish of that era, and
despite an excellent reputation for resourcefulness, I had drawn
Monterey as my next assignment. An aptitude for foreign languages had
led to an instructorship in the Russian department with additional
duties instructing in the Slavic tongues.

My life was pleasant and uneventful, and it was with mixed emotions that
I received orders to report to Washington for a new duty assignment.
The chain of events which precipitated those orders were to change the
world....

For while you and I were playing on the lawn of our Monterey home, an
unknown Hungarian physicist working under Russian supervision had made a
startling discovery. Within a matter of days alarming rumors of his work
reached Washington. Our embassies in Moscow and Belgrade reported
furious activity in the field of psychic research and large-scale
experiments in mass hypnosis. Four of us were selected to investigate
the rumors. Before we could commence our undertaking, word reached
Washington that the rumors were now actualities. A device capable of the
mass hypnosis of great segments of the world's population was rapidly
reaching perfection.

After three months of intensive grooming in the fields of physics and
psychology, we four agents set out individually with orders to track
down and destroy both the scientist and his machine. I never saw the
other three again....

During the three months of schooling, other members of our vast
intelligence organization had been engaged in laying the groundwork for
our efforts. In December 1955, I slipped into Russia and took the place
of a government official who felt that Western civilization offered
greater reimbursement than Soviet Communism.

I entered into my new role with trepidation, but my fears were
unfounded. Thanks to a remarkable resemblance (which was the original
