The Project Gutenberg EBook of Side-lights on Astronomy and Kindred Fields
of Popular Science, by Simon Newcomb

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Side-lights on Astronomy and Kindred Fields of Popular Science

Author: Simon Newcomb

Posting Date: June 13, 2009 [EBook #4065]
Release Date: May, 2003
First Posted: October 30, 2001

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SIDE-LIGHTS ON ASTRONOMY ***




Produced by Charles Franks, Robert Rowe and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team. HTML version by Al Haines.










SIDE-LIGHTS ON ASTRONOMY

AND KINDRED FIELDS OF POPULAR SCIENCE


ESSAYS AND ADDRESSES


BY

SIMON NEWCOMB




CONTENTS


PREFACE

     I. THE UNSOLVED PROBLEMS OF ASTRONOMY
    II. THE NEW PROBLEMS OF THE UNIVERSE
   III. THE STRUCTURE OF THE UNIVERSE
    IV. THE EXTENT OF THE UNIVERSE
     V. MAKING AND USING A TELESCOPE
    VI. WHAT THE ASTRONOMERS ARE DOING
   VII. LIFE IN THE UNIVERSE
  VIII. HOW THE PLANETS ARE WEIGHED
    IX. THE MARINER'S COMPASS
     X. THE FAIRYLAND OF GEOMETRY
    XI. THE ORGANIZATION OF SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH
   XII. CAN WE MAKE IT RAIN?
  XIII. THE ASTRONOMICAL EPHEMERIS AND NAUTICAL ALMANAC
   XIV. THE WORLD'S DEBT TO ASTRONOMY
    XV. AN ASTRONOMICAL FRIENDSHIP
   XVI. THE EVOLUTION OF THE SCIENTIFIC INVESTIGATOR
  XVII. THE EVOLUTION OF ASTRONOMICAL KNOWLEDGE
 XVIII. ASPECTS OF AMERICAN ASTRONOMY
   XIX. THE UNIVERSE AS AN ORGANISM
    XX. THE RELATION OF SCIENTIFIC METHOD TO SOCIAL PROGRESS
   XXI. THE OUTLOOK FOR THE FLYING-MACHINE




ILLUSTRATIONS

SIMON NEWCOMB

PHOTOGRAPH OF THE CORONA OF THE SUN, TAKEN IN TRIPOLI DURING TOTAL
ECLIPSE OF AUGUST 30, 1905.

A TYPICAL STAR CLUSTER-CENTAURI

THE GLASS DISK

THE OPTICIAN'S TOOL

THE OPTICIAN'S TOOL

GRINDING A LARGE LENS

IMAGE OF CANDLE-FLAME IN OBJECT-GLASS

TESTING ADJUSTMENT OF OBJECT-GLASS

A VERY PRIMITIVE MOUNTING FOR A TELESCOPE

THE HUYGHENIAN EYE-PIECE

SECTION OF THE PRIMITIVE MOUNTING

SPECTRAL IMAGES OF STARS, THE UPPER LINE SHOWING HOW THEY APPEAR WITH
THE EYE-PIECE PUSHED IN, THE LOWER WITH THE EYE-PIECE DRAWN OUT

THE GREAT REFRACTOR OF THE NATIONAL OBSERVATORY AT WASHINGTON

THE "BROKEN-BACKED COMET-SEEKER"

NEBULA IN ORION

DIP OF THE MAGNETIC NEEDLE IN VARIOUS LATITUDES

STAR SPECTRA

PROFESSOR LANGLEY'S AIR-SHIP






PREFACE

In preparing and issuing this collection of essays and addresses, the
author has yielded to what he could not but regard as the too
flattering judgment of the publishers. Having done this, it became
incumbent to do what he could to justify their good opinion by revising
the material and bringing it up to date. Interest rather than unity of
thought has determined the selection.

A prominent theme in the collection is that of the structure, extent,
and duration of the universe. Here some repetition of ideas was found
unavoidable, in a case where what is substantially a single theme has
been treated in the various forms which it assumed in the light of
constantly growing knowledge. If the critical reader finds this a
defect, the author can plead in extenuation only the difficulty of
avoiding it under the circumstances. Although mainly astronomical, a
number of discussions relating to general scientific subjects have been
included.

Acknowledgment is due to the proprietors of the various periodicals
from the pages of which most of the essays have been taken. Besides
Harper's Magazine and the North American Review, these include
McClure's Magazine, from which were taken the articles "The Unsolved
Problems of Astronomy" and "How the Planets are Weighed." "The
Structure of the Universe" appeared in the International Monthly, now
the International Quarterly; "The Outlook for the Flying-Machine" is
mainly from The New York Independent, but in part from McClure's
Magazine; "The World's Debt to Astronomy" is from The Chautauquan; and
"An Astronomical Friendship" from the Atlantic Monthly.

SIMON NEWCOMB. WASHINGTON, JUNE, 1906.




I

THE UNSOLVED PROBLEMS OF ASTRONOMY


The reader already knows what the solar system is: an immense central
body, the sun, with a number of planets revolving round it at various
distances. On one of these planets we dwell. Vast, indeed, are the
distances of the planets when measured by our terrestrial standards. A
cannon-ball fired from the earth to celebrate the signing of the
Declaration of Independence, and continuing its course ever since with
a velocity of eighteen hundred feet per second, would not yet be
half-way to the orbit of Neptune, the outer planet. And yet the
thousands of stars which stud the heavens are at distances so much
greater than that of Neptune that our solar system is like a little
colony, separated from the rest of the universe by an ocean of void
space almost immeasurable in extent. The orbit of the earth round the
sun is of such size that a railway train running sixty miles an hour,
with never a stop, would take about three hundred and fifty years to
cross it. Represent this orbit by a lady's finger-ring. Then the
nearest fixed star will be about a mile and a half away; the next more
than two miles; a few more from three to twenty miles; the great body
at scores or hundreds of miles. Imagine the stars thus scattered from
the Atlantic to the Mississippi, and keep this little finger-ring in
mind as the orbit of the earth, and one may have some idea of the
extent of the universe.

One of the most beautiful stars in the heavens, and one that can be
seen most of the year, is a Lyrae, or Alpha of the Lyre, known also as
Vega. In a spring evening it may be seen in the northeast, in the later
summer near the zenith, in the autumn in the northwest. On the scale we
have laid down with the earth's orbit as a finger-ring, its distance
would be some eight or ten miles. The small stars around it in the same
constellation are probably ten, twenty, or fifty times as far.

Now, the greatest fact which modern science has brought to light is
that our whole solar system, including the sun, with all its planets,
is on a journey towards the constellation Lyra. During our whole lives,
in all probability during the whole of human history, we have been
flying unceasingly towards this beautiful constellation with a speed to
which no motion on earth can compare. The speed has recently been
determined with a fair degree of certainty, though not with entire
exactness; it is about ten miles a second, and therefore not far from
three hundred millions of miles a year. But whatever it may be, it is
unceasing and unchanging; for us mortals eternal. We are nearer the
constellation by five or six hundred miles every minute we live; we are
nearer to it now than we were ten years ago by thousands of millions of
miles, and every future generation of our race will be nearer than its
predecessor by thousands of millions of miles.

When, where, and how, if ever, did this journey begin--when, where, and
how, if ever, will it end? This is the greatest of the unsolved
problems of astronomy. An astronomer who should watch the heavens for
ten thousand years might gather some faint suggestion of an answer, or
he might not. All we can do is to seek for some hints by study and
comparison with other stars.

The stars are suns. To put it in another way, the sun is one of the
stars, and rather a small one at that. If the sun is moving in the way
I have described, may not the stars also be in motion, each on a
journey of its own through the wilderness of space? To this question
astronomy gives an affirmative answer. Most of the stars nearest to us
are found to be in motion, some faster than the sun, some more slowly,
and the same is doubtless true of all; only the century of accurate
observations at our disposal does not show the motion of the distant
ones. A given motion seems slower the more distant the moving body; we
have to watch a steamship on the horizon some little time to see that
she moves at all. Thus it is that the unsolved problem of the motion of
our sun is only one branch of a yet more stupendous one: What mean the
motions of the stars--how did they begin, and how, if ever, will they
end? So far as we can yet see, each star is going straight ahead on its
own journey, without regard to its neighbors, if other stars can be so
called. Is each describing some vast orbit which, though looking like a
straight line during the short period of our observation, will really
be seen to curve after ten thousand or a hundred thousand years, or
will it go straight on forever? If the laws of motion are true for all
space and all time, as we are forced to believe, then each moving star
will go on in an unbending line forever unless hindered by the
attraction of other stars. If they go on thus, they must, after
countless years, scatter in all directions, so that the inhabitants of
each shall see only a black, starless sky.

Mathematical science can throw only a few glimmers of light on the
questions thus suggested. From what little we know of the masses,
distances, and numbers of the stars we see a possibility that the more
slow-moving ones may, in long ages, be stopped in their onward courses
or brought into orbits of some sort by the attraction of their millions
of fellows. But it is hard to admit even this possibility in the case
of the swift-moving ones. Attraction, varying as the inverse square of
the distance, diminishes so rapidly as the distance increases that, at
the distances which separate the stars, it is small indeed. We could
not, with the most delicate balance that science has yet invented, even
show the attraction of the greatest known star. So far as we know, the
two swiftest-moving stars are, first, Arcturus, and, second, one known
in astronomy as 1830 Groombridge, the latter so called because it was
first observed by the astronomer Groombridge, and is numbered 1830 in
his catalogue of stars. If our determinations of the distances of these
bodies are to be relied on, the velocity of their motion cannot be much
less than two hundred miles a second. They would make the circuit of
the earth every two or three minutes. A body massive enough to control
this motion would throw a large part of the universe into disorder.
Thus the problem where these stars came from and where they are going
is for us insoluble, and is all the more so from the fact that the
swiftly moving stars are moving in different directions and seem to
have no connection with each other or with any known star.

It must not be supposed that these enormous velocities seem so to us.
Not one of them, even the greatest, would be visible to the naked eye
until after years of watching. On our finger-ring scale, 1830
Groombridge would be some ten miles and Arcturus thirty or forty miles
away. Either of them would be moving only two or three feet in a year.
To the oldest Assyrian priests Lyra looked much as it does to us
to-day. Among the bright and well-known stars Arcturus has the most
rapid apparent motion, yet Job himself would not to-day see that its
position had changed, unless he had noted it with more exactness than
any astronomer of his time.

Another unsolved problem among the greatest which present themselves to
the astronomer is that of the size of the universe of stars. We know
that several thousand of these bodies are visible to the naked eye;
moderate telescopes show us millions; our giant telescopes of the
present time, when used as cameras to photograph the heavens, show a
number past count, perhaps one hundred millions. Are all these stars
only those few which happen to be near us in a universe extending out
without end, or do they form a collection of stars outside of which is
empty infinite space? In other words, has the universe a boundary?
Taken in its widest scope this question must always remain unanswered
by us mortals because, even if we should discover a boundary within
which all the stars and clusters we ever can know are contained, and
outside of which is empty space, still we could never prove that this
space is empty out to an infinite distance. Far outside of what we call
the universe might still exist other universes which we can never see.

It is a great encouragement to the astronomer that, although he cannot
yet set any exact boundary to this universe of ours, he is gathering
faint indications that it has a boundary, which his successors not many
generations hence may locate so that the astronomer shall include
creation itself within his mental grasp. It can be shown mathematically
that an infinitely extended system of stars would fill the heavens with
a blaze of light like that of the noonday sun. As no such effect is
produced, it may be concluded that the universe has a boundary. But
this does not enable us to locate the boundary, nor to say how many
stars may lie outside the farthest stretches of telescopic vision. Yet
by patient research we are slowly throwing light on these points and
reaching inferences which, not many years ago, would have seemed
forever beyond our powers.

Every one now knows that the Milky Way, that girdle of light which
spans the evening sky, is formed of clouds of stars too minute to be
seen by the unaided vision. It seems to form the base on which the
universe is built and to bind all the stars into a system. It comprises
by far the larger number of stars that the telescope has shown to
exist. Those we see with the naked eye are almost equally scattered
over the sky. But the number which the telescope shows us become more
and more condensed in the Milky Way as telescope power is increased.
The number of new stars brought out with our greatest power is vastly
greater in the Milky Way than in the rest of the sky, so that the
