
The scientist eyed Stutsman calmly. Stutsman's knuckles were white with
the grip he had upon the gun.

"We're lost," Craven told him, looking squarely at him. "We may never
find the Solar System!"




_CHAPTER TWENTY_


The revolution was over. Interplanetary officials and army heads had
fled to the sanctuary of Earth. Interplanetary was ended ... ended
forever, for on every world, including Earth, material energy engines
were humming. The people had power to burn, to throw away, power so
cheap that it was practically worthless as a commodity, but invaluable
as a way to a new life, a greater life, a fuller life ... a broader
destiny for the human race.

Interplanetary stocks were worthless. The mighty power plants on Venus
and Mercury were idle. The only remaining tangible asset were the fleets
of spaceships used less than a month before to ship the accumulators to
the outer worlds, to bring them Sunward for recharging.

Patents protecting the rights to the material energy engines had been
obtained from every government throughout the Solar System. New
governments were being formed on the wreckage of the old. John Moore
Mallory already had been inaugurated as president of the Jovian
confederacy. The elections on Mars and Venus would be held within a
week.

Mercury, its usefulness gone with the smashing of the accumulator trade,
had been abandoned. No human foot now trod its surface. Its mighty domes
were empty. It went its way, as it had gone for billions of years, a
little burned out, worthless planet, ignored and shunned. For a brief
moment it had known the conquering tread of mankind, had played its part
in the commerce of the worlds, but now it had reverted to its former
state ... a lonely wanderer of the regions near the Sun, a pariah among
the other planets.

       *       *       *       *       *

Russell Page looked across the desk at Gregory Manning. He heaved a sigh
and dug the pipe out of his jacket pocket.

"It's finished, Greg," he said.

Greg nodded solemnly, watching Russ fill the bowl and apply the match.

Except for the small crew, they were alone in the _Invincible_. John
Moore Mallory and the others were on their own worlds, forming their own
governments, carrying out the dictates of the people, men who would go
down in solar history.

The _Invincible_ hung just off Callisto. Russ looked out at the mighty
moon, saw the lonely stretches of its ice-bound surface, saw the silvery
spot that was the dome of Ranthoor.

"All done," said Greg, "except for one thing."

"Go out and get Chambers and the others," said Russ, puffing at the
pipe.

Greg nodded. "We may as well get started."

Russ rose slowly, went to the wall cabinet and lifted out a box, the
mechanical shadow with its tiny space field surrounding the fleck of
steel that would lead them to the _Interplanetarian_. Carefully he
lifted the machine from its resting place and set it on the desk.
Bending over it, he watched the dials.

Suddenly he whistled. "Greg, they've moved! They aren't where we left
them!"

Greg sprang to his side and stared at the readings. "They're moving
farther away from us ... out into space. Where can they be going?"

Russ straightened, scowling, pulling at the pipe. "They probably found
another G-type star, and are heading for that. They must think it is old
Sol."

"That sounds like it," said Greg. "We spun all over the map to throw
Craven off and looped several times so he'd lose all sense of direction.
Naturally he would be lost."

"But he's evidently got something," Russ pointed out. "We left him
marooned ... dead center, out where he didn't have too much radiation
and couldn't get leverage on any single body. Yet he's moving--and
getting farther away all the time."

"He solved our gravitation concentration screen," said Greg. "He tricked
us into giving him power to build it."

The two men looked at one another for a long minute.

"Well," said Russ, "that's that. Craven and Chambers and Stutsman. The
three villains. All lost in space. Heading for the wrong star.
Hopelessly lost. Maybe they'll never find their way back."

He stopped and relit his pipe. An aching silence fell in the room.

"Poetic justice," said Russ. "Hail and farewell."

Greg rubbed his fist indecisively along the desk. "I can't do it, Russ.
We took them out there. We marooned them. We have to get them back or I
couldn't sleep nights."

Russ laughed quietly, watching the bleak face that stared at him. "I
knew that's what you'd say."

He knocked out the pipe, crushed a fleck of burning tobacco with his
boot. Pocketing the pipe, he walked to the control panel, sat down and
reached for the lever. The engines hummed louder and louder. The
_Invincible_ darted spaceward.

       *       *       *       *       *

"It's too late now," said Chambers. "By the time we reach that planetary
system and charge our accumulators, Manning and Page will have
everything under control back in the Solar System. Even if we could
locate the star that was our Sun, we wouldn't have a chance to get there
in time."

"Too bad," Craven said, and wagged his head, looking like a solemn owl.
"Too bad. Dictator Stutsman won't have a chance to strut his stuff."

Stutsman started to say something and thought better of it. He leaned
back in his chair. From his belt hung a heat pistol.

Chambers eyed the pistol with ill-concealed disgust. "There's no point
in playing soldier. We aren't going to try to upset your mutiny. So far
your taking over the ship hasn't made any difference to us ... so why
should we fight you?"

"It isn't going to make any difference either," said Craven. "Because
there are just two things that will happen to us. We're either lost
forever, will never find our way back, will spend the rest of our days
wandering from star to star, or Manning will come out and take us by the
ear and lead us home again."

Chambers started, leaned forward and fastened his steely eyes on Craven.
"Do you really think he could find us?"

"I have no doubt of it," Craven replied. "I don't know how he does it,
but I'm convinced he can. Probably, however, he'll find that we are lost
and get rid of us that way."

"No," said Chambers, "you're wrong there. Manning wouldn't do that.
He'll come to get us."

"I don't know why he should," snapped Craven.

"Because he's that sort of man," declared Chambers.

"What you going to do when he does get out here?" demanded Stutsman.
"Fall on his neck and kiss him?"

Chambers smiled, stroked his mustache. "Why, no," he said. "I imagine
we'll fight. We'll give him everything we've got and he'll do the same.
It wouldn't seem natural if we didn't."

"You're damned right we will," growled Stutsman. "Because I'm running
this show. You seem to keep forgetting that. We have power enough, when
we get those accumulators filled, to wipe him out. And that is exactly
what I'm going to do."

"Fine," said Craven, mockingly, "just fine. There's just one thing you
forget. Manning is the only man who can lead us back to the Solar
System."

"Hell," stormed Stutsman, "that doesn't make any difference. I'll find
my way back there some way."

"You're afraid of Manning," Chambers challenged.

Stutsman's hand went down to the heat pistol's grip. His eyes glazed and
his face twisted itself into utter hatred. "I don't know why I keep on
letting you live. Craven is valuable to me. I can't kill him. But you
aren't. You aren't worth a damn to anyone."

       *       *       *       *       *

Chambers matched his stare. Stutsman's hand dropped from the pistol and
he slouched to his feet, walked from the room.

Afraid of Manning! He laughed, a hollow, gurgling laugh. Afraid of
Manning!

But he was.

Within his brain hammered a single sentence. Words he had heard Manning
speak as he watched over the television set at Manning's mocking
invitation. Words that beat into his brain and seared his reason and
made his soul shrivel and grow small.

Manning talking to Scorio. Talking to him matter-of-factly, but grimly:
"_I promise you that we'll take care of Stutsman!_"

Manning had taken Scorio and his gangsters one by one and sent them to
far corners of the Solar System. One out to the dreaded Vulcan Fleet,
one to the Outpost, one to the Titan prison, and one to the hell-hole
on Vesta, while Scorio had gone to a little mountain set in a Venus
swamp. They hadn't a chance. They had been locked within a force shell
and shunted through millions of miles of space. No trial, no hearing ...
nothing. Just terrible, unrelenting judgment.

"_I promise you that we'll take care of Stutsman!_"

       *       *       *       *       *

"Craven's only a few billion miles ahead now," said Gregory Manning.
"With our margin of speed, we should overhaul him in a few more hours.
He is still short on power, but he's remedying that rapidly. He's
getting nearer to that sun every minute. Running in toward it as he is,
he tends to sweep up outpouring radiations. That helps him collect a
whole lot more than he would under ordinary circumstances."

Russ, sitting before the controls, pipe clenched in his teeth, watching
the dials, nodded soberly.

"All I'm afraid of," he said, "is that he'll get too close to that sun
before we catch up with him. If he gets close enough so he can fill
those accumulators, he'll pack a bigger wallop than we do. It'll all be
in one bolt, of course, for his power isn't continuous like ours. He has
to collect it slowly. But when he's really loaded, he can give us aces
and still win. I'd hate to take everything he could pack into those
accumulators."

Greg shuddered. "So would I."

The _Invincible_ was exceeding the speed of light, was enveloped in the
mysterious darkness that characterized the speed. They could see nothing
outside the ship, for there was nothing to see. But the tiny mechanical
shadow, occupying a place of honor on the navigation board, kept them
informed of the position and the distance of the _Interplanetarian_.

Greg lolled in his chair, watching Russ.

"I don't think we need to worry about him throwing the entire load of
the accumulators at us," he said. "He wouldn't dare load those
accumulators to peak capacity. He's got to leave enough carrying
capacity in the cells to handle any jolts we send him and he knows we
can send him plenty. He has to keep that handling margin at all times,
over and above what he takes in for power, because his absorption screen
is also a defensive screen. And he has to use some power to keep our
television apparatus out."

Russ chuckled. "I suppose, at that, we have him plenty worried."

The thunder of the engines filled the control room. For days now that
thunder had been in their ears. They had grown accustomed to it, now
hardly noticed it. Ten mighty engines, driving the _Invincible_ at a
pace no other ship had ever obtained, except, possibly, the
_Interplanetarian_, although lack of power should have held Craven's
ship down to a lower speed. Craven wouldn't have dared to build up the
acceleration they had now attained, for he would have drained his banks
and been unable to charge them again.

"Maybe he won't fight," said Russ. "Maybe he's figured out by this time
that he's heading for the wrong star. He may be glad to see us and
follow us back to the Solar System."

"No chance of that. Craven and Chambers won't pass up a chance for a
fight. They'll give us a few wallops if only for the appearance of
things."

"We're crawling up all the time," said Russ. "If we can catch him within
four or five billion miles of the star, he won't be too tough to handle.
Be getting plenty of radiations even then, but not quite as much as he
would like to have."

"He'll have to start decelerating pretty soon," Greg declared. "He can't
run the chance of smashing into the planetary system at the speed he's
going. He won't want to waste too much power using his field as a brake,
because he must know by this time that we're after him and he'll want
what power he has to throw at us."

Hours passed. The _Invincible_ crept nearer and nearer, suddenly seemed
to leap ahead as the _Interplanetarian_ began deceleration.

"Keep giving her all you got," Greg urged Russ. "We've got plenty of
power for braking. We can overhaul him and stop in a fraction of the
time he does."

Russ nodded grimly. The distance indicator needle on the mechanical
shadow slipped off rapidly. Greg, leaping from his chair, hung over it,
breathlessly.

"I think," he said, "we better slow down now. If we don't, we'll be
inside the planetary system."

"How far out is Craven?" asked Russ.

"Not far enough," Greg replied unhappily. "He can't be more than three
billion miles from the star and that star's hot. A class G, all right,
but a good deal younger than old Sol."

       *       *       *       *       *

"We'll let them know we've arrived," grinned Greg. He sent a stabbing
beam of half a billion horsepower slashing at the _Interplanetarian_.

The other ship staggered but steadied itself.

"They know," said Russ cryptically from his position in front of the
vision plate. "We shook them up a bit."

They waited. Nothing happened.

Greg scratched his head. "Maybe you were right. Maybe they don't want to
fight."

Together they watched the _Interplanetarian_. It was still moving in
toward the distant sun, as if nothing had happened.

"We'll see," said Greg.

Back at the controls he threw out a gigantic tractor beam, catching the
other ship in a net of forces that visibly cut its speed.

Space suddenly vomited lashing flame that slapped back and licked and
crawled in living streamers over the surface of the _Invincible_. The
engines moaned in their valiant battle to keep up the outer screen. The
pungent odor of ozone filtered into the control room. The whole ship was
bucking and vibrating, creaking, as if it were being pulled apart.

"So they don't want to fight, eh?" hooted Russ.

Greg gritted his teeth. "They snapped the tractor beam."

"They have power there," Russ declared.

"Too much," said Greg. "More power than they have any right to have."

His hand went out to the lever on the board and pulled it back. A beam
smashed out, with the engines' screaming drive behind it, billions of
horsepower driving with unleashed ferocity at the other ship.

Greg's hand spun a dial, while the generators roared thunderous
defiance.

"I'm giving them the radiation scale," said Greg.

The _Interplanetarian_ was staggering under the terrific bombardment,
but its screen was handling every ounce of the power that Greg was
pouring into it.

"Their photo-cells can't handle that," cried Russ. "No photo-cell would
handle all that stuff you're shooting at them. Unless ..."

"Unless what?"

"Unless Craven has improved on them."

"We'll have to find out. Get the televisor."

       *       *       *       *       *

Russ leaped for the television machine.

A moment later he lifted a haggard face.

"I can't get through," he said. "Craven's got our beams stopped and now
he has our television blocked out."

Greg nodded. "We might have expected that. When he could scramble our
televisors back in the Jovian worlds, he certainly ought to be able to
screen his ship against them."
