The Project Gutenberg EBook of Astounding Stories, July, 1931, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Astounding Stories, July, 1931

Author: Various

Release Date: February 3, 2010 [EBook #31168]
[Last updated: May 13, 2011]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ASTOUNDING STORIES, JULY, 1931 ***




Produced by Sankar Viswanathan, Greg Weeks, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net







                              ASTOUNDING

                               STORIES

                                 20c


              _On Sale the First Thursday of Each Month_


                       W. M. CLAYTON, Publisher
                         HARRY BATES, Editor
                  DOUGLAS M. DOLD, Consulting Editor


The Clayton Standard on a Magazine Guarantees

    _That_ the stories therein are clean, interesting, vivid, by leading
           writers of the day and purchased under conditions approved by
           the Authors' League of America;

    _That_ such magazines are manufactured in Union shops by American
           workmen;

    _That_ each newsdealer and agent is insured a fair profit;

    _That_ an intelligent censorship guards their advertising pages.


_The other Clayton magazines are:_

ACE-HIGH MAGAZINE, RANCH ROMANCES, COWBOY STORIES, CLUES, FIVE-NOVELS
MONTHLY, ALL STAR DETECTIVE STORIES, RANGELAND LOVE STORY MAGAZINE,
WESTERN ADVENTURES, and WESTERN LOVE STORIES.

_More than Two Million Copies Required to Supply the Monthly Demand
for Clayton Magazines._

       *       *       *       *       *


VOL. VII, No. 1               CONTENTS               JULY, 1931


COVER DESIGN                  H. W. WESSO
     _Painted in Water-Colors from a Scene in "The Doom from Planet 4."_

THE DOOM FROM PLANET 4        JACK WILLIAMSON                         5
     _A Ray of Fire, Green, Mysterious, Stabs Through the Night to
      Dan on His Ship. It Leads Him to an Island of Unearthly Peril._

THE HANDS OF ATEN             H. G. WINTER                           20
     _Out of the Solid Ice Craig Hews Three Long-Frozen Egyptians
      and Is at Once Caught Up into Amazing Adventure._ (A Complete
      Novelette.)

THE DIAMOND THUNDERBOLT       H. THOMPSON RICH                       46
     _Locked in a Rocket and Fired into Space! Such Was the Fate
      which Awaited Young Stoddard at the End of the Diamond Trail!_

THE SLAVE SHIP FROM SPACE     A. R. HOLMES                           68
     _Three Kidnapped Earthlings Show Xantra of the Tillas How
      "Docile" Earth Slaves Can Be._

THE REVOLT OF THE MACHINES    NAT SCHACHNER AND ARTHUR L. ZAGAT      86
     _Something in the Many-Faceted Mind of the Master Machine Spurs
      It to Diabolical Revolt Against the Authority of Its Human
      Masters._

THE EXILE OF TIME             RAY CUMMINGS                          109
     _Only Near the End of the World Does Fate Catch Up with Tugh,
      the Cripple Who Ran Amuck Through Time._ (_Conclusion._)

THE READERS' CORNER           ALL OF US                             129
     _A Meeting Place for Readers of Astounding Stories._

       *       *       *       *       *

Single Copies, 20 Cents In Canada, 25 Cents Yearly Subscription, $2.00

Issued monthly by The Clayton Magazines, Inc., 80 Lafayette Street,
New York, N. Y. W. M. Clayton, President; Francis P. Pace, Secretary.
Entered as second-class matter December 7, 1929, at the Post Office at
New York, N. Y., under Act of March 3, 1879. Title registered as a
Trade Mark in the U. S. Patent Office. Member Newsstand Group. For
advertising rates address The Newsstand Group, Inc., 80 Lafayette
Street, New York; or The Wrigley Bldg., Chicago.

       *       *       *       *       *




The Doom from Planet 4

_By Jack Williamson_

[Illustration: _For long seconds he was plunging down through space._]

[Sidenote: A ray of fire, green, mysterious, stabs through the night
to Dan on his ship. It leads him to an island of unearthly peril.]


"S O S. S O S. S O S." Three short, three long, three short, the
flashes winked from the dark headland. Dan McNally, master and owner
of the small and ancient trading schooner, _Virginia_, caught the
feeble flickering light from the island as he strode across the
fore-deck. He stopped, stared at the looming black line of land
beneath the tropical stars. Again light flashed from a point of rock
far above the dim white line of phosphorescent surf, spelling out the
signal of distress.

"Somebody bane callin' with a flashlight, I t'ank," the big Swede,
Larsen, rumbled from the wheel.

Dan thought suddenly of a reply. He rushed into the charthouse, to
return in a moment with a lighted lantern and a copy of the _Nautical
Almanac_ which would serve to hide the flame between flashes. He
flashed an answer.

Again the pale light flickered from the dark mass of land, spelling
words out rather slowly, as if the sender were uncertain in his
knowledge of Morse. Surprised as Dan had been by the signal from an
island marked on the charts as uninhabited, he was astonished at the
message that now came to him.

"You are in terrible danger," he read in the flashes. "Dreadful thing
here. Hurry away. Radio for warships. I am--"

The winking light suddenly went out. Dan strained his eyes to watch
the point where it had been, and a few seconds later he saw a curious
thing. A darting, stabbing lance of green fire flashed out across the
barren, rocky cliff, lighting it fleetingly with pale green radiance.
It leapt out and was gone in an instant, leaving the shoulder of the
island dark as before.

Dan watched for long minutes, but he saw nothing more brilliant than
the pale gleam of phosphorescence where the waves dashed against the
sheer granite wall of the island.

"What you t'ank?" Larsen broke in upon him.

       *       *       *       *       *

Dan started, then answered slowly. "I don't know. First I thought
there must be a lunatic at large. But that green light! I didn't like
it."

He stared again at the looming mass of the island. Davis Island is one
of the innumerable tiny islets that dot the South Pacific; merely the
summit of a dead volcano, projecting above the sea. Nominally claimed
by Great Britain, it is marked on the charts as uninhabited.

"Radio for warships, eh?" he muttered. A wireless transmitter was one
of many modern innovations that the _Virginia_ did not boast. She had
been gathering copra and shell among the islands long before such
things came into common use, though Dan had invested his modest
savings in her only a year before.

"What would anyone want with warships on Davis Island?" The name
roused a vague memory. "Davis Island?" he repeated, staring in
concentration at the black sea. "Of course!" It came to him suddenly.
A newspaper article that he had read five years before, at about the
time he had abandoned college in the middle of his junior year, to
follow the call of adventure.

The account had dealt with an eclipse of the sun, visible only from
certain points on the Pacific. One Dr. Hunter, under the auspices of a
Western university, had sailed with his instruments and assistants to
Davis Island, to study the solar corona during the few precious
moments when the shadow covered the sun, and to observe the
displacement of certain stars as a test of Einstein's theory of
relativity.

The reporter had interviewed the party at San Francisco, on the eve of
sailing. There had been photographs of the chartered vessel, of Dr.
Hunter and his instruments, and of his daughter, Helen, who acted as
his secretary. She looked not at all like a scientist, Dan recalled.
In fact, her face had seemed rather pretty, even in the blurred
newspaper half-tone.

But the memory cast no light upon the present puzzle. In the rambling
years that had led him to this spot upon the old _Virginia_, he had
lost touch with the science that had interested him during his college
days. He had heard nothing of the results of the Hunter expedition.
But this island had been its destination.

       *       *       *       *       *

He turned decisively to the man at the wheel. "Larsen, we'll stand
well offshore till daylight," he said. "Then, unless we see something
unusual, we can sail in and land a boat to--"

The sentence was never finished. Through the corner of his eye, Dan
saw a ray of green light darting toward them from the island. A line
of green fire seemed to reach out and strike him a physical blow.
Green flame flared around him; and somehow he was hurled from the
bridge, clear of the rail and into the sea.

His impression of the incident was very confused. He seemed to have
struck the water with such force that his breath was knocked out. He
struggled back to the surface, strangling, and coughing the bitter
brine from his lungs. It was several minutes before he was comfortably
treading water, and able to see what had happened.

The old schooner was then a hundred yards away, careening crazily, and
drifting aimlessly before the light breeze. The strange green fire had
vanished. Parts of the ship apparently had been carried away or
disintegrated by the ray or the force of which it was a visible
effect. The mainmast was down, and was hanging over the side in a
tangle of rigging.

Bright yellow flames were dancing at a dozen points about the wreckage
on the listing deck. A grotesque broken thing, queerly illuminated by
the growing fires, was hanging over the wheel--the body of Larsen. No
living thing was visible; and Dan, after a second look at the wreck of
the bow, knew that he must be the sole survivor of the catastrophe.

"Too bad about the boys," he muttered through teeth that chattered,
for the cold water had already chilled him. "And poor old Larsen."

He thought again of the warning flashed from the shore. "Guess there
must be something hellish afoot after all," he muttered again. "The
flicker of green that stopped the signals, and the green fire that got
us--what can they mean?" He looked toward the looming black shadow of
the island, and began divesting himself of his clinging, sodden
garments. "I don't wonder somebody wanted battleships. But even a
battleship, if that green ray hit it--"

He drew a deep breath and ducked his head while he unlaced his shoes
and kicked out of them. Then, with a final look at the burning wreck
of the _Virginia_, he tore off the last bit of his underclothing and
swam for the shore in an easy crawl.

       *       *       *       *       *

The rocky ramparts of Davis Island were three or four miles away. But
there was no wind; the black sea was calm save for a long, hardly
perceptible swell. A strong swimmer and in superb condition, Dan felt
no anxiety about being able to make the distance. There was danger,
however, that a shark would run across him, or that he could not find
a landing place upon the rocky shore.

Four bells had rung when he had seen the first flash; it had been just
ten o'clock. And it was some four hours later that Dan touched bottom
and waded wearily up a bit of smooth hard beach, through palely
glittering phosphorescent foam.

He rubbed the brine from his tired limbs, and sat down for a time, in
a spot where a fallen boulder sheltered his naked body from the cool
morning wind. In a few moments he rose, flexed his muscles and peered
through the starlit darkness for a way up the cliff behind the beach.
He found it impossible to distinguish anything.

"Got to keep moving, or find some clothes," he muttered. "And I may
stumble onto what made the green light. Darn lucky I've been so far,
anyhow. Larsen and the others--but I shan't think of them. Wonder who
was flashing the signals from the island. And did the green fire get
him?"

He turned to look out over the black plain of the sea. Far out, the
_Virginia_ lay low in the water, a pillar of yellow flame rising from
her hull. As he watched, the flame flickered and vanished: the old
schooner, he supposed, had sunk. Then he noticed a pale glow come into
being among the stars on the eastern horizon.

"Hello," he muttered again. "So we're going to have a moon? In the
last quarter, but still it ought to light me up from this beach."

A moment later the horns of the crescent had come above the black rim
of the sea. Dan waited, swinging his arms and tramping up and down on
the sand, until the silvery moon had cleared the horizon and
illuminated the rugged face of the cliff with pale white radiance.

He chose a path to the top of the cliff and clambered up, emerging in
a jungle-like thicket of brush. Picking his way with the greatest
caution, yet scratching his naked skin most painfully, he made his way
for a few yards through the brush to a point of vantage from which he
could look about.

He was, he perceived, in a narrow valley or ravine, with rugged black
walls rising sheer on either side. The silvery light of the crescent
moon fell upon the rank jungle that covered the narrow floor of the
canyon, which rose and dwindled as it penetrated inland.

       *       *       *       *       *

Gazing up the canyon, Dan gasped in amazement at what he saw.

Mars, the red planet, hung bright and motionless, low in the western
sky, gleaming with deep bloody radiance. Directly beneath it, bathed
in the white light of the moon, was a bare, rocky peak that seemed the
highest point of the island. And upon that highest pinnacle, that
chanced to be just below the ruddy star, was an astounding machine.

Three slender towers, of a white metal that gleamed in the moonlight
with the silvery luster of aluminum, rose from the rocky peak. They
supported, in a horizontal position, an enormous metal ring. It must
be, Dan reckoned swiftly, at least a hundred feet in diameter, and
held a hundred feet above the summit of the mountain.

The huge ring gleamed with a strange purple radiance. A shimmering
mist of red-violet light surrounded it. An unknown force seemed to
throb within the mighty ring, drawing the mantle of purple haze about
it.

And suspended inside the ring and below it was a long, slender needle
of dazzling white light. To Dan, from where he stood in the canyon, it
seemed a fine, sharp line, though he knew it must be some kind of
pointer, luminous with the strange force pulsing through it.

The strange needle wavered a little, with quick, uncertain motions.
The brilliance of its light varied oddly; it seemed to throb with a
queer, irregular rhythm.

And the gleaming needle pointed straight at the planet Mars!
