The Project Gutenberg EBook of Bowser The Hound, by Thornton W. Burgess

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Bowser The Hound

Author: Thornton W. Burgess

Release Date: February 25, 2005 [EBook #15168]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BOWSER THE HOUND ***




Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Cori Samuel and the PG Online
Distributed Proofreading Team.





[Illustration: "AS I LIVE," HE MUTTERED, "THAT IS BOWSER THE HOUND!"
_Page 29._]




BOWSER THE HOUND

BY

THORNTON W. BURGESS


_With Illustrations by_

_HARRISON CADY_


This book, while produced under wartime conditions, in full compliance
with government regulations for the conservation of paper and other
essential materials, is COMPLETE AND UNABRIDGED


GROSSET & DUNLAP

Publishers
New York

_Printed by arrangement with Little, Brown, and Company_


_Copyright, 1920,_
BY LITTLE, BROWN, AND COMPANY.
_All rights reserved_




=Dedication=

TO THE CHILD'S LOVING PLAYMATE,
LOYAL PROTECTOR
AND STAUNCH ALLY
--THE DOG,
THIS BOOK IS DEDICATED




CONTENTS


CHAPTER                                                 PAGE

I OLD MAN COYOTE LEADS BOWSER AWAY                        1

II OLD MAN COYOTE PLAYS A TRICK                           6

III WHAT HAPPENED TO BOWSER                              10

IV POOR BOWSER                                           15

V BOWSER SPENDS A BAD NIGHT                              20

VI THE SURPRISE OF BLACKY THE CROW                       25

VII BLACKY THE CROW TAKES PITY ON BOWSER                 30

VIII HOW BLACKY THE CROW HELPED BOWSER                   34

IX OLD MAN COYOTE GIVES OUT DARK HINTS                   39

X HOW REDDY FOX INVESTIGATED                             44

XI A LITTLE UNPLEASANTNESS                               49

XII THE CLEVERNESS OF OLD MAN COYOTE                     54

XIII THE MISCHIEVOUS LITTLE NIGHT BREEZE                 59

XIV THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN BEING INSIDE AND OUTSIDE      64

XV REDDY'S FORLORN CHANCE                                69

XVI WHY REDDY WENT WITHOUT A CHICKEN DINNER              74

XVII FARMER BROWN'S BOY DROPS A PAN OF CORN              79

XVIII MUTUAL RELIEF                                      84

XIX WHERE WAS BOWSER THE HOUND?                          89

XX WHERE BOWSER WAS                                      93

XXI BOWSER BECOMES A PRISONER                            98

XXII FARMER BROWN'S BOY LOOKS IN VAIN                   103

XXIII BOWSER'S GREAT VOICE                              107

XXIV BLACKY TRIES TO GET HELP                           112

XXV BLACKY CALLS ON REDDY FOX                           117

XXVI RED WITS AND BLACK WITS                            122

XXVII THE ARTFULNESS OF BLACKY                          127

XXVIII REDDY FOX DREAMS OF CHICKENS                     131

XXIX REDDY TRIES TO AROUSE BLACKY'S PITY                136

XXX BLACKY THE CROW IS ALL PITY                         141

XXXI BLACKY IS MUCH PLEASED WITH HIMSELF                146

XXXII BLACKY WAITS FOR REDDY                            151

XXXIII REDDY WATCHES THE FAT HENS                       156

XXXIV PATIENCE AND IMPATIENCE                           161

XXXV THINGS HAPPEN ALL AT ONCE                          166

XXXVI REDDY HIDES THE FAT HEN                           171

XXXVII FARMER BROWN'S BOY HAS A GLAD SURPRISE           176

XXXVIII REDDY GOES BACK FOR HIS FAT HEN                 181

XXXIX A VANISHED DINNER                                 186

XL WHERE WAS REDDY'S DINNER?                            191

XLI WHAT BLACKY THE CROW SAW                            196

XLII ALL IS WELL THAT ENDS WELL                         201




LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS

"As I live," he muttered, "that is Bowser the Hound!"  _Frontispiece_

Over at the gate of Farmer Brown's henyard he could
see a dark form                                          53

Somewhere not very far ahead of him was a house          96

On broad wings it sailed over to that hollow stump      199




CHAPTER I

OLD MAN COYOTE LEADS BOWSER AWAY

    Though great or small the matter prove
      Be faithful in whate'er you do.
    'Tis thus and only thus you may
      To others and yourself be true.

    _Bowser the Hound._


Old Man Coyote is full of tricks. People with such clever wits as his
usually are full of tricks. On the other hand Bowser the Hound isn't
tricky at all. He just goes straight ahead with the thing he has to do
and does it in the most earnest way. Not being tricky himself, he
sometimes forgets to watch out for tricks in others.

One day he found the fresh trail of Old Man Coyote and made up his mind
that he would run down Old Man Coyote if he had to run his legs off to
do it. He always makes up his mind like that whenever he starts out to
hunt. You know there is nothing in the world Bowser enjoys quite so much
as to hunt some one who will give him a long, hard run. Any time he will
go without eating for the pleasure of chasing Reddy or Granny Fox, or
Old Man Coyote.

Now Old Man Coyote was annoyed. He was and he wasn't afraid of Bowser
the Hound. That is to say he was afraid to fight Bowser, but he wasn't
afraid to be hunted by Bowser, because he was so sure that he was smart
enough to get away from Bowser. If Bowser had appeared at almost any
other time Old Man Coyote wouldn't have been so annoyed. But to have
Bowser appear just then made him angry clear through. You see he had
just started out to get his dinner.

"What business has that good-for-nothing dog over here anyway, I'd like
to know," he muttered, as he ran swiftly through the Green Forest. "What
right has he to meddle in other folks' business? I'll just teach that
fellow a lesson; that's what I'll do! I'll teach him that he can't
interfere with me not be sorry for it."

So Old Man Coyote ran and ran and ran, and never once did he try to
break his trail. In fact, he took pains to leave a trail that Bowser
could follow easily. After him Bowser ran and ran and ran, and all the
time his great voice rang out joyously. This was the kind of a hunt he
loved. Out of the Green Forest into the Old Pasture, Old Man Coyote led
Bowser the Hound. Across the Old Pasture and out on the other side they
raced. Farther and farther away from home Old Man Coyote led Bowser the
Hound. Instead of circling back as usual, he kept on. Bowser kept on
after him. By and by he was in strange country, country he had never
visited before. He didn't notice this. He didn't notice anything but the
splendid trail Old Man Coyote was making. He didn't even realize that he
was getting tired. Always in his nose was the tantalizing scent of Old
Man Coyote. Bowser was sure that this time he would catch this fellow
who had fooled him so often before.




CHAPTER II

OLD MAN COYOTE PLAYS A TRICK

    Of people who play tricks beware,
    Lest they may get you in a snare.
    You cannot trust them, so watch out
    Whenever one may be about.

    _Bowser the Hound._


There is such a thing as being too much interested in the thing you are
doing. That is the way accidents very often happen. A person will get so
interested in something that he will be blind and deaf to everything
else, and so will walk straight into danger or trouble of some kind.

Now just take the case of Bowser the Hound. Bowser was so interested in
the chase of Old Man Coyote that he paid no attention whatever to
anything but the warm scent of Old Man Coyote which the latter was
taking pains to leave. Bowser ran with his nose in Old Man Coyote's
tracks and never looked either to left or right. He would lift his head
only to look straight ahead in the hope of seeing Old Man Coyote. Then
down would go his nose again to follow that scent.

So Bowser didn't notice that Old Man Coyote was leading him far, far
away from home into country with which he was quite unacquainted. Bowser
has a great, deep, wonderful voice which can be heard a very long
distance when he bays on the tracks of some one he is hunting. It can
be heard a very long distance indeed. But far as it can be heard, Bowser
was far, far beyond hearing distance from Farmer Brown's house before
Old Man Coyote began to even think of playing one of his clever tricks
in order to make Bowser lose his scent. You see, Old Man Coyote intended
to lead Bowser into strange country and there lose him, hoping that he
would not be able to find the way home.

Old Man Coyote is himself a tireless runner. He is not so heavy as is
Bowser, so does not tire as easily. Then, too, he had not wasted his
breath as had Bowser with his steady baying. Old Man Coyote could tell
by the sound of Bowser's voice when the latter was beginning to grow
tired, and he could tell by the fact that he often had a moment or two
to sit down and rest before Bowser got dangerously near.

So at last Old Man Coyote decided that the time had come to play a
trick. By and by he came to a river. At that point there was a high,
overhanging bank. On the very edge of this bank Old Man Coyote made a
long leap to one side. Then he made another long leap to the big trunk
of a fallen tree. He ran along this and from the end of it made still
another long leap, as long a leap as he could. Then he hid in a little
thicket to see what would happen.




CHAPTER III
