its feet together and put it across his shoulder, for he had a long way
to go.

That day, the Shifty Lad happened to be wandering over the moor, when he
saw the man with the sheep on his shoulder walking along the road which
led past the Black Rogue's house. The sheep was heavy and the man was
in no hurry, so he came slowly and the boy knew that he himself could
easily get back to his master before the shepherd was even in sight.

'I will wager,' he cried, as he pushed quickly through the bushes which
hid the cabin--'I will wager that I will steal the sheep from the man
that is coming before he passes here.'

'Will you indeed?' said the Gallows Bird. 'I will wager you a hundred
silver pieces that you can do nothing of the sort.'

'Well, I will try it, anyway,' replied the boy, and disappeared in the
bushes. He ran fast till he entered a wood through which the shepherd
must go, and then he stopped, and taking off one of his shoes smeared it
with mud and set it in the path. When this was done he slipped behind a
rock and waited.

Very soon the man came up, and seeing the shoe lying there, he stooped
and looked at it.

'It is a good shoe,' he said to himself, 'but very dirty. Still, if I
had the fellow, I would be at the trouble of cleaning it'; so he threw
the shoe down again and went on.

The Shifty Lad smiled as he heard him, and, picking up the shoe, he
crept round by a short way and laid the other shoe on the path. A few
minutes after the shepherd arrived, and beheld the second shoe lying on
the path.

'Why, that is the fellow of the dirty shoe!' he exclaimed when he saw
it. 'I will go back and pick up the other one, and then I shall have a
pair of good shoes,' and he put the sheep on the grass and returned to
fetch the shoe. Then the Shifty Lad put on his shoes, and, picking up
the sheep, carried it home. And the Black Rogue paid him the hundred
marks of his wager.

When the shepherd reached the farmhouse that night he told his tale to
his master, who scolded him for being stupid and careless, and bade him
go the next day to the mountain and fetch him a kid, and he would send
that as a wedding gift. But the Shifty Lad was on the look-out, and hid
himself in the wood, and the moment the man drew near with the kid on
his shoulders began to bleat like a sheep, and no one, not even the
sheep's own mother, could have told the difference.

'Why, it must have got its feet loose, and have strayed after all,'
thought the man; and he put the kid on the grass and hurried off in the
direction of the bleating. Then the boy ran back and picked up the kid,
and took it to the Black Gallows Bird.

The shepherd could hardly believe his eyes when he returned from seeking
the sheep and found that the kid had vanished. He was afraid to go home
and tell the same tale that he had told yesterday; so he searched the
wood through and through till night was nearly come. Then he felt that
there was no help for it, and he must go home and confess to his master.

Of course, the farmer was very angry at this second misfortune; but this
time he told him to drive one of the big bulls from the mountain, and
warned him that if he lost THAT he would lose his place also. Again the
Shifty Lad, who was on the watch, perceived him pass by, and when he saw
the man returning with the great bull he cried to the Black Rogue:

'Be quick and come into the wood, and we will try to get the bull also.'

'But how can we do that?' asked the Black Rogue.

'Oh, quite easily! You hide yourself out there and baa like a sheep, and
I will go in the other direction and bleat like a kid. It will be all
right, I assure you.'

The shepherd was walking slowly, driving the bull before him, when he
suddenly heard a loud baa amongst the bushes far away on one side of the
path, and a feeble bleat answering it from the other side.

'Why, it must be the sheep and the kid that I lost,' said he. 'Yes,
surely it must'; and tying the bull hastily to a tree, he went off
after the sheep and the kid, and searched the wood till he was tired. Of
course by the time he came back the two thieves had driven the bull home
and killed him for meat, so the man was obliged to go to his master and
confess that he had been tricked again.

After this the Black Rogue and the Shifty Lad grew bolder and bolder,
and stole great quantities of cattle and sold them and grew quite rich.
One day they were returning from the market with a large sum of money in
their pockets when they passed a gallows erected on the top of a hill.

'Let us stop and look at that gallows,' exclaimed the Shifty Lad. 'I
have never seen one so close before. Yet some say that it is the end of
all thieves.'

There was no one in sight, and they carefully examined every part of it.

'I wonder how it feels to be hanged,' said the Shifty Lad. 'I should
like to know, in case they ever catch me. I'll try first, and then you
can do so.'

As he spoke he fastened the loose cord about his neck, and when it was
quite secure he told the Black Rogue to take the other end of the rope
and draw him up from the ground.

'When I am tired of it I will shake my legs, and then you must let me
down,' said he.

The Black Rogue drew up the rope, but in half a minute the Shifty Lad's
legs began to shake, and he quickly let it down again.

'You can't imagine what a funny feeling hanging gives you,' murmured
the Shifty Lad, who looked rather purple in the face and spoke in an odd
voice. 'I don't think you have every tried it, or you wouldn't have let
me go up first. Why, it is the pleasantest thing I have ever done. I was
shaking my legs from sheer delight, and if you had been there you would
have shaken your legs too.'

'Well, let me try, if it is so nice,' answered the Black Rogue. 'But be
sure you tie the knot securely, for I don't want to fall down and break
my neck.'

'Oh, I will see to that!' replied the Shifty Lad. 'When you are tired,
just whistle, and I'll let you down.'

So the Black Rogue was drawn up, and as soon as he was as high as the
rope would allow him to go the Shifty Lad called to him:

'Don't forest to whistle when you want to come down; but if you are
enjoying yourself as I did, shake your legs.'

And in a moment the Black Rogue's legs began to shake and to kick, and
the Shifty Lad stood below, watching him and laughing heartily.

'Oh, how funny you are! If you could only see yourself! Oh, you ARE
funny! But when you have had enough, whistle and you shall be let down';
and he rocked again with laughter.

But no whistle came, and soon the legs ceased to shake and to kick, for
the Black Gallows Bird was dead, as the Shifty Lad intended he should
be.

Then he went home to the Black Rogue's wife, and told her that her
husband was dead, and that he was ready to marry her if she liked. But
the woman had been fond of the Black Rogue, thief though he was, and she
shrank from the Shifty Lad in horror, and set the people after him,
and he had to fly to another part of the country where none knew of his
doings.

Perhaps if the Shifty Lad's mother knew anything of this, she may have
thought that by this time her son might be tired of stealing, and ready
to try some honest trade. But in reality he loved the tricks and danger,
and life would have seemed very dull without them. So he went on just as
before, and made friends whom he taught to be as wicked as himself, till
they took to robbing the king's storehouses, and by the advice of the
Wise Man the king sent out soldiers to catch the band of thieves.

For a long while they tried in vain to lay hands on them. The Shifty Lad
was too clever for them all, and if they laid traps he laid better ones.
At last one night he stole upon some soldiers while they were asleep in
a barn and killed them, and persuaded the villagers that if THEY did not
kill the other soldiers before morning they would certainly be killed
themselves. Thus it happened that when the sun rose not a single soldier
was alive in the village.

Of course this news soon reached the king's ears, and he was very angry,
and summoned the Wise Man to take counsel with him. And this was the
counsel of the Wise Man--that he should invite all the people in the
countryside to a ball, and among them the bold and impudent thief would
be sure to come, and would be sure to ask the king's daughter to dance
with him.

'Your counsel is good,' said the king, who made his feast and prepared
for his ball; and all the people of the countryside were present, and
the Shifty Lad came with them.

When everyone had eaten and drunk as much as they wanted they went into
the ballroom. There was a great throng, and while they were pressing
through the doorway the Wise Man, who had a bottle of black ointment
hidden in his robes, placed a tiny dot on the cheek of the Shifty Lad
near his ear. The Shifty Lad felt nothing, but as he approached the
king's daughter to ask her to be his partner he caught sight of the
black dot in a silver mirror. Instantly he guessed who had put it
there and why, but he said nothing, and danced so beautifully that the
princess was quite delighted with him. At the end of the dance he bowed
low to his partner and left her, to mingle with the crowd that was
filling the doorway. As he passed the Wise Man he contrived not only to
steal the bottle but to place two black dots on his face, and one on the
faces of twenty other men. Then he slipped the bottle back in the Wise
Man's robe.

By-and-by he went up to the king's daughter again, and begged for the
honour of another dance. She consented, and while he was stooping to
tie the ribbons on his shoe she took out from her pocket another bottle,
which the Wizard had given her, and put a black dot on his cheek. But
she was not as skilful as the Wise Man, and the Shifty Lad felt the
touch of her fingers; so as soon as the dance was over he contrived to
place a second black dot on the faces of the twenty men and two more on
the Wizard, after which he slipped the bottle into her pocket.

At length the ball came to an end, and then the king ordered all the
doors to be shut, and search made for a man with two black dots on his
cheek. The chamberlain went among the guests, and soon found such a man,
but just as he was going to arrest him and bring him before the king his
eye fell on another with the same mark, and another, and another, till
he had counted twenty--besides the Wise Man--on whose face were found
spots.

Not knowing what to do, the chamberlain hurried back with his tale
to the king, who immediately sent for the Wise Man, and then for his
daughter.

'The thief must have stolen your bottle,' said the king to the Wizard.

'No, my lord, it is here,' answered the Wise Man, holding it out.

'Then he must have got yours,' he cried, turning to his daughter.

'Indeed, father, it is safe in my pocket,' replied she, taking it out as
she spoke; and they all three looked at each other and remained silent.

'Well,' said the king at last, 'the man who has done this is cleverer
than most men, and if he will make himself known to me he shall marry
the princess and govern half my kingdom while I am alive, and the whole
of it when I am dead. Go and announce this in the ballroom,' he added to
an attendant, 'and bring the fellow hither.'

So the attendant went into the ballroom and did as the king had bidden
him, when, to his surprise, not one man, but twenty, stepped forward,
all with black dots on their faces.

'I am the person you want,' they all exclaimed at once, and the
attendant, as much bewildered as the chamberlain had been, desired them
to follow him into the king's presence.

But the question was too difficult for the king to decide, so he called
together his council. For hours they talked, but to no purpose, and in
the end they hit upon a plan which they might just as well have thought
of at the beginning.

And this was the plan. A child was to be brought to the palace, and next
the king's daughter would give her an apple. Then the child was to take
the apple and be led into a room where the twenty men with the black
dots were sitting in a ring. And to whomsoever the child gave the apple,
that man should marry the king's daughter.

'Of course,' said the king, 'it may not be the right man, after all, but
then again it MAY be. Anyhow, it is the best we can do.'

The princess herself led the child into the room where the twenty men
were now seated. She stood in the centre of the ring for a moment,
looking at one man after another, and then held out the apple to the
Shifty Lad, who was twisting a shaving of wood round his finger, and had
the mouthpiece of a bagpipe hanging from his neck.

'You ought not to have anything which the others have not got,' said
the chamberlain, who had accompanied the princess; and he bade the
child stand outside for a minute, while he took away the shaving and the
mouthpiece, and made the Shifty Lad change his place. Then he called the
child in, but the little girl knew him again, and went straight up to
him with the apple.

'This is the man whom the child has twice chosen,' said the chamberlain,
signing to the Shifty Lad to kneel before the king. 'It was all quite
fair; we tried it twice over.' In this way the Shifty Lad won the king's
daughter, and they were married the next day.

A few days later the bride and bridegroom were taking a walk together,
and the path led down to the river, and over the river was a bridge.

'And what bridge may this be?' asked the Shifty Lad; and the princess
told him that this was the bridge of Dublin.

'Is it indeed?' cried he. 'Well, now, many is the time that my mother
has said, when I played her a trick, that my end would be that I should
hang on the bridge of Dublin.'

'Oh, if you want to fulfil her prophecies,' laughed the princess, 'you
have only to let me tie my handkerchief round your ankle, and I will
hold you as you hang over the wall of the bridge.'

'That would be fine fun,' said he; 'but you are not strong enough to
hold me up.'

'Oh, yes, I am,' said the princess; 'just try.' So at last he let her
bind the handkerchief round his ankle and hang him over the wall, and
they both laughed and jested at the strength of the princess.

'Now pull me up again,' called he; but as he spoke a great cry arose
that the palace was burning. The princess turned round with a start, and
let go her handkerchief, and the Shifty Lad fell, and struck his head on
a stone, and died in an instant.

So his mother's prophecy had come true, after all.

West Highland Tales.




The False Prince and the True


The king had just awakened from his midday sleep, for it was summer, and
everyone rose early and rested from twelve to three, as they do in hot
countries. He had dressed himself in cool white clothes, and was passing
through the hall on his way to the council chamber, when a number of
young nobles suddenly appeared before him, and one amongst them stepped
forward and spoke.

'Sire, this morning we were all playing tennis in the court, the prince
and this gentleman with the rest, when there broke out some dispute
about the game. The prince lost his temper, and said many insulting
things to the other, who was playing against him, till at length the
gentleman whom you see there struck him violently in the face, so that
the blood ran from his mouth and nose. We were all so horrified at the
sight, that we should most likely have killed the man then and there,
for daring to lay hands on the prince, had not his grandfather the duke
stepped between and commanded us to lay the affair before you.'

The king had listened attentively to the story, and when it was ended he
said:

'I suppose the prince had no arms with him, or else he would have used
them?'

'Yes, sire, he had arms; he always carries a dagger in his belt. But
when he saw the blood pouring from his face, he went to a corner of the
court and began to cry, which was the strangest thing of all.'

On hearing this the king walked to the window and stood for a few
minutes with his back to the room, where the company of young men
remained silent. Then he came back, his face white and stern.

'I tell you,' he said, 'and it is the solemn truth, that I would rather
you had told me that the prince was dead, though he is my only son, than
know that he would suffer such an injury without attempting to avenge
it. As for the gentleman who struck him, he will be brought before my
judges, and will plead his own cause, but I hardly think he can escape
death, after having assaulted the heir to the crown.'

The young man raised his head as if to reply, but the king would not
listen, and commanded his guards to put him under arrest, adding,
however, that if the prisoner wished to visit any part of the city, he
was at liberty to do so properly guarded, and in fifteen days he would
be brought to trial before the highest judges in the land.

The young man left the king's presence, surrounded by soldiers, and
accompanied by many of his friends, for he was a great favourite. By
their advice he spent the fourteen days that remained to him going about
to seek counsel from wise men of all sorts, as to how he might escape
death, but no one could help him, for none could find any excuse for the
blow he had given to the prince.

The fourteenth night had come, and in despair the prisoner went out to
take his last walk through the city. He wandered on hardly knowing
where he went, and his face was so white and desperate that none of his
companions dared speak to him. The sad little procession had passed some
hours in this manner, when, near the gate of a monastery, an old woman
appeared round a corner, and suddenly stood before the young man. She
was bent almost double, and was so wizened and wrinkled that she looked
at least ninety; only her eyes were bright and quick as those of a girl.

'Sir,' she said, 'I know all that has happened to you, and how you are
seeking if in any wise you can save your life. But there is none that
can answer that question save only I myself, if you will promise to do
all I ask.'

