there to Ventura, was marked out on maps to be saltsown by the very same
bombercommand which had dropped the spectacular but futile incendiaries.
The triumph of the salt people was ungenerous in its enthusiasm; the
disgruntled antisalts, now a mere handful of diehards publishing an
esoteric press, muttered everyone would be sorry, wait and see.


_30._ The grass itself waited for nothing. It seemed to take new
strength from the indignities inflicted upon it and it increased, if
anything, its tempo of growth. It plunged into the ocean in a dozen
spots at once. It swarmed over sand which had never known anything but
cactus and the Sierra Madres became great humps of green against the
skyline. This last conquest shocked those who had thought the mountains
immune in their inhospitable heights. _Cynodon dactylon_, uninoculated,
had always shunned coldness, though it survived some degrees of frost.
The giant growth, however, seemed to be less subject to this inhibition,
though it too showed slower progress in the higher and colder regions.
The _Intelligencer_ planned to move from Pomona to San Bernardino and if
necessary to Victorville.

Daily Le ffacase became a sterner taskmaster, a more pettishly exacting
employer. By the living guts of William Lloyd Garrison, he raged, had no
one ever driven the simple elements of punctuation into my bloody head?
Had no schoolmaster in moments of heroic enthusiasm attempted to pound a
few rules of rhetoric through my incrassate skull? Had I never heard of
taste? Was the word "style" outside my macilent vocabulary? What the
devil did I mean by standing there with my mouth open, exposing my
unfortunate teeth for all the world to see? Was it possible for any
allegedly human to be as addlepated as I? And had I been thrust from my
mother's womb--I suppress his horrible adjectives--only to torment and
afflict his longsuffering editorial patience?

A hundred times I was tempted to sever my connection with this
journalistic autocrat. My column was widely read and two
publishinghouses had approached me with the idea of putting out a book,
any editorial revision and emendations to be taken care of by them
without disturbing me at all. I could have allied myself with almost any
paper in the country, undoubtedly at better than the meager stipend Le
ffacase doled out to me.

But I think loyalty is one of the most admirable of virtues and it was
not in my nature to desert the _Intelligencer_--certainly not till I
could secure a lengthy and ironclad contract, such as for some reason
other papers seemed unwilling to offer me. In accord with this innate
loyalty of mine--I take no credit for it, I was born that way--I did not
balk at the assignments given me though they ranged from the hazardous
to the absurd.

One of the more pleasant of these excursions thought up by Mr Le
ffacase was to fly over the grass and to Catalina, embark on a chartered
boat there and survey the parts of the coast now overrun. A fresh point
of observation. Accompanying me was the moviecameraman, Rafe Slafe, as
uncommunicative and earnest in his medications as before.

It was a sad sight to see neat rectangular patterns of roads and
highways, cultivated fields and orangegroves, checkered towns and
sprawling suburbs come to an abrupt stop where they were blotted out by
the regimented uniformity of the onrushing grass. For miles we flew
above its dazzling green until our eyes ached from the sameness and our
minds were dulled from the lack of variety below. On the sea far ahead a
frothing whitecap broke the monotony of color, a flyingfish jumped out
of the water to glisten for a moment in the sun, loose seaweed floated
on the surface, to change in some degree the intense blue. But here
below no alien touch lightened the unnatural homogeneity. No solitary
tree broke this endless pasture, now healed of the wounds inflicted by
the incendiary bombing, no saltlick, wandering stream or struggling bush
enlivened this prairie. There was not even an odd conformation, a higher
clump here or there, a dead patch to relieve the unimaginative symmetry.
I have read of men going mad in solitary confinement from looking at the
same unchanging walls; well, here was a solitary cell hundreds of miles
in area and its power to destroy the mind was that much magnified.

I got little consolation from the presence of the others, for the pilot
was engaged in navigation while Slafe was, as ever, singlemindedly
recording mile after mile of the verdant mat beneath, never pausing nor
speaking, though how he justified the use of so much film when one foot
was identical with what went before and the next, I could not
understand.

At last we cleared the awful cancer and flew over the sea. A thousand
variations I had never noticed before offered themselves to my suddenly
refreshed eyes. Not for one split second was the water the same.
Leaping, tossing, spiraling, foaming back upon itself, making its own
shadows and mirroring in an infinitely faceted glass the sunlight, it
changed so constantly it was impossible to grasp even a fraction of its
mutations. But Slafe evidently did not share my blessed relief, for he
turned his camera back to catch every last glimpse of the solid green I
was so happy to leave behind.

At the airport, on the way to the boat, on the little vessel itself, I
expected Slafe to relax, to indulge in a conversational word, to do
something to mark him as more than an automaton. But his actions were
confined to using the nasalsyringe, to exchanging one camera for
another, to quizzing the sun through that absurd lorgnette, and to
muttering over cans of film which he sorted and resorted, always to his
inevitable discontent.

While we waited to start, a perverse fog rolled between us and the
mainland. It made a dramatic curtain over the object of our visit and
emphasized the normality and untouchedness of Avalon behind us. As the
boat got under way, strain my eyes as I could eastward, not the faintest
suggestion of the ominous outline showed. We sped toward it, cutting the
purple sea into white foam. Slafe was in the bow, customarily taciturn,
the crew were busy. Alone on board I had no immediate occupation and so
I took out my copy of the _Intelligencer_ and after reading the column
which went under my name and noting the incredible bad taste which had
diluted when it had not excluded everything I had written, I turned as
for consolation to the marketquotations. The Dow-Jones average was down
again, as might be expected since the spread of the weed had unsettled
the delicate balance of the stockmarket. My eyes automatically ran down
the column and over to the corner where stocks were quoted in cents to
reassure my faith in Consolidated Pemmican and Allied Concentrates.
There it was, immovable through any storm or stress or injudicious
investment by Albert Weener, "CP&AC ... 1/16."

I must have raised my eyes from the newspaper just about the time the
fog lifted. Before us, like the smokewreath accompanying the discharge
of some giant cannon, the green mass volleyed into the sea. It did not
slope gently like a beach or offer a rugged shoulder to be gnawed away
as a rocky cliff, but thundered forward into the surging brine, yielding
but invincible, a landforce potent as the wave itself. Hundreds of feet
into the air it towered, falling abruptly in a sharp wall, its ends and
fringes merging with the surf and wallowing in happy freedom. The
breakers did not batter it for it offered them no enmity to rage and
boil upon, but giving way with each surge, smothered the eternal anger
of the ocean with its own placid surety.

The seagulls, the helldivers, pelicans, seapigeons had not been
affected. Resting briefly on the weed, they winged out for their food
and returned. It mattered no more to them that the manmade piers and
wharves, the seacoast towns, gypjoints, rollercoasters, whorehouses,
cottages, hotels, streets, gastanks, quarries, potterykilns, oilfields
and factories had been swallowed up than if some old wreck in the sand,
once offering them foothold, had been taken back by the sea. If I
thought the grass awesome from the land, monotonous from the air, it
seemed eternal from the water.

But impressive as it was from any angle, there were just so many things
I could say about it. My art, unlike Slafe's, not permitting of endless
repetition, I was glad to get back to the Pomona office, to pad what
little copy I had, retire into the small tent I shared with six other
sufferers from the housing shortage, and attempt some sleep.


_31._ The course mapped for the saltband caused almost as much
controversy, anguish and denunciation as the proposal itself. Cities and
towns fought to have the saltband laid between them and the approaching
grass, understandably ignoring larger calculations and considerations.
Cattle ranchers shot at surveying parties and individual farmers or
homeowners fought against having their particular piece of property
covered with salt. The original plan had contemplated straight lines;
eventually the band twisted and turned like a typewriter ribbon plagued
by a kitten, avoiding not only natural obstacles, but the domains of
those with proper influence.

Recovery plants worked three shifts a day to pile up great mounds of the
white crystals, which were hauled to the airfields by trains and trucks.
The laden trucks moved over the highways bumper to bumper; the
freighttrains' engines nosed the cabooses of those in front. All other
goods were shunted on sidings, perishables rotted, valuables went
undelivered; all transportation was reserved for the salt.

Not only was the undertaking unprecedented for its magnitude, but the
urgency and the breakdowns, bottlenecks, shortages and disruptions
caused by the grass itself added to the formidable accomplishment. But
the people were aroused and aware of danger, and they put almost the
same effort behind the saltsowing as they would have in turning out
instruments of war.

The sowing itself was in a way anticlimactic. By the whim of Le ffacase
I went in one of the planes on the first day of the task. My protests,
as always, proving futile, I spent a very boresome time flying
backandforth over the same patch of ground. That is, it would have been
boresome had it not been for the dangers involved, for in order to sow
the salt evenly and thickly it was necessary to fly low, to hedgehop,
the pilot called it. If the parachutejump had unnerved me, the flying at
terrific speed straight toward a tree, hill or electricpowerline and
then curving upward at the last second to miss them by a whisper must
have put gray in my hair and taken years from my life.

The rivers, washes and creeks on the inner edge had been roughly dammed
to lessen future erosion of the salt and inappropriately gay flags
marked the boundaries of the area. Owing to our speed the salt billowed
out behind us like powdery fumes, but beyond the evidence of this smoky
trail we might merely have been a group of madmen confusedly searching
for some object lost upon the ground.

In reporting for the _Intelligencer_ it was impossible to dramatize the
event; even the rewritemen were baffled, for under the enormous head
SALT SOWN they could not find enough copy to carry over from page one.


_32._ The sowing of the salt went on for weeks, and the grass leaped
forward as if to meet it. It raced southward through Long Beach, Seal
Beach and the deserted dunes to Newport and Balboa; it came east in a
fury through Puente and Monrovia, northeastward it moved into Lancaster,
Simi and Piru. Only in its course north did the weed show a slower pace;
by the time we had been forced to leave Pomona for San Bernardino it had
got no farther than Calabasas and Malibu.

The westward migration of the American people was abruptly reversed.
Those actually displaced by the grass infected others, through whose
homes they passed in their flight, with their own panic. Land values
west of the Rockies dropped to practically nothing and the rich farms of
the Great Plains were worth no more than they had been a hundred years
before. People had seen directly, heard over the radio, or read in
newspapers of the countless methods vainly used to stop the grass and
there was little confidence in the saltband's succeeding where other
devices had failed. True, there were hereandthere individuals or whole
families or even entire communities obstinate enough to scorn flight,
but in the opinion of most they were like pigheadedly trustful peasants
who cling, in the face of all warning, to homes on the slopes of an
active volcano.

It was generally thought the government itself, in creating the
saltband, was making no more than a gesture. Whatever the validity of
this pessimism, the work itself was impressive. Viewed from high in the
air only a month after the start it was already visible; after two
months it was a thick, glistening river winding over mountain, desert,
and what had been green fields, a white crystalline barrier behind which
the country waited nervously.

When the salt had been first proposed, batches had been dumped in
proximity to the grass, but the quantity had been too small to
demonstrate any conclusion and observers had been immediately driven
from the scene of the experiments by the grass.

Nevertheless, the very inclusiveness of these trials confirmed the
doubts of the waiting country as the narrow gap before the salt was
closed and the weed rolled to it near Capistrano. I would like to think
of the meeting as dramatic, heightened by inaudible drumrolls and
flashes of invisible lightning. Actually the conflict was pedestrian.

Manipulated once more by my tyrant, I was stationed, like other
reporters and radiomen, in a captive balloon. For the utmost in
discomfort and lack of dignity let me recommend this ludicrous
invention. Cramped, seasickened, inconvenienced--I don't like to mention
this, but provisions for answering the calls of nature were, to say the
least, inadequate--I swayed and rocked in that inconsiderable basket,
chilled, blinded by the dazzle of the salt, knocked about by gusts of
irresponsible wind, and generally disgusted by the uselessness of my
pursuit. A telescope to the eye and constant radioreports from shuttling
planes told of the approaching grass, but under the circumstances
weariness rather than excitement or anxiety was the prevailing emotion.

At last the collision came. The long runners, curiously flat from the
air, pushed their way ahead. The salt seemed no more to them than bare
ground, concrete, vegetation, or any of the hundred obstacles they had
traveled. Unstutteringly the vinelike stolons went forward. A foot, two,
six, ten. No recoil, no hesitation, no recognition they were traversing
a wall erected against them.

Behind these first outposts, the higher growth came on, and still
farther off the great bulk itself reared skyward, blotting out the
horizon behind, threatening, inexhaustible. It seemed to prod its
precursors, to demand hungrily ever more and more room to expand.

But the creeping of the runners over the first few feet of salt
dwindled to a stop. This caused experienced observers like myself no
elation; we had seen it happen many times before at the encountering of
any novel obstacle, and its only effect had been to make the weed change
its tactics in order to overcome the obstruction, as it did now. A
second rank moved forward on top of the halted first, a third upon the
second and so on till a living wall frowned down upon the salt, throwing
its shadow across it for hundreds of ominous yards. It towered erect and
then, repeating the tactic invariably successful, it toppled forward to
create a bridgehead from which to launch new assaults.

The next day new stolons emerged from the mass, but now for the first
time excitement seized us up in our bobbing post of observation. Not
only were the new runners visibly shorter in length but they crept
forward more slowly, haltingly, as though hurt. This impression was
generally discredited, people were surfeited with optimism; they felt
our reports were wishful thinking. Their pessimism seemed to be
confirmed when the weed repeated its action of the day before, falling
ahead of itself upon the salt; and few took stock in our excited
announcements that the grass had covered only half the previous
distance.

Again the probing fingers poked out, again the reserves piled up, again
the mass fell. But it fell far short of a normal leap. There could no
longer be any doubt about it; the advance had been slowed, almost
stopped. The salt was working.

Everywhere along the entire band the story was the same. The grass
rushed confidently in, bit off great chunks, then smaller, then smaller,
until its movement ceased entirely. That part which embedded itself in
the salt lost the dazzling green color so characteristic and turned
piebald, from dirty gray through brown and yellow, an appearance so
familiar in its normal counterpart on lawns and vacant lots.

The encircled area filled up and choked with the balked weed. Time after
time it essayed the deadly band, only to be thwarted. The glistening
fortification, hardly battered, stood triumphant, imprisoning the
invader within. Commentators in trembling voices broke the joyful news
over every receivingset and even the stodgiest newspapers brought out
their blackest type to announce GRASS STOPPED!


_33._ The President of the United States, as befitted a farmer knowing
something of grasses on his own account, issued a proclamation of
thanksgiving for the end of the peril which had beset the country. The
stockmarket recovered from funereal depths and jumped upward. In all the
great cities hysterical rapture so heated the blood of the people that
all restraints withered. In frantic joy women were raped in the streets,
dozens of banks were looted, thousands of plateglasswindows were smashed
while millions of celebrants wept tears of 86 proof ecstasy. Torn
tickertapes made Broadway impassable and the smallest whistlestops
spontaneously revived the old custom of uprooting outhouses and perching
them on the church steeple.

I had my own particular reason to rejoice coincident with the stoppage
of the grass. It was so unreal, so dreamlike, that for many days I had
trouble convincing myself of its actuality. It began with a series of
agitated telephone messages from a firm of stockbrokers asking for my
immediate presence, which because of my assignments, failed to reach me
for some time. So engrossed was I in the events surrounding the victory
over the grass I could not conceive why any broker would want to see me
and so put off my visit several times, till the urgency of the calls
began to pique my curiosity.

The man who greeted me was runcible, with little strands of sickly hair
twisted mopwise over his bald head. His striped suit was rumpled, the
collar of his shirt was wrinkled, and dots of perspiration stood out on
his upperlip and forehead. "Mr Weener?" he asked. "Oh, thank God, thank
God."

Completely at a loss, I followed him into his private office. "You
recall commissioning us--when we were located in Pomona--to purchase
some shares of Consolidated Pemmican and Allied Concentrates for your
account?"

To tell the truth, while I had not forgotten the event, I had been
sufficiently ashamed of my rashness to have pushed all recollection of
the transaction to the back of my mind. But I nodded confirmingly.

"No doubt you would be willing to sell at a handsome profit?"

Aha, I thought, the rise of the market has sent Consolidated Pemmican up
for once beyond its usual 1/8. I am probably a rich man and this fellow
wants to cheat me of the fruits of my foresight. "You bought the stock
outright?"

"Of course, Mr Weener," he affirmed in a hurt tone.

"Good. Then I will take immediate delivery."

He pulled out a handkerchief and wiped his lip and forehead with evident
inefficiency for the perspiration either remained or started afresh. "Mr
Weener," he said, "I am authorized to offer you six times--six times,"
he echoed impressively, "the amount of your original investment. This is
an amazing return."

If it was worth it to him, it was worth it to me. "I will take immediate
delivery," I repeated firmly.

"And no brokerage fees involved," he added, as one making an
unbelievable concession.

I shook my head.

"Mr Weener," he said, "I have been empowered to make you an incredible
tender for your stock. Not only will the boardofdirectors of
Consolidated Pemmican return to you six times the amount of your
investment, but they will assign to you, over and above this price, 49
percent of the company's votingstock. It is a magnificent and
unparalleled bid and I sincerely advise you to take it."

I pressed my palms into the back of the chair. I, Albert Weener, was a
capitalist. The money involved already seemed negligible, for it was a
mere matter of a few thousand dollars, but to own what amounted to a
controlling interest, even in a defunct or somnolent corporation, made
me an important person. Only a reflex made me gasp, "I will take
immediate delivery."

The broker dropped his hands against his thighs. "Mr Weener, you are an
acute man. Mr Weener, I must confess the truth. You have bought more
shares of Consolidated Pemmican than there are in existence; you not
only own the firm, lock, stock and barrel, but you owe yourself money."
He gave a weak laugh.

"Above and beyond this, Mr Weener, through an unfortunate series of
events due to the confusion of the times--without it, such an absurd
situation would never have occurred--several people: our own firm, our
New York correspondents, and the present heads of Consolidated Pemmican
are liable to prosecution by the Securities Exchange Commission. We can
only throw ourselves on your mercy."

I waved this aside magnanimously. "Where is my property located?"

"Well, I believe Consolidated Pemmican has an office in New York."

"Yes, but the factory, the works; where is the product made?"

"Strictly speaking, I understand active operations ceased back in 1919.
However, there is a plant somewhere in New Jersey, I think; I'll look it
up for you."

My dream of wealth began fading as the whole situation became clear and
suspicions implicit in the peculiar behavior of the stock were
confirmed. The corporation had evidently fallen into the hands of
unscrupulous promoters who manipulated for the small but steady "take"
its fluctuations on the market afforded. Without attempting to operate
the factory, my reasoning ran, they had taken advantage of the stock's
low price to double whatever they cared to invest twice yearly. It was a
neat and wellshaped little racket and discovery, as the broker admitted,
would have exposed them to legal action. Only my recklessness with the
checks from the _Weekly Ruminant_ and the _Honeycomb_ had broken the
routine.

But ... they had offered me several thousand dollars, evidently in cold
cash. Defunct or not, then, the business was presumably worth at least
that. And if they had employed the stock to maintain some sort of
income, why, I could certainly learn to do the same. I was an
independent man afterall.

Except for the slightly embarrassing detail of being without current
funds I was also free of Le ffacase and the _Daily Intelligencer_. "Mr
Blank," I said, "I need some money for immediate expenses."

"I knew youd see things in a sensible light, Weener. I'll have your
check in a minute."

"You misunderstand me. I have no intention of giving up any part of
Consolidated Pemmican."

"Ah?"

"No."

He looked at me intently. "Mr. Weener, I am not a wealthy man. Above and
beyond that, since this grass business started, I assure you any common
laborer has made more money than I. Any common laborer," he repeated
sadly.

"Oh, I only need about a thousand dollars for immediate outlays. Just
write me a check for that much, like a good fellow."

"Mr Weener, how can we be sure you won't call upon us again for
more--ah--expensemoney?"

I drew myself up indignantly. "Mr Blank, no one has ever questioned my
integrity before. When I say a thousand dollars is all the expensemoney
I require, why, it is all the expensemoney I require. To doubt it is to
insult me."

"Ah," he said.

"Ah," I agreed.

Reluctantly he wrote the check and handed it to me. Then, more amicably,
we settled the details of the stock transfer and he gave me the location
of my property. I went back to the _Intelligencer_ office with the
springy step of a man who acknowledges no master. In my mind I prepared
a triumph: I would wait--even if it took days--for the first bullying
word from Le ffacase and then I would magnificently fling my resignation
in his face.


_34._ When the grass was thought to be invincible, Miss Francis, as the
discoverer of the compound which started it on its course, was the
recipient of a universal if grudging respect. Those whom the grass had
made homeless hated her and would have overcome their natural feeling of
