what Paul says is just this--'In regard to your earnestness in all
directions, see that you are not slothful.'

The force and drift of the whole precept is just the exhortation to
exercise the very homely virtue of diligence, which is as much a
condition of growth and maturity in the Christian as it is in any
other life. The very homeliness and obviousness of the duty causes us
often to lose sight of its imperativeness and necessity.

Many of us, if we would sit quietly down and think of how we go about
our 'business,' as we call it, and of how we go about our Christian
life, which ought to be our highest business, would have great cause
for being ashamed. We begin the one early in the morning, we keep
hard at it all day, our eyes are wide open to see any opening where
money is to be made; that is all right. We give our whole selves to
our work whilst we are at it; that is as it should be. But why are
there not the same concentration, the same wide-awakeness, the same
open-eyed eagerness to find out ways of advancement, the same
resolved and continuous and all-comprehending and dominating
enthusiasm about our Christianity as there is about our shop, or our
mill, or our success as students? Why are we all fire in the one case
and all ice in the other? Why do we think that it is enough to lift
the burden that Christ lays upon us with one languid finger, and to
put our whole hand, or rather, as the prophet says, 'both hands
earnestly,' to the task of lifting the load of daily work? 'In your
earnestness be not slothful.'

Brethren, that is a very homely exhortation. I wonder how many of us
can say, 'Lord! I have heard, and I have obeyed Thy precept.'

II. Diligence must be fed by a fervent spirit.

The word translated 'fervent' is literally boiling. The metaphor is
very plain and intelligible. The spirit brought into contact with
Christian truth and with the fire of the Holy Spirit will naturally
have its temperature raised, and will be moved by the warm touch as
heat makes water in a pot hung above a fire boil. Such emotion,
produced by the touch of the fiery Spirit of God, is what Paul
desires for, and enjoins on, all Christians; for such emotion is the
only way by which the diligence, without which no Christian progress
will be made, can be kept up.

No man will work long at a task that his heart is not in; or if he
does, because he is obliged, the work will be slavery. In order,
then, that diligence may neither languish and become slothfulness,
nor be felt to be a heavy weight and an unwelcome necessity, Paul
here bids us see to it that our hearts are moved because there is a
fire below which makes 'the soul's depths boil in earnest.'

Now, of course, I know that, as a great teacher has told us, 'The
gods approve the depth and not the tumult of the soul,' and I know
that there is a great deal of emotional Christianity which is worth
nothing. But it is not that kind of fervour that the Apostle is
enjoining here. Whilst it is perfectly true that mere emotion often
does co-exist with, and very often leads to, entire negligence as to
possessing and manifesting practical excellence, the true relation
between these is just the opposite--viz. that this fervour of which I
speak, this wide-awakeness and enthusiasm of a spirit all quickened
into rapidity of action by the warmth which it has felt from God in
Christ, should drive the wheels of life. Boiling water makes steam,
does it not? And what is to be done with the steam that comes off the
'boiling' spirit? You may either let it go roaring through a
waste-pipe and do nothing but make a noise and be idly dissipated in
the air, or you may lead it into a cylinder and make it lift a
piston, and then you will get work out of it. That is what the
Apostle desires us to do with our emotion. The lightning goes
careering through the sky, but we have harnessed it to tram-cars
nowadays, and made it 'work for its living,' to carry our letters and
light our rooms. Fervour of a Christian spirit is all right when it
is yoked to Christian work, and made to draw what else is a heavy
chariot. It is not emotion, but it is indolent emotion, that is the
curse of much of our 'fervent' Christianity.

There cannot be too much fervour. There may be too little outlet
provided for the fervour to work in. It may all go off in comfortable
feeling, in enthusiastic prayers and 'Amens!' and 'So be it, Lords!'
and the like, or it may come with us into our daily tasks, and make
us buckle to with more earnestness, and more continuity. Diligence
driven by earnestness, and fervour that works, are the true things.

And surely, surely there cannot be any genuine
Christianity--certainly there cannot be any deep Christianity--which
is not fervent.

We hear from certain quarters of the Church a great deal about the
virtue of moderation. But it seems to me that, if you take into
account what Christianity tells us, the 'sober' feeling is fervent
feeling, and tepid feeling is imperfect feeling. I cannot understand
any man believing as plain matter-of-fact the truths on which the
whole New Testament insists, and keeping himself 'cool,' or, as our
friends call it, 'moderate.' Brethren, enthusiasm--which properly
means the condition of being dwelt in by a god--is the wise, the
reasonable attitude of Christian men, if they believe their own
Christianity and are really serving Jesus Christ. They should be
'diligent in business, fervent'--boiling--in spirit.

III. The diligence and the fervency are both to be animated by the
thought, 'Serving the Lord!'

Some critics, as many of you know, no doubt, would prefer to read
this verse in its last clause 'serving the time.' But that seems to
me a very lame and incomplete climax for the Apostle's thought, and
it breaks entirely the sequence which, as I think, is discernible in
it. Much rather, he here, in the closing member of the triplet,
suggests a thought which will be stimulus to the diligence and fuel
to the fire that makes the spirit boil.

In effect he says, 'Think, when your hands begin to droop, and when
your spirits begin to be cold and indifferent, and languor to steal
over you, and the paralysing influences of the commonplace and the
familiar, and the small begin to assert themselves--think that you
are serving the Lord.' Will that not freshen you up? Will that not
set you boiling again? Will it not be easy to be diligent when we
feel that we are 'ever in the great Taskmaster's eye'? There are many
reasons for diligence--the greatness of the work, for it is no small
matter for us to get the whole lump of our nature leavened with the
good leaven; the continual operation of antagonistic forces which are
all round us, and are working night-shifts as well as day ones,
whether we as Christians are on short time or not, the brevity of the
period during which we have to work, and the tremendous issues which
depend upon the completeness of our service here--all these things
are reasons for our diligence. But _the_ reason is: 'Thou Christ
hast died for me, and livest for me; truly I am Thy slave.' That is
the thought that will make a man bend his back to his work, whatever
it be, and bend his will to his work, too, however unwelcome it may
be; and that is the thought that will stir his whole spirit to
fervour and earnestness, and thus will deliver him from the
temptations to languid and perfunctory work that ever creep over us.

You can carry that motive--as we all know, and as we all forget when
the pinch comes--into your shop, your study, your office, your mill,
your kitchen, or wherever you go. 'On the bells of the horses there
shall be written, Holiness to the Lord,' said the prophet, and 'every
bowl in Jerusalem' may be sacred as the vessels of the altar. All
life may flash into beauty, and tower into greatness, and be smoothed
out into easiness, and the crooked things may be made straight and
the rough places plain, and the familiar and the trite be invested
with freshness and wonder as of a dream, if only we write over them,
'For the sake of the Master.' Then, whatever we do or bear, be it
common, insignificant, or unpleasant, will change its aspect, and all
will be sweet. Here is the secret of diligence and of fervency, 'I
set the Lord always before me.'




ANOTHER TRIPLET OF GRACES

   'Rejoicing in hope; patient in tribulation; continuing
   instant in prayer.'--ROMANS xii. 12.


These three closely connected clauses occur, as you all know, in the
midst of that outline of the Christian life with which the Apostle
begins the practical part of this Epistle. Now, what he omits in this
sketch of Christian duty seems to me quite as significant as what he
inserts. It is very remarkable that in the twenty verses devoted to
this subject, this is the only one which refers to the inner secrets
of the Christian life. Paul's notion of 'deepening the spiritual
life' was 'Behave yourself better in your relation to other people.'
So all the rest of this chapter is devoted to inculcating our duties
to one another. Conduct is all-important. An orthodox creed is
valuable if it influences action, but not otherwise. Devout emotion
is valuable, if it drives the wheels of life, but not otherwise.
Christians should make efforts to attain to clear views and warm
feelings, but the outcome and final test of both is a daily life of
visible imitation of Jesus. The deepening of spiritual life should be
manifested by completer, practical righteousness in the market-place
and the street and the house, which non-Christians will acknowledge.

But now, with regard to these three specific exhortations here, I
wish to try to bring out their connection as well as the force of
each of them.

I. So I remark first, that the Christian life ought to be joyful
because it is hopeful.

Now, I do not suppose that many of us habitually recognise it as a
Christian duty to be joyful. We think that it is a matter of
temperament and partly a matter of circumstance. We are glad when
things go well with us. If we have a sunny disposition, and are
naturally light-hearted, all the better; if we have a melancholy or
morose one, all the worse. But do we recognise this, that a Christian
who is not joyful is not living up to his duty; and that there is no
excuse, either in temperament or in circumstances, for our not being
so, and always being so? 'Rejoice in the Lord alway,' says Paul; and
then, as if he thought, 'Some of you will be thinking that that is a
very rash commandment, to aim at a condition quite impossible to make
constant,' he goes on--'and, to convince you that I do not say it
hastily, I will repeat it--"and again I say, rejoice."' Brethren, we
shall have to alter our conceptions of what true gladness is before
we can come to understand the full depth of the great thought that
joy is a Christian duty. The true joy is not the kind of joy that a
saying in the Old Testament compares to the 'crackling of thorns
under a pot,' but something very much calmer, with no crackle in it;
and very much deeper, and very much more in alliance with 'whatsoever
things are lovely and of good report,' than that foolish,
short-lived, and empty mirth that burns down so soon into black
ashes.

To be glad is a Christian duty. Many of us have as much religion as
makes us sombre, and impels us often to look upon the more solemn and
awful aspects of Christian truth, but we have not enough to make us
glad. I do not need to dwell upon all the sources in Christian faith
and belief, of that lofty and imperatively obligatory gladness, but I
confine myself to the one in my text, 'Rejoicing in hope.'

Now, we all know--from the boy that is expecting to go home for his
holidays in a week, up to the old man to whose eye the time-veil is
wearing thin--that hope, if it is certain, is a source of gladness.
How lightly one's bosom's lord sits upon its throne, when a great
hope comes to animate us! how everybody is pleasant, and all things
are easy, and the world looks different! Hope, if it is certain, will
gladden, and if our Christianity grasps, as it ought to do, the only
hope that is absolutely certain, and as sure as if it were in the
past and had been experienced, then our hearts, too, will sing for
joy. True joy is _not_ a matter of temperament, so much as a matter
of faith. It is _not_ a matter of circumstances. All the surface
drainage may be dry, but there is a well in the courtyard deep and
cool and full and exhaustless, and a Christian who rightly
understands and cherishes the Christian hope is lifted above
temperament, and is not dependent upon conditions for his joys.

The Apostle, in an earlier part of this same letter, defines for us
what that hope is, which thus is the secret of perpetual gladness,
when he speaks about 'rejoicing in hope of the glory of God.' Yes, it
is that great, supreme, calm, far off, absolutely certain prospect of
being gathered into the divine glory, and walking there, like the
three in the fiery furnace, unconsumed and at ease; it is that hope
that will triumph over temperament, and over all occasions for
melancholy, and will breathe into our life a perpetual gladness.
Brethren, is it not strange and sad that with such a treasure by our
sides we should consent to live such poor lives as we do?

But remember, although I cannot say to myself, 'Now I will be glad,'
and cannot attain to joy by a movement of the will or direct effort,
although it is of no use to say to a man--which is all that the world
can ever say to him--'Cheer up and be glad,' whilst you do not alter
the facts that make him sad, there is a way by which we can bring
about feelings of gladness or of gloom. It is just this--we can
choose what we will look at. If you prefer to occupy your mind with
the troubles, losses, disappointments, hard work, blighted hopes of
this poor sin-ridden world, of course sadness will come over you
often, and a general grey tone will be the usual tone of your lives,
as it is of the lives of many of us, broken only by occasional bursts
of foolish mirth and empty laughter. But if you choose to turn away
from all these, and instead of the dim, dismal, hard present, to sun
yourselves in the light of the yet unrisen sun, which you can do,
then, having rightly chosen the subjects to think about, the feeling
will come as a matter of course. You cannot make yourselves glad by,
as it were, laying hold of yourselves and lifting yourselves into
gladness, but you can rule the direction of your thoughts, and so can
bring around you summer in the midst of winter, by steadily
contemplating the facts--and they are present facts, though we talk
about them collectively as 'the future'--the facts on which all
Christian gladness ought to be based. We can carry our own atmosphere
with us; like the people in Italy, who in frosty weather will be seen
sitting in the market-place by their stalls with a dish of embers,
which they grasp in their hands, and so make themselves comfortably
warm on the bitterest day. You can bring a reasonable degree of
warmth into the coldest weather, if you will lay hold of the vessel
in which the fire is, and keep it in your hand and close to your
heart. Choose what you think about, and feelings will follow
thoughts.

But it needs very distinct and continuous effort for a man to keep
this great source of Christian joy clear before him. We are like the
dwellers in some island of the sea, who, in some conditions of the
atmosphere, can catch sight of the gleaming mountain-tops on the
mainland across the stormy channel between. But thick days, with a
heavy atmosphere and much mist, are very frequent in our latitude,
and then all the distant hills are blotted out, and we see nothing
but the cold grey sea, breaking on the cold, grey stones. Still, you
can scatter the mist if you will. You can make the atmosphere bright;
and it is worth an effort to bring clear before us, and to keep high
above the mists that cling to the low levels, the great vision which
will make us glad. Brethren, I believe that one great source of the
weakness of average Christianity amongst us to-day is the dimness
into which so many of us have let the hope of the glory of God pass
in our hearts. So I beg you to lay to heart this first commandment,
and to rejoice in hope.

II. Now, secondly, here is the thought that life, if full of joyful
hope, will be patient.

I have been saying that the gladness of which my text speaks is
independent of circumstances, and may persist and be continuous even
when externals occasion sadness. It is possible--I do not say it is
easy, God knows it is hard--I do not say it is frequently attained,
but I do say it is possible--to realise that wonderful ideal of the
Apostle's 'As sorrowful, yet always rejoicing.' The surface of the
ocean may be tossed and fretted by the winds, and churned into foam,
but the great central depths 'hear not the loud winds when they
call,' and are still in the midst of tempest. And we, dear brethren,
ought to have an inner depth of spirit, down to the disturbance of
which no surface-trouble can ever reach. That is the height of
attainment of Christian faith, but it is a possible attainment for
every one of us.

And if there be that burning of the light under the water, like
'Greek fire,' as it was called, which many waters could not
quench--if there be that persistence of gladness beneath the
surface-sorrow, as you find a running stream coming out below a
glacier, then the joy and the hope, which co-exist with the sorrow,
will make life patient.

Now, the Apostle means by these great words, 'patient' and
'patience,' which are often upon his lips, something more than simple
endurance. That endurance is as much as many of us can often muster
up strength to exercise. It sometimes takes all our faith and all our
submission simply to say, 'I opened not my mouth, because thou didst
it; and I will bear what thine hand lays upon me.' But that is not
all that the idea of Christian 'patience' includes, for it also takes
in the thought of active work, and it is _perseverance_ as much
as _patience_.

Now, if my heart is filled with a calm gladness because my eye is
fixed upon a celestial hope, then both the passive and active sides
of Christian 'patience' will be realised by me. If my hope burns
bright, and occupies a large space in my thoughts, then it will not
be hard to take the homely consolation of good John Newton's hymn and
say--

  'Though painful at present,
    'Twill cease before long;
  And then, oh, how pleasant
    The conqueror's song!'

A man who is sailing to America, and knows that he will be in New
York in a week, does not mind, although his cabin is contracted, and
he has a great many discomforts, and though he has a bout of
sea-sickness. The disagreeables are only going to last for a day or
two. So our hope will make us bear trouble, and not make much of it.

And our hope will strengthen us, if it is strong, for all the work
that is to be done. Persistence in the path of duty, though my heart
be beating like a smith's hammer on the anvil, is what Christian men
should aim at, and possess. If we have within our hearts that fire of
a certain hope, it will impel us to diligence in doing the humblest
duty, whether circumstances be for or against us; as some great
steamer is driven right on its course, through the ocean, whatever
storms may blow in the teeth of its progress, because, deep down in
it, there are furnaces and boilers which supply the steam that drives
the engines. So a life that is joyful because it is hopeful will be
full of calm endurance and strenuous work. 'Rejoicing in hope;
patient,' persevering in tribulation.

III. Lastly, our lives will be joyful, hopeful, and patient, in
proportion as they are prayerful.

'Continuing instant'--which, of course, just means steadfast--'in
prayer.' Paul uttered a paradox when he said, 'Rejoice in the Lord
alway,' as he said long before this verse, in the very first letter
that he ever wrote, or at least the first which has come down to us.
There he bracketed it along with two other equally paradoxical
sayings. 'Rejoice evermore; pray without ceasing; in everything give
thanks.' If you pray without ceasing you can rejoice without ceasing.

But can I pray without ceasing? Not if by prayer you mean only words
of supplication and petition, but if by prayer you mean also a mental
attitude of devotion, and a kind of sub-conscious reference to God in
all that you do, such unceasing prayer is possible. Do not let us
blunt the edge of this commandment, and weaken our own consciousness
of having failed to obey it, by getting entangled in the cobwebs of
mere curious discussions as to whether the absolute ideal of
perfectly unbroken communion with God is possible in this life. At
all events it is possible to us to approximate to that ideal a great
deal more closely than our consciences tell us that we ever yet have
done. If we are trying to keep our hearts in the midst of daily duty
in contact with God, and if, ever and anon in the press of our work,
we cast a thought towards Him and a prayer, then joy and hope and
patience will come to us, in a degree that we do not know much about
yet, but might have known all about long, long ago.

There is a verse in the Old Testament which we may well lay to heart:
'They cried unto God in the battle, and He was entreated of them.'
Well, what sort of a prayer do you think that would be? Suppose that
you were standing in the thick of battle with the sword of an enemy
at your throat, there would not be much time for many words of
prayer, would there? But the cry could go up, and the thought could
go up, and as they went up, down would come the strong buckler which
God puts between His servants and all evil. That is the sort of
prayer that you, in the battle of business, in your shops and
counting-houses and warehouses and mills, we students in our studies,
and you mothers in your families and your kitchens, can send up to
heaven. If thus we 'pray without ceasing,' then we shall 'rejoice
evermore,' and our souls will be kept in patience and filled with the
peace of God.




STILL ANOTHER TRIPLET

   'Distributing to the necessity of saints; given to
   hospitality. 14. Bless them which persecute you: bless,
   and curse not. 15. Rejoice with them that do rejoice,
   and weep with them that weep.'--ROMANS xii. 13-15.


In these verses we pass from the innermost region of communion with
God into the wide field of duties in relation to men. The solitary
secrecies of rejoicing hope, endurance, and prayer unbroken, are
exchanged for the publicities of benevolence and sympathy. In the
former verses the Christian soul is in 'the secret place of the Most
High'; in those of our text he comes forth with the light of God on
his face, and hands laden with blessings. The juxtaposition of the
two suggests the great principles to which the morality of the New
Testament is ever true--that devotion to God is the basis of all
practical helpfulness to man, and that practical helpfulness to man
is the expression and manifestation of devotion to God.

The three sets of injunctions in our text, dissimilar though they
appear, have a common basis. They are varying forms of one
fundamental disposition--love; which varies in its forms according to
the necessities of its objects, bringing temporal help to the needy,
meeting hostility with blessing, and rendering sympathy to both the
glad and the sorrowful. There is, further, a noteworthy connection,
not in sense but in sound, between the first and second clauses of
our text, which is lost in our English Version. 'Given to
hospitality' is, as the Revised margin shows, literally, pursuing
hospitality. Now the Greek, like the English word, has the special
meaning of following with a hostile intent, and the use of it in the
one sense suggests its other meaning to Paul, whose habit of 'going
off at a word,' as it has been called, is a notable feature of his
style. Hence, this second injunction, of blessing the persecutors,
comes as a kind of play upon words, and is obviously occasioned by
the verbal association. It would come more appropriately at a later
part of the chapter, but its occurrence here is characteristic of
Paul's idiosyncrasy. We may represent the connection of these two
clauses by such a rendering as: Pursue hospitality, and as for those
who pursue you, bless, and curse not.

We may look at these three flowers from the one root of love.

I. Love that speaks in material help.

We have here two special applications of that love which Paul regards
as 'the bond of perfectness,' knitting all Christians together. The
former of these two is love that expresses itself by tangible
material aid. The persons to be helped are 'saints,' and it is their
'needs' that are to be aided. There is no trace in the Pauline
Epistles of the community of goods which for a short time prevailed
in the Church of Jerusalem and which was one of the causes that led
to the need for the contribution for the poor saints in that city
which occupied so much of Paul's attention at Corinth and elsewhere.
But, whilst Christian love leaves the rights of property intact, it
charges them with the duty of supplying the needs of the brethren.
They are not absolute and unconditioned rights, but are subject to
the highest principles of stewardship for God, trusteeship for men,
and sacrifice for Christ. These three great thoughts condition and
limit the Christian man's possession of the wealth, which, in a
modified sense, it is allowable for him to call his own. His
brother's need constitutes a first charge on all that belongs to him,
and ought to precede the gratification of his own desires for
superfluities and luxuries. If we 'see our brother have need and shut
up our bowels of compassion against him' and use our possessions for
the gratification of our own whims and fancies, 'how dwelleth the
love of God in us?' There are few things in which Christian men of
this day have more need for the vigorous exercise of conscience, and
for enlightenment, than in their getting, and spending, and keeping
money. In that region lies the main sphere of usefulness for many of
us; and if we have not been 'faithful in that which is least,' our
unfaithfulness there makes it all but impossible that we should be
faithful in that which is greatest. The honest and rigid
contemplation of our own faults in the administration of our worldly
goods, might well invest with a terrible meaning the Lord's
tremendous question, 'If ye have not been faithful in that which is
another's, who shall give you that which is your own?'

The hospitality which is here enjoined is another shape which
Christian love naturally took in the early days. When believers were
a body of aliens, dispersed through the world, and when, as they went
from one place to another, they could find homes only amongst their
own brethren, the special circumstances of the time necessarily
attached special importance to this duty; and as a matter of fact, we
find it recognised in all the Epistles of the New Testament as one of
the most imperative of Christian duties. 'It was the unity and
strength which this intercourse gave that formed one of the great
forces which supported Christianity.' But whilst hospitality was a
special duty for the early Christians, it still remains a duty for
us, and its habitual exercise would go far to break down the frowning
walls which diversities of social position and of culture have reared
between Christians.

II. The love that meets hostility with blessing.

There are perhaps few words in Scripture which have been more
fruitful of the highest graces than this commandment. What a train of
martyrs, from primitive times to the Chinese Christians in recent
years, have remembered these words, and left their legacy of blessing
as they laid their heads on the block or stood circled by fire at the
stake! For us, in our quieter generation, actual persecution is rare,
but hostility of ill-will more or less may well dog our steps, and
the great principle here commended to us is that we are to meet
enmity with its opposite, and to conquer by love. The diamond is cut
with sharp knives, and each stroke brings out flashing beauty. There
are kinds of wood which are fragrant when they burn; and there are
kinds which show their veining under the plane. It is a poor thing if
a Christian character only gives back like a mirror the expression of
the face that looks at it. To meet hate with hate, and scorn with
scorn, is not the way to turn hate into love and scorn into sympathy.
Indifferent equilibrium in the presence of active antagonism is not
possible for us. As long as we are sensitive we shall wince from a
blow, or a sarcasm, or a sneer. We must bless in order to keep
ourselves from cursing. The lesson is very hard, and the only way of
obeying it fully is to keep near Christ and drink in His spirit who
prayed 'Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do.'

III. Love that flows in wide sympathy.

Of the two forms of sympathy which are here enjoined, the former is
the harder. To 'rejoice with them that do rejoice' makes a greater
demand on unselfish love than to 'weep with them that weep.' Those
who are glad feel less need of sympathy than do the sorrowful, and
envy is apt to creep in and mar the completeness of sympathetic joy.
But even the latter of the two injunctions is not altogether easy.
The cynic has said that there is 'something not wholly displeasing in
the misfortunes of our best friends'; and, though that is an utterly
worldly and unchristian remark, it must be confessed not to be
altogether wanting in truth.

But for obedience to both of these injunctions, a heart at leisure
from itself is needed to sympathise; and not less needed is a
sedulous cultivation of the power of sympathy. No doubt temperament
has much to do with the degree of our obedience; but this whole
context goes on the assumption that the grace of God working on
temperament strengthens natural endowments by turning them into
'gifts differing according to the grace that is given to us.' Though
we live in that awful individuality of ours, and are each, as it
were, is landed in ourselves 'with echoing straits between us thrown,'
it is possible for us, as the result of close communion with Jesus
Christ, to bridge the chasms, and to enter into the joy of a
brother's joy. He who groaned in Himself as He drew near to the grave
of Lazarus, and was moved to weep with the weeping sisters, will help
us, in the measure in which we dwell in Him and He in us, that we too
may look 'not every man on his own things, but every man also on the
things of others.'

On the whole, love to Jesus is the basis of love to man, and love to
man is the practical worship of Christianity. As in all things, so in
the exhortations which we have now been considering, Jesus is our
pattern and power. He Himself communicates with our necessities, and
opens His heart to give us hospitable welcome there. He Himself has
shown us how to meet and overcome hatred with love, and hurt with
blessing. He shares our griefs, and by sharing lessens them. He
shares our joys, and by sharing hallows them. The summing up of all
these specific injunctions is, 'Let that mind be in you which was
also in Christ Jesus.'




STILL ANOTHER TRIPLET

   'Be of the same mind one toward another. Set not your
   mind on high things, but condescend to things that are
   lowly. Be not wise in your own conceits.'--Romans xii. 16 (R.V.).


We have here again the same triple arrangement which has prevailed
through a considerable portion of the context. These three
exhortations are linked together by a verbal resemblance which can
scarcely be preserved in translation. In the two former the same verb
is employed: and in the third the word for 'wise' is cognate with the
verb found in the other two clauses. If we are to seek for any closer
connection of thought we may find it first in this--that all the
three clauses deal with mental attitudes, whilst the preceding ones
dealt with the expression of such; and second in this--that the first
of the three is a general precept, and the second and third are
warnings against faults which are most likely to interfere with it.

I. We note, the bond of peace.

'Be of the same mind one toward another.' It is interesting to notice
how frequently the Apostle in many of his letters exhorts to mutual
harmonious relations. For instance, in this very Epistle he invokes
'the God of patience and of comfort' to grant to the Roman Christians
'to be of the same mind with one another according to Christ Jesus,'
and to the Corinthians, who had their full share of Greek
divisiveness, he writes, 'Be of the same mind, live in peace,' and
assures them that, if so, 'the God of love and peace will be with
them'; to his beloved Philippians he pours out his heart in
beseeching them by 'the consolation that is in Christ Jesus, and the
comfort of love, and the fellowship of the Spirit--' that they would
'fulfil his joy, that they be of the same mind, having the same love,
being of one accord, of one mind'; whilst to the two women in that
Church who were at variance with one another he sends the earnest
exhortation 'to be of the same mind in the Lord,' and prays one whom
we only know by his loving designation of 'a true yokefellow,' to
help them in what would apparently put a strain upon their Christian
principle. For communities and for individuals the cherishing of the
spirit of amity and concord is a condition without which there will
be little progress in the Christian life.

But it is to be carefully noted that such a spirit may co-exist with
great differences about other matters. It is not opposed to wide
divergence of opinion, though in our imperfect sanctification it is
hard for us to differ and yet to be in concord. We all know the
hopelessness of attempting to make half a dozen good men think alike
on any of the greater themes of the Christian religion; and if we
could succeed in such a vain attempt, there would still be many an
unguarded door through which could come the spirit of discord, and
the half-dozen might have divergence of heart even whilst they
profess identity of opinion. The true hindrances to our having 'the
same mind one toward another' lie very much deeper in our nature than
the region in which we keep our creeds. The self-regard and
self-absorption, petulant dislike of fellow-Christians'
peculiarities, the indifference which comes from lack of imaginative
sympathy, and which ministers to the ignorance which causes it, and a
thousand other weaknesses in Christian character bring about the
deplorable alienation which but too plainly marks the relation of
Christian communities and of individual Christians to one another in
this day. When one thinks of the actual facts in every corner of
Christendom, and probes one's own feelings, the contrast between the
apostolic ideal and the Church's realisation of it presents a
contradiction so glaring that one wonders if Christian people at all
believe that it is their duty 'to be of the same mind one toward
another.'

The attainment of this spirit of amity and concord ought to be a
distinct object of effort, and especially in times like ours, when
there is no hostile pressure driving Christian people together, but
when our great social differences are free to produce a certain
inevitable divergence and to check the flow of our sympathy, and when
there are deep clefts of opinion, growing deeper every day, and
seeming to part off Christians into camps which have little
understanding of, and less sympathy with, one another. Even the
strong individualism, which it is the glory of true Christian faith
to foster in character, and which some forms of Christian fellowship
do distinctly promote, works harm in this matter; and those who pride
themselves on belonging to 'Free churches,' and standing apart from
creed-bound and clergy-led communities, are specially called upon to
see to it that they keep this exhortation, and cultivate 'the unity
of the Spirit in the bond of peace.'

It should not be necessary to insist that the closest mutual concord
amongst all believers is but an imperfect manifestation, as all
manifestations in life of the deepest principles must be, of the true
oneness which binds together in the most sacred unity, and should
bind together in closest friendship, all partakers of the one life.
And assuredly the more that one life flows into our spirits, the less
power will all the enemies of Christian concord have over us. It is
the Christ in us which makes us kindred with all others in whom He
is. It is self, in some form or other, that separates us from the
possessors of like precious faith. When the tide is out, the little
rock-pools on the shore lie separated by stretches of slimy weeds,
but the great sea, when it rushes up, buries the divisions, and
unites them all. Our Christian unity is unity in Christ, and the only
sure way 'to be of the same mind one toward another' is, that 'the
mind which was in Christ Jesus be in us also.'

II. The divisive power of selfish ambition.

'Set not your mind on high things, but condescend to things that are
lowly.' The contrast here drawn between the high and the lowly makes
it probable that the latter as well as the former is to be taken as
referring to 'things' rather than persons. The margin of the Revised
Version gives the literal rendering of the word translated
'condescend.' 'To be carried away with,' is metaphorically equivalent
to surrendering one's self to; and the two clauses present two sides
of one disposition, which seeks not for personal advancement or
conspicuous work which may minister to self-gratulation, but
contentedly fills the lowly sphere, and 'the humblest duties on
herself doth lay.' We need not pause to point out that such an ideal
is dead against the fashionable maxims of this generation. Personal
ambition is glorified as an element in progress, and to a world which
believes in such a proverb as 'devil take the hindmost,' these two
exhortations can only seem fanatical absurdity. And yet, perhaps, if
we fairly take into account how the seeking after personal
advancement and conspicuous work festers the soul, and how the flower
of heart's-ease grows, as Bunyan's shepherd-boy found out, in the
lowly valley, these exhortations to a quiet performance of lowly
duties and a contented filling of lowly spheres, may seem touched
with a higher wisdom than is to be found in the arenas where men
trample over each other in their pursuit of a fame 'which appeareth
for a little time, and then vanisheth away.' What a peaceful world it
would be, and what peaceful souls they would have, if Christian
people really adopted as their own these two simple maxims. They are
easy to understand, but how hard they are to follow.

It needs scarcely be noted that the temper condemned here destroys
all the concord and amity which the Apostle has been urging in the
previous clause. Where every man is eagerly seeking to force himself
in front of his neighbour, any community will become a struggling
mob; and they who are trying to outrun one another and who grasp at
'high things,' will never be 'of the same mind one toward another.'
But, we may observe that the surest way to keep in check the natural
selfish tendency to desire conspicuous things for ourselves is
honestly, and with rigid self-control, to let ourselves be carried
away by enthusiasm for humble tasks. If we would not disturb our
lives and fret our hearts by ambitions that, even when gratified,
bring no satisfaction, we must yield ourselves to the impulse of the
continuous stream of lowly duties which runs through every life.

But, plainly as this exhortation is needful, it is too
heavy a strain to be ever carried out except by the power of Christ
formed in the heart. It is in His earthly life that we find the great
example of the highest stooping to the lowest duties, and elevating
them by taking them upon Himself. He did not 'strive nor cry, nor
cause His voice to be heard in the streets.' Thirty years of that
perfect life were spent in a little village folded away in the
Galilean hills, with rude peasants for the only spectators, and the
narrow sphere of a carpenter's shop for its theatre. For the rest,
the publicity possible would have been obscurity to an ambitious
soul. To speak comforting words to a few weeping hearts; to lay His
hands on a few sick folk and heal them; to go about in a despised
land doing good, loved indeed by outcasts and sinners, unknown by
all the dispensers of renown, and consciously despised by all whom
the world honoured--that was the perfect life of the Incarnate God.
And that is an example which His followers seem with one consent to
set aside in their eager race after distinction and work that may
glorify their names. The difficulty of a faithful following of these
precepts, and the only means by which that difficulty can be
overcome, are touchingly taught us in another of Paul's Epistles by
the accumulation of motives which he brings to bear upon his
commandment, when he exhorts by the tender motives of 'comfort in
Christ, consolation of love, fellowship of the Spirit, and tender
mercies and compassions, that ye fulfil my joy, being of the same
mind, of one accord; doing nothing through faction or vainglory, but
in lowliness of mind each counting other better than himself.' As the
pattern for each of us in our narrow sphere, he holds forth the mind
that was in Christ Jesus, and the great self-emptying which he shrank
not from, 'but being in the form of God counted it not a prize to be
on an equality with God, but, being found in fashion as a man, He
humbled Himself, becoming obedient even unto death.'

III. The divisive power of intellectual self-conceit.

In this final clause the Apostle, in some sense, repeats the maxim
with which he began the series of special exhortations in this
chapter. He there enjoined 'every one among you not to think of
himself more highly than he ought to think'; here he deals with one
especial form of such too lofty thinking, viz. intellectual conceit.
He is possibly quoting the Book of Proverbs (iii. 7), where we read,
'Be not wise in thine own eyes,' which is preceded by, 'Lean not to
thine own understanding; in all thy ways acknowledge Him'; and is
followed by, 'Fear the Lord and depart from evil'; thus pointing to
the acknowledgment and fear of the Lord as the great antagonist of
such over-estimate of one's own wisdom as of all other faults of mind
and life. It needs not to point out how such a disposition breaks
Christian unity of spirit. There is something especially isolating in
that form of self-conceit. There are few greater curses in the Church
than little coteries of superior persons who cannot feed on ordinary
food, whose enlightened intelligence makes them too fastidious to
soil their dainty fingers with rough, vulgar work, and whose
supercilious criticism of the unenlightened souls that are content to
condescend to lowly Christian duties, is like an iceberg that brings
down the temperature wherever it floats. That temper indulged in,
breaks the unity, reduces to inactivity the work, and puts an end to
the progress, of any Christian community in which it is found; and
just as its predominance is harmful, so the obedience to the
exhortation against it is inseparable from the fulfilling of its
sister precepts. To know ourselves for the foolish creatures that we
are, is a mighty help to being 'of the same mind one toward another.'
Who thinks of himself soberly and according to the measure of faith
which God hath dealt to him will not hunger after high things, but
rather prefer the lowly ones that are on a level with his lowly self.

The exhortations of our text were preceded with injunctions to
distribute material help, and to bestow helpful sympathy. The tempers
enjoined in our present text are the inward source and fountain of
such external bestowments. The rendering of material help and of
sympathetic emotion are right and valuable only as they are the
outcome of this unanimity and lowliness. It is possible to
'distribute to the necessity of saints' in such a way as that the
gift pains more than a blow; it is possible to proffer sympathy so
that the sensitive heart shrinks from it. It was 'when the multitude
of them that believed were of one heart and one soul' that it became
natural to have all things common. As in the aurora borealis,
quivering beams from different centres stream out and at each throb
approach each other till they touch and make an arch of light that
glorifies the winter's night, so, if Christian men were 'of the same
mind toward one another,' did not 'set their minds on high things,
but condescended to things that were lowly, and were not wise in
their own conceits,' the Church of Christ would shine forth in the
darkness of a selfish world and would witness to Him who came down
'from the highest throne in glory' to the lowliest place in this
lowly world, that He might lift us to His own height of glory
everlasting.




STILL ANOTHER TRIPLET

   'Render to no man evil for evil. Take thought for
   things honourable in the light of all men. 18. If it
   be possible, as much as in you lieth, be at peace
   with all men.'--ROMANS xii. 17, 18 (R.V.).


The closing words of this chapter have a certain unity in that they
deal principally with a Christian's duty in the face of hostility and
antagonism. A previous injunction touched on the same subject in the
exhortation to bless the persecutors; but with that exception, all
the preceding verses have dealt with duties owing to those with whom
we stand in friendly relations. Such exhortations take no cognisance
of the special circumstances of the primitive Christians as 'lambs in
the midst of wolves'; and a large tract of Christian duty would be
undealt with, if we had not such directions for feelings and actions
in the face of hate and hurt. The general precept in our text is
expanded in a more complete form in the verses which follow the text,
and we may postpone its consideration until we have to deal with
them. It is one form of the application of the 'love without
hypocrisy' which has been previously recommended. The second of these
three precepts seems quite heterogeneous, but it may be noticed that
the word for 'evil' in the former and that for 'honourable,' in these
closely resemble each other in sound, and the connection of the two
clauses may be partially owing to that verbal resemblance; whilst we
