when a track leading across to Turrai was reached, the troops moved
down towards the village; the regiments in support advancing at the
foot of the open, on the north side. The mountain path that the
advanced troops were now filing down did not lead directly to the
village, but fell into the valley ahead of it, at a point where it
widens out into what was known as the "punch bowl valley," at the
foot of the Peiwar-Khotal.

As soon as the head of the column reached this spot, they came in
sight of the Afghans; who showed themselves in great numbers on the
crest of the mountain, far above their heads. As the troops had no
orders to attack so formidable a position, they fell back towards
Turrai, which was about a quarter of a mile to the rear. At the
sight of this movement, the Afghans swarmed down a spur of the
hill, and commenced an attack on the regiments that were moving
towards the village. The 29th Punjaubees climbed the hill and a
sharp skirmish ensued, the two mounted guns coming into action.

While this was going on, the main body of the troops arrived at
Turrai. The advanced troops were recalled, and the 5th Ghoorkas
were advanced to cover the movement. As it was now seen that the
story of the abandonment of the guns was false, orders were given
to pile arms in the village, and to encamp there.

This step was an imprudent one, as the Afghans speedily showed.
While our men were sitting or lying upon the ground, waiting for
the baggage to arrive, the Afghans brought up a mountain gun from
the main ridge--about three-quarters of a mile distant--to the
point of the spur overlooking the village of Turrai, and opened
fire at 1700 yards range.

The astonishment of the troops, when the first shell fell among
them, was great. Every one jumped to his feet, and seized his
rifle; and the guns of the Royal Horse Artillery were brought at
once into action. It was four o'clock in the afternoon when the
Afghans opened fire. Had they waited for a few hours, brought up
another gun or two, and made a night attack immediately after
opening fire, it is morally certain that the imprudence of camping
in such a position would have been punished by a disaster, which
might have vied with that of Isandula. Huddled together in a small
village surrounded by scrub; and impeded, as the troops would have
been, by the baggage animals and native followers, rushing in
terror in all directions, our men would have been taken at an
immense disadvantage.

Fortunate was it that the enemy opened fire before the darkness set
in. The troops were at once ordered to fall back a mile and a half,
and to pitch on fresh ground. There was much confusion in the
retreat, as the road in the rear was crowded with the baggage
animals. The spot chosen for the camp was a rough one; for the
ground was covered with scrub, and a scattered growth of hill oak
and thorny bushes, and was broken by the remains of some ancient
terraces but, as the jungle and broken ground extended for three
and a half miles, there was nothing for it but to take up the best
position possible, under the circumstances. The troops bivouacked
on the ridge of a ravine, with steep banks; which formed a line of
defense in front of the camp, while the view in every other
direction was obscured by trees.

The regiments passed a wretched night on the rough ground. Most of
them were unable to find their baggage, which was wandering in the
scrub in the dark; and the greater part of the troops lay down on
the bare ground, and went supperless to sleep, after their
fatiguing march of twenty-one miles.

In the morning, both men and cattle were greatly exhausted by their
long marches and almost sleepless nights; and General Roberts
determined to wait, for a day or two, to reconnoiter the formidable
position of the enemy before undertaking its attack. The camp was
shifted to a more secure site, the brushwood and trees were cleared
away, the tents pitched, and the troops were again comfortable.

A reconnaissance was made by Colonel Perkins--commanding the Royal
Engineers--with two companies of the Pioneers. He ascertained that
a deep ravine lay between the ridge on which they were encamped and
the Khotal itself, and that it was impossible to direct an attack
on that side.

Major Collett also, with two companies of the 23rd, proceeded to
reconnoiter the route known as the Spingawi--or Cow--Pass. This,
instead of going straight up the hill in front, wound round its
foot to the right of the valley. Ascending the mountain at a point
some three or four miles to the east of the Peiwar-Khotal, the
reconnaissance reached the summit of a ridge about five miles
distant from the camp, and overlooking the Spingawi-Khotal. It was
ascertained that the road up the pass seemed easy and practicable,
for all arms; that the top of the pass appeared to be on the same
ridge as the Peiwar-Khotal; and that a force, working from it
towards the Peiwar, would pass over a series of dominating
positions. It did not appear to Major Collett that the enemy held
the Peiwar-Khotal in force; although there was a gun on a
commanding knoll on the south, and there seemed to be one at the
top of the pass. The road from the village of Peiwar to the top of
the Spingawi Pass seemed perfectly easy, for troops of all arms.

The next two days were spent in clearing the camp and, so far as
possible, improving its military position; but it was still
surrounded by thick oak jungle, which would have afforded cover for
an enemy making a sudden attack.

A further reconnaissance was made of the Spingawi Pass and, as the
examination confirmed Major Collett's report, it was determined to
attack by it. Orders were issued, on the 1st of December, for a
march that night. The regiments which were to form the main attack,
by the Spingawi plateau route, were the 29th Punjaub Infantry and
the 5th Ghoorkas--commanded by Colonel Gordon--in advance; these
were to be followed by the mountain battery, a wing of the 72nd
Highlanders, a company of the Rangers, the 2nd Punjaubees, and the
23rd Pioneers, under Brigadier General Thelwall. Four guns, on
elephants, were to proceed with the column. The 5th Punjaub
Infantry, the 8th Regiment, two guns Royal Horse Artillery, three
guns Royal Artillery, and the 5th Bengal Cavalry--the whole under
the command of Brigadier General Cobbe--were to make an attack on
the Peiwar-Khotal direct.

The rest of the force was to remain to guard the camp and--in order
to convince the enemy that a front attack upon the Peiwar-Khotal
was intended--a party of pioneers, with an engineer officer and a
covering party of the 8th Regiment, were to construct a battery
near the village of Turrai. Frequent reconnoitering parties had
also been sent out in this direction and, so well was the secret of
the general's intention to attack by the Spingawi Khotal kept, that
everyone in camp who had not been let into the secret was confident
that the Peiwar-Khotal would be stormed, on the morrow.

The enemy--although those in camp were ignorant of the fact--were
reinforced, on the 1st, by four regiments of infantry, with a
mountain battery and, on their side, were meditating an attack upon
the British camp. The regiments which had freshly arrived were,
however, fatigued by their long march; and the assault on our camp
was postponed until the next day, and the chance of its coming off
was, therefore, lost for ever.

To William Gale's great satisfaction, a company of the
Rangers--that to which he had been posted--was the one selected by
the colonel to accompany the column marching up the pass. He did
not, indeed, know that this was the route by which they were to
advance; but he was pleased at not being left behind, with the
regiment, in charge of the camp.

"Well, young 'un," a corporal said to him, that evening, "we are
going to be under fire, at last; and a nice climb we shall have of
it. It puts one out of breath, to look at that steep road running
up the hill and, when it comes to fighting one's way up it, with
cannon and Afghans on the top, we shall find it hard work."

"I expect," William answered, "that we sha'n't go up it at any
extraordinary pace. If we skirmish up--as I expect we shall--from
rock to rock, we shall have plenty of time to get our wind, at each
halt. We are not to take our knapsacks; so we shall fight light,
and we have not much extra weight to carry. What with the heat, and
what with the long marches, I should think I must have lost a stone
in weight, since we landed in Calcutta."

"I don't think you have lost weight at all," the corporal said; "it
seems to me that you have grown and widened out, in the two months
and, only yesterday, when I was sizing the company, I had to move
you two men higher; for a young 'un, you stand the fatigues well."

"I am all right," Will said, "except that I have got some frightful
blisters on my feet. I was not going to say anything about it,
because I should have been kept in hospital, and left behind at
Khuram; but I have hardly known how to march, the last few days. I
don't think I could possibly have managed it, if I had not adopted
the native dodge of wearing putties--which I have greased well on
the inside, and wear instead of stockings."

Putties, it may be said, are slips of woolen cloth, about two and a
half yards long and three inches wide, with a tape sewn into one
end. They are wound round and round the leg, from the ankle to
below the knee, and secured by the end being tied with the tape.
Nearly every one, officers and men, wore them through the campaign.
For a long march there could be no doubt that these bandages--wound
round the foot instead of stockings--are very preferable, as they
obviate the liability to foot sores. Even with well-made boots all
pedestrians may, at times, suffer from sore feet; but the liability
is immensely increased when--as in the case of the British
soldier--the boots are coarse, roughly sewn, and frequently ill
fitted.



Chapter 10: The Peiwar-Khotal.


At ten o'clock at night, on the 1st of December, the troops
detailed for the attack mustered in the camp. The assembly took
place without sound of bugle, and even the necessary words of
command were given in a low tone. Through the still night air the
Afghans on the hills, little more than two miles away, would have
heard the stir. It was a very dark night, although the stars shone
clear.

"Where can we be going?" William Gale asked the soldier next to
him. "We are going right away from the pass, instead of towards
it."

"So we are!" the soldier replied. "I am blest if I know what we are
up to, and it's so precious dark that I can scarcely see the file
before me. I hope we ain't going to fight in the dark, anyhow. What
would be the good of being a marksman, when you cannot see the end
of your own rifle, let alone the man you are firing at?"

"Oh! We can't be going to attack in the dark," Will said. "I expect
we have got a long march before us; and are going to work round,
somehow, and take them in rear."

"Well, I hope whoever is acting as guide can see better in the
darkness than I can; else we are safe to lose our way, and may find
ourselves anywhere, in the morning.

"Confound it!" The exclamation was elicited by the speaker
stumbling over a boulder, and nearly going on to his head.

"Silence in the ranks, there!" an officer said, close by.

Each regiment was followed by its ammunition mules, and hospital
doolies--the latter being covered stretchers, or palkies, carried
by natives. Besides these were dandies--or chairs--slung upon
mules. This greatly added to the difficulty of a night march for,
even in the daytime, the presence of baggage animals in a column,
upon a narrow road, greatly hinders the troops and, at night, the
delays occasioned by them are naturally very much greater.

For the first three and a half miles the column marched away from
the enemy upon the Khotal, and the surprise of the soldiers
increased at every step they took. At the end of that time they
arrived at the village of Peiwar. Here they turned to the left and,
after crossing several ravines, and stony water courses, arrived on
a cultivated terrace; and kept along this till they reached a very
stiff nullah, twenty feet deep.

The night was bitterly cold, the bank of the nullah was extremely
slippery, and the boulders in the water course below coated with
ice. The difficulty of getting the loaded animals across, in the
darkness, was therefore very great. The passage of the various
water courses caused great delays; and it was difficult to keep the
column together, in the dark. At each passage, the rear was
immensely delayed while the leading troops were passing; and these
again had to be halted, while those behind them struggled over the
difficulties. The men suffered much from cold, as the pace was so
slow that they could not warm themselves; and the mounted officers
specially suffered, in their hands and feet.

At midnight the ravine leading up to the Spingawi Pass was reached;
but so dark was it that the 2nd Punjaubees, separated by a few
yards from the regiment in front of them, marched straight on
instead of turning up it; and the 22nd Pioneers, and the four
artillery guns carried on elephants--being behind them--naturally
went astray, also. Brigadier General Thelwall, who commanded the
column, was at the head of his brigade; and was, for some time,
unaware of the absence of two of his regiments but, after halting
and finding that they did not come up, sent back a mounted officer
who, after a two-mile ride, came up with the missing troops, and
guided them back to the point where they had left the route.

From the foot of the ravine to the top of the pass is six miles in
distance and, dark as it was in the open, it was still more so in
the ravine, shadowed by the steep hills on either side. As the
ascent continued the road became worse; the boulders being larger,
and the holes and dried-up pools deeper. The darkness, and the
prevailing white color of the stones, prevented the difference of
level being observed; and many of the men had heavy falls, as the
steep sides of these pools were often from two to four feet deep.

After marching for a mile and a half up the ravine, the report of a
rifle was heard in the ranks of the 29th Punjaubees--who were
leading the column--followed instantly by another discharge.
Colonel Gordon--commanding the regiment--halted; and he and the
general tried, in vain, to discover who had fired. No one could, or
would, identify them; and this seemed clearly to prove that the
rifles had been fired as a signal to the enemy, for they had not
been loaded before the column started. The Punjaubee regiments
contained many hill tribesmen--men closely connected, by ties of
blood and religion, with the enemy whom they were marching to
attack.

A non-commissioned officer and several of the men, who were just
about the spot where the guns had been fired, were placed under
arrest and sent back. It was afterwards found that two of their
rifles had been discharged; and the men who fired, and their
non-commissioned officer were tried by court martial for treachery,
and were hung. After these men had been sent back, the 5th
Ghoorkas, the company of Rangers, and two companies of the 72nd
passed the 23rd Punjaubees, and took their places at the head of
the column. In the course of the march a good many other men of the
23rd left the column, in the dark, and made their way back to camp.

It turned out, afterwards, that the Afghan sentries at the top of
the pass heard the reports, and woke up the commander of the post;
who, hearing no further cause of alarm, took no action in the
matter. Had the traitors waited until the column was within a mile
of the top of the pass, the Afghans would assuredly have taken the
alarm but, firing at a distance of four and a half miles, they
failed in the desired effect.

The advance was resumed, up the bed of the stream, for another mile
and a half. About three in the morning the main water course was
quitted, the road now entering a ravine to the left; up which,
three miles further on, was the summit of the pass. The column
continued its weary way up the ravine, slowly stumbling along in
the dark.

One incident occurred, in this part of the road, showing the
necessity, in night marching, for the regiments to keep close to
each other. In one place a fir-covered island lay in the middle of
the ravine, the torrent's bed lying on either side of it. When the
two companies of the 72nd Highlanders--who had been following close
to that of the Rangers--came to the spot, they were surprised to
find that the troops in front had suddenly vanished. No explanation
could be given as to the cause of this disappearance, so the
company were halted until the mystery was solved.

The leading regiment had taken the passage to the right of the
island, while the 72nd had gone to the left; the separation of the
roads being unnoticed, in the dark. Had the roads diverged, instead
of reuniting, much inconvenience might have been caused by the
delay in collecting the separated portions of the force.

At last the foot of the Khotal was reached, where the track left
the ravine and turned up the spur. The two guides--natives of the
country, who had led the head of the column to this point--refused
to go any further and, as the column was now at the point where the
fighting might begin, they were allowed to depart.

It was about six o'clock when the Ghoorkas began to climb the spur.
The morning had broken; but it was still dark, and the path was
almost invisible in the shadow of the trees. The Ghoorkas--their
rifles loaded now--made their way quietly up the hill. Presently
the challenge of the sentry was heard, followed by two shots.

