before a committee and these hundred thousand guilders will be paid to
you."

Rosa heaved a deep sigh.

"And now," continued Cornelius,--wiping away a tear which was glistening
in his eye, and which was shed much more for that marvellous black
tulip which he was not to see than for the life which he was about to
lose,--"I have no wish left, except that the tulip should be called Rosa
Barlaensis, that is to say, that its name should combine yours and mine;
and as, of course, you do not understand Latin, and might therefore
forget this name, try to get for me pencil and paper, that I may write
it down for you."

Rosa sobbed afresh, and handed to him a book, bound in shagreen, which
bore the initials C. W.

"What is this?" asked the prisoner.

"Alas!" replied Rosa, "it is the Bible of your poor godfather, Cornelius
de Witt. From it he derived strength to endure the torture, and to bear
his sentence without flinching. I found it in this cell, after the death
of the martyr, and have preserved it as a relic. To-day I brought it to
you, for it seemed to me that this book must possess in itself a divine
power. Write in it what you have to write, Mynheer Cornelius; and
though, unfortunately, I am not able to read, I will take care that what
you write shall be accomplished."

Cornelius took the Bible, and kissed it reverently.

"With what shall I write?" asked Cornelius.

"There is a pencil in the Bible," said Rosa.

This was the pencil which John de Witt had lent to his brother, and
which he had forgotten to take away with him.

Cornelius took it, and on the second fly leaf (for it will be remembered
that the first was torn out), drawing near his end like his godfather,
he wrote with a no less firm hand:--

"On this day, the 23d of August, 1672, being on the point of rendering,
although innocent, my soul to God on the scaffold, I bequeath to Rosa
Gryphus the only worldly goods which remain to me of all that I have
possessed in this world, the rest having been confiscated; I bequeath, I
say, to Rosa Gryphus three bulbs, which I am convinced must produce,
in the next May, the Grand Black Tulip for which a prize of a hundred
thousand guilders has been offered by the Haarlem Society, requesting
that she may be paid the same sum in my stead, as my sole heiress, under
the only condition of her marrying a respectable young man of about
my age, who loves her, and whom she loves, and of her giving the black
tulip, which will constitute a new species, the name of Rosa Barlaensis,
that is to say, hers and mine combined.

"So may God grant me mercy, and to her health and long life!

"Cornelius van Baerle."

The prisoner then, giving the Bible to Rosa, said,--

"Read."

"Alas!" she answered, "I have already told you I cannot read."

Cornelius then read to Rosa the testament that he had just made.

The agony of the poor girl almost overpowered her.

"Do you accept my conditions?" asked the prisoner, with a melancholy
smile, kissing the trembling hands of the afflicted girl.

"Oh, I don't know, sir," she stammered.

"You don't know, child, and why not?"

"Because there is one condition which I am afraid I cannot keep."

"Which? I should have thought that all was settled between us."

"You give me the hundred thousand guilders as a marriage portion, don't
you?

"And under the condition of my marrying a man whom I love?"

"Certainly."

"Well, then, sir, this money cannot belong to me. I shall never love any
one; neither shall I marry."

And, after having with difficulty uttered these words, Rosa almost
swooned away in the violence of her grief.

Cornelius, frightened at seeing her so pale and sinking, was going
to take her in his arms, when a heavy step, followed by other dismal
sounds, was heard on the staircase, amidst the continued barking of the
dog.

"They are coming to fetch you. Oh God! Oh God!" cried Rosa, wringing her
hands. "And have you nothing more to tell me?"

She fell on her knees with her face buried in her hands and became
almost senseless.

"I have only to say, that I wish you to preserve these bulbs as a
most precious treasure, and carefully to treat them according to the
directions I have given you. Do it for my sake, and now farewell, Rosa."

"Yes, yes," she said, without raising her head, "I will do anything you
bid me, except marrying," she added, in a low voice, "for that, oh! that
is impossible for me."

She then put the cherished treasure next her beating heart.

The noise on the staircase which Cornelius and Rosa had heard was caused
by the Recorder, who was coming for the prisoner. He was followed by
the executioner, by the soldiers who were to form the guard round the
scaffold, and by some curious hangers-on of the prison.

Cornelius, without showing any weakness, but likewise without any
bravado, received them rather as friends than as persecutors, and
quietly submitted to all those preparations which these men were obliged
to make in performance of their duty.

Then, casting a glance into the yard through the narrow iron-barred
window of his cell, he perceived the scaffold, and, at twenty paces
distant from it, the gibbet, from which, by order of the Stadtholder,
the outraged remains of the two brothers De Witt had been taken down.

When the moment came to descend in order to follow the guards, Cornelius
sought with his eyes the angelic look of Rosa, but he saw, behind the
swords and halberds, only a form lying outstretched near a wooden bench,
and a deathlike face half covered with long golden locks.

But Rosa, whilst falling down senseless, still obeying her friend, had
pressed her hand on her velvet bodice and, forgetting everything in
the world besides, instinctively grasped the precious deposit which
Cornelius had intrusted to her care.

Leaving the cell, the young man could still see in the convulsively
clinched fingers of Rosa the yellowish leaf from that Bible on which
Cornelius de Witt had with such difficulty and pain written these few
lines, which, if Van Baerle had read them, would undoubtedly have been
the saving of a man and a tulip.




Chapter 12. The Execution


Cornelius had not three hundred paces to walk outside the prison to
reach the foot of the scaffold. At the bottom of the staircase, the dog
quietly looked at him whilst he was passing; Cornelius even fancied
he saw in the eyes of the monster a certain expression as it were of
compassion.

The dog perhaps knew the condemned prisoners, and only bit those who
left as free men.

The shorter the way from the door of the prison to the foot of the
scaffold, the more fully, of course, it was crowded with curious people.

These were the same who, not satisfied with the blood which they had
shed three days before, were now craving for a new victim.

And scarcely had Cornelius made his appearance than a fierce groan ran
through the whole street, spreading all over the yard, and re-echoing
from the streets which led to the scaffold, and which were likewise
crowded with spectators.

The scaffold indeed looked like an islet at the confluence of several
rivers.

In the midst of these threats, groans, and yells, Cornelius, very likely
in order not to hear them, had buried himself in his own thoughts.

And what did he think of in his last melancholy journey?

Neither of his enemies, nor of his judges, nor of his executioners.

He thought of the beautiful tulips which he would see from heaven above,
at Ceylon, or Bengal, or elsewhere, when he would be able to look with
pity on this earth, where John and Cornelius de Witt had been murdered
for having thought too much of politics, and where Cornelius van Baerle
was about to be murdered for having thought too much of tulips.

"It is only one stroke of the axe," said the philosopher to himself,
"and my beautiful dream will begin to be realised."

Only there was still a chance, just as it had happened before to M. de
Chalais, to M. de Thou, and other slovenly executed people, that the
headsman might inflict more than one stroke, that is to say, more than
one martyrdom, on the poor tulip-fancier.

Yet, notwithstanding all this, Van Baerle mounted the scaffold not the
less resolutely, proud of having been the friend of that illustrious
John, and godson of that noble Cornelius de Witt, whom the ruffians, who
were now crowding to witness his own doom, had torn to pieces and burnt
three days before.

He knelt down, said his prayers, and observed, not without a feeling of
sincere joy, that, laying his head on the block, and keeping his eyes
open, he would be able to his last moment to see the grated window of
the Buytenhof.

At length the fatal moment arrived, and Cornelius placed his chin on the
cold damp block. But at this moment his eyes closed involuntarily, to
receive more resolutely the terrible avalanche which was about to fall
on his head, and to engulf his life.

A gleam like that of lightning passed across the scaffold: it was the
executioner raising his sword.

Van Baerle bade farewell to the great black tulip, certain of awaking in
another world full of light and glorious tints.

Three times he felt, with a shudder, the cold current of air from the
knife near his neck, but what a surprise! he felt neither pain nor
shock.

He saw no change in the colour of the sky, or of the world around him.

Then suddenly Van Baerle felt gentle hands raising him, and soon stood
on his feet again, although trembling a little.

He looked around him. There was some one by his side, reading a large
parchment, sealed with a huge seal of red wax.

And the same sun, yellow and pale, as it behooves a Dutch sun to be, was
shining in the skies; and the same grated window looked down upon
him from the Buytenhof; and the same rabble, no longer yelling, but
completely thunderstruck, were staring at him from the streets below.

Van Baerle began to be sensible to what was going on around him.

His Highness, William, Prince of Orange, very likely afraid that
Van Baerle's blood would turn the scale of judgment against him, had
compassionately taken into consideration his good character, and the
apparent proofs of his innocence.

His Highness, accordingly, had granted him his life.

Cornelius at first hoped that the pardon would be complete, and that he
would be restored to his full liberty and to his flower borders at Dort.

But Cornelius was mistaken. To use an expression of Madame de Sevigne,
who wrote about the same time, "there was a postscript to the letter;"
and the most important part of the letter was contained in the
postscript.

In this postscript, William of Orange, Stadtholder of Holland, condemned
Cornelius van Baerle to imprisonment for life. He was not sufficiently
guilty to suffer death, but he was too much so to be set at liberty.

Cornelius heard this clause, but, the first feeling of vexation and
disappointment over, he said to himself,--

"Never mind, all this is not lost yet; there is some good in this
perpetual imprisonment; Rosa will be there, and also my three bulbs of
the black tulip are there."

But Cornelius forgot that the Seven Provinces had seven prisons, one for
each, and that the board of the prisoner is anywhere else less expensive
than at the Hague, which is a capital.

His Highness, who, as it seems, did not possess the means to feed Van
Baerle at the Hague, sent him to undergo his perpetual imprisonment at
the fortress of Loewestein, very near Dort, but, alas! also very far
from it; for Loewestein, as the geographers tell us, is situated at the
point of the islet which is formed by the confluence of the Waal and the
Meuse, opposite Gorcum.

Van Baerle was sufficiently versed in the history of his country to know
that the celebrated Grotius was confined in that castle after the
death of Barneveldt; and that the States, in their generosity to the
illustrious publicist, jurist, historian, poet, and divine, had granted
to him for his daily maintenance the sum of twenty-four stivers.

"I," said Van Baerle to himself, "I am worth much less than Grotius.
They will hardly give me twelve stivers, and I shall live miserably; but
never mind, at all events I shall live."

Then suddenly a terrible thought struck him.

"Ah!" he exclaimed, "how damp and misty that part of the country is,
and the soil so bad for the tulips! And then Rosa will not be at
Loewestein!"




Chapter 13. What was going on all this Time in the Mind of one of the
Spectators


Whilst Cornelius was engaged with his own thoughts, a coach had driven
up to the scaffold. This vehicle was for the prisoner. He was invited to
enter it, and he obeyed.

His last look was towards the Buytenhof. He hoped to see at the window
the face of Rosa, brightening up again.

But the coach was drawn by good horses, who soon carried Van Baerle
away from among the shouts which the rabble roared in honour of the most
magnanimous Stadtholder, mixing with it a spice of abuse against the
brothers De Witt and the godson of Cornelius, who had just now been
saved from death.

This reprieve suggested to the worthy spectators remarks such as the
following:--

"It's very fortunate that we used such speed in having justice done to
that great villain John, and to that little rogue Cornelius, otherwise
his Highness might have snatched them from us, just as he has done this
fellow."

Among all the spectators whom Van Baerle's execution had attracted to
the Buytenhof, and whom the sudden turn of affairs had disagreeably
surprised, undoubtedly the one most disappointed was a certain
respectably dressed burgher, who from early morning had made such a
good use of his feet and elbows that he at last was separated from the
scaffold only by the file of soldiers which surrounded it.

Many had shown themselves eager to see the perfidious blood of the
guilty Cornelius flow, but not one had shown such a keen anxiety as the
individual just alluded to.

The most furious had come to the Buytenhof at daybreak, to secure a
better place; but he, outdoing even them, had passed the night at the
threshold of the prison, from whence, as we have already said, he had
advanced to the very foremost rank, unguibus et rostro,--that is to say,
coaxing some, and kicking the others.

And when the executioner had conducted the prisoner to the scaffold, the
burgher, who had mounted on the stone of the pump the better to see and
be seen, made to the executioner a sign which meant,--

"It's a bargain, isn't it?"

The executioner answered by another sign, which was meant to say,--

"Be quiet, it's all right."

This burgher was no other than Mynheer Isaac Boxtel, who since the
arrest of Cornelius had come to the Hague to try if he could not get
hold of the three bulbs of the black tulip.

Boxtel had at first tried to gain over Gryphus to his interest, but the
jailer had not only the snarling fierceness, but likewise the fidelity,
