out with an army which is said to have numbered more than two million
fighting men. As they were attended by slaves and servants of all kinds,
some of the old historians say that ten millions of human beings were
included in this mighty host.




XLVIII. THE GREAT ARMY.


Xerxes' army marched in various sections across Asia Minor, and all the
forces came together at the Hellespont. Here the king had ordered the
building of two great bridges,--one for the troops, and the other for
the immense train of baggage which followed him.

These bridges were no sooner finished than a rising storm entirely
destroyed them. When Xerxes heard of the disaster, he not only condemned
the unlucky engineers to death, but also had the waves flogged with
whips, and ordered chains flung across the strait, to show that he
considered the sea an unruly slave, who should be taught to obey his
master.

Then, undaunted by his misfortune, the King of Persia gave orders for
the building of new bridges; and when they were finished, he reviewed
his army from the top of a neighboring mountain.

The sight must have been grand indeed, and the courtiers standing around
were greatly surprised when they saw their master suddenly burst into
tears. When asked the cause of his sorrow, Xerxes answered, "See that
mighty host spread out as far as eye can reach! I weep at the thought
that a hundred years hence there will be nothing left of it except,
perhaps, a handful of dust and a few moldering bones!"

The king was soon comforted, however, and crossed the bridge first,
attended by his bodyguard of picked soldiers, who were called the
Immortals because they had never suffered defeat. All the army followed
him, and during seven days and nights the bridge resounded with the
steady tramp of the armed host; but, even when the rear guard had passed
over the Hellespont, there were still so many slaves and baggage wagons,
that it took them a whole month to file past.

That was a procession such as has never again been seen. You can imagine
what a sight it was for all the boys and girls who lived near enough to
the Hellespont to see this mighty parade, which continued night and day.

They saw not only the sacred chariot drawn by eight white horses, the
glittering array of the Immortals, the burnished helmets and arms of the
foot soldiers, and the silken canopies and tents over the grandees, but
also countless chariots drawn by four horses, and provided on either
side with sharp scythes, which were intended to mow down the enemy like
ripe grain.

[Illustration: Crossing the Hellespont.]

Besides these strange mowing machines, there were many other engines of
war, which were all made to strike terror into the hearts of the Greeks,
and to subdue completely the proud people who had so sorely defeated
Darius' troops at Marathon.

To prevent his fleet from being wrecked as his father's was, Xerxes had
given orders to dig a great canal across the isthmus that connected
Mount Athos with the mainland; and through this the vessels sailed past
the promontory in safety.




XLIX. PREPARATIONS FOR DEFENSE.


The news of Xerxes' crossing of the Hellespont, and of his approach to
conquer Greece, soon reached Athens, where it filled all hearts with
fear. The people then remembered Miltiades, and bitterly regretted his
death, and their ingratitude, which had been its real cause.

As the mighty general who had already once delivered them was dead, they
tried to think who could best replace him, and decided to recall
Aristides the Just from his undeserved exile. Aristides generously
forgave his fellow-citizens for all the harm they had done him, and he
and Themistocles began to do all in their power to insure the safety of
Athens.

Swift runners were dispatched in every direction with messages urging
all the Greek cities to unite for the good of the country by sending as
many brave men as possible to check the Persian army, and to try to
hinder it from really entering Greece.

Themistocles was the most active in this attempt to induce the Greek
cities to join forces, and it was he who planned a great council, or
meeting, at Corinth, in 481 B.C. There it soon became evident that the
cities were too jealous of each other to unite as they should.

Many of them promised help, which they never sent; others vowed they
would neither send troops nor furnish aid of any kind, unless _their_
generals had supreme command; and even the oracles gave vague and
discouraging answers, when consulted as usual.

In spite of all these drawbacks, Themistocles managed to get a few
allies; and, in order to induce the Spartans to lend their aid, he
promised them the command not only of the army, but also of the fleet.

He next persuaded them that it would be wisest to send an armed force
into Thessaly, so as to defend the narrow pass of Thermopylae, which was
the only road by which the Persians could enter Greece. This natural
causeway, as we have seen, lay between the mountains and the sea; and,
because there were springs of warm water here, it was generally known as
Thermopylae, which is the Greek for "Hot Gateway."

Under the guidance of Le-on'i-das, one of the Spartan kings, three
hundred Lacedaemonian soldiers and six thousand allies marched thither,
and undertook to guard the pass. This was a very small army; but it was
impossible to get more soldiers at the time, as all the Greeks were more
anxious to attend the Olympic games, which were just then being
celebrated, than to defend their country and homes.

Many of them said they were afraid the gods would be angry if they did
not keep the feast as usual, and declared that it was against the law to
bear arms or make war during that time. This was perfectly true; but
Xerxes did not care at all for the Greek gods, and the country would
have been defenseless had it not been for Leonidas and his handful of
men.

While this little army traveled northwards, the rest of the people
thronged to Olympia, promising to come and fight as soon as the games
were ended, and they could again bear arms without offending the gods.

The Persian fleet, as you have seen, had passed behind Mount Athos,
instead of rounding it as before, and Xerxes intended landing part of
his army just below Thermopylae. Unfortunately for him, however, the four
hundred vessels bearing his troops were wrecked by a sudden storm.

Another fleet was immediately prepared; but, before it was ready, the
Olympic games came to an end, and the Greeks, flying to arms as they had
promised, hastily embarked upon their own vessels, and came and took up
their position at Ar-te-mis'ium, to hinder the advance of the Persian
fleet.

[Illustration]




L. LEONIDAS AT THERMOPYLAE


The Persian army had come to the Pass of Thermopylae; and Xerxes, seeing
that it was guarded by only a few men, sent them a haughty message,
bidding them surrender their arms.

Instead of seeing a meek compliance with this request, as they expected,
the Persian heralds were amazed to hear Leonidas reply with true laconic
brevity, "Come and take them!"

The Spartan king, however, had quickly seen that it would be impossible
for him to do much more than stop for a while the advance of this mighty
host. As a Spartan never drew back, he made up his mind to die on the
field of battle, and bade his warriors comb their hair, don their
choicest armor, and dress themselves in their richest attire, as was the
custom when some great danger threatened them and they expected to die.

The Persians, seeing this, were greatly surprised, and advanced
confidently, for they fancied that men who took so much trouble to curl
and perfume their hair would not be hard to conquer. They soon found out
their mistake.

As they advanced, the archers shot a volley of arrows, and in such
numbers that they fairly darkened the sun. One of the allies, seeing
this, ran to warn Leonidas; but he received the startling news with
great coolness, and merely said, "Very well; then we can fight in the
shade."

When Xerxes saw that the Greeks would not yield without striking a blow,
he gave orders for the battle to begin. The Persians pressed forward,
under the eye of their king, who sat high up on the rocks to see them
conquer; but, to his surprise, they were driven back by that mere
handful of men.

Again and again they tried to force the pass, but all their attempts
proved vain. The Persian soldiers, amazed at the courage of the Greeks,
were filled with superstitious fears, and began to refuse to advance,
except when driven onward under the stinging blows of the lash.

The king was furious to see their close ranks give way time after time,
and finally ordered his own Immortals to march on and scatter the army,
which, although so small, was keeping millions of men at bay. He
expected that everything would of course give way at the very first
charge of these troops.

Imagine his wrath, therefore, when he saw the Immortals also retreat,
after many useless efforts to drive away the enemy. The Persians did not
know what to do. They could not advance, and were ashamed to retreat.




LI. DEATH OF LEONIDAS.


While the Persians were hesitating thus, a Greek shepherd, Eph-i-al'tes,
stole into their camp, and, vile traitor that he was, offered to show
them another way to get into Greece, if they would pay him well. This
man was led into the tent of a Persian general, where he explained that
he could easily lead a troop of Persians over the mountains.

By a goat path known to the Greeks only, it was possible not only to
cross the mountains, but also to come down upon the small Greek force
guarding the Pass of Thermopylae.

His offer as guide was accepted. Ephialtes, true to his promise, if not
to his country, led the Persian Immortals along this narrow way.
Leonidas, who could not imagine that any one of the Greeks would be base
enough to sell his country and honor for gold, had placed only a few of
the allies at this spot.

[Illustration: A Fighting Persian.]

The Immortals followed Ephialtes, easily cut these few men down, and
came unperceived behind the Spartan troops. It was only when he heard
the tramp of horses behind him and on the mountain above him, that
Leonidas found out that he had been betrayed.

Hastily calling his allies, he gave them permission to save themselves
by flight, declaring, however, that he and his companions would never
leave their post, and that, since they could not conquer, they were
ready to die.

Some of the allies took advantage of this permission to escape, but
seven hundred Thes'pi-ans nobly chose to remain with the Spartans. With
the courage of despair, these men now fought against the Persians before
and behind them, selling their lives as dearly as possible. In spite of
the odds against them, they refused to surrender, and finally fell, one
after another, on the spot which they had undertaken to guard.

Their bodies, which were found almost in a heap,--for they had scorned
to fly,--were honorably buried in a single mound, over which rose a
monument with this modest inscription,--


  "Go, passer-by, at Sparta tell,
  Obedient to her law we fell."


The Persians had forced their way into Greece. Nothing could check their
further advance, so the mighty army swept southward. The first place of
note on their way to Athens was Delphi, the site of the sacred temple,
where great treasures were stored.

The Greeks knew that the Persians did not worship the same gods, and
feared that they might rob the temple: so they now eagerly questioned
the oracle, to find out whether they should not all assemble there in
its defense.

To their surprise, the oracle proudly replied, "The gods will take care
of their own," and bade them rather use their strength to defend their
own homes.

The Persians marched into the rocky gorge leading to the temple at
Delphi, but just as they were entering the valley a terrible
thunderstorm broke forth. The darkness became so great that the
soldiers lost their way. The rocks rolled and crashed down upon them;
and the soldiers, filled with dread, beat a hasty retreat, and never
again dared venture into this valley.

In the mean while the Greek fleet at Artemisium had held the Persian
vessels at bay, until news was brought of the death of Leonidas, and the
passage of Thermopylae. Then the Greeks sailed as fast as they could
toward Athens, knowing that they would be needed there to defend the
city.

The various allies, sure that it would be quite useless to try to defend
the northern part of Greece any longer, retreated into the Peloponnesus,
and, hoping to prevent the Persians from entering there, hastily began
to build a huge wall all across the Isthmus of Corinth, which is only
about five miles wide.




LII. THE BURNING OF ATHENS.


As all their allies were trying only to defend the Peloponnesus, the
Athenians were left entirely alone. Many of their friends advised them
to abandon their city, and follow the other Greeks southward, leaving
all Attica a prey to the foe.

This the Athenians did not wish to do, so they sent in haste to Delphi,
to inquire of the oracle whether they had better retreat, or attempt to
defend their city. As was generally the case, the oracle did not give a
plain answer, but merely said, "The wooden walls will defend you and
your children."

When this answer was brought to Athens, no one could tell exactly what
it meant. Some of the citizens fancied that the oracle was advising them
to retreat behind the ancient wooden stockade on the Acropolis, but
Themistocles insisted that by "wooden walls" the oracle meant their
ships.

He finally persuaded the Athenians to believe him. All the old men,
women, and children were hastily brought on board the ships, and carried
to the Peloponnesus, where they were welcomed by their friends. Then the
men embarked in their turn, and the fleet sailed off to the Bay of
Sal'a-mis, where it awaited a good chance to fight.

The Persians swept down into Attica, and entered the deserted city of
Athens. Here they gazed in wonder at all they saw, and, after robbing
