"I hope so, although it is not what I started out to get. Did you
bring a car as I told you?"

"It's waiting below."

"Good enough. I'll go in it. Williams, are those projectors all
loaded?"

"Yes, Dr. Bird. The magnet will be ready to go in five minutes. The
electroscopes and the other light stuff are all loaded and ready to
move."

"You have done well. I'll let you bring the trucks and heavy equipment
while I go ahead with the instruments. Take the road out toward Upper
Marlboro. If I don't meet you before, stop there for orders."

"Very well, Doctor."

"Come on, Carnes, let's go."

       *       *       *       *       *

He raced down the stairs with the detective at his heels. He went
along the line of touring cars and spoke briefly to the drivers. He
climbed into the car which Carnes had brought. As it started the other
cars fell in behind it. At a speed of forty miles an hour, with a
detachment of motorcycle police leading the van, the cavalcade rolled
out through the deserted streets of Washington. Once clear of the
city, the speed was increased.

"Did you persuade the President to leave?" asked the doctor.

"There wasn't a chance. The papers panned him so much for following my
advice at Charleston that he has turned stubborn. He says that if all
the forces of the government can't protect him against one man, he is
willing to die."

"We've got to save him," said Dr. Bird grimly. "Hello, there's the
Chesapeake ahead."

The doctor studied the country.

"We are about opposite the place where we left that sub last night. I
fancy that Saranoff will operate from there, for it didn't move during
the last half hour we watched it. We'll go back inland a mile or two
and spread out. I have no idea how far his radiations will affect the
electroscopes, but we'll try four hundred-yard intervals to start.
That will enable us to cover a line twelve miles long."

He picked up a megaphone and spoke to the line of cars behind him.

"Take up four hundred yard intervals when we spread out," he said.
"Every man keep his headphone on and listen for orders. Follow my car
until it stops, then turn north and south and drop your men at
intervals."

He reentered the car and led the way back for two miles. He halted his
car at a crossroad. The cars following him turned and went to the
north and south. Besides Carnes and the doctor, the car held two men
from the Bureau. As they climbed out, Carnes saw that one of them
carried a portable radio sending set, while the other bore an
electroscope and a rubber rod. The radio operator set up his device,
while the other man rubbed his coat sleeve briskly with the hard
rubber and then touched the ball of the electroscope with it. The two
bits of gold-leaf spread out.

"While we're waiting, I'll explain something of this to you, Carnes,"
said the doctor. "At four hundred-yard intervals are men with
electroscopes like this one. My attempt to locate Saranoff by means of
wave detectors was a failure. That proved that the ray he was using is
not of the wave type. The other common ray is the cathode ray type
which does not consist of vibrations but of a stream of electrons,
negative particles of electricity, traveling in straight lines of high
velocity. He must be knocking loose some of the electrons when he
collapses the atoms. The rate of discharge of these electroscopes will
give us a clue to the nearness of his device."

       *       *       *       *       *

"Once you locate him, how do you propose to attack him?"

"The obvious method, that of using his own ray against him, fell down.
However, in attempting to produce it, I stumbled on another weapon
which may be equally effective. I am going to try to use an exact
opposite of his ray. The cathode ray, when properly used, will bombard
the atoms and knock electrons loose. I perfected last night a device
on which I have been working for months. It is a super-cathode ray. I
tested it on the yellow powder and find that I can successfully
reverse Saranoff's process. He can contract matter together until it
occupies less than one one-thousandth of its original volume. My ray
will destroy this effect and restore matter to something like its
original condition."

"And the effect will be?"

"Use your imagination. He blasts out a hole by condensing the rock to
a pinch of yellow powder. He moves forward into the hole he has made.
I come along and reverse his process. The yellow powder expands to its
original volume and the hole he has made ceases to exist. What must
happen to the foreign body which had been introduced into the hole
that is no longer a hole?"

Carnes whistled.

"At any rate, I hope that I am never in a hole when that happens."

"And I devoutly hope that Saranoff is. I met with one difficulty. My
ray will not penetrate the depth of solid rock which separates his
borer from the surface."

"Then how will you reach him to crush him? You don't expect to drill
down ahead of him?"

"That is my stroke of genius, Carnes. I am going to make him bore the
hole down which my ray will travel to accomplish his destruction. The
cathode ray and rays of that type--"

       *       *       *       *       *

"Pardon me, Doctor," interrupted the radio operator. "I have just
received a message from the squadron leader of the planes patrolling
the bay. He states that every inch of the Chesapeake Bay and the
Potomac River have been examined and no submarine is visible."

"I expected that. He will have opened a cavern under the earth, in
which his craft is safe from aerial observation. Once the borer has
left it, it is invulnerable no longer."

"What reply shall I make?"

"Tell him to keep up a constant patrol. Three navy subs with
radite-charged torpedos are on their way up the bay, together with
half a dozen destroyers. The subs will scout for such a hole as I have
described and will attack his sub if they find it. The destroyers will
stand by and support them."

The operator turned to his instrument. The electroscope observer
claimed the doctor's attention.

"There is a steady leak here, Doctor," he said. "I get a discharge in
eleven minutes."

"Probably a result of his work in opening the hiding place for his
submarine last night. Keep it charged, Jones."

"What did you say about the cathode ray, Doctor?" asked Carnes.

"The cathode ray? Oh, yes. I said that rays of that type were
attracted by--Hello, look there!"

From a point a mile to the north a ball of red fire streaked up into
the air. A moment later similar signals rose from other watchers in
the line.

"It works, Carnes!" cried the doctor as he rushed for the car. "We've
got him this time!"

       *       *       *       *       *

The car raced along the road. At the first man who had signalled, it
slackened speed. The doctor leaned out.

"What is your discharge rate?" he called.

"Eight minutes. Doctor."

The car rolled on. Dr. Bird repeated the question at the next post and
was told that the electroscope there was losing its charge in seven
minutes. The next man reported four minutes and the next man, one
minute. The following station reported three minutes.

"It's right along here somewhere!" cried the doctor. "Summon everyone
to this point and take up twenty-yard intervals."

From the north and south the cars came racing in. The instruments were
spread out along a new line twenty yards apart. As the borer was
located the intervals were decreased to fifteen feet. Dr. Bird thrust
a long white rod into the ground.

"His path lies under here," he said. "Into the cars and go back a mile
and test again."

The borer was making slow progress, and it was half an hour before Dr.
Bird drove the second stake in the ground. With a transit he took the
bearing of the path and laid it out on a large scale map.

"We'll stop him between Marr and Ritchie," he announced. "Jones, I am
going back and set up my apparatus. Keep track of his movements. If
he changes direction, let me know at once."

       *       *       *       *       *

The doctor's car tore off to the west. Near Upper Marlboro, he met the
convoy of trucks and led them to the selected spot. The trucks were
unloaded and the apparatus laid out. Attached to a huge transformer
were a dozen strange-looking projectors. What puzzled Carnes most was
a huge built-up steel bar wound about with heavy cable. Dr. Bird had
this bar erected on a truck and located it with great exactness. The
projectors were set up in a battery just east of the bar.

"How about power?" asked the doctor.

"We'll have it in five minutes," replied one of the men. "A power
transmission line carrying twenty-two thousand passes within two
hundred yards of here. We are phoning now to have the power cut off.
As soon as the line is dead we'll cut it and bring the ends here."

The electrician was good at his word. In five minutes the power line
had been cut and cables spliced to the ends. The cables were brought
to the doctor's apparatus and the main lines were rigged to the ends
of the cable wound around the bar. In parallel on taps, the projectors
were connected. Huge oil-switches were placed in both lines.

"All ready, Doctor," reported the electrician.

"Good work, Avent. He'll be here soon, I fancy."

A car whirled up and a man leaped out with a surveyor's rod. He set it
up on the ground while a companion watched through binoculars. He
moved it a hundred yards to the north and then back twenty. When he
was satisfied he turned to Dr. Bird.

"The direction of movement has not changed," he said. "The path will
pass under this stake."

Under the doctor's supervision, the truck carrying the bar moved
forward until it stood over the surveyor's stake. The battery of
projectors moved to a new location a few feet east of the rod. Other
cars came racing up.

"He's less than half a mile away, Doctor!" cried Jones.

"Get your electroscopes out and spot him a hundred yards from this
truck."

"Very well, Doctor."

       *       *       *       *       *

The men with the instruments spread out along the path of the borer.
Briskly they rubbed their sleeves with the rubber rods and charged
their instruments. Almost as fast as they charged them, the tiny bits
of gold-leaf collapsed together. Presently the man on the end of the
line shouted.

"Maximum discharge!" he cried.

Dr. Bird looked around. Every man stood ready at his post. The next
man signalled that the borer was under him. Carnes felt himself
trembling. He did not know what the doctor was about to do, but he
felt that the fate of America hung in the balance. Whether it remained
free or became the slave of Soviet Russia would quickly be decided.

Slowly the borer made its way forward. With a pale face, Jones
signalled the news that it had reached the point the doctor had
indicated. Dr. Bird raised his hand.

"Power!" he cried.

The electrician closed a switch and power surged through the cables
around the bar. The earth rocked and quivered. A hundred yards east of
the bar a flash of intolerable red light sprang from the ground with a
roar like that of Niagara. Toward the bar it moved with gathering
momentum.

"Back, everyone!" roared Dr. Bird.

       *       *       *       *       *

The men sprang back. The searing ray approached the bar. It touched
it, and bar and truck disappeared into thin air. A splutter of sparks
came from the severed ends of the wire. The ray disappeared. Carnes
rubbed his eyes. Where the truck had rested on solid ground was now a
gaping wound in the earth.

"Projector forward!" cried the doctor. "Hurry, men!"

The trucks bearing the battery of projectors moved forward until they
were at the edge of the hole. Portable cranes swung the lamps out, and
men swarmed over them. The projectors were pointed down the hole.
Carnes joined the doctor in peering down. A hundred yards below them
the terrible ray was blazing. As they watched, its end came in sight.
The ray was being projected forward from the end of a black
cigar-shaped machine which was slowly moving forward.

"That's your target, men!" cried the doctor. "Align on it and signal
when you are ready!"

One by one the projector operators raised their hands in the signal of
"ready." Still the doctor waited. Suddenly the forward movement of the
black body ceased. The ray was stationary for a moment and then moved
slowly upward. A terrific roaring came from the cavern.

"Projector switch!" roared the doctor, his heavy voice sounding over
the tumult.

"Ready, sir!" a shrill voice answered.

"Power!"

       *       *       *       *       *

From each of the projectors a dazzling green ray leaped forth as the
switch was closed. There was a crash like all the thunder of the
universe. Before the astonished eyes of the detective, the hole
closed. Not only did it close but the earth piled up until the trucks
were overturned and the green rays blazed in all directions.

"Power off!" roared the doctor.

The switch was opened and the ray died out. Before them was a huge
mound where a moment before had been a hole.

"You see, Carnes," said Dr. Bird with a wan smile. "I made him bore
his own hole, as I promised."

"I saw it, but I don't understand. How did you do it?"

"Magnetism. Rays of the cathode type are deflected from their course
by a magnet. His ray proved unusually susceptible, and I drew it
toward a huge electro-magnet which I improvised. When the magnet was
destroyed, the ray dropped back ... to its original ... direction.
That's the end ... of Saranoff. That is ... I hope ... it is."

Dr. Bird's voice had grown slower and less distinct as he talked. As
he said the last words, he slumped gently to the ground. Carnes sprang
forward with a cry of alarm and bent over him.

"What's the matter, Doctor?" he demanded anxiously, shaking the
scientist. Dr. Bird rallied for a moment.

"Sleep, old dear," he murmured. "Four days--no sleep. Go 'way, I'm ...
going ... to ... sleep...."


[Illustration: Advertisement]




The Exile of Time

PART TWO OF A FOUR-PART NOVEL

_By Ray Cummings_

WHAT HAS GONE BEFORE

[Illustration: Where nothing had been stood a cage.]

[Sidenote: Young lovers of three eras are swept down the torrent of
the sinister cripple Tugh's frightful vengeance.]


"Let me out! Let me out!" came the cry.

