of receptacle, which must have been broken open by somebody, for the
hand was quickly withdrawn with three apples in it.  Again it entered.
Mr Sharp might have kissed it easily, but he was a man of considerable
self-restraint--at least when others were concerned.  He thought it
advisable that there should be some of the stolen goods found in Jim's
pockets!  He did not touch the hand, therefore, while it was drawn back
with other three apples in it.  You see it was a large hand, and could
hold three at a time.  A third time it entered and grasped more of the
forbidden fruit.

"There's luck in odd numbers," thought Mr Sharp, as he seized the wrist
with both of his iron hands, and held it fast.

The appalling yell which Jim uttered was due more to superstitious dread
than physical fear, for, on discovering that the voice which accompanied
the grip was that of Mr Sharp, he struggled powerfully to get free.
After the first violent effort was over, Mr Sharp suddenly slid one
hand along Jim's arm, caught him by the collar, and, launching himself
through the hole which had been cut so conveniently large, plunged into
Jim's bosom and crushed him to the earth.

This was quite sufficient for Jim, who got up meekly when permitted, and
pleaded for mercy.  Mr Sharp told him that mercy was a commodity in
which he did not deal, that it was the special perquisite of judges,
from whom he might steal it if they would not give or sell it to him,
and, bidding him come along quietly, led him to the station, and locked
him up for the night.

Not satisfied with what he had already accomplished, Mr Sharp then
returned to his office, where he found the faithful Blunt awaiting him,
to whom he related briefly what he had done.

"Now," said he, in conclusion, "if we can only manage to clear up that
case of the beer-cask, we shall have done a good stroke of business
to-day.  Have you found out anything in regard to it?"

The case to which Mr Sharp referred was that of a cask of beer which
had been stolen from the line at a station not three miles distant from
Clatterby.

"Yes, sir," said David Blunt with a satisfied smile, "I have found out
enough to lead to the detection of the thief."

"Indeed, who d'ye think it is?"

"One of the men at the station, sir.  There have been two about it but
the other is a stranger.  You see, sir," continued Blunt, with an
earnest look, and in a business tone of voice, "when you sent me down to
investigate the case I went d'rect to the station-master there and heard
all he had to say about it--which wasn't much;--then off I goes to where
the truck was standin', from which the cask had bin taken and pottered
about there for some time.  At last I tried on the Red Indian dodge--
followed up tracks and signs, till at last I came upon a mark as if
somethin' had bin rolled along the bank, and soon traced it to a gap
broken through a hedge into a field.  I followed it up in the field, and
in a short time came on the cask itself.  Of course I made a careful
examination of the locality, and found very distinct foot-prints,
particularly one of 'em on a piece of clay as sharp as if it had been
struck in wax.  While thus engaged I found a shoe--"

"Ha!" exclaimed Mr Sharp.

"And here it is," said Blunt taking the shoe from under his chair and
laying it on the table.

The superintendent took it up, examined it and then replaced it on the
table with a nod, saying, "Proceed."

"Well, sir, of course I looked well for the other shoe, but didn't find
it; so I came away with what I had got, takin' care to place a lump of a
stone over the foot-print in the clay, so as to guard but not touch
it,--for it wasn't the print of _this_ shoe, sir, though somewhat like
it."

"Ha!" exclaimed Mr Sharp again.

After revolving the matter in his mind for some minutes, and consulting
with his satellite, Mr Sharp resolved to go down at once to the place
and watch the beer-cask.

"It is not very late yet," he said, "and these thirsty boys will be sure
to want a drop of beer to their supper to-night.  What makes you so sure
that Bill Jones is the thief?"

"Because," answered Blunt, "I observed that he was the only man at the
station that had on a pair of new shoes!"

"Well, come along," said Sharp, smiling grimly, "we shall find out
before long."

They soon reached the scene of the robbery, and were able to examine the
place by the light of the moon, which had just managed to pierce the
thick veil of clouds that had covered it during the earlier part of that
night.  Then they retired to a shady cavern, or hole, or hollow at the
foot of the embankment, near to the gap in the hedge, and there they
prepared to pass the night, with a heap of mingled clods and stones for
their couch, and an overhanging bank of nettles for their canopy.

It was a long weary watch that began.  There these patient men sat, hour
after hour, gazing at the moon and stars till they almost fell asleep,
and then entering into animated, though softly uttered, conversation
until they roused themselves up.  It was strange converse too, about
struggles and fights with criminals and the detection of crime.  But it
was not _all_ on such subjects.  No, they forsook the professional path
occasionally and strayed, as pleasantly as other men do, into the
flowery lanes of social life--talking of friends, and wives, and
children, and home, with as much pathos and tenderness as if their
errand that night had been to succour some comrade in distress, instead
of to watch like wolves, and pounce on unawares, and half throttle if
need be, and bear off to punishment, an erring fellow-mortal.

But no fellow-mortal came that night to be thus pounced on, throttled,
and borne off.  When it became obvious that there was no use in
remaining longer, Mr Sharp and his satellite returned to the office,
and the former bade the latter go home for the night.

The satellite, thus set free, went home and set immediately--in his bed.
The luminary himself postponed his setting for a time, put the thief's
shoe in his pocket and went straight to the residence of Bill Jones,
which he reached shortly after the grey dawn had appeared.  Here he
found Bill in bed; but being peremptory in his demand for admission,
Bill arose and let him in.

"You look rather pale this morning, Bill?"

"Bin at work late, sir," said Bill uneasily, observing that the
superintendent was casting an earnest glance all round his room.

Jones was a bachelor, so there wasn't much of any kind to look at in the
room.

"You've been treating yourself to a new pair of shoes, I see, Jones,
what have you done with the old ones?"

"I--they're worn-out, sir--I--"

"Yes, I see--ah! here is _one_ of them," said Mr Sharp, drawing an old
shoe out of a corner; "you don't require to look for the other, I've got
it here," he added, drawing its fellow from his pocket.

Jones stood aghast.

"Look here, Jones," said Mr Sharp, gazing sternly into the culprit's
face, "you needn't trouble yourself to deny the theft.  I haven't yet
looked at the sole of _this_ shoe, but I'll engage to tell how many
tackets are in it.  We have discovered a little lump of clay down near
the station, with a perfect impression of a sole having fifteen tackets
therein,--three being wanting on the right, side, two on the left, and
one at the toe--now, let us see," he said, turning it up, "am I not a
good prophet eh?"

Bill gave in at once!  He not only made "a clean breast of it," but also
gave information that led to the capture of his accomplice before that
day's sun went down, and before Mr Sharp allowed himself to go to bed.

Thus did our superintendent winnow the chaff from the wheat continually.

Now, dear reader, do not say, "From all this it would appear that
railway servants must be a bad lot of men!"  It would be a thousand
pities to fail into such an error, when we are labouring to prove to you
the very reverse, namely, that the bad ones being continually and well
"looked after," none but the good are left.  Our aim necessarily
involves that we should dilate much on evil, so that the evil
unavoidably bulks large in your eyes; but if we were capable of laying
before you all the good that is done, felt and said by the thousands of
our true-hearted men-of-the-line, the evil that is mingled with them
would shrink into comparative insignificance.

The truth is, that in writing these details we desire to reassure
ourself, as well as to comfort you, O timid railway traveller, by
asserting and illustrating the unquestionable fact, that if our dangers
on the line are numerous and great, our safeguards at all points are far
more numerous and much greater.



CHAPTER TWELVE.

LOO'S GARDEN.

The plans of nurses, not less than those of mice and men, are apt to get
into disorder.  Mrs Durby having packed up the diamond ring in the
careful manner which we have described in a previous chapter, essayed to
get ready for her important journey to London on pawning purposes
intent, but she found that there were so many little preparations to
make, both in regard to her own toilette and to the arrangements of Mrs
Tipps' establishment, in prospect of its being left without its first
mate for a time, that a considerable period elapsed before she got her
anchor tripped and herself ready to set sail with the first fair wind.
Worthy Mrs Durby, we may observe, was fond of quoting the late
captain's phraseology.  She was an affectionate creature, and liked to
recall his memory in this somewhat peculiar fashion.

In anticipation of this journey, Netta went one evening, in company with
Emma Lee, to pay Mrs John Marrot a friendly visit, ostensibly for the
purpose of inquiring after the health of baby Marrot, who, having
recently fallen down-stairs, swallowed a brass button and eaten an
unknown quantity of shoe-blacking, had been somewhat ailing.  The real
object of the visit however, was to ask Mrs Marrot to beg of her
husband to take a special interest in Mrs Durby on her journey, as that
excellent nurse had made up her mind to go by the train which he drove,
feeling assured that if safety by rail was attainable at all, it must be
by having a friend at court--a good and true man at the helm, so to
speak.

"But la, Miss!" said Mrs Marrot, sitting on the bed and patting the
baby, whose ruling passion, mischief, could not be disguised even in
distress, seeing that it gleamed from his glassy eyes and issued in
intermittent yells from his fevered throat, "if your nurse is of a
narvish temperment she'd better not go with my John, 'cause _he_ usually
drives the Flyin' Dutchman."

"Indeed!" said Netta, with a puzzled smile; "and pray, what is the
Flyin' Dutchman?"

A yell and a glare from baby interrupted the reply.  At the same instant
the 7:45 p.m. express flew past with a roar, which was intensified by
the whistle into a shriek as it neared the station.  The house trembled
as usual.  Netta, not unnaturally, shuddered.

"Don't be alarmed, Miss, it's only the express."

"Do expresses often pass your cottage in that way?" asked Netta, with a
touch of pity.

"Bless you, yes, Miss; they're always passin' day and night continooly;
but we don't think nothink of it.  We've got used to it now."

"Does it not disturb you at night?" asked Emma Lee in some surprise.

"No, Miss, it don't--not in the least.  No doubt it sometimes _do_
influence our dreams, if I may say so.  As my son Bob says--he's a
humorous boy is my Bob, Miss--he says, says he, the trains can't awaken
_us_, but they _do_ awaken noo trains of ideas, especially w'en they
stops right opposite the winder an' blows off steam, or whistles like
mad for five minutes at a time.  I sometimes think that Bob is right,
an' that's w'y baby have took to yellin' an' mischief with such a 'igh
'and.  They do say that a man is knowd by the company he keeps, and I'm
sure it's no wonder that baby should screech an' smash as he do,
considerin' the example set 'im day an' night by them ingines."

Here another yell from baby gave, as it were, assent to these opinions.

"But, as I was sayin'," continued Mrs Marrot, "the Flyin' Dutchman is
the name that my 'usband's train goes by, 'cause it is the fastest train
in the kingdom--so they say.  It goes at the rate of over sixty miles an
hour, an' ain't just quite the train for people as is narvish--though my
'usband do say it ain't more dangerous than other trains--not s'much so,
indeed, wich I believe myself, for there ain't nothink 'appened to my
John all the eight years he have drove it."

"Is sixty miles an hour _very_ much faster than the rate of ordinary
trains?" asked Emma.

"W'y, yes, Miss.  Or'nary trains they run between twenty and forty miles
an hour, though sometimes in goin' down inclines they git up to fifty;
but my 'usband _averages_ sixty miles an hour, an' on some parts o' the
line 'e gits up the speed to sixty-five an' siventy.  For my own part
I'm quite hignorant of these things.  To my mind all the ingines seem to
go bangin' an' rushin' an' yellin' about pretty much in the same furious
way; but I've often 'eard my 'usband explain it all, an' _he_ knows all
about it Miss, just as if it wor A, B, C."

Having discussed such matters a little longer, and entered with genuine
sympathy into the physical and mental condition of baby, Netta finally
arranged that her old nurse should go by the Flying Dutchman, seeing
that she would be unable to distinguish the difference of speed between
one train and another, while her mind would be at rest, if she knew
herself to be under the care of a man, in whom she could trust.

"Well, Miss, I dessay it won't much matter," said Mrs Marrot,
endeavouring to soothe the baby, in whom the button or the blacking
appeared to be creating dire havoc; "but of course my 'usband can't
attend to 'er 'isself, not bein' allowed to attend to nothink but 'is
ingine.  But he'll put 'er in charge of the guard, who is a very
'andsome man, and uncommon polite to ladies.  Stay, I'll speak to Willum
Garvie about it now," said Mrs Marrot, rising; "he's in the garding
be'ind."

"Pray don't call him in," said Netta, rising quickly; "we will go down
to him.  I should like much to see your garden."

"You'll find my Loo there, too," said Mrs Marrot with a motherly smile,
as she opened the door to let her visitors out.  "You'll excuse me not
goin' hout.  I dursn't leave that baby for a minute.  He'd be over the--
there he--"

The sentence was cut short by a yell, followed by a heavy bump, and the
door shut with a bang, which sent Emma and her friend round the corner
of the house in a highly amused frame of mind.

John Marrot's garden was a small one--so small that the break-van of his
own "Flyin' Dutchman" could have contained it easily--but it was not too
small to present a luxuriance, fertility, and brilliance of colour that
was absolutely magnificent!  Surrounded as that garden was by "ballast"
from the embankment, broken wheels and rail, bricks and stones, and
other miscellaneous refuse and _debris_ of the line, it could only be
compared to an oasis in the desert, or a bright gem on a rugged
warrior's breast.  This garden owed its origin to Lucy Marrot's love for
flowers, and it owed much of its magnificence to Will Garvie's love for
Lucy; for that amiable fireman spent much of his small wage in
purchasing seed and other things for the improvement of that garden, and
spent the very few hours of his life, not claimed by the inexorable iron
horse, in assisting to cultivate the same.

We use the word `assisting' advisedly, because Loo would not hear of his
taking this sort of work out of her hands.  She was far too fond of it
to permit that, but she had no objection whatever to his assistance.
There never was, so Will and Loo thought, anything like the love which
these two bore to each other.  Extremes meet, undoubtedly.  Their love
was so intensely matter of fact and earnest that it rose high above the
region of romance, in which lower region so many of our race do delight
to coo and sigh.  There was no nonsense about it.  Will Garvie, who was
naturally bold--no wonder, considering his meteor-like style of life--
saw all the flowers in the garden as well as any other man, and admired
them more than most men, but he said gravely that he wouldn't give the
end of a cracked boiler-tube for the whole garden, if she were not in
the midst of it.  At which Loo laughed heartily, and blushed with
pleasure, and made no other reply.

It was quite delightful to observe the earnestness with which these two
devoted themselves to the training of honeysuckle and jessamine over a
trellis-work porch in that preposterously small garden, in which there
was such a wealth of sweet peas, and roses, and marigolds, and
mignonette, and scarlet geraniums, and delicately-coloured heliotropes,
that it seemed as though they were making love in the midst of a glowing
furnace.  Gertie was there too, like a small female Cupid nestling among
the flowers.

"A miniature paradise," whispered Emma, with twinkling eyes, as they
