that will satisfy him. He can know afterward. I don't think he ought to
worry his lung with anything like this."

"She wont want a throne," said Rectus, turning the conversation from Mr.
Chipperton, "for she has a very good rocking-chair, which could be fixed
up."

"Yes," said I, "it could be cushioned. She might do it herself."

At this, the colored woman made a remark to the queen, but what it was
we did not know.

"Of course she could," said Corny. "Queens work. Queen Victoria etches
on steel."

"I don't believe Porker-miller can do that," said Rectus, "but I guess
she can pad her chair."

"Do thrones rock?" asked Corny.

"Some of 'em do," I said. "There was the throne of France, you know."

"Well, then, that will be all right," said Corny; "and how about a crown
and sceptre?"

"Oh, we wont want a sceptre," I said; "that sort of thing's pretty
old-fashioned. But we ought to have a crown, so as to make a difference
between her and the other people."

"How much are crowns?" asked Corny, in a thoughtful tone.

"Various prices," I answered; "but I think we can make one, that will do
very well, for about fifty cents. I'll undertake to make the brass part,
if you'll cushion it."

"Brass!" exclaimed Corny, in astonishment.

"You don't suppose we can get gold, do you?" I asked, laughing.

"Well, no," she said, but not quite satisfied.

"And there must be a flag and a flag-pole," said Rectus. "But what sort
of a flag are we going to have?"

"The African flag," said Corny, confidently.

None of us knew what the African flag was, although Corny suggested that
it was probably black. But I told her that if we raised a black flag
before the queen's palace, we should bring down the authorities on us,
sure. They'd think we had started a retail piratical establishment.

We now took leave of the queen, and enjoined her neighbor to impress on
her mind the necessity of not using her capital to lay in a new stock
of goods. Leaving a quarter of a dollar with her, for contingent
expenses during the day, we started for home.

"I'll tell you what it is," said I, "we must settle this matter of
revenue pretty soon. If she don't sell peppers and sugar-cane, she'll
have to be supported in some way, and I'm sure we can't do it."

"Her subjects ought to attend to that," said Rectus.

"But she hasn't got any yet," I answered.

"That's a fact," said Corny. "We must get her a few, to start with."

"Hire 'em, do you mean?" asked Rectus.

"No; call upon them in the name of their country and their queen," she
replied.

"I think it would be better, at first," said I, "to call upon them in
the name of about twopence a head. Then, when we get a nice little body
of adherents to begin with, the other subjects will fall in, of their
own accord, if we manage the thing right."

"There's where the emissary will come in," said Rectus. "She can collect
adherents."

"We must engage her this very day," said Corny. "And now, what about the
flag? We haven't settled that yet."

"I think," said I, "that we'd better invent a flag. When we get back to
the hotel, we can each draw some designs, and the one we choose can
easily be made up. We can buy the stuff anywhere."

"I'll sew it," said Corny.

"Do you think," said Rectus, who had been reflecting, "that the
authorities of this place will object to our setting up a queen?"

"Can't tell," I said. "But I hardly think they will. They don't object
to the black governor, and our queen wont interfere with them in any way
that I can see. She will have nothing to do with anybody but those
native Africans, who keep to themselves, anyway."

"If anybody should trouble us, who would it be? Soldiers or the
policemen? How many soldiers have they here?" asked Corny.

"There's only one company now in the barracks," said Rectus. "I was down
there. There are two men-of-war in the harbor, but one of them's a
Spanish vessel, and I'm pretty sure she wouldn't bother us."

"Is that all?" said Corny, in a tone of relief.

I didn't want to dash her spirits, but I remarked that there were a good
many policemen in the town.

"And they're all colored men," said Corny. "I'd hate to have any of them
coming after us."

"The governor of the colony is at the head of the army, police and all,
isn't he?" said Rectus.

"Yes," I answered.

"And I know where he lives," put in Corny. "Let's go and see him,
sometime, and ask him about it."

This was thought to be a good idea, and we agreed to consider it at our
next meeting.

"As to revenue," said Rectus, just before we reached the hotel, "I don't
believe these people have much money to give for the support of a
queen, and so I think they ought to bring in provisions. The whole thing
might be portioned out. She ought to have so many conchs a week, so many
sticks of sugar-cane, and so many yams and other stuff. This might be
fixed so that it wouldn't come hard on anybody."

Corny said she guessed she'd have to get a little book to put these
things down, so that we could consider them in order.

I could not help noticing that there was a good deal of difference
between Corny and Rectus, although they were much alike, too. Corny had
never learned much, but she had a good brain in her head, and she could
reason out things pretty well, when she had anything in the way of a
solid fact to start with. Rectus was better on things he'd heard
reasoned out. He seemed to know a good thing when it came before him,
and he remembered it, and often brought it in very well. But he hadn't
had much experience in reasoning on his own account, although he was
getting more in practice every day.

Corny was just as much in earnest as she was the first day we saw her,
but she seemed to have grown more thoughtful. Perhaps this was on
account of her having important business on hand. Her thoughtfulness,
however, did not prevent her from saying some very funny things. She
spoke first and did her thinking afterward. But she was a good girl, and
I often wished my sister knew her. Helen was older, to be sure, but she
could have learned a great deal from Corny.

That afternoon, we had a meeting up in the silk-cotton tree, and
Priscilla, who had sold out her small stock of flowers in the hotel-door
market, was requested to be present. A variety-show, consisting of about
a dozen young darkeys with their baskets and strings of sponges,
accompanied her up the steps; but she was ordered to rout them, and she
did it in short order. When we were alone, Rectus, as captain, began to
state to her what we desired of her; but he was soon interrupted by
Corny, who could do a great deal more talking in a given time than he
could, and who always felt that she ought to begin early, in order to
get through in good season.

"Now, Priscilla," said Corny, "in the first place, you must promise
never to tell what we are going to say to you."

Priscilla promised in a flash.

"We want you, then," continued Corny, "to act as our emissary, or
general agent, or errand-girl, if you don't know what the other two
things mean."

"I'll do dat, missy," said Priscilla. "Whar you want me to go?"

"Nowhere just now," said Corny. "We want to engage you by the day, to do
whatever we tell you."

"Cahn't do dat, missy. Got to sell flowers and roses. Sell 'em for de
fam'ly, missy."

"But in the afternoon you can come," said Corny. "There isn't any
selling done then. We'll pay you."

"How much?" asked Priscilla.

This question was referred to me, and I offered sixpence a day.

The money in this place is English, of course, as it is an English
colony; but there are so many visitors from the United States, that
American currency is as much in use, for large sums, as the
pounds-shillings-and-pence arrangement. But all sums under a quarter are
reckoned in English money,--pennies, half-pennies, four, six and
eight-pences, and that sort of thing. One of our quarters passes for a
shilling, but a silver dime wont pass in the shops. The darkeys will
take them--or almost anything else--as a gift. I didn't have to get our
money changed into gold. I got a draft on a Nassau house, and generally
drew greenbacks. But I saw, pretty plainly, that I couldn't draw very
much for this new monarchical undertaking, and stay in Nassau as long as
we had planned.

"A whole afternoon," exclaimed Priscilla, "for sixpence!"

"Why not?" I asked. "That's more than you generally make all day."

"Only sixpence!" said Priscilla, looking as if her tender spirit had
been wounded. Corny glanced at me with an air that suggested that I
ought to make a rise in the price, but I had dealt with these darkeys
before.

"That's all," I said.

"All right, then, boss," said Priscilla. "I'll do it. What you want me
to do?"

The colored people generally gave the name "boss" to all white men, and
I was pleased to see that Priscilla said boss to me much more frequently
than to Rectus.

We had a talk with her about her duties, and each of us had a good deal
to say. We made her understand--at least we hoped so--that she was to be
on hand, every afternoon, to go with Corny, if necessary, whenever we
went out on our trips to the African settlement; and, after giving her
an idea of what we intended doing with the queen,--which interested her
very much indeed, and seemed to set her on pins and needles to see the
glories of the new reign,--we commissioned her to bring together about
twenty sensible and intelligent Africans, so that we could talk to them,
and engage them as subjects for the re-enthroned queen.

"What's ole Goliah Brown goin' to say 'bout dat?" said Priscilla.

"Who's he?" we asked.

"He's de Afrikin gubner. He rule 'em all."

"Oh!" said Rectus, "he's all right. We're going to make him prime
minister."

I was not at all sure that he was all right, and proposed that Rectus
and I should go to his house in the evening, when he was at home, and
talk to him about it.

"Yes, and we'll all go and see the head governor to-morrow morning,"
said Corny.

We had our hands completely full of diplomatic business.

The meeting of the adherents was appointed for the next afternoon. We
decided to have it on the Queen's Stair-way, which is a long flight of
steps, cut in the solid limestone, and leading up out of a deep and
shadowy ravine, where the people of the town many years ago cut out the
calcareous material for their houses. There has been no stone cut here
for a long time, and the walls of the ravine, which stand up as straight
as the wall of a house, are darkened by age and a good deal covered up
by vines. At the bottom, on each side of the pathway which runs through
the ravine to the town, bushes and plants of various semi-tropical kinds
grow thick and close. At the top of the flight of stairs are open fields
and an old fort. Altogether, this was considered a quiet and suitable
place for a meeting of a band of revolutionists. We could not have met
in the silk-cotton tree, for we should have attracted too much
attention, and, besides, the hotel-clerk would have routed us out.




CHAPTER XII.

RECTUS LOSES RANK.


After supper, Rectus and I went to see the African governor, Goliah
Brown. He was a good-natured old colored man, who lived in a house a
trifle better than most of those inhabited by his fellow-countrymen. The
main room was of a fair size, and there was a centre-table, with some
books on it.

When we saw this, we hesitated. Could we ask a man who owned books, and
could probably read, to play second fiddle to a woman who could not
speak the English language, and who for years, perhaps, had devoted the
energies of her soul to the sale of pepper-pods?

However, the office of prime minister was no trifle, and many more
distinguished and more learned men than Goliah Brown have been glad to
get it. Besides this, we considered that blood is blood, and, in
monarchical countries, a queen is a queen. This was a colony of a
monarchy, and we would push forward the claims of Poqua-dilla the First.
We called her "The First," because, although she may have had a good
many ancestors of her name in Africa, she certainly started the line in
the Bahamas.

Goliah proved himself a steady-going talker. He seemed pleased to have
us call on him, and told us the whole story of the capture of himself
and the rest of the Africans. We had heard pretty much all of it before,
but, of course, we had to politely listen to it again.

When he finished, we asked a few questions about the queen, and finding
that Goliah admitted her claims to royal blood, we told him what we
proposed to do, and boldly asked him to take the position of prime
minister in the African community.

At first, he did not understand, and we had to go over the thing two or
three times before he saw into it. Then, it was evident that he could
not see what business this was of ours, and we had to explain our
