had attained a real artistic level, when their struggling culture came
into contact with the powerful Pictish nation. The Picts had also
reverted to flint, but had advanced more rapidly in the matter of
population and war-science. They had none of the Atlanteans' artistic
nature; they were a ruder, more practical, more prolific race. They left
no pictures painted or carved on ivory, as did their enemies, but they
left remarkably efficient flint weapons in plenty.

These stone-age kingdoms clashed, and in a series of bloody wars, the
outnumbered Atlanteans were hurled back into a state of savagery, and
the evolution of the Picts was halted. Five hundred years after the
Cataclysm the barbaric kingdoms have vanished. It is now a nation of
savages--the Picts--carrying on continual warfare with tribes of
savages--the Atlanteans. The Picts had the advantage of numbers and
unity, whereas the Atlanteans had fallen into loosely knit clans. That
was the west of that day.

In the distant east, cut off from the rest of the world by the heaving
up of gigantic mountains and the forming of a chain of vast lakes, the
Lemurians are toiling as slaves of their ancient masters. The far south
is still veiled in mystery. Untouched by the Cataclysm, its destiny is
still pre-human. Of the civilized races of the Thurian Continent, a
remnant of one of the non-Valusian nations dwells among the low
mountains of the southeast--the Zhemri. Here and there about the world
are scattered clans of apish savages, entirely ignorant of the rise and
fall of the great civilizations. But in the far north another people are
slowly coming into existence.

At the time of the Cataclysm, a band of savages, whose development was
not much above that of the Neanderthal, fled to the north to escape
destruction. They found the snow-countries inhabited only by a species
of ferocious snow-apes--huge shaggy white animals, apparently native to
that climate. These they fought and drove beyond the Arctic circle, to
perish, as the savages thought. The latter, then, adapted themselves to
their hardy new environment and throve.

After the Pictish-Atlantean wars had destroyed the beginnings of what
might have been a new culture, another, lesser cataclysm further altered
the appearance of the original continent, left a great inland sea where
the chain of lakes had been, to further separate west from east, and the
attendant earthquakes, floods and volcanoes completed the ruin of the
barbarians which their tribal wars had begun.

A thousand years after the lesser cataclysm, the western world is seen
to be a wild country of jungles and lakes and torrential rivers. Among
the forest-covered hills of the northwest exist wandering bands of
ape-men, without human speech, or the knowledge of fire or the use of
implements. They are the descendants of the Atlanteans, sunk back into
the squalling chaos of jungle-bestiality from which ages ago their
ancestors so laboriously crawled. To the southwest dwell scattered clans
of degraded, cave-dwelling savages, whose speech is of the most
primitive form, yet who still retain the name of Picts, which has come
to mean merely a term designating men--themselves, to distinguish them
from the true beasts with which they contend for life and food. It is
their only link with their former stage. Neither the squalid Picts nor
the apish Atlanteans have any contact with other tribes or peoples.

Far to the east, the Lemurians, levelled almost to a bestial plane
themselves by the brutishness of their slavery, have risen and destroyed
their masters. They are savages stalking among the ruins of a strange
civilization. The survivors of that civilization, who have escaped the
fury of their slaves, have come westward. They fall upon that mysterious
pre-human kingdom of the south and overthrow it, substituting their own
culture, modified by contact with the older one. The newer kingdom is
called Stygia, and remnants of the older nation seemed to have survived,
and even been worshipped, after the race as a whole had been destroyed.

Here and there in the world small groups of savages are showing signs of
an upward trend; these are scattered and unclassified. But in the north,
the tribes are growing. These people are called Hyborians, or Hybori;
their god was Bori--some great chief, whom legend made even more ancient
as the king who led them into the north, in the days of the great
Cataclysm, which the tribes remember only in distorted folklore.

They have spread over the north, and are pushing southward in leisurely
treks. So far they have not come in contact with any other races; their
wars have been with one another. Fifteen hundred years in the north
country have made them a tall, tawny-haired, grey-eyed race, vigorous
and warlike, and already exhibiting a well-defined artistry and poetism
of nature. They still live mostly by the hunt, but the southern tribes
have been raising cattle for some centuries. There is one exception in
their so far complete isolation from other races: a wanderer into the
far north returned with the news that the supposedly deserted ice wastes
were inhabited by an extensive tribe of ape-like men, descended, he
swore, from the beasts driven out of the more habitable land by the
ancestors of the Hyborians. He urged that a large war-party be sent
beyond the arctic circle to exterminate these beasts, whom he swore were
evolving into true men. He was jeered at; a small band of adventurous
young warriors followed him into the north, but none returned.

But tribes of the Hyborians were drifting south, and as the population
increased this movement became extensive. The following age was an epoch
of wandering and conquest. Across the history of the world tribes and
drifts of tribes move and shift in an everchanging panorama.

Look at the world five hundred years later. Tribes of tawny-haired
Hyborians have moved southward and westward, conquering and destroying
many of the small unclassified clans. Absorbing the blood of conquered
races, already the descendants of the older drifts have begun to show
modified racial traits, and these mixed races are attacked fiercely by
new, purer-blooded drifts, and swept before them, as a broom sweeps
debris impartially, to become even more mixed and mingled in the tangled
debris of races and tag-ends of races.

As yet the conquerors have not come in contact with the older races. To
the southeast the descendants of the Zhemri, given impetus by new blood
resulting from admixture with some unclassified tribe, are beginning to
seek to revive some faint shadow of their ancient culture. To the west
the apish Atlanteans are beginning the long climb upward. They have
completed the cycle of existence; they have long forgotten their former
existence as men; unaware of any other former state, they are starting
the climb unhelped and unhindered by human memories. To the south of
them the Picts remain savages, apparently defying the laws of Nature by
neither progressing nor retrogressing. Far to the south dreams the
ancient mysterious kingdom of Stygia. On its eastern borders wander
clans of nomadic savages, already known as the Sons of Shem.

Next to the Picts, in the broad valley of Zingg, protected by great
mountains, a nameless band of primitives, tentatively classified as akin
to the Shemites, has evolved an advanced agricultural system and
existence.

Another factor has added to the impetus of Hyborian drift. A tribe of
that race has discovered the use of stone in building, and the first
Hyborian kingdom has come into being--the rude and barbaric kingdom of
Hyperborea, which had its beginning in a crude fortress of boulders
heaped to repel tribal attack. The people of this tribe soon abandoned
