
11. What advantages are derived from the use of cooked food?

12. State the advantages of drinking pure water.

13. If all the food that one needs to take at a single meal can be
thoroughly masticated in fifteen minutes, why is it better to spend a
longer time at the table?

14. What is meant by the overlapping of meals? What bad results follow?
How avoided?



PRACTICAL WORK


Examine a dissectible model of the human abdomen (Fig. 75), noting the
form, location, and connection of the different organs. Find the
connection of the esophagus with the stomach, of the stomach with the
small intestine, and of the small intestine with the large intestine.
Sketch a general outline of the cavity, and locate in this outline its
chief organs.

Where it is desirable to learn something of the actual structure of the
digestive organs, the dissection of the abdomen of some small animal is
necessary. On account of unpleasant features likely to be associated with
such a dissection, however, this work is not recommended for immature
pupils.

                                [Fig. 75]


      Fig. 75--Model for demonstrating the abdomen and its contents.


*Dissection of the Abdomen.* (Optional)--For individual study, or for a
small class, a half-grown cat is perhaps the best available material. It
should be killed with chloroform, and then stretched, back downward, on a
board, the feet being secured to hold it in place.

The teacher should make a preliminary examination of the abdomen to see
that it is in a fit condition for class study. If the bladder is
unnaturally distended, its contents may be forced out by slight pressure.
The following materials will be needed during the dissection, and should
be kept near at hand: a sharp knife with a good point, a pair of heavy
scissors, a vessel of water, some cotton or a damp sponge, and some fine
cord. During the dissection the specimen should be kept as clean as
possible, and any escaping blood should be mopped up with the cotton or
the sponge. The dissection is best carried out by observing the following
order:

1. Cut through the abdominal wall in the center of the triangular space
where the ribs converge. From here cut a slit downward to the lower
portion of the abdomen, and sideward as far as convenient. Tack the
loosened abdominal walls to the board, and proceed to study the exposed
parts. Observe the muscles in the abdominal walls, and the fold of the
_peritoneum_ which forms an apron-like covering over the intestines.

2. Observe the position of the stomach, liver, spleen, and intestines, and
then, by pushing the intestines to one side, find the kidneys and the
bladder.

3. Study the liver with reference to its location, size, shape, and color.
On the under side, find the gall bladder, from which a small tube leads to
the small intestine. Observe the portal vein as it passes into the liver.
As the liver is filled with blood, neither it nor its connecting blood
vessels should be cut at this time.

4. Trace out the continuity of the canal. Find the esophagus where it
penetrates the diaphragm and joins the stomach. Find next the union of the
stomach with the small intestine. Then, by carefully following the coils
of the small intestine, discover its union with the large intestine.

5. Within the first coil of the small intestine, as it leaves the stomach,
find the _pancreas_. Note its color, size, and branches. Find its
connection with the small intestine.

6. Beginning at the cut portion of the abdominal wall, lift the thin
lining of the peritoneum and carefully follow it toward the back and
central portion of the abdomen. Observe whether it extends back of or in
front of the kidneys, the aorta, and the inferior vena cava. Find where it
leaves the wall as a _double_ membrane, the _mesentery_, which surrounds
and holds in place the large and small intestines. Sketch a coil of the
intestine, showing the mesentery.

7. Find in the center of the coils of small intestine a long, slender body
having the appearance of a gland. This is the beginning of the _thoracic
duct_ and is called the _receptacle of the chyle_. From this the thoracic
duct rapidly narrows until it forms a tiny tube difficult to trace in a
small animal.

8. Cut away about two inches of the small intestine from the remainder,
having first tied the tube on the two sides of the section removed. Split
it open for a part of its length, and wash out its contents. Observe its
coats. Place it in a shallow vessel containing water, and examine the
mucous membrane with a lens to find the _villi_. Make a drawing of this
section, showing the coats.

9. Study the connection of the small intestine with the large. Split them
open at the place of union, wash out the contents, and examine the
ileo-caecal valve.

10. Observe the size, shape, and position of the kidneys. Do they lie in
front of or back of the peritoneum? Do they lie exactly opposite each
other? Note the connection of each kidney with the aorta and the inferior
vena cava by the renal artery and the renal vein. Find a slender tube, the
_ureter_, running from each kidney to the bladder. Do the ureters connect
with the top or with the base of the bladder? Show by a sketch the
connection of the kidneys with the large blood vessels and the bladder.

*To demonstrate the Teeth.*--Procure from the dentist a collection of
different kinds of teeth, both sound and decayed.

(_a_) Examine external surfaces of different kinds of teeth, noting
general shape, cutting or grinding surfaces, etc. Make a drawing of an
incisor and also of a molar.

(_b_) After soaking some of the teeth for a couple of days in warm water
saw one of them in two lengthwise, and another in two crosswise, and
smooth the cut surfaces with fine emery or sand paper. Examine both kinds
of sections, noting arrangement and extent of dentine, enamel, and pulp.
Make drawings.

(_c_) Examine a decayed tooth. Which substance of the tooth appears to
decay most readily? Why is it necessary to cut away a part of the tooth
before filling?

(_d_) Test the effect of acids upon the teeth by leaving a tooth over
night in a mixture of one part hydrochloric acid to four parts water, and
by leaving a second tooth for a couple of days in strong vinegar. Examine
the teeth exposed to the action of acids, noting results.

*To show the Importance of Mastication.*--Fill two tumblers each half full
of water. Into one put a lump of rock salt. Into the other place an equal
amount of salt that has been finely pulverized. Which dissolves first and
why?

*To illustrate Acid and Alkaline Reactions.*--To a tumbler half full of
water add a teaspoonful of hydrochloric or other acid, as vinegar. To a
second tumbler half full of water add an equal amount of cooking soda.
Taste each liquid, noting the sour taste of the acid, and the alkaline
taste of the soda. Hold a piece of red litmus paper in the soda solution,
noting that it is turned blue. Then hold a piece of blue litmus paper in
the acid solution, noting that it is turned red. Add acid to the soda
solution, and soda to the acid solution, until the conditions are
reversed, testing with the red and blue litmus papers.

Hold, for a minute or longer, a narrow strip of red litmus paper in the
mouth, noting any change in the color of the paper. Repeat, using blue
litmus paper. What effect, if any, has the saliva upon the color of the
papers? Has the mouth an acid or an alkaline reaction?

*To show the Action of Saliva on Starch.*--1 (Optional). Prepare starch
paste by mixing half a teaspoonful of starch in half a pint of water and
heating the mixture to boiling. Place some of this in a test tube and thin
it by adding more water. Then add a small drop of iodine solution (page
136) to the solution of starch. It should turn a deep blue color. This is
the test for starch.

Now collect from the mouth, in a clean test tube, two or three
teaspoonfuls of saliva. Add portions of this to small amounts of fresh
starch solution in two test tubes. Let the tubes stand for five or ten
minutes surrounded by water having about the temperature of the body. Test
for changes that have occurred as follows:

(_a_) To one tube add a little of the iodine solution. If it does not turn
blue, it shows that the starch has been converted into some other
substance by the saliva, (_b_) To the other tube add a few drops of a very
dilute solution of copper sulphate. Then add sodium (or potassium)
hydroxide, a few drops at a time, until the precipitate which first forms
dissolves and turns a deep blue. Then gradually heat the upper portion of
the liquid to boiling. If it turns an orange or yellowish red color, the
presence of a form of sugar (maltose or dextrose) is proved. See page 136.

2. Hold some powdered starch in the mouth until it completely dissolves
and observe that it gradually acquires a sweetish taste. This shows the
change of starch into sugar.

*To illustrate the Action of the Gastric Juice.*--Add to a tumbler two
thirds full of water as much scale pepsin (obtained from a drug store) as
will stay on the end of the large blade of a penknife. Then add enough
hydrochloric acid to give a slightly sour taste. Place in the artificial
gastric juice thus prepared some boiled white of egg which has been finely
divided by pressing it through a piece of wire gauze. Also drop in a
single large lump. Keep in a warm place (about the temperature of the
body) for several hours or a day, examining from time to time. What is the
general effect of the artificial gastric juice upon the egg?

*To illustrate Effect of Alcohol upon Gastric Digestion.*--Prepare a
tumbler half full of artificial gastric juice as in the above experiment,
and add 10 cubic centimeters of this to each of six clean test tubes
bearing labels. To five of the tubes add alcohol from a burette as
follows: (1) .5 c.c., (2) 1 c.c., (3) 1.5 c.c., (4) 2 c.c., and (5) 3
c.c., leaving one tube without alcohol. Now add to each tube about 1/4
gram of finely divided white of egg from the experiment above, and place
all of the tubes in a beaker half full of water. Keep the water a little
above the temperature of the body for several hours, examining the tubes
at intervals to note the progress of digestion. Inferences.




CHAPTER XI - ABSORPTION, STORAGE, AND ASSIMILATION


The dissolved nutrients, to reach the cells, must be transferred from the
alimentary canal to the blood stream. This process is known as
_absorption_. In general, absorption means the penetration of a liquid
into the pores of a solid, and takes place according to the simple laws of
molecular movements. The absorption of food is, however, not a simple
process, and the passage takes place through an _active_ (living)
membrane. Another difference is that certain foods undergo chemical change
while being absorbed.

*Small Intestine as an Organ of Absorption.*--While absorption may occur to
a greater or less extent along the entire length of the alimentary canal,
most of it takes place at the small intestine. Its great length, its small
diameter, and its numerous blood vessels all adapt the small intestine to
the work of absorption. The transverse folds in the mucous membrane, by
retarding the food in its passage and by increasing the absorbing surface,
also aid in the process. But of greatest importance are the minute
elevations that cover the surface of the mucous membrane, known as

*The Villi.*--Each single elevation, or villus, has a length of about one
fiftieth of an inch and a diameter about half as great (_A_, Fig. 76), and
contains the following essential parts:

1. An outer layer of epithelial cells, resting upon a connective tissue
support.

2. A small lymph tube, called a _lacteal_, which occupies the center of
the villus and connects at the base with other lymph tubes, also called
lacteals (_B_, Fig. _76_).

3. A network of capillaries.

The villi are structures especially adapted to the work of absorption, and
they are found only in the small intestine. The mucous membrane in all
parts of the canal, however, is capable of taking up some of the digested
materials.

                                [Fig. 76]


Fig. 76--*The villi.* _A._ Diagram of a small section of mucous membrane of
      small intestine. 1. Villi. 2. Small glands, called _crypts_.

 _B._ Diagram showing structure of villi. 1. Small artery. 2. Lacteal. 3.
Villus showing termination of the lacteal. 4. Villus showing capillaries.
5. Villus showing both the lacteal and the capillaries. 6. Small vein. 7.
                        Layer of epithelial cells.


*Work of Capillaries and Lacteals.*--The capillaries and lacteals act as
receivers of material as it passes through the layer of epithelial cells
covering the mucous membrane. The lacteals take up the digested fats,(66)
and the capillaries receive all the other kinds of nutrients. These
vessels do not, of course, retain the absorbed materials, but pass them
on. Their final destination is the general circulation, which they reach
by two well-defined channels, or routes.

*Routes to the Circulation.*--The two routes from the place of absorption
to the general circulation are as follows:

1. _Route taken by the Fat._--The fat is conveyed by the lacteals from the
villi to the receptacle of the chyle. At this place it mingles with the
lymph from the lower parts of the body, and with it passes through the
thoracic duct to the left subclavian vein. Here it enters the general
circulation. Thus, to reach the general circulation, the fat has to pass
through the villi, the lacteals, the receptacle of the chyle, and the
thoracic duct (Fig. 77). Its passage through these places, like the
movements in all lymph vessels, is slow, and it is only gradually admitted
to the blood stream.

                                [Fig. 77]


 Fig. 77--*Diagram of routes* from food canal to general circulation. See
                                  text.


2. _Route of All the Nutrients except Fat._--Water and salts and the
digested proteids and carbohydrates, in passing into the capillaries, mix
there with the blood. But this blood, instead of flowing directly to the
heart, is passed through the portal vein to the liver, where it enters a
_second set of capillaries_ and is brought very near the liver cells. From
the liver it is passed through the hepatic veins into the inferior vena
cava, and by these it is emptied into the right auricle. This route then
includes the capillaries in the mucous membrane of the stomach and
intestines, the branches of the portal vein, the portal vein proper, the
liver, and the hepatic veins (Fig. 77). In passing through the liver, a
large portion of the food material is temporarily retained for a purpose
and in a manner to be described later (page 177).

*Absorption Changes.*--During digestion the insoluble foods are converted
into certain soluble materials, such as peptones, maltose, and
glycerine,--the conversion being necessary to their solution. A natural
supposition is that these materials enter and become a part of the blood,
but examination shows them to be absent from this liquid. (See Composition
of the Blood, page 30.) There are present in the blood, however,
substances closely related to the peptones, maltose, glycerine, etc.;
substances which have in fact been formed from them. During their transfer
from the food canal, the dissolved nutrients undergo changes, giving rise
to the materials in the blood. Thus are the serum albumin and serum
globulin of the blood derived from the peptones and proteoses; the
dextrose, from the maltose and other forms of sugar; and the fat droplets,
from the glycerine, fatty acid, and soluble soap.

While considerable doubt exists as to the cause of these changes and as to
the places also where some of them occur, their purpose is quite apparent.
The materials forming the dissolved foods, although adapted to absorption,
are not suited to the needs of the body, and if introduced in this form
are likely to interfere with its work.(67) They are changed, therefore,
into the forms which the body can use.

*A Second Purpose of Digestion.*--Comparing the digestive changes with
those of absorption, it is found that they are of a directly opposite
nature; that while digestion is a process of tearing down, or
separating,--one which reduces the food to a more finely divided
condition--there is in absorption a process of building up. From the
comparatively simple compounds formed by digestion, there are formed
during absorption the more complex compounds of the blood. The one
exception is dextrose, which is a simple sugar; but even this is combined
in the liver and the muscles to form the more complex compound known as
glycogen. (See Methods of Storage, below.) These facts have suggested a
second purpose of digestion--that of reducing foods to forms sufficiently
simple to enable the body to construct out of them the more complex
materials that it needs. Evidence that digestion serves such a purpose is
found in the fact that both proteids and carbohydrates are reduced to a
simpler form than is necessary for dissolving them.(68)

*The Storage of Nutriment.*--For some time after the taking of a meal, food
materials are being absorbed more rapidly than they can be used by the
cells. Following this is an interval when the body is taking no food, but
during which the cells must be supplied with nourishment. It also happens
that the total amount of food absorbed during a long interval may be in
excess of the needs of the cells during that time; and it is always
possible, as in disease, that the quantity absorbed is not equal to that
consumed. To provide against emergencies, and to keep up a uniform supply
of food to the cells, it is necessary that the body store up nutrients in
excess of its needs.

*Methods of Storage.*--The general plan of storage varies with the
different nutrients as follows:

1. _The carbohydrates_ are stored in the form of _glycogen_. This, as
already stated (page 120), is a substance closely resembling starch. It is
stored in the cells of both the liver and the muscles, but mainly in the
liver (Fig. 78). It is a chief function of the liver to collect the excess
of dextrose from the blood passing through it, and to convert it into
glycogen, which it then stores within its cells. It does not, however,
separate all of the dextrose from the blood, a small amount being left for
supplying the immediate needs of the tissues. As this is used, the
glycogen in the liver is changed back to dextrose and, dissolving, again
finds its way into the blood. In this way, the amount of dextrose in the
blood is kept practically constant. The carbohydrates are stored also by
converting them into fat.

                                [Fig. 78]


  Fig. 78--*Liver cells* where is stored the glycogen. _C._ Capillaries.


                                [Fig. 79]


  Fig. 79--*Stored-up fat.* The figure shows four connective tissue cells
 containing small particles of fat. 1. Nucleus. 2. Protoplasm. 3. Fat. 4.
                        Connective tissue fibers.


2. _The fat_ is stored for the most part in the connective tissue. Certain
of the connective tissue cells have the property of taking fat from the
blood and of depositing it within their inclosing membranes (Fig. 79).
When this is done to excess, and the cells become filled with fat, they
form the so-called _adipose tissue_. Most of this tissue is found under
the skin, between the muscles, and among the organs occupying the
abdominal cavity. If one readily takes on fat, it may also collect in the
connective tissue around the heart. The stored-up fat is redissolved as
needed, and enters the blood, where it again becomes available to the
active cells.

3. _The proteids_ form a part of all the tissues, and for this reason are
stored in larger quantities than any of the other food substances. The
large amount of proteid found in the blood may also be looked upon as
storage material. The proteids in the various tissues are spoken of as
_tissue proteids_, and those in the blood as _circulating proteids_. The
proteids of the tissues serve the double purpose of forming a working part
of the cell protoplasm, and of supplying reserve food material. That they
are available for supplying energy, and are properly regarded as _storage
material_, is shown by the rapid loss of proteid in starving animals. When
the proteids are eaten in excess of the body's need for rebuilding the
tissues, they are supposed to be broken up in such a manner as to form
glycogen and fat, which may then be stored in ways already described.

*General Facts Relating to Storage.*--The form into which the food is
converted for storage in the body is that of _solids_--the form that takes
up the least amount of space. These solids are of such a nature that they
can be changed back into their former condition and, by dissolving,
reenter the blood.

Only energy-yielding foods are stored. Water and salts, though they may be
absorbed in excess of the needs of the body, are not converted into other
substances and stored away. Oxygen, as already stated (page 108), is not
stored. The interval of storage may be long or short, depending upon the
needs of the body. In the consumption of stored material the glycogen is
used first, then as a rule the fat, and last of all the proteids.

*Storage in the Food Canal.*--Not until three or four hours have elapsed
are all the nutrients, eaten at a single meal, digested and passed into
the body proper. The undigested food is held in reserve, awaiting
digestion, and is only gradually absorbed as this process takes place. It
may properly, on this account, be regarded as _stored material_. That such
storage is of advantage is shown by the observed fact that substances
which digest quickly (sugar, dextrin, "predigested foods," etc.) do not
supply the needs of the body so well as do substances which, like starch
and proteids, digest slowly. Even substances digesting quite slowly
(greasy foods and pastry), since they can be stored longer in the food
canal, may be of real advantage where, from hard work or exposure, the
body requires a large supply of energy for some time. These "stay by" the
laborer, giving him strength after the more easily digested foods have
been used up. Storage by the food canal is limited chiefly to the stomach.

*Regulation of the Food Supply to the Cells.*--The storage of food
materials is made to serve a second purpose in the plan of the body which
is even more important than that of supplying nourishment to the cells
during the intervals when no food is being taken. It is largely the means
whereby the rate of supply of materials to the cells is regulated. The
cells obtain their materials from the lymph, and the lymph is supplied
from the blood. Should food substances, such as sugar, increase in the
blood beyond a low per cent, they are converted into a form, like
glycogen, in which they are held in reserve, or, for the time being,
placed beyond the reach of the cells. When, however, the supply is
reduced, the stored-up materials reenter the blood and again become
available to the cells. By this means their rate of supply to the cells is
practically constant.

We are now in a position to understand why carbohydrates, fats, and
proteids are so well adapted to the needs of the body, while other
substances, like alcohol, which may also liberate energy, prove injurious.
It is because foods are of such a chemical nature that they are adapted in
all respects to the body plan of taking up and using materials, while the
other substances are lacking in some particular.

                                [Fig. 80]


    Fig. 80--*Diagrams illustrating the relation of nutrients* and the
 non-relation of these to alcohol. _A._ Inter-relation and convertibility
           of proteids, fats, and carbohydrates (after Hall).

_B._ Diagram showing disposition of alcohol if this substance is taken in
  quantity corresponding to that of the nutrients (F.M.W.). The alcohol
         thrown off as waste is unoxidized and yields no energy.


*Why Alcohol is not a Food.*--If the passage of alcohol through the body is
followed, it is seen, in the first place, that it is a simple liquid and
undergoes no digestive change; and in the second place, that it is rapidly
absorbed from the stomach in both weak and concentrated solutions. This
introduces it quickly into the blood, and once there, it diffuses rapidly
into the lymph and then into the cells. Since the body cannot store
alcohol or convert it into some nutrient that can be stored (Fig. 80),
_there is no way of_ _regulating the amount that shall be present in the
blood, or of supplying it to the cells as their needs require_. They must
take it in excess of their needs, regardless of the effect, at least until
the organs of excretion can throw off the surplus as waste. Compared with
proteid, carbohydrates, or fats, alcohol is an _unmanageable_ substance in
the body. Attempting to use it as a food is as foolish as trying to burn
gasolene or kerosene in an ordinary wood stove. It may be done to a
limited extent, but is an exceedingly hazardous experiment. Not being
adapted to the body method of using materials, alcohol cannot be classed
as a food.

*Assimilation.*--Digestion, absorption, circulation, and storage of foods
are the processes that finally make them available to the cells in the
different parts of the body. There still remains another process for these
materials to undergo before they serve their final purposes. This last
process, known as _assimilation_, is the appropriation of the food
material by the cell protoplasm. In a sense the storage of fat by
connective tissue cells and of glycogen by the liver cells is
assimilation. The term is limited, however, to the disposition of material
with reference to its final use. Whether all the materials used by the
cells actually become a part of the protoplasm is not known. It is known,
however, that the cells are the places where most of the oxidations of the
body occur and that materials taking part in these oxidations must, at
least, come in close contact with the protoplasm. Assimilation, then, is
the last event in a series of processes by which oxygen, food materials,
and cell protoplasm are brought into close and _active_ relations. The
steps leading up to assimilation are shown in Table II.

                  TABLE II. THE PASSAGE OF MATERIALS TO THE CELLS
MATERIALS     DIGESTION     ABSORPTION     ROUTE TO       STORAGE       CONDITION
                                           THE GENERAL                  IN THE
                                           CIRCULATION                  BLOOD
Proteids      Changed       In passing     Through the    Become a      As proteids
              into          into the       portal vein    part of the   in
              proteoses     capillaries,   to the         protoplasm    colloidal
              and           the            liver and      of all the    solution.
              peptones by   proteoses      from there     cells.
              the action    and            through the
              of the        peptones       hepatic
              gastric and   change into    veins into
              pancreatic    the            the
              juices.       proteids of    inferior
                            the blood.     vena cava.
Fat           Changed       In passing     Through the    As fat in     Chiefly as
              into fatty    into the       lacteals to    the cells     minute oil
              acid,         lacteals,      the            of            droplets.
              glycerine,    the            thoracic       collective
              and           glycerine      duct, by       tissue.
              soluable      unites with    which it is
              soap by the   the soluable   emptied
              bile and      soap and       into the
              pancreatic    fatty acid     left
              juice.        to form the    subclavian
                            oil droplets   vein.
                            of the
                            blood.
Starch        Reduced to    Enters the     Through the    As glycogen   As dextrose
              some of the   capillaries    portal         chiefly by    in
              different     as dextrose.   vein,          the liver,    solution.
              forms of                     liver,         but to some
              sugar, as                    hepatic        extent by
              maltose,                     veins, into    muscle
              dextrose,                    inferior       cells.
              etc.                         vena cava.
Water         Undergoes     Taken up by    Both           Is not        As the
              no change.    both the       routes, but    stored in     water which
                            lacteals and   mostly by      the sense     serves as a
                            capillaries,   way of the     that energy   carrier of
                            but to the     liver.         foods are.    all the
                            greater                                     other
                            extent by                                   constituents
                            the                                         of the
                            capilaries.                                 blood.
Common salt   Undergoes     Taken up by    By way of      Not stored.   In solution.
              no change.    the            portal
                            capillaries    vein,
                            without        liver, and
                            undergoing     hepatic
