labored in the engine-room, where the two scientists were
toiling.  As this rendered it unnecessary for Washington to be
there, the colored man went to his kitchen, while Andy again made
a vain search of the projectile, looking for the crazy man.

Though Mr. Roumann had provided duplicates of the power plates
for the Etherium motor, it was quite a task to take out the
broken pieces and insert the new ones.

"Can't you run the atmospheric motor while we're fixing this
one?" asked Jack.  "That would prevent us falling, I should
think."

"No, for the reason that there is no atmosphere for it to work
on," declared Mr. Roumann.  "But don't worry.  We shall soon be
under way again.  We will be somewhat delayed in reaching Mars,
that is all."

They labored hard all the rest of that day and part of what
corresponded to the night, though of course the daylight outside
never ceased.  Little of it could penetrate the projectile,
however, for the big car was all sealed up, save for the
observation window in the pilot house and one on the side.

"There," announced Mr. Roumann, after inserting the last new
plate.  "I think we are all right."

It had been nearly eighteen hours since the motor had so suddenly
stopped.

"Will you start it now?" asked Jack.

"Yes.  I wish you and Mark would go to the pilot house and turn
on the power.  Do it very slowly.  Mr. Henderson and I will stay
here and see how the motor behaves."

It was an anxious moment when the power was turned on the
repaired machinery, but, to the delight of all, the motor again
began to give out the mysterious force.  The projectile ceased to
fall, and once more was hurled onward.

"That's the stuff!" cried Jack, as he noted the needle of the
indicator moving around, showing that they were again headed for
Mars.

Once more they were shooting through the ether.  The wonderful
motor worked even better with the new plates, and Mr. Roumann
said they had increased their speed about twenty-five percent.

"So we will soon make up for what we lost," he added.

They were all tired that night, for the work of making the
repairs had not been easy, and Andy had gone over the whole
projectile many times, looking for the hidden insane man.

"I don't believe he can be here," was Mr. Henderson's opinion.

"He certainly is," declared Mr. Roumann, "and we shall have more
trouble from him."

"I hope not," ventured Professor Henderson.

It was on the second day after the accident, when the Annihilator
was speeding along, that Jack and Mark, who were in the pilot
house with Mr. Roumann, noticed a peculiar trembling of one of
the needles on a dial designed to indicate the nearness of
heavenly bodies.

"We're coming close to something," said Jack.

"We certainly are," admitted the scientist, with an anxious look
at the instrument.

"Maybe it's Mars," suggested Mark.

"No, it can't be that planet."

"What is it?" inquired Jack.  "Look, the needle went all the way
around that time."

Mr. Roumann bent over the gauge.  Then he consulted some charts of
the sky, and made a few calculations.

"Boys, I am afraid we're approaching a large comet," he said
gravely.  "And, what is worse, it is attracting us toward itself.
We are in great danger!"




CHAPTER XIX

ESCAPING A COMET


The two boys looked at the German scientist. He was gazing, as if
fascinated, at the swiftly moving needle of the gage that had
told of the nearness of the comet.

"How far from it are we?" asked Jack.

"Many thousands of miles," replied Mr. Roumann.  "But that
distance is nothing compared to the rate at which we are
traveling.  We are almost certain to crash into it, or the comet
will collide with us."

"And when it does, what will happen?" inquired Mark quietly.

"That is hard to say," was the answer of the German.  "We know
very little about the composition of comets.  They may be
composed merely of flaming gasses, or they may be a train of
burning meteors, held together by attraction.  The head may be
some vast, blazing world, as large as our planet.  In fact,
comets are very baffling to astronomers."

"Well, if a comet is nothing but gas, it won't hurt if we run
into it, will it?" inquired Jack.

"That's just the trouble.  We don't know that it is gas," said
Mr. Roumann.  "It may be solid, and then to rush into it at
terrific speed would mean that we would be demolished.  Also, if
the gas is flaming, you can easily imagine what would happen to
the Annihilator.  There would be nothing left of it--or us--in
less than an instant."

"But isn't there some way of escaping it?" asked Mark.

"I'm going to try," responded Mr. Roumann.  "Jack, ask Professor
Henderson to step here.  I wish to consult him."

Jack delivered the message, and it was overheard by Washington
White.  Something in Jack's manner told the colored man that
there was trouble aboard.

"What's de mattah?" he asked.

Jack saw no reason for concealing the danger from the cook.

"We're heading into a comet," he, said.

"What?  One ob dem tings wid long, fiery tails, Massa Jack?"

The youth nodded.

"Am we gwine t' hit it?"

"I'm afraid so."

"Well, I hopes we does!" exclaimed Washington with great
earnestness.  "I hopes we knocks it clean outen de universe,
dat's what I hopes."

"We're a great deal more likely to be knocked out ourselves,
Wash."

"No, sah!  Don't yo' believe anyt'ing like dat!" exclaimed the
colored man.  "I know dis airship.  I helped build it, an' it's
de strongest one de perfesser eber made.  A comet won't be one,
two, six wid it.  We'll jest knock a piece of his tail off, at's
what we'll do.  I don't laik comets.  Dey allers brings bad luck.
Onct, when I was a young feller, I had a ten-dollar gold piece.
Dat same year a comet was observed, an' de fust t'ing I knowed
somebody done up an' stole mah ten-dollar gold piece.  Comets
brings bad luck, an' I knows it; Golly!  I want t' see one ob 'em
busted all t' pieces."

"I guess you don't appreciate the danger," said Jack gravely, as
he followed Professor Henderson back to the pilot room, where the
two scientists began to consult.

"We have decided on a plan, Mr. Henderson and myself," said Mr.
Roumann.  "The fact that so little is certainly known concerning
comets makes it difficult to know what to do.  We might keep on
our course and come to no harm, merely pawing through a gaseous
mass which makes up the comet's tail.  But there is a danger that
we might strike the solid head of it, for that the head is solid,
and of a glowing, fiery mass, which gives off a train of sparks,
is my belief.  To collide with a fiery ball, larger than the sun,
would indeed be terrible.  So we have decided to try to pass
through the less dense part the tail of the comet."

"Can't we steer to one side, or above or below the comet?" asked
Jack.

"Impossible," replied Mr. Roumann.  "We have made some calculations,
and have ascertained that this is Donati's comet--the one of 1858--and
the head of it is two hundred and fifty thousand miles in diameter.
The tail is many millions of miles long, and as many thick.  To pass
entirely beyond it would consume much time.  In fact, we could not move
quickly enough to escape it, as we are now being attracted out of our
course toward the comet."

"How far off is it now?" asked Mark.

"About seven hundred and twenty thousand miles."

"Then we'll be up to it in about two hours," went on Mark, making
a rapid calculation.

"I only hope we don't get into it, as well as up to it,"
commented Jack.

"We all do," observed Mr. Henderson.  "But now, boys, we are
going to do our best to escape.  Mr. Roumann will remain in the
pilot house to steer the projectile, while you and I will attend
to the Etherium, motor."

"Try and see if you can get any more speed out of it," advised
the German.  "Use the accelerator plates, as I instructed you.
Perhaps we can pass so quickly through the gaseous tail, or a
portion of it, that we shall not be harmed."

"Even if it blazes?" asked Jack.

"Even if it blazes.  The gas between the two shells of our
projectile will absorb an enormous quantity of heat.  It is our
only hope."

Their hearts filled with apprehension, the two boys accompanied
Professor Henderson back to the engine-room.  There the scientist
changed the plates on the motor, and made some adjustments, as
suggested by Mr. Roumann, so that more speed would develop.
Anxiously they watched the gages, to see if the motor did work
any faster.

"It's increasing!" cried Jack, as he watched the needle swing,
until it indicated a rate of one hundred and thirty miles a
second.  "We are going faster than we ever went before."

"And we need to," observed Mr. Henderson.  "A comet is a terrible
mass to escape from."

In spite of the increased speed of the projectile, it could not
be noticed by those within it.  For all they could tell they were
stationary, but they were really flying through the ether at
enormous velocity.  For over an hour the motor was worked at the
increased rate.  Then, leaving the boys in charge for a few
minutes, Mr. Henderson went to the pilot house to ask Mr. Roumann
if there was any chance of escape.  He met the German coming
toward the engine-room.

"Well?" inquired the professor.

"No, not well--bad," was the gloomy answer.

"Why so?"

"I can't force the Annihilator to one side or the other.  I have
tried, time and again, to steer it away from the comet's head and
into the less dense part of the tail, but, so far, without
success.  The rudder arrangement appears to be affected by the
comet and will not work."

"What can we do?"

"Nothing, unless, perhaps, we can get a little more speed out of
the motor.  The rudder might work then."

They tried, but without success.  Not a bit more speed could the
Etherium machine be induced to give out.  Indeed, Mr. Roumann
admitted that it was working faster than he had ever expected it
would.

"I'll go back and make one more attempt to steer out of the way,"
he said.

He was gone for perhaps ten minutes.  In that time Mr. Henderson,
aided by Jack and Mark, tried to adjust the motor differently,
but unavailingly.  Mr. Roumann came hurrying back from the pilot
house.

"It's of no use!" he exclaimed.  "We are heading right toward the
point of the comet.   We must prepare for the worst!"

There was silence for a moment.  It was an awful fate to meet,
and they realized it.  Then Washington White, looking into the
engine-room from his kitchen, exclaimed:

"Now, don't yo' all go t' worryin' 'bout dat ole comet.  It can't
hurt us, an' we'll knock it into smithereens!"

"You talk that way because you know nothing of comets," said Mr.
Roumann solemnly.

"I don't know nuffin' 'bout 'em?" demanded the colored man.  "I
knows too much ob 'em, dat's what I does.  Didn't I lose mah ten
dollars?"

He stopped suddenly.  From without there came a terrible roaring
sound, that grew louder and louder.

"The comet!" cried Mr. Roumann.  "We are almost upon it.  That
roaring is caused by the flaming gases!"

There was nothing that could be done.  There was no place to go--no
place to run to--no place in which to hide.  They could only
stand there and wait for total annihilation, which they expected
every moment.

The roaring grew louder.  It was like the howling of a mighty
mind.  The projectile seemed to tremble.

Then there came a brilliant light, rivaling even that of the sun,
in the rays of which they constantly were.  The light streamed in
through the plate-glass ports in the engine-room.  It showed
violet rays, purple, orange, green, yellow--all the colors of the
rainbow.

"We'll be consumed in a moment!" murmured Mr. Roumann.  "We are
in the midst of the comet!"

Several seconds passed.  There was no increase in temperature.
After all, would the wonderful gas in the space between the two
shells of the projectile absorb the terrific heat?

The light faded away.  Only the glow of the sun remained.  The
Annihilator shot onward.

Mr. Roumann rushed to the pilot house.  He uttered a cry.

"We have escaped the comet!" he called to the boys and Professor
Henderson, who followed him.  "We went right through a small
section of the tail.  And I was mistaken in thinking it was
composed of flaming gases.  It is only nebulous light.  There is
no harm in a comet, after all!"

"Dat's what I said all along," remarked Washington White, as he
went back to his kitchen.  "All a comet is good fer is t' bring
bad luck.  Look at mah ten dollars.  I wish we'd batted dis one
inter pieces!"




CHAPTER XX

THE MOTOR STOPS


They were hardly able to realize their escape.  That is, all but
Washington.  He took it as a matter of course.

"How did it come about?" asked Jack.

"It's hard to say," replied Mr. Roumann.  "I couldn't steer away
from the comet, but it's probably just as well that I could not.
It seems that the mass of queer light attracted us to it, but to
a certain section where we came to no harm.  And we must have
gone through it at an angle, or we would have been much longer
within its influence."

"Can we see the comet?" asked Mark.

"There it is," replied the German.  "Only it doesn't look as a
comet does when you view it from the earth.  We are too close to
it."

They looked from the side window of the projectile.  Far off
appeared to be a great mass of clouds, except that instead of
being white, the mass was colored with many hues, It was so vast
