
"I know, I know," Her Majesty said with a trace of testiness. "Roll
'em."

The dealer stared at her popeyed. Next to her, the gentleman in the
cowboy outfit turned. "Ma'am, are you from around these parts?" he
said.

"Oh, no," the Queen said. "I'm from England."

"England?" The cowboy looked puzzled. "You don't seem to have any
accent, ma'am," he said at last.

"Certainly not," the Queen said. "I've lost that; I've been over here
a great many years."

Malone hoped fervently that Her Majesty wouldn't mention just how many
years. He didn't think he could stand it, and he was almost grateful
for the cowboy's nasal twang.

"Oil?" he said.

"Oh, no," Her Majesty said. "The Government is providing this money."

"The Government?"

"Certainly," Her Majesty said. "The FBI, you know."

There was a long silence.

At last, the dealer said: "Five-card draw your game, ma'am?"

"If you please," Her Majesty said.

The dealer shrugged and, apparently, commended his soul to a gambler's
God. He passed the pasteboards around the table with the air of one
who will have nothing more to do with the world.

Her Majesty picked up her hand.

"The ante's ten, ma'am," the dealer said softly.

Without looking, Her Majesty removed a ten-dollar chip from the pile
before her and sent it spinning to the middle of the table.

The dealer opened his mouth, but said nothing. Malone, meanwhile, was
peering over the Queen's shoulder.

She held a pair of nines, a four, a three and a Jack.

The man to the left of the dealer announced glumly: "Can't open."

The next man grinned. "Open for twenty," he said.

Malone closed his eyes. He heard the cowboy say: "I'm in," and he
opened his eyes again. The Queen was pushing two ten-dollar chips
toward the center of the table.

The next man dropped, and the dealer looked round the table. "How
many?"

The man who couldn't open took three cards. The man who'd opened for
twenty stood pat. Malone shuddered invisibly. That, he figured, meant
a straight or better. And Queen Elizabeth Thompson was going in
against at least a straight with a pair of nines, Jack high.

For the first time, it was borne in on Malone that being a telepath
did not necessarily mean that you were a good poker player. Even if
you knew what every other person at the table held, you could still
make a whole lot of stupid mistakes.

He looked nervously at Queen Elizabeth, but her face was serene.
Apparently she'd been following the thoughts of the poker players, and
not concentrating on him at all. That was a relief. He felt, for the
first time in days, as if he could think freely.

The cowboy said: "Two," and took them. It was Her Majesty's turn.

"I'll take two," she said, and threw away the three and four. It left
her with the nine of spades and the nine of hearts, and the Jack of
diamonds.

These were joined, in a matter of seconds, by two bright new cards:
the six of clubs and the three of hearts.

Malone closed his eyes. _Oh, well_, he thought.

It was only thirty bucks down the drain. Practically nothing.

Of course Her Majesty dropped at once; knowing what the other players
held, she knew she couldn't beat them after the draw. But she did like
to take long chances, Malone thought miserably. Imagine trying to fill
a full house on one pair!

Slowly, as the minutes passed, the pile of chips before Her Majesty
dwindled. Once Malone saw her win with two pair against a reckless man
trying to fill a straight on the other side of the table. But whatever
was going on, Her Majesty's face was as calm as if she were asleep.

Malone's worked overtime. If the Queen hadn't been losing so
obviously, the dealer might have mistaken the play of naked emotion
across his visage for a series of particularly obvious signals.

An hour went by. Barbara left to find a ladies' lounge where she could
sit down and try to relax. Fascinated in a horrible sort of way, both
Malone and Boyd stood, rooted to the spot, while hand after hand went
by and the ten thousand dollars dwindled to half that, to a quarter,
and even less....

Her Majesty, it seemed, was a damn poor poker player.

The ante had been raised by this time.

Her Majesty was losing one hundred dollars a hand, even before the
betting began. But she showed not the slightest indication to stop.

"We've got to get up in the morning," Malone announced to no one in
particular, when he thought he couldn't possibly stand another half-
hour of the game.

"So we do," Her Majesty said with a little regretful sigh. "Very well,
then. Just one more hand."

"It's a shame to lose you," the cowboy said to her, quite sincerely.
He had been winning steadily ever since Her Majesty sat down, and
Malone thought that the man should, by this time, be awfully grateful
to the United States Government. Somehow, he doubted that this
gratitude existed.

Malone wondered if she should be allowed to stay for one more hand.
There was, he estimated, about two thousand dollars in front of her.
Then he wondered how he was going to stop her.

The cards were dealt.

The first man said quietly: "Open for two hundred."

Malone looked at the Queen's hand. It contained the Ace, King, Queen
and ten of clubs--and the seven of spades.

_Oh, no._ He thought. _She couldn't possibly be thinking of filling a
flush._

He knew perfectly well that she was.

The second man said: "And raise two hundred."

The Queen equably tossed (counting, Malone thought, the ante) five
hundred into the pot.

The cowboy muttered to himself for a second, and finally shoved in his
money.

"I think I'll raise it another five hundred," the Queen said calmly.

Malone wanted to die of shock.

Unfortunately, he remained alive and watching. He saw the last man,
after some debate internal, shove a total of one thousand dollars into
the pot.

"Cards?" said the dealer. The first man said: "One."

It was too much to hope for, Malone thought. If that first man were
trying to fill a straight or a flush, maybe he wouldn't make it. And
maybe something final would happen to all the other players. But that
was the only way he could see for Her Majesty to win.

The card was dealt. The second man stood pat and Malone's green tinge
became obvious to the veriest dunce. The cowboy, on Her Majesty's
right, asked for a card, received it and sat back without a trace of
expression.

The Queen said: "I'll try one for size." She'd picked up poker lingo,
and the basic rules of the game, Malone realized, from the other
players--or possibly from someone at the hospital itself, years ago.

He wished she'd picked up something less dangerous instead, like a
love of big-game hunting, or stunt-flying.

But no. It had to be poker.

The Queen threw away her seven of spades, showing more sense than
Malone had given her credit for at any time during the game. She let
the other card fall and didn't look at it.

She smiled up at Malone and Boyd. "Live dangerously," she said gaily.

Malone gave her a hollow laugh.

The last man drew one card, too, and the betting began.

The Queen's remaining thousand was gone before an eye could notice it.
She turned to Boyd.

"Sir Thomas," she said. "Another five thousand, please. At once."

Boyd said nothing at all, but marched off. Malone noticed, however,
that his step was neither as springy nor as confident as it had been
before. For himself, Malone was sure that he could not walk at all.

Maybe, he thought hopefully, the floor would open up and swallow them
all. He tried to imagine explaining the loss of $20,000 to Burris and
some congressmen, and after that he watched the floor narrowly, hoping
for the smallest hint of a crack in the palazzo marble.

"May I raise the whole five thousand?" the Queen said.

"It's okay with me," the dealer said. "How about the rest of you?"

The four grunts he got expressed a suppressed eagerness. The Queen
took the new chips Boyd had brought her and shoved them into the
center of the table with a fine, careless gesture of her hand. She
smiled gaily at everybody. "Seeing me?" she said.

Everybody was.

"Well, you see, it was this way," Malone muttered to himself,
rehearsing. He half-thought that one of the others would raise again,
but no one did. After all, each of them must be convinced that he held
a great hand, and though raising had gone on throughout the hand, each
must now be afraid of going the least little bit too far and scaring
the others out.

"Mr. Congressman," Malone muttered. "There's this game called poker.
You play it with cards and money. Chiefly money."

That wasn't any good.

"You've been called," the dealer said to the first man, who'd opened
the hand a year or so before.

"Why, sure," the player said, and laid down a pair of aces, a pair of
threes--and a four. One of the threes, and the four, were clubs. That
reduced the already improbable chances of the Queen's coming up with a
flush.

"Sorry," said the second man, and laid down a straight with a single
gesture.

The straight was nine-high and there were no clubs in it. Malone felt
devoutly thankful for that.

The second man reached for the money but, under the popeyed gaze of
the dealer, the fifth man laid down another straight--this one ten
high. The nine was a club Malone felt the odds go down, right in his
own stomach.

And now the cowboy put down his cards. The King of diamonds. The King
of hearts. The Jack of diamonds. The Jack of spades. And--the Jack of
hearts.

Full house. "Well," said the cowboy, "I suppose that does it."

The Queen said: "Please. One moment."

The cowboy stopped halfway in his reach for the enormous pile of
chips. The Queen laid down her four clubs--Ace, King, Queen and ten--
and for the first time flipped over her fifth card.

It was the Jack of clubs.

"My God," the cowboy said, and it sounded like a prayer. "A royal
flush."

"Naturally," the Queen said. "What else?"

Her Majesty calmly scooped up the tremendous pile of chips. The
cowboy's hands fell away. Five mouths were open around the table.

Her Majesty stood up. She smiled sweetly at the men around the table.
"Thank you very much, gentlemen," she said. She handed the chips to
Malone, who took them in nerveless fingers. "Sir Kenneth," she said,
"I hereby appoint you temporary Chancellor of the Exchequer--at least
until Parliament convenes."

There was, Malone thought, at least thirty-five thousand dollars in
the pile. He could think of nothing to say.

So, instead of using up words, he went and cashed in the chips. For
once, he realized, the Government had made money on an investment. It
was probably the first time since 1775.

Malone thought vaguely that the government ought to make more
investments like the one he was cashing in. If it did, the National
Debt could be wiped out in a matter of days.

He brought the money back. Boyd and the Queen were waiting for him,
but Barbara was still in the ladies' lounge. "She's on the way out,"
the Queen informed him, and, sure enough, in a minute they saw the
figure approaching them. Malone smiled at her, and, tentatively, she
smiled back. They began the long march to the exit of the club, slowly
and regally, though not by choice.

The crowd, it seemed, wouldn't let them go. Malone never found out,
then or later, how the news of Her Majesty's winnings had gone through
the place so fast, but everyone seemed to know about it. The Queen was
the recipient of several low bows and a few drunken curtsies, and,
when they reached the front door at last, the doorman said in a most
respectful tone: "Good evening, Your Majesty."

The Queen positively beamed at him. So, to his own great surprise, did
Sir Kenneth Malone.

Outside, it was about four in the morning. They climbed into the car
and headed back toward the hotel.

Malone was the first to speak. "How did you know that was a Jack of
clubs?" he said in a strangled sort of voice.

