It wouldn't have happened, if they hadn't sent me way out there to work.
But, you see, there are so many things I can't do.

I remember the day the Chief of Vocation took me before the council.

"I've tried him on a dozen things," he reported. People always talk
about me as if I can't understand what they mean. But I'm really not
_that_ dumb.

"There doesn't seem to be a thing he can do," the Chief went on.
"Actually, his intelligence seems to be no greater than that which we
believe our ancestors had, back in the twentieth century."

"As bad as that?" observed one of the council members. "You do have a
problem."

"But we must find something for him to do," said another. "We can't have
an idle person in the State. It's unthinkable."

"But what?" asked the Chief. "He's utterly incapable of running any of
the machines. I've tried to teach him. The only things he can do, are
already being done much better by robots."

There was a long silence, broken at last by one little, old council
member.

"I have it," he cried. "The very thing. We'll make him guard of the
Treasure."

"But there's no need of a guard. No one will touch the Treasure without
permission. We haven't had a dishonest person in the State for more than
three thousand years."

"That's it, exactly. There aren't any dishonest people, so there won't
be anything for him to do. But we will have solved the problem of his
idleness."

"It might be a solution," said the Chief. "At least, a temporary one. I
suppose we will have to find something else later on. But this will give
us time to look for something."

So I became guard of the Treasure. With a badge. And nothing to
do--unless you count watching the Key. The gates were kept locked, just
as they were in the old days, but the large Key hung beside them. Of
course, no one wanted to bother carrying it around. It was too heavy.
The only ones who ever used it, anyway, were members of the council. As
the man said, we haven't had a dishonest person in the State for
thousands of years. Even I know that much.

Of course, this left me with lots of time on my hands. That's how I
happened to get her in the first place. I'd always wanted one, but pets
were forbidden. Busy people didn't have time for them. So I knew I was
breaking the Law. But I figured that no one would ever find out.

First I fixed a place for her, and made a brush screen, so that she
couldn't be seen by anyone coming to the gates. Then, one night, I
sneaked into the forest and got her.
