fertilised. He also fertilised 45 flowers with pollen from the shortest stamens,
and these yielded only 17 capsules, or 31 per cent, containing on an average
only 2.65 seeds. We thus see that about thrice as many flowers, when fertilised
with pollen from the mid-length stamens, produced capsules, and these contained
twice as many seeds, as did the flowers fertilised with pollen from the shortest
stamens. It thus appears (and we find some evidence of the same fact with O.
speciosa), that the same rule holds good with Oxalis as with Lythrum salicaria;
namely, that in any two unions, the greater the inequality in length between the
pistils and stamens, or, which is the same thing, the greater the distance of
the stigma from the anthers, the pollen of which is used for fertilisation, the
less fertile is the union,--whether judged by the proportion of flowers which
set capsules, or by the average number of seeds per capsule. The rule cannot be
explained in this case any more than in that of Lythrum, by supposing that
wherever there is greater liability to self-fertilisation, this is checked by
the union being rendered more sterile; for exactly the reverse occurs, the
liability to self-fertilisation being greatest in the unions between the pistils
and stamens which approach each other the nearest, and these are the more
fertile. I may add that I also possessed some long-styled plants of this
species: one was covered by a net, and it set spontaneously a few capsules,
though extremely few compared with those produced by a plant growing by itself,
but exposed to the visits of bees.

With most of the species of Oxalis the short-styled form seems to be the most
sterile of the three forms, when these are illegitimately fertilised; and I will
add two other cases to those already given. I fertilised 29 short-styled flowers
of O. compressa with pollen from their own two sets of stamens (the pollen-
grains of which differ in diameter as 100 and 83), and not one produced a
capsule. I formerly cultivated during several years the short-styled form of a
species purchased under the name of O. Bowii (but I have some doubts whether it
was rightly named), and fertilised many flowers with their own two kinds of
pollen, which differ in diameter in the usual manner, but never got a single
seed. On the other hand, Hildebrand says that the short-styled form of O.
Deppei, growing by itself, yields plenty of seed; but it is not positively known
that this species is heterostyled; and the pollen-grains from the two sets of
anthers do not differ in diameter.

Some facts communicated to me by Fritz Muller afford excellent evidence of the
utter sterility of one of the forms of certain trimorphic species of Oxalis,
when growing isolated. He has seen in St. Catharina, in Brazil, a large field of
young sugar-cane, many acres in extent, covered with the red blossoms of one
form alone, and these did not produce a single seed. His own land is covered
with the short-styled form of a white-flowered trimorphic species, and this is
equally sterile; but when the three forms were planted near together in his
garden they seeded freely. With two other trimorphic species he finds that
isolated plants are always sterile.

Fritz Muller formerly believed that a species of Oxalis, which is so abundant in
St. Catharina that it borders the roads for miles, was dimorphic instead of
trimorphic. Although the pistils and stamens vary greatly in length, as was
evident in some specimens sent to me, yet the plants can be divided into two
sets, according to the lengths of these organs. A large proportion of the
anthers are of a white colour and quite destitute of pollen; others which are
pale yellow contain many bad with some good grains; and others again which are
bright yellow have apparently sound pollen; but he has never succeeded in
finding any fruit on this species. The stamens in some of the flowers are
partially converted into petals. Fritz Muller after reading my description,
hereafter to be given, of the illegitimate offspring of various heterostyled
species, suspects that these plants of Oxalis may be the variable and sterile
offspring of a single form of some trimorphic species, perhaps accidentally
introduced into the district, which has since been propagated asexually. It is
probable that this kind of propagation would be much aided by there being no
expenditure in the production of seed.

Oxalis (Biophytum) sensitiva.

This plant is ranked by many botanists as a distinct genus. Mr. Thwaites sent me
a number of flowers preserved in spirits from Ceylon, and they are clearly
trimorphic. The style of the long-styled form is clothed with many scattered
hairs, both simple and glandular; such hairs are much fewer on the style of the
mid-styled, and quite absent from that of the short-styled form; so that this
plant resembles in this respect O. Valdiviana and Regnelli. Calling the length
of the two lobes of the stigma of the long-styled form 100, that of the mid-
styled is 141, and that of the short-styled 164. In all other cases, in which
the stigma in this genus differs in size in the three forms, the difference is
of a reversed nature, the stigma of the long-styled being the largest, and that
of the short-styled the smallest. The diameter of the pollen-grains from the
longest stamens being represented by 100, those from the mid-length stamens are
91, and those from the shortest stamens 84 in diameter. This plant is
remarkable, as we shall see in the last chapter of this volume, by producing
long-styled, mid-styled, and short-styled cleistogamic flowers.

HOMOSTYLED SPECIES OF OXALIS.

Although the majority of the species in the large genus Oxalis seem to be
trimorphic, some are homostyled, that is, exist under a single form; for
instance the common O. acetosella, and according to Hildebrand two other widely
distributed European species, O. stricta and corniculata. Fritz Muller also
informs me that a similarly constituted species is found in St. Catharina, and
that it is quite fertile with its own pollen when insects are excluded. The
stigmas of O. stricta and of another homostyled species, namely O.
tropaeoloides, commonly stand on a level with the upper anthers, and both these
species are likewise quite fertile when insects are excluded.

With respect to O. acetosella, Hildebrand says that in all the many specimens
examined by him the pistil exceeded the longer stamens in length. I procured 108
flowers from the same number of plants growing in three distant parts of
England; of these 86 had their stigmas projecting considerably above, whilst 22
had them nearly on a level with the upper anthers. In one lot of 17 flowers from
the same wood, the stigmas in every flower projected fully as much above the
upper anthers as these stood above the lower anthers. So that these plants might
fairly be compared with the long-styled form of a heterostyled species; and I at
first thought that O. acetosella was trimorphic. But the case is one merely of
great variability. The pollen-grains from the two sets of anthers, as observed
by Hildebrand and myself, do not differ in diameter. I fertilised twelve flowers
on several plants with pollen from a distinct plant, choosing those with pistils
of a different length; and 10 of these (i.e. 83 per cent) produced capsules,
which contained on an average 7.9 seeds. Fourteen flowers were fertilised with
their own pollen, and 11 of these (i.e. 79 per cent) yielded capsules,
containing a larger average of seed, namely 9.2. These plants, therefore, in
function show not the least sign of being heterostyled. I may add that 18
flowers protected by a net were left to fertilise themselves, and only 10 of
these (i.e. 55 per cent) yielded capsules, which contained on an average only
6.3 seeds. So that the access of insects, or artificial aid in placing pollen on
the stigma, increases the fertility of the flowers; and I found that this
applied especially to those having shorter pistils. It should be remembered that
the flowers hang downwards, so that those with short pistils would be the least
likely to receive their own pollen, unless they were aided in some manner.

Finally, as Hildebrand has remarked, there is no evidence that any of the
heterostyled species of Oxalis are tending towards a dioecious condition, as
Zuccarini and Lindley inferred from the differences in the reproductive organs
of the three forms, the meaning of which they did not understand.

PONTEDERIA [SP.?] (PONTEDERIACEAE).

Fritz Muller found this aquatic plant, which is allied to the Liliaceae, growing
in the greatest profusion on the banks of a river in Southern Brazil. (4/15.
"Ueber den Trimorphismus der Pontederien" 'Jenaische Zeitschrift' etc. Band 6
1871 page 74.) But only two forms were found, the flowers of which include three
long and three short stamens. The pistil of the long-styled form, in two dried
flowers which were sent me, was in length as 100 to 32, and its stigma as 100 to
80, compared with the same organs in the short-styled form. The long-styled
stigma projects considerably above the upper anthers of the same flower, and
stands on a level with the upper ones of the short-styled form. In the latter
the stigma is seated beneath both its own sets of anthers, and is on a level
with the anthers of the shorter stamens in the long-styled form. The anthers of
the longer stamens of the short-styled form are to those of the shorter stamens
of the long-styled form as 100 to 88 in length. The pollen-grains distended with
water from the longer stamens of the short-styled form are to those from the
shorter stamens of the same form as 100 to 87 in diameter, as deduced from ten
measurements of each kind. We thus see that the organs in these two forms differ
from one another and are arranged in an analogous manner, as in the long and
short-styled forms of the trimorphic species of Lythrum and Oxalis. Moreover,
the longer stamens of the long-styled form of Pontederia, and the shorter ones
of the short-styled form are placed in a proper position for fertilising the
stigma of a mid-styled form. But Fritz Muller, although he examined a vast
number of plants, could never find one belonging to the mid-styled form. The
older flowers of the long-styled and short-styled plants had set plenty of
apparently good fruit; and this might have been expected, as they could
legitimately fertilise one another. Although he could not find the mid-styled
form of this species, he possessed plants of another species growing in his
garden, and all these were mid-styled; and in this case the pollen-grains from
the anthers of the longer stamens were to those from the shorter stamens of the
same flower as 100 to 86 in diameter, as deduced from ten measurements of each
kind. These mid-styled plants growing by themselves never produced a single
fruit.

Considering these several facts, there can hardly be a doubt that both these
species of Pontederia are heterostyled and trimorphic. This case is an
interesting one, for no other Monocotyledonous plant is known to be
heterostyled. Moreover, the flowers are irregular, and all other heterostyled
plants have almost symmetrical flowers. The two forms differ somewhat in the
colour of their corollas, that of the short-styled being of a darker blue,
whilst that of the long-styled tends towards violet, and no other such case is
known. Lastly, the three longer stamens alternate with the three shorter ones,
whereas in Lythrum and Oxalis the long and short stamens belong to distinct
whorls. With respect to the absence of the mid-styled form in the case of the
Pontederia which grows wild in Southern Brazil, this would probably follow if
only two forms had been originally introduced there; for, as we shall hereafter
see from the observations of Hildebrand, Fritz Muller and myself, when one form
of Oxalis is fertilised exclusively by either of the other two forms, the
offspring generally belong to the two parent-forms.

Fritz Muller has recently discovered, as he informs me, a third species of
Pontederia, with all three forms growing together in pools in the interior of S.
Brazil; so that no shadow of doubt can any longer remain about this genus
including trimorphic species. He sent me dried flowers of all three forms. In
the long-styled form the stigma stands a little above the tips of the petals,
and on a level with the anthers of the longest stamens in the other two forms.
The pistil is in length to that of the mid-styled as 100 to 56, and to that of
the short-styled as 100 to 16. Its summit is rectangularly bent upwards, and the
stigma is rather broader than that of the mid-styled, and broader in about the
ratio of 7 to 4 than that of the short-styled. In the mid-styled form, the
stigma is placed rather above the middle of the corolla, and nearly on a level
with the mid-length stamens in the other two forms; its summit is a little bent
upwards. In the short-styled form the pistil is, as we have seen, very short,
and differs from that in the other two forms in being straight. It stands rather
beneath the level of the anthers of the shortest stamens in the long-styled and
mid-styled forms. The three anthers of each set of stamens, more especially
those of the shortest stamens, are placed one beneath the other, and the ends of
the filaments are bowed a little upwards, so that the pollen from all the
anthers would be effectively brushed off by the proboscis of a visiting insect.
The relative diameters of the pollen-grains, after having been long soaked in
water, are given in Table 4.d, as measured by my son Francis.

TABLE 4.d. Pontederia. Diameters of pollen-grains, after having been long soaked
in water, in divisions of the micrometer.

Column 1: Source of Pollen-grains.
Column 2: diameter.

Long-styled form, mid-length stamens (Average of 20 measurements): 13.2.
Long-styled form, shortest stamens (10 measurements): 9.0.

Mid-styled form, longest stamens (15 measurements) : 16.4.
Mid-styled form, shortest stamens (20 measurements): 9.1.

Short-styled form, longest stamens (20 measurements): 14.6.
Short-styled form, mid-length stamens (20 measurements): 12.3.

We have here the usual rule of the grains from the longer stamens, the tubes of
which have to penetrate the longer pistil, being larger than those from the
stamens of less length. The extreme difference in diameter between the grains
from the longest stamens of the mid-styled form, and from the shortest stamens
of the long-styled, is as 16.4 to 9.0, or as 100 to 55; and this is the greatest
difference observed by me in any heterostyled plant. It is a singular fact that
the grains from the corresponding longest stamens in the two forms differ
considerably in diameter; as do those in a lesser degree from the corresponding
mid-length stamens in the two forms; whilst those from the corresponding
shortest stamens in the long- and mid-styled forms are almost exactly equal.
Their inequality in the two first cases depends on the grains in both sets of
anthers in the short-styled form being smaller than those from the corresponding
anthers in the other two forms; and here we have a case parallel with that of
the mid-styled form of Lythrum salicaria. In this latter plant the pollen-grains
of the mid-styled forms are of smaller size and have less fertilising power than
the corresponding ones in the other two forms; whilst the ovarium, however
fertilised, yields a greater number of seeds; so that the mid-styled form is
altogether more feminine in nature than the other two forms. In the case of
Pontederia, the ovarium includes only a single ovule, and what the meaning of
the difference in size between the pollen-grains from the corresponding sets of
anthers may be, I will not pretend to conjecture.

The clear evidence that the species just described is heterostyled and
trimorphic is the more valuable as there is some doubt with respect to P.
cordata, an inhabitant of the United States. Mr. Leggett suspects that it is
either dimorphic or trimorphic, for the pollen-grains of the longer stamens are
"more than twice the diameter or than eight times the mass of the grains of the
shorter stamens. Though minute, these smaller grains seem as perfect as the
larger ones." (4/16. 'Bulletin of the Torrey Botanical Club' 1875 volume 6 page
62.) On the other hand, he says that in all the mature flowers, "the style was
as long at least as the longer stamens;" "whilst in the young flowers it was
intermediate in length between the two sets of stamens;" and if this be so, the
species can hardly be heterostyled.


CHAPTER V.

ILLEGITIMATE OFFSPRING OF HETEROSTYLED PLANTS.

Illegitimate offspring from all three forms of Lythrum salicaria.
Their dwarfed stature and sterility, some utterly barren, some fertile.
Oxalis, transmission of form to the legitimate and illegitimate seedlings.
Primula Sinensis, Illegitimate offspring in some degree dwarfed and infertile.
Equal-styled varieties of P. Sinensis, auricula, farinosa, and elatior.
P. vulgaris, red-flowered variety, Illegitimate seedlings sterile.
P. veris, Illegitimate plants raised during several successive generations,
their dwarfed stature and sterility.
Equal-styled varieties of P. veris.
Transmission of form by Pulmonaria and Polygonum.
Concluding remarks.
Close parallelism between illegitimate fertilisation and hybridism.

We have hitherto treated of the fertility of the flowers of heterostyled plants,
when legitimately and illegitimately fertilised. The present chapter will be
devoted to the character of their offspring or seedlings. Those raised from
legitimately fertilised seeds will be here called LEGITIMATE SEEDLINGS or
PLANTS, and those from illegitimately fertilised seeds, ILLEGITIMATE SEEDLINGS
or PLANTS. They differ chiefly in their degree of fertility, and in their powers
of growth or vigour. I will begin with trimorphic plants, and I must remind the
reader that each of the three forms can be fertilised in six different ways; so
that all three together can be fertilised in eighteen different ways. For
instance, a long-styled form can be fertilised legitimately by the longest
stamens of the mid-styled and short-styled forms, and illegitimately by its own-
form and mid-length and shortest stamens, also by the mid-length stamens of the
mid-styled and by the shortest stamens of the short-styled form; so that the
long-styled can be fertilised legitimately in two ways and illegitimately in
four ways. The same holds good with respect to the mid-styled and short-styled
forms. Therefore with trimorphic species six of the eighteen unions yield
legitimate offspring, and twelve yield illegitimate offspring.

I will give the results of my experiments in detail, partly because the
observations are extremely troublesome, and will not probably soon be repeated--
thus, I was compelled to count under the microscope above 20,000 seeds of
Lythrum salicaria--but chiefly because light is thus indirectly thrown on the
important subject of hybridism.

Lythrum salicaria.

Of the twelve illegitimate unions two were completely barren, so that no seeds
were obtained, and of course no seedlings could be raised. Seedlings were,
however, raised from seven of the ten remaining illegitimate unions. Such
illegitimate seedlings when in flower were generally allowed to be freely and
legitimately fertilised, through the agency of bees, by other illegitimate
plants belonging to the two other forms growing close by. This is the fairest
plan, and was usually followed; but in several cases (which will always be
stated) illegitimate plants were fertilised with pollen taken from legitimate
plants belonging to the other two forms; and this, as might have been expected,
increased their fertility. Lythrum salicaria is much affected in its fertility
by the nature of the season; and to avoid error from this source, as far as
possible, my observations were continued during several years. Some few
experiments were tried in 1863. The summer of 1864 was too hot and dry, and,
though the plants were copiously watered, some few apparently suffered in their
fertility, whilst others were not in the least affected. The years 1865 and,
especially, 1866, were highly favourable. Only a few observations were made
during 1867. The results are arranged in classes according to the parentage of
the plants. In each case the average number of seeds per capsule is given,
generally taken from ten capsules, which, according to my experience, is a
nearly sufficient number. The maximum number of seeds in any one capsule is also
given; and this is a useful point of comparison with the normal standard--that
is, with the number of seeds produced by legitimate plants legitimately
fertilised. I will give likewise in each case the minimum number. When the
maximum and minimum differ greatly, if no remark is made on the subject, it may
be understood that the extremes are so closely connected by intermediate figures
that the average is a fair one. Large capsules were always selected for
counting, in order to avoid over-estimating the infertility of the several
illegitimate plants.

In order to judge of the degree of inferiority in fertility of the several
illegitimate plants, the following statement of the average and of the maximum
number of seeds produced by ordinary or legitimate plants, when legitimately
fertilised, some artificially and some naturally, will serve as a standard of
comparison, and may in each case be referred to. But I give under each
experiment the percentage of seeds produced by the illegitimate plants, in
comparison with the standard legitimate number of the same form. For instance,
ten capsules from the illegitimate long-styled plant (Number 10), which was
legitimately and naturally fertilised by other illegitimate plants, contained on
an average 44.2 seeds; whereas the capsules on legitimate long-styled plants,
legitimately and naturally fertilised by other legitimate plants, contained on
an average 93 seeds. Therefore this illegitimate plant yielded only 47 per cent
of the full and normal complement of seeds.

STANDARD NUMBER OF SEEDS PRODUCED BY LEGITIMATE PLANTS OF THE THREE FORMS, WHEN
LEGITIMATELY FERTILISED.

Long-styled form:
Average number of seeds in each capsule, 93;
Maximum number observed out of twenty-three capsules, 159.

Mid-styled form:
Average number of seeds, 130;
Maximum number observed out of thirty-one capsules, 151.

Short-styled form:
Average number of seeds, 83.5; but we may, for the sake of brevity, say 83;
Maximum number observed out of twenty-five capsules, 112.

CLASSES 1 AND 2. ILLEGITIMATE PLANTS RAISED FROM LONG-STYLED PARENTS FERTILISED
WITH POLLEN FROM THE MID-LENGTH OR THE SHORTEST STAMENS OF OTHER PLANTS OF THE
SAME FORM.

From this union I raised at different times three lots of illegitimate
seedlings, amounting altogether to 56 plants. I must premise that, from not
foreseeing the result, I did not keep a memorandum whether the eight plants of
the first lot were the product of the mid-length or shortest stamens of the same
form; but I have good reason to believe that they were the product of the
latter. These eight plants were much more dwarfed, and much more sterile than
those in the other two lots. The latter were raised from a long-styled plant
growing quite isolated, and fertilised by the agency of bees with its own
pollen; and it is almost certain, from the relative position of the organs of
fructification, that the stigma under these circumstances would receive pollen
from the mid-length stamens.

All the fifty-six plants in these three lots proved long-styled; now, if the
parent-plants had been legitimately fertilised by pollen from the longest
stamens of the mid-styled and short-styled forms, only about one-third of the
seedlings would have been long-styled, the other two-thirds being mid-styled and
short-styled. In some other trimorphic and dimorphic genera we shall find the
same curious fact, namely, that the long-styled form, fertilised illegitimately
by its own-form pollen, produces almost exclusively long-styled seedlings. (5/1.
Hildebrand first called attention to this fact in the case of Primula Sinensis
('Botanische Zeitung' January 1, 1864 page 5); but his results were not nearly
so uniform as mine.)

The eight plants of the first lot were of low stature: three which I measured
attained, when fully grown, the heights of only 28, 29, and 47 inches; whilst
legitimate plants growing close by were double this height, one being 77 inches.
They all betrayed in their general appearance a weak constitution; they flowered
rather later in the season, and at a later age than ordinary plants. Some did
not flower every year; and one plant, behaving in an unprecedented manner, did
not flower until three years old. In the two other lots none of the plants grew
quite to their full and proper height, as could at once be seen by comparing
them with the adjoining rows of legitimate plants. In several plants in all
three lots, many of the anthers were either shrivelled or contained brown and
