boat, and he might find them on the island, or a portion of them, for it
was hardly to be expected that the whole crew had escaped.

From the deck he went below. He had anticipated that the fall of the
tide would enable him to enter the state-room of the captain; but there
was no perceptible change in the height of the water. In this locality
the whole range of the tide was not more than a foot. There were many
things which might be of great value to Mollie, if they ever escaped
from this region, and he was anxious to save them for her use. The
captain had a considerable sum of money in gold and silver. The
cabin-boy, knowing where it was, set himself at work to obtain it. He
was obliged to dive several times before he succeeded; but at last he
brought it up, and deposited it in the safest place he could find.

Other articles of value were saved in the same manner, including the
captain's chronometer and sextant, the sad neglect of which had caused
the terrible disaster. Towards night a change in the wind "knocked down"
the sea, and the waves no longer dashed against the shattered vessel.
The galley had been washed away; but the boat on deck, though thrown
from the blocks, was still uninjured; and Noddy was sorely perplexed to
find a means of getting it overboard. It was too late, and he was too
tired to accomplish anything that night.

Mollie was awake when he went to the forecastle again; and rest and
refreshment had made her more cheerful and more hopeful. She spoke with
greater interest of the future, and dwelt less mournfully on the sad
event which had made her an orphan. Noddy told her his plans for the
morrow; that he intended to launch the long-boat, and visit the island
the next day; that he would build a house for her; and that they would
be happy there till some passing whaler picked them up. The tired boy,
now secure of life, went to sleep. His fair companion wept again, as she
thought of the pleasant days when her father had been a joy to every
hour of her existence; but she, too, went to sleep, with none to watch
over her but the good Father who had saved her in all the perils through
which she had passed.

The sun rose clear and bright the next morning, and Noddy went on deck
to prepare their simple breakfast. He had constructed a fireplace of
iron plates, and he boiled some water to make tea. Mollie soon joined
him; and sad as she still was, she insisted that the cooking was her
duty. She performed it, while Noddy employed himself in devising some
plan by which, with his feeble powers, he could hoist the heavy boat
into the water. The bulwarks had been partially stove on one side, and
he cleared away the wreck till there was nothing to obstruct the passage
of the boat over the side.

They sat down on the deck to eat their breakfast; and during the meal
Noddy was very quiet and thoughtful. Occasionally he cast his eyes up at
the rigging over their heads. Mollie could not help looking at him. She
had a great admiration for him; he had been so kind to her, and so brave
and cheerful in the discharge of the duties which the awful catastrophe
imposed upon him. Besides, he was her only friend--her only hope now.

"What are you thinking about, Noddy?" asked she, perplexed by his
unusually meditative mood.

"I was thinking how I should get the boat into the water."

"You can't get it into the water. What can a small boy like you do with
a great boat like that?"

"I think I can manage it somehow."

"I am afraid not."

"Don't give it up, Mollie; our salvation depends on that boat. I found
out something more, when I went aloft this morning."

"What?"

"There is another island off here to the northward, just as far as you
can see. We may wish to go there, and the boat would be wanted then."

"Noddy, perhaps there are savages on those islands, who will kill us if
we go on shore."

"Two can play at that game," replied Noddy, in his confident tone.

"What could a boy like you do against a mob of Indians?"

"There are two or three pistols in the cabin, and I think I know how to
use them; at any rate I shall not be butchered, nor let you be, without
showing them what I am made of," answered Noddy, as he rose from the
planks, and turned his attention once more to the moving of the boat.

"You wouldn't shoot them--would you?"

"Not if I could help it. I shouldn't want to shoot them; and I won't do
it, if they behave themselves. But I must go to work on the boat now."

"Let me help you, Noddy, I am real strong, and I can do a great deal."

"I will tell you when you can help me, Mollie, for I may need a little
assistance."

"I don't see how you are going to do this job."

"I will show you in a moment," replied Noddy, as he ran up the main
shrouds.

He carried a small hatchet in his belt, with which he detached the
starboard fore-brace from the mast. This was a rope, the end of which
was tied to the main-mast, and extended through a single sheaf-block at
the starboard fore-yard-arm. After passing through this block, the brace
returned to the main-mast, passed through another block, and led down
upon the deck. There was another rope of the same kind on the port side
of the vessel. They were used to swing round the yard, in order to place
the sail so that it would draw in the wind.

When Noddy cut it loose, the brace dropped to the deck. It was now
simply a rope passing through a single block at the end of the yard. The
little engineer made fast one end of the brace to the ring in the bow of
the boat. He then unhooked the peak halliards of the fore-sail, and
attached them to the ring in the stern of the boat. Now, if he had had
the strength, he would have pulled on the yard-arm rope till he dragged
the bow out over the water; the stern line being intended merely to
steady the boat, if necessary, and keep it from jamming against the
mast. When he had drawn the bow out as far as he could with the brace,
he meant to attach the same rope to the stern, and complete the job.

"That's all very pretty," said Mollie, who had carefully noticed all her
companion's proceedings; "but you and I can't hoist the boat up with
that rigging."

"I know that, Mollie," replied Noddy, wiping the perspiration from his
brow. "I haven't done yet."

"I am afraid you won't make out, Noddy."

"Yes, I shall. Work and win; that's the idea."

"You are working very hard, and I hope you will win."

"Did you know I made an improvement on Miss Bertha's maxim?"

"Indeed! What?"

"He that works shall win."

"That's very encouraging; but it isn't always true."

"It is when you work in the right way," answered Noddy, as he took the
end of the yard-arm rope, and, after passing it through a snatch-block,
began to wind it around the barrel of the small capstan on the
forecastle.

"Perhaps you haven't got the right way."

"If I haven't I shall try again, and keep trying till I do get it,"
replied Noddy, as he handed Mollie the end of the rope which he had
wound four times round the capstan. "Do you think you can hold this
rope and take in the slack?"

"I am afraid there will not be any to take in; but I can hold it, if
there is," said she, satirically, but without even a smile.

Noddy inserted one of the capstan bars, and attempted to "walk round;"
but his feeble powers were not sufficient to move the boat a single
inch. He tightened up the rope, and that was all he could accomplish.

"I was afraid you could not stir it," said Mollie; but her tones were
full of sympathy for her companion in his disappointment.

He struggled in vain for a time; but it required a little more
engineering to make the machinery move. Taking a "gun-tackle purchase,"
or "tackle and fall," as it is called on shore, he attached one hook to
the extreme end of the capstan bar, and the other to the rail. This
added power accomplished the work; and he made the capstan revolve with
ease, though the business went on very slowly. He was obliged to shift
back the bar four times for every revolution of the barrel. But the boat
moved forward, and that was success. He persevered, and skill and labor
finally accomplished the difficult task. The boat floated in the water
alongside the wreck. He had worked; he had won.




CHAPTER XVIII.

THE BEAUTIFUL ISLAND.


"There, Mollie, what do you think now!" exclaimed the youthful engineer,
as he made fast the painter of the boat to a ring in the deck of the
schooner.

"You have worked very hard, Noddy, but you have succeeded. You must be
very tired."

"I am tired, for I have done a hard day's work."

"You ought to rest now."

"I think I will. We are in no hurry, for we are very comfortable here,
and storms don't come very often."

It was late in the afternoon when the work of getting out the boat was
finished. Noddy had labored very hard, and he was perfectly willing to
rest during the remainder of the day. Mollie made some tea, and they had
supper at an early hour. It was a remarkably pleasant day, and the air
was as soft and balmy as a poet's dream. Both the young workers were
very much fatigued, and they sat upon the deck till dark.

"Where is my father now?" asked Mollie, as she cast a nervous glance
towards the beautiful island which they hoped to reach on the following
day.

"Where is he?" repeated Noddy, surprised at the question, and not
knowing what she meant.

"I mean his remains."

"In his state-room," answered Noddy, very reluctant to have the subject
considered.

"Will you do one thing more for me, Noddy?" demanded she, earnestly and
impressively.

"Certainly, I will, Mollie."

"It shall be the last thing I shall ask you to do for me."

"Don't say that, for I've always been ready to do everything you wished
me to do."

"I know you have, Noddy; and you work so hard that I don't feel like
asking you to do any extra labor."

"I will do anything you wish, Mollie. You needn't be afraid to ask me,
either. If you knew how much pleasure it gives me to work for you, I'm
sure you would keep me busy all the time."

"I don't wish to wear you out, and you may think this is useless work."

"I'm sure I shall not, if you want it done."

"If you knew how sad it makes me feel to think of my poor father lying
in the water there, you would understand me," added she, bursting into
tears.

"I know what you mean, Mollie, and it shall be done the first thing
to-morrow."

"Thank you, Noddy. You are so good and so kind! I hope I shall see Miss
Bertha, some time, and tell her what you have done for me," continued
she, wiping away her tears.

They retired to the forecastle soon after dark; and when Mollie had said
her simple prayer for both of them, they lay down in the bunks, and were
soon asleep.

Noddy's first work the next morning was to rig a mast and sail for the
long-boat. In this labor he was assisted by Mollie, who sewed diligently
on the sail all the forenoon. While she was thus engaged, Noddy, without
telling her what he was going to do, went into the cabin, carrying a
boat-hook, and, with a feeling of awe amounting almost to superstitious
terror, proceeded to fish up the body of Captain McClintock. He knew
just where it lay, and had no difficulty in accomplishing the task. He
dragged the remains out into the cabin, and floated the corpse in the
water to the foot of the ladder. It was an awful duty for him to
perform; and when he saw the ghastly, bloated face, he was disposed to
flee in terror from the spot.

Noddy was strong for his years, or he could not have placed the body on
the locker, out of the reach of the water. He prepared the remains for
burial precisely as those of Mr. Watts had been. The most difficult
part of the task was yet to be performed--to get the corpse on deck, and
lower it into the boat. He procured a long box in the hold, from which
he removed the merchandise, and found that it would answer the purpose
of a coffin. By much hard lifting, and by resorting to various
expedients, he placed the remains in the box and nailed down the lid. He
felt easier now, for the face of the corpse no longer glared at him.

When he had bent on the sail, and shipped the rudder, he contrived to
set Mollie at work in the forecastle, where she could not see what he
was doing; for he thought his work must be revolting to her feelings,
especially as it would be very clumsily performed. Having put a sling on
the box, he rigged a purchase, and hoisted it out of the cabin. Then,
with suitable rigging, he lowered it into the boat, placing it across
the thwarts, amidships.

"Come, Mollie," said he, in a gentle, subdued tone, at the fore-scuttle.

"What, Noddy?" asked she, impressed by his voice, and by his manner, as
she came up from below.

"We will go on shore now."

"To-day?"

"Yes; but we will return. The boat is ready, and I have done what you
asked me to do."

"What?"

"Your father."

She was awed by his manner, and did not readily understand what he
meant. He pointed to the long box in the boat, and she comprehended the
loving labor he had performed. She did not inquire how he had
accomplished the task, and did not think of the difficulties which
attended it. Noddy did not allude to them.

"I am ready, Noddy; but can you get me the prayer-book?" said she, her
eyes filling with tears, as she prepared to perform the pious duty which
the exigencies of the occasion required of her.

The book was fortunately on a shelf to which the water had not risen,
and he brought it up and gave it to her. He had before placed a pick and
shovel, an axe, a couple of boards and some cords in the boat. He helped
her to a seat in the stern-sheets, and shoved off. There was hardly a
breath of wind, and Noddy sculled the boat towards an opening in the
reef, which was of coral, and surrounded the island. The afflicted
daughter gazed in silent grief at the box, and did not speak a word till
the boat entered a little inlet, which Noddy had chosen as a
landing-place.

He stepped on shore, and secured the boat to a bush which grew on the
bank. Mollie followed him in silence, and selected a place for the
grave. It was at the foot of a cocoa palm. The spot was as beautiful as
the heart could desire for such a holy purpose; and Noddy commenced his
work. The soil was light and loose, and after much severe labor, he made
a grave about three feet deep. It would be impossible for him to lower
the box into the grave; and, from one end, he dug out an inclined plane,
down which he could roll the corpse to its final resting-place.

