
"Well, you were talking about Marken, and I don't wonder, for we have
been so long trying to go there. Do take it back, Polly," he begged,
holding it out.

"No, indeed!" declared Polly again, shaking her brown head decidedly,
"not for the world, Jasper."

"What is going over in that corner?" called Grandpapa's voice, by the
big reading table. He had finished his newspaper, and was now ready to
talk. So Jasper and Polly explained, and that brought out the subject
of Marken, and old Mr. King said yes, it was perfectly true that he had
made all the arrangements to go the following day if the weather were
fine. So Polly and Jasper swept off the remaining pieces on the
chessboard, and packed them away in their box, and ran over to hear all
the rest of it that he was now telling to the family.

"So you see it didn't make any difference about that old queen anyway,"
said Polly, as they hurried over to him, "for nobody has beaten."

"I'm glad I didn't beat," declared Jasper. "I've that satisfaction,
anyway, because you wouldn't have moved that pawn, Polly, if you hadn't
been talking of Marken."

The next day was fine enough to warrant the trip, though not absolutely
sunshiny. Old Mr. King wisely deciding that the fun of the expedition
would lose its edge if postponed again, said, "Start!" So after
breakfast they all went down to the Wester dock and embarked on the
little steamer bound for the island of Marken in the Zuyder Zee.

"Oh, Polly, look," said Jasper, "doesn't Amsterdam look fine?" as the
little steamer slowly put forth.

Polly leaned over the rail and drew in long breaths of delight. "Come,
Adela," she called, "here is a good place;" for the little old lady was
still too much shaken up to make much attempt at travelling, so Polly
had begged Mother Fisher and Grandpapa to ask Adela to come with them
on their sightseeing trips.

And this was done, and the young girl was happy as a bird. So here she
was, going down to Marken too.

Adela ran and kneeled down on the seat by Polly's side and hung over
the rail too. "Don't the houses lean over queerly?" she said, pointing
to the long narrow buildings they were leaving behind. "They look worse
from the water than when we are in the midst of them."

"It's just as if they were holding each other up," said Polly. "Dear
me, I should think they'd tumble over some fine day.

"What makes them sag so?" asked Adela, intently regarding them.

"That's because the city is built on piles, I suppose," said Jasper.
"It's mostly sand in Holland, you know, particularly around Amsterdam,
and so they had to drive down piles to get something strong enough to
put their houses on. That's what--who was it?--oh I
know--Erasmus--meant when he said, 'I know a city whose inhabitants
dwell on the tops of the trees like rooks.'"

"O dear me," said Adela, quite impressed; "well, what makes them not
sag any more?" she asked at length.

"Because they've sagged all they want to, I suppose'" said Jasper,
laughing. "Anyway they've stood so for years on years--probably, so
it's fair to believe they're all right."

"And I think they're ever so much prettier leaning every which way,"
declared Polly. "We can see plenty of straight houses at home, so it's
nice to see crooked ones over here. Oh, Jasper, there's the King's
palace!"

"Yes and there is the dome of the Lutheran Church," said Jasper.

"Look at that woman with the boy," said Adela, on the wharf. She's got
a little black bonnet tied on top of her white cap.".

"That's nothing to what we shall see at Marken, I suppose," said Polly.
"I'm going to take ever so many photographs." She tapped her kodak
lovingly, as it hung from the strap on her shoulder.

"I wish I'd brought mine," said Adela.

"Why didn't you?" cried Polly, whirling around to scan Adela.

"I forgot it," said Adela. "I put it on the table last night close to
my hat and gloves, and then walked off this morning without it."

"Now that's too bad!" exclaimed Polly in sympathy. Then she turned back
uncomfortably, and began to talk of something else. "I'm not going to,"
she said to herself; "it isn't my fault she forgot her kodak, and I
want every one of my films myself. And I care a great deal more for
Marken than for almost any other place." The next moment Mamsie seemed
to say, "Is that my Polly?" and although she was at the other end of
the boat, Polly's head drooped as if she had heard the words.

"O dear me--and Adela hasn't any one but a sick grandmother--and I have
just--everybody," she thought "You shall use my kodak," cried Polly,
aloud, "one-half the time, Adela."

"Oh, no," protested Adela; but she looked hungrily at Polly's kodak
swinging over her shoulder.

"Yes, you shall too," declared Polly, cheerily. "I can take all the
pictures I want in that time, and I have lots of films."

"I'll divide with you, Polly," said Jasper. "I brought ever so many,
and will go shares with my kodak, too." But Polly made up her mind that
Jasper's kodak was to be used for his own special pictures, for she
knew he had set his heart on taking certain ones, and a good many of
them, too.

"Isn't that water just perfectly lovely!" she exclaimed; "such a bluish
grey."

"I think it's a greyish blue," said Adela, squinting along its surface
critically.

"Well, what's the difference?" asked Polly, laughing.

"Not much," said Jasper, "I should think."

"Well, anyway, it's lovely," declared Polly; "I just wish I could paint
it."

"Do you paint?" asked Adela, suddenly.

"No," said Polly, "not a bit"

"Polly is all for music," said Jasper, quickly. "You ought to hear her
play."

"Oh, I can't play much now," said Polly, "but I mean tot some time.
Jasper, how long it is since we have had a duet." Her face dropped its
cheery curves and a sad little look crept into her eyes.

"That's the bother of travelling about; one can't play in a hotel,"
said Jasper. "But wait till we get to Dresden, Polly."

"Oh, I can't bear to wait," said Polly. "I don't want to hurry on,
Jasper--but oh, I do wish we could play on a piano." Her fingers
drummed on the rail in her eagerness.

"Why, you are playing now," said Adela, bursting into a laugh, "or
pretending to, Polly Pepper."

"I know it," said Polly, laughing too; "well, that's what I always used
to do in the little brown house,--drum on the table."

"In the little brown where?" demanded Adela in astonishment.

"The little brown house," answered Polly, and her eyes lightened as she
seemed to see it before her. "That's where we used to live, Adela--oh,
the sweetest place, you can't think!"  Polly's fingers stopped drumming
now, and the colour flew up to her cheek; she forgot all about Adela.

"Oh, I suppose it had everything beautiful about it," said Adela,
delighted to make Polly talk, "big gardens, and terraces, and--"

"Oh, no," said Polly, "it didn't have gardens at all, Adela, only a
little bit of a green grass-plot in front. But there was an apple tree
at the back."

"Apple tree at the back?" echoed Adela, faintly.

"Yes, and we had beautiful plays under it," cried Polly, rushing on in
remembrance; "and sometimes when all the work was finished, Mamsie
would let us spend the whole afternoon out there. You can't think what
perfectly splendid times we had there, Adela Gray!"

Adela by this time was beyond words, but stared up at Polly's face
speechlessly. "And what fun it was on baking days, Polly," cried
Jasper, unable to keep quiet any longer; "do you remember when I burnt
all my cakes around the edges?"

"Well, that was because the old stove acted so," said Polly; "one
minute it wouldn't bake at all, and the next it burnt things black."

"And the washing the dishes and things up afterward," said Jasper,
reflecting; "I think I liked that just as well as the baking, Polly."

"It was good fun," said Polly; "and how funny you looked with one of
Mamsie's aprons tied round under your chin, Jasper."

"I know it," said Jasper, bursting into a laugh. "I must have looked
like--I don't know what. But it was good fun, Polly."

And then Phronsie came running up, and after her came Grandpapa to see
that she got there all right.

"Oh, Polly, do you see the windmills?" she cried, clapping her small
hands.

"Yes, Pet," said Polly, looking all along the soft curves of the shore,
"there are hundreds of them, aren't there?"

"There was a girl coming out of the door of one of them," announced
Phronsie, climbing up on the seat and putting her arm around Polly's
neck. "Polly, I'd like to live in a windmill; I would," she whispered
close to her ear.

"Would you, Pet?"

"Yes, I would truly," she said. "Why couldn't I, Polly, just like that
girl I saw coming out of the door?" she asked, looking back wistfully.

"Well, that girl never had a little brown house to live in," said
Polly; "think of that, Phronsie."




XIII

"THE CLEANEST PLACE IN ALL HOLLAND"


"Oh, Polly, see the cunning little doll-houses!" exclaimed Phronsie in
a little scream, flying about from Grandpapa at the head of his party
on their way up from the boat-landing, and then back to the rear of the
procession, which happened to be Polly and Jasper.

"Hush, Phronsie, don't talk so loud; they are not doll-houses," said
Polly. "People live in them."

"People live in them!" echoed Phronsie, standing quite still on the
paved road, that shone as if just freshly scoured.

"Yes, yes; come along, child, the people will hear you," said Polly,
seizing her hand.

Phronsie suffered herself to be piloted along, but she stumbled more
than once over the cobbles, her eyes were so busy.

"Take care, Phronsie," warned Polly, "you came near falling on your
nose that time."

"I'll go on the other side," said Jasper; "there, now, Phronsie, give
us your hand. Well, I don't wonder you are surprised. I never saw such
a place as this Broek is."

"They've just washed it all up, haven't they, Jasper?" asked Polly, her
brown eyes scanning the little walks along each tiny garden they
passed. Everything shone alike.

"They're always washing up, I believe," answered Jasper, with a laugh.
"I suppose they live in a pail of water, so to speak."

"Oh, Jasper, in a pail of water!" exclaimed Phronsie, between them,
poking her head out to look for such a strange and unwarrantable sight
provided by the inhabitants of Broek.

"I mean they're always scrubbing, so they can never be separated from
their pails of water," said Jasper.

"It seems almost too bad to step on such clean roads," said Polly,
getting up on her tiptoes, and stepping gingerly off. When Phronsie saw
Polly do that, she got up on her tiptoes too, and tried to get over the
ground with her.

"You can't do that long," said Jasper, with a laugh for both, "and it
wouldn't do any good, Polly, if you could, for these Broek women will
have to come out and scrub up after us all the same."

"I suppose they will," said Polly, with a sigh of relief, coming down
on to the rest of her feet, which proceeding, Phronsie was very glad to
copy. "And it isn't as nice as it looks to walk on the tips of your
toes. Jasper, do see those cunning little windows and those china
images inside!"

"It seems as if they were all windows," said Jasper, scanning the tiny
panes shining at them from all the cottages. "Dear me, the Broek women
have something to do, don't they, to keep everything so shiny and
clean?"

"Haven't they!" cried Polly. "Well, I don't wonder it is the cleanest
place in all Holland. They must have to sit up all night and wash and
scrub."

"It's the cleanest place on the whole earth, I imagine," laughed Jasper.

"But I should love to see some boys playing with mud pies," sighed
Polly, running her glance up and down the immaculate road, and
compassing all the tiny gardens possible to her range of vision.

"Mud pies!" exclaimed Jasper, in mock surprise. "Polly, how can you
mention such a thing as dirt or mud here!"

"Jasper, do you suppose the children can have a good time here?"
pursued Polly, anxiously, willing to give up the mud pies, if only
reassured on the latter point, which seemed to her a very doubtful one.

"We'll hope so," answered Jasper. "See the klompen outside that door,
Polly. Well, here we are at the dairy, Polly."

"And can I see the cows?" cried Phronsie. "Oh, Grandpapa is calling
me," and off she ran.

And so he was calling her, as he and the parson had now reached the
dairy door, under cover with the dwelling, which seemed much less an
object of painstaking care than the house where the cows resided and
the cheeses were made.

But everything was as neat as a pin in the house, though, and Polly and
Jasper concluded they would explore the two rooms, as everybody seemed
to be expected to do, after the main object of the visit was
accomplished and the dairy inspected.

"Dear me, do they have to take their shoes off before they go in the
house?" cried Polly.

"I suppose so," said Jasper. "Well, it isn't much trouble to get out of
those sabots, that's one comfort for them."

"Dear me," Mrs. Fisher was saying, "if they haven't a carpet on the
floor for the cows to walk on!" And there, surely, were strips of
carpeting all down the walks between the rows of stalls, and something
that looked like braided hemp in the bottom of the stalls themselves.
And everything was tiled where it could be, with little tiles, and all
these and every bit of the woodwork itself shone beautifully--it was so
clean and polished.

Mrs. Fisher's black eyes shone, too. "It's beautiful," she said to her
husband, "to see everything so clean for once in the world."

"What are those hooks for?" asked Jasper of the stolid Dutchman, who
showed them about, and who spoke English fairly well.

"We hook the cows' tails up so they won't shake any dirt on their
sides," said the Dutchman.

"O dear me!" exclaimed Polly Pepper, and everybody laughed--but she
didn't.

"I think that is cruel," she said. "What do the poor things do to beat
off the flies, pray tell?"

"Flies?" said Mother Fisher. "I don't suppose they ever see a fly here,
Polly."

"They'd chase one worse than the dirt, I guess," said the little doctor.

"Oh," said Polly, with a sigh of relief.

"Come, Polly, let us go into the cheese room," suggested Jasper,
peering in, for everything was connected and under one roof. "There's a
man in there, and he is telling something;" so they skipped in, while
Phronsie was bewailing that there were no cows there, and where were
they?

"Why, Phronsie, they are all out in the fields. You wouldn't have them
shut up this hot day," said Grandpapa.
