adjuncts (upadhi), the fictitious offspring of Maya, and thus looks for
its true Self in the body, the sense organs, and the internal organ
(manas), i.e. the organ of specific cognition. The soul, which in
reality is pure intelligence, non-active, infinite, thus becomes limited
in extent, as it were, limited in knowledge and power, an agent and
enjoyer. Through its actions it burdens itself with merit and demerit,
the consequences of which it has to bear or enjoy in series of future
embodied existences, the Lord--as a retributor and dispenser--allotting
to each soul that form of embodiment to which it is entitled by its
previous actions. At the end of each of the great world periods called
kalpas the Lord retracts the whole world, i.e. the whole material world
is dissolved and merged into non-distinct Maya, while the individual
souls, free for the time from actual connexion with upadhis, lie in deep
slumber as it were. But as the consequences of their former deeds are
not yet exhausted, they have again to enter on embodied existence as
soon as the Lord sends forth a new material world, and the old round of
birth, action, death begins anew to last to all eternity as it has
lasted from all eternity.

The means of escaping from this endless sa/ms/ara, the way out of which
can never be found by the non-enlightened soul, are furnished by the
Veda. The karmaka/nd/a indeed, whose purport it is to enjoin certain
actions, cannot lead to final release; for even the most meritorious
works necessarily lead to new forms of embodied existence. And in the
j/n/anaka/nd/a of the Veda also two different parts have to be
distinguished, viz., firstly, those chapters and passages which treat of
Brahman in so far as related to the world, and hence characterised by
various attributes, i.e. of I/s/vara or the lower Brahman; and,
secondly, those texts which set forth the nature of the highest Brahman
transcending all qualities, and the fundamental identity of the
individual soul with that highest Brahman. Devout meditation on Brahman
as suggested by passages of the former kind does not directly lead to
final emancipation; the pious worshipper passes on his death into the
world of the lower Brahman only, where he continues to exist as a
distinct individual soul--although in the enjoyment of great power and
knowledge--until at last he reaches the highest knowledge, and, through
it, final release.--That student of the Veda, on the other hand, whose
soul has been enlightened by the texts embodying the higher knowledge of
Brahman, whom passages such as the great saying, 'That art thou,' have
taught that there is no difference between his true Self and the highest
Self, obtains at the moment of death immediate final release, i.e. he
withdraws altogether from the influence of Maya, and asserts himself in
his true nature, which is nothing else but the absolute highest Brahman.

Thus /S/a@nkara.--According to Ramanuja, on the other hand, the teaching
of the Upanishads has to be summarised as follows.--There exists only
one all-embracing being called Brahman or the highest Self of the Lord.
This being is not destitute of attributes, but rather endowed with all
imaginable auspicious qualities. It is not 'intelligence,'--as
/S/a@nkara maintains,--but intelligence is its chief attribute. The Lord
is all-pervading, all-powerful, all-knowing, all-merciful; his nature is
fundamentally antagonistic to all evil. He contains within himself
whatever exists. While, according to /S/a@nkara, the only reality is to
be found in the non-qualified homogeneous highest Brahman which can only
be defined as pure 'Being' or pure thought, all plurality being a mere
illusion; Brahman--according to Ramanuja's view--comprises within itself
distinct elements of plurality which all of them lay claim to absolute
reality of one and the same kind. Whatever is presented to us by
ordinary experience, viz. matter in all its various modifications and
the individual souls of different classes and degrees, are essential
real constituents of Brahman's nature. Matter and souls (a/k/it and
/k/it) constitute, according to Ramanuja's terminology, the body of the
Lord; they stand to him in the same relation of entire dependence and
subserviency in which the matter forming an animal or vegetable body
stands to its soul or animating principle. The Lord pervades and rules
all things which exist--material or immaterial--as their antaryamin; the
fundamental text for this special Ramanuja tenet--which in the writings
of the sect is quoted again and again--is the so-called antaryamin
brahma/n/a. (B/ri/. Up. III, 7) which says, that within all elements,
all sense organs, and, lastly, within all individual souls, there abides
an inward ruler whose body those elements, sense-organs, and individual
souls constitute.--Matter and souls as forming the body of the Lord are
also called modes of him (prakara). They are to be looked upon as his
effects, but they have enjoyed the kind of individual existence which is
theirs from all eternity, and will never be entirely resolved into
Brahman. They, however, exist in two different, periodically
alternating, conditions. At some times they exist in a subtle state in
which they do not possess those qualities by which they are ordinarily
known, and there is then no distinction of individual name and form.
Matter in that state is unevolved (avyakta); the individual souls are
not joined to material bodies, and their intelligence is in a state of
contraction, non-manifestation (sa@nko/k/a). This is the pralaya state
which recurs at the end of each kalpa, and Brahman is then said to be in
its causal condition (kara/n/avastha). To that state all those
scriptural passages refer which speak of Brahman or the Self as being in
the beginning one only, without a second. Brahman then is indeed not
absolutely one, for it contains within itself matter and souls in a
germinal condition; but as in that condition they are so subtle as not
to allow of individual distinctions being made, they are not counted as
something second in addition to Brahman.--When the pralaya state comes
to an end, creation takes place owing to an act of volition on the
Lord's part. Primary unevolved matter then passes over into its other
condition; it becomes gross and thus acquires all those sensible
attributes, visibility, tangibility, and so on, which are known from
ordinary experience. At the same time the souls enter into connexion
with material bodies corresponding to the degree of merit or demerit
acquired by them in previous forms of existence; their intelligence at
the same time undergoes a certain expansion (vika/s/a). The Lord,
together with matter in its gross state and the 'expanded' souls, is
Brahman in the condition of an effect (karyavastha). Cause and effect
are thus at the bottom the same; for the effect is nothing but the cause
which has undergone a certain change (pari/n/ama). Hence the cause being
known, the effect is known likewise.

Owing to the effects of their former actions the individual souls are
implicated in the sa/m/sara, the endless cycle of birth, action, and
death, final escape from which is to be obtained only through the study
of the j/n/anaka/nd/a of the Veda. Compliance with the injunctions of
the karmaka/nd/a does not lead outside the sa/m/sara; but he who,
assisted by the grace of the Lord, cognizes--and meditates on--him in
the way prescribed by the Upanishads reaches at his death final
emancipation, i.e. he passes through the different stages of the path of
the gods up to the world of Brahman and there enjoys an everlasting
blissful existence from which there is no return into the sphere of
transmigration. The characteristics of the released soul are similar to
those of Brahman; it participates in all the latter's glorious qualities
and powers, excepting only Brahman's power to emit, rule, and retract
the entire world.

The chief points in which the two systems sketched above agree on the
one hand and diverge on the other may be shortly stated as
follows.--Both systems teach advaita, i.e. non-duality or monism. There
exist not several fundamentally distinct principles, such as the
prak/r/iti and the purushas of the Sa@nkhyas, but there exists only one
all-embracing being. While, however, the advaita taught by /S/a@nkara is
a rigorous, absolute one, Ramanuja's doctrine has to be characterised as
visish/t/a advaita, i.e. qualified non-duality, non-duality with a
difference. According to Sankara, whatever is, is Brahman, and Brahman
itself is absolutely homogeneous, so that all difference and plurality
must be illusory. According to Ramanuja also, whatever is, is Brahman;
but Brahman is not of a homogeneous nature, but contains within itself
elements of plurality owing to which it truly manifests itself in a
diversified world. The world with its variety of material forms of
existence and individual souls is not unreal Maya, but a real part of
Brahman's nature, the body investing the universal Self. The Brahman of
/S/a@nkara is in itself impersonal, a homogeneous mass of objectless
thought, transcending all attributes; a personal God it becomes only
through its association with the unreal principle of Maya, so
that--strictly speaking--/S/a@nkara's personal God, his I/s/vara, is
himself something unreal. Ramanuja's Brahman, on the other hand, is
essentially a personal God, the all-powerful and all-wise ruler of a
real world permeated and animated by his spirit. There is thus no room
for the distinction between a param nirgu/n/am and an apara/m/ sagu/n/am
brahma, between Brahman and I/s/vara.--/S/a@nkara's individual soul is
Brahman in so far as limited by the unreal upadhis due to Maya. The
individual soul of Ramanuja, on the other hand, is really individual; it
has indeed sprung from Brahman and is never outside Brahman, but
nevertheless it enjoys a separate personal existence and will remain a
personality for ever--The release from sa/m/sara means, according to
/S/a@nkara, the absolute merging of the individual soul in Brahman, due
to the dismissal of the erroneous notion that the soul is distinct from
Brahman; according to Ramanuja it only means the soul's passing from the
troubles of earthly life into a kind of heaven or paradise where it will
remain for ever in undisturbed personal bliss.--As Ramanuja does not
distinguish a higher and lower Brahman, the distinction of a higher and
lower knowledge is likewise not valid for him; the teaching of the
Upanishads is not twofold but essentially one, and leads the enlightened
devotee to one result only [1].

I now proceed to give a conspectus of the contents of the Vedanta-sutras
according to /S/a@nkara in which at the same time all the more important
points concerning which Ramanuja disagrees will be noted. We shall here
have to enter into details which to many may appear tedious. But it is
only on a broad substratum of accurately stated details that we can hope
to establish any definite conclusions regarding the comparative value of
the different modes of interpretation which have been applied to the
Sutras. The line of investigation is an entirely new one, and for the
present nothing can be taken for granted or known.--In stating the
different heads of discussion (the so-called adhikara/n/as), each of
which comprises one or more Sutras, I shall follow the subdivision into
adhikara/n/as adopted in the Vyasadhika-ra/n/amala, the text of which is
printed in the second volume of the Bibliotheca Indica edition of the
Sutras.


FIRST ADHYAYA.
PADA I.


The first five adhikara/n/as lay down the fundamental positions with
regard to Brahman. Adhik. I (1) [2] treats of what the study of the
Vedanta presupposes. Adhik. II (2) defines Brahman as that whence the
world originates, and so on. Adhik. III (3) declares that Brahman is the
source of the Veda. Adhik. IV (4) proves Brahman to be the uniform topic
of all Vedanta-texts. Adhik. V (5-11) is engaged in proving by various
arguments that the Brahman, which the Vedanta-texts represent as the
cause of the world, is an intelligent principle, and cannot be
identified with the non-intelligent pradhana from which the world
springs according to the Sa@nkhyas.

With the next adhikara/n/a there begins a series of discussions of
essentially similar character, extending up to the end of the first
adhyaya. The question is throughout whether certain terms met with in
the Upanishads denote Brahman or some other being, in most cases the
jiva, the individual soul. /S/a@nkara remarks at the outset that, as the
preceding ten Sutras had settled the all-important point that all the
Vedanta-texts refer to Brahman, the question now arises why the enquiry
should be continued any further, and thereupon proceeds to explain that
the acknowledged distinction of a higher Brahman devoid of all qualities
and a lower Brahman characterised by qualities necessitates an
investigation whether certain Vedic texts of prima facie doubtful import
set forth the lower Brahman as the object of devout meditation, or the
higher Brahman as the object of true knowledge. But that such an
investigation is actually carried on in the remaining portion of the
first adhyaya, appears neither from the wording of the Sutras nor even
from /S/a@nkara's own treatment of the Vedic texts referred to in the
Sutras. In I, 1, 20, for instance, the question is raised whether the
golden man within the sphere of the sun, with golden hair and beard and
lotus-coloured eyes--of whom the Chandogya Upanishad speaks in 1, 6,
6--is an individual soul abiding within the sun or the highest Lord.
/S/a@nkara's answer is that the passage refers to the Lord, who, for the
gratification of his worshippers, manifests himself in a bodily shape
made of Maya. So that according to /S/a@nkara himself the alternative
lies between the sagu/n/a Brahman and some particular individual soul,
not between the sagu/n/a Brahman and the nirgu/n/a Brahman.

Adhik. VI (12-19) raises the question whether the anandamaya, mentioned
in Taittiriya Upanishad II, 5, is merely a transmigrating individual
soul or the highest Self. /S/a@nkara begins by explaining the Sutras on
the latter supposition--and the text of the Sutras is certainly in
favour of that interpretation--gives, however, finally the preference to
a different and exceedingly forced explanation according to which the
Sutras teach that the anandamaya is not Brahman, since the Upanishad
expressly says that Brahman is the tail or support of the
anandamaya[3].--Ramanuja's interpretation of Adhikara/n/a VI, although
not agreeing in all particulars with the former explanation of
/S/a@nkara, yet is at one with it in the chief point, viz. that the
anandamaya is Brahman. It further deserves notice that, while /S/a@nkara
looks on Adhik. VI as the first of a series of interpretatory
discussions, all of which treat the question whether certain Vedic
passages refer to Brahman or not, Ramanuja separates the adhikara/n/a
from the subsequent part of the pada and connects it with what had
preceded. In Adhik. V it had been shown that Brahman cannot be
identified with the pradhana; Adhik. VI shows that it is different from
the individual soul, and the proof of the fundamental position of the
system is thereby completed[4].--Adhik. VII (20, 21) demonstrates that
the golden person seen within the sun and the person seen within the
eye, mentioned in Ch. Up. I, 6, are not some individual soul of high
eminence, but the supreme Brahman.--Adhik. VIII (22) teaches that by the
ether from which, according to Ch. Up. I, 9, all beings originate, not
the elemental ether has to be understood but the highest
Brahman.--Adhik. IX (23). The pra/n/a also mentioned in Ch. Up. I, ii, 5
denotes the highest Brahman[5]--Adhik. X (24-27) teaches that the light
spoken of in Ch. Up. III, 13, 7 is not the ordinary physical light but
the highest Brahman[6].--Adhik. XI (28-31) decides that the pra/n/a
mentioned in Kau. Up. III, 2 is Brahman.


PADA II.


Adhik. I (1-8) shows that the being which consists of mind, whose body
is breath, &c., mentioned in Ch. Up. III, 14, is not the individual
soul, but Brahman. The Sutras of this adhikara/n/a emphatically dwell on
the difference of the individual soul and the highest Self, whence
/S/a@nkara is obliged to add an explanation--in his comment on Sutra
6--to the effect that that difference is to be understood as not real,
but as due to the false limiting adjuncts of the highest Self.--The
comment of Ramanuja throughout closely follows the words of the Sutras;
on Sutra 6 it simply remarks that the difference of the highest Self
from the individual soul rests thereon that the former as free from all
evil is not subject to the effects of works in the same way as the soul
is [7].--Adhik. II (9, 10) decides that he to whom the Brahmans and
Kshattriyas are but food (Ka/th/a. Up. I, 2, 25) is the highest
Self.--Adhik. III (11, 12) shows that the two entered into the cave
(Ka/th/a Up. I, 3, 1) are Brahman and the individual soul[8].--Adhik. IV
(13-17) shows that the person within the eye mentioned in Ch. Up. IV,
15, 1 is Brahman.--Adhik. V (18-20) shows that the ruler within
(antaraymin) described in B/ri/. Up. III, 7, 3 is Brahman. Sutra 20
clearly enounces the difference of the individual soul and the Lord;
hence /S/a@nkara is obliged to remark that that difference is not
real.--Adhik. VI (21-23) proves that that which cannot be seen, &c,
mentioned in Mu/nd/aka Up. I, 1, 3 is Brahman.--Adhik. VII (24-32) shows
that the atman vai/s/vanara of Ch. Up. V, 11, 6 is Brahman.


PADA III.


Adhik. I (1-7) proves that that within which the heaven, the earth, &c.
are woven (Mu/nd/. Up. II, 2, 5) is Brahman.--Adhik. II (8, 9) shows
that the bhuman referred to in Ch. Up. VII, 23 is Brahman.--Adhik. III
(10-12) teaches that the Imperishable in which, according to B/ri/. Up.
III, 8, 8, the ether is woven is Brahman.--Adhik. IV (13) decides that
the highest person who is to be meditated upon with the syllable Om,
according to Pra/s/na Up. V, 5, is not the lower but the higher
Brahman.--According to Ramanuja the two alternatives are Brahman and
Brahma (jivasamash/t/irupoz/nd/adhipatis /k/aturmukha/h/).--Adhik. V and
VI (comprising, according to /S/a@nkara, Sutras l4-2l) discuss the
question whether the small ether within the lotus of the heart mentioned
in Ch. Up. VIII, 1 is the elemental ether or the individual soul or
Brahman; the last alternative being finally adopted. In favour of the
second alternative the purvapakshin pleads the two passages Ch. Up.
VIII, 3, 4 and VIII, 12, 3, about the serene being (samprasada); for by
the latter the individual soul only can be understood, and in the
chapter, of which the latter passage forms part, there are ascribed to
it the same qualities (viz. freeness from sin, old age, death, &c.) that
were predicated in VIII, 1, of the small ether within the heart.--But
the reply to this is, that the second passage refers not to the
(ordinary) individual soul but to the soul in that state where its true
nature has become manifest, i.e. in which it is Brahman; so that the
subject of the passage is in reality not the so-called individual soul
but Brahman. And in the former of the two passages the soul is mentioned
not on its own account, but merely for the purpose of intimating that
the highest Self is the cause through which the individual soul
manifests itself in its true nature.--What Ramanuja understands by the
avirbhava of the soul will appear from the remarks on IV, 4.

The two next Sutras (22, 23) constitute, according to /S/a@nkara, a new
adhikara/n/a (VII), proving that he 'after whom everything shines, by
whose light all this is lighted' (Ka/th/a Up. II, 5, 15) is not some
material luminous body, but Brahman itself.--According to Ramanuja the
two Sutras do not start a new topic, but merely furnish some further
arguments strengthening the conclusion arrived at in the preceding
Sutras.[9]

Adhik. VIII (24, 25) decides that the person of the size of a thumb
mentioned in Ka/th/a Up. II, 4, 12 is not the individual soul but
Brahman.

The two next adhikara/n/as are of the nature of a digression. The
passage about the a@ngush/th/amatra was explained on the ground that the
human heart is of the size of a span; the question may then be asked
whether also such individuals as belong to other classes than mankind,
more particularly the Gods, are capable of the knowledge of Brahman: a
question finally answered in the affirmative.--This discussion leads in
its turn to several other digressions, among which the most important
one refers to the problem in what relation the different species of
beings stand to the words denoting them (Sutra 28). In connexion
herewith /S/a@nkara treats of the nature of words (/s/abda), opposing
the opinion of the Mima/m/saka Upavarsha, according to whom the word is
nothing but the aggregate of its constitutive letters, to the view of
the grammarians who teach that over and above the aggregate of the
letters there exists a super-sensuous entity called 'spho/t/a,' which is
the direct cause of the apprehension of the sense of a word (Adhik. IX;
Sutras 26-33).

Adhik. X (34-38) explains that /S/udras are altogether disqualified for
Brahmavidya.

Sutra 39 constitutes, according to /S/a@nkara, a new adhikara/n/a (XI),
proving that the pra/n/a in which everything trembles, according to
/K/a/th/a Up. II, 6, 2, is Brahman.--According to Ramanuja the Sutra
does not introduce a new topic but merely furnishes an additional reason
for the decision arrived at under Sutras 24, 25, viz. that the
a@ngus/th/amatra is Brahman. On this supposition, Sutras 24-39 form one
adhikara/n/a in which 26-38 constitute a mere digression led up to by
the mention made of the heart in 25.--The a@ngus/th/matra is referred to
twice in the Ka/th/a Upanishad, once in the passage discussed (II, 4,
12), and once in II, 6, 17 ('the Person not larger than a thumb'). To
determine what is meant by the a@ngus/th/matra, Ramanuja says, we are
enabled by the passage II, 6, 2, 3, which is intermediate between the
two passages concerning the a@ngus/th/matra, and which clearly refers to
the highest Brahman, of which alone everything can be said to stand in
awe.

The next Sutra (40) gives rise to a similar difference of opinion.
According to /S/a@nkara it constitutes by itself a new adhikara/n/a
(XII), proving that the 'light' (jyotis) mentioned in Ch. Up. VIII, 12,
3 is the highest Brahman.--According to Ramanuja the Sutra continues the
preceding adhikara/n/a, and strengthens the conclusion arrived at by a
further argument, referring to Ka/th/a Up. II, 5, 15--a passage
intermediate between the two passages about the a@ngush/th/amatra--which
speaks of a primary light that cannot mean anything but Brahman. The
Sutra has in that case to be translated as follows: '(The
a@ngush/th/amatra is Brahman) because (in a passage intervening between
the two) a light is seen to be mentioned (which can be Brahman only).'

The three last Sutras of the pada are, according to /S/a@nkara, to be
divided into two adhikara/n/as (XIII and XIV), Sutra 41 deciding that
the ether which reveals names and forms (Ch. Up. VIII, 14) is not the
elemental ether but Brahman; and 42, 43 teaching that the vij/n/anamaya,
'he who consists of knowledge,' of B/ri/. Up. IV, 3, 7 is not the
individual soul but Brahman.--According to Ramanuja the three Sutras
make up one single adhikara/n/a discussing whether the Chandogya
Upanishad passage about the ether refers to Brahman or to the individual
soul in the state of release; the latter of these two alternatives being
suggested by the circumstance that the released soul is the subject of
the passage immediately preceding ('Shaking off all evil as a horse
shakes off his hair,' &c.). Sutra 41 decides that 'the ether (is
Brahman) because the passage designates the nature of something else,'
&c. (i.e. of something other than the individual soul; other because to
the soul the revealing of names and forms cannot be ascribed, &c.)--But,
an objection is raised, does not more than one scriptural passage show
that the released soul and Brahman are identical, and is not therefore
the ether which reveals names and forms the soul as well as
Brahman?--(The two, Sutra 42 replies, are different) 'because in the
states of deep sleep and departing (the highest Self) is designated as
different' (from the soul)--which point is proved by the same scriptural
passages which /S/a@nkara adduces;--and 'because such terms as Lord and
the like' cannot be applied to the individual soul (43). Reference is
made to IV, 4, 14, where all jagadvyapara is said to belong to the Lord
only, not to the soul even when in the state of release.


PADA IV.


The last pada of the first adhyaya is specially directed against the
Sa@nkhyas.

The first adhikara/n/a (1-7) discusses the passage Ka/th/a Up. I, 3, 10;
11, where mention is made of the Great and the Undeveloped--both of them
terms used with a special technical sense in the Sa@nkhya-/s/astra,
avyakta being a synonym for pradhana.--/S/a@nkara shows by an exhaustive
review of the topics of the Ka/th/a Upanishad that the term avyakta has
not the special meaning which the Sa@nkhyas attribute to it, but denotes
the body, more strictly the subtle body (sukshma /s/arira), but at the
same time the gross body also, in so far as it is viewed as an effect of
the subtle one.

Adhik. II (8-10) demonstrates, according to /S/a@nkara, that the
tricoloured aja spoken of in /S/ve. Up. IV, 5 is not the pradhana of the
Sankhyas, but either that power of the Lord from which the world
springs, or else the primary causal matter first produced by that
power.--What Ramanuja in contradistinction from /S/a@nkara understands
by the primary causal matter, follows from the short sketch given above
of the two systems.

Adhik. III (11-13) shows that the pa/nk/a pa/nk/ajana/h/ mentioned in
B/ri/. Up. IV, 4, 17 are not the twenty-five principles of the
Sa@nkhyas.--Adhik. IV (14, 15) proves that Scripture does not contradict
itself on the all-important point of Brahman, i.e. a being whose essence
is intelligence, being the cause of the world.

Adhik. V (16-18) is, according to /S/a@nkara, meant to prove that 'he
who is the maker of those persons, of whom this is the work,' mentioned
in Kau. Up. IV, 19, is not either the vital air or the individual soul,
but Brahman.--The subject of the adhikara/n/a is essentially the same in
Ramanuja's view; greater stress is, however, laid on the adhikara/n/a
being polemical against the Sa@nkhyas, who wish to turn the passage into
an argument for the pradhana doctrine.

The same partial difference of view is observable with regard to the
next adhikara/n/a (VI; Sutras 19-22) which decides that the 'Self to be
seen, to be heard,' &c. (B/ri/. Up. II, 4, 5) is the highest Self, not
the individual soul. This latter passage also is, according to Ramanuja,
made the subject of discussion in order to rebut the Sa@nkhya who is
anxious to prove that what is there inculcated as the object of
knowledge is not a universal Self but merely the Sa@nkhya purusha.

Adhik. VII (23-27) teaches that Brahman is not only the efficient or
operative cause (nimitta) of the world, but its material cause as well.
The world springs from Brahman by way of modification (pari/n/ama; Sutra
26).--Ramanuja views this adhikara/n/a as specially directed against the
Se/s/vara-sa@nkhyas who indeed admit the existence of a highest Lord,
but postulate in addition an independent pradhana on which the Lord acts
as an operative cause merely.

Adhik. VIII (28) remarks that the refutation of the Sa@nkhya views is
applicable to other theories also, such as the doctrine of the world
having originated from atoms.

After this rapid survey of the contents of the first adhyaya and the
succinct indication of the most important points in which the views of
/S/a@nkara and Ramanuja diverge, we turn to a short consideration of two
questions which here naturally present themselves, viz., firstly, which
is the principle on which the Vedic passages referred to in the Sutras
have been selected and arranged; and, secondly, if, where /S/a@nkara and
Ramanuja disagree as to the subdivision of the Sutras into
Adhikara/n/as, and the determination of the Vedic passages discussed in
the Sutras, there are to be met with any indications enabling us to
determine which of the two commentators is right. (The more general
question as to how far the Sutras favour either /S/a@nkara's or
Ramanuja's general views cannot be considered at present.)

The Hindu commentators here and there attempt to point out the reason
why the discussion of a certain Vedic passage is immediately followed by
the consideration of a certain other one. Their explanations--which have
occasionally been referred to in the notes to the translation--rest on
the assumption that the Sutrakara in arranging the texts to be commented
upon was guided by technicalities of the Mima/m/sa-system, especially by
a regard for the various so-called means of proof which the Mima/m/saka
employs for the purpose of determining the proper meaning and position
of scriptural passages. But that this was the guiding principle, is
rendered altogether improbable by a simple tabular statement of the
Vedic passages referred to in the first adhyaya, such as given by
Deussen on page 130; for from the latter it appears that the order in
which the Sutras exhibit the scriptural passages follows the order in
which those passages themselves occur in the Upanishads, and it would
certainly be a most strange coincidence if that order enabled us at the
same time to exemplify the various prama/n/as of the Mima/m/sa in their
due systematic succession.

As Deussen's statement shows, most of the passages discussed are taken
from the Chandogya Upanishad, so many indeed that the whole first
adhyaya may be said to consist of a discussion of all those Chandogya
passages of which it is doubtful whether they are concerned with Brahman
or not, passages from the other Upanishads being brought in wherever an
opportunity offers. Considering the prominent position assigned to the
Upanishad mentioned, I think it likely that the Sutrakara meant to begin
the series of doubtful texts with the first doubtful passage from the
Chandogya, and that hence the sixth adhikara/n/a which treats of the
anandamaya mentioned in the Taittiriya Upanishad has, in agreement with
Ramanuja's views, to be separated from the subsequent adhikara/n/as, and
to be combined with the preceding ones whose task it is to lay down the
fundamental propositions regarding Brahman's nature.--The remaining
adhikara/n/as of the first pada follow the order of passages in the
Chandogya Upanishad, and therefore call for no remark; with the
exception of the last adhikara/n/a, which refers to a Kaushitaki
passage, for whose being introduced in this place I am not able to
account.--The first adhikara/n/a of the second pada returns to the
Chandogya Upanishad. The second one treats of a passage in the Ka/th/a
Upanishad where a being is referred to which eats everything. The reason
why that passage is introduced in this place seems to be correctly
assigned in the /S/ri-bhashya, which remarks that, as in the preceding
Sutra it had been argued that the highest Self is not an enjoyer, a
doubt arises whether by that being which eats everything the highest
Self can be meant[10]--The third adhikara/n/a again, whose topic is the
'two entered into the cave' (Ka/th/a Up. I, 3, 1), appears, as Ramanuja
remarks, to come in at this place owing to the preceding adhikara/n/a;
for if it could not be proved that one of the two is the highest Self, a
doubt would attach to the explanation given above of the 'eater' since
the 'two entered into the cave,' and the 'eater' stand under the same
prakara/n/a, and must therefore be held to refer to the same
matter.--The fourth adhikara/n/a is again occupied with a Chandogya
passage.--The fifth adhikara/n/a, whose topic is the Ruler within
(antaryamin), manifestly owes its place, as remarked by Ramanuja also,
to the fact that the Vedic passage treated had been employed in the
preceding adhikara/n/a (I, 2, 14) for the purpose of strengthening the
argument [11].--The sixth adhikara/n/a, again, which discusses 'that
which is not seen' (adre/s/ya; Mu/nd/. Up. I, 1, 6), is clearly
introduced in this place because in the preceding adhikara/n/a it had
been said that ad/ri/sh/t/a, &c. denote the highest Self;--The reasons
to which the last adhikara/n/a of the second pada and the first and
third adhikara/n/as of the third pada owe their places are not apparent
(the second adhikara/n/a of the third pada treats of a Chandogya
passage). The introduction, on the other hand, of the passage from the
Pra/s/na Upanishad treating of the akshara. O/m/kara is clearly due to
the circumstance that an akshara, of a different nature, had been
discussed in the preceding adhikara/n/a.--The fifth and sixth
adhikara/n/as investigate Chandogya passages.--The two next Sutras (22,
23) are, as remarked above, considered by /S/a@nkara to constitute a new
adhikara/n/a treating of the 'being after which everything shines'
(Mu/nd/. Up. II, 2, 10); while Ramanuja looks on them as continuing the
sixth adhikara/n/a. There is one circumstance which renders it at any
rate probable that Ramanuja, and not /S/a@nkara, here hits the intention
of the author of the Sutras. The general rule in the first three padas
is that, wherever a new Vedic passage is meant to be introduced, the
subject of the discussion, i.e. that being which in the end is declared
to be Brahman is referred to by means of a special word, in most cases a
nominative form [12]. From this rule there is in the preceding part of
the adhyaya only one real exception, viz. in I, 2, 1, which possibly may
be due to the fact that there a new pada begins, and it therefore was
considered superfluous to indicate the introduction of a new topic by a
special word. The exception supplied by I, 3, 19 is only an apparent
one; for, as remarked above, Sutra 19 does not in reality begin a new
adhikara/n/a. A few exceptions occurring later on will be noticed in
their places.--Now neither Sutra 22 nor Sutra 23 contains any word
intimating that a new Vedic passage is being taken into consideration,
and hence it appears preferable to look upon them, with Ramanuja, as
continuing the topic of the preceding adhikara/n/a.--This conclusion
receives an additional confirmation from the position of the next
adhikara/n/a, which treats of the being 'a span long' mentioned in
Ka/th/a Up. II, 4, 12; for the reason of this latter passage being
considered here is almost certainly the reference to the alpa/s/ruti in
Sutra 21, and, if so, the a@ngush/th/amatra properly constitutes the
subject of the adhikara/n/a immediately following on Adhik. V, VI;
which, in its turn, implies that Sutras 22, 23 do not form an
independent adhikara/n/a.--The two next adhikara/n/as are digressions,
and do not refer to special Vedic passages.--Sutra 39 forms a new
adhikara/n/a, according to /S/a@nkara, but not according to Ramanuja,
whose opinion seems again to be countenanced by the fact that the Sutra
does not exhibit any word indicative of a new topic. The same difference
of opinion prevails with regard to Sutra 40, and it appears from the
translation of the Sutra given above, according to Ramanuja's view, that
'jyoti/h/' need not be taken as a nominative.--The last two
adhikara/n/as finally refer, according to Ramanuja, to one Chandogya
passage only, and here also we have to notice that Sutra 42 does not
comprise any word intimating that a new passage is about to be
discussed.

From all this we seem entitled to draw the following conclusions. The
Vedic passages discussed in the three first padas of the Vedanta-sutras
comprise all the doubtful--or at any rate all the more important
doubtful--passages from the Chandogya Upanishad. These passages are
arranged in the order in which the text of the Upanishad exhibits them.
Passages from other Upanishads are discussed as opportunities offer,
there being always a special reason why a certain Chandogya passage is
followed by a certain passage from some other Upanishad. Those reasons
can be assigned with sufficient certainty in a number of cases although
not in all, and from among those passages whose introduction cannot be
satisfactorily accounted for some are eliminated by our following the
subdivision of the Sutras into adhikara/n/as adopted by Ramanuja, a
subdivision countenanced by the external form of the Sutras.

The fourth pada of the first adhyaya has to be taken by itself. It is
directed specially and avowedly against Sa@nkhya-interpretations of
Scripture, not only in its earlier part which discusses isolated
passages, but also--as is brought out much more clearly in the
/S/ri-bhashya than by /S/a@nkara--in its latter part which takes a
general survey of the entire scriptural evidence for Brahman being the
material as well as the operative cause of the world.

Deussen (p. 221) thinks that the selection made by the Sutrakara of
Vedic passages setting forth the nature of Brahman is not in all cases
an altogether happy one. But this reproach rests on the assumption that
the passages referred to in the first adhyaya were chosen for the
purpose of throwing light on what Brahman is, and this assumption can
hardly be upheld. The Vedanta-sutras as well as the Purva
Mima/m/sa-sutras are throughout Mima/m/sa i.e. critical discussions of
such scriptural passages as on a prima facie view admit of different
interpretations and therefore necessitate a careful enquiry into their
meaning. Here and there we meet with Sutras which do not directly
involve a discussion of the sense of some particular Vedic passage, but
rather make a mere statement on some important point. But those cases
are rare, and it would be altogether contrary to the general spirit of
the Sutras to assume that a whole adhyaya should be devoted to the task
of showing what Brahman is. The latter point is sufficiently determined
in the first five (or six) adhikara/n/as; but after we once know what
Brahman is we are at once confronted by a number of Upanishad passages
concerning which it is doubtful whether they refer to Brahman or not.
With their discussion all the remaining adhikara/n/as of the first
adhyaya are occupied. That the Vedanta-sutras view it as a particularly
important task to controvert the doctrine of the Sa@nkhyas is patent
(and has also been fully pointed out by Deussen, p. 23). The fifth
adhikara/n/a already declares itself against the doctrine that the world
has sprung from a non-intelligent principle, the pradhana, and the
fourth pada of the first adhyaya returns to an express polemic against
Sa@nkhya interpretations of certain Vedic statements. It is therefore
perhaps not saying too much if we maintain that the entire first adhyaya
is due to the wish, on the part of the Sutrakara, to guard his own
doctrine against Sa@nkhya attacks. Whatever the attitude of the other
so-called orthodox systems may be towards the Veda, the Sa@nkhya system
is the only one whose adherents were anxious--and actually attempted--to
prove that their views are warranted by scriptural passages. The
Sa@nkhya tendency thus would be to show that all those Vedic texts which
the Vedantin claims as teaching the existence of Brahman, the
intelligent and sole cause of the world, refer either to the pradhana or
some product of the pradhana, or else to the purusha in the Sankhya
sense, i.e. the individual soul. It consequently became the task of the
Vedantin to guard the Upanishads against misinterpretations of the kind,
and this he did in the first adhyaya of the Vedanta-sutras, selecting
those passages about whose interpretation doubts were, for some reason
or other, likely to arise. Some of the passages singled out are
certainly obscure, and hence liable to various interpretations; of
others it is less apparent why it was thought requisite to discuss them
at length. But this is hardly a matter in which we are entitled to find
fault with the Sutrakara; for no modern scholar, either European or
Hindu, is--or can possibly be--sufficiently at home, on the one hand, in
the religious and philosophical views which prevailed at the time when
the Sutras may have been composed, and, on the other hand, in the
intricacies of the Mima/m/sa, to judge with confidence which Vedic
passages may give rise to discussions and which not.

Notes:

[Footnote 1: The only 'sectarian' feature of the Sri-bhashya is, that
identifies Brahman with Vish/n/u or Naraya/n/a; but this in no way
affects the interpretations put on the Sutras and Upanishads. Naraya/n/a
is in fact nothing but another name of Brahman.]

[Footnote 2: The Roman numerals indicate the number of the adhikara/n/a;
the figures in parentheses state the Sutras comprised in each
adhikara/n/a.]

[Footnote 3: Deussen's supposition (pp. 30, 150) that the passage
conveying the second interpretation is an interpolation is liable to two
objections. In the first place, the passage is accepted and explained by
all commentators; in the second place, /S/a@nkara in the passage
immediately preceding Sutra 12 quotes the adhikara/n/a 'anandamayo s
bhyasat' as giving rise to a discussion whether the param or the aparam
brahman is meant. Now this latter point is not touched upon at all in
that part of the bhashya which sets forth the former explanation, but
only in the subsequent passage, which refutes the former and advocates
