
"Forty seconds past midnight," came the reply from the equatorial
observer.

Evarts repeated the answer for Thornton's benefit, looking at their own
clock at the same time. It pointed to exactly forty seconds past the
hour. He heard Thornton suppress something like an oath.

"There's something the matter!" repeated Thornton dumbly. "Aeta isn't
within five minutes of crossing. Both clocks can't be wrong!"

He pressed a button that connected with the wireless room.

"What's the time?" he called sharply through the nickel-plated
speaking-tube.

"Forty-five seconds past the hour," came the answer. Then: "But I want
to see you, sir. There's something queer going on. May I come in?"

"Come!" almost shouted Thornton.

A moment later the flushed face of Williams, the night operator,
appeared in the doorway.

"Excuse me, sir," he stammered, "but something fierce must have
happened! I thought you ought to know. The Eiffel Tower has been trying
to talk to us for over two hours, but I can't get what he's saying."

"What's the matter--atmospherics?" snapped Evarts.

"No; the air _was_ full of them, sir--shrieking with them you might say;
but they've stopped now. The trouble has been that I've been jammed by
the Brussels station talking to the Belgian Congo--same wave length--and
I couldn't tune Brussels out. Every once in a while I'd get a word of
what Paris was saying, and it's always the same word--'_heure_.' But
just now Brussels stopped sending and I got the complete message of the
Eiffel Tower. They wanted to know our time by Greenwich. I gave it to
'em. Then Paris said to tell you to take your transit with great care
and send result to them immediately----"

The ordinarily calm Thornton gave a great suspiration and his face was
livid. "Aeta's just crossed--we're five minutes out! Evarts, am I crazy?
Am I talking straight?"

Evarts laid his hand on the other's arm.

"The earthquake's knocked out your transit," he suggested.

"And Paris--how about Paris?" asked Thornton. He wrote something down on
a card mechanically and started for the door. "Get me the Eiffel Tower!"
he ordered Williams.

The three men stood motionless, as the wireless man sent the Eiffel
Tower call hurtling across the Atlantic:

"ETA--ETA--ETA."

"All right," whispered Williams, "I've got 'em."

"Tell Paris that our clocks are all out five minutes according to the
meridian."

Williams worked the key rapidly, and then listened.

"The Eiffel Tower says that their chronometers also appear to be out by
the same time, and that Greenwich and Moscow both report the same thing.
Wait a minute! He says Moscow has wired that at eight o'clock last
evening a tremendous aurora of bright yellow light was seen to the
northwest, and that their spectroscopes showed the helium line only. He
wants to know if we have any explanation to offer----"

"Explanation!" gasped Evarts. "Tell Paris that we had earthquake shocks
here together with violent seismic movements, sudden rise in barometer,
followed by fall, statics, and erratic variation in the magnetic
needle."

"What does it all mean?" murmured Thornton, staring blankly at the
younger man.

The key rattled and the rotary spark whined into a shriek. Then silence.

"Paris says that the same manifestations have been observed in Russia,
Algeria, Italy, and London," called out Williams. "Ah! What's that?
Nauen's calling." Again he sent the blue flame crackling between the
coils. "Nauen reports an error of five minutes in their meridian
observations according to the official clocks. And hello! He says Berlin
has capitulated and that the Russians began marching through at
daylight--that is about two hours ago. He says he is about to turn the
station over to the Allied Commissioners, who will at once assume
charge."

Evarts whistled.

"How about it?" he asked of Thornton.

The latter shook his head gravely.

"It may be--explainable--or," he added hoarsely, "it may mean the end of
the world."

Williams sprang from his chair and confronted Thornton.

"What do you mean?" he almost shouted.

"Perhaps the universe is running down!" said Evarts soothingly. "At any
rate, keep it to yourself, old chap. If the jig is up there's no use
scaring people to death a month or so too soon!"

Thornton grasped an arm of each.

"Not a word of this to anybody!" he ground out through compressed lips.
"Absolute silence, or hell may break loose on earth!"




IV


Free translation of the Official Report of the Imperial Commission of
the Berlin Academy of Science to the Imperial Commissioners of the
German Federated States:

     The unprecedented cosmic phenomena which occurred on the 22d and
     27th days of the month of July, and which were felt over the entire
     surface of the globe, have left a permanent effect of such
     magnitude on the position of the earth's axis in space and the
     duration of the period of the rotation, that it is impossible to
     predict at the present time the ultimate changes or modifications
     in the climatic conditions which may follow. This commission has
     considered most carefully the possible causes that may have been
     responsible for this catastrophe--(_Weltunfall_)--and by
     eliminating every hypothesis that was incapable of explaining all
     of the various disturbances, is now in a position to present two
     theories, either one of which appears to be capable of explaining
     the recent disturbances.

     The phenomena in question may be briefly summarized as follows;

     1. THE YELLOW AURORA. In Northern Europe this appeared suddenly on
     the night of July 22d as a broad, faint sheaf--(_Lichtbuendel_)--of
     clear yellow light in the western sky. Reports from America show
     that at Washington it appeared in the north as a narrow shaft of
     light, inclined at an angle of about thirty degrees with the
     horizon, and shooting off to the east. Near the horizon it was
     extremely brilliant, and the spectroscope showed that the light was
     due to glowing helium gas.

     The Potsdam Observatory reported that the presence of sodium has
     been detected in the aurora; but this appears to have been a mistake
     due to the faintness of the light and the circumstance that no
     comparison spectrum was impressed on the plate. On the photograph
     made at the Washington Observatory the helium line is certain, as a
     second exposure was made with a sodium flame; and the two lines are
     shown distinctly separated.

     2. THE NEGATIVE ACCELERATION. This phenomenon was observed
     to a greater or less extent all over the globe. It was especially
     marked near the equator; but in Northern Europe it was noted by only
     a few observers, though many clocks were stopped and other
     instruments deranged. There appears to be no doubt that a force of
     terrific magnitude was applied in a tangential direction to the
     surface of the earth, in such a direction as to oppose its axial
     rotation, with the effect that the surface velocity was diminished
     by about one part in three hundred, resulting in a lengthening of
     the day by five minutes, thirteen and a half seconds.

     The application of this brake--(_Bremsekraft_), as we may term
     it--caused acceleration phenomena to manifest themselves precisely
     as on a railroad train when being brought to a stop. The change in
     the surface speed of the earth at the equator has amounted to about
     6.4 kilometres an hour; and various observations show that this
     change of velocity was brought about by the operation of the unknown
     force for a period of time of less than three minutes. The negative
     acceleration thus represented would certainly be too small to
     produce any marked physiological sensations, and yet the reports
     from various places indicate that they were certainly observed. The
     sensations felt are usually described as similar to those
     experienced in a moving automobile when the brake is very gently
     applied.

     Moreover, certain destructive actions are reported from localities
     near the equator--chimneys fell and tall buildings swayed; while
     from New York comes the report that the obelisk in Central Park was
     thrown from its pedestal. It appears that these effects were due to
     the circumstance that the alteration of velocity was propagated
     through the earth as a wave similar to an earthquake wave, and that
     the effects were cumulative at certain points--a theory that is
     substantiated by reports that at certain localities, even near the
     equator, no effects were noted.

     3. TIDAL WAVES. These were observed everywhere and were
     very destructive in many places. In the Panama Canal, which is near
     the equator and which runs nearly east and west, the sweep of the
     water was so great that it flowed over the Gatun Lock. On the
     eastern coasts of the various continents there was a recession of
     the sea, the fall of the tide being from three to five metres below
     the low-water mark. On the western coasts there was a corresponding
     rise, which in some cases reached a level of over twelve metres.

     That the tidal phenomena were not more marked and more destructive
     is a matter of great surprise, and has been considered as evidence
     that the retarding force was not applied at a single spot on the
     earth's surface, but was a distributed force, which acted on the
     water as well as on the land, though to a less extent. It is
     difficult, however, to conceive of a force capable of acting in such
     a way; and Bjoernson's theory of the magnetic vortex in the ether has
     been rejected by this commission.

     4. ATMOSPHERIC DISTURBANCES. Some time after the appearance
     of the yellow aurora a sudden rise in atmospheric pressure, followed
     by a gradual fall considerably below the normal pressure, was
     recorded over the entire surface of the globe. Calculations based on
     the time of arrival of this disturbance at widely separated points
     show that it proceeded with the velocity of sound from a point
     situated probably in Northern Labrador. The maximum rise of pressure
     recorded was registered at Halifax, the self-recording barographs
     showing that the pressure rose over six centimetres in less than
     five minutes.

     5. SHIFT IN DIRECTION OF THE EARTH'S AXIS. The axis of the
     earth has been shifted in space by the disturbance and now points
     almost exactly toward the double star Delta Ursae Minoris. This
     change appears to have resulted from the circumstance that the force
     was applied to the surface of the globe in a direction not quite
     parallel to the direction of rotation, the result being the
     development of a new axis and a shift in the positions of the poles,
     which it will now be necessary to rediscover.

     It appears that these most remarkable cosmic phenomena can be
     explained in either of two ways: they may have resulted from an
     explosive or volcanic discharge from the surface of the earth, or
     from the oblique impact of a meteoric stream moving at a very high
     velocity. It seems unlikely that sufficient energy to bring about
     the observed changes could have been developed by a volcanic
     disturbance of the ordinary type; but if radioactive forces are
     allowed to come into play the amount of energy available is
     practically unlimited.

     It is difficult, however, to conceive of any way in which a sudden
     liberation of atomic energy could have been brought about by any
     terrestrial agency; so that the first theory, though able to account
     for the facts, seems to be the less tenable of the two. The meteoric
     theory offers no especial difficulty. The energy delivered by a
     comparatively small mass of finely divided matter, moving at a
     velocity of several hundred kilometres a second--and such a velocity
     is by no means unknown--would be amply sufficient to alter the
     velocity of rotation by the small amount observed.

     Moreover, the impact of such a meteoric stream may have
     developed a temperature sufficiently high to bring about
     radioactive changes, the effect of which would be to expel
     helium and other disintegration products at cathode-ray
     velocity--(_Kathoden-Strahlen-Fortpflanzung-Geschwindigkeit_)--from
     the surface of the earth; and the recoil exerted by this expulsion
     would add itself to the force of the meteoric impact.

     The presence of helium makes this latter hypothesis not altogether
     improbable, while the atmospheric wave of pressure would result at
     once from the disruption of the air by the passage of the meteor
     stream through it. Exploration of the region in which it seems
     probable that the disturbance took place will undoubtedly furnish
     the data necessary for the complete solution of the problem."
     [Pp. 17-19.]




V


At ten o'clock one evening, shortly after the occurrences heretofore
described, an extraordinary conference occurred at the White House,
probably the most remarkable ever held there or elsewhere. At the long
table at which the cabinet meetings took place sat six gentlemen in
evening dress, each trying to appear unconcerned, if not amused. At the
head of the table was the President of the United States; next to him
Count von Koenitz, the German Ambassador, representing the Imperial[1]
German Commissioners, who had taken over the reins of the German
Government after the abdication of the Kaiser; and, on the opposite
side, Monsieur Emil Liban, Prince Rostoloff, and Sir John Smith, the
respective ambassadors of France, Russia, and Great Britain. The sixth
person was Thornton, the astronomer.

[Footnote 1: The Germans were unwilling to surrender the use of the
words "Empire" and "Imperial," even after they had adopted a republican
form of government.]

The President had only succeeded in bringing this conference about after
the greatest effort and the most skilful diplomacy--in view of the
extreme importance which, he assured them all, he attached to the
matters which he desired to lay before them. Only for this reason had
the ambassadors of warring nations consented to meet--unofficially as it
were.

"With great respect, your Excellency," said Count von Koenitz, "the
matter is preposterous--as much so as a fairy tale by Grimm! This
wireless operator of whom you speak is lying about these messages. If he
received them at all--a fact which hangs solely upon his word--he
received them _after_ and not _before_ the phenomena recorded."

The President shook his head. "That might hold true of the first
message--the one received July 19th," said he, "but the second message,
foretelling the lengthening of July 27th, _was delivered on that day,
and was in my hands before the disturbances occurred_."

Von Koenitz fingered his moustache and shrugged his shoulders. It was
clear that he regarded the whole affair as absurd, undignified.

Monsieur Liban turned impatiently from him.

"Your Excellency," he said, addressing the President, "I cannot share
the views of Count von Koenitz. I regard this affair as of the most
stupendous importance. Messages or no messages, extraordinary natural
phenomena are occurring which may shortly end in the extinction of human
life upon the planet. A power which can control the length of the day
can annihilate the globe."

"You cannot change the facts," remarked Prince Rostoloff sternly to the
German Ambassador. "The earth has changed its orbit. Professor
Vaskofsky, of the Imperial College, has so declared. There is some
cause. Be it God or devil, there is a cause. Are we to sit still and do
nothing while the globe's crust freezes and our armies congeal into
corpses?" He trembled with agitation.

"Calm yourself, _mon cher Prince_!" said Monsieur Liban. "So far we have
gained fifteen minutes and have lost nothing! But, as you say, whether
or not the sender of these messages is responsible, there is a cause,
and we must find it."

"But how? That is the question," exclaimed the President almost
apologetically, for he felt, as did Count von Koenitz, that somehow an
explanation would shortly be forthcoming that would make this conference
seem the height of the ridiculous. "I have already," he added hastily,
"instructed the entire force of the National Academy of Sciences to
direct its energies toward the solution of these phenomena. Undoubtedly
Great Britain, Russia, Germany, and France are doing the same. The
scientists report that the yellow aurora seen in the north, the
earthquakes, the variation of the compass, and the eccentricities of the
barometer are probably all connected more or less directly with the
change in the earth's orbit. But they offer no explanation. They do not
suggest what the aurora is nor why its appearance should have this
effect. It, therefore, seems to me clearly my duty to lay before you all
the facts as far as they are known to me. Among these facts are the
mysterious messages received by wireless at the Naval Observatory
immediately preceding these events."

"_Post hoc, ergo propter hoc!_" half sneered Von Koenitz.

The President smiled wearily.

"What do you wish me to do?" he asked, glancing round the table. "Shall
we remain inactive? Shall we wait and see what may happen?"

"No! No!" shouted Rostoloff, jumping to his feet. "Another week and we
may all be plunged into eternity. It is suicidal not to regard this
matter seriously. We are sick from war. And perhaps Count von Koenitz,
in view of the fall of Berlin, would welcome something of the sort as an
honourable way out of his country's difficulties."

"Sir!" cried the count, leaping to his feet. "Have a care! It has cost
Russia four million men to reach Berlin. When we have taken Paris we
shall recapture Berlin and commence the march of our victorious eagles
toward Moscow and the Winter Palace."

"Gentlemen! Gentlemen! Be seated, I implore you!" exclaimed the
President.

The Russian and German ambassadors somewhat ungraciously resumed their
former places, casting at each other glances of undisguised contempt.

"As I see the matter," continued the President, "there are two distinct
propositions before you: The first relates to how far the extraordinary
events of the past week are of such a character as to demand joint
investigation and action by the Powers. The second involves the cause of
these events and their connection with and relation to the sender of the
messages signed Pax. I shall ask you to signify your opinion as to each
of these questions."

"I believe that some action should be taken, based on the assumption
that they are manifestations of one and the same power or cause," said
Monsieur Liban emphatically.

"I agree with the French Ambassador," growled Rostoloff.

"I am of opinion that the phenomena should be the subject of proper
scientific investigation," remarked Count von Koenitz more calmly. "But
as far as these messages are concerned they are, if I may be pardoned
for saying so, a foolish joke. It is undignified to take any cognizance
of them."

"What do you think, Sir John?" asked the President, turning to the
English Ambassador.

"Before making up my mind," returned the latter quietly, "I should like
to see the operator who received them."

"By all means!" exclaimed Von Koenitz.

The President pressed a button and his secretary entered.

"I had anticipated such a desire on the part of all of you," he
announced, "and arranged to have him here. He is waiting outside. Shall
I have him brought in?"

"Yes! Yes!" answered Rostoloff. And the others nodded.

The door opened, and Bill Hood, wearing his best new blue suit and
nervously twisting a faded bicycle cap between his fingers, stumbled
awkwardly into the room. His face was bright red with embarrassment and
one of his cheeks exhibited a marked protuberance. He blinked in the
glare of the electric light.

"Mr. Hood," the President addressed him courteously, "I have sent for
you to explain to these gentlemen, who are the ambassadors of the great
European Powers, the circumstances under which you received the wireless
messages from the unknown person describing himself as 'Pax.'"

Hood shifted from his right to his left foot and pressed his lips
together. Von Koenitz fingered the waxed ends of his moustache and
regarded the operator whimsically.

"In the first place," went on the President, "we desire to know whether
the messages which you have reported were received under ordinary or
under unusual conditions. In a word, could you form any opinion as to
the whereabouts of the sender?"

Hood scratched the side of his nose in a manner politely doubtful.

"Sure thing, your Honour," he answered at last. "Sure the conditions was
unusual. That feller has some juice and no mistake."

"Juice?" inquired Von Koenitz.

"Yare--current. Whines like a steel top. Fifty kilowatts sure, and maybe
more! And a twelve-thousand-metre wave."

"I do not fully understand," interjected Rostoloff. "Please explain,
sir."

"Ain't nothin' to explain," returned Hood. "He's just got a hell of a
wave length, that's all. Biggest on earth. We're only tuned for a
three-thousand-metre wave. At first I could hardly take him at all. I
had to throw in our new Henderson ballast coils before I could hear
properly. I reckon there ain't another station in Christendom can get
him."

"Ah," remarked Von Koenitz. "One of your millionaire amateurs, I
suppose."

"Yare," agreed Hood. "I thought sure he was a nut."

"A what?" interrupted Sir John Smith.

"A nut," answered Hood. "A crank, so to speak."

"Ah, 'krank'!" nodded the German. "Exactly--a lunatic! That is precisely
what I say!"

"But I don't think it's no nut now," countered Hood valiantly. "If he is
a bug he's the biggest bug in all creation, that's all I can say. He's
got the goods, that's what he's got. He'll do some damage before he gets
through."

"Are these messages addressed to anybody in particular?" inquired Sir
John, who was studying Hood intently.

"Well, they are and they ain't. Pax--that's what he calls
himself--signals NAA, our number, you understand, and then says what he
has to say to the whole world, care of the United States. The first
message I thought was a joke and stuck it in a book I was reading,
'_Silas Snooks_'----"

"What?" ejaculated Von Koenitz impatiently.

"Snooks--man's name--feller in the book--nothing to do with this
business," explained the operator. "I forgot all about it. But after the
earthquake and all the rest of the fuss I dug it out and gave it to Mr.
Thornton. Then on the 27th came the next one, saying that Pax was
getting tired of waiting for us and was going to start something. That
came at one o'clock in the afternoon, and the fun began at three sharp.
The whole observatory went on the blink. Say, there ain't any doubt in
your minds that it's _him_, is there?"

Von Koenitz looked cynically round the room.

"There is not!" exclaimed Rostoloff and Liban in the same breath.

The German laughed.

"Speak for yourselves, Excellencies," he sneered. His tone nettled the
wireless representative of the sovereign American people.

"Do you think I'm a liar?" he demanded, clenching his jaw and glaring at
Von Koenitz.

The German Ambassador shrugged his shoulders again. Such things were
impossible in a civilized country--at Potsdam--but what could you
expect----

"Steady, Hood!" whispered Thornton.

"Remember, Mr. Hood, that you are here to answer our questions," said
the President sternly. "You must not address his Excellency, Baron von
Koenitz, in this fashion."

"But the man was making a monkey of me!" muttered Hood. "All I say is,
look out. This Pax is on his job and means business. I just got another
call before I came over here--at nine o'clock."

"What was its purport?" inquired the President.

"Why, it said Pax was getting tired of nothing being done and wanted
action of some sort. Said that men were dying like flies, and he
proposed to put an end to it at any cost. And--and----"

"Yes! Yes!" ejaculated Liban breathlessly.

"And he would give further evidence of his control over the forces of
