to the cubic foot, it is in great demand for various purposes,
one of them indicated in the plant's popular name of Spoon-wood.

SHEEP-LAUREL, LAMB-KILL, WICKY, CALF-KILL, SHEEP-POISON
NARROW-LEAVED LAUREL (K. angustifolia), and so on through a list
of folk names testifying chiefly to the plant's wickedness in the
pasture, may be especially deadly food for cattle, but it
certainly is a feast to the eyes. However much we may admire the
small, deep crimson-pink flowers that we find in June and July in
moist fields or swampy ground or on the hillsides, few of us will
agree with Thoreau, who claimed that it is "handsomer than the
mountain laurel." The low shrub may be only six inches high, or
it may attain three feet. The narrow evergreen leaves, pale on
the underside, have a tendency to form groups of threes, standing
upright when newly put forth, but bent downward with the weight
of age. A peculiarity of the plant is that clusters of leaves
usually terminate the woody stem, for the flowers grow in whorls
or in clusters at the side of it below.

The PALE or SWAMP LAUREL (K. glauca), found in cool bogs from
Newfoundland to New Jersey and Michigan, and westward to the
Pacific Coast, coats the under side of its mostly upright leaves
with a smooth whitish bloom like the cabbage's. It is a
straggling little bush, even lower than the lamb-kill, and an
earlier bloomer, putting forth its loose, niggardly clusters of
deep rose or lilac-colored flowers in June.


TRAILING ARBUTUS; MAYFLOWER; GROUND LAUREL
  (Epigaea repens)  Heath family

Flowers - Pink, fading to nearly white, very fragrant about 1/2
in. across when expanded, few or many in clusters at ends of
branches. Calyx of 5 dry overlapping sepals; corolla
salver-shaped, the slender, hairy tube spreading into 5 equal
lobes; 10 stamens; 1 pistil with a column-like style and a
5-lobed stigma. Stem: Spreading over the ground (Epigaea = on the
earth); woody, the leafy twigs covered with rusty hairs. Leaves:
Alternate, oval, rounded at the base, smooth above, more or less
hairy below, evergreen, weather-worn, on short, rusty, hairy
petioles.
Preferred Habitat - Light sandy loam in woods, especially under
evergreen trees, or in mossy, rocky places.
Flowering Season - March-May.
Distribution - Newfoundland to Florida, west to Kentucky, and the
Northwest Territory.

Can words describe the fragrance of the very breath of spring -
that delicious commingling of the perfume of arbutus, the odor of
pines, and the snow-soaked soil just warming into life? Those who
know the flower only as it is sold in the city streets, tied with
wet, dirty string into tight bunches, withered and forlorn, can
have little idea of the joy of finding the pink, pearly blossoms
freshly opened among the withered leaves of oak and chestnut,
moss, and pine needles in which they nestle close to the cold
earth in the leafless, windy northern forest. Even in Florida,
where broad patches carpet the woods in February, one misses
something of the arbutus's accustomed charm simply because there
are no slushy remnants of snow drifts, no reminders of winter
hardships in the vicinity. There can be no glad surprise at
finding dainty spring flowers in a land of perpetual summer.
Little wonder that the Pilgrim Fathers, after the first awful
winter on the "stern New England coast," loved this early
messenger of hope and gladness above the frozen ground at
Plymouth. In an introductory note to his poem "The Mayflowers,"
Whittier states that the name was familiar in England, as the
application of it to the historic vessel shows; but it was
applied by the English, and still is, to the hawthorn. Its use in
New England in connection with the trailing arbutus dates from a
very early day, some claiming that the first Pilgrims so used it
in affectionate memory of the vessel and its English flower
association.

    "Sad Mayflower I watched by winter stars,
       And nursed by winter gales,
     With petals of the sleeted spars,
       And leaves of frozen sails!

    "But warmer suns ere long shall bring
       To life the frozen sod,
     And through dead leaves of hope shall spring
       Afresh the flowers of God!"

Some have attempted to show that the Pilgrims did not find the
flowers until the last month of spring, and that, therefore, they
were named Mayflowers. Certainly the arbutus is not a typical May
blossom even in New England. Bryant associates it with the
hepatica, our earliest spring flower, in his poem, "The,
Twenty-seventh of March":

               "Within the woods
     Tufts of ground laurel, creeping underneath
     The leaves of the last summer, send their sweets
     Upon the chilly air, and by the oak,
     The squirrel cups, a graceful company
     Hide in their bells a soft aerial blue."

There is little use trying to coax this shyest of sylvan flowers
into our gardens where other members of its family,
rhododendrons, laurels, and azaleas make themselves delightfully
at home. It is wild as a hawk, an untamable creature that slowly
pines to death when brought into contact with civilization.
Greedy street venders, who ruthlessly tear up the plant by the
yard, and others without even the excuse of eking out a paltry
income by its sale, have already exterminated it within a wide
radius of our Eastern cities. How curious that the majority of
people show their appreciation of a flower's beauty only by
selfishly, ignorantly picking every specimen they can find!

In many localities the arbutus sets no fruit, for it is still
undergoing evolutionary changes looking toward the perfecting of
an elaborate system to insure cross-fertilization. Already it has
attained to perfume, nectar, and color to attract quantities of
insects, chiefly flies and small female bees but in some flowers
the anthers produce no pollen for them to carry, while others are
filled with grains, yet all the stigmas in the neighboring
clusters may be defective. The styles and the filaments are of
several different lengths, showing a tendency toward trimorphism,
perhaps, like the wonderful purple loosestrife; but at present
the flower pursues a most wasteful method of distributing pollen,
and in different sections of the country acts so differently that
its phases are impossible to describe except to the advanced
student. They may, however, be best summarized in the words of
Professor Asa Gray: "The flowers are of two kinds, each with two
modifications; the two main kinds characterized by the nature and
perfection of the stigma, along with more or less abortion of the
stamens; their modifications by the length of the style."

When our English cousins speak of the arbutus, they have in mind
a very different species from ours. Theirs is the late flowering
strawberry-tree, an evergreen shrub with clustering white
blossoms and beautiful rough, red berries. Indeed, the name
arbutus is derived from the Celtic word Arboise, meaning rough
fruit.


LARGE or AMERICAN CRANBERRY
  (Oxycoccus macrocarpus; Vaccinium macrocarpon of Gray)
Huckleberry family

Flowers - Light pink, about 1/2 in. across, nodding on slender
pedicels from sides and tips of erect branches. Calyx round, 4-or
5-parted; corolla a long cone in bud, its four or five nearly
separate, narrow petals turned far backward later; 8 or 10
stamens, the anthers united into a protruding cone, its hollow
tubes shedding pollen by a pore at tip. Stem: Creeping or
trailing, slender, woody, 1 to 3 ft. long, its leafy branches 8
in. high or less. Leaves: Small, alternate, oblong, evergreen,
pale beneath, the edges rolled backward. Fruit: An oblong or
ovoid, many seeded, juicy red berry (Oxycoccus = sour berry).
Preferred Habitat - Bogs; sandy, swampy meadows.
Flowering Season - June-August.
Distribution - North Carolina, Michigan, and Minnesota northward
and westward.

A hundred thousand people are interested in the berry of this
pretty vine to one who has ever seen its flowers. Yet if the
blossom were less attractive, to insects at least, and took less
pains to shake out its pollen upon them as they cling to the cone
to sip its nectar, few berries would accompany the festive
Thanksgiving turkey. Cultivators of the cranberry know how
important it is to have the flooded bogs well drained before the
flowering season. Water (or ice) may cover the plants to the
depth of a foot or more all winter and until the 10th of May; and
during the late summer it is often advisable to overflow the bogs
to prevent injury of the fine, delicate roots from drought, and
to destroy the worm that is the plant's worst enemy; but until
the flowers have wooed the bees, flies, and other winged
benefactors, and fruit is well formed, every cultivator knows
enough not to submerge his bog. With flowers under water there
are no insect visitors, consequently no berries. Dense mats of
the wiry vines should yield about one hundred and fifty bushels
of berries to the acre, under skilful cultivation - a most
profitable industry, since the cranberry costs less to cultivate,
gather, and market than the strawberry or any of the small
perishable fruits. Planted in muck and sand in the garden, the
vines yield surprisingly good results. The Cape Cod Bell is the
best known market berry. One of the interesting sights to the
city loiterer about the New England coast in early autumn is the
berry picking that is conducted on an immense scale. Men, women,
and children drop all other work; whole villages are nearly
depopulated while daylight lasts; temporary buildings set up on
the edges of the bogs contain throngs of busy people sorting,
measuring, and packing fruit; and lonely railroad stations, piled
high with crates, give the branch line its heaviest freight
business of the year.


SHOOTING STAR; AMERICAN COWSLIP; PRIDE OF OHIO
  (Dodecatheon Meadia)  Primrose family

Flowers - Purplish pink or yellowish white, the cone tipped with
yellow; few or numerous, hanging on slender, recurved pedicels in
an umbel at top of a simple scape 6 in. to 2 ft. high. Calyx
deeply 5-parted; corolla of 5 narrow lobes bent backward and
upward; the tube very short, thickened at throat, and marked with
dark reddish-purple dots; 5 stamens united into a protruding
cone; 1 pistil, protruding beyond them. Leaves: Oblong or
spatulate 3 to 12 in. long, narrowed into petioles, all from
fibrous roots. Fruit: A 5-valved capsule on erect pedicels.
Preferred Habitat - Prairies, open woods, moist cliffs. Flowering
Season - April-May.
Distribution - Pennsylvania southward and westward, and from
Texas to Manitoba.

Ages ago Theophrastus called an entirely different plant by this
same scientific name, derived from dodeka = twelve, and theos =
gods; and although our plant is native of a land unknown to the
ancients, the fanciful Linnaeus imagined he saw in the flowers of
its umbel a little congress of their divinities seated around a
miniature Olympus! Who has said science kills imagination? These
handsome, interesting flowers so familiar in the Middle West and
Southwest, especially, somewhat resemble the cyclamen in oddity
of form, indeed, these prairie wildflowers are not unknown in
florists' shops in Eastern cities.

Many flowers like the shooting star, cyclamen, and nightshade,
with protruding cones made up of united stamens, are so designed
that, as the bees must cling to them while sucking nectar, they
receive pollen jarred out from the end of the cone on their
undersides. The reflexed petals serve three purposes: First, in
making the flower more conspicuous; secondly, in facilitating
access to nectar and pollen; and, finally, in discouraging
crawling intruders. Where the short tube is thickened, the bee
finds her foothold while she forces her tongue between the anther
tips. The nectar is well concealed and quite deeply seated,
thanks to the rigid cone. Few bee workers are flying at the
shooting star's early blooming season. Undoubtedly the female
bumblebees, which, by striking the protruding stigma before they
jar out any pollen, cross-fertilize it, are the flower's
benefactors; but one frequently sees the little yellow puddle
butterfly clinging to the pretty blossoms.

Very different from the bright yellow cowslip of Europe is our
odd, misnamed blossom.


BITTER-BLOOM; ROSE-PINK; SQUARE-STEMMED SABBATIA; ROSY CENTAURY
  (Sabbatia angularis)  Gentian family

Flowers - Clear rose pink, with greenish star in center, rarely
white, fragrant, 1 1/2 in. broad or less, usually solitary on
long peduncles at ends of branches. Calyx lobes very narrow;
corolla of 5 rounded segments; stamens 5; style 2-cleft. Stem:
Sharply 4-angled, 2 to 3 ft. high, with opposite branches, leafy.
Leaves: Opposite, 5-nerved, oval, tapering at tip, and clasping
stem by broad base.
Preferred Habitat - Rich soil, meadows, thickets.
Flowering Season - July-August.
Distribution - New York to Florida, westward to Ontario,
Michigan, and Indian Territory.

During the drought of midsummer the lovely rose-pink blooms
inland with cheerful readiness to adapt itself to harder
conditions than most of its moisture-loving kin will tolerate;
but it may be noticed that although we may oftentimes find it
growing in dry soil, it never spreads in such luxuriant clusters
as when the roots are struck beside meadow runnels and ditches.
Probably the plant would be commoner than it is about populous
Eastern districts were it not so much sought after as a tonic
medicine.

It was the Centaurea, represented here by the blue ragged sailor
of gardens, and not our Centaury, a distinctly American group of
plants, which, Ovid tells us, cured a wound in the foot of the
Centaur Chiron, made by an arrow hurled by Hercules.

Three exquisite members of the Sabbatia tribe keep close to the
Atlantic coast in salt meadows and marshes, along the borders of
brackish rivers, and very rarely in the sand at the edges of
fresh-water ponds a little way inland. From Maine to Florida they
range, and less frequently are met along the shores of the Gulf
of Mexico so far as Louisiana. How bright and dainty and are!
Whole meadows are radiant with their blushing lovliness. Probably
if they consented to live far away from the sea, they would lose
some of the deep, clear pink from out their lovely petals, since
all flowers show a tendency to brighten their colors as they
approach the coast. In England some of the same wildflowers we
have here are far deeper-hued, owing, no doubt to the fact that
they live on a sea-girt, moisture-laden island, and also that the
sun never scorches and blanches at the far north as it does in
the United States.

As might be expected, blossoms so bright of hue as the marsh
pinks attract many insects. Guided by the yellow eye that serves
as a pathfinder to the nectary, they feast on the generour supply
of sweets; but all unwittingly they must pay for their
entertainment by carrying pollen from early to later flowers.
Like so many other blossoms, the sabbatias guard themselves
against the evils of self-fertilization by shedding their pollen
before they mature and spread their two-cleft style, which is now
ready to receive the golden, quickening dust on its stigmatic
inner surfaces.

The SEA or MARSH PINK, or ROSE OF PLYMOUTH (S. stellaris), whose
graceful alternate branching stem attains a height of two feet
only under most favorable conditions, from July to September
opens a succession of pink flowers that often fade to white. The
yellow eye is bordered with carmine. They measure about one inch
across, and are usually solitary at the ends of branches, or else
sway on slender peduncles from the axils. The upper leaves are
narrow and bract-like; those lower down gradually widen as they
approach the root.

Similar to the Rose of Plymouth is the even more graceful SLENDER
MARSH PINK (S. Campanulata - the S. gracilis of Gray), whose
upper leaves are almost thread-like in their narrowness. Its five
calyx lobes, too, are exceedingly slender, and often as long as
the corolla lobes. One of our soldiers in Cuba, during the
Spanish War, sent home to his sister in Massachusetts some of
these same little flowers in a letter. "You would just love to
see the marshes here," he wrote. "They are filled with beautiful
little pink flowers. I wish I knew their names." That soldier had
passed by New England marshes aglow with the blossoms all his
life, but he had never noticed them until all his perceptions
became quickened by the stimulus of travel and the excitement of
war. How blind and deaf we all are in some directions; having
eyes we see not, and ears we hear not, in the natural as in the
spiritual realm.

No danger of confusing the LARGE MARSH PINK (S. dodecandra - S.
chloroides of Gray) with its smaller, more branching relatives.
It displays few flowers to a plant, but each measures two and a
half inches or less across, and has from nine to twelve pink (or
rarely white) petals. This sabbatia often chooses the sandy
borders of ponds for its habitat.


SPREADING DOGBANE; FLY-TRAP DOGBANE; HONEY-BLOOM; BITTER-ROOT
  (Apocynum androsaemifolium)  Dogbane family

Flowers - Delicate pink, veined with a deeper shade, fragrant,
bell-shaped, about 1/3 in. across, borne in loose terminal cymes.
Calyx 5-parted; corolla of 5 spreading, recurved lobes united
into a tube; within the tube 5 tiny, triangular appendages
alternate with stamens; the arrow-shaped anthers united around
the stigma and slightly adhering to it. Stem: 1 to 4 ft. high,
with forking, spreading, leafy branches. Leaves: Opposite,
entire-edged, broadly oval, narrow at base, paler, and more or
less hairy below. Fruit: Two pods about 4 in. long.
Preferred Habitat - Fields, thickets, beside roads, lanes, and
walls.
Flowering Season - June-July.
Distribution - Northern part of British Possessions south to
Georgia, westward to Nebraska.

Everywhere at the North we come across this interesting, rather
shrubby plant, with its pretty but inconspicuous little
rose-veined bells suggesting pink lilies-of-the-valley. Now that
we have learned to read the faces of flowers, as it were, we
instantly suspect by the color, fragrance, pathfinders, and
structure that these are artful wilers, intent on gaining ends of
their own through their insect admirers. What are they up to?

Let us watch. Bees, flies, moths, and butterflies, especially the
latter, hover near. Alighting, the butterfly visitor unrolls his
long tongue and inserts it where the five pink veins tell him to,
for five nectar-bearing glands stand in a ring around the base of
the pistil. Now, as he withdraws his slender tongue through one
of the V-shaped cavities that make a circle of traps, he may
count himself lucky to escape with no heavier toll imposed than
pollen cemented to it. This granular dust he is required to rub
off against the stigma of the next flower entered. Some bees,
too, have been taken with the dogbane's pollen cemented to their
tongues. But suppose a fly call upon this innocent-looking
blossom? His short tongue, as well as the butterfly's, is guided
into one of the V-shaped cavities after he has sipped; but,
getting wedged between the trap's horny teeth, the poor little
victim is held a prisoner there until he slowly dies of
starvation in sight of plenty. This is the penalty he must pay
for trespassing on the butterfly's preserves! The dogbane, which
is perfectly adapted to the butterfly, and dependent upon it for
help in producing fertile seed, ruthlessly destroys all poachers
that are not big or strong enough to jerk away from its vise-like
grasp. One often sees small flies and even moths dead and
dangling by the tongue from the wicked little charmers. If the
flower assimilated their dead bodies as the pitcher plant, for
example, does those of its victims, the fly's fate would seem
less cruel. To be killed by slow torture and dangled like a
scarecrow simply for pilfering a drop of nectar is surely an
execution of justice medieval in its severity.

In July the most splendid of our native beetles, the green dandy
(Eumolpus auratus) fastens itself to the dogbane's foliage in
numbers until often the leaves appear to be studded with these
brilliant little jewels. "It is not easy," says William Hamilton
Gibson, "to describe its burnished hue, which is either
shimmering green, or peacock blue, or purplish-green, or
refulgent ruby, according to the position in which it rests." But
it is not golden, as its specific name would imply. It confines
itself exclusively to the dogbane. To prevent capture, it has a
trick of drawing up its legs and rolling off into the grass its
body so cleverly matches.

>From the silky coma on which the small seeds float away from long
pods to found new colonies, from the opposite leaves, milky
juice, and certain structural resemblances in the flowers, one
might guess this plant belonged to the milkweed tribe. Formerly
it was so classed; and although the botanists have now removed
its family one step away, the milkweed butterflies, especially
the Monarch (Anosia plexippus), ignoring the arbitrary dividing
line of man, still includes the dogbane on its visiting list. We
know that this plant derived its name from the fact that it was
considered poisonous to dogs; and we also know that all the tribe
of milkweed butterflies are provided with protective secretions
which are distasteful to birds and predaceous insects, enjoying
their immunity from attack, it is thought, from the acrid,
poisonous character of the foliage on which the caterpillars
feed.


COMMON MIIKWEED or SILKWEED
  (Asclepias Syriaca; A. cornuti of Gray)  Milkweed family

Flowers - Dull pale greenish purple pink, or brownish pink, borne
on pedicels, in many flowered, broad umbels. Calyx inferior,
5-parted; corolla deeply 5-cleft, the segments turned backward.
Above them an erect, 5-parted crown, each part called a hood,
containing a nectary, and with a tooth on either side, and an
incurved horn projecting from within. Behind the crown the short,
stout stamens, united by their filaments in a tube, are inserted
on the corolla. Broad anthers united around a thick column of
pistils terminating in a large, sticky, 5-angled disk. The anther
sacs tipped with a winged membrane; a waxy, pear-shaped
pollen-mass in each sac connected with the stigma in pairs or
fours by a dark gland, and suspended by a stalk like a pair of
saddle-bags. Stem: Stout, leafy, usually unbranched, 3 to 5 ft.
high, juice milky. Leaves: Opposite, oblong, entire-edged smooth
above, hairy below, 4 to 9 in. long. Fruit: 2 thick, warty pods,
usually only one filled with compressed seeds attached to tufts
of silky, white, fluffy hairs.
Preferred Habitat - Fields and waste places, roadsides.
Flowering Season - June-September
Distribution - New Brunswick, far westward and southward to North
Carolina and Kansas.

After the orchids, no flowers show greater executive ability,
none have adopted more ingenious methods of compelling insects to
work for them than the milkweeds. Wonderfully have they perfected
their mechanism in every part until no member of the family even
attempts to fertilize itself; hence their triumphal, vigorous
march around the earth, the tribe numbering over nineteen hundred
species located chiefly in those tropical and warm, temperate
regions that teem with insect life.

Commonest of all with us is this rank weed, which possesses the
dignity of a rubber plant. Much more attractive to human eyes, at
least, than the dull, pale, brownish-pink umbels of flowers are
its exquisite silky seed-tufts. But not so with insects. Knowing
that the slightly fragrant blossoms are rich in nectar, bees,
wasps, flies, beetles, and butterflies come to feast. Now, the
visitor finding his alighting place slippery, his feet claw about
in all directions to secure a hold, just as it was planned they
should for in his struggles some of his feet must get caught in
the fine little clefts at the base of the flower. His efforts to
extricate his foot only draw it into a slot at the end of which
lies a little dark-brown body. In a newly opened flower five of
these little bodies may be seen between the horns of the crown,
at equal distances around it. This tiny brown excrescence is hard
and horny, with a notch in its face. It is continuous with and
forms the end of the slot in which the visitor's foot is caught.
Into this he must draw his foot or claw, and finding it rather
tightly held, must give a vigorous jerk to get it free. Attached
to either side of the little horny piece is a flattened yellow
pollen-mass, and so away he flies with a pair of these pollinia,
that look like tiny saddle-bags, dangling from his feet. One
might think that such rough handling as many insects must submit
to from flowers would discourage them from making any more
visits; but the desire for food is a mighty passion. While the
insect is flying off to another blossom, the stalk to which the
saddlebags are attached twists until it brings them together,
that, when his feet get caught in other slots, they may be in the
position to get broken off in his struggles for freedom precisely
where they will fertilize the stigmatic chambers. Now the visitor
flies away with the stalks alone sticking to his claws.
Bumblebees and hive-bees have been caught with a dozen
pollen-masses dangling from a single foot. Outrageous imposition!

Does this wonderful mechanism always work to perfection? Alas!
no. It is a common thing to find dead hive-bees and flies hanging
from the flowers. While still struggling to escape, the unhappy
victims will be attacked by ants, beetles, and spiders, or killed
by heavy showers. Larger and stronger insects than honeybees are
required to regularly effect pollination and free themselves,
especially when they are so unfortunate as to catch several feet
in the grooves. Doubtless it is the bumblebee that can transfer
pollen with impunity; but very many other insects, not perfectly
adapted to the flowers, occasionally benefit them. Among the
large butterflies the Papilios, which suck with their wings in
motion, are the most useful, because in using their legs to
offset the motion of their wings they rapidly repeat those
movements which are necessary to draw the pollinia from the
anther cells and insert them in the stigmatic chambers of other
flowers. "Large butterflies like Danais," says Professor
Robertson, "hold their wings still in sucking, spending more time
on an umbel, but generally carrying pollinia. Small butterflies
are worse than useless. They remain long on the umbels sucking,
but resting their feet superficially on the flowers.

Since several moths were found entrapped, pollination must often
be brought about by night-flying Lepidoptera. As a rule, Diptera
(flies) either do not transfer pollinia at all, or become
hopelessly entangled when they do. "Occasionally pollen-masses
are found on the tongues of insects, especially on those of bees
and wasps, which move about with their unruly member sticking
out. Probably no one has ever made the exhaustive and absorbingly
interesting study of the milkweeds that Professor Robertson has.

Better than any written description of the milkweed blossom's
mechanism is a simple experiment. If you have neither time nor
patience to sit in the hot sun, magnifying glass in hand, and
watch for an unwary insect to get caught, take an ordinary
housefly, and hold it by the wings so that it may claw at one of
the newly opened flowers from which no pollinia have been
removed. It tries frantically to hold on, and with a little
direction it may be led to catch its claws in the slots of the
flower. Now pull it gently away, and you will find a pair of
saddlebags slung over his foot by a slender curved stalk. If you
are rarely skilful, you may induce your fly to withdraw the
pollinia from all five slots on as many of his feet. And they are
not to be thrown or scraped off, let the fly try as hard as he
pleases. You may now invite the fly to take a walk on another
flower in which he will probably leave one or more pollinia in
its stigmatic cavities.

Dr. Kerner thought the milky juice in milkweed plants, especially
abundant in the uppermost leaves and stems, serves to protect the
flowers from useless crawling pilferers. He once started a number
of ants to climb up a milky stalk. When they neared the summit,
he noticed that at each movement the terminal hooks of their feet
cut through the tender epiderm, and from the little clefts the
milky juice began to flow, bedraggling their feet and the hind
part of their bodies. "The ants were much impeded in their
movements," he writes, "and in order to rid themselves of the
annoyance, drew their feet through their mouths. Their movements
however, which accompanied these efforts, simply resulted in
making fresh fissures and fresh discharges of milky juice, so
that the position of the ants became each moment worse and worse.
Many escaped by getting to the edge of a leaf and dropping to the
ground. Others tried this method of escape too late, for the air
soon hardened the milky juice into a tough brown substance, and
after this, all the strugglings of the ants to free themselves
from the viscid matter were in vain." Nature's methods of
preserving a flower's nectar for the insects that are especially
adapted to fertilize it, and of punishing all useless intruders,
often shock us yet justice is ever stern, ever kind in the
largest sense.

If the asclepias really do kill some insects with their juice,
others doubtless owe their lives to it. Among the "protected"
insects are the milkweed butterflies and their caterpillars,
which are provided with secretions that are distasteful to birds
and predaceous insects. "These acrid secretions are probably due
to the character of the plants upon which the caterpillars feed,"
says Dr. Holland, in his beautiful and invaluable "Butterfly
Book." "Enjoying on this account immunity from attack, they have
all, in the process of time, been mimicked by species in other
genera which have not the same immunity." "One cannot stay long
around a patch of milkweeds without seeing the monarch butterfly.
(Anosia plexippus), that splendid, bright, reddish-brown winged
fellow, the borders and veins broadly black, with two rows of
white spots on the outer borders and two rows of pale spots
across the tip of the fore wings. There is a black scent-pouch on
the hind wings. The caterpillar, which is bright yellow or
greenish yellow, banded with shining black, is furnished with
black fleshy 'horns' fore and aft."

Like the dandelion, thistle, and other triumphant strugglers for
survival, the milkweed sends its offspring adrift on the winds to
found fresh colonies afar. Children delight in making pompons for
their hats by removing the silky seed-tufts from pods before they
burst, and winding them, one by one, on slender stems with fine
thread. Hung in the sunshine, how charmingly fluffy and soft they
dry!

Among the comparatively few butterfly flowers - although, of
course, other insects not adapted to them are visitors - is the
PURPLE MILKWEED (A. purpurasceus), whose deep magenta umbels are
so conspicuous through the summer months. Hummingbirds
occasionally seek it too. From Eastern Massachusetts to Virginia,
and westward to the Mississippi, or beyond, it is to be found in
dry fields, woods, and thickets.

The SWAMP MILKWEED (A. incarnata), on the other hand, rears its
intense purplish-red or pinkish hoods in wet places. Its leaves
are lance-shaped or oblong-lanceolate, whereas the purple
milkweed's leaves are oblong or ovate-oblong. This is a smooth
plant; and a similar species once reckoned as a mere variety (A.
pulchra) is the HAIRY MILKWEED. It differs chiefly in having some
hairs on the under side of its leaves, and a great many hairs on
its stem. Both plants bear erect, rather slender, tapering pods.

The POKE or TALL MILKWEED (A. exaltata - A. phytolaecoides of
Gray) may attain a height of six feet if the moist soil in which
it grows be exactly to its liking. Drooping or spreading umbels
of flowers whose corolla segments are pale purplish green, and
whose crown is clear ivory white or pink, appear from June to
August from Maine to Georgia and far westward. Sometimes the
tapering oblong leaves may be nine inches long. The erect
seedpods are drawn out to an unusually long point.

One may always distinguish the low-growing FOUR-LEAVED MILKWEED
(A. quadrifolia) from its relatives of ranker growth by its
general air of refinement, as well as by the two pairs of thin,
tapering leaves that grow in an upright whorl near the middle of
the slender stem. Usually there are no leaves on the lower part.
Small terminal umbels of delicate pink and white fragrant
flowers, which appear from May till July, give place to very
narrow pointed pods in late summer. From Maine to Ontario
southward to North Carolina and Arkansas is its range, in woods
and thickets chiefly.


HEDGE or GREAT BINDWEED; WILD MORNING-GLORY; RUTLAND BEAUTY;
BELL-BIND; LADY'S NIGHTCAP

  (Convolvulus sepium; Calystegia sepium of Gray)  Morning-glory
family

Flowers - Light pink, with white stripes or all white,
bell-shaped, about 2 in. long, twisted in the bud, solitary, on
long peduncles from leaf axils. Calyx of 5 sepals, concealed by 2
large bracts at base. Corolla 5-lobed, the 5 included stamens
inserted on its tube; style with 2 oblong stigmas. Stem: Smooth
or hairy, 3 to 10 ft. long, twining or trailing over ground.
Leaves: Triangular or arrow-shaped, 2 to 5 in. long, on slender
petioles.
Preferred Habitat - Wayside hedges, thickets, fields, walls.
Flowering Season - June-September.
Distribution - Nova Scotia to North Carolina, westward to
Nebraska. Europe and Asia.

No one need be told that the pretty, bell-shaped pink and white
flower on the vigorous vine clambering over stone walls and
winding about the shrubbery of wayside thickets in a suffocating
embrace is akin to the morning-glory of the garden trellis (C.
major). An exceedingly rapid climber, the twining stem often
describes a complete circle in two hours, turning against the
sun, or just contrary to the hands of a watch. Late in the
season, when an abundance of seed has been set, the flower can
well afford to keep open longer hours, also in rainy weather; but
early in the summer, at least, it must attend to business only
while the sun shines and its benefactors are flying. Usually it
closes at sundown. On moonlight nights, however, the hospitable
blossom keeps open for the benefit of certain moths. In Europe
the plant's range is supposed to be limited to that of a
crepuscular moth (Sphinx convolvuli), and where that benefactor
is rare, as in England, the bindweed sets few seeds where it does
