The Project Gutenberg EBook of Oneness, by James H. Schmitz

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Oneness

Author: James H. Schmitz

Illustrator: Leo Summers

Release Date: December 21, 2009 [EBook #30728]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ONENESS ***




Produced by Sankar Viswanathan, Greg Weeks, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net







                         Transcriber's Note:

  This etext was produced from Analog Science Fact & Fiction May 1963.
  Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
  copyright on this publication was renewed.


                               ONENESS


            At that, you know the power to enforce
            the Golden Rule would make a terrible weapon!


                         by JAMES H. SCHMITZ


                      ILLUSTRATED BY LEO SUMMERS

       *       *       *       *       *




Menesee felt excitement surge like a living tide about him as he came
with the other directors into the vast Tribunal Hall. Sixty years ago,
inexcusable carelessness had deprived Earth of its first chance to
obtain a true interstellar drive. Now, within a few hours, Earth, or
more specifically, the upper echelons of that great political
organization called the Machine which had controlled the affairs of
Earth for the past century and a half, should learn enough of the
secrets of the drive to insure that it would soon be in their
possession.

Menesee entered his box between those of Directors Cornelius and
Ojeda, immediately to the right of the Spokesman's Platform and with
an excellent view of the prisoner. When Administrator Bradshaw and
Spokesman Dorn had taken their places on the platform, Menesee seated
himself, drawing the transcript of the day's proceedings towards him.
However, instead of glancing over it at once, he spent some seconds in
a study of the prisoner.

The fellow appeared to be still young. He was a magnificent physical
specimen, tall and strongly muscled, easily surpassing in this respect
any of the hard-trained directors present. His face showed alert
intelligence, giving no indication of the fact that for two of the
three days since his capture he had been drugged and subject to
constant hypnotic suggestion. He had given his name as Rainbolt,
acknowledged freely that he was a member of the group of malcontent
deserters known in the records of the Machine as the Mars Convicts,
but described himself as being a "missionary of Oneness" whose purpose
was to bring the benefits of some of the principles of "Oneness" to
Earth. He had refused to state whether he had any understanding of the
stardrive by the use of which the Mars Convicts had made their mass
escape from the penal settlements of the Fourth Planet sixty years
before, though the drive obviously had been employed in bringing him
out of the depths of interstellar space to the Solar System and Earth.
At the moment, while the significance of the bank of torture
instruments on his right could hardly have escaped him, his expression
was serious but not detectably concerned.

"Here is an interesting point!" Director Ojeda's voice said on
Menesee's right.

Menesee glanced over at him. Ojeda was tapping the transcript with a
finger.

"This Rainbolt," he said, "hasn't slept since he was captured! He
states, furthermore, that he has never slept since he became an
adult--"

Menesee frowned slightly, failing to see any great significance in the
fact. That the fellow belonged to some curious cult which had
developed among the Mars Convicts following their flight from the
Solar System was already known. Earth's science had methods of
inducing permanent sleeplessness but knew, too, that in most instances
the condition eventually gave rise to very serious side effects which
more than offset any advantages to be gained from it.

He picked up his transcript, indicating that he did not wish to be
drawn into conversation. His eyes scanned quickly over the pages. Most
of it was information he already had. Rainbolt's ship had been
detected four days earlier, probing the outermost of the multiple
