    10.  ith.
    20.  tqa.
    30.  tqe ith       = 20 + 10.
    40.  sauz-tqa      = 2 x 20.
    50.  sauz-tqe ith  = 40 + 10.
    60.  chuz-tqa      = 3 x 20.
    70.  chuz-tqe ith  = 60 + 10.
    80.  w-iez-tqa     = 4 x 20.
    90.  w-iez-tqe ith = 80 + 10.
   100.  b'e.
  1000.  ezir (akin to Persian).


  THUSCH

    10.  itt.
    20.  tqa.
    30.  tqa-itt        = 20 + 10.
    40.  sauz-tq        = 2 x 20.
    50.  sauz-tqa-itt   = 40 + 10.
    60.  chouz-tq       = 3 x 20.
    70.  chouz-tqa-itt  = 60 + 10.
    80.  dhewuz-tq      = 4 x 20.
    90.  dhewuz-tqa-itt = 80 + 10.
   100.  phchauz-tq     = 5 x 20.
   200.  itsha-tq       = 10 x 20.
   300.  phehiitsha-tq  = 15 x 20.
  1000.  satsh tqauz-tqa itshatqa = 2 x 20 x 20 + 200.


  GEORGIA

    10.  athi.
    20.  otsi.
    30.  ots da athi     = 20 + 10.
    40.  or-m-otsi       = 2 x 20.
    50.  ormots da athi  = 40 + 10.
    60.  sam-otsi        = 3 x 20.
    70.  samots da athi  = 60 + 10.
    80.  othch-m-otsi    = 4 x 20.
    90.  othmots da athi = 80 + 10.
   100.  asi.
  1000.  ath-asi = 10 x 100.


  LAZI

    10.  wit.
    20.  oets.
    30.  oets do wit         = 20 x 10.
    40.  dzur en oets        = 2 x 20.
    50.  dzur en oets do wit = 40 + 10.
    60.  dzum en oets        = 3 x 20.
    70.  dzum en oets do wit = 60 + 10.
    80.  otch-an-oets        = 4 x 20.
   100.  os.
  1000.  silia (akin to Greek).


  CHUNSAG.[350]

    10.  ants-go.
    20.  chogo.
    30.  chogela antsgo      = 20 + 10.
    40.  kichogo             = 2 x 20.
    50.  kichelda antsgo     = 40 + 10.
    60.  taw chago           = 3 x 20.
    70.  taw chogelda antsgo = 60 + 10.
    80.  uch' chogo          = 4 x 20.
    90.  uch' chogelda antsgo.
   100.  nusgo.
  1000.  asargo (akin to Persian).


  DIDO.[351]

    10.  zino.
    20.  ku.
    30.  kunozino.
    40.  kaeno ku        = 2 x 20.
    50.  kaeno kuno zino = 40 + 10.
    60.  sonno ku        = 3 x 20.
    70.  sonno kuno zino = 60 + 10.
    80.  uino ku         = 4 x 20.
    90.  uino huno zino  = 80 + 10.
   100.  bischon.
   400.  kaeno kuno zino = 40 x 10.


  AKARI

    10.  entzelgu.
    20.  kobbeggu.
    30.  lowergu.
    40.  kokawu      = 2 x 20.
    50.  kikaldanske = 40 + 10.
    60.  secikagu.
    70.  kawalkaldansku = 3 x 20 + 10.
    80.  onkuku         = 4 x 20.
    90.  onkordansku    = 4 x 20 + 10.
   100.  nosku.
  1000.  askergu (from Persian).


  CIRCASSIA

    10.  psche.
    20.  to-tsch.
    30.  totsch-era-pschirre   = 20 + 10.
    40.  ptl'i-sch             = 4 x 10.
    50.  ptl'isch-era-pschirre = 40 + 10.
    60.  chi-tsch              = 6 x 10.
    70.  chitsch-era-pschirre  = 60 + 10.
    80.  toshitl               = 20 x 4?
    90.  toshitl-era-pschirre  = 80 + 10.
   100.  scheh.
  1000.  min (Tartar) or schi-psche = 100 x 10.

The last of these scales is an unusual combination of decimal and
vigesimal. In the even tens it is quite regularly decimal, unless 80 is of
the structure suggested above. On the other hand, the odd tens are formed
in the ordinary vigesimal manner. The reason for this anomaly is not
obvious. I know of no other number system that presents the same
peculiarity, and cannot give any hypothesis which will satisfactorily
account for its presence here. In nearly all the examples given the decimal
becomes the leading element in the formation of all units above 100, just
as was the case in the Celtic scales already noticed.

Among the northern tribes of Siberia the numeral scales appear to be ruder
and less simple than those just examined, and the counting to be more
consistently vigesimal than in any scale we have thus far met with. The two
following examples are exceedingly interesting, as being among the best
illustrations of counting by twenties that are to be found anywhere in the
Old World.


  TSCHUKSCHI.[352]

    10.  migitken  = both hands.
    20.  chlik-kin = a whole man.
    30.  chlikkin mingitkin parol = 20 + 10.
    40.  nirach chlikkin = 2 x 20.
   100.  milin chlikkin  = 5 x 20.
   200.  mingit chlikkin = 10 x 20, _i.e._ 10 men.
  1000.  miligen chlin-chlikkin = 5 x 200, _i.e._ five (times) 10 men.


  AINO.[353]

    10.  wambi.
    20.  choz.
    30.  wambi i-doehoz        = 10 from 40.
    40.  tochoz                = 2 x 20.
    50.  wambi i-richoz        = 10 from 60.
    60.  rechoz                = 3 x 20.
    70.  wambi [i?] inichoz    = 10 from 80.
    80.  inichoz               = 4 x 20.
    90.  wambi aschikinichoz   = 10 from 100.
   100.  aschikinichoz         = 5 x 20.
   110.  wambi juwanochoz      = 10 from 120.
   120.  juwano choz           = 6 x 20.
   130.  wambi aruwanochoz     = 10 from 140.
   140.  aruwano choz          = 7 x 20.
   150.  wambi tubischano choz = 10 from 160.
   160.  tubischano choz       = 8 x 20.
   170.  wambi schnebischano choz = 10 from 180.
   180.  schnebischano choz    = 9 x 20.
   190.  wambi schnewano choz  = 10 from 200.
   200.  schnewano choz        = 10 x 20.
   300.  aschikinichoz i gaschima chnewano choz = 5 x 20 + 10 x 20.
   400.  toschnewano choz      = 2 x (10 x 20).
   500.  aschikinichoz i gaschima toschnewano choz = 100 + 400.
   600.  reschiniwano choz     = 3 x 200.
   700.  aschikinichoz i gaschima reschiniwano choz = 100 + 600.
   800.  inischiniwano choz    = 4 x 200.
   900.  aschikinichoz i gaschima inischiniwano choz = 100 + 800.
  1000.  aschikini schinewano choz = 5 x 200.
  2000.  wanu schinewano choz   = 10 x (10 x 20).

This scale is in one sense wholly vigesimal, and in another way it is not
to be regarded as pure, but as mixed. Below 20 it is quinary, and, however
far it might be extended, this quinary element would remain, making the
scale quinary-vigesimal. But in another sense, also, the Aino system is not
pure. In any unmixed vigesimal scale the word for 400 must be a simple
word, and that number must be taken as the vigesimal unit corresponding to
100 in the decimal scale. But the Ainos have no simple numeral word for any
number above 20, forming all higher numbers by combinations through one or
more of the processes of addition, subtraction, and multiplication. The
only number above 20 which is used as a unit is 200, which is expressed
merely as 10 twenties. Any even number of hundreds, or any number of
thousands, is then indicated as being so many times 10 twenties; and the
odd hundreds are so many times 10 twenties, plus 5 twenties more. This
scale is an excellent example of the cumbersome methods used by uncivilized
races in extending their number systems beyond the ordinary needs of daily
life.

In Central Asia a single vigesimal scale comes to light in the following
fragment of the Leptscha scale, of the Himalaya region:[354]

    10.  kati.
    40.  kafali      = 4 x 10,
          or kha nat = 2 x 20.
    50.  kafano      = 5 x 10,
          or kha nat sa kati = 2 x 20 + 10.
   100.  gjo, or kat.

Further to the south, among the Dravidian races, the vigesimal element is
also found. The following will suffice to illustrate the number systems of
these dialects, which, as far as the material at hand shows, are different
from each other only in minor particulars:


  MUNDARI.[355]

    10.  gelea.
    20.  mi hisi.
    30.  mi hisi gelea = 20 + 10.
    40.  bar hisi  = 2 x 20.
    60.  api hisi  = 3 x 20.
    80.  upun hisi = 4 x 20.
   100.  mone hisi = 5 x 20.

In the Nicobar Islands of the Indian Ocean a well-developed example of
vigesimal numeration is found. The inhabitants of these islands are so low
in the scale of civilization that a definite numeral system of any kind is
a source of some surprise. Their neighbours, the Andaman Islanders, it will
be remembered, have but two numerals at their command; their intelligence
does not seem in any way inferior to that of the Nicobar tribes, and one is
at a loss to account for the superior development of the number sense in
the case of the latter. The intercourse of the coast tribes with traders
might furnish an explanation of the difficulty were it not for the fact
that the numeration of the inland tribes is quite as well developed as that
of the coast tribes; and as the former never come in contact with traders
and never engage in barter of any kind except in the most limited way, the
conclusion seems inevitable that this is merely one of the phenomena of
mental development among savage races for which we have at present no
adequate explanation. The principal numerals of the inland and of the coast
tribes are:[356]


  INLAND TRIBES                        COAST TRIBES

    10.  teya.                           10.  sham.
    20.  heng-inai.                      20.  heang-inai.
    30.  heng-inai-tain                  30.  heang-inai-tanai
         = 20 + 5 (couples).                  = 20 + 5 (couples).
    40.  au-inai   = 2 x 20.             40.  an-inai    = 2 x 20.
   100.  tain-inai = 5 x 20.            100.  tanai-inai = 5 x 20.
   200.  teya-inai = 10 x 20.           200.  sham-inai  = 10 x 20.
   300.  teya-tain-inai                 300.  heang-tanai-inai
         = (10 + 5) x 20.                     = (10 + 5) 20.
   400.  heng-teo.                      400.  heang-momchiama.

In no other part of the world is vigesimal counting found so perfectly
developed, and, among native races, so generally preferred, as in North and
South America. In the eastern portions of North America and in the extreme
western portions of South America the decimal or the quinary decimal scale
is in general use. But in the northern regions of North America, in western
Canada and northwestern United States, in Mexico and Central America, and
in the northern and western parts of South America, the unit of counting
among the great majority of the native races was 20. The ethnological
affinities of these races are not yet definitely ascertained; and it is no
part of the scope of this work to enter into any discussion of that
involved question. But either through contact or affinity, this form of
numeration spread in prehistoric times over half or more than half of the
western hemisphere. It was the method employed by the rude Eskimos of the
north and their equally rude kinsmen of Paraguay and eastern Brazil; by the
forest Indians of Oregon and British Columbia, and by their more southern
kinsmen, the wild tribes of the Rio Grande and of the Orinoco. And, most
striking and interesting of all, it was the method upon which were based
the numeral systems of the highly civilized races of Mexico, Yucatan, and
New Granada. Some of the systems obtained from the languages of these
peoples are perfect, extended examples of vigesimal counting, not to be
duplicated in any other quarter of the globe. The ordinary unit was, as
would be expected, "one man," and in numerous languages the words for 20
and man are identical. But in other cases the original meaning of that
numeral word has been lost; and in others still it has a signification
quite remote from that given above. These meanings will be noticed in
connection with the scales themselves, which are given, roughly speaking,
in their geographical order, beginning with the Eskimo of the far north.
The systems of some of the tribes are as follows:


  ALASKAN ESKIMOS.[357]

    10.  koleet.
    20.  enuenok.
    30.  enuenok kolinik   = 20 + 10.
    40.  malho kepe ak     = 2 x 20.
    50.  malho-kepe ak-kolmik che pah ak to = 2 x 20 + 10.
    60.  pingi shu-kepe ak = 3 x 20.
   100.  tale ma-kepe ak   = 5 x 20.
   400.  enue nok ke pe ak = 20 x 20.


  TCHIGLIT.[358]

    10.  krolit.
    20.  kroleti, or innun = man.
    30.  innok krolinik-tchikpalik = man + 2 hands.
    40.  innum mallerok   = 2 men.
    50.  adjigaynarmitoat = as many times 10 as the fingers of the hand.
    60.  innumipit        = 3 men.
    70.  innunmalloeronik arveneloerit = 7 men?
    80.  innun pinatcunik arveneloerit = 8 men?
    90.  innun tcitamanik arveneloerit = 9 men?
   100.  itchangnerkr.
  1000.  itchangner-park = great 100.

The meanings for 70, 80, 90, are not given by Father Petitot, but are of
such a form that the significations seem to be what are given above. Only a
full acquaintance with the Tchiglit language would justify one in giving
definite meanings to these words, or in asserting that an error had been
made in the numerals. But it is so remarkable and anomalous to find the
decimal and vigesimal scales mingled in this manner that one involuntarily
suspects either incompleteness of form, or an actual mistake.


  TLINGIT.[359]

    10.  djinkat = both hands?
    20.  tle ka  = 1 man.
    30.  natsk djinkat  = 3 x 10.
    40.  dak'on djinkat = 4 x 10.
    50.  kedjin djinkat = 5 x 10.
    60.  tle durcu djinkat    = 6 x 10.
    70.  daqa durcu djinkat   = 7 x 10.
    80.  natska durcu djinkat = 8 x 10.
    90.  gocuk durcu djinkat  = 9 x 10.
   100.  kedjin ka  = 5 men, or 5 x 20.
   200.  djinkat ka = 10 x 20.
   300.  natsk djinkat ka  = 30 men.
   400.  dak'on djinkat ka = 40 men.

This scale contains a strange commingling of decimal and vigesimal
counting. The words for 20, 100, and 200 are clear evidence of vigesimal,
while 30 to 90, and the remaining hundreds, are equally unmistakable proof
of decimal, numeration. The word _ka_, man, seems to mean either 10 or 20;
a most unusual occurrence. The fact that a number system is partly decimal
and partly vigesimal is found to be of such frequent occurrence that this
point in the Tlingit scale need excite no special wonder. But it is
remarkable that the same word should enter into numeral composition under
such different meanings.


  NOOTKA.[360]

    10.  haiu.
    20.  tsakeits.
    30.  tsakeits ic haiu = 20 + 10.
    40.  atlek    = 2 x 20.
    60.  katstsek = 3 x 20.
    80.  moyek    = 4 x 20.
   100.  sutc'ek  = 5 x 20.
   120.  nop'ok   = 6 x 20.
   140.  atlpok   = 7 x 20.
   160.  atlakutlek = 8 x 20.
   180.  ts'owakutlek = 9 x 20.
   200.  haiuk    = 10 x 20.

This scale is quinary-vigesimal, with no apparent decimal element in its
composition. But the derivation of some of the terms used is detected with
difficulty. In the following scale the vigesimal structure is still more
obscure.


  TSIMSHIAN.[361]

    10.  gy'ap.
    20.  kyedeel = 1 man.
    30.  gulewulgy'ap.
    40.  t'epqadalgyitk, or tqalpqwulgyap.
    50.  kctoncwulgyap.
   100.  kcenecal.
   200.  k'pal.
   300.  k'pal te kcenecal = 200 + 100.
   400.  kyedal.
   500.  kyedal te kcenecal = 400 + 100.
   600.  gulalegyitk.
   700.  gulalegyitk te kcenecal = 600 + 100.
   800.  tqalpqtalegyitk.
   900.  tqalpqtalegyitk te kcenecal = 800 + 100.
  1000.  k'pal.

To the unobservant eye this scale would certainly appear to contain no more
than a trace of the vigesimal in its structure. But Dr. Boas, who is one of
the most careful and accurate of investigators, says in his comment on this
system: "It will be seen at once that this system is quinary-vigesimal....
In 20 we find the word _gyat_, man. The hundreds are identical with the
numerals used in counting men (see p. 87), and then the quinary-vigesimal
system is most evident."


  RIO NORTE INDIANS.[362]

    20.  taiguaco.
    30.  taiguaco co juyopamauj ajte = 20 + 2 x 5.
    40.  taiguaco ajte = 20 x 2.
    50.  taiguaco ajte co juyopamauj ajte = 20 x 2 + 5 x 2.


  CARIBS OF ESSIQUIBO, GUIANA

    10.  oween-abatoro.
    20.  owee-carena   = 1 person.
    40.  oko-carena    = 2 persons.
    60.  oroowa-carena = 3 persons.


  OTOMI

    10.  ra-tta.
    20.  na-te.
    30.  na-te-m'a-ratta = 20 + 10.
    40.  yo-te           = 2 x 30.
    50.  yote-m'a-ratta  = 2 x 20 + 10.
    60.  hiu-te          = 3 x 20.
    70.  hiute-m'a-ratta = 3 x 20 + 10.
    80.  gooho-rate      = 4 x 20.
    90.  gooho-rate-m'a ratta = 4 x 20 + 10.
   100.  cytta-te        = 5 x 20,
          or nanthebe    = 1 x 100.


  MAYA, YUCATAN.[363]

           1.  hun.
          10.  lahun  = it is finished.
          20.  hunkal = a measure, or more correctly, a fastening together.
          30.  lahucakal   = 40 - 10?
          40.  cakal       = 2 x 20.
          50.  lahuyoxkal  = 60 - 10.
          60.  oxkal       = 3 x 20.
          70.  lahucankal  = 80 - 10.
          80.  cankal      = 4 x 20.
          90.  lahuyokal   = 100 - 10.
         100.  hokal       = 5 x 20.
         110.  lahu uackal = 120 - 10.
         120.  uackal      = 6 x 20.
         130.  lahu uuckal = 140 - 10.
         140.  uuckal      = 7 x 20.
         200.  lahuncal    = 10 x 20.
         300.  holhukal    = 15 x 20.
         400.  hunbak      = 1 tying around.
         500.  hotubak.
         600.  lahutubak
         800.  calbak = 2 x 400.
         900.  hotu yoxbak.
