up one bag of mail and four bags of scientific records and photographs
which had only been transmitted by facsimile TV before. They got into
the space tug. It floated free.

"_You will fire in ten seconds_," said a crisp voice in Joe's
headphones. "_Ten ... nine ... eight ... seven ... six ... five ... four
... three ... two ... one ... fire!_"

Joe crooked his index finger. There was an explosive jolt. Rockets
flamed terribly in emptiness. The space tug rushed toward the west. The
Platform seemed to dwindle with startling suddenness. It seemed to rush
away and become lost in the myriads of stars. The space tug accelerated
at four gravities in the direction opposed to its orbital motion.

As the acceleration built up, it dropped toward Earth and home like a
tumbled stone.




10


There was bright sunshine at the Shed, not a single cloud in all the
sky. The radar bowls atop the roof--they seemed almost invisibly small
compared with its vastness--wavered and shifted and quivered. Completely
invisible beams of microwaves lanced upward. Atop the Shed, in the
communication room, there was the busy quiet of absolute intentness.
Signals came down and were translated into visible records which fed
instantly into computers. Then the computers clicked and hummed and
performed incomprehensible integrations, and out of their slot-mouths
poured billowing ribbons of printed tape. Men read those tapes and
talked crisply into microphones, and their words went swiftly aloft
again.

Down by the open eastern door of the Shed at the desert's edge, Sally
Holt and Joe's father waited together, watching the sky. Sally was white
and scared. Joe's father patted her shoulder reassuringly.

"He'll make it, all right," said Sally, dry-throated.

Joe's father nodded. "Of course he will!" But his voice was not steady.

"Nothing could happen to him now!" said Sally fiercely.

"Of course not," said Joe's father.

A loudspeaker close to them said abruptly: "_Nineteen miles._"

There was a tiny, straggling thread of white visible in the now. It
thinned out to nothingness, but its nearest part flared out and flared
out and flared out. It grew larger, came closer with a terrifying speed.

"_Twelve miles_," said the speaker harshly. "_Rockets firing._"

The downward-hurtling trail of smoke was like a crippled plane falling
flaming from the sky, except that no plane ever fell so fast.

At seven miles the white-hot glare of the rocket flames was visible even
in broad daylight. At three miles the light was unbearably bright. At
two, the light winked out. Sally saw something which glittered come
plummeting toward the ground, unsupported.

It fell almost half a mile before rocket fumes flung furiously out
again. Then it checked. Visibly, its descent was slowed. It dropped more
slowly, and more slowly, and more slowly still....

It hung in mid-air a quarter-mile up. Then there was a fresh burst of
rocket fumes, more monstrous than ever, and it went steadily downward,
touched the ground, and stayed there spurting terrible incandescent
flames for seconds. Then the bottom flame went out. An instant later
there were no more flames at all.

Sally began to run toward the ship. She stopped. A procession of
rumbling, clanking, earth-moving machinery moved out of the Shed and
toward the upright space tug. Prosaically, a bulldozer lowered its wide
blade some fifty yards from the ship. It pushed a huge mass of earth
before it, covering over the scorched and impossibly hot sand about the
rocket's landing place. Other bulldozers began to circle methodically
around and around, overturning the earth and burying the hot surface
stuff. Water trucks sprayed, and thin steam arose.

But also an exit-port opened and Joe stood in the opening.

Then Sally began to run again.

       *       *       *       *       *

Joe sat at dinner in the major's quarters. Major Holt was there, and
Joe's father, and Sally.

"It feels good," said Joe warmly, "to use a knife and fork again, and to
pick food up from a plate where it stays until it's picked up!"

"The crew of the Platform----" Major Holt began.

"They're all right," said Joe, with his mouth full. "They're wearing
gravity simulator harness. Brent's got his up to three-quarters gravity.
They get tired, wearing the harness. They sleep better. Everything's
fine! They can handle the space wagons we left and they've got guided
missiles to spare! They're all right!"

Joe's father said unsteadily, "You'll stay on Earth a while now, son?"

Sally moved quickly. She looked up, tense. But Joe said, "They're going
to get the Moonship up, sir. We came back--my gang and me--to help train
the crew. We only have a week to do it in, but we've got some combat
tactics to show them on the training gadget in the Shed." He added
anxiously, "And, sir--they'll have to take the Moonship off in a spiral
orbit. She can't go straight up! That means she's got to pass over enemy
territory, and--we've got to have a real escort for her. A fighting
escort. It's planned for the space tug to take off a few minutes after
the Moonship and blast along underneath. We'll dump guided missiles
out--like drones--and if anything comes along we can start their rockets
and fight our way through. And we four have had more experience than
anybody else. We're needed!"

"You've done enough, surely!" Sally cried.

"The United States," said Joe awkwardly, "is going to take over the
Moon. I--can't miss having a hand in that! Not if it's at all possible!"

"I'm afraid you will miss it, Joe," Major Holt said detachedly. "The
occupation of the Moon will be a Navy enterprise. Space Exploration
Project facilities are being used to prepare for it, but the Navy won
the latest battle of the Pentagon. The Navy takes over the Moon."

Joe looked startled. "But----"

"You're Space Exploration personnel," said the major with the same
coolness. "You will be used to instruct naval personnel, and your space
tug will be asked to go along to the Platform as an auxiliary vessel.
For purposes of assisting in the landing of the Moonship at the
Platform, you understand. You'll haul her away from the Platform when
she's refueled and supplied, so she can start off for the Moon. But the
occupation of the Moon will be strictly Navy."

Joe's expression became carefully unreadable. "I think," he said evenly,
"I'd better not comment."

Major Holt nodded. "Very wise--not that we'd repeat anything you did
say. But the point is, Joe, that just one day before the Moonship does
take off, the United Nations will be informed that it is a United States
naval vessel. The doctrine of the freedom of space--like the freedom of
the seas--will be promulgated. And the United States will say that a
United States naval task force is starting off into space on an official
mission. To attack a Space Exploration ship is one thing. That's like a
scientific expedition. But to fire on an American warship on official
business is a declaration of war. Especially since that ship can shoot
back--and will."

Joe listened. He said, "It's daring somebody to try another Pearl
Harbor?"

"Exactly," said the major. "It's time for us to be firm--now that we can
back it up. I don't think the Moonship will be fired on."

"But they'll need me and my gang just the same," said Joe slowly, "for
tugboat work at the Platform?"

"Exactly," said the major.

"Then," Joe said doggedly, "they get us. My gang will gripe about being
edged out of the trip. They won't like it. But they'd like backing out
still less. We'll play it the way it's dealt--but we won't pretend to
like it."

Major Holt's expression did not change at all, but Joe had an odd
feeling that the major approved of him.

"Yes. That's right, Joe," his father added. "You--you'll have to go
aloft once more, son. After that, we'll talk it over."

Sally hadn't said a word during the discussion, but she'd watched Joe
every second. Later, out on the porch of the major's quarters, she had a
great deal to say. But that couldn't affect the facts.

The world at large, of course, received no inkling of the events in
preparation. The Shed and the town of Bootstrap and all the desert for
a hundred-mile circle round about, were absolutely barred to all
visitors. Anybody who came into that circle stayed in. Most people were
kept out. All that anyone outside could discover was that enormous
quantities of cryptic material had poured and still were pouring into
the Shed. But this time security was genuinely tight. Educated guesses
could be made, and they were made; but nobody outside the closed-in area
save a very few top-ranking officials had any real knowledge. The world
only knew that something drastic and remarkable was in prospect.

Mike, though, was able to write a letter to the girl who'd written him.
Major Holt arranged it. Mike wrote his letter on paper supplied by
Security, with ink supplied by Security, and while watched by Security
officers. His letter was censored by Major Holt himself, and it did not
reveal that Mike was back on Earth. But it did invite a reply--and Mike
sweated as he waited for one.

The others had plenty to sweat about. Joe and Haney and the Chief were
acting as instructors to the Moonship's crew. They taught practical
space navigation. At first they thought they hadn't much to pass on, but
they found out otherwise. They had to pass on data on everything from
how to walk to how to drink coffee, how to eat, sleep, why one should
wear gravity harness, and the manners and customs of ships in space.
They had to show why in space fighting a ship might send missiles on
before it, but would really expect to do damage with those it left
behind. They had to warn of the dangers of unshielded sunshine, and the
equal danger of standing in shadow for more than five minutes, and----

They had material for six months of instruction courses, but there was
barely a week to pass it on. Joe was run ragged, but in spite of
everything he managed to talk at some length with Sally. He found
himself curiously anxious to discuss any number of things with his
father, too, who suddenly appeared to be much more intelligent than Joe
had ever noticed before.

He was almost unhappy when it was certain that the Moonship would take
off for space on the following day. He talked about it with Sally the
night before take-off.

"Look," he said awkwardly. "As far as I'm concerned this has turned out
a pretty sickly business. But when we have got a base on the Moon, it'll
be a good job done. There will be one thing that nobody can stop!
Everybody's been living in terror of war. If we hold the Moon the cold
war will be ended. You can't kick on my wanting to help end that!"

Sally smiled at him in the moonlight.

"And--meanwhile," said Joe clumsily, "well--when I come back we can do
some serious talking about--well--careers and such things. Until
then--no use. Right?"

Sally's smile wavered. "Very sensible," she agreed wrily. "And awfully
silly, Joe. I know what kind of a career I want! What other fascinating
topic do you know to talk about, Joe?"

"I don't know of any. Oh, yes! Mike got a letter from his girl. I don't
know what she said, but he's walking on air."

"But it isn't funny!" said Sally indignantly. "Mike's a person! A fine
person! If he'll let me, I'll write to his girl myself and--try to make
friends with her so when you come back I--maybe I can be a sort of
match-maker."

"That, I like!" Joe said warmly. "You're swell sometimes, Sally!"

Sally looked at him enigmatically in the moonlight.

"There are times when it seems to escape your attention," she observed.

       *       *       *       *       *

The next morning she cried a little when he left her, to climb in the
space tug which was so small a part of today's activity. Joe and his
crew were the only living men who had ever made a round trip to the
Platform and back. But now there was the Moonship to go farther than
they'd been allowed. It was even clumsier in design than the Platform,
though it was smaller. But it wasn't designed to stay in space. It was
to rest on the powdery floor of a ring-mountain's central plain.

Let it get off into space, and somehow get to the Platform to reload.
Then let it replace the rockets it would burn in this take-off and it
could go on out to emptiness. It would make history as the first
serious attempt by human beings to reach the Moon.

Joe and his followers would go along simply to handle guided missiles if
it came to a fight, and to tow the Moonship to its wharf--the
Platform--and out into midstream again when it resumed its journey. And
that was all.

The Moonship lifted from the floor of the Shed to the sound of hundreds
of pushpot engines.

Then the space tug roared skyward. Her take-off rockets here substituted
for the pushpots. Her second-stage rockets were also of the nonpoisonous
variety, because she fired them at a bare 60,000 feet. They were
substitutes for the jatos the pushpots carried.

She was out in space when the third-stage rockets roared dully outside
her hull.

When the Moonship crossed the west coast of Africa, the space tug was
400 miles below and 500 miles behind. When the Moonship crossed Arabia,
the difference was 200 miles vertically and less than 100 in line.

Then the Moonship released small objects, steadied by gyroscopes and
flung away by puffs of compressed air. The small objects spread out.
Haney and Mike and the Chief had reloaded the firing racks from inside
the ship, and now were intent upon control boards and radar. They
pressed buttons. One by one, little puffs of smoke appeared in space.
They had armed the little space missiles, setting off tiny flares which
had no function except to prove that each missile was ready for use.

By the time the two space craft floated toward India, above an area from
which war rockets had been known to rise, there were more little weapons
floating with them. One screen of missiles hurtled on before the space
tug, and another behind. Anything that came up from Earth would
instantly be attacked by dozens of midget ships bent upon suicide.

Radar probed the space formation, but enemies of the fleet and the
Platform very wisely did no more than probe. The Moonship and its
attendants went across the Pacific, still rising. Above the longitude of
Washington, the space tug left its former post and climbed, nudging the
Moonship this way and that. And from behind, the Platform came floating
splendidly.

Tiny figures in space suits extended the incredibly straight lines which
were plastic hoses filled with air. Very, very gently indeed, the great,
bulbous Platform and the squat, flat Moonship came together and touched.
They moored in contact.

And then the inert small missiles that had floated below, all the way
up, flared simultaneously. Their rockets emitted smoke. In fine
alignment, they plunged forward through emptiness, swerved with a
remarkable precision, and headed out for emptiness beyond the Platform's
orbit. Their function had been to protect the Moonship on its way out.
That function was performed. There were too many of them to recover, so
they went out toward the stars.

When their rockets burned out they vanished. But a good hour later, when
it was considered that they were as far out as they were likely to go,
they began to blow up. Specks of flame, like the tiniest of new stars,
flickered against the background of space.

But Joe and the others were in the Platform by then. They'd brought up
mail for the crew. And they were back on duty.

The Platform seemed strange with the Moonship's crew aboard. It had been
a gigantic artificial world with very few inhabitants. With twenty-five
naval ratings about, plus the four of its regular crew, plus the space
tug's complement, it seemed excessively crowded.

And it was busy. There were twenty-five new men to be guided as they
applied what they'd been taught aground about life in space. It was
three full Earthdays before the stores intended for the journey to the
Moon and the maintenance of a base there really began to move. The tug
and the space wagons had to be moored outside and reached only by space
suits through small personnel airlocks.

And there was the matter of discipline. Lieutenant Commander Brown had
been put in command of the Platform for experience in space. He was
considered to be prepared for command of the Moonship by that
experience. So now he turned over command of the Platform to Brent--he
made a neat ceremony of it--and took over the ship that would go out to
