going out, I shall prefer to go in her. Now that my studies are over, I
shall very soon get tired of doing nothing. Perhaps in a few years I
may care more for the gaieties of Venice, but certainly at present I
have no interest in them, and would rather be at sea. Matteo tells me
that you have promised he shall make a few voyages in your ships, and
that you have told him he shall go in one of them shortly. If so, it
would be very pleasant to us both if we can sail together."

"I will arrange it so, Francisco. It would be for the benefit of my
cousin--who is a good lad, but harebrained, and without ballast--for
you to go with him. I should indeed have proposed it, but the vessel in
which I have decided he shall sail will be ready for sea in another ten
days or so, and I thought that you would prefer a longer stay in Venice
before you again set sail. If, however, it is your wish to be off again
so soon, I will arrange for you both to sail together.

"This time you will go officially as my supercargo, since you now
understand the duties. The captain of the vessel in which you will sail
is a good sailor and a brave man, but he has no aptitude for trade, and
I must have sent a supercargo with him. Your decision to go relieves me
of this, for which I am not sorry, for men who are at once good
supercargos, and honest men, are difficult to get."

The fortnight passed rapidly, and Francis enjoyed his stay at the
merchant's greatly, but he was not sorry when, at the end of ten days,
Polani told him that the lading of the vessel would begin the next day,
and that he had best go on board early and see the cargo shipped, so
that he might check off the bales and casks as they were sent on board,
and see where each description of goods was stowed away.

"I think, papa, it is too bad of you, sending Francisco away so soon,"
Maria said, when at their evening meal she learned the news of his
early departure.

"It is his own doing," her father said. "It is he who wants to go, not
I who send him. I consider that it is entirely your fault."

"Our fault!" the two girls repeated in surprise.

"Certainly. If you had made Venice sufficiently pleasant to him, he
would not wish to leave. I am too busy to see about such things, and I
left it to you to entertain him. As he is in such a hurry to get away
again, it is evident that you have not succeeded in doing so."

"Indeed, Signor Polani, your daughters have been everything that is
kind, but I have no taste for assemblies and entertainments. I feel out
of place there, amid all the gaily dressed nobles and ladies, and no
sooner do I get there, than I begin to wonder how anyone can prefer the
heated rooms, and clatter of tongues, to the quiet pleasure of a walk
backwards and forwards on the deck of a good ship. Besides, I want to
learn my profession, and there is so much to learn in it that I feel I
have no time to lose."

"I am right glad to see your eagerness in that direction, Francisco,
and I did but jest with my daughters. You have not yet asked me what is
the destination of the Lido, for that is the name of your new vessel.
This time you are going quite in a new direction. In the spring we are
certain to have war with Genoa, and as Parma and Hungary will probably
both take side against us, we may find ourselves cut off from the
mainland, and, in case of a disaster happening to our fleet, in sore
straits for food. I am, therefore, going to gather into my warehouses
as much grain as they will hold. This will both be a benefit to the
state, and will bring me good profit, for the price of wheat will be
high in the city if we are leaguered on the land side.

"The Lido will go down to Sicily, and fill up there with corn. You will
have to use care before entering port, for with war now certain, both
parties will begin to snap up prizes when they get the chance. So you
must keep a sharp lookout for Genoese galleys. If you find the coast is
too closely watched, you will go to the Moorish ports. We are friends
with them at present, though doubtless, as soon as Genoa and ourselves
get to blows, they will be resuming their piratical work. Thus you
will, this time, take in a much smaller amount of cargo, as you will
have to pay for the most part in gold."

It mattered little to Francis where he voyaged; but Matteo, who had
been greatly delighted at the thought of sailing with his friend, was
much disappointed when he heard that they were only going to fetch
grain from Sicily.

"Why, it is nothing to call a voyage," he said in tones of disgust,
when Francis told him the destination of the Lido. "I had hoped we were
going to make a long voyage, and touch at all sorts of places, just as
you did last time."

"I do not see that it matters much, Matteo; and we shall learn
navigation just as well from one course as another. The voyage will not
be a long one, unless we meet with unfavourable winds; but there's no
saying what may happen, and you may meet with adventure, even on a
voyage to Sicily and back."

The trip down to Sicily was quickly made. Francis had worked hard on
his first voyage, and was now able to make daily calculations as to the
run made, the course steered, and the position of the ship, and found
that these tallied closely with those of the captain. Matteo and he
shared a large and handsome cabin, and the time passed pleasantly as
the vessel ran down the coast of Italy. Once out of the Adriatic a
sharp lookout was kept, but the coast of Sicily was made without seeing
any sails of a suspicious character.

The lads were struck with surprise and admiration when, on coming on
deck in the morning, they saw the great cone of Etna lying ahead of
them. Neither of them had ever seen a mountain of any size, and their
interest in the scene was heightened by a slight wreath of smoke, which
curled up from the summit of the hill.

"It is well worth a voyage, if it were only to see that mountain,"
Francis said. "What an immense height it is, and how regular in its
shape!"

"And yet," Matteo said, "those who have journeyed from Italy into
France tell me that there are mountains there beside which Etna is as
nothing. These mountains are a continuation of the range of hills which
we can see from Venice. Their tops are always covered with snow, and
cannot be ascended by man; whereas it is easy, they say, to reach the
top of Etna."

"Yes, that looks easy enough," Francis agreed. "It seems such a regular
slope, that one could almost ride up; but I dare say, when you are
close you would find all sorts of difficult places."

"I should like to try," Matteo said. "What a grand view there would be
from the top!

"Is the port we are going to try first, captain, anywhere near the foot
of the mountain?"

"No, I am going round the southern part of the island. On this side the
ground is less fertile, and we should have difficulty in obtaining a
cargo. But even were we to put into a port on this side, you would not
be able to climb Mount Etna.

"Sicily has been an unfortunate country. Its great natural wealth has
rendered it an object of desire, to all its neighbours. It was the
battleground of the Romans and Carthaginians. Pisa, Genoa, and Naples
have all contended for its possession; and the Moors frequently make
descents upon its coasts. It has seldom enjoyed a peaceful and settled
government. The consequence is that general lawlessness prevails in the
districts remote from the towns; while in the forests that clothe the
side of Mount Etna, there are numerous hordes of bandits who set the
authorities at defiance, levy blackmail throughout the surrounding
villages, and carry off wealthy inhabitants, and put them to ransom. No
one in his senses would think of ascending that mountain, unless he had
something like an army with him."

"I should like to try it, all the same," Matteo asserted. "If there are
woods all over it, it is not likely one would happen to meet with any
of these people. I should like, above all things, to get to the top of
that hill."

"It would be harder work than you think, young sir," the captain said.
"You have no idea from this distance what the height is, or what a long
journey it is to ascend to the top. I have been told that it is a
hundred and twenty miles round its foot."

"I don't think you would like it, Matteo, if you were to try it,"
Francis said laughing. "You know you are as lazy as you can be, and
hate exerting yourself. I am sure that, before you got a quarter the
distance up that mountain, you would have only one wish, and that would
be to be at the bottom again."

"I don't know," Matteo said. "I hate exerting myself uselessly--wasting
my strength, as you do, in rowing at an oar, or anything of that sort;
but to do anything great, I would not mind exertion, and would go on
until I dropped."

"That is all very well, Matteo; but to do anything great, you have got
to do small things first. You could never wield a sword for five
minutes unless you had practised with it; and you will never succeed in
accomplishing any feats requiring great strength and endurance, if you
do not practise your muscles on every occasion. You used to grumble at
the height when you came up to my room in the old house, and I suppose
Etna is something like two hundred times as high."

"That does sound a serious undertaking," Matteo said, laughing; "and I
am afraid that I shall never see the view from the top of Etna.
Certainly I shall not, if it will be necessary beforehand to be always
exercising my muscles by running up the stairs of high houses."

The next day they were off Girgenti, the port at which they hoped to
obtain a cargo. They steered in until they encountered a fishing boat,
and learned from those on board that there was no Genoese vessel in
port, nor, as far as the men knew, any state galleys anywhere in the
neighbourhood. Obtaining this news, they sailed boldly into the port
and dropped anchor.

Francis, who had received before starting a list of houses with whom
Signor Polani was in the habit of doing business, at once rowed ashore,
Matteo and Giuseppi accompanying him. His business arrangements were
soon completed. The harvest had been a good one, and there was an
abundance of corn to be had at a cheap rate. In half an hour he
arranged for as large a quantity as the Lido would carry.

The work of loading soon commenced, and in four days the ship was full
up to the hatches. Francis went on shore to settle the various
accounts, and was just making the last payment when Matteo ran into the
office.

"Four Genoese galleys are entering the bay!"

Francis ran out, and saw four Genoese galleys rowing in.

"It is too late to escape. Even were we empty we could not get away;
but laden as the Lido is, they could row three feet to her one."

"What shall we do, Francisco?"

Francis stood for half a minute thinking.

"You had better stay here, Matteo. I will row out to the ship, and send
most of the men on shore. If they seize the ship, they may not take
those on board prisoners; but if they do, there is no reason why they
should take us all."

"You had better come on shore too, Francisco, and leave the captain in
charge. You can do no good by staying there; and Polani would be more
concerned at your capture than he would at the loss of a dozen ships.
If you could do any good, it would be different; but as it is, it would
be foolish to risk capture."

"I will see," Francis said. "At any rate, do you stop here."

Jumping into a boat, he rowed towards the Lido, which was lying but a
cable's length from the shore. As he neared her, he shouted to the men
to lower the boats.

"Captain," he said, "I do not know whether there is any danger of being
captured by the Genoese. But it is useless to run any unnecessary risk.
Therefore send all the crew but three or four men on shore. If the
Genoese board us, we have our papers as peaceful traders buying wheat;
but if, in spite of that, they capture us, we must take our chance."

"Surely you are not thinking of stopping, Messer Francisco. The padrone
would be terribly vexed if you were taken. He specially ordered me,
before we started, to see that no unnecessary risk was run, and to
prevent you from thrusting yourself into danger. Therefore, as captain
of the ship, I must insist that you go on shore."

"I think I ought to stay here," Francis said.

"I do not think so," the captain said firmly, "and I will not suffer
it. I have to answer for your safety to the padrone; and if you do not
go by yourself, I shall order the men to put you into one of the boats
by force. I mean no disrespect; but I know my duty, and that is to
prevent you from falling into the hands of the Genoese."

"I will not oblige you to use force, captain," Francis said, smiling,
"and will do as you wish me."

In five minutes the men were all--save four, whom the captain had
selected--in the boat, and rowing towards shore. Matteo was awaiting
them when they landed.

"That is right, Francisco. I was half afraid you would stay on board. I
know how obstinate you are whenever you take a thing into your head."

"The captain was more obstinate still, Matteo, and said that unless I
came away he would send me on shore by force; but I don't like
deserting the ship."

"That is nonsense, Francisco. If the Genoese take her, they take her,
and your remaining on board could not do any good. What are you going
to do now?"

"We will at once leave the place with the men, Matteo, and retire into
the country behind. It is not likely the Genoese would land and seize
us here, but they might do so, or the inhabitants, to please Genoa,
might seize us and send us on board. At any rate, we shall be safer in
the country."

The men had, by the captain's orders, brought their arms ashore on
leaving the ship. This was the suggestion of Francis, who said that,
were they unarmed, the people might seize them and hand them over to
the Genoese. At the head of this party, which was about fifty strong,
Francis marched up through the little town and out into the country. He
had really but little fear, either that the Genoese would arrest them
on shore, or that the people would interfere with them, for they would
not care to risk the anger of Venice by interfering in such a matter.
He thought it probable, however, that if his men remained in the town,
broils would arise between them and any of the Genoese sailors who
might land.

As soon as the Genoese galleys came up to the head of the bay, a boat
was lowered and rowed to the Lido, at whose masthead the Venetian flag
was flying. An officer, followed by six men, climbed up on to the deck.

"Are you the captain of this ship?" the officer asked as the captain
approached him.

"I am," the captain said.

"What ship is it?"

"It is the Lido, the property of Messer Polani, a merchant of Venice,
and laden with a cargo of wheat."

"Then you are my prisoner," the Genoese said. "I seize this vessel as
lawful prize."

"There is peace between the republics," the captain said. "I protest
against the seizure of this ship, as an act of piracy."

"We have news that several of our ships have been seized by the
Venetians," the officer said; "and we therefore capture this vessel in
reprisal. Where are your crew?"

"There are only four on board," the captain said. "We have filled up
our cargo, and were going to sail tomorrow, and therefore the rest of
the crew were allowed to go on shore; and I do not think it is likely
that they will return now," for one of the Genoese sailors had hauled
down the flag of Venice, and had replaced it with that of Genoa.

The Genoese officer briefly examined the vessel.

"Whom have you here on board with you?" he asked, struck with the
furniture and fittings of Francis' cabin.

"This is the cabin of Matteo Giustiniani, a young noble of Venice, who
is making his first voyage, in order to fit himself for entering the
service of the state: and of Francisco Hammond, who stands high in the
affections of my patron."

The Genoese uttered an angry exclamation. The name of Polani was well
known in Genoa as one of the chief merchants of Venice and as belonging
to a ducal house, while the family of Giustiniani was even more
illustrious; and had these passengers fallen into his hands, a ransom
might have been obtained greatly exceeding the value of the Lido and
her cargo. Leaving four of his men on board he went off to the galley
of the officer commanding the fleet, and presently returned with a
large boat full of sailors.

"You and your men can go ashore," he said to the captain. "The admiral
does not deem you worth the trouble of carrying to Genoa; but be quick,
or you will have to swim to shore."

As the Lido's boats had all gone ashore, the captain hailed a fishing
boat which was passing, and with the four sailors was rowed to shore,
well content that he had escaped the dungeons of Genoa. He rightly
imagined that he and his men were released solely on account of the
paucity of their numbers. Had the whole crew been captured, they would
have been carried to Genoa; but the admiral did not care to bring in
five prisoners only, and preferred taking the ship alone.

Francis, with his party, followed the line of the coast, ascending the
hills which rose steeply from the edge of the sea at a short distance
from the town. He had brought with him from the town a supply of food
sufficient for four or five days, and encamped in a little wood near
the edge of the cliff. From this they had a view of the port, and could
watch the doings of the Genoese galleys. Fires were lit and meat cooked
over them; and just as the meal was prepared the captain and the four
sailors joined them, amid a hearty cheer from the crew.

"I have made my protest," the captain said as he took his seat by the
side of Francis, "and the padrone can make a complaint before the
council if he thinks fit to do so; but there is small chance that he
will ever recover the Lido, or the value of her cargo."

"I don't like losing the ship," Francis said. "Of course, it is only a
stroke of bad fortune, and we could neither fly nor defend ourselves.
Still one hates arriving home with the story that one has lost the
ship."

"Yes," the captain agreed. "Messer Polani is a just man, yet no one
cares to employ men who are unlucky; and the worst of it is that the
last ship I commanded was wrecked. Many men would not have employed me
again, although it wasn't my fault. But after this second affair, in a
few months' time, I shall get the name of being an unlucky man, and no
one in his senses would employ a man who is always losing his ships."

"Do you think that there is any chance of our recapturing it, captain?"

"Not the least in the world," the captain replied. "Even supposing that
we could get on board, and overpower the Genoese without being heard,
and get her out of the port without being seen, we should not get away.
Laden as she is with grain, she will sail very slowly, and the Genoese
would overtake her in a few hours; and I needn't tell you that then
there would be very little mercy shown to any on board."

"That is true enough," Francis said. "Still, I do not like the idea of
losing the Lido."

After the meal was over Francis rose, and asked Matteo to accompany him
on a stroll along the cliffs, Giuseppi as usual following them. They
walked along until they rounded the head of the bay, and were able to
look along the coast for some distance. It was steep and rocky, and
worn into a number of slight indentations. In one of these rose a ledge
of rocks at a very short distance from the shore.

"How much further are we going, Francis?" Matteo said when they had
walked a couple of miles.

"About a quarter of a mile, Matteo. I want to examine that ledge of
rocks we saw from the first point."

"What on earth do you want to look at them for, Francis? You certainly
are the most curious fellow I ever met. You scoffed at me when I said I
should like to go up Mount Etna, and now here you are, dragging me
along this cliff, just to look at some rocks of no possible interest to
any one."

"That is the point to be inquired into, Matteo. I think it's possible
they may prove very interesting."

Matteo shrugged his shoulders, as he often did when he felt too lazy to
combat the eccentric ideas of his English friend.

"There we are," Francis said at last, standing on the edge of the cliff
and looking down. "Nothing could be better."

"I am glad you think so, Francisco," Matteo said, seating himself on
the grass. "I hope you intend to stay some little time to admire them,
for I own that I should like a rest before I go back."

Francis stood looking at the rocks. The bay was a shallow one, and was
but five or six hundred yards from point to point, the rocks rising
nearly in a line between the points, and showing for about two hundred
yards above water, and at about the same distance from the cliffs
behind them.

"What height do you think those rocks are above the water, Giuseppi?"

"It is difficult to judge, signor, we are so high above them; but I
should think in the middle they must be ten or twelve feet."

"I should think it likely they were more than double that, Giuseppi;
but we shall see better when we get down to the bottom. I daresay we
shall find a place where we can clamber down somewhere."

"My dear Francisco," Matteo said earnestly, "is anything the matter
with you? I begin to have doubts of your sanity. What on earth do these
rocks matter to you, one way or the other? or what can you care whether
they are thirty inches or thirty feet above the water?

"They do not differ from other rocks, as far as I can see. They are
very rugged and very rough, and would be very awkward if they lay out
at sea instead of in this little bay, where they are in nobody's way.
Is it not enough that you have tramped two miles to have a look at
