knew that sentinels were on watch in the woods, but still keeping in
the shadow of the palisade they went to the far side, where the Indian
line was thinner. Then they dropped to hand and knee and crept toward
the forest.

They stopped at intervals, lying flat upon the ground, looking with
all their eyes and listening with all their ears. They saw ahead but
one fire, apparently about four hundred yards away, and they heard
only a light damp wind rustling the dry boughs and bushes. But they
knew they could not afford to relax their caution by a hair, and they
continued a slow creeping progress until they reached the woods. Then
they rested on their elbows in a thicket, and took long breaths of
relief. They had been a quarter of an hour in crossing the open and it
was an immense relief to sit up again. They kept very close together,
while their muscles recovered elasticity, and still used their eyes
and ears to the utmost. It was impossible to say that a warrior was
not near crouching in the thicket as they were, and they did not
intend to run any useless risk. Moreover, if the alarm were raised
now, they would escape into the fort, and await another chance.

But they neither heard nor saw a hostile presence. In truth, they saw
nothing that betokened a siege, save the dim light flickering several
hundred yards ahead of them, and they resumed their advance, bent so
low that they could drop flat at the first menace. Their eyes looked
continually for a sentinel, but they saw none.

"Don't you think the wind is rising a bit, Tayoga?"  whispered the
hunter.

"Yes," replied the Onondaga.

"And it feels damper to the face?"

"Yes, Great Bear."

"And it doesn't mean rain, because the air's too cold, but it does
mean snow, for which the air is just right, and I think it's coming,
as the clouds grow thicker and thicker all the time."

"Which proves that we are favored. Tododaho from his great and shining
star, that we cannot see tonight, looks down upon us and will help us,
since we have tried to do the things that are right. We wish the snow
to come, because we wish a veil about us, while we confound our
enemies, and Tododaho will send it."

He spoke devoutly and Robert admired and respected his faith, the
center of which was Manitou, and Manitou in the mind of the Christian
boy was the same as God. He also shared the faith of Tayoga that
Tododaho would wrap the snow like a white robe about them to hide them
from their enemies. Meanwhile the three crept slowly toward the fire,
and Robert felt something damp brush his face. It was the first flake
of snow, and Tododaho, on his shining star, was keeping his unspoken
promise.

Tayoga looked up toward the point in the heavens where the great
chief's star shone on clear nights, and, even in the dark, Robert saw
the spiritual exaltation on his face. The Onondaga never doubted for
an instant. The mighty chief who had gone away four centuries ago had
answered the prayer made to him by one of his loyal children, and was
sending the snow that it might be a veil before them while they
destroyed the camp of their enemies. The soul of Tayoga leaped
up. They had received a sign. They were in the care of Tododaho and
they could not fail.

Another flake fell on Robert's face and a third followed, and then
they came down in a white and gentle stream that soon covered him,
Willet and Tayoga and hung like a curtain before them. He looked back
toward the fort, but the veil there also hung between and he could not
see it. Then he looked again, and the dim fire had disappeared in the
white mist.

"Will it keep their huts and lodges from burning?"  he whispered to
the hunter.

Willet shook his head.

"If we get a fire started well," he said, "the snow will seem to feed
it rather than put it out. It's going to help us in more ways than
one, too. I'd expected that we'd have to use flint and steel to touch
off our blaze, but as they're likely to leave their own fire and seek
shelter, maybe we can get a torch there. Now, you two boys keep close
to me and we'll approach that fire, or the place where it was."

They continued a cautious advance, their moccasins making no sound in
the soft snow, all objects invisible at a distance of twelve or
fifteen feet. Yet they saw one Indian warrior on watch, although he
did not see or hear them. He was under the boughs of a small tree and
was crouched against the trunk, protecting himself as well as he could
from the tumbling flakes. He was a Huron, a capable warrior with his
five senses developed well, and in normal times he was ambitious and
eager for distinction in his wilderness world, but just now he did not
dream that any one from the fort could be near. So the three passed
him, unsuspected, and drew close to the fire, which now showed as a
white glow through the dusk, sufficient proof that it was still
burning. Further progress proved that the warriors had abandoned it
for shelter, and they left the next task to Tayoga.

The Onondaga lay down in the snow and crept forward until he reached
the fire, where he paused and waited two or three minutes to see that
his presence was not detected. Then he took three burning sticks and
passed them back swiftly to his comrades. Willet had already discerned
the outline of a bark hut on his right and Robert had made out another
on his left. Just beyond were skin tepees. They must now act quickly,
and each went upon his chosen way.

Robert approached the hut on the left from the rear, and applied the
torch to the wall which was made of dry and seasoned bark. Despite the
snow, it ignited at once and burned with extraordinary speed. The
roar of flames from the right showed that the hunter had done as well,
and a light flash among the skin tepees was proof that Tayoga was not
behind them.

The besieging force was taken completely by surprise. The three had
imitated to perfection the classic example of Scipio's soldiers in the
Carthaginian camp. The confusion was terrible as French and Indians
rushed for their lives from the burning huts and lodges into the
blinding snow, where they saw little, and, for the present, understood
less. Tayoga who, in the white dusk readily passed for one of their
own, slipped here and there, continually setting new fires, traveling
in a circle about the fort, while Robert and Willet kept near him, but
on the inner side of the circle and well behind the veil of snow.

The huts and lodges burned fiercely. Where they stood thickest each
became a lofty pyramid of fire and then blended into a mighty mass of
flames, forming an intense red core in the white cloud of falling
snow. French soldiers and Indian warriors ran about, seeking to save
their arms, ammunition and stores, but they were not always
successful. Several explosions showed that the flames had reached
powder, and Robert laughed to himself in pleasure. The destruction of
their powder was a better result than he had hoped or foreseen.

The hunter uttered a low whistle and Tayoga throwing down his torch,
at once joined him and Robert who had already cast theirs far from
them.

"Back to the fort!" said Willet. "We've already done 'em damage they
can't repair in a long time, and maybe we've broken up their camp for
the winter!  What a godsend the snow was!"

"It was Tododaho who sent it," said Tayoga, reverently. "They almost
make a red ring around our fort. We have succeeded because the mighty
chief, the founder of the great League of the Hodenosaunee, who went
away to his star four centuries ago, willed for us to succeed. How
splendidly the fires burn!  Not a hut, not a lodge will be left!"

"And it's time for us to be going," said the hunter. "Men like De
Courcelles, Jumonville and Tandakora will soon bring order out of all
that tumult, and they'll be looking for those who set the torch. The
snow is coming down heavier and heavier and it hides our flight,
although it is not able to put out the fires. You're right, Tayoga,
about Tododaho pouring his favor upon us."

It was easy for the three to regain the palisade, and they were not
afraid of mistaken bullets fired at them for enemies, since Colden and
Wilton had warned the soldiers that they might expect the return of
the three. Tododaho continued to watch over, them as they reached the
palisade, at the point where the young Philadelphia captain himself
stood upon the raised plank behind it.

"Captain Colden! Captain Colden!" called Willet through the white
cloud.

"Is it you, Mr. Willet?" exclaimed Colden. "Thank God you've
come. I've been in great fear for you! I knew that you had set the
fires, because my own eyes tell me so, but I didn't know what had
become of you."

"I'm here, safe and well."

"And Mr. Lennox?"

"Here, unhurt, too," replied Robert.

"And the Onondaga?"

"All right and rejoicing that we have done even more than we hoped to
do," said Tayoga, in his measured and scholastic English.

The three, coated with snow until they looked like white bears,
quickly scaled the wall, and received the joyous welcome, given to
those who have done a great deed, and who return unhurt to their
comrades. Colden, Wilton and Carson shook their hands again and again
and Robert knew that it was due as much to pleasure at the return as
at the destruction of the besieging camp.

The entire population of Fort Refuge was at the palisade, heedless of
the snow, watching the burning huts and lodges. There was no wind, but
cinders and ashes fell near them, to be covered quickly with white.
Fierce yells now came from the forest and arrows and bullets were
fired at the fort, but they were harmless and the defenders did not
reply.

The flames began to decline by and by, then they sank fast, and after
a while the snow which still came down as if it meant never to stop
covered everything. The circling white wall enveloped the stronghold
completely, and Robert knew that the disaster to the French and
Indians had been overwhelming. Probably all of them had saved their
lives, but they had lost ammunition--the explosions had told him
that--much of their stores, and doubtless all of their food. They
would have to withdraw, for the present at least.

Robert felt immense exultation. They had struck a great blow, and it
was he who had suggested the plan. His pride increased, although he
hid it, when Willet put his large hand on his shoulder and said:

"'Twas well done, Robert, my lad, and 'twould not have been done at
all had it not been for you. Your mind bred the idea, from which the
action flowed."

"And you think the French and Indians have gone away now?"

"Surely, lad! Surely! Indians can stand a lot, and so can French, but
neither can stand still in the middle of a snow that bids fair to be
two feet deep and live. They may have to travel until they reach some
Indian village farther west and north."

"Such being the case, there can be no pressing need for me just at
present, and I think I shall sleep. I feel now as if I were bound to
relax."

"The best thing you could do, and I'll take a turn between the
blankets myself."

Robert had a great sleep. Some of the rooms in the blockhouse offered
a high degree of frontier comfort, and he lay down upon a soft couch
of skins. A fine fire blazing upon a stone hearth dried his deerskin
garments, and, when he awoke about noon, he was strong and thoroughly
refreshed. The snow was still falling heavily. The wilderness in its
white blanket was beautiful, but it did not look like a possible home
to Robert now. His vivid imagination leaped up at once and pictured
the difficulties of any one struggling for life, even in that vast
white silence.

Willet and Tayoga were up before him, and they were talking of another
expedition to see how far the besieging force had gone, but while they
were discussing it a figure appeared at the edge of the forest.

"It's a white man," exclaimed Wilton, "and so it must be one of the
Frenchmen. He's a bold fellow walking directly within our range. What
on earth can he want?"

One of the guards on the palisade raised his rifle, but Willet
promptly pushed down the muzzle.

"That's no Frenchman," he said.

"Then who is it?" asked Wilton.

"He's clothed in white, as any one walking in this snow is bound to
be, but I could tell at the first glimpse that it was none other than
our friend, Black Rifle."

"Coming to us for refuge, and so our fort is well named."

"Not for refuge. Black Rifle has taken care of himself too long in the
wilderness to be at a loss at any time. I suspect that he has
something of importance to tell us or he would not come at all."

At the command of Colden the great gate was thrown open that the
strange rover might enter in all honor, and as he came in, apparently
oblivious of the storm, his eyes gleamed a little at the sight of
Willet, his friend.

"You've come to tell us something," said the hunter.

"So I have," said Black Rifle.

"Brush off the snow, warm yourself by the fire, and then we'll
listen."

"I can tell it now. I don't mind the snow. I saw from a distance the
great fire last night, when the camp of the French and Indians
burned. It was clever to destroy their huts and lodges, and I knew at
once who did it. Such a thing as that could not have happened without
you having a hand in it, Dave Willet. I watched to see what the
French and Indians would do, and I followed them in their hurried
retreat into the north. I hid in the snowy bushes, and heard some of
their talk, too. They will not stop until they reach a village a full
hundred miles from here. The Frenchmen, De Courcelles and Jumonville
are mad with anger and disappointment, and so is the Indian chief
Tandakora."

"And well they may be!" jubilantly exclaimed Captain Colden, off whose
mind a great weight seemed to have slid. "It was splendid tactics to
burn their home over their heads. I wouldn't have thought of it
myself, but since others have thought of it, and, it has succeeded so
admirably, we can now do the work we were sent here to do."

Tayoga and Willet made snow-shoes and went out on them a few days
later, confirming the report of Black Rifle. Then small parties were
sent forth to search the forest for settlers and their families. Robert
had a large share in this work, and sometimes he looked upon terrible
things. In more than one place, torch and tomahawk had already done
their dreadful work, but in others they found the people alive and
well, still clinging to their homes. It was often difficult, even in
the face of imminent danger, to persuade them to leave, and when they
finally went, under mild compulsion, it was with the resolve to return
to their log cabins in the spring.

Fort Refuge now deserved its name. There were many axes, with plenty
of strong and skillful arms to wield them, and new buildings were
erected within the palisade, the smoke rising from a half dozen
chimneys. They were rude structures, but the people who occupied
them, used all their lives to hardships, did not ask much, and they
seemed snug and comfortable enough to them. Fires always blazed on the
broad stone hearths and the voices of children were heard within the
log walls. The hands of women furnished the rooms, and made new
clothes of deerskin.

The note of life at Fort Refuge was comfort and good cheer. They felt
that they could hold the little fortress against any force that might
come. The hunters, Willet, Tayoga and Black Rifle at their head,
brought in an abundance of game. There was no ill health. The little
children grew mightily, and, thus thrown together in a group, they had
the happiest time they had ever known. Robert was their hero. No other
could tell such glorious tales. He had read fairy stories at Albany,
and he not only brought them all from the store of his memory but he
embroidered and enlarged them. He had a manner with him, too. His
musical, golden voice, his vivid eyes and his intense earnestness of
tone, the same that had impressed so greatly the fifty sachems in the
vale of Onondaga, carried conviction. If one telling a tale believed
in it so thoroughly himself then those who heard it must believe in it
too.

Robert fulfilled a great mission. He was not the orator, the golden
mouthed, for nothing. If the winter came down a little too fiercely,
his vivid eyes and gay voice were sufficient to lift the
depression. Even the somber face of Black Rifle would light up when he
came near. Nor was the young Quaker, Wilton, far behind him. He was a
spontaneously happy youth, always bubbling with good nature, and he
formed an able second for Lennox.

"Will," said Robert, "I believe it actually gives you joy to be here
in this log fortress in the snow and wilderness. You do not miss the
great capital, Philadelphia, to which you have been used all your
life."

"No, I don't, Robert. I like Fort Refuge, because I'm free from
restraints. It's the first time my true nature has had a chance to
come out, and I'm making the most of the opportunity. Oh, I'm
developing! In the spring you'll see me the gayest and most reckless
blade that ever came into the forest."

The deep snow lasted a long time. More snowshoes were made, but only
six or eight of the soldiers learned to use them well. There were
sufficient, however, as Willet, Robert, Tayoga and Black Rifle were
already adepts, and they ranged the forest far in all directions. They
saw no further sign of French or Indians, but they steadily increased
their supply of game.

Christmas came, January passed and then the big snow began to
melt. New stirrings entered Robert's mind. He felt that their work at
Fort Refuge was done. They had gathered into it all the outlying
settlers who could be reached, and Colden, Wilton and Carson were now
entirely competent to guard it and hold it. Robert felt that he and
Willet should return to Albany, and get into the main current of the
great war. Tayoga, of course, would go with them.

He talked it over with Willet and Tayoga, and they agreed with him at
once. Black Rifle also decided to depart about the same time, and
Colden, although grieved to see them go, could say nothing against it.
When the four left they received an ovation that would have warmed the
heart of any man. As they stood at the edge of the forest with their
packs on their backs, Captain Colden gave a sharp command. Sixty
rifles turned their muzzles upward, and sixty fingers pulled sixty
triggers. Sixty weapons roared as one, and the four with dew in their
eyes, lifted their caps to the splendid salute. Then a long, shrill
cheer followed. Every child in the fort had been lifted above the
palisade, and they sent the best wishes of their hearts with those who
were going.

"That cheer of the little ones was mostly for you, Robert," said
Willet, when the forest hid them.

"It was for all of us equally," said Robert modestly.

