[260] P. 56.

[261] Reinaud, _Memoire sur l'Inde_, p. 399. In the fourteenth century one
Sih[=a]b al-D[=i]n wrote a work on which, a scholiast to the Bodleian
manuscript remarks: "The science is called Algobar because the inventor had
the habit of writing the figures on a tablet covered with sand." [Gerhardt,
_Etudes, _p. 11, note.]

[262] Gerhardt, _Entstehung _etc., p. 20.

[263] H. Suter, "Das Rechenbuch des Ab[=u] Zakar[=i]j[=a]
el-[H.]a[s.][s.][=a]r," _Bibliotheca Mathematica_, Vol. II (3), p. 15.

[264] A. Devoulx, "Les chiffres arabes," _Revue Africaine_, Vol. XVI, pp.
455-458.

[265] _Kit[=a]b al-Fihrist_, G. Fluegel, Leipzig, Vol. I, 1871, and Vol. II,
1872. This work was published after Professor Fluegel's death by J. Roediger
and A. Mueller. The first volume contains the Arabic text and the second
volume contains critical notes upon it.

[266] Like those of line 5 in the illustration on page 69.

[267] Woepcke, _Recherches sur l'histoire des sciences mathematiques chez
les orientaux_, loc. cit.; _Propagation, _p. 57.

[268] Al-[H.]a[s.][s.][=a]r's forms, Suter, _Bibliotheca Mathematica_, Vol.
II (3), p. 15.

[269] Woepcke, _Sur une donnee historique_, etc., loc. cit. The name
_[.g]ob[=a]r_ is not used in the text. The manuscript from which these are
taken is the oldest (970 A.D.) Arabic document known to contain all of the
numerals.

[270] Silvestre de Sacy, loc. cit. He gives the ordinary modern Arabic
forms, calling them _Indien_.

[271] Woepcke, "Introduction au calcul Gob[=a]r[=i] et Haw[=a][=i]," _Atti
dell' accademia pontificia dei nuovi Lincei_, Vol. XIX. The adjective
applied to the forms in 5 is _gob[=a]r[=i]_ and to those in 6 _indienne_.
This is the direct opposite of Woepcke's use of these adjectives in the
_Recherches sur l'histoire_ cited above, in which the ordinary Arabic forms
(like those in row 5) are called _indiens_.

These forms are usually written from right to left.

[272] J. G. Wilkinson, _The Manners and Customs of the Ancient Egyptians_,
revised by S. Birch, London, 1878, Vol. II, p. 493, plate XVI.

[273] There is an extensive literature on this "Boethius-Frage." The reader
who cares to go fully into it should consult the various volumes of the
_Jahrbuch ueber die Fortschritte der Mathematik_.

[274] This title was first applied to Roman emperors in posthumous coins of
Julius Caesar. Subsequently the emperors assumed it during their own
lifetimes, thus deifying themselves. See F. Gnecchi, _Monete romane_, 2d
ed., Milan, 1900, p. 299.

[275] This is the common spelling of the name, although the more correct
Latin form is Boetius. See Harper's _Dict. of Class. Lit. and Antiq._, New
York, 1897, Vol. I, p. 213. There is much uncertainty as to his life. A
good summary of the evidence is given in the last two editions of the
_Encyclopaedia Britannica_.

[276] His father, Flavius Manlius Boethius, was consul in 487.

[277] There is, however, no good historic evidence of this sojourn in
Athens.

[278] His arithmetic is dedicated to Symmachus: "Domino suo patricio
Symmacho Boetius." [Friedlein ed., p. 3.]

[279] It was while here that he wrote _De consolatione philosophiae_.

[280] It is sometimes given as 525.

[281] There was a medieval tradition that he was executed because of a work
on the Trinity.

[282] Hence the _Divus_ in his name.

[283] Thus Dante, speaking of his burial place in the monastery of St.
Pietro in Ciel d'Oro, at Pavia, says:

      "The saintly soul, that shows
  The world's deceitfulness, to all who hear him,
  Is, with the sight of all the good that is,
  Blest there. The limbs, whence it was driven, lie
  Down in Cieldauro; and from martyrdom
  And exile came it here."--_Paradiso_, Canto X.

[284] Not, however, in the mercantile schools. The arithmetic of Boethius
would have been about the last book to be thought of in such institutions.
While referred to by Baeda (672-735) and Hrabanus Maurus (c. 776-856), it
was only after Gerbert's time that the _Boetii de institutione arithmetica
libri duo_ was really a common work.

[285] Also spelled Cassiodorius.

[286] As a matter of fact, Boethius could not have translated any work by
Pythagoras on music, because there was no such work, but he did make the
theories of the Pythagoreans known. Neither did he translate Nicomachus,
although he embodied many of the ideas of the Greek writer in his own
arithmetic. Gibbon follows Cassiodorus in these statements in his _Decline
and Fall of the Roman Empire_, chap. xxxix. Martin pointed out with
positiveness the similarity of the first book of Boethius to the first five
books of Nicomachus. [_Les signes numeraux_ etc., reprint, p. 4.]

[287] The general idea goes back to Pythagoras, however.

[288] J. C. Scaliger in his _Poetice_ also said of him: "Boethii Severini
ingenium, eruditio, ars, sapientia facile provocat omnes auctores, sive
illi Graeci sint, sive Latini" [Heilbronner, _Hist. math. univ._, p. 387].
Libri, speaking of the time of Boethius, remarks: "Nous voyons du temps de
Theodoric, les lettres reprendre une nouvelle vie en Italie, les ecoles
florissantes et les savans honores. Et certes les ouvrages de Boece, de
Cassiodore, de Symmaque, surpassent de beaucoup toutes les productions du
siecle precedent." [_Histoire des mathematiques_, Vol. I, p. 78.]

[289] Carra de Vaux, _Avicenne_, Paris, 1900; Woepcke, _Sur
l'introduction_, etc.; Gerhardt, _Entstehung_ etc., p. 20. Avicenna is a
corruption from Ibn S[=i]n[=a], as pointed out by Wuestenfeld, _Geschichte
der arabischen Aerzte und Naturforscher_, Goettingen, 1840. His full name is
Ab[=u] `Al[=i] al-[H.]osein ibn S[=i]n[=a]. For notes on Avicenna's
arithmetic, see Woepcke, _Propagation_, p. 502.

[290] On the early travel between the East and the West the following works
may be consulted: A. Hillebrandt, _Alt-Indien_, containing "Chinesische
Reisende in Indien," Breslau, 1899, p. 179; C. A. Skeel, _Travel in the
First Century after Christ_, Cambridge, 1901, p. 142; M. Reinaud,
"Relations politiques et commerciales de l'empire romain avec l'Asie
orientale," in the _Journal Asiatique_, Mars-Avril, 1863, Vol. I (6), p.
93; Beazley, _Dawn of Modern Geography, a History of Exploration and
Geographical Science from the Conversion of the Roman Empire to A.D. 1420_,
London, 1897-1906, 3 vols.; Heyd, _Geschichte des Levanthandels im
Mittelalter_, Stuttgart, 1897; J. Keane, _The Evolution of Geography_,
London, 1899, p. 38; A. Cunningham, _Corpus inscriptionum Indicarum_,
Calcutta, 1877, Vol. I; A. Neander, _General History of the Christian
Religion and Church_, 5th American ed., Boston, 1855, Vol. III, p. 89; R.
C. Dutt, _A History of Civilization in Ancient India_, Vol. II, Bk. V,
chap, ii; E. C. Bayley, loc. cit., p. 28 et seq.; A. C. Burnell, loc. cit.,
p. 3; J. E. Tennent, _Ceylon_, London, 1859, Vol. I, p. 159; Geo. Turnour,
_Epitome of the History of Ceylon_, London, n.d., preface; "Philalethes,"
_History of Ceylon_, London, 1816, chap, i; H. C. Sirr, _Ceylon and the
Cingalese_, London, 1850, Vol. I, chap. ix. On the Hindu knowledge of the
Nile see F. Wilford, _Asiatick Researches_, Vol. III, p. 295, Calcutta,
1792.

[291] G. Oppert, _On the Ancient Commerce of India_, Madras, 1879, p. 8.

[292] Gerhardt, _Etudes_ etc., pp. 8, 11.

[293] See Smith's _Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography and Mythology_.

[294] P. M. Sykes, _Ten Thousand Miles in Persia, or Eight Years in Iran_,
London, 1902, p. 167. Sykes was the first European to follow the course of
Alexander's army across eastern Persia.

[295] Buehler, _Indian Br[=a]hma Alphabet_, note, p. 27; _Palaeographie_, p.
2; _Herodoti Halicarnassei historia_, Amsterdam, 1763, Bk. IV, p. 300;
Isaac Vossius, _Periplus Scylacis Caryandensis_, 1639. It is doubtful
whether the work attributed to Scylax was written by him, but in any case
the work dates back to the fourth century B.C. See Smith's _Dictionary of
Greek and Roman Biography_.

[296] Herodotus, Bk. III.

[297] Rameses II(?), the _Sesoosis_ of Diodorus Siculus.

[298] _Indian Antiquary_, Vol. I, p. 229; F. B. Jevons, _Manual of Greek
Antiquities_, London, 1895, p. 386. On the relations, political and
commercial, between India and Egypt c. 72 B.C., under Ptolemy Auletes, see
the _Journal Asiatique_, 1863, p. 297.

[299] Sikandar, as the name still remains in northern India.

[300] _Harper's Classical Dict._, New York, 1897, Vol. I, p. 724; F. B.
Jevons, loc. cit., p. 389; J. C. Marshman, _Abridgment of the History of
India_, chaps. i and ii.

[301] Oppert, loc. cit., p. 11. It was at or near this place that the first
great Indian mathematician, [=A]ryabha[t.]a, was born in 476 A.D.

[302] Buehler, _Palaeographie_, p. 2, speaks of Greek coins of a period
anterior to Alexander, found in northern India. More complete information
may be found in _Indian Coins_, by E. J. Rapson, Strassburg, 1898, pp. 3-7.

[303] Oppert, loc. cit., p. 14; and to him is due other similar
information.

[304] J. Beloch, _Griechische Geschichte_, Vol. III, Strassburg, 1904, pp.
30-31.

[305] E.g., the denarius, the words for hour and minute ([Greek: hora,
lepton]), and possibly the signs of the zodiac. [R. Caldwell, _Comparative
Grammar of the Dravidian Languages_, London, 1856, p. 438.] On the probable
Chinese origin of the zodiac see Schlegel, loc. cit.

[306] Marie, Vol. II, p. 73; R. Caldwell, loc. cit.

[307] A. Cunningham, loc. cit., p. 50.

[308] C. A. J. Skeel, _Travel_, loc. cit., p. 14.

[309] _Inchiver_, from _inchi_, "the green root." [_Indian Antiquary_, Vol.
I, p. 352.]

[310] In China dating only from the second century A.D., however.

[311] The Italian _morra_.

[312] J. Bowring, _The Decimal System_, London, 1854, p. 2.

[313] H. A. Giles, lecture at Columbia University, March 12, 1902, on
"China and Ancient Greece."

[314] Giles, loc. cit.

[315] E.g., the names for grape, radish (_la-po_, [Greek: rhaphe]),
water-lily (_si-kua_,  "west gourds"; [Greek: sikua], "gourds"), are much
alike. [Giles, loc. cit.]

[316] _Epistles_, I, 1, 45-46. On the Roman trade routes, see Beazley, loc.
cit., Vol. I, p. 179.

[317] _Am. Journ. of Archeol._, Vol. IV, p. 366.

[318] M. Perrot gives this conjectural restoration of his words: "Ad me ex
India regum legationes saepe missi sunt numquam antea visae apud quemquam
principem Romanorum." [M. Reinaud, "Relations politiques et commerciales de
l'empire romain avec l'Asie orientale," _Journ. Asiat._, Vol. I (6), p.
93.]

[319] Reinaud, loc. cit., p. 189. Florus, II, 34 (IV, 12), refers to it:
"Seres etiam habitantesque sub ipso sole Indi, cum gemmis et margaritis
elephantes quoque inter munera trahentes nihil magis quam longinquitatem
viae imputabant." Horace shows his geographical knowledge by saying: "Not
those who drink of the deep Danube shall now break the Julian edicts; not
the Getae, not the Seres, nor the perfidious Persians, nor those born on
the river Tanais." [_Odes_, Bk. IV, Ode 15, 21-24.]

[320] "Qua virtutis moderationisque fama Indos etiam ac Scythas auditu modo
cognitos pellexit ad amicitiam suam populique Romani ultro per legatos
petendam." [Reinaud, loc. cit., p. 180.]

[321] Reinaud, loc. cit., p. 180.

[322] _Georgics_, II, 170-172. So Propertius (_Elegies_, III, 4):

  Arma deus Caesar dites meditatur ad Indos
    Et freta gemmiferi findere classe maris.

"The divine Caesar meditated carrying arms against opulent India, and with
his ships to cut the gem-bearing seas."

[323] Heyd, loc. cit., Vol. I, p. 4.

[324] Reinaud, loc. cit., p. 393.

[325] The title page of Calandri (1491), for example, represents Pythagoras
with these numerals before him. [Smith, _Rara Arithmetica_, p. 46.] Isaacus
Vossius, _Observationes ad Pomponium Melam de situ orbis_, 1658, maintained
that the Arabs derived these numerals from the west. A learned dissertation
to this effect, but deriving them from the Romans instead of the Greeks,
was written by Ginanni in 1753 (_Dissertatio mathematica critica de
numeralium notarum minuscularum origine_, Venice, 1753). See also Mannert,
_De numerorum quos arabicos vocant vera origine Pythagorica_, Nuernberg,
1801. Even as late as 1827 Romagnosi (in his supplement to _Ricerche
storiche sull' India_ etc., by Robertson, Vol. II, p. 580, 1827) asserted
that Pythagoras originated them. [R. Bombelli, _L'antica numerazione
italica_, Rome, 1876, p. 59.] Gow (_Hist. of Greek Math._, p. 98) thinks
that Iamblichus must have known a similar system in order to have worked
out certain of his theorems, but this is an unwarranted deduction from the
passage given.

[326] A. Hillebrandt, _Alt-Indien_, p. 179.

[327] J. C. Marshman, loc. cit., chaps. i and ii.

[328] He reigned 631-579 A.D.; called Nu['s][=i]rw[=a]n, _the holy one_.

[329] J. Keane, _The Evolution of Geography_, London, 1899, p. 38.

[330] The Arabs who lived in and about Mecca.

[331] S. Guyard, in _Encyc. Brit._, 9th ed., Vol. XVI, p. 597.

[332] Oppert, loc. cit., p. 29.

[333] "At non credendum est id in Autographis contigisse, aut vetustioribus
Codd. MSS." [Wallis, _Opera omnia_, Vol. II, p. 11.]

[334] In _Observationes ad Pomponium Melam de situ orbis_. The question was
next taken up in a large way by Weidler, loc. cit., _De characteribus_
etc., 1727, and in _Spicilegium_ etc., 1755.

[335] The best edition of these works is that of G. Friedlein, _Anicii
Manlii Torquati Severini Boetii de institutione arithmetica libri duo, de
institutione musica libri quinque. Accedit geometria quae fertur
Boetii_.... Leipzig.... MDCCCLXVII.

[336] See also P. Tannery, "Notes sur la pseudo-geometrie de Boece," in
_Bibliotheca Mathematica_, Vol. I (3), p. 39. This is not the geometry in
two books in which are mentioned the numerals. There is a manuscript of
this pseudo-geometry of the ninth century, but the earliest one of the
other work is of the eleventh century (Tannery), unless the Vatican codex
is of the tenth century as Friedlein (p. 372) asserts.

[337] Friedlein feels that it is partly spurious, but he says: "Eorum
librorum, quos Boetius de geometria scripsisse dicitur, investigare veram
inscriptionem nihil aliud esset nisi operam et tempus perdere." [Preface,
p. v.] N. Bubnov in the Russian _Journal of the Ministry of Public
Instruction_, 1907, in an article of which a synopsis is given in the
_Jahrbuch ueber die Fortschritte der Mathematik_ for 1907, asserts that the
geometry was written in the eleventh century.

[338] The most noteworthy of these was for a long time Cantor
(_Geschichte_, Vol. I., 3d ed., pp. 587-588), who in his earlier days even
believed that Pythagoras had known them. Cantor says (_Die roemischen
Agrimensoren_, Leipzig, 1875, p. 130): "Uns also, wir wiederholen es, ist
die Geometrie des Boetius echt, dieselbe Schrift, welche er nach Euklid
bearbeitete, von welcher ein Codex bereits in Jahre 821 im  Kloster
Reichenau vorhanden war, von welcher ein anderes Exemplar im Jahre 982 zu
Mantua in die Haende Gerbert's gelangte, von welcher mannigfache
Handschriften noch heute vorhanden sind." But against this opinion of the
antiquity of MSS. containing these numerals is the important statement of
P. Tannery, perhaps the most critical of modern historians of mathematics,
that none exists earlier than the eleventh century. See also J. L. Heiberg
in _Philologus, Zeitschrift f. d. klass. Altertum_, Vol. XLIII, p. 508.

Of Cantor's predecessors, Th. H. Martin was one of the most prominent, his
argument for authenticity appearing in the _Revue Archeologique_  for
1856-1857, and in his treatise _Les signes numeraux_ etc. See also M.
Chasles, "De la connaissance qu'ont eu les anciens d'une numeration
decimale ecrite qui fait usage de neuf chiffres prenant les valeurs de
position," _Comptes rendus_, Vol. VI, pp. 678-680; "Sur l'origine de notre
systeme de numeration," _Comptes rendus_, Vol. VIII, pp. 72-81; and note
"Sur le passage du premier livre de la geometrie de Boece, relatif a un
nouveau systeme de numeration," in his work _Apercu historique sur
l'origine et le developpement des methodes en geometrie_, of which the
first edition appeared in 1837.

[339] J. L. Heiberg places the book in the eleventh century on philological
grounds, _Philologus_, loc. cit.; Woepcke, in _Propagation_, p. 44; Blume,
Lachmann, and Rudorff, _Die Schriften der roemischen Feldmesser_, Berlin,
1848; Boeckh, _De abaco graecorum_, Berlin, 1841; Friedlein, in his Leipzig
edition of 1867; Weissenborn, _Abhandlungen_, Vol. II, p. 185, his
_Gerbert_, pp. 1, 247, and his _Geschichte der Einfuehrung der jetzigen
Ziffern in Europa durch Gerbert_, Berlin, 1892, p. 11; Bayley, loc. cit.,
p. 59; Gerhardt, _Etudes_, p. 17, _Entstehung und Ausbreitung_, p. 14;
Nagl, _Gerbert_, p. 57; Bubnov, loc. cit. See also the discussion by
