The Project Gutenberg EBook of Manual Of Egyptian Archaeology And Guide To
The Study Of Antiquities In Egypt, by Gaston Camille Charles Maspero

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Manual Of Egyptian Archaeology And Guide To The Study Of Antiquities In Egypt

Author: Gaston Camille Charles Maspero

Release Date: December 20, 2004 [EBook #14400]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK EGYPTIAN ARCHAEOLOGY ***




Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Robert Connal and the PG Online
Distributed Proofreading Team.








MANUAL OF EGYPTIAN ARCHAEOLOGY

AND

Guide to the Study of Antiquities in Egypt.

_FOR THE USE OF STUDENTS AND TRAVELLERS_.

BY
G. MASPERO, D.C.L. OXON.
MEMBER OF THE INSTITUTE OF FRANCE; PROFESSOR AT THE COLLEGE DE FRANCE;
EX-DIRECTOR GENERAL OF EGYPTIAN MUSEUMS.

_TRANSLATED BY_

AMELIA B. EDWARDS.

_NEW EDITION, REVISED AND ENLARGED BY THE AUTHOR_.

With Three Hundred and Nine Illustrations.


1895.




PREFACE TO THE FOURTH AND REVISED EDITION.

Notwithstanding the fact that Egyptology is now recognised as a science, an
exact and communicable knowledge of whose existence and scope it behoves
all modern culture to take cognisance, this work of M. Maspero still
remains the Handbook of Egyptian Archaeology. But Egyptology is as yet in
its infancy; whatever their age, Egyptologists will long die young. Every
year, almost every month, fresh material for the study is found, fresh
light is thrown upon it by the progress of excavation, exploration, and
research. Hence it follows that, in the course of a few years, the standard
text-books require considerable addition and modification if they are to be
of the greatest value to students, who must always start from the foremost
vantage-ground.

The increasing demand for the _Egyptian Archaeology_ by English and
American tourists, as well as students, decided the English publishers to
issue a new edition in as light and portable a form as possible. This
edition is carefully corrected, and contains the enlarged letterpress and
many fresh illustrations necessary for incorporating within the book
adequate accounts of the main archaeological results of recent Egyptian
excavations. M. Maspero has himself revised the work, indicated all the
numerous additions, and qualified the expression of any views which he has
seen reason to modify in the course of his researches during the past eight
years. By the headings of the pages, the descriptive titles of the
illustrations, and a minute revision of the index, much has been done to
facilitate the use of the volume as a book of reference. In that capacity
it will be needed by the student long after he first makes acquaintance
with its instructive and abundant illustrations and its luminous
condensation of the archaeological facts and conclusions which have been
elucidated by Egyptology through the devotion of many an arduous lifetime
during the present century, and, not least, by the unremitting labours of
M. Maspero.

_April, 1895_.




PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION.

To put this book into English, and thus to hand it on to thousands who
might not otherwise have enjoyed it, has been to me a very congenial and
interesting task. It would be difficult, I imagine, to point to any work of
its scope and character which is better calculated to give lasting delight
to all classes of readers. For the skilled archaeologist, its pages contain
not only new facts, but new views and new interpretations; while to those
who know little, or perhaps nothing, of the subjects under discussion, it
will open a fresh and fascinating field of study. It is not enough to say
that a handbook of Egyptian Archaeology was much needed, and that Professor
Maspero has given us exactly what we required. He has done much more than
this. He has given us a picturesque, vivacious, and highly original volume,
as delightful as if it were not learned, and as instructive as if it were
dull.

As regards the practical side of Archaeology, it ought to be unnecessary to
point out that its usefulness is strictly parallel with the usefulness of
public museums. To collect and exhibit objects of ancient art and industry
is worse than idle if we do not also endeavour to disseminate some
knowledge of the history of those arts and industries, and of the processes
employed by the artists and craftsmen of the past. Archaeology, no less
than love, "adds a precious seeing to the eye"; and without that gain of
mental sight, the treasures of our public collections are regarded by the
general visitor as mere "curiosities"--flat and stale for the most part,
and wholly unprofitable.

I am much indebted to Mr. W.M. Flinders Petrie, author of _The Pyramids and
Temples of Gizeh_, for kindly translating the section on "Pyramids," which
is entirely from his pen. I have also to thank him for many valuable notes
on subjects dealt with in the first three chapters. To avoid confusion, I
have numbered these notes, and placed them at the end of the volume.

My acknowledgments are likewise due to Professor Maspero for the care with
which he has read the proof-sheets of this version of his work. In
departing from his system of orthography (and that of Mr. Petrie) I have
been solely guided by the necessities of English readers. I foresee that
_Egyptian Archaeology_ will henceforth be the inseparable companion of all
English-speaking travellers who visit the Valley of the Nile; hence I have
for the most part adopted the spelling of Egyptian proper names as given by
the author of "Murray's Handbook for Egypt."

Touching my own share in the present volume, I will only say that I have
tried to present Professor Maspero's inimitable French in the form of
readable English, rather than in a strictly word-for-word translation; and
that with the hope of still further extending the usefulness of the book, I
have added some foot-note references.

AMELIA B. EDWARDS.

WESTBURY-ON-TRYM,

_August_, 1887.






CONTENTS.


CHAPTER I.

ARCHITECTURE--CIVIL AND MILITARY.

    Sec. 1. HOUSES:--Bricks and Brickmaking--Foundations--Materials--Towns--
    Plans--Decoration

    Sec. 2. FORTRESSES:--Walls--Plans--Migdols, etc.

    Sec. 3. PUBLIC WORKS:--Roads--Bridges--Storehouses--Canals--Lake Moeris--
    Dams--Reservoirs--Quarries


CHAPTER II.

RELIGIOUS ARCHITECTURE.

    Sec. 1. MATERIALS; PRINCIPLES OF CONSTRUCTION:--Materials of Temples--
    Foundations of Temples--Sizes of Blocks--Mortars--Mode of hoisting
    Blocks--Defective Masonry--Walls--Pavements--Vaultings--Supports--
    Pillars and Columns--Capitals--Campaniform Capitals--Lotus-bud
    Capitals--Hathor-headed Capitals

    Sec. 2. TEMPLES:--Temples of the Sphinx--Temples of Elephantine--Temple
    at El Kab--Temple of Khonsu--Arrangement of Temples--Levels--Crypts--
    Temple of Karnak--Temple of Luxor--Philae--The Speos, or Rock-cut
    Temple--Speos of Horemheb--Rock-cut Temples of Abu Simbel--Temple of
    Deir el Bahari--Temple of Abydos--Sphinxes--Crio-sphinxes

    Sec. 3. DECORATION:--Principles of Decoration--The Temple a Symbolic
    Representation of the World--Decoration of Parts nearest the Ground--
    Dadoes--Bases of Columns--Decoration of Ceilings--Decoration of
    Architraves--Decoration of Wall-surfaces--Magic Virtues of Decoration
    --Decoration of Pylons--Statues--Obelisks--Libation-tables--Altars--
    Shrines--Sacred Boats--Moving Statues of Deities

CHAPTER III.

TOMBS.

    Sec. 1. MASTABAS:--Construction of the Mastaba--The Door of the Living,
    and the Door of the Dead--The Chapel--Wall Decorations--The Double and
    his Needs--The _Serdab_--Ka Statues--The Sepulchral Chamber

    Sec. 2. PYRAMIDS:--Plan of the Pyramid comprises three leading features
    of the Mastaba--Materials of Pyramids--Orientation--Pyramid of Khufu--
    Pyramids of Khafra and Menkara--Step Pyramid of Sakkarah--Pyramid of
    Unas--Decoration of Pyramid of Unas--Group of Dashur--Pyramid of Medum

    Sec. 3. TOMBS OF THE THEBAN EMPIRE; THE ROCK-CUT TOMBS:--Pyramid-mastabas
    of Abydos--Pyramid-mastabas of Drah Abu'l Neggah--Rock-cut Tombs of
    Beni Hasan and Syene--Rock-cut Tombs of Siut--Wall-decoration of
    Theban Catacombs--Tombs of the Kings of the Eighteenth Dynasty at
    Thebes--Valley of the Tombs of the Kings--Royal Catacombs--Tomb of
    Seti I.--Wall-decorations of Royal Catacombs--Funerary Furniture of
    Catacombs--Ushabtiu--Amulets--Common Graves of the Poor

CHAPTER IV.

PAINTING AND SCULPTURE.

    Sec. 1. DRAWING AND COMPOSITION:--Supposed Canon of Proportion--Drawing
    Materials--Sketches--Illustrations to the _Book of the Dead_--
    Conventional Treatment of Animal and Human Figures--Naturalistic
    Treatment--Composition--Grouping--Wall-paintings of Tombs--A Funerary
    Feast--A Domestic Scene--Military Subjects--Perspective--Parallel
    between a Wall-painting in a Tomb at Sakkarah and the Mosaic of
    Palestrina

    Sec. 2. TECHNICAL PROCESSES:--The Preparation of Surfaces--Outline--
    Sculptors' Tools--Iron and Bronze Tools--Impurity of Iron--Methods of
    Instruction in Sculpture--Models--Methods of cutting Various Stones--
    Polish--Painted Sculptures--Pigments--Conventional Scale of Colour--
    Relation of Painting to Sculpture in Ancient Egypt

    Sec. 3. SCULPTURE:--The Great Sphinx--Art of the Memphite School--Wood-
    panels of Hesi--Funerary Statues--The Portrait-statue and the Double
    --_Chefs d'oeuvre_ of the Memphite School--The Cross-legged
    Scribe--Diorite Statue of Khafra--Rahotep and Nefert--The Sheikh el
    Beled--The Kneeling Scribe--The Dwarf Nemhotep--Royal Statues of the
    Twelfth Dynasty--Hyksos Sphinxes of Tanis--Theban School of the
    Eighteenth Dynasty--Colossi of Amenhotep III.--New School of Tel el
    Amarna--Its Superior Grace and Truth--Works of Horemheb--School of the
    Nineteenth Dynasty--Colossi of Rameses II.--Decadence of Art begins
    with Merenptah--Ethiopian Renaissance--Saite Renaissance--The
    Attitudes of Statues--Saite Innovations--Greek Influence upon Egyptian
    Art--The Ptolemaic and Roman Periods--The School of Meroe--Extinction
    of Egyptian Art

CHAPTER V.

THE INDUSTRIAL ARTS.

    Sec. 1. STONE, CLAY, AND GLASS:--Precious Stones--Lapidary Art--Beads and
    Amulets--Scarabaei--Statuettes--Libation Tables--Perfume Vases--Kohl-
    pots--Pottery--Clay--Glazes--Red and Painted Wares--Ushabtiu--Funerary
    Cones--Painted Vases--"Canopic" Vases--Clay Sarcophagi--Glass--Its
    Chemical Constituents--Clear Glass--Coloured Glass--Imitations of
    Precious Stones in Glass--Glass Mosaics--Miniature Objects in Coloured
    Glass--Glass Amulets--Coloured Glass Vases--Enamels--The Theban Blue--
    The Enamels of Tell el Amarna--Enamelled Ushabtiu of Amen Ptahmes--
    Enamelled Tiles of the Step Pyramid at Sakkarah--Enamelled Tiles of
    Tell el Yahudeh

    Sec. 2. WOOD, IVORY, LEATHER; TEXTILE FABRICS:--Bone and Ivory--Elephant
    Tusks--Dyed Ivory--Egyptian Woods--Wooden Statuettes--Statuette of
    Hori--Statuette of Nai--Wooden Toilet Ornaments--Perfume and Unguent
    Spoons--Furniture--Chests and Coffers--Mummy-cases--Wooden Effigies on
    Mummy Cases--Huge Outer Cases of Ahmesnefertari and Aahhotep--Funerary
    Furniture--Beds--Canopies--Sledges--Chairs--Stools--Thrones--
    Textiles--Methods of Weaving--Leather--Breast-bands of Mummies--
    Patchwork Canopy in Coloured Leather of Princess Isiemkheb--
    Embroideries--Muslins--Celebrated Textiles of Alexandria

    Sec. 3. METALS:--Iron--Lead--Bronze--Constituents of Egyptian Bronze--
    Domestic Utensils in Bronze--Mirrors--Scissors--Bronze Statuettes--
    The Stroganoff Bronze--The Posno Bronzes--The Lion of Apries--Gilding
    --Gold-plating--Gold-leaf--Statues and Statuettes of Precious Metals
    --The Silver and Golden Cups of General Tahuti--The Silver Vases of
    Thmuis--Silver Plate--Goldsmith's Work--Richness of Patterns--
    Jewellery--Funerary Jewellery--Rings--Seal-rings--Chains--The Jewels
    of Queen Aahhotep--The Ring of Rameses II.--The Ear-rings of Rameses
    IX.--The Bracelet of Prince Psar--Conclusion

NOTES

INDEX






LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS.

FIGURE

1. Brickmaking, tomb of Rekhmara, Eighteenth Dynasty

2. House with vaulted floors, Medinet Habu

3. Plan of the town of Kahun, Twelfth Dynasty

4. Plan of house, Medinet Habu, Twentieth Dynasty

5. Plan of house, Medinet Habu, Twentieth Dynasty

6. Facade of house of Second Theban Period

7. Plan of house of Second Theban Period

8. Restoration of hall in Twelfth Dynasty house, Kahun

9. Box representing a house

10. Wall-painting in Twelfth Dynasty house, Kahun

11. View of mansion, tomb of Anna, Eighteenth Dynasty

12. Porch of mansion of Second Theban Period

13. Porch of mansion of Second Theban Period

14. Plan of Theban house and grounds, Eighteenth Dynasty

15. A perspective view of same

16. Part of palace of Ai, El Amarna tomb, Eighteenth Dynasty

17. Perspective view of part of palace of Ai

18. Frontage of house, Second Theban Period

19. Frontage of house, Second Theban Period

20. Central pavilion of house, Second Theban Period
