
"That's because AN-I-MALS can't see how naughty you are sometimes,"
said Miss Henny tartly, not having recovered her temper even after
many days.

"I shall make EVERY one love me before I go away. Mamma told me to,
and I shall. I know how;" and Button smiled with a wise little nod
that was pretty to see, as she proudly cuddled her first conquest.

"We shall see;" and Miss Henny ponderously departed, wondering what
odd fancy the little thing would take into her head next.

It was soon evident; for when she came down from her long nap, later
in the afternoon, Miss Henny found Rosamond reading aloud to her
sister in the great dim parlor. They made a curious contrast,--the
pale, white-haired, feeble old lady, with her prim dress, high cap,
knitting, and shaded eyes; and the child, rosy and round, quaint and
sweet, a pretty little ornament for the old-fashioned room, as she
sat among the tea-poys and samplers, ancient china and furniture,
with the portraits of great grandfathers and grandmothers simpering
and staring at her, as if pleased and surprised to see such a
charming little descendant among them.

"Bless the baby! what is she at now?" asked Miss Henny, feeling more
amiable after her sleep.

"I'm reading to Cousin Penny, 'cause no one else does, and her poor
eyes hurt her, and she likes stories, and so do I," answered Button,
with one chubby finger on the place in her book, and eyes full of
pride at the grown-up employment she had found for herself.

"So kind of the little dear! She found me alone and wanted to amuse
me; so I proposed a story to suit us both, and she does very well
with a little help now and then. I haven't read 'Simple Susan' for
years, and really enjoy it. Maria Edgeworth was always a favorite of
mine, and I still think her far superior to any modern writer for
the young," said Miss Penny, looking quite animated and happy in the
new entertainment provided for her.

"Go on, child; let me hear how well you can read;" and Miss Henny
settled herself in the sofa-corner with her embroidery.

So Button started bravely on, and tried so hard that she was soon
out of breath. As she paused, she said with a gasp,--

"Isn't Susan a dear girl? She gives ALL the best things to other
people, and is kind to the old harper. She didn't send him away, as
you did the music-man to-day, and tell him to be still."

"Organs are a nuisance, and I never allow them here. Go on, and
don't criticise your elders, Rosamond."

"Mamma and I always talk over stories, and pick out the morals of
'em. SHE likes it;" with which remark, made sweetly not pertly,
Button went on to the end, with an occasional lift over a long word;
and the old ladies were interested, in spite of themselves, in the
simple tale read in that childish voice.

"Thank you, dear, it is very nice, and we will have one every day.
Now, what can I do for you?" asked Miss Penny, as the little girl
pushed the curls off her forehead, with a sigh of mingled weariness
and satisfaction.

"Let me go in the back garden and peep through the knot-hole at the
pretty roses. I do long to see if the moss ones are out, and the
cherries ripe," said Rosy, clasping her hands imploringly.

"It can do no harm, Henrietta. Yes, dear, run away and get some
catnip for Tabby, and see if the balsams are up yet."

That last suggestion won Miss Henny's consent; and Button was off at
once, skipping like a young colt all over the garden, which now
seemed delightful to her.

At the back of the summer-house was a narrow space between it and
the fence where certain plump toads lived; peeping in to watch them,
Rosy had spied a large knot-hole in the old boards, and through it
found she could get a fine view of several rose-bushes, a tree, and
one window of the "missionary man's" house. She had longed for
another peep since the flower-stand was gone, and climbing trees
forbidden; now with joy she slipped into the damp nook, regardless
of the speckled gentlemen who stared at her with dismay, and took a
good look at the forbidden paradise beyond.

Yes, the "moss ones" were in bloom, the cherries quite red, and at
the window was the gray head of Mr. Dover, as he sat reading in his
queer yellow dressing-gown.

Button yearned to get in, and leaned so hard against the hateful
fence that the rotten board cracked, a long bit fell out, and she
nearly went after it, as it dropped upon the green bank below. Now
the full splendor of the roses burst upon her, and a delightful
gooseberry bush stood close by with purplish berries temptingly
bobbing within reach. This obliging bush hid the hole, but left fine
openings to see through; so the child popped her curly head out, and
gazed delightedly at the chickens, the flowers, the fruit, and the
unconscious old gentleman not far away.

"I'll have it for my secret; or maybe I'll tell Cousin Penny, and
beg her to let me peep if I truly promise never to go in," thought
Button, knowing well who her best friend was.

At bedtime, when the dear old lady came to give the good-night kiss,
which the others forgot, Rosy, as Miss Penny called her, made her
request; and it was granted, for Miss Penny had a feeling that the
little peacemaker would sooner or later heal the breach with her
pretty magic, and so she was very ready to lend a hand in a quiet
way.

Next day at play-time, Button was hurrying down her last bit of
gingerbread, which she was obliged to eat properly in the
dining-room, instead of enjoying out-of-doors, when she heard a
sudden flurry in the garden, and running to the window saw Roxy the
maid chasing a chicken to and fro, while Miss Henny stood flapping
her skirts on the steps, and crying, "Shoo!" till she was red in the
face.

"It's the white banty, and it must have come in my hole! Oh dear, I
hope they won't catch it! Cousin Henny said she'd wring the neck of
the first one that flied over the wall."

Away went Rosy, to join in the hunt; for Miss Henny was too fat to
run, and Roxy found the lively fowl too much for her. It was a long
and hard chase; feathers flew, the maid lost her breath, Rosy
tumbled down, and Miss Henny screamed and scolded till she was
forced to sit down and watch in silence.

At last poor, hunted Banty ran into the arbor, for its clipped wings
would not lift it over the wall. Button rushed after it, and dismal
squalls plainly proclaimed that the naughty chicken was caught.

Miss Henny waddled down the path, declaring that she WOULD wring its
neck; and Roxy went puffing after her, glad to rest. But the old
summer-house was empty. No little girl, no ruffled bantam, appeared.
Both had vanished like magic; and mistress and maid stared at each
other in amazement, till they saw that the long-disused window was
open, and a gleam of light came in from the narrow opening behind.

"My patience! if that child hasn't crept out there, and bolted
through that hole in the fence! Did you ever, Miss?" exclaimed Roxy,
trying not to look pleased at being spared the distasteful task of
killing the poor chicken.

"Naughty girl!" began Miss Henny, when the sound of voices made both
listen. "Slip in there, and see what is going on," said the
mistress, well knowing that her stout person never could be squeezed
into the small space between house and fence.

Roxy, being thin, easily obeyed, and in a whisper telephoned what
went on beyond the hole, causing Miss Henny much vexation, surprise,
and at last real pleasure, as the child performed her little part in
the mission she had undertaken.

"Oh, please, it's all my fault! I kept the hole open, Mr. Thomas,
and so Banty flied in. But it isn't hurt a bit, and I've brought it
home all safe, 'cause I know you love your chickies, and Tabby ate
lots of 'em," said the childish voice in its most conciliatory tone.

"Why didn't you fling it over the wall, as I did the cat?" asked Mr.
Dover, smiling, as he shut up the truant fowl, and turned to look at
the rosy, breathless child, whose pink frock bore the marks of many
a tumble on grass and gravel.

"It would hurt Banty's feelings, and yours too, and not be polite.
So I came myself, to make some pollygies, and say it was my fault.
But, please, could I keep the hole to peep through, if I always put
up a board when I go away? It is so dull in there, and SO sweet in
here!"

"Don't you think a little gate would be nicer,--one just big enough
for you, with a hook to fasten it? We'll call it a button-hole,"
laughed Mr. Dover. "Then you could peep; or perhaps the ladies will
think better of it, and show that they pardon my ill treatment of
Tabby by letting you come in and pick some cherries and roses now
and then."

This charming proposal caused the little girl to clasp her hands and
cry aloud,--

"That would be perfully sp'endid! I know Cousin Penny would like it,
and let me. P'r'aps she'd come herself; she's so thin, she could,
and she loves your mother and wants to see her. Only, Cousin Henny
won't let us be nice and friendly. S'pose you send HER some
cherries; she loves good things to eat, and maybe she will say yes,
if you send lots."

Mr. Dover laughed at this artless proposal, and Miss Henny smiled at
the prospect of a gift of the luscious black-heart cherries she had
been longing for. Roxy wisely repeated only the agreeable parts of
the conversation; so nothing ruffled the lady's temper. Now, whether
Mr. Dover's sharp eye caught a glimpse of the face among the
gooseberry bushes, and suspected eavesdroppers, or whether the
child's earnest desire to make peace touched him, who shall say?
Certain it is that his eyes twinkled like a boy's, as he said rather
loudly, in his most affable tone,--

"I shall be most happy to send Miss Henrietta a basket of fruit. She
used to be a charming young woman. It's a pity she shuts herself up
so much; but that sad little romance of hers has darkened her life,
I suppose. Ah, well, I can sympathize with her!"

Rosy stared at the sudden change in his manner, and was rather
bewildered by his grown-up way of talking to her. But being intent
on securing something nice to carry home, she stuck to the cherries,
which she DID understand, and pointing to the piazza said with a
business-like air,--

"There's a basket; so we might pick 'em right away. I love to go up
in trees and throw 'em down; and I know Cousin Henny will like
cherries ever so much, and not scold a bit when I take some to her."

"Then come on," cried Mr. Thomas, relapsing into the hearty manner
she liked so much; and away he went, quite briskly, down the path,
with his yellow skirts waving in the wind, and Button skipping after
him in great glee.

"They actually ARE a-picking cherries, Miss, up in the tree like a
couple of robins a-chirpin' and laughin' as gay as can be," reported
Roxy, from her peep-hole.

"Rip off the rest of that board, then I can see," whispered Miss
Henny, quivering with interest now; for she had heard Mr. Dover's
words, and her wrath was appeased by that flattering allusion to
herself.

Off came the rest of the board, and from the window, half hidden in
woodbine, she could now see over the bushes into the next garden.
The peep-hole commanded the tree, and she watched with eager eyes
the filling of the basket to be sent her, planning the while a
charming note of thanks.

"Do look, Miss; they are resting now, and she's on his knee. Ain't
it a pretty picter?" whispered Roxy, unmindful of the earwigs, ants,
and daddy-long-legs promenading over her as she crouched in her
mouldy corner, intent on the view beyond.

"Very pretty! He lost several children in India and I suppose Rosy
reminds him of them. Ah, poor man! I can sympathize with him, for
_I_ too have loved and lost," sighed Miss Henny, pensively surveying
the group on the rustic seat.

They were playing cherry-bob; and the child's laughter made pleasant
music in the usually quiet place, while the man's face lost its sad,
stern look, and was both gay and tender, as he held the little
creature close, and popped the ripe fruit into the red, laughing
mouth.

As the last sweet morsel disappeared Rosy said, with a long breath
of perfect content,--

"It's ALMOST as good as having Papa to play with. I do hope the
cousins WILL let me come again! If they don't, I think my heart will
break, 'cause I get so homesick over there, and have so many trials,
and no one but Cousin Penny ever cuddles me."

"Bless her heart! We'll send her some flowers for that. You tell her
that Mrs. Dover is poorly, and would like very much to see her; and
so would Mr. Thomas, who enjoys her little niece immensely. Can you
remember that?"

"Every word! SHE is very nice to me, and I love her, and I guess she
will be glad to come. She likes MOSS-roses, and so do I," added the
unblushing little beggar, as Mr. Dover took out his knife and began
to make the bouquet which was to be Miss Penny's bribe. He could not
bear to give up his little playmate, and was quite ready to try
again, with this persistent and charming ally to help him heal the
breach.

"Shall you send anything to Cis? You needn't mind about it, 'cause
she can't keep me at home, but it might please her, and make her
stop rapping my head with her thimble when I ask questions, and
slapping my fingers when I touch any of her pretty things,"
suggested Button, as the flowers were added to the fruit, making
a fine display.

"I never send presents to YOUNG ladies," said Mr. Thomas shortly,
adding, with both hands out, and his most inviting smile, "But I
ALWAYS kiss nice little girls if they will allow me?"

Button threw both arms about his neck and gave him a shower of
grateful kisses, which were sweeter to the lonely old man than all
the cherries that ever grew, or the finest flowers in his garden.
Then Miss Rosamond proudly marched home, finding no trace of the
watchers, for both had fled while the "cuddling" went on. Roxy was
soberly setting the dinner-table, and Miss Henny in the parlor
breathing hard behind a newspaper. Miss Penny and Cicely were
spending the day out, so the roses had to wait; but the basket was
most graciously received, also the carefully delivered message, and
the child's heart was rejoiced by free permission to go and see "our
kind neighbor now and then, if Sister does not object."

Rosy was in great spirits, and prattled away as they sat at dinner,
emboldened by the lady's unusual amiability to ask all sorts of
questions, some of which proved rather embarrassing to Miss Henny,
and very amusing to Roxy, listening in the china-closet.

"I wish _I_ had 'spepsia," was the abrupt remark of the small person
as her plate of drum-sticks was removed and the pudding appeared,
accompanied by the cherries.

"Why, dear?" asked Miss Henny, busily arranging the small dish of
delicate tidbits, which left little but the skeleton of the roast
fowl for the kitchen.

"Then I could have the nicest bits of chicken, and heaps of sauce on
my pudding, and the butteryest slices of toast, and ALL the cream
for my tea, as you do. It isn't a VERY bad pain, is it?" asked Rosy,
in such perfect good faith that Miss Henny's sudden flush and Roxy's
hasty dive into the closet never suggested to her that this innocent
speech was bringing the old lady's besetting sin to light in the
most open manner.

"Yes, child, it is VERY bad, and you may thank your stars that I try
to keep you from it by feeding you on plain food. At my age, and
suffering as I do, the best of everything is needed to keep up my
strength," said Miss Henny, tartly. But the largest plate of
pudding, with "heaps of sauce," went to the child this day, and when
the fruit was served, an unusually small portion was put away for
the invalid, who was obliged to sustain nature with frequent lunches
through the day and evening.

"I'm s'prised that you suffer much, Cousin Henny. How brave you must
be, not to cry about it, and go round in horrid pain, as you do, and
dress so nicely, and see people, and work 'broidering, and make
calls! I hope I shall be brave if I ever DO have 'spepsia; but I
guess I shan't, you take such care to give me small pieces every
time."

With which cheerful remark Rosy closed that part of the conversation
and returned to the delights of her new friend's garden. But from
that day, among other changes which began about this time, the
child's cup and plate were well filled, and the dread of adding to
her own sufferings seemed to curb the dyspeptic's voracious
appetite. "A cheild was amang them takin' notes," and every one
involuntarily dreaded those clear eyes and that frank tongue, so
innocently observing and criticising all that went on. Cicely had
already been reminded of a neglected duty by Rosy's reading to Miss
Penny, and tried to be more faithful in that, as in other services
which she owed the old lady. So the little missionary was evidently
getting on, though quite unconscious of her work at home, so
absorbed was she in her foreign mission; for, like many another
missionary, the savage over the way was more interesting than the
selfish, slothful, or neglected souls at home.

Miss Penny was charmed with her flowers and the friendly message
sent her, and to Rosy's great delight went next day, in best bonnet
and gown, to make a call upon the old lady "who was poorly," for
that appeal could not be resisted. Rosy also, in honor of the great
occasion, wore HER best hat, and a white frock so stiff that she
looked like a little opera dancer as the long black legs skipped
along the street; for it was far too grand a visit to be paid
through a hole in the wall.

In the basket were certain delicacies for the old lady, and a card
had been prepared, with the names of Miss Carey and Miss Rosamond
Carey beautifully written on it by Cis, who was dying to go, but
dared not after Rosy had told her Mr. Dover's remark about young
ladies.

As the procession of two paused at the door, both the young and the
old heart fluttered a little, for this was the first decided step
toward reconciliation, and any check might spoil it all. The maid
stared, but civilly led these unexpected guests in and departed with
the card. Miss Penny settled herself in a large chair and looked
about with pensive interest at the familiar room. But Rosy made a
bee-line for the great tiger-skin, and regardless of her clean
frock lay down on it to examine the head, which glared at her with
yellow eyes, showing all its sharp teeth in the most delightfully
natural manner.

Mr. Dover came in with a formal bow, but Miss Penny put out both
hands, and said in her sweet old voice,--

"Let us be friends again for the sake of your mother."

That settled the matter at once, and Mr. Thomas was so eager to do
his part that he not only shook the hands heartily, but kept them in
his as he said like an honest man,--

"My dear neighbor, I beg your pardon! _I_ was wrong, but I'm not too
proud to own it and say I'm glad to let by-gones be by-gones for the
sake of all. Now come and see my mother; she is longing for you."

What went on in the next room Rosy never knew or cared, for Mr.
Thomas soon returned, and amused her so well, showing his treasures,
that she forgot where she was till the maid came to say tea was
ready.

"Are we going to stay?" cried the little girl, beaming from under a
Feejee crown of feathers, which produced as comical an effect upon
her curly head as did the collar of shark's teeth round her plump
neck or the great Japanese war-fan in her hand.

"Yes, we have tea at five; come and turn it out. I've ordered the
little cups especially for you," said her host, as he changed the
