
"Tubbs attempted to sit down on a chair, but his weight was so great
that it was crushed beneath him. Finally, he was compelled to sit on
the floor, and even then his stature was such that his head rose to the
height of six feet.

"What an enormous appetite he had, too! The viands on the table seemed
nothing. He at first supplied his plate with the usual quantity; but as
the extent of his appetite became revealed to him, he was forced to make
away with everything on the table. Even then he was hungry.

"'Well, I declare,' thought Mrs. Tubbs, in amazement, 'it does take an
immense quantity to keep him alive!'

"Tubbs rose from the table, and, in doing so, hit his head a smart whack
against the ceiling. Before leaving the house he turned to make a last
appeal to his wife, who, he could not help seeing, was anxious to have
him go.

"'Won't you own me, Mary?' he asked. 'It isn't my fault that I am so
big.'

"'Own you!' exclaimed his wife. 'I wouldn't own you for a mint of
money. You'd eat me out of house and home in less than a week.'

"'I don't know but I should,' said Mr. Tubbs mournfully. 'I don't see
what gives me such an appetite. I'm hungry now.'

"'Hungry, after you've eaten enough for six!' exclaimed his wife,
aghast. 'Well, I never!'

"'Then you won't let me stay, Mary?'

"'No, no.'

"With slow and sad strides Thomas Tubbs left the house. The world seemed
dark enough to the poor fellow. Not only was he disowned by his wife and
children, but he could not tell how he should ever earn enough to keep
him alive, with the frightful appetite which he now possessed. 'I don't
know,' he thought, 'but the best way is to drown myself at once.' So he
walked to the river, but found it was not deep enough to drown him.

"As he emerged from the river uncomfortably wet, he saw a man timidly
approaching him. It proved to be the manager of the show.

"'Hello!' said he hesitatingly.

"'Hello!' returned Tubbs disconsolately.

"'Would you like to enter into a business engagement with me?'

"'Of what sort?' asked Tubbs, brightening up.

"'To be exhibited,' was the reply. 'You're the largest man living in
the world. We could make a pretty penny together.'

"Tubbs was glad enough to accept this proposition, which came to him
like a plank to a drowning man. Accordingly an agreement was made that,
after deducting expenses, he should share profits with the manager.

"It proved to be a great success. From all quarters people flocked to
see the great prodigy, the wonder of the world, as he was described in
huge posters. Scientific men wrote learned papers in which they strove
to explain his extraordinary height, and, as might be expected, no two
assigned the same cause.

"At the end of six months Tubbs had five thousand dollars as his share
of the profits. But after all he was far from happy. He missed
the society of his wife and children, and shed many tears over his
separation from them.

"At the end of six months his singular customer again made his
appearance.

"'It seems to me you've altered some since I last saw you,' he said,
with a smile.

"'Yes,' said Tubbs dolefully.

"'You don't like the change, I judge?'

"'No,' said Tubbs. 'It separates me from my wife and children, and that
makes me unhappy.'

"'Would you like to be changed back again!'

"'Gladly,' was the reply.

"Presto! the wonderful giant was changed back into the little tailor. No
sooner was this effected than he returned post-haste to Webbington. His
wife received him with open arms.

"'Oh, Thomas,' she exclaimed, 'how could you leave us so? On the day of
your disappearance a huge brute of a man came here and pretended to be
you, but I soon sent him away.'

"Thomas wisely said nothing, but displayed his five thousand dollars.
There was great joy in the little dwelling. Thomas Tubbs at once took a
larger shop, and grew every year in wealth and public esteem. The
only way in which he did not grow was in stature; but his six months'
experience as a giant had cured him of any wish of that sort. The last I
heard of him was his election to the legislature."

"That's a bully story," said Charlie, using a word which he had heard
from older boys. "I wish I was a great tall giant."

"What would you do if you were, Charlie?"

"I'd go and fight the rebels," said Charlie manfully.



CHAPTER XX. POMP'S EDUCATION COMMENCES

In the season of leisure from farm work which followed, Frank found
considerable time for study. The kind sympathy and ready assistance
given by Mr. Morton made his task a very agreeable one, and his progress
for a time was as rapid as if he had remained at school.

He also assumed the office of teacher, having undertaken to give a
little elementary instruction to Pomp. Here his task was beset with
difficulties. Pomp was naturally bright, but incorrigibly idle.
His activity was all misdirected and led him into a wide variety of
mischief. He had been sent to school, but his mischievous propensities
had so infected the boys sitting near him that the teacher had been
compelled to request his removal.

Three times in the week, during the afternoon, Pomp came over to the
farm for instruction. On the first of these occasions we will look in
upon him and his teacher.

Pomp is sitting on a cricket by the kitchen fire. He has a primer open
before him at the alphabet. His round eyes are fixed upon the page as
long as Frank is looking at him, but he requires constant watching. His
teacher sits near-by, with a Latin dictionary resting upon a light stand
before him, and a copy of Virgil's Aeneid in his hand.

"Well, Pomp, do you think you know your lesson?" he asks.

"Dunno, Mass' Frank; I reckon so."

"You may bring your book to me, and I will try you."

Pomp rose from his stool and sidled up to Frank with no great alacrity.

"What's that letter, Pomp?" asked the young teacher, pointing out the
initial letter of the alphabet.

Pomp answered correctly.

"And what is the next?"

Pomp shifted from one foot to the other, and stared vacantly out of the
window, but said nothing.

"Don't you know?"

"'Pears like I don't 'member him, Mass' Frank."

Here Frank had recourse to a system of mnemonics frequently resorted to
by teachers in their extremity.

"What's the name of the little insect that stings people sometimes,
Pomp?"

"Wasp, Mass' Frank," was the confident reply.

"No, I don't mean that. I mean the bee."

"Yes, Mass' Frank."

"Well, this is B."

Pomp looked at it attentively, and, after a pause, inquired, "Where's
him wings, Mass' Frank?"

Frank bit his lips to keep from laughing. "I don't mean that this is a
bee that makes honey," he explained, "only it has the same name. Now do
you think you can remember how it is called?" "Bumblebee!" repeated Pomp
triumphantly.

Pomp's error was corrected, and the lesson proceeded.

"What is the next letter?" asked Frank, indicating it with the point of
his knife-blade.

"X," answered the pupil readily.

"No, Pomp," was the dismayed reply. "It is very different from X."

"Dat's him name at school," said Pomp positively.

"No, Pomp, you are mistaken. That is X, away down there."

"Perhaps him change his name," suggested Pomp.

"No. The letters never change their names. I don't think you know your
lesson, Pomp. just listen to me while I tell you the names of some of
the letters, and try to remember them."

When this was done, Pomp was directed to sit down on the cricket, and
study his lesson for twenty Minutes, at the end of which he might again
recite.

Pomp sat down, and for five minutes seemed absorbed in his book. Then,
unfortunately, the cat walked into the room, and soon attracted the
attention of the young student. He sidled from his seat so silently that
Frank did not hear him. He was soon made sensible that Pomp was engaged
in some mischief by hearing a prolonged wail of anguish from the cat.

Looking up, he found that his promising pupil had tied her by the leg to
a chair, and under these circumstances was amusing himself by pinching
her tail.

"What are you doing there, Pomp?" he asked quickly.

Pomp scuttled back to his seat, and appeared to be deeply intent upon
his primer.

"Ain't doin' noffin', Mass' Frank," he answered innocently.

"Then how came the cat tied to that chair?"

"'Spec' she must have tied herself."

"Come, Pomp, you know better than that. You know cats can't tie
themselves. Get up immediately and unfasten her."

Pomp rose with alacrity, and undertook to release puss from the thraldom
of which she had become very impatient. Perhaps she would have been
quite as well off if she had been left to herself. The process of
liberation did not appear to be very agreeable, judging from the angry
mews which proceeded from her. Finally, in her indignation against Pomp
for some aggressive act, she scratched him sharply.

"You wicked old debble!" exclaimed Pomp wrathfully.

He kicked at the cat; but she was lucky enough to escape, and ran out of
the room as fast as her four legs could carry her.

"Big ugly debble!" muttered Pomp, watching the blood ooze from his
finger.

"What's the matter, Pomp?"

"Old cat scratch me."

"And what did you do to her, Pomp? I am afraid you deserved your
scratch."

"Didn't do noffin', Mass' Frank," said Pomp virtuously.

"I don't think you always tell the truth, Pomp."

"Can't help it, Mass' Frank. 'Spec' I've got a little debble inside of
me."

"What do you mean, Pomp! What put that idea in your head?"

"Dat's what mammy says. Dat's what she al'ays tells me."

"Then," said Frank, "I think it will be best to whip it out of you.
Where's my stick?"

"Oh, no, Mass' Frank," said Pomp, in alarm; "I'll be good, for sure."

"Then sit down and get your lesson."

Again Pomp assumed his cricket. Before he had time to devise any new
mischief, Mrs. Frost came to the head of the stairs and called Frank.

Frank laid aside his books, and presented himself at the foot of the
stairs.

"I should like your help a few minutes. Can you leave your studies?"

"Certainly, mother."

Before going up, he cautioned Pomp to study quietly, and not get into
any mischief while he was gone. Pomp promised very readily.

Frank had hardly got upstairs before his pupil rose from the cricket,
and began to look attentively about him. His first proceeding was to,
hide his primer carefully in Mrs. Frost's work-basket, which lay on the
table. Then, looking curiously about him, his attention was drawn to the
old-fashioned clock that stood in the corner.

Now, Pomp's curiosity had been strongly excited by this clock. It was
not quite clear to him how the striking part was effected. Here seemed
to be a favorable opportunity for instituting an investigation. Pomp
drew his cricket to, the clock, and, opening it, tried to reach up to
the face. But he was not yet high enough. He tried a chair, and still
required a greater elevation. Espying Frank's Latin dictionary, he
pressed that into service.

By and by Frank and his mother heard the clock striking an unusual
number of times.

"What is the matter with the clock?" inquired Mrs. Frost.

"I don't know," said Frank unsuspiciously.

"It has struck ten times, and it is only four o' clock."

"I wonder if Pomp can have got at it," said Frank, with a sudden
thought.

He ran downstairs hastily.

Pomp heard him coming, and in his anxiety to escape detection, contrived
to lose his balance and fall to the floor. As he fell, he struck
the table, on which a pan of sour milk had been placed, and it was
overturned, deluging poor Pomp with the unsavory fluid.

Pomp shrieked and kicked most energetically. His appearance, as he
picked himself up, was ludicrous in the extreme. His sable face was
plentifully besprinkled with clotted milk, giving him the appearance
of a negro who is coming out white in spots. The floor was swimming in
milk. Luckily the dictionary had fallen clear of it, and so escaped.

"Is this the way you study?" demanded Frank, as sternly as his sense of
the ludicrous plight in which he found Pomp would permit.

For once Pomp's ready wit deserted him. He had nothing to say.

"Go out and wash yourself."

Pomp came back rather shamefaced, his face restored to its original
color.

"Now, where is your book?"

Pomp looked about him, but, as he took good care not to look where he
knew his book to be, of course he did not find it.

"I 'clare, Mass' Frank, it done lost," he at length asserted.

"How can it be lost when you had it only a few minutes ago?"

"I dunno," answered Pomp stolidly.

"Have you been out of the room?"

Pomp answered in the negative.

"Then it must be somewhere here."

Frank went quietly to the corner of the room and took therefrom a stick.

"Now, Pomp," he said, "I will give you just two minutes to find the book
in. If you don't find it, I shall have to give you a whipping."

Pomp looked at his teacher to see if he was in earnest. Seeing that he
was, he judged it best to find the book.

Looking into the work-box, he said innocently: "I 'clare to gracious,
Mass' Frank, if it hasn't slipped down yere. Dat's mi'ty cur's, dat is."

"Pomp, sit down," said Frank. "I am going to talk to you seriously. What
makes you tell so many lies?"

"Dunno any better," replied Pomp, grinning.

"Yes, you do, Pomp. Doesn't your mother tell you not to lie?"

"Lor', Mass' Frank, she's poor ignorant nigger. She don't know nuffin'."

"You mustn't speak so of your mother. She brings you up as well as she
knows how. She has to work hard for you, and you ought to love her."

"So I do, 'cept when she licks me."

"If you behave properly she won't whip you. You'll grow up a 'poor,
ignorant nigger' yourself, if you don't study."

"Shall I get white, Mass' Frank, if I study?" asked Pomp, showing a
double row of white teeth.

"You were white enough just now," said Frank, smiling.

"Yah, yah!" returned Pomp, who appreciated the joke.

"Now, Pomp," Frank continued seriously, "if you will learn your lesson
in fifteen minutes I will give you a piece of gingerbread."

"I'll do it, Mass' Frank," said Pomp promptly.

Pomp was very fond of gingerbread, as Frank very well knew. In the time
specified the lesson was got, and recited satisfactorily.

As Pomp's education will not again be referred to, it may be said that
when Frank had discovered how to manage him, he learned quite rapidly.
Chloe, who was herself unable to read, began to look upon Pomp with
a new feeling of respect when she found that he could read stories in
words of one syllable, and the "lickings" of which he complained became
less frequent. But his love of fun still remained, and occasionally got
him into trouble, as we shall hereafter have occasion to see.



CHAPTER XXI. THE BATTLE OF FREDERICKSBURG

About the middle of December came the sad tragedy of Fredericksburg,
in which thousands of our gallant soldiers yielded up their lives in a
hard, unequal struggle, which brought forth nothing but mortification
and disaster.

The first telegrams which appeared in the daily papers brought anxiety
and bodings of ill to many households. The dwellers at the farm were
not exempt. They had been apprised by a recent letter that Mr. Frost's
regiment now formed a part of the grand army which lay encamped on
the eastern side of the Rappahannock. The probability was that he was
engaged in the battle. Frank realized for the first time to what peril
his father was exposed, and mingled with the natural feeling which such
a thought was likely to produce was the reflection that, but for him,
his father would have been in safety at home.

"Did I do right?" Frank asked himself anxiously, the old doubt recurring
once more.

Then, above the selfish thought of peril to him and his, rose the
