

STRONG SOULS.

JOHN x. 10 p. (Revised Version):

"I came that they may have life, and may have it abundantly."


Life is a gift of very unequal distribution. I am not speaking merely of
length of life, though that is an important element in the case: there
may be sad and quiet years which do not count: we have known existences
which crept on in one dull round, from petty pleasure to petty pleasure,
from monotonous occupation to monotonous occupation, never roused to
storm by any noble passion, never thrilled by an electric touch of
sympathy. Some lives are complete within narrow limits: in the few
years which are all they have, they ripen into perfect sweetness, or
expend themselves in such a flash of heroism, as would make subsequent
days, were they given, mean and poor by contrast. What shall we say of
that nameless engine-driver in America, who last week, measuring his own
life against six hundred more, rushed through the flames and saved them?
Dead of his glorious wounds, who would dare to pity him, or to think his
end untimely? Life may be measured by its breadth as well as by its
length: by the number of its intellectual points of contact with
humanity, by the width of its sympathies, the largeness of its hopes.
Still more, there is a quality of intensity in which lives differ: some
live more in a week than others in a year: it is not that they are
consuming themselves under stress of circumstance or in agony of
passion, but that their fibre is stronger, their central flame
brighter, their power of endurance larger. This inequality of gift may
be a religious difficulty, but it fits in with the whole economy of
Nature, who is a Mother at once bountiful and prodigal, and while
careful of the type, careless of the individual life; bidding one soul
but open unconscious eyes upon the world and close them again, while
another moves through the slow changes of ninety years. But it is easier
to understand when we remember that a just God asks account only of what
He has given. Within the narrowest fate is yet room to round off the
perfect sphere. Of the lily that blooms to-day and fades to-morrow, He
demands only that it shall be sweet and beautiful in its season.

Energy is largely, though perhaps not wholly, a physical quality. It
comes of a certain superb vitality, a power of unconscious living,
well-strung nerves, a quickly-working brain. I know the wonders which an
eager will and a keen conscience can work, with no better instrument
than a frail body, always full of languors, always accessible to pain;
and I bow before them in glad reverence, as tokens of the spirit's
victory over the flesh. But this, though undoubtedly from a moral point
of view not inferior, is not the same thing as the easy swing of mind
and body which is not only always equal to its work, but finds its
keenest delight in strenuous efforts and long-drawn toils, which would
hopelessly overtax weaker men. And there is an obvious connection
between this kind of vitality and that which shows itself in life
prolonged far beyond the usual limits. Men and women do not live the
longer for sparing themselves, even were long life under such
conditions worth having. I admit the wearing power of fretting anxiety,
of sorrow that saps the springs of life, of labour pushed to contempt of
the physical and moral conditions of existence; but honest work for an
honest purpose, the full exercise of all the powers from day to day, the
steady strain of faculties that were meant for strain and which rust in
disuse, never hurt any one yet. But the temptations of exuberant
vitality are all, if not to over-strain, yet to a certain hardness, and
arrogance, and disregard of eternal law. It is not complimentary to
human nature to note that perfectly healthy people, whom nothing tries
and who are ignorant of pain, are seldom tolerant, tender, sympathetic,
with lives that in one important constituent of happiness are far
beneath their own. Upon such the shadow of the infinite seems to fall
but seldom. They succeed in so many things that they undertake, as to
escape the sense of the impassable barriers that hem in all human
existence. The very fact of living is so much to them, that they fail to
