The Project Gutenberg EBook of Scientific American, Vol.22, No. 1, January
1, 1870, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Scientific American, Vol.22, No. 1, January 1, 1870
       Journal Of Practical Information, Art, Science, Mechanics,
       Chemistry, And Manufactures

Author: Various

Posting Date: April 8, 2014 [EBook #8952]
Release Date: September, 2005
First Posted: August 29, 2003

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN, JAN 1, 1870 ***




Produced by Don Kretz, Juliet Sutherland, and Distributed Proofreaders









[Illustration]




SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN




A WEEKLY JOURNAL OF PRACTICAL INFORMATION, ART, SCIENCE, MECHANICS,
CHEMISTRY, AND MANUFACTURES.




NEW YORK, JANUARY 1, 1870.

Vol. XXII.--No. 1. [NEW SERIES.]

$3 per Annum [IN ADVANCE.]


       *       *       *       *       *

Contents: (Illustrated articles are marked with an asterisk.)

  *Engines of the Spanish Gunboats

  The Torpedo Problem

  Sugar Making in Louisiana

  Sticking, or Court Plaster

  *An Improved Hoisting Pulley Wanted

  *Ferdinand De Lesseps--Chief Promoter of the Suez Canal

  *An Ingenious Vent Peg

  *A New English Patent Pulley Block

  Plants in Sleeping Booms

  *Improved Treadle Motion

  *Improved Method of Catching Curculios

  Remains of a Megatherium in Ohio

  Artificial Ivory

  American and English Kailway Practice Contrasted

  Boiler Covering

  Attachment of Saws to Swing Frames

  Patent Decision

  Inventions Patented in England by Americans

  *Russ Improved Wood Molding Machine

  A Lost Civilisation

  *Girards "Palier Glissant"

  A Happv New Year

  The Suez Canal not yet a Failure

  Tubular Boilers and Boiler Explosions

  Professor Fiske's Lecture at Harvard

  The Brighter Side

  The American Institute Prizes Awarded to Steam Engines

  A Protest against the Canadian Patent Law

  American Railway Management

  Scientific Lecture before the American Institute

  The Battle Fields of Sceence

  How French Bank Notes are Made

  What the Newspapers Say

  Chinese Method of Preserving Eggs

  Steam Boiler Explosion

  Editorial Summary

  The Steven Breech Loading Rifle

  * A Novel Improved Hand Vise

  The Mound Builders of Colorado

  *The Woven-Wire Mattress

  Flouring Mill Hazards

  Fire-Proof Building

  The Decline of American Shipping

  Aerial Navigation-A Suggestion

  Putty Floors of Jewelers Shops and otherwise

  Western Demand for Agricultural Implements

  Economical Steam Engine

  Friction and Percussion

  Oiling a Preservative of Brownstone

  Interesting Correspondence from China

  Commumcation Between Deaf and Blind Mutes

  Cheap Cotton Press Wanted

  A Singular Freak of a Magnet

  Preservation of Iron

  The Bananas and Plantains of the Tropics

  Putting Up Stoves

  The Magic Lantern

  The Largest well in the World--Capacity 1,000,000 gallons
  of water per Day

  Paper for Building

  *Improved Muzzle-Pivoting Gun

  Stock Feeding by Clock Work

  Milk and What Comes of It

  *Improved Hay Elevator

  *Improvement in Lamp Wicks

  Great Transformation

  Answers to Correspondents

  Recent American and Foreign Patents

  New Books and Publications

  List of Patents

       *       *       *       *       *




Engines of the Spanish Gunboats.


In our description of these boats in No. 25, Vol. XXI., special mention
was made of the compactness of the engines.

It has frequently been urged as an objection against the twin screw
system that the double set of engines, four steam cylinders with
duplicates of all the working parts called for on this system, render
the whole too complicated and heavy for small vessels, preventing, at
the same time, the application of surface condensation. In the engines
of the Spanish gunboats, of which we annex an illustration from
_Engineering_, the designer, Captain Ericsson, has overcome these
objections by introducing a surface condenser, which, while it performs
the function of condensing the steam to be returned to the boiler in the
form of fresh water, serves as the principal support of the engines,
dispensing entirely with the usual framework. Besides this expedient,
each pair of cylinders have their slide frames for guiding the movements
of the piston rods cast in one piece. Altogether the combination, is
such that the total weight and space occupied by these novel twin screw
engines do not exceed the ordinary single screw engines of equal
power. Several improvements connected with the working gear have been
introduced.

[Illustration: ENGINES OF THE TWIN SCREW SPANISH GUNBOATS]

The outer bearings of the propeller shafts, always difficult to regulate
and keep in order on the twin screw system, are selfadjusting and
accommodate themselves to every change of the direction of the shafts.
This is effected by their being spherical externally, and resting in
corresponding cavities in the stern braces or hangers. The spring
bearings for supporting the middle of the shafts are also arranged on a
similar self-adjusting principle.

The thrust bearing is of peculiar construction, the arrangement being
such that the bearing surfaces remain in perfect contact however much
the shaft may be out of line. The reversing gear likewise is quite
peculiar, insuring complete control over the movement of the two
propellers under all circumstances. It is claimed that these engines are
the lightest and most compact yet constructed for twin screw vessels.

       *       *       *       *       *




The Torpedo Boat Problem.


The _Army and Navy Journal_ thinks the problem of a torpedo boat
capable of firing rapidly and with certainty, has at length reached a
satisfactory solution. It says:

"A boat has been completed which is proved by experiment to be faultless
in machinery and arrangement. On the 2d of December, Secretary Robeson,
Vice-Admiral Porter, and Commodore Case, Chief of the Bureau of
Ordnance, went to the Navy Yard at Washington, to witness the experiment
with this new engine of destruction. After examining the workings of the
machinery, and the manner of firing, one of the destructives was put in
the frame and the party proceeded to the shore to witness the result. A
torpedo of only thirty-six pounds was first run out with rapidity and
fired; but the result showed that this small amount of powder, even,
would have been sufficient to destroy any ship, by lifting her out of
the water and breaking her back, even if her bottom was not knocked out
altogether. Mud and water were thrown up together, and the concussion
was felt far up in the Navy Yard, the ground being shaken by the shock
of the powder against the bed of the river. The concussion felt on board
the torpedo-boat was not more than that caused by a wave striking a
vessel at sea.

"Several torpedoes were fired from the vessel, the explosion of
which the party witnessed on board, as they desired to ascertain for
themselves the effect of the shock. The result seemed satisfactory,
as no change whatever is contemplated in the machinery, which is very
simple, and 'works to a charm.' The torpedo vessel is the _Nina_, a very
strong iron boat of three hundred and fifty tuns burden, capable of
crossing the ocean, and having a speed of seventeen knots an hour. She
is not impervious to heavy shot, but can be made so, and is capable of
resisting any ordinary projectile that could be brought to bear on her
from the decks of a ship of war. Her decks will be made torpedo and
shot-proof, and several arrangements will be applied, now that it is
known that the torpedo system is a success. Such a vessel as the _Nina_,
attacking an enemy's squadron on our coast some dark night, or entering
an enemy's port, could destroy half the vessels in the harbor, and
easily escape as few vessels could overtake her. Such a vessel could,
for instance, enter the harbor of Havana, and destroy every vessel of
war in the port, under cover of darkness. A squadron supplied with such
boats to be used to attack, after the fight began, and the ships were
enveloped in smoke, would have a most decided advantage against an enemy
not thus armed for torpedo warfare. It is reported that our torpedo navy
will consist of twenty vessels, none of which will have a less speed
than twelve knots, and the fastest of them will go seventeen knots."

       *       *       *       *       *




SUGAR MAKING IN LOUISIANA.


The New Orleans _Times_ contains, in a late number, an account of the
manufacture of sugar as conducted on the Poychas estate, from which we
extract portions containing the essential particulars of cane sugar
making as conducted in the southern portions of the United States.

"Reaching the Cane shed, the crop, dumped into piles, is received by a
crowd of feeders, who place it (eight or ten stalks at a time) on the
cane carrier. This is an elevator, on an endless band of wood and iron,
which carries them to the second story, where the stalks drop between
the rollers. An immense iron tank below, called a juice box, receives
the liquid portion, and another elevator bears the bruised and broken
