death. Really, I have no hope now; but I promised my mother to do
everything in my power to ascertain it, for a certainty. She placed a
packet in my hands, which was not to be opened until I had so satisfied
myself. I do not know what it contains, but I believe it relates to my
father's family.

"I do not see that that can make any difference to me, for I certainly
should not care to go home to see relations to whom my coming might be
unwelcome. I should greatly prefer to stay out here, for a few years,
until I had obtained such a position as would make me absolutely
independent of them."

"I can quite understand that," Captain Keppel said. "Poor relations
seldom get a warm welcome, and as you were born in Alexandria, they may
be altogether unaware of your existence. You have certainly been
extremely fortunate, so far; and if you preferred a civil appointment,
you would be pretty certain of getting one when the war is over.

"There will be a big job in organizing this country, after the
Dervishes are smashed up; and a biggish staff of officials will be
wanted. No doubt most of these will be Egyptians, but Egyptian
officials want looking after, so that a good many berths must be filled
by Englishmen; and Englishmen with a knowledge of Arabic and the Negro
dialect are not very easily found. I should say that there will be
excellent openings, for young men of capacity."

"I have no doubt there will," Gregory said. "I have really never
thought much about the future. My attention, from childhood, has been
fixed upon this journey to the Soudan; and I never looked beyond it,
nor did my mother discuss the future with me. Doubtless she would have
done so, had she lived; and these papers I have may give me her advice
and opinion about it."

"Well, I must be going on deck," Captain Keppel said. "We shall start
in half an hour."

The three gunboats were all of the same design. They were flat
bottomed, so as to draw as little water as possible; and had been built
and sent out, in sections, from England. They were constructed entirely
of steel, and had three decks, the lower one having loophole shutters
for infantry fire. On the upper deck, which was extended over the whole
length of the boat, was a conning tower. In the after portion of the
boat, and beneath the upper deck, were cabins for officers. Each boat
carried a twelve-pounder quick-firing gun forward, a howitzer, and four
Maxims. The craft were a hundred and thirty-five feet long, with a beam
of twenty-four feet, and drew only three feet and a half of water. They
were propelled by a stern wheel.

At half-past nine the Zafir's whistle gave the signal, and she and her
consorts--the Nazie and Fatteh--cast off their warps, and steamed out
into the river. Each boat had on board two European engineers, fifty
men of the 9th Soudanese, two sergeants of royal marine artillery, and
a small native crew.

"I expect that we shall not make many more trips down to Berber," the
Commander said, when they were once fairly off. "The camp at Atbara
will be our headquarters, unless indeed Mahmud advances; in which case,
of course, we shall be recalled. Until then we shall be patrolling the
river up to Metemmeh; and making, I hope, an occasional rush as far as
the next cataract."

When evening came on, the steamer tied up to an island, a few miles
north of Shendy. So far they had seen no hostile parties--indeed, the
country was wholly deserted.

Next morning they started before daybreak. Shendy seemed to be in
ruins. Two Arabs, only, were seen on the bank. A few shots were fired
into the town, but there was no reply.

Half an hour later, Metemmeh was seen. It stood half a mile from the
river. Along the bank were seven mud forts, with extremely thick and
solid walls. Keeping near the opposite bank, the gunboats, led by the
Zafir, made their way up the river. Dervish horsemen could be seen,
riding from fort to fort, doubtless carrying orders.

The river was some four thousand yards wide and, at this distance, the
gunboats opened fire at the two nearest forts. The range was soon
obtained to a nicety, and the white sergeants and native gunners made
splendid practice, every shell bursting upon the forts, while the
Maxims speedily sent the Dervish horsemen galloping off to the distant
hills, on which could be made out a large camp.

The Dervish gunners replied promptly, but the range was too great for
their old brass guns. Most of the shot fell short, though a few, fired
at a great elevation, fell beyond the boats. One shell, however, struck
the Zafir, passing through the deck and killing a Soudanese; and a
shrapnel shell burst over the Fatteh.

After an hour's fire, at this range, the gunboats moved up opposite the
position; and again opened fire with shell and shrapnel, committing
terrible havoc on the forts, whose fire presently slackened suddenly.
This was explained by the fact that, as the gunboats passed up, they
saw that the embrasures of the forts only commanded the approach from
the north; and that, once past them, the enemy were unable to bring a
gun to bear upon the boats. Doubtless the Dervishes had considered it
was impossible for any steamer to pass up, under their fire; and that
it was therefore unnecessary to widen the embrasures, so that the guns
could fire upon them when facing the forts, or going beyond them.

Suddenly, as all on board were watching the effect of their fire, an
outburst of musketry broke out from the bushes that lined the eastern
bank, a hundred yards away. Fortunately, the greater part of the
bullets flew overhead, but many rattled against the side. The Maxims
were instantly turned upon the unseen enemy, the Soudanese fired
volleys, and their rash assailants went at once into the thicker bush,
many dropping before they gained it.

The gunboats now steamed slowly up the river; and then, turning,
retired downstream again, shelling the enemy's position as they passed.
As they were going down they came upon a number of Dervishes, who were
busy unloading half a dozen native craft. The Maxim soon sent them
flying; and the boats, which contained horses, donkeys, grain, and
other goods, were taken in tow by the gunboats, which anchored at the
same island as on the previous night.

"Well, Bimbashi," Captain Keppel said, when the work for the day was
over, "so you have had your first brush with the enemy. What do you
think of it?"

"I would rather that you did not call me Bimbashi, Captain Keppel. The
title is ridiculous for me, and it was only given me that it might be
useful when with Egyptian or Soudanese soldiers. I should feel really
obliged, if you would simply call me Hilliard.

"I felt all right, sir, during the fight; except that I envied the
gunners, who were doing something, while I had nothing to do but look
on. It certainly made me jump, when that shell struck the boat, because
I had quite made up my mind that their guns would not carry so far, and
so it was a complete surprise to me."

"Yes, it was a very harmless affair. Still, it was good as a
preparation for something more severe. You have got accustomed to the
noise, now, and that is always as great a trial to the nerves as actual
danger."

"I wish I could be doing something, sir. Everyone else had some duty,
from yourself down to the black firemen--even my servant made himself
useful, in carrying up shot."

"I tell you what I will do, Mr. Hilliard. I will get those marine
sergeants to instruct you in the working of the Maxim, and in the
duties of the men attending on it. Then next time we come up, I will
put you in command of one of them. Your duties will not be severe, as
you would simply direct the men as to the object at which they are to
aim, watch the effect and direction of the bullets, and see that they
change their aim, as circumstances may direct. The black gunners are
well trained, and know their work; still, if by any chance the gun
jams, it will be useful for you to be able to show them what to do;
even though they know it as well as, or better than, you do yourself.
The blacks like being commanded by a white officer, and will feel
pleased, rather than otherwise, at your being appointed to command
their gun. Your lessons cannot begin for a day or two, for I have not
done with Metemmeh, yet."

"I am very much obliged to you, indeed," Gregory said warmly. "I will
take care not to interfere with the men's working of the gun."

"No, you will not have to do that; but a word or two of commendation,
when they make good practice, pleases them immensely; and they will
work all the better, and faster, for your standing by them."

At daybreak next morning the gunboats went up again, and engaged the
forts, as before. The Dervishes had placed more guns in position, but
again the shells fell short, while those of the boats played havoc with
the enemy's defences. Some ten thousand of the Dervish horse and foot
came down near the town, in readiness to repel any attempt at a
landing.

After some hours' bombardment, the gunboats retired. As they steamed
away, the Dervish host were shouting and waving their banners,
evidently considering that they had won a great victory.

Having fulfilled their object, which was to retain Mahmud at Metemmeh
by showing him that, if he advanced against Merawi and Dongola, we had
it in our power to occupy the town; and so cut off his retreat, and
prevent reinforcements or stores from reaching him from Omdurman, the
gunboats returned to Berber.

So far, Gregory had had no duties to perform in his capacity of
interpreter, for no prisoners had been taken. On the way down the
river, one of the artillery sergeants explained the working of the
Maxim to him, taking the weapon to pieces, and explaining to him how
each part acted, and then showing him how to put it together again. The
sergeant having done this several times, Gregory was then told to
perform the operation himself, and the lessons continued after their
arrival at Berber.

In the course of a week he was able to do this smartly; and had
learned, in case of a breakdown, which parts of the mechanism would
most probably have given way, and how to replace broken parts by spare
ones, carried up for the purpose.

There was no long rest at Berber, and on the 1st of November the
gunboats again went up the river, reinforced by the Metemmeh, which had
now arrived. Each boat, as before, carried fifty soldiers; and Major
Stuart-Wortley went up, as staff officer. The evening before starting,
they received the welcome news that the railway line had, that day,
reached Abu Hamed.

This time there was but a short pause made opposite Metemmeh, and after
shelling the forts, which had been added to since the last visit, they
proceeded up the river. Shortly after passing the town, a large Dervish
camp was seen in a valley, and this, they afterwards found, was
occupied by the force that had returned from Berber. A heavy fire of
shell and shrapnel was opened upon it, and it was speedily destroyed.

The gunboats then went up as high as the sixth cataract. The country
was found to be absolutely deserted, neither a peasant nor a Dervish
being visible. Having thus accomplished the object of their
reconnaissance, the flotilla returned, exchanged fire with the Metemmeh
batteries, and then kept on their way down to Berber.



Chapter 11: A Prisoner.


Rather than remain unoccupied on board the gunboat, Gregory went to
Colonel Wingate's headquarters and said that he should be very glad if
he would allow him, while the flotilla remained at Berber, to assist in
interrogating the fugitives who arrived from the south, and the spies
employed to gain early information of the intentions and movements of
the enemy. The position of the Dervishes at Metemmeh was becoming
critical. The Khalifa was desirous that Mahmud should return with his
force to Omdurman, there to take part in the battle in which, as he was
convinced, the invaders would be annihilated. Mahmud, who was of an
eager and impetuous disposition, was anxious to take the offensive at
once, and either to march upon Merawi and Dongola, or to drive the
British out of Berber.

There could be no doubt that his view was a more sagacious one than
that of his father; and that the best tactics to be adopted were to
harass the British advance, fall upon their convoys, cut their
communications, and so oblige them to fall back for want of supplies.
The Khalifa's mistake was similar to that made by Theodore in
Abyssinia, and Koffee Kalkalli in Ashanti. Had either of these leaders
adopted the system of harassing the invaders, from the moment they left
the coast, it would have been next to impossible for the latter to
arrive at their destination. But each allowed them to march on,
unmolested, until within striking distance; then hazarded everything on
the fortune of a single battle, and lost.

Mahmud made no movement in obedience to the Khalifa's orders to retire
to Omdurman, and the latter thereupon refused to send any further
supplies to him, and Mahmud's army was therefore obliged to rely upon
raids and plunder for subsistence. These raids were carried out with
great boldness, and villages situated within a few miles of Berber were
attacked. The Dervishes, however, met with a much warmer reception than
they had expected, for rifles and ammunition had been served out freely
to the villagers; and these, knowing the fate that awaited them were
the Dervishes victorious, offered so obstinate a resistance that the
latter fell back, discomfited.

Early in January, the Sirdar learned that the Khalifa had changed his
mind, and had sent peremptory orders to Mahmud to advance and drive the
British out of Berber, and destroy the railway. Mahmud had now been
joined by Osman Digna, with five thousand men; and as the Egyptian
troops, well as they had fought, had never yet been opposed to so
formidable a force as that which Mahmud commanded, the Sirdar
telegraphed to England for white troops.

His request was at once complied with. The Warwickshires,
Lincolnshires, and Cameron Highlanders were ordered to proceed from
Cairo and Alexandria to the front; and the Seaforth Highlanders at
Malta, and the Northumberland Fusiliers at Gibraltar were also
despatched, without delay. Major General Gatacre was appointed to the
command of the brigade.

At the end of the third week in January, the three regiments from Lower
Egypt had arrived at Wady Halfa, and the Seaforths at Assouan. At the
beginning of February the British brigade was carried, by railway, to
Abu Dis. Here they remained until the 26th, when they marched to
Berber, and then to a camp ten miles north of the Atbara, where they
arrived on the 4th of March, having covered a hundred and forty-four
miles in six days and a half, a great feat in such a climate.

Mahmud had made no movement until the 10th of February, when he began
to cross the Nile to Shendy. This movement had not been expected by the
Sirdar, and was hailed by him with satisfaction. Had Mahmud remained at
Metemmeh he could, aided by the forts, his artillery, and the walled
town, have offered a very formidable resistance. Had he marched along
the banks of the Nile, he would have been exposed to the fire of the
gunboats, but these could not have arrested his course. The country
round Berber was favourable to the action of his cavalry, and if
defeated he could have fallen back, unmolested, through Metemmeh on
Omdurman; but by crossing the river he practically cut himself off from
the Dervish base, and now had only a desert behind him; for we had
taken over Kassala from the Italians, and the Egyptian battalion there,
and a large force of friendly Arabs, would prevent him from retiring up
the banks of the Atbara.

Mahmud's plan was to march along the Nile to Ahab, then to cross the
desert to Hudi, at an angle of the river; whence a direct march, of
twenty-five miles, would take him to Berber, and in this way he would
avoid our strong position at the junction of the Atbara and the Nile.
It would have been easy for the gunboats to prevent Mahmud from
crossing the Nile, but the Sirdar was glad to allow him to do so. The
movement afforded him time to concentrate his force, and to get up
large supplies. For, each day, the distance that these could be
transported by the railway had increased; and he saw that, when the
time for fighting came, the victory would be a decisive one; and that
few, indeed, of Mahmud's men would ever be able to make their way to
Omdurman, and swell the Khalifa's force there.

On one occasion, however, the gunboats went up to watch what was going
on, and take advantage of any opportunity that might offer to destroy
some of Mahmud's boats, and thus render the work of his getting his
force over slower and more difficult. An entrenchment had been thrown
up at the point where the Dervishes crossed, and this had been manned
by two hundred and fifty riflemen. The Zafir steamed up close to the
bank and opened fire with her Maxims. Another gunboat sank one large
craft and captured two others, and the troops landed and, covered by
the fire of the guns, captured a fourth which had grounded in shallow
water.

A smaller boat was halfway across the river when the gunboats arrived.
It was seen that there were several women on board, and as the capture
would have been of no value, no regard was paid to it. As it would have
been as dangerous to return as to keep on, the boatmen plied their
hardest to get across, but the stream carried them down near the Zafir.
The boat was quite unnoticed, all eyes being intent upon the shore. She
was passing about thirty yards astern of the gunboat, when a badly
aimed shell from a Dervish battery struck her, and she sank almost
instantly.

Gregory, who was superintending the working of the Maxim nearest the
stern, looked round at the sound of the explosion. Several of the
occupants had evidently been killed, but two or three of the boatmen
started to swim to shore. Only two of the women came to the surface,
struggling wildly and screaming for help. With scarcely a thought of
what he was doing, Gregory unclasped his sword belt, dropped his
pistol, and sprang overboard.

One of the women had sunk before he reached them, the other was on the
point of doing so, when he caught her by the arm. She at once clung to
him, and he had hard work to disengage her arm from his neck; then,
after turning her so that her face was above water, he looked round.
The gunboat was already a hundred yards away. Her wheel was revolving,
so as to keep her in her place facing the redoubt, and the stream was
driving him fast away from her.

Within ten yards of him was a black head, and a moment later Zaki was
beside him. He had been working at Gregory's Maxim, and had suddenly
missed his master. Looking round, he had seen him struggling with the
woman in the stream, and without hesitation had leapt overboard.

"I am sorry you came," Gregory said, "for it is only throwing away your
life. It is of no use shouting, for they could not hear us in that din;
and if they happened to catch sight of us, would take us for two of the
black boatmen. I see the stream is taking us nearer to the bank."

Zaki had taken hold of the woman while he was speaking.

"We might swim a long way down, master, if we let go of her."

"I won't do that, Zaki. I know now that I was a fool to jump overboard;
but now that I have done so, I will save her life. Besides, I could not
swim very far even without her. I am feeling the weight of my boots and
clothes.

"Will you swim with us till I can touch the ground, and then leave us?
Strike right into the river again--I know that you are a good
swimmer--and drop down the stream until you reach one of the islands,
and then you can land and hail the gunboats as they come down. Tell
Captain Keppel why I jumped over."

"I am not going to leave you, master. No doubt the Dervishes will shoot
me, but my life is of no consequence, and I shall be glad to die by the
side of so good a master."

The woman, who had ceased to struggle when Gregory shook off her grasp,
was now conscious; as, with one of them supporting her on each side,
her head was above water.

"They will not kill you," she said. "You have saved me, and they will
be grateful."

Gregory had no faith whatever in Dervish gratitude.

"Well, Zaki," he said, "if you will not leave us, we will strike at
once for the shore. The gunboats are nearly half a mile away now. There
is just a chance that we may not have been noticed by the Dervishes,
and may be able to hide in the bushes till the gunboats return. When
they see me, they will at once send a boat ashore, under cover of their
fire, and take us off."

"There is a good chance of that, master," Zaki said cheerfully, "and
the Dervishes are busy up there fighting, and will not think much of a
little boat."

Three or four minutes later they were in shallow water. As soon as they
landed, Gregory threw himself down, utterly exhausted; and the woman
sank down beside him, but not before hastily rearranging her veil. In a
couple of minutes, Gregory roused himself.

"I can climb the bank, now," he said, "and the sooner we are hidden
among the bushes, the better."

But as he spoke he heard the sound of galloping horsemen, and almost
immediately an Emir, on a magnificent animal, followed by a dozen
Dervishes, dashed up.

"Mahmud!" the woman cried, as she rose to her feet; "it is I, Fatma!"

Mahmud gave a cry of joy, and waved his hand to his followers, who had
already pointed their rifles at Gregory.

"These have saved me, my lord," the woman went on. "They jumped from
their boat, and reached me just as I was sinking, and have borne me up.
For my sake you must spare their lives."

Mahmud frowned. He dismounted and went up to his wife.

"Have I not sworn, Fatma," he said, "that I would slay every unbeliever
who falls into my hands? How, then, can I spare even one who has saved
your life?"

"Others have been spared who have been of service, my lord," she said.
"There are Greeks and Egyptians who work your guns, and they were
spared because they were useful. There is Neufeld, who lives under the
protection of the Khalifa. Surely these men have done far more to
deserve, not only life, but honour at your hands. They risked their
lives to save mine. What follower of the Prophet could do more? They
could not have known who I was, a woman they saw drowning. Are there
any among the bravest of the tribes who would have done the same?"

"I have sworn an oath," Mahmud said, gloomily.

"But you have not sworn to slay instantly. You can keep them, at least,
until you can take them before the Khalifa, and say to him:

"'Father, I have sworn to kill unbelievers, but these men have saved
Fatma's life; and I pray you to absolve me from the oath, or order them
to be taken from me, and then do you yourself pardon them and set them
free for the service that they have rendered me.'

"If he refuses, if these men are killed, I also swear that, as my life
is due to them, I myself will perish by my own hands, if they die for
saving it!"

"It needs not that, Fatma. You think that I am ungrateful, that I do
not feel that these men have acted nobly, thus to risk their lives to
save a strange woman whose face they have never seen. It is my oath
that lies heavily upon me. I have never been false to an oath."

"Nor need you be now," Fatma said earnestly. "You swore to slay any
unbeliever that fell into your hands. This man has not fallen into your
hands. I have a previous claim to him. He is under my protection. I
cover him with my robe"--and she swept a portion of her garment round
Gregory--"and as long as he is under it he is, according to tribal
laws, safe even from the vengeance of my husband!

"As to the other, he is not an unbeliever. Your oath concerns him not.
Him you can honour and reward, according to the value you place upon my
life."

The Arab's face cleared.

"Truly you have discovered a way out of it, Fatma, at any rate for the
present."

He turned to Gregory for the first time.

"Do you speak our tongue?" he asked.

"Yes, Emir, as well as my own."

"Then you understand what we have said. Had I not been bound by my
oath, I would have embraced you as a brother. We Arabs can appreciate a
brave deed, even when it is done by an enemy. When one of the boatmen
ran into the battery where I was directing the guns against your boat,
and said that the boat in which my wife, with other women, were
crossing had been sunk, by a shell from our batteries on the other
side, I felt that my blood was turned to water. He said he believed
that all had been killed or drowned, but that he looked back as he
swam, and saw a white man jump overboard, and a short time after
another followed him; and that, when he reached the shore, they were
supporting a woman in the water.

"I rode hither, having but small hope indeed that it was my wife, but
marvelling much that a white officer should thus risk his life to save
a drowning woman. My oath pressed heavily upon me, as I rode. Even had
it been but a slave girl whom you rescued, I should no less have
admired your courage. I myself am said to be brave, but it would never
have entered my mind thus to risk my life for a stranger. When I found
that it was my wife who was saved, I still more bitterly regretted the
oath that stood between me and her preserver, and truly glad am I that
she has herself shown me how I can escape from its consequences.

"Now I see you, I wonder even more than before at what you have done;
for indeed, in years, you are little more than a boy."

"What I did, Emir, I believe any white officer who was a good swimmer
would have done. No Englishman would see a woman drowning without
making an effort to save her, if he had it in his power. As to the fact
that she was not of the same race or religion, he would never give it a
thought. It would be quite enough for him that she was a woman."

"And you," Mahmud said, turning to Zaki, "you are a Jaalin, are you
not?"

