
"Thousands, Your Majesty."

He wished that weren't literally true; he didn't know how many of
them had been little girls like Myrna and little dogs like Mopsy. He
found that he was holding both of them tightly. The girl was saying:
"But you feel bad about it." These children must be telepaths!

"A Space Viking who is also a Prince must do many things he doesn't
want to do."

"I know. So does a Queen. I hope Grandpa and Pappa don't get through
being King for just years and years." She looked over his shoulder.
"Oh! And now I suppose I've got to do something else I don't want to.
Lessons, I bet."

He followed her eyes. The girl who had been his dinner companion was
approaching; she wore a wide sunshade hat, and a gown that trailed
filmy gauze like sunset-colored mist. There was another woman, in
the garb of an upper servant, with her.

"Lady Valerie and who else?" he whispered.

"Margot. She's my nurse. She's awful strict, but she's nice."

"Prince Trask, has Her Highness been bothering you?" Lady Valerie asked.

"Oh, far from it." He rose, still holding the funny little dog.
"But you should say, Her Majesty. She has informed me that she
is sovereign of three princely domains. And of one dear loving
subject." He gave the subject back to the sovereign.

"You should not have told Prince Trask that," Lady Valerie chided.
"When Your Majesty is outside her domains, Your Majesty must remain
incognito. Now, Your Majesty must go with the Minister of the
Bedchamber; the Minister of Education awaits an audience."

"Arithmetic, I bet. Well, good-by, Prince Trask. I hope I can see
you again. Say good-by, Mopsy."

She went away with her nurse, the little dog looking back over her
shoulder.

"I came out to enjoy the gardens alone," he said, "and now I find
I'd rather enjoy them in company. If your Ministerial duties do not
forbid, could you be the company?"

"But gladly, Prince Trask. Her Majesty will be occupied with serious
affairs of state. Square root. Have you seen the grottoes? They're
down this way."

       *       *       *       *       *

That afternoon, one of the gentlemen-attendants caught up with him;
Baron Cragdale would be gratified if Prince Trask could find time to
talk with him privately. Before they had talked more than a few
minutes, however, Baron Cragdale abruptly became Crown Prince Edvard.

"Prince Trask, Admiral Shefter tells me that you and he are having
informal discussions about co-operation against this mutual enemy
of ours, Dunnan. This is fine; it has my approval, and the approval
of Prince Vandarvant, the Prime Minister, and, I might add, that of
Goodman Mikhyl. I think it ought to go further, though. A formal treaty
between Tanith and Marduk would be greatly to the advantage of both."

"I'd be inclined to think so, Prince Edvard. But aren't you
proposing marriage on rather short acquaintance? It's only been
fifty hours since the _Nemesis_ orbited in here."

"Well, we know a bit about you and your planet beforehand. There's
a large Gilgamesher colony here. You have a few on Tanith, haven't
you? Well, anything one Gilgamesher knows, they all find out, and
ours are co-operative with Naval intelligence."

That would be why Andray Dunnan was having no dealings with
Gilgameshers. It would also be what Zaspar Makann meant when
he ranted about the Gilgamesh Interstellar Conspiracy.

"I can see where an arrangement like that would be mutually
advantageous. I'd be quite in favor of it. Co-operation against
Dunnan, of course, and reciprocal trade-rights on each other's
trade-planets, and direct trade between Marduk and Tanith. And
Beowulf and Amaterasu would come into it, too. Does this also have
the approval of the Prime Minister and the King?"

"Goodman Mikhyl's in favor of it; there's a distinction between him
and the King, as you'll have noticed. The King can't be in favor of
anything till the Assembly or the Chancellor express an opinion.
Prince Vandarvant favors it personally; as Prime Minister, he is
reserving his opinion. We'll have to get the support of the Crown
Loyalist Party before he can take an unequivocal position."

"Well, Baron Cragdale; speaking as Baron Trask of Traskon, suppose
we just work out a rough outline of what this treaty ought to be,
and then consult, unofficially, with a few people whom you can
trust, and see what can be done about presenting it to the proper
government officials...."

       *       *       *       *       *

The Prime Minister came to Cragdale that evening, heavily incognito
and accompanied by several leaders of the Crown Loyalist Party. In
principle, they all favored a treaty with Tanith. Politically, they
had doubts. Not before the election; too controversial a subject.
"Controversial," it appeared, was the dirtiest dirty-name anything
could be called on Marduk. It would alienate the labor vote; they'd
think increased imports would threaten employment in Mardukan
industries. Some of the interstellar trading companies would like
a chance at the Tanith planets; others would resent Tanith ships
being given access to theirs. And Zaspar Makann's party were already
shrieking protests about the _Nemesis_ being repaired by the
Royal Navy.

And a couple of professors who inclined toward Makann had introduced
a resolution calling for the court-martial of Prince Bentrik and an
investigation of the loyalty of Admiral Shefter. And somebody else,
probably a stooge of Makann's, was claiming that Bentrik had sold
the _Victrix_ to the Space Vikings and that the films of the battle of
Audhumla were fakes, photographed in miniature at the Navy Moon Base.

Admiral Shefter, when Trask flew in to see him the next day, was
contemptuous about this last.

"Ignore the whole bloody thing; we get something like that before
every general election. On this planet, you can always kick the
Gilgameshers and the Armed Forces with impunity, neither have votes
and neither can kick back. The whole thing'll be forgotten the day
after the election. It always is."

"That's if Makann doesn't win the election," Trask qualified.

"That's no matter who wins the election. They can't any of them
get along without the Navy, and they bloody well know it."

Trask wanted to know if Intelligence had been getting anything.

"Not on how Dunnan found out the _Victrix_ had been ordered to
Audhumla, no," Shefter said. "There wasn't any secrecy about it;
at least a thousand people, from myself down to the shoeshine boys,
could have known about it as soon as the order was taped.

"As for the list of ships you gave me, yes. One of them puts in
to this planet regularly; she spaced out from here only yesterday
morning. The _Honest Horris_."

"Well, great Satan, haven't you done anything?"

"I don't know if there's anything we can do. Oh, we're investigating,
but.... You see, this ship first showed up here four years ago,
commanded by some kind of a Neobarb, not a Gilgamesher, named Horris
Sasstroff. He claimed to be from Skathi; the locals there have a few
ships, the Space Vikings had a base on Skathi about a hundred or so
years ago. Naturally, the ship had no papers. Tramp trading among
the Neobarbs, it might be years before you'd put in on a planet where
they'd ever heard of ship's papers.

"The ship seems to have been in bad shape, probably abandoned on
Skathi as junk a century ago and tinkered up by the locals. She was
in here twice, according to the commercial shipping records, and the
second time she was in too bad shape to be moved out, and Sasstroff
couldn't pay to have her rebuilt, so she was libeled for spaceport
charges and sold. Some one-lung trading company bought her and fixed
her up a little; they went bankrupt in a year or so, and she was
bought by another small company, Startraders, Ltd., and they've been
using her on a milk-run to and from Gimli. They seem to be a
legitimate outfit, but we're looking into them. We're looking for
Sasstroff, too, but we haven't been able to find him."

"If you have a ship out Gimli way, you might find out if anybody
there knows anything about her. You may discover that she hasn't
been going there at all."

"We might, at that," Shefter agreed. "We'll just find out."

       *       *       *       *       *

Everybody at Cragdale knew about the projected treaty with Tanith
by the morning after Trask's first conversation with Prince Edvard
on the subject. The Queen of the Royal Bedroom, the Royal Playroom
and the Royal Bathroom was insisting that her domains should have
a treaty with Tanith, too.

It was beginning to look to Trask as though that would be the only
treaty he'd sign on Marduk, and he was having his doubts about that.

"Do you think it would be wise?" he asked Lady Valerie Alvarath.
The Queen of three rooms and one four-footed subject had already
decreed that Lady Valerie should be the Space Viking Prince's girl
on the planet of Marduk. "If it got out, these People's Welfare
lunatics would pick it up and twist it into evidence of some kind
of a sinister plot."

"Oh, I believe Her Majesty could sign a treaty with Prince Trask,"
Her Majesty's Prime Minister decided. "But it would have to be kept
very secret."

"Gee!" Myrna's eyes widened. "A real secret treaty; just like the
wicked rulers of the old dictatorship!" She hugged her subject
ecstatically. "I'll bet Grandpa doesn't even have any secret treaties!"

       *       *       *       *       *

In a few days, everybody on Marduk knew that a treaty with Tanith
was being discussed. If they didn't, it was no fault of Zaspar
Makann's party, who seemed to command a disconcertingly large number
of telecast stations, and who drenched the ether with horror stories
of Space Viking atrocities and denunciations of carefully unnamed
traitors surrounding the King and the Crown Prince who were about to
betray Marduk to rapine and plunder. The leak evidently did not come
from Cragdale, for it was generally believed that Trask was still at
the Royal Palace in Malverton. At least, that was where the
Makannists were demonstrating against him.

He watched such a demonstration by screen; the pickup was evidently
on one of the landing stages of the palace, overlooking the wide
parks surrounding it. They were packed almost solid with people,
surging forward toward the thin cordon of police. The front of the
mob looked like a checkerboard--a block in civilian dress, then a
block in the curiously effeminate-looking uniforms of Zaspar
Makann's People's Watchmen, then more in ordinary garb, and more
People's Watchmen. Over the heads of the crowds, at intervals,
floated small contragravity lifters on which were mounted the
amplifiers that were bellowing:

"SPACE VI-KING--GO HOME! SPACE VI-KING--GO HOME!"

The police stood motionless, at parade rest; the mob surged closer.
When they were fifty yards away, the blocks of People's Watchmen ran
forward, then spread out until they formed a line six deep across
the entire front; other blocks, from the rear, pushed the ordinary
demonstrators aside and took their place. Hating them more every
second, Trask grudged approval of a smart and disciplined maneuver.
How long, he wondered, had they been drilling in that sort of
tactics? Without stopping, they continued their advance on the
police, who had now shifted their stance.

"SPACE VI-KING--GO HOME! SPACE VI-KING--GO HOME!"

"Fire!" he heard himself yelling. "Don't let them get any closer,
fire now!"

They had nothing to fire with; they had only truncheons, no better
weapons than the knobbed swagger-sticks of the People's Watchmen.
They simply disappeared, after a brief flurry of blows, and the
Makann storm-troopers continued their advance.

And that was that. The gates of the Palace were shut; the mob,
behind a front of Makann People's Watchmen, surged up to them and
stopped. The loud-speakers bellowed on, reiterating their four-word
chant.

"Those police were murdered," he said. "They were murdered by the
man who ordered them out there unarmed."

"That would be Count Naydnayr, the Minister of Security," somebody said.

"Then he's the one you want to hang for it."

"What else would you have done?" Crown Prince Edvard challenged.

"Put up about fifty combat cars. Drawn a deadline, and opened
machine-gun fire as soon as the mob crossed it, and kept on firing
till the survivors turned tail and ran. Then sent out more cars, and
shot everybody wearing a People's Watchmen uniform, all over town.
Inside forty-eight hours, there'd be no People's Welfare party, and
no Zaspar Makann either."

The Crown Prince's face stiffened. "That may be the way you do
things in the Sword-Worlds, Prince Trask. It's not the way we do
things here on Marduk. Our government does not propose to be guilty
of shedding the blood of its people."

He had it on the tip of his tongue to retort that if they didn't,
the people would end by shedding theirs. Instead, he said softly:

"I'm sorry, Prince Edvard. You had a wonderful civilization here on
Marduk. You could have made almost anything of it. But it's too late
now. You've torn down the gates; the barbarians are in."

[Illustration][Illustration]




XXIII


The colored turbulence faded into the gray of hyperspace;
five hundred hours to Tanith. Guatt Kirbey was securing his
control-panel, happy to return to his music. And Vann Larch would go
back to his paints and brushes, and Alvyn Karffard to the working
model of whatever it was he had left unfinished when the _Nemesis_
had emerged at the end of the jump from Audhumla.

Trask went to the index of the ship's library and punched for
_History, Old Terran_. There was plenty of that, thanks to Otto
Harkaman. Then he punched for _Hitler, Adolf_. Harkaman was right;
anything that could happen in a human society had already happened,
in one form or another, somewhere and at some time. Hitler could
help him understand Zaspar Makann.

By the time the ship came out, with the yellow sun of Tanith
in the middle of the screen, he knew a great deal about Hitler,
occasionally referred to as Schicklgruber, and he understood, with
sorrow, how the lights of civilization on Marduk were going out.

Beside the _Lamia_, stripped of her Dillinghams and crammed with
heavy armament and detection instruments, the _Space Scourge_ and
the _Queen Flavia_ were on off-planet watch. There were half a dozen
other ships on orbit just above atmosphere; a Gilgamesher, one of
the Gram-Tanith freighters, a couple of free-lance Space Vikings,
and a new and unfamiliar ship. When he asked the moonbase who she
was, he was told that she was the _Sun Goddess_, Amaterasu. That
was, by almost a year, better than he had expected of them. Otto
Harkaman was out in the _Corisande_, raiding and visiting the
trade-planets.

He found his cousin, Nikkolay Trask, at Rivington; when he inquired
about Traskon, Nikkolay cursed.

"I don't know anything about Traskon; I haven't anything to do with
Traskon, any more. Traskon is now the personal property of our well
loved--very well loved--Queen Evita. The Trasks don't own enough
land on Gram now for a family cemetery. You see what you did?" he
added bitterly.

"You needn't rub it in, Nikkolay. If I'd stayed on Gram, I'd have
helped put Angus on the throne, and it would have been about the
same in the end."

"It could be a lot different," Nikkolay said. "You could bring
your ships and men back to Gram and put yourself on the throne."

"No; I'll never go back to Gram. Tanith's my planet, now. But I will
renounce my allegiance to Angus. I can trade on Morglay or Joyeuse
or Flamberge just as easily."

"You won't have to; you can trade with Newhaven and Bigglersport.
Count Lionel and Duke Joris are both defying Angus; they've refused
to furnish him men, they've driven out his tax collectors, those
they haven't hanged, and they're building ships of their own. Angus
is building ships, too. I don't know whether he's going to use them
to fight Bigglersport and Newhaven, or attack you, but there's going
to be a war before another year's out."

The _Goodhope_ and the _Speedwell_, he found, had gone back to Gram.
They were commanded by men who had come into favor at the court of
King Angus recently. The _Black Star_ and the _Queen Flavia_--whose
captain had contemptuously ignored an order from Gram to re-christen
her _Queen Evita_--had remained. They were his ships, not King
Angus'. The captain of the merchantman from Wardshaven now on orbit
refused to take a cargo to Newhaven; he had been chartered by King
Angus, and would take orders from no one else.

"All right," Trask told him. "This is your last voyage here. You
bring that ship back under Angus of Wardshaven's charter and we'll
fire on her."

Then he had the regalia he had worn in his last audiovisual to
Angus dusted off. At first, he had decided to proclaim himself
King of Tanith. Lord Valpry, Baron Rathmore and his cousin all
advised against it.

"Just call yourself Prince of Tanith," Valpry said. "The title won't
make any difference in your authority here, and if you do lay claim
to the throne of Gram, nobody can say you're a foreign king trying
to annex the planet."

He had no intention of doing anything of the kind, but Valpry was
quite in earnest.

So he sat on his throne, as sovereign Prince of Tanith, and
renounced his allegiance to "Angus, Duke of Wardshaven, self-styled
King of Gram." They sent it back on the otherwise empty freighter.
Another copy went to the Count of Newhaven, along with a cargo in
the _Sun Goddess_, the first non-Space-Viking ship into Gram from
the Old Federation.

       *       *       *       *       *

Seven hundred and fifty hours after the return of the _Nemesis_,
the _Corisande II_ emerged from her last microjump, and immediately
Harkaman began hearing of the Battle of Audhumla and the destruction
of the _Yo-Yo_ and the _Enterprise_. At first, he merely reported a
successful raiding voyage, from which he was bringing rich booty.
Oddly varigated booty, it was remarked, when he began itemizing it.

"Why, yes," he replied. "Secondhand booty. I raided Dagon for it."

Dagon was a Space Viking base planet, occupied by a character named
Fedrig Barragon. A number of ships operated from it, including a
couple commanded by Barragon's half-breed sons.

"Barragon's ships were raiding one of our planets," Harkaman said.
"Ganpat. They looted a couple of cities, destroyed one, killed a lot
of the locals. I found out about it from Captain Ravallo of the
_Black Star_, on Indra; he'd just been from Ganpat. Beowulf wasn't
too far out of the way, so we put in there, and found the
_Grendelsbane_ just ready to space out." The _Grendelsbane_ was the
second of Beowulf's ships, sister to the _Viking's Gift_. "So she
joined us, and the three of us went to Dagon. We blew up one of
Barragon's ships, and put the other one down out of commission, and
then we sacked his base. There was a Gilgamesher colony there; we
didn't bother them. They'll tell what we did, and why."

"That should furnish Prince Viktor of Xochitl something to ponder,"
Trask said. "Where are the other ships, now?"

"The _Grendelsbane_ went back to Beowulf; she'll stop at Amaterasu
to do a little trading on the way. The _Black Star_ went to Xochitl.
Just a friendly visit, to say hello to Prince Viktor for you.
Ravallo has a lot of audiovisuals we made during the Dagon
Operation. Then she's going to Jagannath to visit Nikky Gratham."

       *       *       *       *       *

Harkaman approved his attitude and actions with regard to King Angus.

"We don't need to do business with the Sword-Worlds at all. We have
our own industries, we can produce what we need, and we can trade
with Beowulf and Amaterasu, and with Xochitl and Jagannath and Hoth,
if we can make any sort of agreement with them; everybody agrees to
let everybody else's trade-planets alone. It's too bad you couldn't
get some kind of an agreement with Marduk." Harkaman regretted that
for a few seconds, and then shrugged. "Our grandchildren, if any,
will probably be raiding Marduk."

"You think it'll be like that?"

"Don't you? You were there; you saw what's happening. The barbarians
are rising; they have a leader, and they're uniting. Every society
