time close upon me--within striking distance almost.  I turned abruptly
and confronted them.

"Who are you, and what do you want?"  I said, eyeing them warily, my
hand on my sword.

They did not answer, but separated more widely so as to form a
half-circle:  and one of them whistled.  On the instant a knot of men
started out of the line of houses, and came quickly across the strip of
light towards us.

The position seemed serious.  If I could have run indeed--but I glanced
round, and found escape in that fashion impossible. There were men
crouching on the steps behind me, between me and the river.  I had
fallen into a trap.  Indeed, there was nothing for it now but to do as
Madame had bidden me, and play the man boldly.  I had the words still
ringing in my ears.  I had enough of the excitement I had lately felt
still bounding in my veins to give nerve and daring.  I folded my arms
and drew myself up.

"Knaves!"  I said, with as much quiet contempt as I could muster, "you
mistake me.  You do not know whom you have to deal with. Get me a boat,
and let two of you row me across.  Hinder me, and your necks shall
answer for it--or your backs!"

A laugh and an oath of derision formed the only response, and before I
could add more, the larger group arrived, and joined the three.

"Who is it, Pierre?"  asked one of these in a matter-of-fact way, which
showed I had not fallen amongst mere thieves.

The speaker seemed to be the leader of the band.  He had a feather in
his bonnet, and I saw a steel corslet gleam under his cloak, when some
one held up a lanthorn to examine me the better. His trunk-hose were
striped with black, white, and green--the livery as I learned
afterwards of Monsieur the King's brother, the Duke of Anjou,
afterwards Henry the Third; then a close friend of the Duke of Guise,
and later his murderer.  The captain spoke with a foreign accent, and
his complexion was dark to swarthiness.  His eyes sparkled and flashed
like black beads.  It was easy to see that he was an Italian.

"A gallant young cock enough," the soldier who had whistled answered;
"and not quite of the breed we expected."  He held his lanthorn towards
me and pointed to the white badge on my sleeve. "It strikes me we have
caught a crow instead of a pigeon!"

"How comes this?"  the Italian asked harshly, addressing me. "Who are
you?  And why do you wish to cross the river at this time of night,
young sir?"

I acted on the inspiration of the moment.  "Play the man boldly!"
Madame had said.  I would:  and I did with a vengeance.  I sprang
forward and seizing the captain by the clasp of his cloak, shook him
violently, and flung him off with all my force, so that he reeled.
"Dog!"  I exclaimed, advancing, as if I would seize him again.  "Learn
how to speak to your betters!  Am I to be stopped by such sweepings as
you?  Hark ye, I am on the King's service!"

He fairly spluttered with rage.  "More like the devil's!"  he
exclaimed, pronouncing his words abominably, and fumbling vainly for
his weapon.  "King's service or no service you do not insult Andrea
Pallavicini!"

I could only vindicate my daring by greater daring, and I saw this even
as, death staring me in the face, my heart seemed to stop.  The man had
his mouth open and his hand raised to give an order which would
certainly have sent Anne de Caylus from the world, when I cried
passionately--it was my last chance, and I never wished to live more
strongly than at that moment--I cried passionately, "Andrea
Pallavicini, if such be your name, look at that!  Look at that!"  I
repeated, shaking my open hand with the ring on it before his face,
"and then hinder me if you dare! To-morrow if you have quarterings
enough, I will see to your quarrel!  Now send me on my way, or your
fate be on your own head!  Disobey--ay, do but hesitate--and I will
call on these very men of yours to cut you down!"

It was a bold throw, for I staked all on a talisman of which I did not
know the value!  To me it was the turn of a die, for I had had no
leisure to look at the ring, and knew no more than a babe whose it was.
But the venture was as happy as desperate.

Andrea Pallavicini's expression--no pleasant one at the best of
times--changed on the instant.  His face fell as he seized my hand, and
peered at the ring long and intently.  Then he cast a quick glance of
suspicion at his men, of hatred at me.  But I cared nothing for his
glance, or his hatred.  I saw already that he had made up his mind to
obey the charm:  and that for me was everything.  "If you had shown
that to me a little earlier, young sir, it would, maybe, have been
better for both of us," he said, a surly menace in his voice.  And
cursing his men for their stupidity he ordered two of them to unmoor a
boat.

Apparently the craft had been secured with more care than skill, for to
loosen it seemed to be a work of time.  Meanwhile I stood waiting in
the midst of the group, anxious and yet exultant; an object of
curiosity, and yet curious myself.  I heard the guards whisper
together, and caught such phrases as "It is the Duc d'Aumale."

"No, it is not D'Aumale.  It is nothing like him."

"Well, he has the Duke's ring, fool!"

"The Duke's?"

"Ay."

"Then it is all right, God bless him!"  This last was uttered with
extreme fervour.

I was conscious too of being the object of many respectful glances; and
had just bidden the men on the steps below me to be quick, when I
discovered with alarm three figures moving across the open space
towards us, and coming apparently from the same point from which
Pallavicini and his men had emerged.

In a moment I foresaw danger.  "Now be quick there!"  I cried again.
But scarcely had I spoken before I saw that it was impossible to get
afloat before these others came up, and I prepared to stand my ground
resolutely.

The first words, however, with which Pallavicini saluted the new-comers
scattered my fears.  "Well, what the foul fiend do you want?"  he
exclaimed rudely; and he rapped out half-a-dozen CORPOS before they
could answer him.  "What have you brought him here for, when I left him
in the guard-house?  Imbeciles!"

"Captain Pallavicini," interposed the midmost of the three, speaking
with patience--he was a man of about thirty, dressed with some
richness, though his clothes were now disordered as though by a
struggle--"I have induced these good men to bring me down--"

"Then," cried the captain, brutally interrupting him, "you have lost
your labour, Monsieur."

"You do not know me," replied the prisoner with sternness--a prisoner
he seemed to be.  "You do not understand that I am a friend of the
Prince of Conde, and that--"

He would have said more, but the Italian again cut him short.  "A fig
for the Prince of Conde!"  he cried; "I understand my duty. You may as
well take things easily.  You cannot cross, and you cannot go home, and
you cannot have any explanation; except that it is the King's will!
Explanation?"  he grumbled, in a lower tone, "you will get it soon
enough, I warrant!  Before you want it!"

"But there is a boat going to cross," said the other, controlling his
temper by an effort and speaking with dignity.  "You told me that by
the King's order no one could cross; and you arrested me because,
having urgent need to visit St. Germain, I persisted. Now what does
this mean, Captain Pallavicini?  Others are crossing.  I ask what this
means?"

"Whatever you please, M. de Pavannes," the Italian retorted
contemptuously.  "Explain it for yourself!"

I started as the name struck my ear, and at once cried out in surprise,
"M. de Pavannes!"  Had I heard aright?

Apparently I had, for the prisoner turned to me with a bow. "Yes, sir,"
he said with dignity, "I am M. de Pavannes.  I have not the honour of
knowing you, but you seem to be a gentleman." He cast a withering
glance at the captain as he said this. "Perhaps you will explain to me
why this violence has been done to me.  If you can, I shall consider it
a favour; if not, pardon me."

I did not answer him at once, for a good reason--that every faculty I
had was bent on a close scrutiny of the man himself. He was fair, and
of a ruddy complexion.  His beard was cut in the short pointed fashion
of the court; and in these respects he bore a kind of likeness, a
curious likeness, to Louis de Pavannes. But his figure was shorter and
stouter.  He was less martial in bearing, with more of the air of a
scholar than a soldier.  "You are related to M. Louis de Pavannes?"  I
said, my heart beginning to beat with an odd excitement.  I think I
foresaw already what was coming.

"I am Louis de Pavannes," he replied with impatience.

I stared at him in silence:  thinking--thinking--thinking.  And then I
said slowly, "You have a cousin of the same name?"

"I have."

"He fell prisoner to the Vicomte de Caylus at Moncontour?"

"He did," he answered curtly.  "But what of that, sir?"

Again I did not answer--at once.  The murder was out.  I remembered, in
the dim fashion in which one remembers such things after the event,
that I had heard Louis de Pavannes, when we first became acquainted
with him, mention this cousin of the same name; the head of a younger
branch.  But our Louis living in Provence and the other in Normandy,
the distance between their homes, and the troubles of the times had
loosened a tie which their common religion might have strengthened.
They had scarcely ever seen one another.  As Louis had spoken of his
namesake but once during his long stay with us, and I had not then
foreseen the connection to be formed between our families, it was no
wonder that in the course of months the chance word had passed out of
my head, and I had clean forgotten the subject of it. Here however, he
was before my eyes, and seeing him; I saw too what the discovery meant.
It meant a most joyful thing!  a most wonderful thing which I longed to
tell Croisette and Marie.  It meant that our Louis de Pavannes--my
cheek burned for my want of faith in him--was no villain after all, but
such a noble gentleman as we had always till this day thought him!  It
meant that he was no court gallant bent on breaking a country heart for
sport, but Kit's own true lover!  And--and it meant more--it meant that
he was yet in danger, and still ignorant of the vow that unchained
fiend Bezers had taken to have his life!  In pursuing his namesake we
had been led astray, how sadly I only knew now!  And had indeed lost
most precious time.

"Your wife, M. de Pavannes"--I began in haste, seeing the necessity of
explaining matters with the utmost quickness.  "Your wife is--"

"Ah, my wife!"  he cried interrupting me, with anxiety in his tone.
"What of her?  You have seen her!"

"I have.  She is safe at your house in the Rue de St. Merri."

"Thank Heaven for that!"  he replied fervently.  Before he could say
more Captain Andrea interrupted us.  I could see that his suspicions
were aroused afresh.  He pushed rudely between us, and addressing me
said, "Now, young sir, your boat is ready."

"My boat?"  I answered, while I rapidly considered the situation. Of
course I did not want to cross the river now.  No doubt Pavannes--this
Pavannes--could guide me to Louis' address.  "My boat?"

"Yes, it is waiting," the Italian replied, his black eyes roving from
one to the other of us.

"Then let it wait!"  I answered haughtily, speaking with an assumption
of anger.  "Plague upon you for interrupting us!  I shall not cross the
river now.  This gentleman can give me the information I want.  I shall
take him back with me."

"To whom?"

"To whom?  To those who sent me, sirrah!"

I thundered.  "You do not seem to be much in the Duke's confidence,
captain," I went on; "now take a word of advice from me!  There is
nothing:  so easily cast off as an over-officious servant!  He goes too
far--and he goes like an old glove!  An old glove," I repeated grimly,
sneering in his face, "which saves the hand and suffers itself.  Beware
of too much zeal, Captain Pallavicini!  It is a dangerous thing!"

He turned pale with anger at being thus treated by a beardless boy.
But he faltered all the same.  What I said was unpleasant, but the
bravo knew it was true.

I saw the impression I had made, and I turned to the soldiers standing
round.

"Bring here, my friends," I said, "M. de Pavannes' sword!"

One ran up to the guard house and brought it at once.  They were
townsfolk, burgher guards or such like, and for some reason betrayed so
evident a respect for me, that I soberly believe they would have turned
on their temporary leader at my bidding. Pavannes took his sword, and
placed it under his arm.  We both bowed ceremoniously to Pallavicini,
who scowled in response; and slowly, for I was afraid to show any signs
of haste, we walked across the moonlit space to the bottom of the
street by which I had come.  There the gloom swallowed us up at once.
Pavannes touched my sleeve and stopped in the darkness.

"I beg to be allowed to thank you for your aid," he said with emotion,
turning and facing me.  "Whom have I the honour of addressing?"

"M. Anne de Caylus, a friend of your cousin," I replied.

"Indeed?"  he said "well, I thank you most heartily," and we embraced
with warmth.

"But I could have done little," I answered modestly, "on your behalf,
if it had not been for this ring."

"And the virtue of the ring lies in--"

"In--I am sure I cannot say in what!"  I confessed.  And then, in the
sympathy which the scene had naturally created between us, I forgot one
portion of my lady's commands and I added impulsively, "All I know is
that Madame d'O gave it me; and that it has done all, and more than all
she said it would."

"Who gave it to you?"  he asked, grasping my arm so tightly as to hurt
me.

"Madame d'O," I repeated.  It was too late to draw back now.

"That woman!"  he ejaculated in a strange low whisper.  "Is it
possible?  That woman gave it you?"

I wandered what on earth he meant, surprise, scorn and dislike were so
blended in his tone.  It even seemed to me that he drew off from me
somewhat.  "Yes, M. de Pavannes," I replied, offended and indignant,
"It is so far possible that it is the truth; and more, I think you
would not so speak of this lady if you knew all; and that it was
through her your wife was to-day freed from those who were detaining
her, and taken safely home!"

"Ha!"  he cried eagerly.  "Then where has my wife been?"

"At the house of Mirepoix, the glover," I answered coldly, "in the Rue
Platriere.  Do you know him?  You do.  Well, she was kept there a
prisoner, until we helped her to escape an hour or so ago."

He did not seem to comprehend even then.  I could see little of his
face, but there was doubt and wonder in his tone when he spoke.
"Mirepoix the glover," he murmured.  "He is an honest man enough,
though a Catholic.  She was kept there!  Who kept her there?"

