implements and fittings are made of coloured metals or alloys. Many of
the cups and vessels are beautifully cut from shells and diamonds,
rubies, or other precious stones. Statuary, manuscripts, and musical
instruments, bespeak their taste and genius for the fine arts.

Their love of Nature is also shown in their gardens and pleasure
grounds, which are stocked with the rarest flowers, fruits, and pet
animals; such as bright fishes, luminous frogs and moths, singing birds,
and so forth, none of which are captives in the strict sense of the
word.

Members of one family live under the same roof, or at all events within
the same ground. The father is head of the household, and the highest in
authority. The mother is next, and the children follow in the order of
their age. They hold that the proper place for the woman is between the
man and the child, and that her nature, which partakes of both, fits
her for it. On the rare occasions when authority needs to be exercised
it is promptly obeyed. All the members of the family mix freely together
in mutual confidence and love, with reverence, but not fear. They are
very clean and dainty in their habits. To every house, either in an open
court or in the garden, there is a bathing pond of running water, with a
fountain playing in the middle, where they can bathe at any time without
going to the lake.

They deem it not only gross to eat flesh or fish, but also barbarous,
nay cruel, to enjoy and sustain their own lives through the suffering
and death of other creatures. This feeling, or prejudice as some would
call it, extends even to eggs. They live chiefly on fruits, nuts, edible
flowers, grain, herbs, gums, and roots, which are in great profusion. I
did not see any alcoholic, or at least intoxicating beverages amongst
them. Their drink is water, either pure or else from mineral springs,
and the delectable juices of certain fruits and plants. They eat
together, chatting merrily the while, and afterwards recline on couches
listening to some tale, or song, or piece of music, but taking care not
to fall asleep, as they believe it is injurious.

They rejoice when a child is born, and cherish it as the most holy
gift. For the first eight or ten years of its life it is left as much as
possible to the teaching of Nature, care being taken to guard it from
serious harm. It is allowed to run wild about the gardens and fields,
developing its bodily powers in play, and gaining a practical experience
of the most elementary facts. After that it goes to school, at first for
a short time, then, as it becomes used to the confinement and study, for
a longer and longer period each day. Their end in education is to
produce noble men and women; that is to say, physical, moral, and
intellectual beauty by assisting the natural growth. They hold it a sin
to falsify or distort the mind, as well as the soul or body of a child.
They seem to be as careful to cultivate the genius and temperament as
the heart and conscience. Their object is to train and form the pupil
according to the intention of Nature without forcing him beyond his
strength, or into an artificial mould. Studious to preserve the harmony
and unity of mind, soul, and body, they never foster one to the
detriment of the others, but seek to develop the whole person.

It is not so much words as things, not so much facts, dates, and
figures, as principles, ideas, and sentiments, which they endeavour to
teach. The scholar is made familiar with what he is told by observation
and experience whenever it is possible, for that is how Nature teaches.
Precept, they say, is good, and example is better; but an ideal of
perfection is best of all.

At first more attention is paid to the cultivation of the body than the
mind. Not only are the boys and girls trained in open-air gymnasia, or
contend in games, but they also work in the gardens, and during the
holidays are sent into the wilderness under the guidance of their
elders, especially their elder brothers, to rough it there in primitive
freedom.

The first lessons of the pupil are very short and simple, but as his
mind ripens they become longer and more difficult. The education of the
soul precedes that of the mind. They wish to make their children good
before they make them clever; and good by the feelings of the heart
rather than the instruction of the head. Every care is taken to refine
and strengthen the sentiments and instincts, the conscience, good sense
and taste, as well as the affections, filial piety, friendship, and the
love of Nature. Spiritual and moral ideals are inculcated by means of
innocent and simple tales or narratives. Children are taught to obey the
authority placed over them, or in their own breast, and to sacrifice all
to their duty. The conduct of the teacher must be irreproachable,
because he is a model to them; but while they look upon him as their
friend and guide, he leaves them free to choose their own companions and
amuse themselves in their own way.

In the cultivation of the mind they give the first and foremost place to
the imagination. The reason, they say, is mechanical, and cannot rise
above the known; that is to say, the real; whereas the imagination is
creative and attains to the unknown, the ideal. Its highest work is the
creation of beauty. Because it is unruly, and precarious in its action,
however, the imagination requires the most careful guidance, and the
assistance of the reason. Students are taught to idealise and invent, as
well as to analyse and reason, but without disturbing the equilibrium of
the faculties by acquiring a pronounced habit of one or the other. It is
better, they say, to be reasonable than a reasoner; to be imaginative
than a dreamer; and to have discernment or insight than mere knowledge.

The most important study of all is the art of living, or in other words
the art of leading a simple, noble, and beautiful life. It finishes
their education, and consists in the reduction of their highest precepts
and ideals to practice. The reasons for every lesson are given so far
as they are known, and they are always founded in the nature of things.
A pupil is taught to act in a particular way, not in the hope of a
reward or in the fear of punishment, but because it would be contrary to
the laws of matter and spirit to act otherwise; in short, because it is
right. They hold that life is its own end as well as its own reward.
According as it is good or bad, so it achieves or fails of its purpose,
and is happy or miserable. We are happy by our emotions or feelings, and
through these by our actions. Happiness comes from goodness, but is not
perfect without health, beauty, and fitness: hence the pupils are taught
self-regulation, practical hygiene, and a graceful manner. Indeed, their
passion for beauty is such that they regard nothing as perfect until it
is beautiful.

As beauty of mind, soul, and body, is their aim, a beautiful person is
held in the highest honour. Prizes are offered for beauty, and statues
are erected to the winners. Many are called after some particular trait;
for example, "Timare of the lovely toes," and a pretty eyelash is a
title to public fame. Beauty they say is twice blessed, since it pleases
the possessor as well as others.

The sense of existence, apart from what they do or gain, is their chief
happiness. Their "ealo," or the height of felicity, is a passive rather
than an active state. It is (if I am not mistaken) a kind of serene
rapture or tranquil ecstasy of the soul, which is born doubtless from a
perfect harmony between the person and his environment. In it, they say,
the illusion of the world is complete, and life is another name for
music and love.

As far as I could learn, this condition, though independent of sexual
love, is enhanced by it. On the one hand it is spoiled by too much
thought, and on the other by too much passion. They cherish it as they
cherish all the natural illusions (which are sacred in their eyes), but
being a state of repose it is transient, and only to be enjoyed from
time to time.

Since an unfit employment is a mistake, and a source of unhappiness,
everyone is free to choose the work that suits his nature. Parents and
teachers only help him to discover himself. One is called to his work by
a love for it, and the pleasure he takes in doing it easily and well. If
his bent is vague or tardy, he is allowed to change, and feel his way to
it by trial. Since the work or vocation is not a means of living, there
is no compulsion in it. Their aim is to do right in carrying out the
true intentions of Nature.

For the same reason everyone is free to choose the partner of his life.
They are monogamists, and believe that nothing can justify marriage but
love on both sides. The rite is very simple, and consists in the elected
pair sipping from the same dish of sacred water. It is called "drinking
of the cup."

Most of them die gradually of old age, and they do not seem to share our
fear and horror of death, but to regard it with a sad and pleasing
melancholy. The body is reduced to ashes on a pyre of fragrant wood, and
the songs they sing around it only breathe a tender regret for their
loss, mingled with a joyful hope of meeting again. They neither preserve
the dust as a memento, nor wear any kind of mourning; but they cherish
the memory of the absent in their hearts.

They believe that labour like virtue is a necessity, and its own reward;
but it is moderate labour of the right sort, which is a blessing and not
a curse. They all seem happy at their work, which is often cheered by
music, songs, or tales. Everyone enjoys his task, and tries to attain
the perfection of skill and grace. Those who excel are honoured, and
sometimes commemorated with statues.

They seem artists in all, and above all. They hold that every beautiful
thing has a use, and they never make a useful thing without beauty.
Apart from portraits, their pictures and statuary are mostly historical,
or else ideal representations. Many of these are typical of life; for
example, a boy at play, a pair of lovers, a mother weaning her child,
and the parting of friends. The ideal of art is to them not merely a
show to please the eye for a while, but a model to be realised in their
own lives; and I daresay it has helped to make them such a fine people.
They are clever architects and gardeners. Indeed, the whole country may
be described as a vast ornamental garden. In the middle zone, which
borders on the wilderness, their wonderful art of beautifying natural
scenery is at its best. They have a good many simple machines and
implements, but I should not call them a scientific people. Gazen, who
enquired into the matter, was told by Otare, himself an artist, by the
way, that science in their opinion had a tendency to destroy the
illusion of Nature and impair the finer sentiments and spontaneity of
the soul; hence they left the systematic study of it to the few who
possess a decided bias for it. As a rule they are content to admire.

They have many books of various kinds, either printed or finely written
and illustrated by hand. I should say their favourite reading was
history and travels, or else poetry and fiction; anything having a
human interest, more especially of a pathetic order. Everyone is taught
to read aloud, and if he possess the voice and talent, to recite. Poets
are highly esteemed, and not only read their poems to the people, but
also teach elocution. They have dramatic performances on certain days,
and seem to prefer tragedies or affecting plays, perhaps because these
awaken feelings which their happy lot in general permits to sleep. They
are very fond of music, and can all sing or play on some musical
instrument. Their favourite melodies are mostly in a minor key, and they
dislike noisy music; indeed, noise of any sort. Gesture and the dance
are fine arts, and they can imitate almost any action without words. A
favourite amusement is to gather in the dusk of the evening, crowned
with flowers, or wearing fanciful dresses, and sing or dance together by
the light of the fire-flies.

The inhabitants of the whole island live as one happy family.
Recognising their kinship by intermarriage, and their isolation in the
world, they never forget that the good or ill of a part is the good or
ill of the whole, and their object is to secure the happiness of one and
all. It is considered right to help another in trouble before thinking
of oneself.

When Gazen explained the doctrine of "the struggle for existence ending
in the survival of the fittest" to Otare, he replied that it was an
excellent principle for snakes; but he considered it beneath the dignity
and wisdom of men to struggle for a life which could be maintained by
the labour of love, and ought to be devoted to rational or spiritual
enjoyment.

Thanks to the helpful spirit which animates them, and the bounty of
Nature, nobody is ever in want. As a rule, the garden around each home
provides for the family, and any surplus goes to the public stores, or
rather free tables, where anyone takes what he may require.

As I have already hinted, personal merit of every kind is honoured
amongst them.

Dinus, the gentleman who received us on the night of our arrival, is the
chief man or head of the community, and was appointed to the post for
his wisdom, character, and age. He is assisted in the government by a
council of a hundred men, and there are district officers in various
parts of the country.

They have no laws, or at all events their old laws have become a dead
letter. Custom and public opinion take their place. Crime is practically
unknown amongst them, and when a misdemeanour is committed the culprit
is in general sufficiently punished by his own shame and remorse.
However, they have certain humane penalties, such as fines or
restitution of stolen goods; but they never resort to violence or take
life, and only in extreme cases of depravity and madness do they
infringe on the liberty of an individual.

Quarrels and sickness of mind or body are almost unknown amongst them.
The care and cure of the person is a portion of the art of life as it is
taught in the schools.

An account of this remarkable people would not be complete without some
reference to their religion; but owing to their reticence on sacred
subjects, and the shortness of our visit, I was unable to learn much
about it. They believe, however, in a Supreme Being, whom they only name
by epithets such as "The Giver" or "The Divine Artist." They also
believe in the immortality of the soul. One of their proverbs, "Life is
good, and good is life," implies that goodness means life, and badness
death. They hold that every thought, word, and deed, is by the nature of
things its own reward or punishment, here or hereafter. Their ideals of
childlike innocence, and the reign of love, seem to be essentially
Christian. Their solicitude and kindness extends to all that lives and
suffers, and they regard the world around them as a divine work which
they are to reverence and perfect.

Our visit fell during a great religious festival and holiday, which they
keep once a year, and by the courtesy of Dinus, or his son, we witnessed
many of their sacred concerts, dances, games, and other celebrations. Of
these, however, I shall only describe the principal ceremony, which is
called "Plucking the Flower," and appears to symbolise the passage of
the soul into a higher life.




CHAPTER IX.

THE FLOWER OF THE SOUL.


Early on the chief day of the festival Otare came and took us to see the
mystical rite of cutting the "Flower of the Soul."

The morning was fine, and the clear waters of the lake were bright with
boats filled with joyous parties bound like ourselves for the Holy
Island.

Landing at a noble quay of red granite, we climbed the steep and shaggy
sides of the mountain by a sacred and winding avenue, bordered with
blooming trees and statuary. Most of the figures were exquisitely carved
in a white wood or stone, having a pearly sheen, and represented the
former priestesses of the Temple, or illustrated the animating spirit of
the cult.

On gaining the summit we found ourselves at the brim of a spacious
hollow or basin, which in past ages must have been the crater of the
volcanic peak. The grassy slopes of the basin were laid out in flower
gardens and terraces of coloured marbles, shaded with sombre trees, and
ornamented with sculpture. In the bottom lay an oval sheet of water a
mile long or more, and from the midst of it, towards the near end, a
beautiful islet, crowned by a magnificent temple, rose like a mirage to
the view, and seemed to float on its glassy bosom.

Words of mine cannot give any idea of that sublime architecture, which
resembled no earthly order, though it seemed to partake of both the
Saracenic and the Indian. Fragrant timber, precious stones, and
burnished metals; in fine, the richest materials known to the builders,
had been united with consummate art into one harmonious emblem of their
faith. The first beams of the rising sun blazed on its golden roof and
fretted pinnacles of diamond, and ruby, sapphire, topaz, and emerald;
but the lower part was still in shadow. Nevertheless, we could
distinguish a grand portal in the southern front, which faced the sun,
and a broad flight of marble steps descending from it into the water;
but the massive doors were shut, and not a soul was to be seen about the
temple.

