"Let us go to the library," said John Garwell.

The lady of the house was willing, and hurried hither, followed by her
daughter, the real estate broker, and Nat. As they entered, a gentleman
who had been seated in an arm-chair, reading a book, arose to meet them.

"Well, Clara, I'm back," he said, cheerily.

"Oh!" screamed the lady, and fainted again, and not without good reason,
for before her stood a gentleman who was almost the exact facsimile of
Mr. Garwell in face, form, and general appearance.

"Why, which one of you is my papa?" cried little Lulu.

"I'm your papa!" answered the gentleman of the house. "Why--er--who--who
is this?" he stammered, looking at John Garwell.

"Let us attend to your wife first," was the answer, and soon the lady of
the house was restored to her senses. Then began a series of
explanations.

"It was dreadful of me to make such a mistake," said Mrs. Mann,
hysterically. "But--but----"

"I don't wonder at it--now," answered John Garwell. "Your husband could
pass for my twin brother."

"I can hardly tell one from the other, myself," said Nat.

"Never mind; he bought me some candy," put in little Lulu, and this made
all laugh.

"I am going to ask you to do something," said John Garwell, to Horace
Mann. "I think you owe it to me to walk down town, so that your fellow
citizens can see that there are really two of us."

"Yes, Horace," pleaded his wife. "I made a lot of trouble for Mr.
Garwell."

Horace Mann agreed readily, and soon he and the real estate broker and
Nat left the residence. On the main streets of Trenton many stopped to
stare after them. Among the number was the man who had spoken to Mr.
Garwell, and insisted that the real estate broker was Mr. Mann.

"I apologize," said the man, promptly. "But I reckon you'll admit the
resemblance is simply wonderful."

"I do admit it," was the answer. "Still, that doesn't make me anybody
but myself."

Horace Mann insisted upon taking John Garwell and Nat to dinner, and
treated them to the best the restaurant afforded.

"After this I'm going to wear a badge, so my wife will know me," said
the Trenton man. "And I'll never dare to come to New York, for fear of
being taken for you."




CHAPTER XVIII

NAT MEETS HIS UNCLE


"Nat, if you wish to do me a favor, do not mention this affair to
anybody in New York," said John Garwell, when the pair were on the
train, bound for the metropolis.

"I won't say a word, sir."

"There was nothing wrong about it, but I don't want my friends to make a
laughing stock of me," added the bachelor.

"I shall never mention it to anybody," returned our hero, and it may be
added here that he never did. The matter was also hushed up in Trenton,
so nothing more was heard of it.

Our hero was kept very busy for a day or two after his trip into New
Jersey. Part of his time was spent over some books, and the balance was
used up in running errands, and delivering important papers and
documents.

Once again he visited police headquarters, to learn if anything had been
heard of Nick Smithers.

"We have learned that he visited Jersey City not long ago," said an
official. "But before we could get the authorities to lay their hands on
him, he disappeared. We rather think he is in New York again, and if so,
we shall do all we can to round him up."

On the following day Nat was sent on an errand up to Forty-second
Street. He had to deliver some real estate documents, and this done, he
stopped for a moment to look at the Grand Central Depot.

"Thank fortune, I am not quite so green as I was when I landed," he
mused.

He was just leaving the vicinity of the station, when, chancing to look
down a side street, he saw a sight that filled him with astonishment.

"Uncle Abner, and the Widow Guff!" he murmured. "What are they doing,
talking to that seedy-looking fellow?"

Our hero was right. There, near the entrance to a big building, stood
Abner Balberry and his bride, and a sharp-eyed but shabbily dressed
stranger was talking to them very earnestly.

"Uncle Abner must have married the widow," thought Nat. "More than
likely they are on their wedding tour. Wonder what that other fellow
wants of uncle?"

Nat's first inclination was to leave the spot, so that his relative
might not discover him. But he did not like the looks of the stranger,
and so drew closer, to learn, if possible, what the interview meant.

The man had just come past Abner and his wife, and had pretended to pick
up a pocketbook.

"Say, did you drop your pocketbook?" he asked, of Abner.

"I--I guess not!" stammered the farmer, and felt to make certain that
his own wallet was safe.

"Queer, who did drop this," went on the stranger. "Pretty well filled,
too," he added, opening the pocketbook and looking into it.

"Did you jest pick it up?" queried Abner, falling into the trap.

"Sure, right down there. Say, this is a find, ain't it?" and the man
smiled broadly.

"That's what it is," said the farmer.

"I wish I could find a pocketbook," sighed Mrs. Balberry.

"I'd like to return this to the owner," went on the stranger. "I don't
want to keep anybody's money."

"'Tain't everybody would say thet," was Abner's comment. He wished he
had made the find.

"I suppose not, but I believe in being honest." The stranger scratched
his head. "Hang me, if I know what to do," he continued.

"What do you mean?"

"I've got to go out of town soon--train leaves in ten minutes. I don't
want to take this with me. It don't seem just right."

"I see."

"Can't you find the owner--I'm sure he would pay us a reward."

"Me find the owner?" stammered the farmer.

"Yes. You might advertise. The pocketbook has got at least a hundred
dollars in it. The owner ought to give you twenty-five for returning
it."

"Maybe he would."

"I'll tell you what I'll do," said the stranger, earnestly. "You take
the pocketbook, and give me ten dollars. If you can find the owner, you
can claim twenty-five dollars reward."

"An' supposin' I can't find the owner?"

"Then you can keep the pocketbook."

The temptation was strong, and Abner looked at his newly-made wife.

"Might as well take it, Abner," she said, promptly. "I guess we can find
the owner quick enough," and she pinched his arm suggestively.

The farmer drew forth his wallet, and began to count out ten dollars. At
the same time the stranger gazed again into the other wallet.

"Must be about a hundred and fifty dollars in this," he said. "I'll
trust you to do the square thing by the owner."

"Oh, you kin trust me," said Abner, quickly.

He was about to pass over his ten dollars, when he felt somebody catch
him by the arm, and turning, he beheld Nat.

"Nat!" he gasped.

"Not so fast, Uncle Abner!" cried our hero. "You had better keep your
money."

"Wh--what?"

"Put your money away."

"See here, what do you mean by interfering?" said the stranger, roughly.

"If he gives up the pocketbook take the ten dollars out of that," went
on Nat. "My idea is, there isn't a dollar in the pocketbook."

"Nat!"

"That's right, uncle. This is an old game. I heard all about it only a
few days ago."

"Oh, you go to grass!" cried the stranger, with a malicious look at Nat,
and then he hurried away with all speed.

"Where did you spring from, Nat?"

"I was in this neighborhood on an errand, Uncle Abner. How do you do,
Mrs. Guff."

"I'm not Mrs. Guff any more," said the lady. "I'm Mrs. Balberry, your
new aunt."

"Oh, so you're married, Uncle Abner."

"Yes," was the answer. "But see here, Nat, I don't understand about thet
pocketbook," said the farmer.

"It's simple enough. As I said before, the game is an old one. That
fellow had the pocketbook all the time. It was stuffed with old paper,
with a dollar bill wrapped on the outside. He wanted to get your money,
and if he had gotten it he would have left you with a pocketbook worth
about a quarter, with nothing but old paper and a dollar bill in it, and
maybe he would have taken the dollar bill out, too."

"Well, I never!" cried Mrs. Balberry. "Did you ever hear of such a
swindle!"

"They play all sorts of games in a big city like this. You've got to
keep your eyes open."

"I know it," groaned Abner Balberry. "Yesterday, a cabman cheated me out
o' fifty cents, an' a boy got a quarter from me by a bogus telegram. I
thought something had happened to hum, and when I opened the telegram it
had nuthin but a sheet o' blank paper inside!"

"That was too bad."

There was an awkward pause. Now that the farmer had found Nat he hardly
knew what to say. He had expected to upbraid his nephew for running
away, but the pocketbook episode rather flustered him.

"So you come to New York, didn't you?" he said, slowly.

"Yes."

"Are you working?"

"Yes, and I've got a pretty good job, too."

"What at?"

"I'm in an office downtown."

"How much do you git?"

"What do you think, Uncle Abner?"

"About two or three dollars a week."

"I get seven dollars a week."

"Seven dollars a week--fer a boy!"

"You have been very lucky," put in Mrs. Balberry. "I wish Fred could
strike a job like that."

"I'm to have a raise later on," added Nat.

"It wasn't right fer you to run away, Nat," continued his uncle.

"There are two ways of looking at it."

"An' you had no right to set fire to the barn."

"I never did that, Uncle Abner. I wouldn't be so mean."

"And you sold thet cow."

"She was my cow."

"No, she wasn't!"

"I say she was, and I can prove it!"

"Well, we won't quarrel about the cow. What I want to know is, are you
behavin' yourself here in the city?"

"I am. I work every day, and I board with some very nice people."

"Ain't squanderin' your earnin's on theaters an' sech?"

"No, I have never seen the inside of a theater."

"Maybe you ain't seen the inside of a church either," came from Mrs.
Balberry.

"Yes, I go to church every Sunday."

"Then you don't want to go back to the farm?" came from Abner Balberry.

"No, I am never going back there."

"Don't you know that I am your guardeen?"

"That may be so, Uncle Abner, but I am not going back to the farm."

"You'll go if I say so!"

"No, I won't!" and Nat's eyes flashed fire. "I'm going to support
myself, and all I ask is to be let alone."

"Oh, leave him stay, Abner," broke in Mrs. Balberry. "You don't want
him, now you have Fred."

The farmer was on the point of saying that Nat as a worker was worth two
Freds, but he thought it best to keep silent on that point.

"I'd like to make certain you are stopping with decent folks," said he,
after another pause.

"And you won't bother me if I can prove that?" cried our hero, eagerly.

"I guess so, Nat. But you mustn't come down on me fer board an' clothes,
later on."

"I won't."

The matter was talked over for a few minutes longer, and in the end Nat
led the way to his boarding house and introduced his uncle and Mrs.
Balberry to Mrs. Talcott. The surroundings rather pleased Abner
Balberry, and he ended by arranging to stay with Mrs. Talcott for
several days.

"It's better'n them hotels," said the farmer. "It's more like hum, ain't
it, Lucy?"

"Yes, but it ain't quite so high-toned," said the bride, who was
inclined to cut a dash whenever the opportunity afforded.




CHAPTER XIX

NAT BECOMES A PRIVATE CLERK


Abner Balberry and his bride remained in New York four days longer, and
during that time Nat did all in his power to make their visit a pleasant
one. He received Mr. Garwell's permission to remain away from work one
day, and took his uncle and aunt to Central Park, and to the Brooklyn
Bridge, and the Statue of Liberty. They were greatly pleased, and were
frank enough to tell Nat so.

"I guess you are more cut out for the city than for the farm," said
Abner to his nephew. "I hope you do well. You must write to us often,
an' some day you must pay us a visit."

"I certainly will do that, Uncle Abner," said Nat, and then, to please
the bride, he purchased for her a souvenir book, containing many
illustrations of the metropolis. This book Mrs. Balberry prized highly,
and from that moment she began to like Nat.

"He ain't half so bad as I was led to expect," she said, on the way
home. "He seems to know what he is doing."

"He certainly is gettin' along," responded Abner. "Shouldn't wonder but
what he'll be a regular business man some day."

"Do you think it would pay to send Fred down to the city?"

"No, he better stay on the farm. Fred ain't got the way about him thet
Nat's got."

"He's just as smart," said the youth's mother, quickly.

"Maybe, but he ain't got the knack o' it."

"He would do just as well if he had the chance," continued Mrs.
Balberry. As was perhaps natural she thought her own son as good as any
boy.

On the day after Nat's uncle left New York John Garwell called the boy
into his private office.

"Did you arrange matters with Mr. Balberry?" he asked, pleasantly.

"Yes, sir. He is going to leave me alone after this," and our hero
smiled.

