order to restore the action of the body, we apply volatile alkali, or
other strong odorous substances, to the nostrils, and with the
greatest effect. It may indeed for some time supply the place, and
produce the effects, of solid nutriment usually received into the
stomach We are told that Democritus supported his expiring life,
and retarded, for three days, the hour of death, by inhaling the
smell of hot bread, when he could not take nutriment by the stomach.
Bacon likewise gives us an account of a man who lived a considerable
time without meat or drink, and who appeared to be nourished by the
odour of different plants, among which were garlic, onions, and
others which had a powerful smell. In short, the stimulus which
active and pleasant odours give to the nerves, seems to animate the
whole frame; and to increase all the senses, internal and external.

The perfection of the organ of smell is different in different
animals; some possessing it very acutely; others on the contrary
having scarcely any sense of smell. We may in general observe that
this sense is much more acute in many quadrupeds than in man: an in
them the organ is much more extensive: in man, from the shape of the
head, little opportunity is given for extending this organ, without
greatly disfiguring the face. In the dog, the horse, and many other
quadrupeds, the upper jaw being large, and full of cavities, much
more extension is given to the membrane which is the organ of smell,
which in some animals is beautifully plaited, in order to give it
more surface. Hence a dog is capable of following game, or of tracing
his master in a crowd, or in a road where it could not be done by the
mere track. Nay, we are told of a pickpocket being discovered in a
crowd, by a dog who was seeking its master, and who was directed to
the man by the pocket handkerchief of his master, which the
pickpocket had stolen. In dogs the sense of smell must be uncommonly
delicate, to enable them to distinguish the way their master has gone
in a crowded city.

The habit of living in society, however, deadens this sense in man as
well as taste; for we have the advantage of learning the properties
of bodies from each other by instruction, and have therefore less
occasion to exercise this sense; and the less any sense is exercised,
the less acute will it become; hence it is, that those whom necessity
does not oblige to to exercise their senses and mental faculties, and
who have nothing to do but lounge about, and consume the fruits of
the earth, become half blind, half deaf, and, in general, have great
deficiency in the sense of smell. The use of spirituous liquors, and
particularly of tobacco in the form of snuff, serves likewise in a
remarkable manner to deaden this sense.

Savages, however, who are continually obliged to exercise all their
senses, have this, as well as others, in very great perfection. Their
smell is so delicate and perfect, that it approaches to that of dogs.
Soemmering and Blumenbach indeed assert, that in Africans and
Americans the nostrils are more extended, and the cavities in the
bones lined with the olfactory membrane much larger than in
Europeans.

I have already observed the powerful effects which some odours have
upon the nervous system. There are some which agreeably excite it,
and produce a pleasant and active state of the mind, while others, on
the contrary, produce the most terrible convulsions, and even
fainting. Those particular antipathies with respect to smells, arise
sometimes from something in the original constitution of the body,
with which we are unacquainted, but generally from the senses having
been powerfully and unpleasantly affected by certain odours at an
early period of life. The latter may often be cured by resolution and
perseverance, but the former cannot.

The sense of smell sometimes becomes too acute, either from a
vitiated state of the organ itself, which is not often the case; or
from an increased sensibility or irritability of the whole nervous
system, which is observed in hysteria, phrenitis, and some fevers.

This sense is however more often found deficient; and this may arise
from a fault in the brain or nerves, which may either proceed from
external violence, or from internal causes. A defect of smell often
arises from a vitiated state of the organ itself; for instance, if
the nervous membrane is too dry, or covered with a thick mucus; of
both of which we have an example in catarrh or common cold, where, at
the beginning, the nostrils feel unusually dry, but as the disease
advances, the pituitary membrane becomes covered with a thick mucus:
in both states, the sense of smell is in general deficient, and
sometimes nearly abolished.

This sense is sometimes depraved, and smells are perceived when no
odorous substance is present; or odours are perceived to arise from
substances, which are very different from those which we perceive in
a sound state.

There are many diseases likewise of the nose, and neighbouring parts,
which cause a depraved sensation; such as ulcers, cancer, caries; a
diseased state of the mouth, teeth, throat, or lungs; or a vitiated
state of the stomach, which sometimes exhales a vapour similar to
that of sulphureted hydrogen. This sense likewise sometimes becomes
depraved from a diseased state of the brain and nerves.

LECTURE VII.
SOUND AND HEARING.

Having in the last lecture examined the senses of taste and smell, I
now proceed to that of hearing. As the sense of smell enables us to
distinguish the small particles of matter which fly off from the
surfaces of bodies, and float in the air, so that of hearing makes us
acquainted with the elastic tremors or impulses of the air itself.

The sense of hearing opens to us a wide field of pleasure, and though
it is less extensive in its range than that of sight, yet it
frequently surmounts obstacles that are impervious to the eye, and
communicates information of the utmost importance, which would
otherwise escape from and be lost to the mind.

Sound arises from a vibratory or tremulous motion produced by a
stroke on a sounding body, which motion that body communicates to the
surrounding medium, which carries the impression forwards to the ear,
and there produces its sensation. In other words, sound is the
sensation arising from the impression made by a sonorous body upon
the air or some other medium, and carried along by either fluid to
the ear.

Three things are necessary to the production of sound; first, a
sonorous body to give the impression; secondly, a medium or vehicle
to convey this impression; thirdly, an organ of sense or ear to
perceive it. Each of these I shall separately examine.

Strictly speaking, sonorous bodies are those whose sounds are
distinct, of some duration, and which may be compared with each
other, such as those of a bell or a musical string, and not such as
give a confused noise, like that made by a stone falling on the
pavement. To be sonorous, a body must be elastic, so that the tremors
exerted by it in the air may be continued for some time: it must be a
body whose parts are capable of a vibratory motion when forcibly
struck.

All hard bodies, when struck return more or less of a sound; but
those which are destitute of elasticity, give no repetition of the
sound; the noise is at once produced and dies; while other bodies,
which are more elastic and capable of vibration, repeat the sounds
produced several times successively. These last are said to have a
tone; the others are not allowed to have any. If we wish to give
nonelastic bodies a tone, it will be necessary to make them continue
their sound, by repeating our blows quickly upon them. This will
effectually give them a tone; and an unmusical instrument has often
by this means a fine effect in concerts. The effects of a drum depend
upon this principle. Gold, silver, copper, and iron, which are
elastic metals, are sonorous; but lead, which possesses scarcely any
elasticity, produces little or no tone. Tin, which in itself has very
little more sound than lead, highly improves the tone of copper when
mixed with it. Bell metal is formed of ten parts of copper, and one
of tin. Each of these is ductile when separate, though tin is only so
in a small degree, yet they form when united a substance almost as
brittle as glass, and highly elastic. So curious is the power of tin
in this respect, that even the vapour of it, when in fusion, will
give brittleness to gold and silver, the most ductile of all metals.
Sonorous bodies may be divided into three classes; first, bells of
various figures and magnitudes: of these such as are formed of glass
have the most pure and elegant tones, glass being very elastic, and
its sound very powerful; secondly, pipes of wood or metal; thirdly,
strings formed either of metallic or animal substances. The sounds
given by strings are more grave or more acute according to the
thickness, length, and tension of the strings.

Air is universally allowed to be the ordinary medium of sound, or the
medium by which sounds are propagated from sonorous bodies, and
communicated to the ear. This may be shown by an experiment with the
air pump; also with the condenser.

But though air is the general vehicle of sound, yet sound will go
where no air can convey it; thus the scratching of a pin at the end
of a long piece of timber may be heard by an ear applied at the other
end, though it could not be heard at the same distance through the
air. On this account it is that sentinels are accustomed to lay their
ears to the ground, by which means they can often discover the
approach of cavalry, at a much greater distance than they can see
them.

For the same reason two stones being struck together under water, may
be heard at a much greater distance by an ear placed under water
likewise, than it can be heard through the air. Dr. Franklin, who
several times made this experiment, thinks that he has heard it at a
greater distance than a mile. This shows that water is better adapted
to convey sound than air.

When an elastic body is struck, that body, or some part of it, is
made to vibrate. This is evident to sense in the string of a violin
or harpsichord, for we may perceive by the eye, or feel by the hand,
the trembling of the strings, when by striking they are made to
sound. If a bell be struck by a clapper on the inside, the bell is
made to vibrate. The base, of the bell, is a circle, but it has been
found that by striking any part of this circle on the inside, that
part flies out, so that the diameter which passes through this part
of the base will be longer than the other diameter. The base, by the
stroke, is changed into an ellipse or oval, whose longer axis passes
through the part against which the clapper is struck. The elasticity
of the bell restores the figure of the base, and makes that part
which was forced out of its place, return back to its former
situation, from which the same principle throws it out again; so that
the circular figure of the bell will be again changed to an ellipse,
only now the shorter axis will pass through the part which was first
struck.

The same stroke, which makes the bell vibrate, occasions the sound,
and as the vibrations decay, the sound grows weaker. We may be
convinced by our senses that the parts of the bell are in a vibratory
motion while it sounds. If we lay the hand gently on it, we shall
easily feel this tremulous motion, and even be able to stop it, or if
small pieces of paper be put upon the bell, its vibrations will put
them in motion.

These vibrations in the sounding body will cause undulations or waves
in the air; and, as the motions of one fluid may often be illustrated
by those of another, the invisible motions of the air have been
properly enough compared to the visible waves of water produced by
throwing a stone therein. These waves spread themselves in all
directions in concentric circles, whose common centre is the spot
where the stone fell, and when they strike against a bank or other
obstacle, they return in the contrary direction to the place from
whence they proceeded. Sound in like manner expands in every
direction, and the extent of its progress is in proportion to the
impulse on the vibrating chord or bell.

Such is the yielding nature of fluids, that when other waves are
generated near the first waves, and others again near these, they
will perform their vibrations among each other without interruption;
those that are coming back will pass by those that are going
forwards, or even through them, without interruption: for instance,
if we throw a stone into a pond, and immediately after that, another,
and then a third, we shall perceive that their respective circles
will proceed without interruption, and strike the banks in regular
succession.

The atmosphere in the same manner possesses the faculty of conveying
sounds in the most rapid succession or combination, as distinctly as
they were produced. It possesses the power not only of receiving and
propagating simple and compound vibrations in direct lines from the
voice, or an instrument, but of retaining and repeating sounds with
equal fidelity after repeated reflection and reverberation, as is
evident from the sound of a French horn among hills.

Newton was the first who attempted to demonstrate that the waves or
pulses of the air are propagated in all directions round a sounding
body, and that during their progress and regress they are twice
accelerated and twice retarded, according to the law of a pendulum
vibrating in a cycloid. These propositions are the foundation of
almost all our reasoning concerning sound. When sonorous bodies are
struck, they, by their vibration, excite waves in the air, similar to
those caused by a stone thrown into water; some parts of these waves
entering the ear, produce in us that sensation which we call sound.
How these pulsations act upon the auditory nerve, to produce sound,
we know not, as we see no necessary connexion between the pulses and
the sensation, nor the least resemblance between them; but we can
trace their progress to a certain extent, which I shall now endeavour
to do.

The external part of the ear is called the auricle, or outward ear,
which is a cartilaginous funnel, connected to the bones of the
temple, by means of cellular substance, and likewise by its own
proper ligaments and muscles. This cartilage is of a very compound
figure, being a kind of oval, marked with spirals standing up, and
hollows interposed, to which other hollows and ridges correspond on
the opposite side. The outer eminence is called helix. Within the
body of the cartilage arises a forked eminence called antihelix,
which terminates in a small and short tongue called antitragus. The
remaining part of the ear, called the concha or shell, is anteriorly
hollow, but posteriorly convex, growing gradually deeper; with a
crooked line or ridge running along its middle, which is immediately
joined to the meatus auditorius, or entrance into the ear; before
which stands a round moveable appendix, which serves as a defense,
called tragus.

Against this funnel of the ear the sonorous waves strike, and its
different parts are most admirably contrived to reflect them all into
the meatus auditorius: if it would not occupy too much time, it might
be shown, that all these curves and spirals are contrived in the best
manner possible, and with a most perfect knowledge of the geometry of
sounds, to reflect the sonorous pulses accurately, and in the
greatest possible quantity, into the ear.

This external part of the ear is differently formed in different
animals; and admirably suited to their various situations and habits.
In man it is close to the head, but so formed as to collect the
various pulses with great accuracy; in other animals it is more
simple, where less accuracy is required, but it is, in general, much
larger, having the appearance of an oblong funnel; and this gives
them a greater delicacy of hearing, which was necessary for them.

In animals which are defenceless and timid, and which are constantly
obliged to seek their safety in flight, the opening of this funnel is
placed behind, that they may better hear the noises behind them. This
is particularly instanced in the hare. Beasts of prey have this
opening before, that they may more easily discover their prey; as the
lion and tiger. Those that feed on birds have the opening directed
upwards, as the fox; and it is inclined downwards in animals, such as
the weasel, which seek their prey on the earth.

To this external part of the ear, which I have described, is
connected the meatus auditorius, or passage to the internal ear,
which is somewhat of a compressed cylindrical figure, lessening as it
bends inwards: a considerable part of it is bony, and it is bent
towards the middle. Across this passage, at its inner extremity, is
stretched a thin membrane, called membrana tympani. Upon the surface
of this membrane, the sonorous waves, which have been directed
inwards by the external ear, strike, and cause it to vibrate like the
membrane of a drum. This membrane is stretched over a cavity in the
bone, called the os petrosum, which cavity is called the tympanum, or
drum of the ear, which is of a rounded figure, divided in its middle
by a promontory, and continued backwards to the cells of the mastoid
bone. Besides this continuation of the tympanum into the mastoid
cells, it has a free communication with the mouth, by means of a tube
I shall soon describe.

Within this cavity of the tympanum are placed four small bones, which
facilitate the hearing: the first is the malleus or hammer, so called
from its shape: the upper part of its round head rests upon the
concavity of the tympanum, from whence the handle is extended down,
along the membrane of the tympanum; this bone has several muscles,
which move it in different directions, and cause it to stretch or
brace the membrana tympani, when we wish to hear with accuracy.

Connected with the malleus is another small bone, called the incus,
or anvil, which is connected with another, called the stapes, or
stirrup, from its shape. These two bones are connected by a small
oval shaped bone, called os orbiculare, placed between them: the
whole forming a little chain of bones.

The stapes, or stirrup, has its end of an oval shape, which fits a
small hole called fenestra ovalis, in that part of the ear called the
labyrinth, or innermost chamber of the ear.

The labyrinth consists of three parts; first, the vestibule, which is
a round cavity in a hard part of the os petrosum; secondly, the
semicircular canals, so called from their shape, which however is not
exactly semicircular; thirdly, the cochlea, which is a beautifully
convoluted canal, like the shell of a snail. This part has a round
cavity called fenestra rotunda, which is covered with a thin elastic
membrane, and looks into the tympanum.

The vestibule, semicircular canals, and cochlea, the whole of which
is called the labyrinth, form one cavity, which is filled with a very
limpid fluid resembling water, and the whole lined with a fine
delicate membrane, upon which the auditory nerve is expanded, like
the retina upon the vitreous humor of the eye. This beautiful
apparatus was only lately discovered by an Italian physician, Scarpa.
The auditory nerve is a portion of the seventh pair, which is called
the portio mollis or soft portion.

There is one part of the ear still to be described, namely, the
Eustachian tube, so called from Eustachius, the anatomist, who first
described it. This tube opens by a wide elliptical aperture into the
tympanum behind the membrane; the other end, which gradually grows
wider, opens into the cavity of the mouth. By this canal the inspired
air enters the tympanum to be changed and renewed, it likewise serves
some important purpose in hearing, with the nature of which we are
yet unacquainted. It is certain that we can hear through this
passage, for if a watch be put into the mouth, and the ears stopped,
its ticking may be distinctly heard; and in several instances of
deafness, this tube has been found completely blocked up.

The waves, which have been described as propagated in the air, in all
directions from the sounding body, enter the external cartilaginous
part of the ear, which, as has before been observed, is admirably
fitted for collecting and condensing them. As soon as these pulses
excite tremors in the membrane of the tympanum, its muscles stretch
and brace it, whence it becomes more powerfully affected by these
impulses. It is on this account that we hear sounds more distinctly
when we attend to them, the membrane being then stretched.

A tremulous motion, being excited in this membrane, is communicated
to the malleus annexed to it, which communicates it to the incus, by
which it is propagated through the os orbiculare to the stapes, which
imparts this tremulous motion through the foramen ovale to the fluid
contained in the labyrinth. This tremor is impressed by the waves
excited in this fluid, on every part of the auditory nerve in the
labyrinth. The use of the foramen rotundum, or round hole, before
described, is probably the same as that of the hole in the side of a
drum; it allows the fluid in the labyrinth to be compressed,
otherwise it could not vibrate.
