him during that time.  But at the end of it, his sleep was penetrated
by a definite sound.  He had dreamed of hearing a voice at a distance,
and, as he tried in his dream to hear what it said, a brief metallic
ringing sound awakened him outright. It was over by the time he was
fully conscious, and at once he realized that the voice of his dream
had been a real one, and was speaking still.  It was the Lovely
Person's voice, and she was speaking rapidly, as if she were in the
greatest haste.  She was speaking through the door.

"You will have to search for it," was all he heard.  "I have not  a
moment!"  And, as he listened to her hurriedly departing feet, there
came to him with their hastening echoes the words, "You are too good
for the cellar.  I like you!"

He sprang to the door and tried it, but it was still locked.  The feet
ran up the cellar steps and through the upper hall, and the front door
closed with a bang.  The two people had gone away, as they had
threatened.  The voice had been excited as well as hurried.  Something
had happened to frighten them, and they had left the house in great
haste.

Marco turned and stood with his back against the door.  The cat had
awakened and she was gazing at him with her green eyes.  She began to
purr encouragingly.  She really helped Marco to think. He was thinking
with all his might and trying to remember.

"What did she come for?  She came for something," he said to himself.
"What did she say?  I only heard part of it, because I was asleep.  The
voice in the dream was part of it.  The part I heard was, 'You will
have to search for it.  I have not a moment.'  And as she ran down the
passage, she called back, 'You are too good for the cellar.  I like
you.'"  He said the words over and over again and tried to recall
exactly how they had sounded, and also to recall the voice which had
seemed to be part of a dream but had been a real thing.  Then he began
to try his favorite experiment.  As he often tried the experiment of
commanding his mind to go to sleep, so he frequently experimented on
commanding it to work for him--to help him to remember, to understand,
and to argue about things clearly.

"Reason this out for me," he said to it now, quite naturally and
calmly.  "Show me what it means."

What did she come for?  It was certain that she was in too great a
hurry to be able, without a reason, to spare the time to come. What was
the reason?  She had said she liked him.  Then she came because she
liked him.  If she liked him, she came to do something which was not
unfriendly.  The only good thing she could do for him was something
which would help him to get out of the cellar.  She had said twice that
he was too good for the cellar.  If he had  been awake, he would have
heard all she said and have understood what she wanted him to do or
meant to do for him.  He must not stop even to think of that.  The
first words he had heard--what had they been?  They had been less clear
to him than her last because he had heard them only as he was
awakening. But he thought he was sure that they had been, "You will
have to search for it."  Search for it.  For what?  He thought and
thought.  What must he search for?

He sat down on the floor of the cellar and held his head in his hands,
pressing his eyes so hard that curious lights floated before them.

"Tell me!  Tell me!" he said to that part of his being which the
Buddhist anchorite had said held all knowledge and could tell a man
everything if he called upon it in the right spirit.

And in a few minutes, he recalled something which seemed so much a part
of his sleep that he had not been sure that he had not dreamed it.  The
ringing sound!  He sprang up on his feet with a little gasping shout.
The ringing sound!  It had been the ring of metal, striking as it fell.
Anything made of metal might have sounded like that.  She had thrown
something made of metal into the cellar.  She had thrown it through the
slit in the bricks near the door.  She liked him, and said he was too
good for his prison.  She had thrown to him the only thing which could
set him free.  She had thrown him the KEY of the cellar!

For a few minutes the feelings which surged through him were so full of
strong excitement that they set his brain in a whirl.  He knew what his
father would say--that would not do.  If he was to think, he must hold
himself still and not let even joy overcome him.  The key was in the
black little cellar, and he must find it in the dark.  Even the woman
who liked him enough to give him a chance of freedom knew that she must
not open the door and let him out.  There must be a delay.  He would
have to find the key himself, and it would be sure to take time.  The
chances were that they would be at a safe enough distance before he
could get out.

"I will kneel down and crawl on my hands and knees," he said.

"I will crawl back and forth and go over every inch of the floor with
my hands until I find it.  If I go over every inch, I shall find it."

So he kneeled down and began to crawl, and the cat watched him and
purred.

"We shall get out, Puss-cat," he said to her.  "I told you we should."

He crawled from the door to the wall at the side of the shelves, and
then he crawled back again.  The key might be quite a small one, and it
was necessary that he should pass his hands over every inch, as he had
said.  The difficulty was to be sure, in the darkness, that he did not
miss an inch.  Sometimes he was not sure enough, and then he went over
the ground again.  He crawled backward and forward, and he crawled
forward and backward.  He crawled crosswise and lengthwise, he crawled
diagonally, and he crawled round and round.  But he did not find the
key.  If he had had only a little light, but he had none.  He was so
absorbed in his search that he did not know he had been engaged in it
for several hours, and that it was the middle of the night.  But at
last he realized that he must stop for a rest, because his knees were
beginning to feel bruised, and the skin of his hands was sore as a
result of the rubbing on the flags.  The cat and her kittens had gone
to sleep and awakened again two or three times.

"But it is somewhere!" he said obstinately.  "It is inside the cellar.
I heard something fall which was made of metal.  That was the ringing
sound which awakened me."

When he stood up, he found his body ached and he was very tired. He
stretched himself and exercised his arms and legs.

"I wonder how long I have been crawling about," he thought. "But the
key is in the cellar.  It is in the cellar."

He sat down near the cat and her family, and, laying his arm on the
shelf above her, rested his head on it.  He began to think of another
experiment.

"I am so tired, I believe I shall go to sleep again.  'Thought which
Knows All'"--he was quoting something the hermit had said to Loristan
in their midnight talk--"Thought which Knows All! Show me this little
thing.  Lead me to it when I awake."

And he did fall asleep, sound and fast.


He did not know that he slept all the rest of the night.  But he did.
When he awakened, it was daylight in the streets, and the milk-carts
were beginning to jingle about, and the early postmen were knocking big
double-knocks at front doors.  The cat may have heard the milk-carts,
but the actual fact was that she herself was hungry and wanted to go in
search of food.  Just as Marco lifted his head from his arm and sat up,
she jumped down from her shelf and went to the door.  She had expected
to find it ajar as it had been before.  When she found it shut, she
scratched at it and was disturbed to find this of no use.  Because she
knew Marco was in the cellar, she felt she had a friend who would
assist her, and she miauled appealingly.

This reminded Marco of the key.

"I will when I have found it," he said.  "It is inside the cellar."

The cat miauled again, this time very anxiously indeed.  The kittens
heard her and began to squirm and squeak piteously.

"Lead me to this little thing," said Marco, as if speaking to Something
in the darkness about him, and he got up.

He put his hand out toward the kittens, and it touched something lying
not far from them.  It must have been lying near his elbow all night
while he slept.

It was the key!  It had fallen upon the shelf, and not on the floor at
all.

Marco picked it up and then stood still a moment.  He made the sign of
the cross.

Then he found his way to the door and fumbled until he found the
keyhole and got the key into it.  Then he turned it and pushed the door
open--and the cat ran out into the passage before him.



XVI

THE RAT TO THE RESCUE

Marco walked through the passage and into the kitchen part of the
basement.  The doors were all locked, and they were solid doors. He ran
up the flagged steps and found the door at the top shut and bolted
also, and that too was a solid door.  His jailers had plainly made sure
that it should take time enough for him to make his way into the world,
even after he got out of the wine-cellar.

The cat had run away to some part of the place where mice were
plentiful.  Marco was by this time rather gnawingly hungry himself.  If
he could get into the kitchen, he might find some fragments of food
left in a cupboard; but there was no moving the locked door.  He tried
the outlet into the area, but that was immovable.  Then he saw near it
a smaller door.  It was evidently the entrance to the coal-cellar under
the pavement. This was proved by the fact that trodden coal-dust marked
the flagstones, and near it stood a scuttle with coal in it.

This coal-scuttle was the thing which might help him!  Above the area
door was a small window which was supposed to light the entry.  He
could not reach it, and, if he reached it, he could not open it.  He
could throw pieces of coal at the glass and break it, and then he could
shout for help when people passed by. They might not notice or
understand where the shouts came from at first, but, if he kept them
up, some one's attention would be attracted in the end.

He picked a large-sized solid piece of coal out of the heap in the
scuttle, and threw it with all his force against the grimy glass.  It
smashed through and left a big hole.  He threw another, and the entire
pane was splintered and fell outside into the area.  Then he saw it was
broad daylight, and guessed that he had been shut up a good many hours.
There was plenty of coal in the scuttle, and he had a strong arm and a
good aim.  He smashed pane after pane, until only the framework
remained.  When he shouted, there would be nothing between his voice
and the street. No one could see him, but if he could do something
which would make people slacken their pace to listen, then he could
call out that he was in the basement of the house with the broken
window.

"Hallo!" he shouted.  "Hallo!  Hallo!  Hallo!  Hallo!"

But vehicles were passing in the street, and the passers-by were
absorbed in their own business.  If they heard a sound, they did not
stop to inquire into it.

"Hallo!  Hallo!  I am locked in!" yelled Marco, at the topmost power of
his lungs.  "Hallo!  Hallo!"

After half an hour's shouting, he began to think that he was wasting
his strength.

"They only think it is a boy shouting," he said.  "Some one will notice
in time.  At night, when the streets are quiet, I might make  a
policeman hear.  But my father does not know where I am.  He will be
trying to find me--so will Lazarus--so will The Rat.  One of them might
pass through this very street, as I did. What can I do!"

A new idea flashed light upon him.

"I will begin to sing a Samavian song, and I will sing it very loud.
People nearly always stop a moment to listen to music and find out
where it comes from.  And if any of my own people came near, they would
stop at once--and now and then I will shout for help."

Once when they had stopped to rest on Hampstead Heath, he had sung a
valiant Samavian song for The Rat.  The Rat had wanted to hear how he
would sing when they went on their secret journey. He wanted him to
sing for the Squad some day, to make the thing seem real.  The Rat had
been greatly excited, and had begged for the song often.  It was a
stirring martial thing with a sort of trumpet call of a chorus.
Thousands of Samavians had sung it together on their way to the
battle-field, hundreds of years ago.

He drew back a step or so, and, putting his hands on his hips, began to
sing, throwing his voice upward that it might pass through the broken
window.  He had a splendid and vibrant young voice, though he knew
nothing of its fine quality.  Just now he wanted only to make it loud.

In the street outside very few people were passing.  An irritable old
gentleman who was taking an invalid walk quite jumped with annoyance
when the song suddenly trumpeted forth.  Boys had no right to yell in
that manner.  He hurried his step to get away from the sound.  Two or
three other people glanced over their shoulders, but had not time to
loiter.  A few others listened with pleasure as they drew near and
passed on.

"There's a boy with a fine voice," said one.

"What's he singing?" said his companion.  "It sounds foreign."

"Don't know," was the reply as they went by.  But at last a young man
who was a music-teacher, going to give a lesson, hesitated and looked
about him.  The song was very loud and spirited just at this moment.
The music-teacher could not understand where it came from, and paused
to find out.  The fact that he stopped attracted the attention of the
next comer, who also paused.

"Who's singing?" he asked.  "Where is he singing?"

"I can't make out," the music-teacher laughed.  "Sounds as if it came
out of the ground."

And, because it was queer that a song should seem to be coming out of
the ground, a costermonger stopped, and then a little boy, and then a
workingwoman, and then a lady.

There was quite a little group when another person turned the corner of
the street.  He was a shabby boy on crutches, and he had a frantic look
on his face.

And Marco actually heard, as he drew near to the group, the tap-tap-tap
of crutches.

"It might be," he thought.  "It might be!"

And he sang the trumpet-call of the chorus as if it were meant to reach
the skies, and he sang it again and again.  And at the end of it
shouted, "Hallo!  Hallo!  Hallo!  Hallo!  Hallo!"

The Rat swung himself into the group and looked as if he had gone
crazy.  He hurled himself against the people.

"Where is he!  Where is he!" he cried, and he poured out some
breathless words; it was almost as if he sobbed them out.

"We've been looking for him all night!" he shouted.  "Where is he!
Marco!  Marco!  No one else sings it but him.  Marco! Marco!"  And out
of the area, as it seemed, came a shout of answer.

"Rat!  Rat!  I'm here in the cellar--locked in.  I'm here!" and a big
piece of coal came hurtling through the broken window and fell crashing
on the area flags.  The Rat got down the steps into the area as if he
had not been on crutches but on legs, and banged on the door, shouting
back:

"Marco!  Marco!  Here I am!  Who locked you in?  How can I get the door
open?"

Marco was close against the door inside.  It was The Rat!  It was
The Rat!  And he would be in the street again in a few minutes. "Call a
policeman!" he shouted through the keyhole.  "The people locked me in
on purpose and took away the keys."

Then the group of lookers-on began to get excited and press against the
area railings and ask questions.  They could not understand what had
happened to cause the boy with the crutches to look as if he were crazy
with terror and relief at the same time.

And the little boy ran delightedly to fetch a policeman, and found one
in the next street, and, with some difficulty, persuaded him that it
was his business to come and get a door open in an empty house where a
boy who was a street singer had got locked up in a cellar.



XVII

"IT IS A VERY BAD SIGN"

The policeman was not so much excited as out of temper.  He did not
know what Marco knew or what The Rat knew.  Some common lad had got
himself locked up in a house, and some one would have to go to the
landlord and get a key from him.  He had no intention of laying himself
open to the law by breaking into a private house with his truncheon, as
The Rat expected him to do.

"He got himself in through some of his larks, and he'll have to wait
till he's got out without smashing locks," he growled, shaking the area
door.  "How did you get in there?" he shouted.

It was not easy for Marco to explain through a keyhole that he had come
in to help a lady who had met with an accident.  The policeman thought
this mere boy's talk.  As to the rest of the story, Marco knew that it
could not be related at all without saying things which could not be
explained to any one but his father.  He quickly made up his mind that
he must let it be believed that he had been locked in by some queer
accident.  It must be supposed that the people had not remembered, in
their haste, that he had not yet left the house.

When the young clerk from the house agency came with the keys, he was
much disturbed and bewildered after he got inside.

"They've made a bolt of it," he said.  "That happens now and then, but
there's something queer about this.  What did they lock these doors in
the basement for, and the one on the stairs?  What did they say to
you?" he asked Marco, staring at him suspiciously.

"They said they were obliged to go suddenly," Marco answered.

"What were you doing in the basement?"

"The man took me down."

"And left you there and bolted?  He must have been in a hurry."

"The lady said they had not a moment's time."

"Her ankle must have got well in short order," said the young man.

"I knew nothing about them," answered Marco.  "I had never seen them
before."

"The police were after them," the young man said.  "That's what I
should say.  They paid three months' rent in advance, and they have
