

[Illustration]

_Almost anything, if it goes on long enough, can be reduced to, first a
Routine, and then, to a Tradition. And at the point it is, obviously,
Necessary._


Two king-sized bands blared martial music, the "_Internationale_" and
the "Star-Spangled Banner," each seemingly trying to drown the other in
a _Goetterdaemmerung_ of acoustics.

Two lines of troops, surfacely differing in uniforms and in weapons, but
basically so very the same, so evenly matched, came to attention. A
thousand hands slapped a thousand submachine gun stocks.

Marshal Vladimir Ignatov strode stiff-kneed down the long march, the
stride of a man for years used to cavalry boots. He was flanked by
frozen visaged subordinates, but none so cold of face as he himself.

At the entrance to the conference hall he stopped, turned and waited.

At the end of the corridor of troops a car stopped and several figures
emerged, most of them in civilian dress, several bearing brief cases.
They in their turn ran the gantlet.

At their fore walked James Warren Donlevy, spritely, his eyes darting
here, there, politician-like. A half smile on his face, as though afraid
he might forget to greet a voter he knew, or was supposed to know.

His hand was out before that of Vladimir Ignatov's.

"Your Excellency," he said.

Ignatov shook hands stiffly. Dropped that of the other's as soon as
protocol would permit.

The field marshal indicated the door of the conference hall. "There is
little reason to waste time, Mr. President."

"Exactly," Donlevy snapped.

       *       *       *       *       *

The door closed behind them and the two men, one uniformed and
bemedaled, the other nattily attired in his business suit, turned to
each other.

"Nice to see you again, Vovo. How're Olga and the baby?"

The soldier grinned back in response. "Two babies now--you don't keep up
on the _real_ news, Jim. How's Martha?" They shook hands.

"Not so good," Jim said, scowling. "I'm worried. It's that new cancer.
As soon as we conquer one type two more rear up. How are you people
doing on cancer research?"

Vovo was stripping off his tunic. He hung it over the back of one of the
chairs, began to unbutton his high, tight military collar. "I'm not
really up on it, Jim, but I think that's one field where you can trust
anything we know to be in the regular scientific journals our people
exchange with yours. I'll make some inquiries when I get back home,
though. You never know, this new strain--I guess you'd call it--might be
one that we're up on and you aren't."

"Yeah," Jim said. "Thanks a lot." He crossed to the small portable bar.
"How about a drink? Whisky, vodka, rum--there's ice."
