extremely well versed in the art of divination by the stars, having with
him Thrasyllus, who was a past master of all astrology, that he had
understood accurately what was fated both for himself and for them. And
the story goes that once in Rhodes he was about to push Thrasyllus from
the walls, because the latter was the only one aware of all he had in
mind; observing, however, that his intended victim looked gloomy, he
asked him why his face was overcast. When the other replied that he
suspected some danger, he was surprised [8] and gave up his murderous
designs. Thrasyllus had such a clear knowledge of all things that when
he descried approaching afar off the boat which brought to Tiberius the
message from his mother and Augustus to return to Rome, he told him in
advance what news it would bring.

[-12-] The bodies of Lucius and of Gaius were brought to Rome by the
military tribunes and by the chief men of each city. The targes and the
golden spears which they had received from the knights on entering the
class of iuvenes were set up in the senate-house.

Augustus was once called "master" by the people, but he not only forbade
that any one should use this form of address to him but took very good
care in every way to enforce his command.

[A.D. 3 (_a. u._ 756)]

When his third ten-year period had been accomplished, he then accepted
the rulership for the fourth time,--of course under compulsion! He had
become milder through age and more hesitating in regard to offending any
of the senators and now wished to have no differences with any of them.

  For lending for three years to such as needed it fifteen hundred
  myriads of denarii, without interest, he was praised and reverenced
  by all.

Once, when a fire destroyed the palace, and many persons offered him
large amounts, he would take nothing except an aureus from the various
peoples and a denarius from single individuals. The name _aureus_, which
I give here, is a local term for a piece of money worth twenty-five
denarii.[9] Some of the Greeks also, whose books we read for acquiring
a pure Attic style, give it this name. When Augustus had restored his
dwelling he made all of it public property, either because of the
contributions made by the people or because he was high priest and wished
to live in a building both private and public.

[-13-] The people urged Augustus very strongly to rescind the sentence of
exile passed upon his daughter, but he answered that fire would mix with
water before she should be brought back. And the populace did throw a
good deal of fire into the Tiber. For the time being they accomplished
nothing, but later they brought such pressure to bear that she was at
last moved from the island to the mainland.

  And later the outbreak of war with the Celtae found Augustus worn
  out in body (by reason of old age and sickness) and incapable of taking
  the field. Yielding, then, partly to the requirements of the situation
  and partly to the persuasions of Julia[10] (who had already been restored
  from banishment)
he both adopted Tiberius and sent him out[11] against the Celtae, granting
him the tribunician authority for ten years.

[A.D. 4 (_a. u._ 757)]

Yet suspecting that he might lose his head and fearing a possible
insurrection he adopted for him also his nephew Germanicus, though
Tiberius himself had a son. After this he took courage, and feeling that
he had successors and supporters, he became desirous to organize the
senate once more. So he nominated the ten senators whom he most honored
and appointed three of them, selected by lot, to be scrutinizers. There
were not many, however, who either imposed sentence on themselves
beforehand,--permission being given them to do so, just as
previously,--or were retired against their will.

This business, then, was managed by others. The emperor himself took a
census of the inhabitants of Italy possessing property valued at not less
than five myriad denarii. The weaker citizens and those dwelling outside
of Italy he did not compel to undergo the taking of a census, for he
feared that they might be disturbed and show insubordination of some
sort. And in order that he might not seem to be acting in the capacity
of censor (for the reason I mentioned before) [12] he assumed proconsular
powers for the purpose of completing the census and accomplishing the
purification. And inasmuch as many of the young men of the senatorial
class and of the equestrian, as well, had grown poor though not at fault
for it themselves, he made up to most of them the required amount of
property, and in the case of some eighty increased it to thirty myriads.

[A.D. 4 ( _a. u._ 757) ]

Since, also, many were giving unrestricted emancipation to their slaves,
he directed what age the manumitter and likewise the person to be
liberated by him must have reached: moreover, what regulations people
in general, and the former masters, should observe toward those made
freedmen.

[-14-] While he was thus occupied plots were formed against him, and
notably one by Gnaeus Cornelius, a son of the daughter of Pompey the
Great. For some time the emperor was a prey to great perplexity not
wishing to kill the men,--for he saw that no greater safety would be
his by their destruction,--nor yet to let them go, for fear this might
attract others to conspire against him. While he was in a dilemma as to
what he should do and could not be free from anxiety by day nor from
terror by night, Livia one day said to him:--

"What is this, husband? Why is it you do not sleep!"

"Wife," answered Augustus, "who could be even to the slightest degree
free from care, that has so many enemies and is so constantly the object
of plots of one set of men or another? Do you not see how many are
attacking both me and our sovereignty? The vengeance meted out to those
found guilty does not retard them: quite the contrary, as if they were
pressing forward to do some noble action the rest also hasten to perish
similarly."

Livia, hearing this, said: "That you should be the object of plots is not
remarkable, nor is it contrary to human nature. Having so large an empire
you must do many things and naturally you cause grief to not a few
people. A ruler can not please all: on the contrary, even an exceedingly
upright sovereign must inevitably make foes of many persons. For those
who wish to be unjust are many more than those who act justly, and their
desires it is impossible to satisfy. Even among such as possess a certain
excellence some yearn for many great rewards which they can not obtain
and some chafe because they are inferior to others: so both of them find
fault with the ruler. From this you can see that it is impossible to
avoid evil, and furthermore that of all the attacks made none is upon you
but all upon your position of supremacy. If you were a private citizen,
no one would willingly do you any harm unless he had previously received
some injury. But for the supremacy and for the good things that it
contains all yearn, and those who occupy any post of influence far more
than their inferiors. It is the nature of wicked men, who have very
little sense, to do so. It is implanted in their dispositions, just like
anything else, and it is impossible by either persuasion or compulsion to
remove such a bent from some of them. There is no law or fear stronger
than natural tendencies. Reflect on this and do not take the offences of
others so hard, but keep yourself and your supremacy carefully guarded,
that we may hold it safely not by virtue of inflicting severe punishments
but by means of strict watchfulness."

[-15-] To this Augustus replied: "Wife, I too know that nothing great is
ever free from envy and plots,--least of all sole power. We should be
peers of the gods if we did not have troubles and cares and fears beyond
all private individuals. But to me it is also a source of grief that this
is inevitably so and that no cure for it can be found."

"Yet," said Livia, "since some men are so constituted as to want to do
wrong in any event, let us guard against them. We have many soldiers who
protect us,--some marshaled against foreign foes and others about your
person,--and a large retinue, so that by their help we may live safely
both at home and abroad."

"I do not need," said Augustus, interrupting, "to state that many men on
many occasions have perished at the hands of their immediate associates.
For in addition to other disadvantages this, too, is a most distressing
thing in monarchies, that we fear not only enemies (like other people)
but also our friends. Many more rulers have been plotted against by such
persons than by those who had nothing to do with them. This is to be
expected, since the inner circle is with the potentate day and night,
exercising and eating, and he has to take food and drink that they have
prepared. Moreover, against acknowledged enemies you can array these very
men, but against the latter themselves there is no one else to employ as
an ally. To us, therefore, the whole time through, solitude is dreadful,
company dreadful: to be unguarded is terrifying, but most terrifying are
the guards themselves: enemies are difficult to deal with, but still
greater difficulties are presented by our friends. They must all be
called friends, whether they are such or not, but even if one should find
them most reliable, even so one may not trust one's self in their company
with a clear, carefree, unsuspecting heart. This, then, and the fact
that it is requisite to take measures of defence against ordinary
conspirators, make the situation overwhelmingly dreadful. For to be
always compelled to be inflicting punishment and chastisement upon
somebody is highly repugnant to men of character."

[-16-] "You are right," answered Livia, "and I have some advice to give
you,--at least, if you prove willing to receive it and willing not to
censure me that, woman as I am, I dare to make suggestions to you which
no one else, even of your most intimate friends, would venture. And this
is not through any lack of knowledge on their part, but because they are
not bold enough to speak."

"Say on," rejoined Augustus, "and let us have it."

"I will tell you," continued Livia, "without hesitation, because I share
your comforts and adversities, and while you are safe I myself hold
dominion day by day, whereas if you come to any harm (which Heaven
forbid!) I shall perish with you. Well, then, human nature persuades some
to sin under any conditions, and there is no device for controlling
it when it has once started toward any goal. What seems good to
persons,--not to rehearse the vices of the masses,--at once induces very
many of them to do wrong. [-17-] The boast of birth and pride of wealth,
greatness of honor, audacity founded on bravery, and conceit due to
authority, bring shipwreck to not a few. There is no making nobility
ignoble, bravery cowardly, or prudence foolish: it is impossible. Nor,
again, is it to curtail men's abundance or to strike down ambitions where
conduct has been correct: that is iniquitous. That he who is on the
defensive and anticipates others' movements should incur injury and ill
repute is inevitable. Come, let us change our policy and spare some of
them. To me it seems far more feasible to set things right by kindness
than by harshness. Not only are those who grant pardon loved by the
objects of their clemency, who strive to repay the favor, but all others
both respect and reverence them and will not readily endure to see harm
done to them. Sovereigns, however, who maintain an inexorable anger not
only are hated by those who have aught to fear, but cause uneasiness to
all the rest. As a result, men plot against them to avoid meeting an
untimely fate. Do you not notice that physicians very rarely have
recourse to cutting and burning, wishing to avoid aggravating a person's
disease, but in the majority of cases soothe and cure by means of
fomentations and mild drugs? Do not think that because those ailments
have to do with the body and these with the mind that they are
essentially different. Very many experiences of the body are similar in
a way to what goes on in the souls of men, no matter how bodiless the
latter may be. The soul contracts under the influence of fear and expands
under that of wrath. Pain humiliates men and audacity puffs them up. The
correspondences then are very close and therefore both kinds of trouble
need treatments which are much alike. A gentle speech uttered to a man
causes all his unruliness to subside, just as a harsh one provokes to
anger even an easy-going person. The granting of pardon melts the most
audacious, just as punishment irritates the most mild. Acts of violence
inflame all men in every instance, even though such measures may be
thoroughly just, but considerate treatment mollifies them. Hence
one would more readily brave great dangers through persuasion and
voluntarily, than under compulsion. Such is the inherent, unalterable
quality of both methods of behavior that even among brute beasts that
have no mind many of the strongest and fiercest are domesticated by
petting and are subdued by coaxing, whereas many of the most cowardly and
weak are made unmanageable and maddened by cruelties and terrors.

[-18-] "I am not saying that we must spare absolutely all wrongdoers, for
we must cut out of the way the daredevil and busybody, the man of
evil nature and evil devices, who gives himself up to an unyielding,
persistent baseness, just as we treat parts of the body that are quite
incurable. But of the rest, who err through youth or ignorance or
a misunderstanding or some other chance, some purposely and others
unwillingly, it is proper to admonish some with words, to bring others to
their senses by threats, and to handle still others with moderation in
some different way, precisely as in other [matters] ... all men impose
upon some greater and upon others lesser punishments. So far as these
persons are concerned you may employ moderation without danger,
inflicting upon some the penalty of banishment, upon others that of loss
of political rights, upon still others a money fine. You may also place
some of them in country districts or in certain cities.

"In the past a few have been brought to their senses by missing what they
hoped for, by failing to secure what they aimed at. A degradation in
seats[13] and factional disputes involving disgrace, as well as being
injured or terrified before they could make a move, has improved not a
few. Yet one well born and courageous would prefer to die rather than to
have any such experience. As a result, vengeance would become not easier
for the plotters but more difficult, and we should be able to live in
safety, since not a word could be said against us. At present we are
thought to kill many through anger,[14] many because of a desire for
their money, others through fear of their bravery, and a great many
others on account of jealousy of their excellence. No one will readily
believe that a person possessing so great an authority and power can
seriously be the object of the plots of any unarmed individual. Some talk
as above and others say that we hear a great many lies and foolishly pay
heed to many of them, believing them true. They assert that those who spy
into and overhear doubtful matters concoct many falsehoods, some being
influenced by enmity, others by wrath, some because they can get money
from their foes, others because they can get no money from the same
persons, and further, that they report not only the fact of certain
persons having committed suspicious actions or intending to commit them,
but also how A said so-and-so, and B hearing it was silent, how one man
laughed and somebody else wept.

[-19-] "I could cite innumerable other details of like nature which,
no matter how true they were, are no business for free men to concern
themselves about or report to you. If they went unnoticed, they would do
you no harm, but when heard they might irritate you even against your
will: and that ought by no means to happen, especially in a ruler of the
people. Now many believe that from this cause large numbers unjustly
perish, some without a trial and others by some unwarranted condemnation
of a court. They will not admit that the evidence given or statements
made under torture or any similar proof against them is genuine. This is
the sort of talk, though some of it may not be just, which is reported in
the case of practically all so put to death. And you ought, Augustus,
to be free not only from injustice but from the appearance of it. It is
sufficient for a private individual to avoid irregular conduct, but it
behooves a ruler to incur not even the suspicion of it. You are the
leader of human beings, not of beasts, and the only way you can make
them really friendly to you is by persuading them by every means
and constantly, without a break, that you will wrong no one either
voluntarily or involuntarily. A man can be forced to fear another but he
has to be persuaded to love him: and he is to be persuaded by the good
treatment he himself receives and the benefits he sees conferred on
others. The person, however, who suspects that somebody has perished
unjustly both fears that he may some day meet the same fate and is
compelled to hate the one responsible for the deed. And to be hated by
one's subjects is (besides containing no element of good) exceedingly
unprofitable. The general mass of people feel that ordinary individuals
must defend themselves against all who wrong them in any way or else be
despised and consequently oppressed: but rulers, they think, ought to
prosecute those who wrong the State but endure those who are thought
to commit offences against them privately; rulers can not be harmed by
disdain or assault, because they have many guardians to protect them.

[-20-] "When I hear this and turn my attention to this I feel inclined to
tell you outright to put no one to death for any such reason. Places of
supremacy are established for the preservation of subjects, to prevent
them from being injured either by one another or by foreign tribes:
such places are not, by Jupiter, for the purpose of allowing the rulers
themselves to hard their subjects. It is most glorious to be able not to
destroy most of the citizens but to save them all, if possible. It is
right to educate them by laws and, favours and admonitions, that they may
be right-minded and further to watch and guard them, so that even if they
wish to do wrong they may not be able. And if there is anything ailing,
we must cure and correct it in some way, in order that there may be no
entire loss. To endure the offences of the multitude is a task requiring
great prudence and force: if any one should simply punish all of them as
they deserve, before he knew it he would have destroyed the majority of
mankind. For these reasons, then, I give you my opinion to the effect
that you should not inflict the death penalty for any such error, but
bring the men to their senses in some other way, so that they will not
again do anything dangerous. What crime could a man commit shut up on
an island, or in the country, or in some city, not only destitute of a
throng of servants and money, but under guard, if it be necessary? If the
enemy were anywhere near here or some alien force had dominion over this
sea so that one of the prisoners might escape to them and do us some
harm, or if, again, there were strong cities in Italy with fortifications
and weapons, so that if a man seized them he might become a menace to us,
that would be a different story. But all towns in this neighborhood are
unarmed and lacking any walls that would serve in war, and the enemy is
removed from them by vast distances; a long stretch of sea, and a journey
by land including mountains and rivers hard to cross lie between them and
us.

Why, then, should one fear this man or that man, defenceless, private
citizens, here in the middle of your empire and enclosed by your armed
forces? I can not see how any one could conceive such a notion or how the
maddest madman could accomplish anything.

[-21-] "With these premises, therefore, let us give the idea a trial. The
discontented will soon themselves change their ways and bring about an
improvement in others. You notice that Cornelius is both of good birth
and renowned. This matter has to be reasoned out in a human fashion. The
sword can not effect everything for you; it would be a great blessing if
it could bring some men to their senses and persuade them or even compel
them to love any one with genuine affection: but, instead, it will
destroy the body of one man and alienate the minds of the rest. People
do not become more attached to any one because of the vengeance they see
meted out to others, but they become more hostile through the influence
of their own fears. That is one side of the picture. On the other hand,
those who obtain pardon for any crime and repent are ashamed to wrong
their benefactors again, but render them much service in return, hoping
to receive much more again for it. When a man is saved by some one who
has been wronged, he thinks that his rescuer, if fairly treated, will
go to any lengths to aid him. Heed me, therefore, dearest, and make a
change. Then all your other acts that have caused displeasure will
appear to have been due to necessity. In conducting so great a city from
democracy into monarchy it is impossible to make the transfer without
bloodshed. But if you follow your old policy, you will be thought to have
done these unpleasant things intentionally."

[-22-] Augustus heeded these suggestions of Livia and released all those
against whom charges were pending, admonishing some of them orally;
Cornelius he even appointed consul. Later he so conciliated both him and
the other men that no one else again really plotted against him or had
the reputation of so doing. Livia had had most to do with saving the life
of Cornelius, yet she was destined to be held responsible for the death
of Augustus.

[A.D. 5 (a. u. 758)]

At this time, in the consulship of Cornelius and Valerius Messala,
earthquakes of ill omen occurred and the Tiber tore away the bridge so
that the City was under water for seven days. There was an eclipse of the
sun, and famine set in. This same year Agrippa was enrolled among the
iuvenes, but obtained none of the same privileges as his brother. The
senators attended the horse-races separately and the knights also
separately from the remainder of the populace, as is done nowadays. And
since the noblest families did not show themselves inclined to give their
daughters for the service of Vesta, a law was passed that the daughters
of freedmen might likewise be consecrated. Many contended for the honor,
and so they drew lots in the senate in the presence of their fathers; no
priestess, however, was appointed from this class.

[-23-] The soldiers were displeased at the small size of the prizes for
the wars that had taken place at this period and no one was willing to
carry arms for longer than the specified term of his service. It was
therefore voted that five thousand denarii be given to members of the
pretorian guard when they had ended sixteen, and three thousand to
the other soldiers when they had completed twenty years' service.
