his integrity, his patriotism, his virtues, and his genius, brought out
no less glaringly his arrogant consciousness of superiority, his love of
display, and the wild and daring insolence of his ambition. Though
too just to avenge himself by retaliating on the patricians their
own violence, though, in his troubled and stormy tribuneship, not one
unmerited or illegal execution of baron or citizen could be alleged
against him, even by his enemies; yet sharing, less excusably, the
weakness of Nina, he could not deny his proud heart the pleasure of
humiliating those who had ridiculed him as a buffoon, despised him as a
plebeian, and who, even now slaves to his face, were cynics behind his
back. "They stood before him while he sate," says his biographer; "all
these Barons, bareheaded; their hands crossed on their breasts;
their looks downcast;--oh, how frightened they were!"--a picture more
disgraceful to the servile cowardice of the nobles than the haughty
sternness of the Tribune. It might be that he deemed it policy to break
the spirit of his foes, and to awe those whom it was a vain hope to
conciliate.

For his pomp there was a greater excuse: it was the custom of the time;
it was the insignia and witness of power; and when the modern historian
taunts him with not imitating the simplicity of an ancient tribune, the
sneer betrays an ignorance of the spirit of the age, and the vain
people whom the chief magistrate was to govern. No doubt his gorgeous
festivals, his solemn processions, set off and ennobled--if parade can
so be ennobled--by a refined and magnificent richness of imagination,
associated always with popular emblems, and designed to convey the idea
of rejoicing for Liberty Restored, and to assert the state and majesty
of Rome Revived--no doubt these spectacles, however otherwise judged in
a more enlightened age and by closet sages, served greatly to augment
the importance of the Tribune abroad, and to dazzle the pride of a
fickle and ostentatious populace. And taste grew refined, luxury called
labour into requisition, and foreigners from all states were attracted
by the splendour of a court over which presided, under republican names,
two sovereigns, (Rienzi, speaking in one of his letters of his great
enterprise, refers it to the ardour of youth. The exact date of his
birth is unknown; but he was certainly a young man at the time now
referred to. His portrait in the Museo Barberino, from which his
description has been already taken in the first book of this work,
represents him as beardless, and, as far as one can judge, somewhere
above thirty--old enough, to be sure, to have a beard; and seven years
afterwards he wore a long one, which greatly displeased his naive
biographer, who seems to consider it a sort of crime. The head is very
remarkable for its stern beauty, and little, if at all, inferior to that
of Napoleon; to which, as I before remarked, it has some resemblance in
expression, if not in feature.) young and brilliant, the one renowned
for his genius, the other eminent for her beauty. It was, indeed, a
dazzling and royal dream in the long night of Rome, spoiled of her
Pontiff and his voluptuous train--that holyday reign of Cola di Rienzi!
And often afterwards it was recalled with a sigh, not only by the poor
for its justice, the merchant for its security, but the gallant for its
splendour, and the poet for its ideal and intellectual grace!

As if to show that it was not to gratify the more vulgar appetite and
desire, in the midst of all his pomp, when the board groaned with
the delicacies of every clime, when the wine most freely circled, the
Tribune himself preserved a temperate and even rigid abstinence. ("Vita
di Cola di Rienzi".--The biographer praises the abstinence of the
Tribune.) While the apartments of state and the chamber of his bride
were adorned with a profuse luxury and cost, to his own private rooms he
transported precisely the same furniture which had been familiar to him
in his obscurer life. The books, the busts, the reliefs, the arms which
had inspired him heretofore with the visions of the past, were endeared
by associations which he did not care to forego.

But that which constituted the most singular feature of his character,
and which still wraps all around him in a certain mystery, was his
religious enthusiasm. The daring but wild doctrines of Arnold of
Brescia, who, two centuries anterior, had preached reform, but
inculcated mysticism, still lingered in Rome, and had in earlier youth
deeply coloured the mind of Rienzi; and as I have before observed,
his youthful propensity to dreamy thought, the melancholy death of his
brother, his own various but successful fortunes, had all contributed
to nurse the more zealous and solemn aspirations of this remarkable
man. Like Arnold of Brescia, his faith bore a strong resemblance to the
intense fanaticism of our own Puritans of the Civil War, as if similar
political circumstances conduced to similar religious sentiments. He
believed himself inspired by awful and mighty commune with beings of the
better world. Saints and angels ministered to his dreams; and without
this, the more profound and hallowed enthusiasm, he might never
have been sufficiently emboldened by mere human patriotism, to
his unprecedented enterprise: it was the secret of much of his
greatness,--many of his errors. Like all men who are thus self-deluded
by a vain but not inglorious superstition, united with, and coloured by,
earthly ambition, it is impossible to say how far he was the visionary,
and how far at times he dared to be the impostor. In the ceremonies of
his pageants, in the ornaments of his person, were invariably introduced
mystic and figurative emblems. In times of danger he publicly professed
to have been cheered and directed by divine dreams; and on many
occasions the prophetic warnings he announced having been singularly
verified by the event, his influence with the people was strengthened by
a belief in the favour and intercourse of Heaven. Thus, delusion of
self might tempt and conduce to imposition on others, and he might not
scruple to avail himself of the advantage of seeming what he believed
himself to be. Yet, no doubt this intoxicating credulity pushed him
into extravagance unworthy of, and strangely contrasted by, his soberer
intellect, and made him disproportion his vast ends to his unsteady
means, by the proud fallacy, that where man failed, God would interpose.
Cola di Rienzi was no faultless hero of romance. In him lay, in
conflicting prodigality, the richest and most opposite elements of
character; strong sense, visionary superstition, an eloquence and
energy that mastered all he approached, a blind enthusiasm that mastered
himself; luxury and abstinence, sternness and susceptibility, pride to
the great, humility to the low; the most devoted patriotism and the most
avid desire of personal power. As few men undertake great and desperate
designs without strong animal spirits, so it may be observed, that with
most who have risen to eminence over the herd, there is an aptness, at
times, to a wild mirth and an elasticity of humour which often astonish
the more sober and regulated minds, that are "the commoners of life:"
And the theatrical grandeur of Napoleon, the severe dignity of
Cromwell, are strangely contrasted by a frequent, nor always seasonable
buffoonery, which it is hard to reconcile with the ideal of their
characters, or the gloomy and portentous interest of their careers. And
this, equally a trait in the temperament of Rienzi, distinguished his
hours of relaxation, and contributed to that marvellous versatility with
which his harder nature accommodated itself to all humours and all men.
Often from his austere judgment-seat he passed to the social board an
altered man; and even the sullen Barons who reluctantly attended his
feasts, forgot his public greatness in his familiar wit; albeit this
reckless humour could not always refrain from seeking its subject in the
mortification of his crest-fallen foes--a pleasure it would have been
wiser and more generous to forego. And perhaps it was, in part, the
prompting of this sarcastic and unbridled humour that made him often
love to astonish as well as to awe. But even this gaiety, if so it may
be called, taking an appearance of familiar frankness, served much to
ingratiate him with the lower orders; and, if a fault in the prince, was
a virtue in the demagogue.

To these various characteristics, now fully developed, the reader must
add a genius of designs so bold, of conceptions so gigantic and august,
conjoined with that more minute and ordinary ability which masters
details; that with a brave, noble, intelligent, devoted people to back
his projects, the accession of the Tribune would have been the close of
the thraldom of Italy, and the abrupt limit of the dark age of Europe.
With such a people, his faults would have been insensibly checked,
his more unwholesome power have received a sufficient curb. Experience
familiarizing him with power, would have gradually weaned him from
extravagance in its display; and the active and masculine energy of his
intellect would have found field for the more restless spirits, as his
justice gave shelter to the more tranquil. Faults he had, but whether
those faults or the faults of the people, were to prepare his downfall,
is yet to be seen.

Meanwhile, amidst a discontented nobility and a fickle populace, urged
on by the danger of repose to the danger of enterprise; partly blinded
by his outward power, partly impelled by the fear of internal weakness;
at once made sanguine by his genius and his fanaticism, and uneasy by
the expectations of the crowd,--he threw himself headlong into the
gulf of the rushing Time, and surrendered his lofty spirit to no
other guidance than a conviction of its natural buoyancy and its
heaven-directed haven.



Chapter 4.IV. The Enemy's Camp.

While Rienzi was preparing, in concert, perhaps, with the ambassadors of
the brave Tuscan States, whose pride of country and love of liberty
were well fitted to comprehend, and even share them, his schemes for
the emancipation from all foreign yoke of the Ancient Queen, and the
Everlasting Garden, of the World; the Barons, in restless secrecy, were
revolving projects for the restoration of their own power.

One morning, the heads of the Savelli, the Orsini, and the Frangipani,
met at the disfortified palace of Stephen Colonna. Their conference
was warm and earnest--now resolute, now wavering, in its object--as
indignation or fear prevailed.

"You have heard," said Luca di Savelli, in his usual soft and womanly
voice, "that the Tribune has proclaimed, that, the day after tomorrow,
he will take the order of knighthood, and watch the night before in the
church of the Lateran: He has honoured me with a request to attend his
vigil."

"Yes, yes, the knave. What means this new fantasy?" said the brutal
Prince of the Orsini.

"Unless it be to have the cavalier's right to challenge a noble," said
old Colonna, "I cannot conjecture. Will Rome never grow weary of this
madman?"

"Rome is the more mad of the two," said Luca di Savelli; "but methinks,
in his wildness, the Tribune hath committed one error of which we may
well avail ourselves at Avignon."

"Ah," cried the old Colonna, "that must be our game; passive here, let
us fight at Avignon."

"In a word then, he hath ordered that his bath shall be prepared in the
holy porphyry vase in which once bathed the Emperor Constantine."

"Profanation! profanation!" cried Stephen. "This is enough to excuse a
bull of excommunication. The Pope shall hear of it. I will despatch a
courier forthwith."

"Better wait and see the ceremony," said the Savelli; "some greater
folly will close the pomp, be assured."

"Hark ye, my masters," said the grim Lord of the Orsini; "ye are for
delay and caution; I for promptness and daring; my kinsman's blood calls
aloud, and brooks no parley."

"And what do?" said the soft-voiced Savelli; "fight without soldiers,
against twenty thousand infuriated Romans? not I."

Orsini sunk his voice into a meaning whisper. "In Venice," said he,
"this upstart might be mastered without an army. Think you in Rome no
man wears a stiletto?"

"Hush," said Stephen, who was of far nobler and better nature than his
compeers, and who, justifying to himself all other resistance to the
Tribune, felt his conscience rise against assassination; "this must not
be--your zeal transports you."

"Besides, whom can we employ? scarce a German left in the city; and
to whisper this to a Roman were to exchange places with poor
Martino--Heaven take him, for he's nearer heaven than ever he was
before," said the Savelli.

"Jest me no jests," cried the Orsini, fiercely. "Jests on such a
subject! By St. Francis I would, since thou lovest such wit, thou hadst
it all to thyself; and, methinks, at the Tribune's board I have seen
thee laugh at his rude humour, as if thou didst not require a cord to
choke thee."

"Better to laugh than to tremble," returned the Savelli.

"How! darest thou say I tremble?" cried the Baron.

"Hush, hush," said the veteran Colonna, with impatient dignity. "We are
not now in such holiday times as to quarrel amongst ourselves. Forbear,
my lords."

"Your greater prudence, Signor," said the sarcastic Savelli, "arises
from your greater safety. Your house is about to shelter itself under
the Tribune's; and when the Lord Adrian returns from Naples, the
innkeeper's son will be brother to your kinsman."

"You might spare me that taunt," said the old noble, with some emotion.
"Heaven knows how bitterly I have chafed at the thought; yet I would
Adrian were with us. His word goes far to moderate the Tribune, and to
guide my own course, for my passion beguiles my reason; and since his
departure methinks we have been the more sullen without being the more
strong. Let this pass. If my own son had wed the Tribune's sister, I
would yet strike a blow for the old constitution as becomes a noble, if
I but saw that the blow would not cut off my own head."

Savelli, who had been whispering apart with Rinaldo Frangipani, now
said--

"Noble Prince, listen to me. You are bound by your kinsman's approaching
connection, your venerable age, and your intimacy with the Pontiff, to
a greater caution than we are. Leave to us the management of the
enterprise, and be assured of our discretion."

A young boy, Stefanello, who afterwards succeeded to the representation
of the direct line of the Colonna, and whom the reader will once again
encounter ere our tale be closed, was playing by his grandsire's knees.
He looked sharply up at Savelli, and said, "My grandfather is too wise,
and you are too timid. Frangipani is too yielding, and Orsini is too
like a vexed bull. I wish I were a year or two older."

"And what would you do, my pretty censurer?" said the smooth Savelli,
biting his smiling lip.

"Stab the Tribune with my own stiletto, and then hey for Palestrina!"

"The egg will hatch a brave serpent," quoth the Savelli. "Yet why so
bitter against the Tribune, my cockatrice?"

"Because he allowed an insolent mercer to arrest my uncle Agapet for
debt. The debt had been owed these ten years; and though it is said that
no house in Rome has owed more money than the Colonna, this is the first
time I ever heard of a rascally creditor being allowed to claim his debt
unless with doffed cap and bended knee. And I say that I would not live
to be a Baron, if such upstart insolence is to be put upon me."

"My child," said old Stephen, laughing heartily, "I see our noble order
will be safe enough in your hands."

"And," continued the child, emboldened by the applause he received, "if
I had time after pricking the Tribune, I would fain have a second stroke
at--"

"Whom?" said the Savelli, observing the boy pause.

"My cousin Adrian. Shame on him, for dreaming to make one a wife whose
birth would scarce fit her for a Colonna's leman!"

"Go play, my child--go play," said the old Colonna, as he pushed the boy
from him.

"Enough of this babble," cried the Orsini, rudely. "Tell me, old lord;
just as I entered, I saw an old friend (one of your former mercenaries)
quit the palace--may I crave his errand?"

"Ah, yes; a messenger from Fra Moreale. I wrote to the Knight, reproving
him for his desertion on our ill-starred return from Corneto, and
intimating that five hundred lances would be highly paid for just now."

"Ah," said Savelli; "and what is his answer!"

"Oh, wily and evasive: He is profuse in compliments and good wishes;
but says he is under fealty to the Hungarian king, whose cause is before
Rienzi's tribunal; that he cannot desert his present standard; that he
fears Rome is so evenly balanced between patricians and the people, that
whatever party would permanently be uppermost must call in a Podesta;
and this character alone the Provencal insinuates would suit him."

"Montreal our Podesta?" cried the Orsini.

"And why not?" said Savelli; "as good a well-born Podesta as a low-born
Tribune? But I trust we may do without either. Colonna, has this
messenger from Fra Moreale left the city?"

"I suppose so."

"No," said Orsini; "I met him at the gate, and knew him of old: it is
Rodolf, the Saxon (once a hireling of the Colonna), who has made some
widows among my clients in the good old day. He is a little disguised
now; however, I recognised and accosted him, for I thought he was one
who might yet become a friend, and I bade him await me at my palace."

"You did well," said the Savelli, musing, and his eyes met those of
Orsini. Shortly afterwards a conference, in which much was said and
nothing settled, was broken up; but Luca di Savelli, loitering at the
porch, prayed the Frangipani, and the other Barons, to adjourn to the
Orsini's palace.

"The old Colonna," said he, "is well-nigh in his dotage. We shall come
to a quick determination without him, and we can secure his proxy in his
son."

And this was a true prophecy, for half-an-hour's consultation with
Rodolf of Saxony sufficed to ripen thought into enterprise.



Chapter 4.V. The Night and its Incidents.

With the following twilight, Rome was summoned to the commencement of
the most magnificent spectacle the Imperial City had witnessed since the
fall of the Caesars. It had been a singular privilege, arrogated by the
people of Rome, to confer upon their citizens the order of knighthood.
Twenty years before, a Colonna and an Orsini had received this popular
honour. Rienzi, who designed it as the prelude to a more important
ceremony, claimed from the Romans a similar distinction. From the
Capitol to the Lateran swept, in long procession, all that Rome boasted
of noble, of fair, and brave. First went horsemen without number, and
from all the neighbouring parts of Italy, in apparel that well befitted
the occasion. Trumpeters, and musicians of all kinds, followed, and
the trumpets were of silver; youths bearing the harness of the knightly
war-steed, wrought with gold, preceded the march of the loftiest
matronage of Rome, whose love for show, and it may be whose admiration
for triumphant fame, (which to women sanctions many offences,) made them
forget the humbled greatness of their lords: amidst them Nina and Irene,
outshining all the rest; then came the Tribune and the Pontiff's Vicar,
surrounded by all the great Signors of the city, smothering alike
resentment, revenge, and scorn, and struggling who should approach
nearest to the monarch of the day. The high-hearted old Colonna alone
remained aloof, following at a little distance, and in a garb studiously
plain. But his age, his rank, his former renown in war and state, did
not suffice to draw to his grey locks and highborn mien a single one
of the shouts that attended the meanest lord on whom the great Tribune
smiled. Savelli followed nearest to Rienzi, the most obsequious of the
courtly band; immediately before the Tribune came two men; the one bore
a drawn sword, the other the pendone, or standard usually assigned to
royalty. The tribune himself was clothed in a long robe of white
satin, whose snowy dazzle (miri candoris) is peculiarly dwelt on by the
historian, richly decorated with gold; while on his breast were many
of those mystic symbols I have before alluded to, the exact meaning of
which was perhaps known only to the wearer. In his dark eye, and on
that large tranquil brow, in which thought seemed to sleep, as sleeps a
storm, there might be detected a mind abstracted from the pomp around;
but ever and anon he roused himself, and conversed partially with
Raimond or Savelli.

"This is a quaint game," said the Orsini, falling back to the old
Colonna: "but it may end tragically."

"Methinks it may," said the old man, "if the Tribune overhear thee."

Orsini grew pale. "How--nay--nay, even if he did, he never resents
words, but professes to laugh at our spoken rage. It was but the
other day that some knave told him what one of the Annibaldi said of
him--words for which a true cavalier would have drawn the speaker's
life's blood; and he sent for the Annibaldi, and said, 'My friend,
receive this purse of gold,--court wits should be paid.'"

"Did Annibaldi take the gold?"

"Why, no; the Tribune was pleased with his spirit, and made him sup with
him; and Annibaldi says he never spent a merrier evening, and no longer
wonders that his kinsman, Riccardo, loves the buffoon so."

Arrived now at the Lateran, Luca di Savelli fell also back, and
whispered to Orsini; the Frangipani, and some other of the nobles,
exchanged meaning looks; Rienzi, entering the sacred edifice in which,
according to custom, he was to pass the night watching his armour, bade
the crowd farewell, and summoned them the next morning, "To hear things
that might, he trusted, be acceptable to heaven and earth."

The immense multitude received this intimation with curiosity and
gladness, while those who had been in some measure prepared by Cecco del
Vecchio, hailed it as an omen of their Tribune's unflagging resolution.
The concourse dispersed with singular order and quietness; it was
recorded as a remarkable fact, that in so great a crowd, composed of men
of all parties, none exhibited licence or indulged in quarrel. Some of
the barons and cavaliers, among whom was Luca di Savelli, whose sleek
urbanity and sarcastic humour found favour with the Tribune, and a few
subordinate pages and attendants, alone remained; and, save a single
sentinel at the porch, that broad space before the Palace, the Basilica
and Fount of Constantine, soon presented a silent and desolate void to
the melancholy moonlight. Within the church, according to the usage of
the time and rite, the descendant of the Teuton kings received the order
of the Santo Spirito. His pride, or some superstition equally weak,
though more excusable, led him to bathe in the porphyry vase which
an absurd legend consecrated to Constantine; and this, as Savelli
predicted, cost him dear. These appointed ceremonies concluded, his arms
were placed in that part of the church, within the columns of St. John.
And here his state bed was prepared. (In a more northern country, the
eve of knighthood would have been spent without sleeping. In Italy, the
ceremony of watching the armour does not appear to have been so rigidly
observed.)

The attendant barons, pages, and chamberlains, retired out of sight to
a small side chapel in the edifice; and Rienzi was left alone. A single
lamp, placed beside his bed, contended with the mournful rays of the
moon, that cast through the long casements, over aisle and pillar, its
"dim religious light." The sanctity of the place, the solemnity of the
hour, and the solitary silence round, were well calculated to deepen
the high-wrought and earnest mood of that son of fortune. Many and high
fancies swept over his mind--now of worldly aspirations, now of more
august but visionary belief, till at length, wearied with his own
reflections, he cast himself on the bed. It was an omen which graver
history has not neglected to record, that the moment he pressed the bed,
new prepared for the occasion, part of it sank under him: he himself was
affected by the accident, and sprung forth, turning pale and muttering;
but, as if ashamed of his weakness, after a moment's pause, again
composed himself to rest, and drew the drapery round him.

The moonbeams grew fainter and more faint as the time proceeded, and
the sharp distinction between light and shade faded fast from the marble
floor; when from behind a column at the furthest verge of the building,
a strange shadow suddenly crossed the sickly light--it crept on--it
moved, but without an echo,--from pillar to pillar it flitted--it rested
at last behind the column nearest to the Tribune's bed--it remained
stationary.

The shades gathered darker and darker round; the stillness seemed to
deepen; the moon was gone; and, save from the struggling ray of the lamp
beside Rienzi, the blackness of night closed over the solemn and ghostly
scene.

In one of the side chapels, as I have before said, which, in the many
alterations the church has undergone, is probably long since destroyed,
were Savelli and the few attendants retained by the Tribune. Savelli
alone slept not; he remained sitting erect, breathless and listening,
while the tall lights in the chapel rendered yet more impressive the
rapid changes of his countenance.

"Now pray Heaven," said he, "the knave miscarry not! Such an occasion
may never again occur! He has a strong arm and a dexterous hand,
doubtless; but the other is a powerful man. The deed once done, I care
not whether the doer escape or not; if not, why we must stab him! Dead
men tell no tales. At the worst, who can avenge Rienzi? There is no
other Rienzi! Ourselves and the Frangipani seize the Aventine, the
Colonna and the Orsini the other quarters of the city; and without the
master-spirit, we may laugh at the mad populace. But if discovered;--"
and Savelli, who, fortunately for his foes, had not nerves equal to his
will, covered his face and shuddered;--"I think I hear a noise!--no--is
it the wind?--tush, it must be old Vico de Scotto, turning in his shell
of mail!--silent--I like not that silence! No cry--no sound! Can the
ruffian have played us false? or could he not scale the casement? It is
but a child's effort;--or did the sentry spy him?"

Time passed on: the first ray of daylight slowly gleamed, when he
thought he heard the door of the church close. Savelli's suspense
became intolerable: he stole from the chapel, and came in sight of the
Tribune's bed--all was silent.

"Perhaps the silence of death," said Savelli, as he crept back.

Meanwhile the Tribune, vainly endeavouring to close his eyes, was
rendered yet more watchful by the uneasy position he was obliged to
assume--for the part of the bed towards the pillow having given way,
while the rest remained solid, he had inverted the legitimate order
of lying, and drawn himself up as he might best accommodate his limbs,
towards the foot of the bed. The light of the lamp, though shaded by the
draperies, was thus opposite to him. Impatient of his wakefulness, he at
last thought it was this dull and flickering light which scared away the
slumber, and was about to rise, to remove it further from him, when he
saw the curtain at the other end of the bed gently lifted: he remained
quiet and alarmed;--ere he could draw a second breath, a dark figure
interposed between the light and the bed; and he felt that a stroke was
aimed against that part of the couch, which, but for the accident that
had seemed to him ominous, would have given his breast to the knife.
Rienzi waited not a second and better-directed blow; as the assassin yet
stooped, groping in the uncertain light, he threw on him all the weight
and power of his large and muscular frame, wrenched the stiletto from
the bravo's hand, and dashing him on the bed, placed his knee on his
breast.--The stiletto rose--gleamed--descended--the murtherer swerved
aside, and it pierced only his right arm. The Tribune raised, for a
deadlier blow, the revengeful blade.

The assassin thus foiled was a man used to all form and shape of danger,
and he did not now lose his presence of mind.

"Hold!" said he; "if you kill me, you will die yourself. Spare me, and I
will save you."

"Miscreant!"

"Hush--not so loud, or you will disturb your attendants, and some of
them may do what I have failed to execute. Spare me, I say, and I will
reveal that which were worth more than my life; but call not--speak not
aloud, I warn you!"

The Tribune felt his heart stand still: in that lonely place, afar from
his idolizing people--his devoted guards--with but loathing barons,
or, it might be, faithless menials, within call, might not the baffled
murtherer give a wholesome warning?--and those words and that doubt
seemed suddenly to reverse their respective positions, and leave the
conqueror still in the assassin's power.

"Thou thinkest to deceive me," said he, but in a voice whispered and
uncertain, which shewed the ruffian the advantage he had gained: "thou
wouldst that I might release thee without summoning my attendants, that
thou mightst a second time attempt my life."

"Thou hast disabled my right arm, and disarmed me of my only weapon."

"How camest thou hither?"

"By connivance."

"Whence this attempt?"

"The dictation of others."

"If I pardon thee--"

"Thou shalt know all!"

"Rise," said the Tribune, releasing his prisoner, but with great
caution, and still grasping his shoulder with one hand, while the other
pointed the dagger at his throat.

"Did my sentry admit thee? There is but one entrance to the church,
methinks."

"He did not; follow me, and I will tell thee more."

"Dog! thou hast accomplices?"

"If I have, thou hast the knife at my throat."

"Wouldst thou escape?"

"I cannot, or I would."

Rienzi looked hard, by the dull light of the lamp, at the assassin. His
rugged and coarse countenance, rude garb, and barbarian speech, seemed
to him proof sufficient that he was but the hireling of others; and it
might be wise to brave one danger present and certain, to prevent much
danger future and unforeseen. Rienzi, too, was armed, strong, active, in
the prime of life;--and at the worst, there was no part of the building
whence his voice would not reach those within the chapel,--if they could
be depended upon.

"Shew me then thy place and means of entrance," said he; "and if I but
suspect thee as we move--thou diest. Take up the lamp."

The ruffian nodded; with his left hand took up the lamp as he was
ordered; and with Rienzi's grasp on his shoulder, while the wound from
his right arm dropped gore as he passed, he moved noiselessly along the
church--gained the altar--to the left of which was a small room for the
use or retirement of the priest. To this he made his way. Rienzi's heart
misgave him a moment.

"Beware," he whispered, "the least sign of fraud, and thou art the first
victim!"

The assassin nodded again, and proceeded. They entered the room; and
then the Tribune's strange guide pointed to an open casement. "Behold my
entrance," said he; "and, if you permit me, my egress--"

"The frog gets not out of the well so easily as he came in, friend,"
returned Rienzi, smiling. "And now, if I am not to call my guards, what
am I to do with thee!"

"Let me go, and I will seek thee tomorrow; and if thou payest me
handsomely, and promisest not to harm limb or life, I will put thine
enemies and my employers in thy power."

Rienzi could not refrain from a slight laugh at the proposition, but
composing himself, replied--"And what if I call my attendants, and give
thee to their charge?"

"Thou givest me to those very enemies and employers; and in despair lest
I betray them, ere the day dawn they cut my throat--or thine."

"Methinks knave, I have seen thee before."

"Thou hast. I blush not for name or country. I am Rodolf of Saxony!"

"I remember me:--servitor of Walter de Montreal. He, then, is thy
instigator!"

"Roman, no! That noble Knight scorns other weapon than the open sword,
and his own hand slays his own foes. Your pitiful, miserable, dastard
Italians, alone employ the courage, and hire the arm, of others."

Rienzi remained silent. He had released hold of his prisoner, and stood
facing him; every now and then regarding his countenance, and again
relapsing into thought. At length, casting his eyes round the small
chamber thus singularly tenanted, he observed a kind of closet, in which
the priests' robes, and some articles used in the sacred service, were
contained. It suggested at once an escape from his dilemma: he pointed
to it--

"There, Rodolf of Saxony, shalt thou pass some part of this night--a
small penance for thy meditated crime; and tomorrow, as thou lookest for
life, thou wilt reveal all."

"Hark, ye, Tribune," returned the Saxon, doggedly; "my liberty is in
your power, but neither my tongue nor my life. If I consent to be caged
in that hole, you must swear on the crossed hilt of the dagger that you
now hold, that, on confession of all I know, you pardon and set me free.
My employers are enough to glut your rage an' you were a tiger. If you
do not swear this--"

"Ah, my modest friend!--the alternative?"

"I brain myself against the stone wall! Better such a death than the
rack!"

"Fool, I want not revenge against such as thou. Be honest, and I swear
that, twelve hours after thy confession, thou shalt stand safe and
unscathed without the walls of Rome. So help me our Lord and his
saints."

"I am content!--Donner und Hagel, I have lived long enough to care only
for my own life, and the great captain's next to it;--for the rest, I
reck not if ye southerns cut each other's throats, and make all Italy
one grave."

With this benevolent speech, Rodolf entered the closet; but ere Rienzi
could close the door, he stepped forth again--

"Hold," said he: "this blood flows fast. Help me to bandage it, or I
shall bleed to death ere my confession."

"Per fede," said the Tribune, his strange humour enjoying the man's cool
audacity; "but, considering the service thou wouldst have rendered me,
thou art the most pleasant, forbearing, unabashed, good fellow, I have
seen this many a year. Give us thine own belt. I little thought my first
eve of knighthood would have been so charitably spent!"

"Methinks these robes would make a better bandage," said Rodolf,
pointing to the priests' gear suspended from the wall.

"Silence, knave," said the Tribune, frowning; "no sacrilege! Yet, as
thou takest such dainty care of thyself, thou shalt have mine own scarf
to accommodate thee."

With that the Tribune, placing his dagger on the ground, while he
cautiously guarded it with his foot, bound up the wounded limb, for
which condescension Rodolf gave him short thanks; resumed his weapon and
lamp; closed the door; drew over it the long, heavy bolt without, and
returned to his couch, deeply and indignantly musing over the treason he
had so fortunately escaped.

