
"Well, you may tell your mistress we will take the room, and that her
plan of growing her own cabbages is simply _admirable_!"

"Yes'm," said the girl, as she showed them out.

"One day-room and three bed-rooms," said Balbus, as they returned to the
hotel. "We will take as our day-room the one that gives us the least
walking to do to get to it."

"Must we walk from door to door, and count the steps?" said Lambert.

"No, no! Figure it out, my boys, figure it out!" Balbus gaily exclaimed,
as he put pens, ink, and paper before his hapless pupils, and left the
room.

"I say! It'll be a job!" said Hugh.

"Rather!" said Lambert.




KNOT III.

MAD MATHESIS.

   "I waited for the train."


"Well, they call me so because I _am_ a little mad, I suppose," she
said, good-humouredly, in answer to Clara's cautiously-worded question
as to how she came by so strange a nick-name. "You see, I never do what
sane people are expected to do now-a-days. I never wear long trains,
(talking of trains, that's the Charing Cross Metropolitan Station--I've
something to tell you about _that_), and I never play lawn-tennis. I
can't cook an omelette. I can't even set a broken limb! _There's_ an
ignoramus for you!"

Clara was her niece, and full twenty years her junior; in fact, she was
still attending a High School--an institution of which Mad Mathesis
spoke with undisguised aversion. "Let a woman be meek and lowly!" she
would say. "None of your High Schools for me!" But it was vacation-time
just now, and Clara was her guest, and Mad Mathesis was showing her the
sights of that Eighth Wonder of the world--London.

"The Charing Cross Metropolitan Station!" she resumed, waving her hand
towards the entrance as if she were introducing her niece to a friend.
"The Bayswater and Birmingham Extension is just completed, and the
trains now run round and round continuously--skirting the border of
Wales, just touching at York, and so round by the east coast back to
London. The way the trains run is _most_ peculiar. The westerly ones go
round in two hours; the easterly ones take three; but they always manage
to start two trains from here, opposite ways, punctually every
quarter-of-an-hour."

"They part to meet again," said Clara, her eyes filling with tears at
the romantic thought.

"No need to cry about it!" her aunt grimly remarked. "They don't meet on
the same line of rails, you know. Talking of meeting, an idea strikes
me!" she added, changing the subject with her usual abruptness. "Let's
go opposite ways round, and see which can meet most trains. No need for
a chaperon--ladies' saloon, you know. You shall go whichever way you
like, and we'll have a bet about it!"

"I never make bets," Clara said very gravely. "Our excellent preceptress
has often warned us----"

"You'd be none the worse if you did!" Mad Mathesis interrupted. "In
fact, you'd be the better, I'm certain!"

"Neither does our excellent preceptress approve of puns," said Clara.
"But we'll have a match, if you like. Let me choose my train," she added
after a brief mental calculation, "and I'll engage to meet exactly half
as many again as you do."

"Not if you count fair," Mad Mathesis bluntly interrupted. "Remember, we
only count the trains we meet _on the way_. You mustn't count the one
that starts as you start, nor the one that arrives as you arrive."

"That will only make the difference of _one_ train," said Clara, as they
turned and entered the station. "But I never travelled alone before.
There'll be no one to help me to alight. However, I don't mind. Let's
have a match."

A ragged little boy overheard her remark, and came running after her.
"Buy a box of cigar-lights, Miss!" he pleaded, pulling her shawl to
attract her attention. Clara stopped to explain.

"I never smoke cigars," she said in a meekly apologetic tone. "Our
excellent preceptress----," but Mad Mathesis impatiently hurried her on,
and the little boy was left gazing after her with round eyes of
amazement.

The two ladies bought their tickets and moved slowly down the central
platform, Mad Mathesis prattling on as usual--Clara silent, anxiously
reconsidering the calculation on which she rested her hopes of winning
the match.

"Mind where you go, dear!" cried her aunt, checking her just in time.
"One step more, and you'd have been in that pail of cold water!"

"I know, I know," Clara said, dreamily. "The pale, the cold, and the
moony----"

"Take your places on the spring-boards!" shouted a porter.

"What are _they_ for!" Clara asked in a terrified whisper.

"Merely to help us into the trains." The elder lady spoke with the
nonchalance of one quite used to the process. "Very few people can get
into a carriage without help in less than three seconds, and the trains
only stop for one second." At this moment the whistle was heard, and two
trains rushed into the station. A moment's pause, and they were gone
again; but in that brief interval several hundred passengers had been
shot into them, each flying straight to his place with the accuracy of a
Minie bullet--while an equal number were showered out upon the
side-platforms.

Three hours had passed away, and the two friends met again on the
Charing Cross platform, and eagerly compared notes. Then Clara turned
away with a sigh. To young impulsive hearts, like hers, disappointment
is always a bitter pill. Mad Mathesis followed her, full of kindly
sympathy.

"Try again, my love!" she said, cheerily. "Let us vary the experiment.
We will start as we did before, but not to begin counting till our
trains meet. When we see each other, we will say 'One!' and so count on
till we come here again."

Clara brightened up. "I shall win _that_," she exclaimed eagerly, "if I
may choose my train!"

Another shriek of engine whistles, another upheaving of spring-boards,
another living avalanche plunging into two trains as they flashed by:
and the travellers were off again.

Each gazed eagerly from her carriage window, holding up her handkerchief
as a signal to her friend. A rush and a roar. Two trains shot past each
other in a tunnel, and two travellers leaned back in their corners with
a sigh--or rather with _two_ sighs--of relief. "One!" Clara murmured to
herself. "Won! It's a word of good omen. _This_ time, at any rate, the
victory will be mine!"

But _was_ it?




KNOT IV.

THE DEAD RECKONING.

   "I did dream of money-bags to-night."


Noonday on the open sea within a few degrees of the Equator is apt to be
oppressively warm; and our two travellers were now airily clad in suits
of dazzling white linen, having laid aside the chain-armour which they
had found not only endurable in the cold mountain air they had lately
been breathing, but a necessary precaution against the daggers of the
banditti who infested the heights. Their holiday-trip was over, and they
were now on their way home, in the monthly packet which plied between
the two great ports of the island they had been exploring.

Along with their armour, the tourists had laid aside the antiquated
speech it had pleased them to affect while in knightly disguise, and
had returned to the ordinary style of two country gentlemen of the
Twentieth Century.

Stretched on a pile of cushions, under the shade of a huge umbrella,
they were lazily watching some native fishermen, who had come on board
at the last landing-place, each carrying over his shoulder a small but
heavy sack. A large weighing-machine, that had been used for cargo at
the last port, stood on the deck; and round this the fishermen had
gathered, and, with much unintelligible jabber, seemed to be weighing
their sacks.

"More like sparrows in a tree than human talk, isn't it?" the elder
tourist remarked to his son, who smiled feebly, but would not exert
himself so far as to speak. The old man tried another listener.

"What have they got in those sacks, Captain?" he inquired, as that great
being passed them in his never ending parade to and fro on the deck.

The Captain paused in his march, and towered over the travellers--tall,
grave, and serenely self-satisfied.

"Fishermen," he explained, "are often passengers in My ship. These five
are from Mhruxi--the place we last touched at--and that's the way they
carry their money. The money of this island is heavy, gentlemen, but it
costs little, as you may guess. We buy it from them by weight--about
five shillings a pound. I fancy a ten pound-note would buy all those
sacks."

By this time the old man had closed his eyes--in order, no doubt, to
concentrate his thoughts on these interesting facts; but the Captain
failed to realise his motive, and with a grunt resumed his monotonous
march.

Meanwhile the fishermen were getting so noisy over the weighing-machine
that one of the sailors took the precaution of carrying off all the
weights, leaving them to amuse themselves with such substitutes in the
form of winch-handles, belaying-pins, &c., as they could find. This
brought their excitement to a speedy end: they carefully hid their sacks
in the folds of the jib that lay on the deck near the tourists, and
strolled away.

When next the Captain's heavy footfall passed, the younger man roused
himself to speak.

"_What_ did you call the place those fellows came from, Captain?" he
asked.

"Mhruxi, sir."

"And the one we are bound for?"

The Captain took a long breath, plunged into the word, and came out of
it nobly. "They call it Kgovjni, sir."

"K--I give it up!" the young man faintly said.

He stretched out his hand for a glass of iced water which the
compassionate steward had brought him a minute ago, and had set down,
unluckily, just outside the shadow of the umbrella. It was scalding hot,
and he decided not to drink it. The effort of making this resolution,
coming close on the fatiguing conversation he had just gone through, was
too much for him: he sank back among the cushions in silence.

His father courteously tried to make amends for his _nonchalance_.

"Whereabouts are we now, Captain?" said he, "Have you any idea?"

The Captain cast a pitying look on the ignorant landsman. "I could tell
you _that_, sir," he said, in a tone of lofty condescension, "to an
inch!"

"You don't say so!" the old man remarked, in a tone of languid surprise.

"And mean so," persisted the Captain. "Why, what do you suppose would
become of My ship, if I were to lose My Longitude and My Latitude?
Could _you_ make anything of My Dead Reckoning?"

"Nobody could, I'm sure!" the other heartily rejoined.

But he had overdone it.

"It's _perfectly_ intelligible," the Captain said, in an offended tone,
"to any one that understands such things." With these words he moved
away, and began giving orders to the men, who were preparing to hoist
the jib.

Our tourists watched the operation with such interest that neither of
them remembered the five money-bags, which in another moment, as the
wind filled out the jib, were whirled overboard and fell heavily into
the sea.

But the poor fishermen had not so easily forgotten their property. In a
moment they had rushed to the spot, and stood uttering cries of fury,
and pointing, now to the sea, and now to the sailors who had caused the
disaster.

The old man explained it to the Captain.

"Let us make it up among us," he added in conclusion. "Ten pounds will
do it, I think you said?"

[Illustration]

But the Captain put aside the suggestion with a wave of the hand.

"No, sir!" he said, in his grandest manner. "You will excuse Me, I am
sure; but these are My passengers. The accident has happened on board My
ship, and under My orders. It is for Me to make compensation." He
turned to the angry fishermen. "Come here, my men!" he said, in the
Mhruxian dialect. "Tell me the weight of each sack. I saw you weighing
them just now."

Then ensued a perfect Babel of noise, as the five natives explained, all
screaming together, how the sailors had carried off the weights, and
they had done what they could with whatever came handy.

Two iron belaying-pins, three blocks, six holystones, four
winch-handles, and a large hammer, were now carefully weighed, the
Captain superintending and noting the results. But the matter did not
seem to be settled, even then: an angry discussion followed, in which
the sailors and the five natives all joined: and at last the Captain
approached our tourists with a disconcerted look, which he tried to
conceal under a laugh.

"It's an absurd difficulty," he said. "Perhaps one of you gentlemen can
suggest something. It seems they weighed the sacks two at a time!"

"If they didn't have five separate weighings, of course you can't value
them separately," the youth hastily decided.

"Let's hear all about it," was the old man's more cautious remark.

"They _did_ have five separate weighings," the Captain said, "but--Well,
it beats _me_ entirely!" he added, in a sudden burst of candour. "Here's
the result. First and second sack weighed twelve pounds; second and
third, thirteen and a half; third and fourth, eleven and a half; fourth
and fifth, eight: and then they say they had only the large hammer left,
and it took _three_ sacks to weigh it down--that's the first, third and
fifth--and _they_ weighed sixteen pounds. There, gentlemen! Did you ever
hear anything like _that_?"

The old man muttered under his breath "If only my sister were here!" and
looked helplessly at his son. His son looked at the five natives. The
five natives looked at the Captain. The Captain looked at nobody: his
eyes were cast down, and he seemed to be saying softly to himself
"Contemplate one another, gentlemen, if such be your good pleasure. _I_
contemplate _Myself_!"




KNOT V.

OUGHTS AND CROSSES.

   "Look here, upon this picture, and on this."


"And what made you choose the first train, Goosey?" said Mad Mathesis,
as they got into the cab. "Couldn't you count better than _that_?"

"I took an extreme case," was the tearful reply. "Our excellent
preceptress always says 'When in doubt, my dears, take an extreme case.'
And I _was_ in doubt."

"Does it always succeed?" her aunt enquired.

Clara sighed. "Not _always_," she reluctantly admitted. "And I can't
make out why. One day she was telling the little girls--they make such a
noise at tea, you know--'The more noise you make, the less jam you will
have, and _vice versa_.' And I thought they wouldn't know what '_vice
versa_' meant: so I explained it to them. I said 'If you make an
infinite noise, you'll get no jam: and if you make no noise, you'll get
an infinite lot of jam.' But our excellent preceptress said that wasn't
a good instance. _Why_ wasn't it?" she added plaintively.

Her aunt evaded the question. "One sees certain objections to it," she
said. "But how did you work it with the Metropolitan trains? None of
them go infinitely fast, I believe."

"I called them hares and tortoises," Clara said--a little timidly, for
she dreaded being laughed at. "And I thought there couldn't be so many
hares as tortoises on the Line: so I took an extreme case--one hare and
an infinite number of tortoises."

"An extreme case, indeed," her aunt remarked with admirable gravity:
"and a most dangerous state of things!"

"And I thought, if I went with a tortoise, there would be only _one_
hare to meet: but if I went with the hare--you know there were _crowds_
of tortoises!"

"It wasn't a bad idea," said the elder lady, as they left the cab, at
the entrance of Burlington House. "You shall have another chance to-day.
We'll have a match in marking pictures."

Clara brightened up. "I should like to try again, very much," she said.
"I'll take more care this time. How are we to play?"

To this question Mad Mathesis made no reply: she was busy drawing lines
down the margins of the catalogue. "See," she said after a minute, "I've
drawn three columns against the names of the pictures in the long room,
and I want you to fill them with oughts and crosses--crosses for good
marks and oughts for bad. The first column is for choice of subject, the
second for arrangement, the third for colouring. And these are the
conditions of the match. You must give three crosses to two or three
pictures. You must give two crosses to four or five----"

"Do you mean _only_ two crosses?" said Clara. "Or may I count the
three-cross pictures among the two-cross pictures?"

"Of course you may," said her aunt. "Any one, that has _three_ eyes, may
be said to have _two_ eyes, I suppose?"

Clara followed her aunt's dreamy gaze across the crowded gallery,
half-dreading to find that there was a three-eyed person in sight.

"And you must give one cross to nine or ten."

"And which wins the match?" Clara asked, as she carefully entered these
conditions on a blank leaf in her catalogue.

"Whichever marks fewest pictures."

"But suppose we marked the same number?"

"Then whichever uses most marks."

Clara considered. "I don't think it's much of a match," she said. "I
shall mark nine pictures, and give three crosses to three of them, two
crosses to two more, and one cross each to all the rest."

"Will you, indeed?" said her aunt. "Wait till you've heard all the
conditions, my impetuous child. You must give three oughts to one or two
pictures, two oughts to three or four, and one ought to eight or nine. I
don't want you to be _too_ hard on the R.A.'s."

Clara quite gasped as she wrote down all these fresh conditions. "It's a
great deal worse than Circulating Decimals!" she said. "But I'm
determined to win, all the same!"

