such a relation. The object of founding colonies, which was one of the
main ends of seventeenth, eighteenth, and nineteenth century
statesmanship, was to bring new communities into this relation of
economic vassalage to the home capitalists, who, having beggared the home
market by their profit, saw no prospect of making more except by
fastening their suckers upon outside communities. Great Britain, whose
capitalists were strongest of all, was naturally the leader in this
policy, and the main end of her wars and her diplomacy for many centuries
before the great Revolution was to obtain such colonies, and to secure
from weaker nations trade concessions and openings--peaceably if
possible, at the mouth of the cannon if necessary."

"How about the condition of the masses in a country thus reduced to
commercial vassalage to the capitalists of another country? Was it
necessarily worse than the condition of the masses of the superior
country?"

"That did not follow at all. We must constantly keep in mind that the
interests of the capitalists and of the people were not identical. The
prosperity of the capitalists of a country by no means implied prosperity
on the part of the population, nor the reverse. If the masses of the
dependent country had not been exploited by foreign capitalists, they
would have been by domestic capitalists. Both they and the working masses
of the superior country were equally the tools and slaves of the
capitalists, who did not treat workingmen any better on account of being
their fellow countrymen than if they had been foreigners. It was the
capitalists of the dependent country rather than the masses who suffered
by the suppression of independent business enterprises."

BETWEEN THE DEVIL AND THE DEEP SEA.

"That will do, Paul.--We will now ask some information from you, Helen,
as to a point which Paul's last words have suggested. During the
eighteenth and nineteenth centuries a bitter controversy raged among our
ancestors between two parties in opinion and politics, calling
themselves, respectively, the Protectionists and the Free Traders, the
former of whom held that it was well to shut out the competition of
foreign capitalists in the market of a country by a tariff upon imports,
while the latter held that no impediment should be allowed to the
entirely free course of trade. What have you to say as to the merits of
this controversy?"

"Merely," replied the girl called Helen, "that the difference between the
two policies, so far as it affected the people at large, reduced itself
to the question whether they preferred being fleeced by home or foreign
capitalists. Free trade was the cry of the capitalists who felt
themselves able to crush those of rival nations if allowed the
opportunity to compete with them. Protection was the cry of the
capitalists who felt themselves weaker than those of other nations, and
feared that their enterprises would be crushed and their profits taken
away if free competition were allowed. The Free Traders were like a man
who, seeing his antagonist is no match for him, boldly calls for a free
fight and no favor, while the Protectionist was the man who, seeing
himself overmatched, called for the police. The Free Trader held that the
natural, God-given right of the capitalist to shear the people anywhere
he found them was superior to considerations of race, nationality, or
boundary lines. The Protectionist, on the contrary, maintained the
patriotic right of the capitalist to the exclusive shearing of his own
fellow-countrymen without interference of foreign capitalists. As to the
mass of the people, the nation at large, it was, as Paul has just said, a
matter of indifference whether they were fleeced by the capitalists of
their own country under protection or the capitalists of foreign
countries under free trade. The literature of the controversy between
Protectionists and Free Traders makes this very clear. Whatever else the
Protectionists failed to prove, they were able to demonstrate that the
condition of the people in free-trade countries was quite as bad as
anywhere else, and, on the other hand, the Free Traders were equally
conclusive in the proofs they presented that the people in protected
countries, other things being equal, were no better off than those in
free-trade lands. The question of Protection or Free Trade interested the
capitalists only. For the people, it was the choice between the devil and
the deep sea."

"Let us have a concrete illustration." said the teacher. "Take the case
of England. She was beyond comparison the country of all others in the
nineteenth century which had most foreign trade and commanded most
foreign markets. If a large volume of foreign trade under conditions
practically dictated by its capitalists was under the profit system a
source of national prosperity to a country, we should expect to see the
mass of the British people at the end of the nineteenth century enjoying
an altogether extraordinary felicity and general welfare as compared with
that of other peoples or any former people, for never before did a nation
develop so vast a foreign commerce. What were the facts?"

"It was common," replied the girl, "for our ancestors in the vague and
foggy way in which they used the terms 'nation' and 'national' to speak
of Great Britain as rich. But it was only her capitalists, some scores of
thousands of individuals among some forty million people, who were rich.
These indeed had incredible accumulations, but the remainder of the forty
millions--the whole people, in fact, save an infinitesimal fraction--were
sunk in poverty. It is said that England had a larger and more hopeless
pauper problem than any other civilized nation. The condition of her
working masses was not only more wretched than that of many contemporary
people, but was worse, as proved by the most careful economic
comparisons, than it had been in the fifteenth century, before foreign
trade was thought of. People do not emigrate from a land where they are
well off, but the British people, driven out by want, had found the
frozen Canadas and the torrid zone more hospitable than their native
land. As an illustration of the fact that the welfare of the working
masses was in no way improved when the capitalists of a country commanded
foreign markets, it is interesting to note the fact that the British
emigrant was able to make a better living in English colonies whose
markets were wholly dominated by English capitalists than he had been at
home as the employee of those capitalists. We shall remember also that
Malthus, with his doctrine that it was the best thing that could happen
to a workingman not to be born, was an Englishman, and based his
conclusions very logically upon his observation of the conditions of life
for the masses in that country which had been more successful than any
other in any age in monopolizing the foreign markets of the world by its
commerce.

"Or," the lad went on, "take Belgium, that old Flemish land of merchants,
where foreign trade had been longer and more steadily used than in any
other European country. In the latter part of the nineteenth century the
mass of the Belgian people, the hardest-worked population in the world,
was said to have been, as a rule, without adequate food--to be
undergoing, in short, a process of slow starvation. They, like the people
of England and the people of Germany, are proved, by statistical
calculations upon the subject that have come down to us, to have been
economically very much better off during the fifteenth and early part of
the sixteenth century, when foreign trade was hardly known, than they
were in the nineteenth. There was a possibility before foreign trade for
profit began that a population might obtain some share of the richness of
a bountiful land just from the lack of any outlet for it. But with the
beginning of foreign commerce, under the profit system, that possibility
vanished. Thenceforth everything good or desirable, above what might
serve for the barest subsistence of labor, was systematically and
exhaustively gathered up by the capitalists, to be exchanged in foreign
lands for gold and gems, silks, velvets, and ostrich plumes for the rich.
As Goldsmith had it:

  "Around the world each needful product flies
  For all the luxuries the world supplies."

"To what has the struggle of the nations for foreign markets in the
nineteenth century been aptly compared?"

"To a contest between galleys manned by slaves, whose owners were racing
for a prize."

"In such a race, which crew was likely to fare worse, that of the winning
or the losing galley?"

"That of the winning galley, by all means," replied the girl, "for the
supposition is that, other conditions being equal, it was the more sorely
scourged."

"Just so," said the teacher, "and on the same principle, when the
capitalists of two countries contended for the supplying of a foreign
market it was the workers subject to the successful group of capitalists
who were most to be pitied, for, other conditions being equal, they were
likely to be those whose wages had been cut lowest and whose general
condition was most degraded."

"But tell us," said the teacher, "were there not instances of a general
poverty in countries having no foreign trade as great as prevailed in the
countries you have mentioned?"

"Dear me, yes!" replied the girl. "I have not meant to convey any
impression that because the tender mercies of the foreign capitalists
were cruel, those of the domestic capitalist were any less so. The
comparison is merely between the operation of the profit system on a
larger or smaller scale. So long as the profit system was retained, it
would be all one in the end, whether you built a wall around a country
and left the people to be exploited exclusively by home capitalists, or
threw the wall down and let in the foreigners."




CHAPTER XXVII.

HOSTILITY OF A SYSTEM OF VESTED INTERESTS TO IMPROVEMENT.

"Now, Florence," said the teacher, "with your assistance we will take up
the closing topic in our consideration of the economic system of our
fathers--namely, its hostility to invention and improvement. It has been
our painful duty to point out numerous respects in which our respected
ancestors were strangely blind to the true character and effects of their
economic institutions, but no instance perhaps is more striking than
this. Far from seeing the necessary antagonism between private capitalism
and the march of improvement which is so plain to us, they appear to have
sincerely believed that their system was peculiarly favorable to the
progress of invention, and that its advantage in this respect was so
great as to be an important set-off to its admitted ethical defects. Here
there is decidedly a broad difference in opinion, but fortunately the
facts are so well authenticated that we shall have no difficulty in
concluding which view is correct.

"The subject divides itself into two branches: First, the natural
antagonism of the old system to economic changes; and, second, the effect
of the profit principle to minimize if not wholly to nullify the benefit
of such economic improvements as were able to overcome that antagonism so
far as to get themselves introduced.--Now, Florence, tell us what there
was about the old economic system, the system of private capitalism,
which made it constitutionally opposed to changes in methods."

"It was," replied the girl, "the fact that it consisted of independent
vested interests without any principle of coordination or combination,
the result being that the economic welfare of every individual or group
was wholly dependent upon his or its particular vested interest without
regard to others or to the welfare of the whole body."

"Please bring out your meaning by comparing our modern system in the
respect you speak of with private capitalism."

"Our system is a strictly integrated one--that is to say, no one has any
economic interest in any part or function of the economic organization
which is distinct from his interest in every other part and function. His
only interest is in the greatest possible output of the whole. We have
our several occupations, but only that we may work the more efficiently
for the common fund. We may become very enthusiastic about our special
pursuit, but as a matter of sentiment only, for our economic interests
are no more dependent upon our special occupation than upon any other. We
share equally in the total product, whatever it is."

"How does the integrated character of the economic system affect our
attitude toward improvements or inventions of any sort in economic
processes?"

"We welcome them with eagerness. Why should we not? Any improvement of
this sort must necessarily redound to the advantage of every one in the
nation and to every one's advantage equally. If the occupation affected
by the invention happens to be our particular employment we lose nothing,
though it should make that occupation wholly superfluous. We might in
that case feel a little sentimental regret over the passing away of old
habits, but that is all. No one's substantial interests are in any way
more identified with one pursuit than another. All are in the service of
the nation, and it is the business and interest of the nation to see that
every one is provided with other work as soon as his former occupation
becomes unnecessary to the general weal, and under no circumstances is
his rate of maintenance affected. From its first production every
improvement in economic processes is therefore an unalloyed blessing to
all. The inventor comes bringing a gift of greater wealth or leisure in
his hand for every one on earth, and it is no wonder that the people's
gratitude makes his reward the most enviable to be won by a public
benefactor."

"Now, Florence, tell us in what way the multitude of distinct vested
interests which made up private capitalism operated to produce an
antagonism toward economic inventions and improvements."

HOW PROGRESS ANTAGONIZED VESTED INTERESTS.

"As I have said," replied the girl, "everybody's interest was wholly
confined to and bound up with the particular occupation he was engaged
in. If he was a capitalist, his capital was embarked in it; if he was an
artisan, his capital was the knowledge of some particular craft or part
of a craft, and he depended for his livelihood on the demand for the sort
of work he had learned how to do. Neither as capitalist or artisan, as
employer or employee, had he any economic interest or dependence outside
of or larger than his special business. Now, the effect of any new idea,
invention, or discovery for economic application is to dispense more or
less completely with the process formerly used in that department, and so
far to destroy the economic basis of the occupations connected with that
business. Under our system, as I have said, that means no loss to
anybody, but simply a shifting of workers, with a net gain in wealth or
leisure to all; but then it meant ruin to those involved in the change.
The capitalist lost his capital, his plant, his investments more or less
totally, and the workingmen lost their means of livelihood and were
thrown on what you well called the cold charity of the world--a charity
usually well below zero; and this loss without any rebate or compensation
whatever from the public at large on account of any general benefit that
might be received from the invention. It was complete. Consequently, the
most beneficent of inventions was cruel as death to those who had been
dependent for living or for profit on the particular occupations it
affected. The capitalists grew gray from fear of discoveries which in a
day might turn their costly plants to old iron fit only for the junkshop,
and the nightmare of the artisan was some machine which should take bread
from his children's mouths by enabling his employer to dispense with his
services.

"Owing to this division of the economic field into a set of vested
personal and group interests wholly without coherency or integrating
idea, each standing or falling by and for itself, every step in the
advance of the arts and sciences was gained only at the cost of an amount
of loss and ruin to particular portions of the community such as would be
wrought by a blight or pestilence. The march of invention was white with
the bleaching bones of innumerable hecatombs of victims. The spinning
jenny replaced the spinning wheel, and famine stalked through English
villages. The railroad supplanted the stagecoach, and a thousand hill
towns died while as many sprang up in the valleys, and the farmers of the
East were pauperized by the new agriculture of the West. Petroleum
succeeded whale-oil, and a hundred seaports withered. Coal and iron were
found in the South, and the grass grew in the streets of the Northern
centers of iron-making. Electricity succeeded steam, and billions of
railroad property were wiped out. But what is the use of lengthening a
list which might be made interminable? The rule was always the same:
every important invention brought uncompensated disaster to some portion
of the people. Armies of bankrupts, hosts of workers forced into
vagabondage, a sea of suffering of every sort, made up the price which
our ancestors paid for every step of progress.

"Afterward, when the victims had been buried or put out of the way, it
was customary with our fathers to celebrate these industrial triumphs,
and on such occasions a common quotation in the mouths of the orators was
a line of verse to the effect that--

  "Peace hath her victories not less renowned than those of war.

The orators were not wont to dwell on the fact that these victories of
what they so oddly called peace were usually purchased at a cost in human
life and suffering quite as great as--yes, often greater than--those of
so-called war. We have all read of Tamerlane's pyramid at Damascus made
of seventy thousand skulls of his victims. It may be said that if the
victims of the various inventions connected with the introduction of
steam had consented to contribute their skulls to a monument in honor of
Stevenson or Arkwright it would dwarf Tamerlane's into insignificance.
Tamerlane was a beast, and Arkwright was a genius sent to help men, yet
the hideous juggle of the old-time economic system made the benefactor
the cause of as much human suffering as the brutal conqueror. It was bad
enough when men stoned and crucified those who came to help them, but
private capitalism did them a worse outrage still in turning the gifts
they brought into curses."

"And did the workers and the capitalists whose interests were threatened
by the progress of invention take practical means of resisting that
progress and suppressing the inventions and the inventors?"

"They did all they could in that way. If the working-men had been strong
enough they would have put an absolute veto on inventions of any sort
tending to diminish the demand for crude hand labor in their respective
crafts. As it was, they did all it was possible for them to accomplish in
that direction by trades-union dictation and mob violence; nor can any
one blame the poor fellows for resisting to the utmost improvements which
improved them out of the means of livelihood. A machine gun would have
been scarcely more deadly if turned upon the workingmen of that day than
a labor-saving machine. In those bitter times a man thrown out of the
employment he had fitted himself for might about as well have been shot,
and if he were not able to get any other work, as so many were not, he
would have been altogether better off had he been killed in battle with
the drum and fife to cheer him and the hope of a pension for his family.
Only, of course, it was the system of private capitalism and not the
labor-saving machine which the workingmen should have attacked, for with
a rational economic system the machine would have been wholly
beneficent."

"How did the capitalists resist inventions?"

"Chiefly by negative means, though much more effective ones than the mob
violence which the workingmen used. The initiative in everything belonged
to the capitalists. No inventor could introduce an invention, however
excellent, unless he could get capitalists to take it up, and this
usually they would not do unless the inventor relinquished to them most
of his hopes of profit from the discovery. A much more important
hindrance to the introduction of inventions resulted from the fact that
those who would be interested in taking them up were those already
carrying on the business the invention applied to, and their interest was
in most cases to suppress an innovation which threatened to make obsolete
the machinery and methods in which their capital was invested. The
capitalist had to be fully assured not only that the invention was a good
one in itself, but that it would be so profitable to himself personally
as to make up for all the damage to his existing capital before he would
touch it. When inventions wholly did away with processes which had been
the basis of profit-charging it was often suicidal for the capitalist to
adopt them. If they could not suppress such inventions in any other way,
it was their custom to buy them up and pigeonhole them. After the
Revolution there were found enough of these patents which had been bought
up and pigeonholed in self-protection by the capitalists to have kept the
world in novelties for ten years if nothing more had been discovered. One
of the most tragical chapters in the history of the old order is made up
of the difficulties, rebuffs, and lifelong disappointments which
inventors had to contend with before they could get their discoveries
introduced, and the frauds by which in most cases they were swindled out
of the profits of them by the capitalists through whom their introduction
was obtained. These stories seem, indeed, well-nigh incredible nowadays,
when the nation is alert and eager to foster and encourage every stirring
of the inventive spirit, and every one with any sort of new idea can
command the offices of the administration without cost to safeguard his
claim to priority and to furnish him all possible facilities of
information, material, and appliances to perfect his conception."

"Considering," said the teacher, "that these facts as to the resistance
offered by vested interests to the march of improvement must have been
even more obvious to our ancestors than to us, how do you account for the
belief they seem to have sincerely held that private capitalism as a
system was favorable to invention?"

"Doubtless," replied the girl, "it was because they saw that whenever an
invention was introduced it was under the patronage of capitalists. This
was, of course, necessarily so because all economic initiative was
confined to the capitalists. Our forefathers, observing that inventions
when introduced at all were introduced through the machinery of private
capitalism, overlooked the fact that usually it was only after exhausting
its power as an obstruction to invention that capital lent itself to its
advancement. They were in this respect like children who, seeing the
water pouring over the edge of a dam and coming over nowhere else, should
conclude that the dam was an agency for aiding the flow of the river
instead of being an obstruction which let it over only when it could be
kept back no longer."

       *       *       *       *       *

"Our lesson," said the teacher, "relates in strictness only to the
economic results of the old order, but at times the theme suggests
aspects of former social conditions too important to pass without
mention. We have seen how obstructive was the system of vested interests
which underlaid private capitalism to the introduction of improvements
and inventions in the economic field. But there was another field in
which the same influence was exerted with effects really far more
important and disastrous.--Tell us, Florence, something of the manner in
which the vested interest system tended to resist the advance of new
ideas in the field of thought, of morals, science, and religion."

"Previous to the great Revolution," the girl replied, "the highest
education not being universal as with us, but limited to a small body,
the members of this body, known as the learned and professional classes,
necessarily became the moral and intellectual teachers and leaders of the
nation. They molded the thoughts of the people, set them their standards,
and through the control of their minds dominated their material interests
and determined the course of civilization. No such power is now
monopolized by any class, because the high level of general education
would make it impossible for any class of mere men to lead the people
blindly. Seeing, however, that such a power was exercised in that day and
limited to so small a class, it was a most vital point that this class
should be qualified to discharge so responsible a duty in a spirit of
devotion to the general weal unbiased by distracting motives. But under
the system of private capitalism, which made every person and group
economically dependent upon and exclusively concerned in the prosperity
of the occupation followed by himself and his group, this ideal was
impossible of attainment. The learned class, the teachers, the preachers,
writers, and professional men were only tradesmen after all, just like
the shoemakers and the carpenters, and their welfare was absolutely bound
up with the demand for the particular sets of ideas and doctrines they
represented and the particular sorts of professional services they got
their living by rendering. Each man's line of teaching or preaching was
his vested interest--the means of his livelihood. That being so, the
members of the learned and professional class were bound to be affected
by innovations in their departments precisely as shoemakers or carpenters
by inventions affecting their trades. It necessarily followed that when
any new idea was suggested in religion, in medicine, in science, in
economics, in sociology, and indeed in almost any field of thought, the
first question which the learned body having charge of that field and
making a living out of it would ask itself was not whether the idea was
good and true and would tend to the general welfare, but how it would
immediately and directly affect the set of doctrines, traditions, and
institutions, with the prestige of which their own personal interests
were identified. If it was a new religious conception that had been
suggested, the clergyman considered, first of all, how it would affect
his sect and his personal standing in it. If it were a new medical idea,
the doctor asked first how it would affect the practice of the school he
was identified with. If it was a new economic or social theory, then all
those whose professional capital was their reputation as teachers in that
branch questioned first how the new idea agreed with the doctrines and
traditions constituting their stock in trade. Now, as any new idea,
almost as a matter of course, must operate to discredit previous ideas in
the same field, it followed that the economic self-interest of the
learned classes would instinctively and almost invariably be opposed to
reform or advance of thought in their fields.

"Being human, they were scarcely more to be blamed for involuntarily
regarding new ideas in their specialties with aversion than the weaver or
the brickmaker for resisting the introduction of inventions calculated to
take the bread out of his mouth. And yet consider what a tremendous,
almost insurmountable, obstacle to human progress was presented by the
fact that the intellectual leaders of the nations and the molders of the
people's thoughts, by their economic dependence upon vested interests in
established ideas, were biased against progress by the strongest motives
of self-interest. When we give due thought to the significance of this
fact, we shall find ourselves wondering no longer at the slow rate of
human advance in the past, but rather that there should have been any
advance at all."




CHAPTER XXVIII.

HOW THE PROFIT SYSTEM NULLIFIED THE BENEFIT OF INVENTIONS.

"The general subject of the hostility of private capitalism to
progress," pursued the teacher, "divides itself, as I said, into two
branches. First, the constitutional antagonism between a system of
distinct and separate vested interests and all unsettling changes which,
whatever their ultimate effect, must be directly damaging to those
interests. We will now ask you, Harold, to take up the second branch of
the subject--namely, the effect of the profit principle to minimize, if
not wholly to nullify, the benefit to the community of such inventions
and improvements as were able to overcome the antagonism of vested
interests so far as to get themselves introduced. The nineteenth century,
including the last quarter of the eighteenth, was marked by an
astonishing and absolutely unprecedented number of great inventions in
economic processes. To what was this outburst of inventive genius due?"

"To the same cause," replied the boy, "which accounts for the rise of the
democratic movement and the idea of human equality during the same
period--that is to say, the diffusion of intelligence among the masses,
which, for the first time becoming somewhat general, multiplied
ten-thousandfold the thinking force of mankind, and, in the political
aspect of the matter, changed the purpose of that thinking from the
interest of the few to that of the many."

"Our ancestors," said the teacher, "seeing that this outburst of
invention took place under private capitalism, assumed that there must be
something in that system peculiarly favorable to the genius of invention.
Have you anything to say on that point beyond what has been said?"

"Nothing," replied the boy, "except that by the same rule we ought to
give credit to the institutions of royalty, nobility, and plutocracy for
the democratic idea which under their fostering influence during the same
period grew to flowering in the great Revolution."

"I think that will do on that point," answered the teacher. "We will now
ask you to tell us something more particularly of this great period of
invention which began in the latter part of the eighteenth century."

HAROLD STATES THE FACTS.

"From the times of antiquity up to the last quarter of the eighteenth
century," said the lad, "there had been almost no progress in the
mechanical sciences save as to shipbuilding and arms. From 1780, or
thereabouts, dates the beginning of a series of discoveries of sources of
power, and their application by machinery to economic purposes, which,
during the century following, completely revolutionized the conditions of
industry and commerce. Steam and coal meant a multiplication of human
energy in the production of wealth which was almost incalculable. For
industrial purposes it is not too much to say that they transformed man
from a pygmy to a Titan. These were, of course, only the greatest factors
in a countless variety of discoveries by which prodigious economies of
labor were effected in every detail of the arts by which human life is
maintained and ministered to. In agriculture, where Nature, which can not
be too much hurried, is a large partner, and wherein, therefore, man's
part is less controlling than in other industries, it might be expected
that the increase of productive energy through human invention would be
least. Yet here it was estimated that agricultural machinery, as most
perfectly developed in America, had multiplied some fifteenfold the
product of the individual worker. In most sorts of production less
directly dependent upon Nature, invention during this period had
multiplied the efficiency of labor in a much greater degree, ranging from
fifty and a hundred-fold to several thousand-fold, one man being able to
