It consisted in allotting a certain equal portion of space to every
star, so that, on the whole, each equal portion of space within the
stellar system contains an equal number of stars. The space about each
star can be considered spherical. Suppose such a sphere to surround our
own sun. Its radius will not differ greatly from the distance of the
nearest fixed star, and this is taken as the unit of distance.

Suppose a series of larger spheres, all drawn around our sun as a
centre, and having the radii 3, 5, 7, 9, etc. The contents of the
spheres being as the cubes of their diameters, the first sphere will
have 3 x 3 x 3 = 27 times the volume of the unit sphere, and will
therefore be large enough to contain 27 stars; the second will have 125
times the volume, and will therefore contain 125 stars, and so on with
the successive spheres. For instance, the sphere of radius 7 has room
for 343 stars, but of this space 125 parts belong to the spheres inside
of it; there is, therefore, room for 218 stars between the spheres of
radii 5 and 7.

HERSCHEL designates the several distances of these layers of stars as
orders; the stars between spheres 1 and 3 are of the first order of
distance, those between 3 and 5 of the second order, and so on.
Comparing the room for stars between the several spheres with the number
of stars of the several magnitudes which actually exists in the sky, he
found the result to be as follows:

  --------------------------------------------------------
    Order of  |  Number of   |             |  Number of
    Distance. | Stars there  |  Magnitude. | Stars of that
              | is Room for. |             |  Magnitude.
  --------------------------------------------------------
    1........ |      26      |      1      |      17
    2........ |      98      |      2      |      57
    3........ |     218      |      3      |     206
    4........ |     386      |      4      |     454
    5........ |     602      |      5      |   1,161
    6........ |     866      |      6      |   6,103
    7........ |   1,178      |      7      |   6,146
    8........ |   1,538      |             |
  ---------------------------------------------------------

The result of this comparison is, that if the order of magnitudes could
indicate the distance of the stars, it would denote at first a gradual
and afterward a very abrupt condensation of them, at and beyond the
region of the sixth-magnitude stars.

If we assume the brightness of any star to be inversely proportional to
the square of its distance, it leads to a scale of distance different
from that adopted by HERSCHEL, so that a sixth-magnitude star on the
common scale would be about of the eighth order of distance according to
this scheme--that is, we must remove a star of the first magnitude to
eight times its actual distance to make it shine like a star of the
sixth magnitude.

On the scheme here laid down, HERSCHEL subsequently assigned the _order_
of distance of various objects, mostly star-clusters, and his estimates
of these distances are still quoted. They rest on the fundamental
hypothesis which has been explained, and the error in the assumption of
equal intrinsic brilliancy for all stars affects these estimates. It is
perhaps probable that the hypothesis of equal brilliancy for all stars
is still more erroneous than the hypothesis of equal distribution, and
it may well be that there is a very large range indeed in the actual
dimensions and in the intrinsic brilliancy of stars at the same order of
distance from us, so that the tenth-magnitude stars, for example, may be
scattered throughout the spheres which HERSCHEL would assign to the
seventh, eighth, ninth, tenth, eleventh, twelfth, and thirteenth
magnitudes. However this may be, the fact remains that it is from
HERSCHEL'S groundwork that future investigators must build. He found the
whole subject in utter confusion. By his observations, data for the
solution of some of the most general questions were accumulated, and in
his memoirs, which STRUVE well calls "immortal," he brought the
scattered facts into order and gave the first bold outlines of a
reasonable theory. He is the founder of a new branch of astronomy.


            _Researches for a Scale of Celestial Measures.
                        Distances of the Stars._

If the stars are _supposed_ all of the same absolute brightness, their
brightness to the eye will depend only upon their distance from us. If
we call the brightness of one of the fixed stars at the distance of
_Sirius_, which may be used as the unity of distance, 1, then if it is
moved to the distance 2, its apparent brightness will be one-fourth; if
to the distance 3, one-ninth; if to the distance 4, one-sixteenth, and
so on, the apparent brightness diminishing as the square of the distance
increases. The distance may be taken as an order of magnitude. Stars at
the _distances_ two, three, four, etc., HERSCHEL called of the second,
third, and fourth magnitudes.

By a series of experiments, the details of which cannot be given here,
HERSCHEL determined the space-penetrating power of each of his
telescopes. The twenty-foot would penetrate into space seventy-five
times farther than the naked eye; the twenty-five foot, ninety-six
times; and the forty-foot, one hundred and ninety-two times. If the
seventh-magnitude stars are those just visible to the naked eye, and if
we still suppose all stars to be of equal intrinsic brightness, such
seventh-magnitude stars would remain visible in the forty-foot, even if
removed to 1,344 times the distance of _Sirius_ (1,344 = 7 x 192).
If, further, we suppose that the visibility of a star is strictly
proportional to the total intensity of the light from it which strikes
the eye, then a condensed cluster of 25,000 stars of the 1,344th
magnitude could still be seen in the forty-foot at a distance where each
star would have become 25,000 times fainter, that is, at about 158 times
the distance of _Sirius_ (158 x 158 = 24,964). The light from the
nearest star requires some three years to reach the earth. From a star
1,344 times farther it would require about 4,000 years, and for such a
cluster as we have imagined no less than 600,000 years are needed. That
is, the light by which we see such a group has not just now left it.
On the contrary, it has been travelling through space for centuries and
centuries since it first darted forth. It is the ancient history of such
groups that we are studying now, and it was thus that HERSCHEL declared
that telescopes penetrated into time as well as into space.

Other more exact researches on the relative light of stars were made by
HERSCHEL. These were only one more attempt to obtain a scale of
celestial distances, according to which some notion of the limits and of
the interior dimensions of the universe could be gained. Two telescopes,
_exactly equal_ in every respect, were chosen and placed side by side.
Pairs of stars which were _exactly equal_, were selected by means of
them. By diminishing the aperture of one telescope directed to a bright
star, and keeping the other telescope unchanged and directed to a
fainter star, the two stars could be equalized in light, and, from the
relative size of the apertures, the relative light of this pair of stars
could be accurately computed, and so on for other pairs. This was the
first use of the method of _limiting apertures_. His general results
were that the stars of the first magnitude would still remain visible to
the naked eye, even if they were at a distance from us _twelve_ times
their actual distance.

This method received a still further development at his hands. He did
not leave it until he had gained all the information it was capable of
giving. He prepared a set of telescopes collecting 4, 9, 16, etc.
(2 x 2, 3 x 3, 4 x 4, etc.), times as much light as the naked eye.
These were to extend the determinations of distance to the telescopic
stars. For example, a certain portion of the heavens which he examined
contained no star visible to the naked eye, but many telescopic stars.
We cannot say that no one of these is as bright in itself as some of our
first-magnitude stars. The smallest telescope of the set showed a large
number of stars; these must, then, be _twice_ as far from us, on the
average, as the stars just visible to the naked eye. But first-magnitude
stars, like _Sirius_, _Procyon_, _Arcturus_, etc., become just visible
to the eye if removed to twelve times their present distance. Hence the
stars seen in this first telescope of the set were between twelve and
twenty-four times as far from us as _Arcturus_, for example.

"At least," as HERSCHEL says, "we are certain that if stars of the size
and lustre of _Sirius_, _Arcturus_, etc., were removed into the
profundity of space I have mentioned, they would then appear like the
stars which I saw." With the next telescope, which collected nine times
more light than the eye, and brought into view objects three times more
distant, other and new stars appeared, which were then (3 x 12)
thirty-six times farther from us than _Arcturus_. In the same way, the
seven-foot reflector showed stars 204 times, the ten-foot 344 times,
the twenty-foot 900 times farther from us than the average
first-magnitude star. As the light from such a star requires three years
to reach us, the light from the faintest stars seen by the twenty-foot
would require 2,700 years (3 x 900).

But HERSCHEL was now (1817) convinced that the twenty-foot telescope
could not penetrate to the boundaries of the Milky Way; the faintest
stars of the Galaxy must then be farther from us even than nine hundred
times the distance of _Arcturus_, and their light must be at least 3,000
years old when it reaches us.

There is no escaping a certain part of the consequences established by
HERSCHEL. It is indeed true that unless a particular star is of the same
intrinsic brightness as our largest stars, this reasoning does not apply
to it; in just so far as the average star is less bright than the
average brightness of our largest stars, will the numbers which HERSCHEL
obtained be diminished. But for every star of which his hypothesis is
true, we may assert that his conclusions are true, and no one can deny,
with any show of reason, that, on the whole, his suppositions must be
valid. On the whole, the stars which we call faint are farther from us
than the brighter ones; and, on the whole, the brilliancy of our
brightest and nearest stars is not very far from the brilliancy of the
average star in space. We cannot yet define the word _very_ by a
numerical ratio.

The _method_ struck out by HERSCHEL was correct; it is for his
successors to look for the special cases and limitations, to answer the
question, At a certain distance from us, what are the variations which
actually take place in the brilliancy and the sizes of stars? The answer
to this question is to be found in the study of the clusters of regular
forms, where we _know_ the stars to be all at the same distance from us.


                    _Researches on Light and Heat, Etc._

Frequently in the course of his astronomical work, HERSCHEL found
himself confronted by questions of physics which could not be
immediately answered in the state of the science at that time. In his
efforts to find a method for determining the dimensions of the stellar
universe, he was finally led, as has been shown, to regard the
brightness of a star as, in general, the best attainable measure of its
distance from us. His work, however, was done with telescopes of various
dimensions and powers, and it was therefore necessary to find some law
for comparing the different results among themselves as well as with
those given by observations with an unassisted eye. This necessity
prompted an investigation, published in 1800, in which, after drawing
the distinction between absolute and intrinsic brightness, HERSCHEL gave
an expression for the _space-penetrating power_ of a telescope. The
reasoning at the base of this conception was as follows.

The ratio of the light entering the eye when directed toward a star, to
the whole light given out by the star, would be as the area of the pupil
of the eye to the area of the whole sphere having the star as a centre
and our distance from the star as a radius. If the eye is assisted by a
telescope, the ratio is quite different. In that case the ratio of the
light which enters the eye to the whole light, would be as the area of
the mirror or object-glass to the area of the whole sphere having the
star as a centre and its distance as a radius. Thus the light received
by the _eye_ in the two cases would be as the area of the pupil is to
the area of the object-glass. For instance, if the pupil has a diameter
of two-fifths of an inch, and the mirror a diameter of four inches, then
a hundred times as much light would enter the eye when assisted by the
telescope as when unarmed, since the _area_ of the pupil is
one-hundredth the _area_ of the objective.

If a particular star is just visible to the naked eye, it will be quite
bright if viewed with this special telescope, which makes it one hundred
times more brilliant in appearance. If we could move the star bodily
away from us to a distance ten times its present distance, we could thus
reduce its brightness, as seen with the telescope, to what it was at
first, as seen with the eye alone, _i. e._, to bare visibility. Moving
the star to ten times its present distance would increase the surface of
the sphere which it illuminates a hundred-fold. We cannot move any
special star, but we can examine stars of all brightnesses, and thus
(presumably) of all distances.

HERSCHEL'S argument was, then, as follows: Since with such a telescope
one can see a star ten times as far off as is possible to the naked eye,
this telescope has the power of penetrating into space ten times farther
than the eye alone. But this number ten, also, expresses the ratio of
the diameter of the objective to that of the pupil of the eye,
consequently the general law is that the _space-penetrating power_ of a
telescope is found by dividing the diameter of the mirror in inches by
two-fifths. The diameter of the pupil of the eye (two-fifths of an inch)
HERSCHEL determined by many measures.

This simple ratio would only hold good, however, provided no more light
were lost by the repeated reflections and refractions in the telescope
than in the eye. That light must be so lost was evident, but no data
existed for determining the loss. HERSCHEL was thus led to a long series
of photometric experiments on the reflecting powers of the metals used
in his mirrors, and on the amount of light transmitted by lenses.
Applying the corrections thus deduced experimentally, he found that the
space-penetrating power of his twenty-foot telescope, with which he made
his star-gauges, was sixty-one times that of the unassisted eye, while
the space-penetrating power of his great forty-foot telescope was one
hundred and ninety-two times that of the eye. In support of his
important conclusions HERSCHEL had an almost unlimited amount of
experimental data in the records of his observations, of which he made
effective use.

By far the most important of HERSCHEL'S work in the domain of pure
physics was published in the same year (1800), and related to radiant
heat. The investigation of the space-penetrating powers of telescopes
was undertaken for the sole purpose of aiding him in measuring the
dimensions of the stellar universe, and there was no temptation for him
to pursue it beyond the limits of its immediate usefulness. But here,
though the first hint leading to remarkable discoveries was a direct
consequence of his astronomical work, the novelty and interest of the
phenomena observed induced him to follow the investigation very far
beyond the mere solution of the practical question in which it
originated.

Having tried many varieties of shade-glasses between the eye-piece of
his telescope and the eye, in order to reduce the inordinate degree of
heat and light transmitted by the instrument when directed towards the
sun, he observed that certain combinations of colored glasses permitted
very little light to pass, but transmitted so much heat that they could
not be used; while, on the other hand, different combinations and
differently colored glasses would stop nearly all the heat, but allow an
inconveniently great amount of light to pass. At the same time he
noticed, in the various experiments, that the images of the sun were of
different colors. This suggested the question as to whether there was
not a different heating power proper to each color of the spectrum. On
comparing the readings of sensitive thermometers exposed in different
portions of an intense solar spectrum, he found that, beginning with the
violet end, he came to the maximum of light long before that of heat,
which lay at the other extremity, that is, near the red. By several
experiments it appeared that the maximum of illumination, _i. e._, the
yellow, had little more than half the heat of the full red rays; and
from other experiments he concluded that even the full red fell short of
the maximum of heat, which, perhaps, lay even a little beyond the limits
of the visible spectrum.

    "In this case," he says, "radiant heat will at least partly, if not
    chiefly, consist, if I may be permitted the expression, of invisible
    light; that is to say, of rays coming from the sun, that have such a
    momentum[35] as to be unfit for vision. And admitting, as is highly
    probable, that the organs of sight are only adapted to receive
    impressions from particles of a certain momentum, it explains why
    the maximum of illumination should be in the middle of the
    refrangible rays; as those which have greater or less momenta are
    likely to become equally unfit for the impression of sight."

In his second paper on this subject, published in the same year,
HERSCHEL describes the experiments which led to the conclusion given
above. This paper contains a remarkably interesting passage which
admirably illustrates HERSCHEL'S philosophic method.

    "To conclude, if we call light, those rays which illuminate objects,
    and radiant heat, those which heat bodies, it may be inquired
    whether light be essentially different from radiant heat? In answer
    to which I would suggest that we are not allowed, by the rules of
    philosophizing, to admit two different causes to explain certain
    effects, if they may be accounted for by one. . . . If this be a true
    account of the solar heat, for the support of which I appeal to my
    experiments, it remains only for us to admit that such of the rays
    of the sun as have the refrangibility of those which are contained
    in the prismatic spectrum, by the construction of the organs of
    sight, are admitted under the appearance of light and colors, and
    that the rest, being stopped in the coats and humors of the eye, act
    on them, as they are known to do on all the other parts of our body,
    by occasioning a sensation of heat."
