with blunted weapons; his eyes never left those of his adversary, a
half smile played on his lips, and although drops of perspiration from
his forehead showed how great were his exertions, his breathing hardly
quickened.

Twice Sweyn drew back for breath, and Edmund each time, instead of
pressing him, dropped the point of his sword and waited for him to
renew the combat. At present he had scarce struck a blow, and while his
own shield was riven in several places and his helmet dinted, those of
Sweyn were unmarked.

At the third assault Sweyn came up determined to end the conflict, and
renewed the attack with greater fury than before. Three times his sword
descended with tremendous force, but each time it met the blade of the
Saxon; the fourth time his arm was raised, then there was a flash and a
sudden shout from the crowd.

With a mighty blow Edmund had smitten full on his opponent's uplifted
arm, and, striking it just above the elbow, the sword clove through
flesh and bone, and the severed limb, still grasping the sword, fell to
the ground.

A loud shout of approval burst from the Danes. Although the conqueror
was their enemy they appreciated so highly the virtues of coolness and
courage that their applause was no less hearty than if the victor had
been a countryman. Sweyn had fallen almost the instant the blow had
been struck. The ring was at once broken up, and his friends ran to
him. The Norsemen were adepts at the treatment of wounds, and
everything had been prepared in case of emergencies.

A bandage was instantly tied tightly round the upper part of the arm to
stop the rush of blood, and the stump was then dipped into boiling
pitch, and Sweyn, who had become almost instantly insensible from the
loss of blood, was carried to his father's tent. According to custom
handsome presents of swords and armour were made to Edmund by those who
had won by his success.

It would have been considered churlish to refuse them, and Edmund had
no thought of doing so, for he needed money, and these things in those
days were equivalent to wealth.

"You have done well and gallantly indeed, my young friend," Siegbert
said as, followed by several slaves bearing Edmund's presents, they
returned to the tent. "I am glad you did not slay him, for I think not
that he will die. Such a blow given in battle would assuredly have been
fatal, but here the means of stanching the blood were at hand, and I
trust for Bijorn's sake that he will recover; but whether or no he
brought it on himself."

On reaching the tent Freda ran out radiant.

"I hear that you have conquered," she said, "and I am glad indeed; it
serves him right, for all say that he forced the fight upon you."

"I did not know that your sympathies were so strongly against Sweyn,"
Siegbert said in a somewhat reproachful tone. "He has always been your
devoted follower."

"He has always been my tyrant, father, for he has always insisted on my
doing his pleasure; but if he had been ten times my follower, and had
been a valiant warrior instead of a youth, and I a maiden of twenty
instead of a girl of fifteen, I should still be glad that he was
conquered, because without any reason for quarrel he has sought to slay
this Saxon youth who did us such great service, and to whom as he knew
we were so indebted."

Siegbert smiled. "Hitherto I have wondered, daughter mine, at the
reason which induced Sweyn to challenge Edmund, but now methinks I
understand it. Sweyn has, as his father has told me, youth as he is,
set his heart on winning your hand when you shall reach the age of
womanhood, and it is just because Edmund has done you and me service
that he hates him. You are young, child, for your bright eyes to have
caused bloodshed; if you go on like this there will be no end to the
trouble I shall have on your account before I get you fairly wedded."

Freda coloured hotly.

"That is nonsense, father; another five years will be soon enough to
begin to think of such things. At any rate," she said with a laugh, "I
am rid of Sweyn, for he can hardly expect me ever to love a one-armed
man."

"There have been brave warriors," Seigbert said, "with but one arm."

"It makes no difference," Freda laughed; "if he had fifty arms I should
never love him."

Edmund now entreated Siegbert to repay himself from the presents he had
received for the goods he had the evening before given to Bijorn as the
price of his liberty, but this the jarl would not hear of. Edmund then
begged him to buy with them, of Bijorn, the four Saxon slaves with whom
he had agreed to attempt an escape, and to expend the rest of the
presents in freeing as many other Saxon prisoners as he could.

This Siegbert did, and by the evening Edmund had the satisfaction of
finding around him twelve Saxons whose freedom he had purchased. He
remained as the guest of Siegbert until the expedition sailed in the
last week of March. Then with the twelve Saxons he embarked in
Siegbert's ship, which, instead of keeping with the others, sailed for
the mouth of the Thames. The wind was favourable and the passage quick,
and three days after sailing Edmund and his companions were disembarked
on the coast of Kent. His adieus with Siegbert were hearty and earnest.

"I would you had been a Northman," the jarl said, "for I love you as a
son, and methinks that when the time comes, had you been so inclined,
you might have really stood in that relation to me, for I guess that my
little Freda would not have said no had you asked her hand; but now our
paths are to part. I shall never war again with the Saxons, for indeed
there is but scant booty to be gained there, while you are not likely
again to be cast upon our shores; but should the fates ever throw us
together again, remember that you have a friend for life in Jarl
Siegbert."

Freda, who had accompanied her father as usual, wept bitterly at the
parting, which, however, she did not deem to be as final as it appeared
to her father; for the evening before, as she was standing on the poop
with Edmund, he had said to her, "You will not forget me, Freda; we are
both very young yet; but some day, when the wars are over, and England
no longer requires my sword, I will seek you again."

"Is that a promise, Edmund?"

"Yes, Freda, a solemn promise."

"I will wait for you," she said simply, "if it were till the end of my
life."

The youth and girl ratified the promise by a kiss, and Freda, as
through her tears she watched the boat which conveyed Edmund and his
companions to shore, felt sure that some day she should see her Saxon
hero again.

On landing, Edmund soon learned that the Danes were everywhere masters,
and that since the autumn nothing had been heard of the king, who was
supposed to be somewhere in hiding.

In every village through which they passed they found evidence of the
mastership of the Danes. Many of the houses were burnt or destroyed,
the people were all dressed in the poorest garb, and their sad faces
and listless mien told of the despair which everywhere prevailed. In
every church the altars had been thrown down, the holy emblems and
images destroyed, the monks and priests had fled across the sea or had
been slain.

The Danish gods, Thor and Woden, had become the divinities of the land,
and the Saxons, in whom Christianity had but recently supplanted the
superstitions of paganism, were fast returning to the worship of the
pagan gods. Edmund and his companions were shocked at the change. On
reaching home they found that the ravages of the Danes had here been
particularly severe, doubtless in revenge for the heavy loss which had
been sustained by them in their attack upon Edmund's fortification. His
own abode had been completely levelled to the ground, and the villages
and farm-houses for the most part wholly destroyed. His people were
lying in rude shelters which they had raised, but their condition was
very much better than that of the people in general.

The news of Edmund's return spread like wildfire, and excited the most
extreme joy among his people, who had long given him up for lost. He
found to his delight that the Dragon had returned safely, and that she
was laid up in her old hiding-place. The great amount of spoil with
which she was loaded had enabled her crew largely to assist their
friends, and it was this which had already raised the condition of the
people above that of their neighbours. Houses were being gradually
rebuilt, animals had been brought from districts which had been less
ravaged by the Danes, and something approaching comfort was being
rapidly restored.

Upon the day after Edmund's return Egbert arrived. Feeling sure of
Edmund's death he had taken no steps towards rebuilding the house, but
was living a wild life in the woods, when the news reached him that
Edmund had reappeared. His own large share of the booty with that of
Edmund he had buried, with the portion set aside for the king, in the
wood near the spot where the Dragon was laid up.

They had passed up the Parrot at night unobserved by the Danes, and
after taking the masts out of the Dragon, and dismantling her, they had
laid her up in the hole near the river where she was built. There was
little fear of her discovery there, for the Danes were for the most
part gathered in winter quarters at the great camp near Chippenham.

Egbert's delight at the reappearance of Edmund was unbounded, for he
loved him as a son, and it was a long time before their joy at the
meeting was sufficiently calmed down to enable them to tell each other
the events which had happened since they parted three months before.
Egbert's narrative was indeed brief. He had remained two or three days
off the coast of Norway in the lingering hope that Edmund might in some
way have escaped death, and might yet come off and join him. At the end
of a week this hope had faded, and he sailed for England. Being winter,
but few Danish galleys were at sea, and he had encountered none from
the time he set sail until he arrived off the coast at the mouth of the
Parrot.

He had entered the river at night so as to be unseen by any in the
village at its mouth, and had, after the Dragon was laid up, passed his
time in the forest. Edmund's narration was much more lengthy, and
Egbert was surprised indeed to find that his kinsman owed his freedom
to the jarl whose vessel they had captured at the mouth of the Humber.




CHAPTER XI: THE ISLE OF ATHELNEY


Edmund spent a month on his lands, moving about among his vassals and
dwelling in their abodes. He inspired them by his words with fresh
spirit and confidence, telling them that this state of things could not
last, and that he was going to join the king, who doubtless would soon
call them to take part in a fresh effort to drive out their cruel
oppressors. Edmund found that although none knew with certainty the
hiding-place of King Alfred, it was generally reported that he had
taken refuge in the low lands of Somersetshire, and Athelney was
specially named as the place which he had made his abode.

"It is a good omen," Edmund said, "for Athelney lies close to the
Parrot, where my good ship the Dragon is laid away."

After visiting all the villages in his earldom Edmund started with
Egbert and four young men, whom he might use as messengers, for the
reported hiding-place of the king. First they visited the Dragon, and
found her lying undisturbed; then they followed the river down till
they reached the great swamps which extended for a considerable
distance near its mouth. After much wandering they came upon the hut of
a fisherman. The man on hearing the footsteps came to his door with a
bent bow. When he saw that the new-comers were Saxons he lowered the
arrow which was already fitted to the string.

"Can you tell us," Edmund said, "which is the way to Athelney? We know
that it is an island amidst these morasses, but we are strangers to the
locality and cannot find it."

"And you might search for weeks," the man said, "without finding it, so
thickly is it surrounded by deep swamps and woods. But what want ye
there?"

"Men say," Edmund replied, "that King Alfred is hidden there. We are
faithful followers of his. I am Ealdorman Edmund of Sherborne, and have
good news for the king."

"If ye are indeed the Ealdorman of Sherborne, of whose bravery I have
heard much, I will right willingly lead you to Athelney if you will,
but no king will you find there. There are a few fugitives from the
Danes scattered here and there in these marshes, but none, so far as I
know, of any rank or station. However, I will lead you thither should
you still wish to go."

Edmund expressed his desire to visit the island even if the king were
not there. The man at once drew out a small boat from a hiding-place
near his hut. It would hold four at most. Edmund and Egbert stepped in
with one of their followers, charging the others to remain at the hut
until they received further instructions. The fisherman with a long
pole took his place in the bow of the boat and pushed off. For some
hours they made their way through the labyrinth of sluggish and narrow
channels of the morass. It was a gloomy journey. The leafless trees
frequently met overhead; the long rushes in the wetter parts of the
swamp rustled as the cold breezes swept across them, and a slight
coating of snow which had fallen the previous night added to the dreary
aspect of the scene. At last they came upon sharply rising ground.

"This is Athelney," the fisherman said, "a good hiding-place truly;
for, as you see, it rises high over the surrounding country, which is
always swampy from the waters of the Parrot and Theme, and at high
tides the salt water of the sea fills all these waterways, and the
trees rise from a broad sheet of sea. No Dane has ever yet set foot
among these marshes; and were there but provisions to keep them alive,
a safe refuge might be found on this island for hundreds of fugitives.
Will you be returning to-night?"

"That I cannot tell you," Edmund replied; "but at any rate I will hire
you and your boat to remain at my service for a week, and will pay you
a far higher price than you can obtain by your fishing."

The fisherman readily agreed, and Edmund and his companions made their
way into the heart of the island. It was of some extent, and rose above
the tree-tops of the surrounding country. Presently they came to a
cottage. A man came out.

"What do you seek?" he asked.

"You have fugitives in refuge here," Edmund said. "Know you if among
them is our good King Alfred?" The man looked astonished.

"A pretty place to seek for a king!" he replied. "There are a few
Saxons in hiding here. Some live by fishing, some chop wood; but for
the most part they are an idle and thriftless lot, and methinks have
fled hither rather to escape from honest work or to avoid the penalties
of crimes than for any other reason."

"How may we find them?" Edmund asked.

"They are scattered over the island. There are eight or ten dwellers
here like myself, and several of them have one or more of these fellows
with them; others have built huts for themselves and shift as they can;
but it is a hard shift, I reckon, and beech-nuts and acorns, eked out
with an occasional fish caught in the streams, is all they have to live
upon. I wonder that they do not go back to honest work among their
kinsfolk."

"Ah!" Edmund said, "you do not know here how cruel are the ravages of
the Danes; our homes are broken up and our villages destroyed, and
every forest in the land is peopled with fugitive Saxons. Did you know
that you would speak less harshly of those here. At any rate the man I
seek is young and fair-looking, and would, I should think"--and he
smiled as he remembered Alfred's studious habits--"be one of the most
shiftless of those here."

"There is such a one," the man replied, "and several times friends of
his have been hither to see him. He dwells at my next neighbour's, who
is often driven well-nigh out of her mind--for she is a dame with a
shrewish tongue and sharp temper--by his inattention. She only asks of
him that he will cut wood and keep an eye over her pigs, which wander
in the forest, in return for his food; and yet, simple as are his
duties, he is for ever forgetting them. I warrant me, the dame would
not so long have put up with him had he not been so fair and helpless.
However bad-tempered a woman may be, she has always a tender corner in
her heart for this sort of fellow. There, you can take this path
through the trees and follow it on; it will take you straight to her
cottage."

The description given by the man tallied so accurately with that of the
king that Edmund felt confident that he was on the right track. The
fact, too, that from time to time men had come to see this person added
to the probability of his being the king. Presently they came upon the
hut. A number of pigs were feeding under the trees around it; the door
was open, and the shrill tones of a woman's voice raised in anger could
be heard as they approached.

"You are an idle loon, and I will no longer put up with your ways, and
you may seek another mistress. You are worse than useless here. I do
but ask you to watch these cakes while I go over to speak with my
neighbour, and inquire how she and the child born yestereven are
getting on, and you go to sleep by the fire and suffer the case to burn.

"You were not asleep, you say? then so much the worse. Where were your
eyes, then?  And where was your nose? Why, I smelt the cakes a hundred
yards away, and you sitting over them, and as you say awake, neither
saw them burning nor smelt them! You are enough to break an honest
woman's heart with your mooning ways. You are ready enough to eat when
the meal-time comes, but are too lazy even to watch the food as it
cooks. I tell you I will have no more of you. I have put up with you
till I am verily ashamed of my own patience; but this is too much, and
you must go your way, for I will have no more of you."

At this moment Edmund and Egbert appeared at the door of the hut. As he
had expected from the nature of the colloquy Edmund saw King Alfred
standing contrite and ashamed before the angry dame.

"My beloved sovereign!" he cried, running in and falling on his knees.

"My trusted Edmund," Alfred exclaimed cordially, "right glad am I to
see you, and you too, my valiant Egbert; truly I feared that the good
ship Dragon had long since fallen into the hands of our enemy."

"The Dragon lies not many miles hence, your majesty, in the hole in
which she was built, by the river Parrot; she has done bravely and has
brought home a rich store of booty, a large share of which has been
hidden away for your majesty, and can be brought here in a few hours
should you wish it."

"Verily I am glad to hear it, Edmund, for I have long been penniless;
and I have great need of something at least to pay this good woman for
all the trouble she has been at with me, and for her food which my
carelessness has destroyed, as you may have heard but now."

Edmund and Egbert joined in the king's merry laugh. The dame looked a
picture of consternation and fell upon her knees.

"Pardon me, your majesty," she cried; "to think that I have ventured to
abuse our good King Alfred, and have even in mine anger lifted my hand
against him!"

"And with right good-will too," the king said laughing. "Never fear,
good dame, your tongue has been rough but your heart has been kindly,
or never would you have borne so long with so shiftless a serving-man.
But leave us now, I pray ye, for I have much to say to my good friends
here. And now, Edmund, what news do you bring? I do not ask after the
doings of the Dragon, for that no doubt is a long story which you shall
tell me later, but how fares it with my kingdom? I have been in
correspondence with several of my thanes, who have from time to time
sent me news of what passes without. From what they say I deem that the
time for action is at last nigh at hand. The people are everywhere
desperate at the oppression and exactions of the Danes, and are ready
to risk everything to free themselves from so terrible a yoke. I fled
here and gave up the strife because the Saxons deemed anything better
than further resistance. Now that they have found out their error it is
time to be stirring again."

"That is so," Edmund said; "Egbert and I have found the people
desperate at their slavery, and ready to risk all did a leader but
appear. My own people will all take up arms the instant they receive my
summons; they have before now proved their valour, and in my crew of
the Dragon you have a body which will, I warrant me, pierce through any
Danish line."

"This tallies with what I have heard," Alfred said, "and in the spring
I will again raise my banner; but in the meantime I will fortify this
place. There are but two or three spots where boats can penetrate
through the morasses; were strong stockades and banks erected at each
landing-place we might hold the island in case of defeat against any
number of the enemy."

"That shall be done," Edmund said, "and quickly. I have a messenger
here with me, and others waiting outside the swamp, and can send and
bring my crew of the Dragon here at once."

"Let that be one man's mission," the king said; "the others I will send
off with messages to the thanes of Somerset, who are only awaiting my
summons to take up arms. I will bid them send hither strong working
parties, but to make no show in arms until Easter, at which time I will
again spread the Golden Dragon to the winds. The treasure you speak of
will be right welcome, for all are so impoverished by the Danes that
they live but from hand to mouth, and we must at least buy provisions
to maintain the parties working here. Arms, too, must be made, for
although many have hidden their weapons, the Danes have seized vast
quantities, having issued an order that any Saxon found with arms shall
be at once put to death. Money will be needed to set all the smithies
to work at the manufacture of pikes and swords. Hides must be bought
for the manufacture of shields. It will be best to send orders to the
ealdormen and thanes to send hither privately the smiths, armourers,
and shield-makers in the villages and towns. They cannot work with the
Danes ever about, but must set up smithies here. They must bring their
tools and such iron as they can carry; what more is required we must
buy at the large towns and bring privately in carts to the edge of the
morass. The utmost silence and secrecy must be observed, that the Danes
may obtain no news of our preparations until we are ready to burst out
upon them."

A fortnight later Athelney presented a changed appearance. A thousand
men were gathered there. Trees had been cut down, a strong fort erected
