The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Settler and the Savage, by R.M. Ballantyne

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Settler and the Savage

Author: R.M. Ballantyne

Release Date: June 6, 2007 [EBook #21701]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SETTLER AND THE SAVAGE ***




Produced by Nick Hodson of London, England




THE SETTLER AND THE SAVAGE, BY R.M. BALLANTYNE.



CHAPTER ONE.

THE WILD KARROO.

A solitary horseman--a youth in early manhood--riding at a snail's pace
over the great plains, or karroo, of South Africa.  His chin on his
breast; his hands in the pockets of an old shooting-coat; his legs in
ragged trousers, and his feet in worn-out boots.  Regardless of
stirrups, the last are dangling.  The reins hang on the neck of his
steed, whose head may be said to dangle from its shoulders, so nearly
does its nose approach the ground.  A felt hat covers the youth's curly
black head, and a double-barrelled gun is slung across his broad
shoulders.

We present this picture to the reader as a subject of contemplation.

It was in the first quarter of the present century that the youth
referred to--Charlie Considine by name--rode thus meditatively over that
South African karroo.  His depression was evidently not due to lack of
spirit, for, when he suddenly awoke from his reverie, drew himself up
and shook back his hair, his dark eyes opened with something like a
flash.  They lost some of their fire, however, as he gazed round on the
hot plain which undulated like the great ocean to the horizon, where a
line of blue indicated mountains.

The truth is that Charlie Considine was lost--utterly lost on the
karroo!  That his horse was in the same lost condition became apparent
from its stopping without orders and looking round languidly with a
sigh.

"Come, Rob Roy," said the youth, gathering up the reins and patting the
steed's neck, "this will never do.  You and I must not give in to our
first misfortune.  No doubt the want of water for two days is hard to
bear, but we are strong and young both of us.  Come, let's try at least
for a sheltering bush to sleep under, before the sun goes down."

Animated by the cheering voice, if not by the words, of its rider, the
horse responded to the exhortation by breaking into a shuffling canter.

After a short time the youth came in sight of what appeared to be a herd
of cattle in the far distance.  In eager expectation he galloped towards
them and found that his conjectures were correct.  They were cattle in
charge of one of that lowest of the human race, a Bushman.  The
diminutive, black-skinned, and monkey-faced creature was nearly naked.
He carried a sheepskin kaross, or blanket, on his left shoulder, and a
knobbed stick, or "kerrie," in his right hand.

"Can you speak English?" asked Considine as he rode up.

The Bushman looked vacant and made no reply.

"Where is your master's house?" asked the youth.

A stare was the only answer.

"Can't you speak, you dried-up essence of stupidity!" exclaimed Charlie
with impatience.

At this the Bushman uttered something with so many klicks, klucks, and
gurgles in it that his interrogator at once relinquished the use of the
tongue, and took to signs, but with no better success, his efforts
having only the effect of causing the mouth of the Bushman to expand
from ear to ear.  Uttering a few more klicks and gurgles, he pointed in
the direction of the setting sun.  As Considine could elicit no fuller
information he bade him a contemptuous farewell and rode away in the
direction indicated.

He had not gone far when a dark speck became visible on the horizon
directly in front.

"Ho!  Rob," he exclaimed, "that looks like something--a bush, is it?  If
so, we may find water there, who knows--eh?  No, it can't be a bush, for
it moves," he added in a tone of disappointment.  "Why, I do believe
it's an ostrich!  Well, if we can't find anything to drink, I'll try to
get something to eat."

Urging his jaded steed into a gallop, the youth soon drew near enough to
discover that the object was neither bush nor ostrich, but a horseman.

The times of which we write were unsettled.  Considine, although "lost,"
was sufficiently aware of his whereabouts to understand that he was near
the north-eastern frontier of Cape Colony.  He deemed it prudent,
therefore, to unsling his gun.  On drawing nearer he became convinced
from the appearance of the stranger that he could not be a Kafir.  When
close enough to perceive that he was a white man, mounted and armed much
like himself, he re-slung his gun, waved his cap in token of friendship,
and galloped forward with the confidence of youth.

The stranger proved to be a young man of about his own age--a little
over twenty--but much taller and more massive in frame.  He was, indeed,
a young giant, and bestrode a horse suitable to his weight.  He was clad
in the rough woollen and leathern garments worn by the frontier farmers,
or boers, of that period, and carried one of those long heavy flint-lock
guns, or "roers," which the Dutch-African colonist then deemed the most
effective weapon in the universe.

"Well met!" exclaimed Considine heartily, as he rode up.

"Humph! that depends on whether we meet as friends or foes," replied the
stranger, with a smile on his cheerful countenance that accorded ill
with the caution of his words.

"Well met, I say again, whether we be friends or foes," returned
Considine still more heartily, "for if we be friends we shall
fraternise; if we be foes we shall fight, and I would rather fight you
for love, hate, or fun, than die of starvation in the karroo."

"What is your name, and where do you come from?" demanded the stranger.

"One question at a time, if you please," answered the youth.  "My name
is Charles Considine.  What is yours?"

"Hans Marais."

"Well, Mr Marais, I come from England, which is my native home.  In the
coming I managed to get wrecked in Table Bay, landed at Capetown, joined
a frontier farmer, and came up here--a long and roughish journey, as
probably you know, and as my garments testify.  On the way I lost my
comrades, and in trying to find them lost myself.  For two days nothing
in the shape of meat or drink has passed my lips, and my poor horse has
fared little better in the way of drink, though the karroo-bush has
furnished him with food enough to keep his bones together.  So now, you
have my biography in brief, and if you be a man possessed of any powers
of sympathy, you will know what to do."

The young Dutchman held out his huge hand, which Considine grasped and
shook warmly.

"Come," he said, while a slight smile played on his bronzed countenance;
"I have nothing here to give you, but if you will come with me to yon
koppie you shall have both meat and drink."

The koppie to which he referred was a scarce discernible knoll on the
horizon.

Hans Marais seemed to be a man of few words, for he turned and galloped
away, without for some time uttering another syllable to his companion.
As for Considine, the thought of once more feasting on any sort of meat
and drink was so fascinating, in his then ravenous condition, that he
cared for nought else, and followed his guide in silence.

Soon the herbage on the plain became more luxuriant, and in half an hour
the two horsemen found themselves riding among scattered groups of
mimosa bushes, the thorns of which were from three to five inches long,
while their sweet fragrance scented the whole atmosphere.

On reaching the ridge of one of the undulations of the plain, Hans
Marais drew rein and gazed intently towards the distant horizon.  At the
same time Considine's horse pricked up its ears, pawed the ground, and
exhibited unwonted signs of a desire to advance.

"Hallo, Rob!" exclaimed its master, "what's wrong with you?"

"Your horse has been gifted by his Maker with a power," said Hans,
"which has been denied to man.  He scents water.  But before he shall
taste it he must help me to procure fresh meat.  Do you see the boks on
that koppie?"

"Do you mean those white specks like ostrich eggs on the hillock to the
right of the big bush?"

"The same.  These are springboks.  Ride away down by that hollow till
you get somewhat in their rear, and then drive them in the direction of
that clump of bushes on our left, just under the sun."

Without waiting for a reply Hans rode off at a gallop, and Considine
proceeded to obey orders.

A few minutes sufficed to bring him close to the springboks, which
beautiful antelopes no sooner observed him than, after one brief gaze of
surprise, they bounded away in the direction of the bushes indicated by
Hans,--conscious apparently of their superior fleetness, for they seemed
in no great haste, but leaped about as if half in play, one and another
taking an occasional spring of six feet or more into the air.  As they
passed the bushes towards which Considine drove them, a white puff was
seen to burst from them, and the huge roer of Hans Marais sent forth its
bellowing report.  It seemed as if the entire flock of boks had received
an electric shock, so high did they spring into the air.  Then they
dashed off at full speed, leaving one of their number dead upon the
plain.

When Considine came up he found that Hans had already disembowelled the
springbok, and was in the act of fastening the carcase on his horse
behind the saddle.  Remounting immediately, the hunter galloped towards
a mound, on the top of which the bushes formed a dense brake.  Skirting
this till he reached the other side, he pulled up, exclaiming--

"There, you'll find good water in the hollow; go drink, while I prepare
supper on the koppie."

Considine went off at once.  Indeed, he could not have done otherwise,
for his impatient horse took the bit in its mouth and galloped towards a
small pool of water, which was so yellow with mud that it resembled thin
pea-soup.

Thirsty though he was, the youth could not help smiling at his new
friend's idea of "good" water, but he was not in a condition to be
fastidious.  Jumping out of the saddle, he lay down on his breast,
dipped his lips into the muddy liquid, and drank with as much enjoyment
as if the beverage had been nectar--or Bass.  Rob Roy also stood, in a
state of perfect bliss, in the middle of the pool, sucking the water in
with unwearied vigour.  It seemed as if man and horse had laid a wager
as to who should drink most.  At last, the point of utmost capacity in
both was reached, and they retired with a sigh of contentment, Rob Roy
to browse on the plain, and his master to betake himself to the
encampment on the knoll, where Hans Marais quickly supplied him with
glorious steaks of springbok venison.

"Isn't it an enjoyable thing to eat when one is hungry, eh?" said
Considine, after half an hour's silent devotion to the duty in
hand.--"Why, where got you that?"

He referred to an ostrich egg which his companion had taken from a
saddle-bag, and in one end of which he was busy boring a hole.

"Found it in the sand just before I found you," said Hans.  "Did you
ever eat one?"

"No, never."

"Well then, you shall do so now, and I'll show you how the niggers here
make an omelet."

He planted the huge egg in the hot ashes as he spoke, and kept stirring
its contents with a piece of stick until sufficiently cooked.

"Not bad,--eh?"

"Glorious!" exclaimed Considine, smacking his lips.

Both youths continued to smack their lips over the egg until it was
finished, after which Charlie pronounced it not only a glorious but a
satisfying morsel.  This was doubtless true, for an ostrich egg is
considered equal to twenty-four hen's eggs.

Returning to the springbok steaks, the half-starved youth continued his
repast, while Hans Marais, having finished, extended his huge frame
beside the camp-fire, leaned upon his saddle, and smoked his pipe in
benignant contemplation of his companion.

"This is pleasant!" said Charlie, pausing, with a sigh, and looking up.

"Ja, it is pleasant," replied Hans.

"Ja!" repeated Charlie, quoting the Dutch "Yes" of the other; "are you a
Dutchman?"

"I am; at least I am a Cape colonist descended from Dutchmen.  Why are
you surprised?"

"Because," replied his companion, while he prepared another steak over
the embers, "you speak English so well that I could not have known it.
How came you to learn the language so perfectly?"

"My father, being wiser than some of his friends and neighbours," said
Hans, "sent me to Capetown to be educated.  I suppose that is the
reason.  We dwelt in the western part of the colony then, and I was the
eldest of the family.  When a number of us Dutchmen left that part of
the country--being disgusted with the Government,--and came up here, my
brothers and sister had to be taken from school.  This was a pity, for
education taught me to know that education is an inestimable blessing--
the want of it a heavy misfortune."

"True," remarked Considine.  But being still too busy with the steaks to
pursue the subject he merely added--"Does your father live near this?"

"About seven hours' ride, which, as I daresay you know, is forty-two
miles.  You shall go home with me to-morrow."

"How many are there of you?" asked Considine, looking at the young
Dutchman over a bone.  "Excuse my being so impolite," he added, "but
d'you know, one feels horribly like a tiger after a two days' fast."

"Don't stand on ceremony," said the other, with a laugh.  "When you are
satisfied we can converse.  There are fifteen of us: father, mother,
sister, and eleven boys besides myself.  I'll tell you about them all
after supper; meanwhile I'll go fetch the horses, for there are lions
about, as I daresay you know, and some of them are nearly as ravenous as
yourself."

Hans rose, put his pipe in the band of his broad-brimmed hat, and
sauntered heavily out of the thicket.

In a few minutes he returned, leading the horses, and then busied
himself in surrounding the camp with an almost impenetrable wall of
mimosa-thorn branches, the spikes of which were so tremendous that it
seemed as if nothing smaller than an elephant could force its way
through.  This done, he sat down and quietly refilled his pipe, while
Considine, having at last finished his meal, drew the embers of the fire
together, disposed his limbs comfortably on the ground, lay back on his
saddle, and prepared to enjoy a contemplative gaze at the cheering blaze
and an interrogative conversation with his new friend.

"Do you smoke?" asked Hans.

"No."

"Why?"

"Because it makes me sick, and I don't like it."

Hans looked surprised.  This was a new idea to him, and he sat for some
time pondering it; indeed, we may say with truth that he "smoked it" In
a few minutes he looked earnestly at the youth, and asked why he came to
the Cape.

"To make my fortune," answered Considine.

"Fortunes are not easily made at the Cape," was the grave reply.  "My
father has been making his fortune for the last quarter of a century,
and it's not made yet.--Why did you choose the Cape?"

"I didn't choose it."

"No?" said the Dutchman, with a look of surprise.

