hundred and thirty-eight neophytes also had deserted, ninety of whom
were afterwards brought in by Corporal Mesa. It had long been the
intention of the government to found more pueblos or towns, as well as
Missions in California, the former for the purpose of properly
colonizing the country. Governor Borica made some personal explorations,
and of three suggested sites finally chose that just across the river
Lorenzo from Santa Cruz. May 12, 1797, certain settlers who had been
recruited in Guadalajara arrived in a pitiable condition at Monterey;
and soon thereafter they were sent to the new site under the direction
of Comisionado Moraga, who was authorized to erect temporary shelters
for them. August 12 the superintendent of the formal foundation,
Cordoba, had all the surveying accomplished, part of an irrigating canal
dug, and temporary houses partially erected. In August, after the
viceroy had seen the estimated cost of the establishment, further
progress was arrested by want of funds. Before the end of the century
everybody concerned had come to the conclusion that the villa of
Brancifort was a great blunder,--the "settlers are a scandal to the
country by their immorality. They detest their exile, and render
no service."

In the meantime the Mission authorities protested vigorously against the
new settlement. It was located on the pasture grounds of the Indians;
the laws allowed the Missions a league in every direction, and trouble
would surely result. But the governor retorted, defending his choice of
a site, and claiming that the neophytes were dying off, there were no
more pagans to convert, and the neophytes already had more land and
raised more grain than they could attend to.

In 1805 Captain Goycoechea recommended that as there were no more
gentiles, the neophytes be divided between the Missions of Santa Clara
and San Juan, and the missionaries sent to new fields. Of course nothing
came of this.

In the decade 1820-1830 population declined rapidly, though in
live-stock the Mission about held its own, and in agriculture actually
increased. In 1823, however, there was another attempt to suppress it,
and this doubtless came from the conflicts between the villa of
Brancifort and the Mission. The effort, like the former one, was
unsuccessful.

In 1834-1835 Ignacio del Valle acted as comisionado, and put in effect
the order of secularization. His valuation of the property was $47,000,
exclusive of land and church property, besides $10,000 distributed to
the Indians. There were no subsequent distributions, yet the property
disappeared, for, in 1839, when Visitador Hartwell went to Santa Cruz,
he found only about one-sixth of the live-stock of the inventory of four
years before. The neophytes were organized into a pueblo named Figueroa
after the governor; but it was a mere organization in name, and the
condition of the ex-Mission was no different from that of any of
the others.

The statistics for the whole period of the Mission's existence,
1791-1834, are: baptisms, 2466; marriages, 847; deaths, 2035. The
largest population was 644 in 1798. The largest number of cattle was
3700 in 1828; horses, 900, in the same year; mules, 92, in 1805; sheep,
8300, in 1826.

In January, 1840, the tower fell, and a number of tiles were carried
off, a kind of premonition of the final disaster of 1851, when the walls
fell, and treasure seekers completed the work of demolition.

The community of the Mission was completely broken up in 1841-1842,
everything being regarded, henceforth, as part of Brancifort. In 1845
the lands, buildings, and fruit trees of the ex-Mission were valued at
less than $1000, and only about forty Indians were known to remain. The
Mission has now entirely disappeared.



CHAPTER XXII

LA SOLEDAD

The Mission of "Our Lady of Solitude" has only a brief record in written
history; but the little that is known and the present condition of the
ruins suggest much that has never been recorded.

Early in 1791 Padre Lasuen, who was searching for suitable locations for
two new Missions, arrived at a point midway between San Antonio and
Santa Clara. With quick perception he recognized the advantages of
Soledad, known to the Indians as _Chuttusgelis_. The name of this
region, bestowed by Crespi years previous, was suggestive of its
solitude and dreariness; but the wide, vacant fields indicated good
pasturage in seasons favored with much rain, and the possibility of
securing water for irrigation promised crops from the arid lands. Lasuen
immediately selected the most advantageous site for the new Mission, but
several months elapsed before circumstances permitted the erection of
the first rude structures.

On October ninth the Mission was finally established.

There were comparatively few Indians in that immediate region, and only
eleven converts were reported as the result of the efforts of the first
year. There was ample room for flocks and herds, and although the soil
was not of the best and much irrigation was necessary to produce good
crops, the padres with their persistent labors gradually increased their
possessions and the number of their neophytes. At the close of the ninth
year there were 512 Indians living at the Mission, and their property
included a thousand cattle, several thousand sheep, and a good supply of
horses. Five years later (in 1805) there were 727 neophytes, in spite of
the fact that a severe epidemic a few years previously had reduced their
numbers and caused many to flee from the Mission in fear. A new church
was begun in 1808.

On July 24, 1814, Governor Arrillaga, who had been taken seriously ill
while on a tour of inspection, and had hurried to Soledad to be under
the care of his old friend, Padre Ibanez, died there, and was buried,
July 26, under the center of the church.

For about forty years priests and natives lived a quiet, peaceful life
in this secluded valley, with an abundance of food and comfortable
shelter. That they were blessed with plenty and prosperity is evidenced
by the record that in 1829 they furnished $1150 to the Monterey
presidio. At one time they possessed over six thousand cattle; and in
1821 the number of cattle, sheep, horses, and other animals was
estimated at over sixteen thousand.

[Illustration: ANOTHER VIEW OF THE WALLS OF MISSION LA SOLEDAD.]

[Illustration: MISSION SAN JOSE. SOON AFTER THE DECREE OF
SECULARIZATION. From an old print.]

[Illustration: FIGURE OF CHRIST, MISSION SAN JOSE ORPHANAGE.]

After the changes brought about by political administration the
number of Indians rapidly decreased, and the property acquired by their
united toil quickly dwindled away, until little was left but poverty and
suffering.

At the time secularization was effected in 1835, according to the
inventory made, the estate, aside from church property, was valued at
$36,000. Six years after secular authorities took charge only about 70
Indians remained, with 45 cattle, 25 horses, and 865 sheep,--and a large
debt had been incurred. On June 4, 1846, the Soledad Mission was sold to
Feliciano Soveranes for $800.

One of the pitiful cases that occurred during the decline of the
Missions was the death of Padre Sarria, which took place at Soledad in
1835, or, as some authorities state, in 1838. This venerable priest had
been very prominent in missionary labors, having occupied the position
of _Comisario Prefecto_ during many years. He was also the presidente
for several years. As a loyal Spaniard he declined to take the oath of
allegiance to the Mexican Republic, and was nominally under arrest for
about five years, or subject to exile; but so greatly was he revered and
trusted as a man of integrity and as a business manager of great ability
that the order of exile was never enforced. The last years of his life
were spent at the Mission of Our Lady of Solitude. When devastation
began and the temporal prosperity of the Mission quickly declined, this
faithful pastor of a fast thinning flock refused to leave the few
poverty-stricken Indians who still sought to prolong life in their old
home. One Sunday morning, while saying mass in the little church, the
enfeebled and aged padre fell before the altar and immediately expired.
As it had been reported that he was "leading a hermit's life and
destitute of means," it was commonly believed that this worthy and
devoted missionary was exhausted from lack of proper food, and in
reality died of starvation.

There were still a few Indians at Soledad in 1850, their scattered huts
being all that remained of the once large rancherias that existed here.

The ruins of Soledad are about four miles from the station of the
Southern Pacific of that name. The church itself is at the southwest
corner of a mass of ruins. These are all of adobe, though the
foundations are of rough rock. Flint pebbles have been mixed with the
adobe of the church walls. They were originally about three feet thick,
and plastered. A little of the plaster still remains.

In 1904 there was but one circular arch remaining in all the ruins;
everything else had fallen in. The roof fell in thirty years ago. At the
eastern end, where the arch is, there are three or four rotten beams
still in place; and on the south side of the ruins, where one line of
corridors ran, a few poles still remain. Heaps of ruined tiles lie here
and there, just as they fell when the supporting poles rotted and
gave way.

It is claimed by the Soberanes family in Soledad that the present ruins
of the church are of the building erected about 1850 by their
grandfather. The family lived in a house just southwest of the Mission,
and there this grandfather was born. He was baptized, confirmed, and
married in the old church, and when, after secularization, the Mission
property was offered for sale, he purchased it. As the church--in the
years of pitiful struggle for possession, of its temporalities--had been
allowed to go to ruin, this true son of the Church erected the building,
the ruins of which now bring sadness to the hearts of all who care for
the Missions.



CHAPTER XXIII

SAN JOSE DE GUADALUPE

There was a period of rest after the founding of Santa Cruz and La
Soledad. Padre Presidente Lasuen was making ready for a new and great
effort. Hitherto the Mission establishments had been isolated units of
civilization, each one alone in its work save for the occasional visits
of governor, inspector, or presidente. Now they were to be linked
together, by the founding of intermediate Missions, into one great
chain, near enough for mutual help and encouragement, the boundary of
one practically the boundary of the next one, both north and south. The
two new foundations of Santa Cruz and Soledad were a step in this
direction, but now the plan was to be completed. With the viceroy's
approval, Governor Borica authorized Lasuen to have the regions between
the old Missions carefully explored for new sites. Accordingly the
padres and their guards were sent out, and simultaneously such a work of
investigation began as was never before known. Reports were sent in, and
finally, after a careful study of the whole situation, it was concluded
that five new Missions could be established and a great annual saving
thereby made in future yearly expenses. Governor Borica's idea was that
the new Missions would convert all the gentile Indians west of the Coast
Range. This done, the guards could be reduced at an annual saving of
$15,000. This showing pleased the viceroy, and he agreed to provide the
$1000 needed for each new establishment on the condition that no added
military force be called for. The guardian of San Fernando College was
so notified August 19, 1796; and on September 29 he in turn announced to
the viceroy that the required ten missionaries were ready, but begged
that no reduction be made in the guards at the Missions already
established. Lasuen felt that it would create large demands upon the old
Missions to found so many new ones all at once, as they must help with
cattle, horses, sheep, neophyte laborers, etc.; yet, to obtain the
Missions, he was willing to do his very best, and felt sure his brave
associates would further his efforts in every possible way. Thus it was
that San Jose was founded, as before related, on June 11, 1797. The same
day all returned to Santa Clara, and five days elapsed ere the guards
and laborers were sent to begin work. Timbers were cut and water brought
to the location, and soon the temporary buildings were ready for
occupancy. By the end of the year there were 33 converts, and in 1800,
286. A wooden structure with a grass roof served as a church.

In 1809, April 23, the new church was completed, and Presidente Tapis
came and blessed it. The following day he preached, and Padre Arroyo de
la Cuesta said mass before a large congregation, including other
priests, several of the military, and people from the pueblo and Santa
Clara, and various neophytes. The following July the cemetery was
blessed with the usual solemnities.

In 1811 Padre Fortuni accompanied Padre Abella on a journey of
exploration to the Sacramento and San Joaquin valleys. They were gone
fifteen days, found the Indians very timid, and thought the shores of
the Sacramento offered a favorable site for a new Mission.

In 1817 Sergeant Soto, with one hundred San Jose neophytes, met twelve
soldiers from San Francisco, and proceeded, by boat, to pursue some
fugitives. They went up a river, possibly the San Joaquin, to a marshy
island where, according to Soto's report, a thousand hostiles were
assembled, who immediately fell upon their pursuers and fought them for
three hours. So desperately did they fight, relying upon their superior
numbers, that Soto was doubtful as to the result; but eventually they
broke and fled, swimming to places of safety, leaving many dead and
wounded but no captives. Only one neophyte warrior was killed.

In 1820 San Jose reported a population of 1754, with 6859 large stock,
859 horses, etc., and 12,000 sheep.

For twenty-seven years Padre Duran, who from 1825 to 1827 was also the
padre presidente, served Mission San Jose. In 1824 it reached its
maximum of population in 1806 souls. In everything it was prosperous,
standing fourth on the list both as to crops and herds.

Owing to its situation, being the first Mission reached by trappers,
etc., from the east, and also being the nearest to the valleys of the
Sacramento and San Joaquin, which afforded good retreats for fugitives,
San Jose had an exciting history. In 1826 there was an expedition
against the Cosumnes, in which forty Indians were killed, a rancheria
destroyed, and forty captives taken. In 1829 the famous campaign against
Estanislas, who has given his name to both a river and county, took
place. This Indian was a neophyte of San Jose, and being of more than
usual ability and smartness, was made alcalde. In 1827 or early in 1828
he ran away, and with a companion, Cipriano, and a large following, soon
made himself the terror of the rancheros of the neighborhood. One
expedition sent against him resulted disastrously, owing to insufficient
equipment, so a determined effort under M.G. Vallejo, who was now the
commander-in-chief of the whole California army, was made. May 29 he and
his forces crossed the San Joaquin River on rafts, and arrived the next
day at the scene of the former battle. With taunts, yells of defiance,
and a shower of arrows, Estanislas met the coming army, he and his
forces hidden in the fancied security of an impenetrable forest.
Vallejo at once set men to work in different directions to fire the
wood, which brought some of the Indians to the edge, where they were
slain. As evening came on, twenty-five men and an officer entered the
wood and fought until dusk, retiring with three men wounded. Next
morning Vallejo, with thirty-seven soldiers, entered the wood, where he
found pits, ditches, and barricades arranged with considerable skill.
Nothing but fire could have dislodged the enemy. They had fled under
cover of night. Vallejo set off in pursuit, and when, two days later, he
surrounded them, they declared they would die rather than surrender. A
road was cut through chaparral with axes, along which the field-piece
and muskets were pressed forward and discharged. The Indians retreated
slowly, wounding eight soldiers. When the cannon was close to the
enemies' intrenchments the ammunition gave out, and this fact and the
heat of the burning thicket compelled retreat. During the night the
Indians endeavored to escape, one by one, but most of them were killed
by the watchful guards. The next day nothing but the dead and three
living women were found. There were some accusations, later, that
Vallejo summarily executed some captives; but he denied it, and claimed
that the only justification for any such charge arose from the fact that
one man and one woman had been killed, the latter wrongfully by a
soldier, whom he advised be punished.

Up to the time of secularization, the Mission continued to be one of
the most prosperous. Jesus Vallejo was the administrator for
secularization, and in 1837 he and Padre Gonzalez Rubio made an
inventory which gave a total of over $155,000, when all debts were paid.
Even now for awhile it seemed to prosper, and not until 1840 did the
decline set in.

In accordance with Micheltorena's decree of March 29, 1843, San Jose was
restored to the temporal control of the padres, who entered with
good-will and zest into the labor of saving what they could out of the
wreck. Under Pico's decree of 1845 the Mission was inventoried, but the
document cannot now be found, nor a copy of it. The population was
reported as 400 in 1842, and it is supposed that possibly 250 still
lived at the Mission in 1845. On May 5, 1846, Pico sold all the property
to Andres Pico and J.B. Alvarado for $12,000, but the sale never went
into effect.

Mission San Jose de Guadalupe and the pueblo of the same name are not,
as so many people, even residents of California, think, one and the
same. The pueblo of San Jose is now the modern city of that name, the
home of the State Normal School, and the starting-point for Mount
Hamilton. But Mission San Jose is a small settlement, nearly twenty
miles east and north, in the foothills overlooking the southeast end of
San Francisco Bay. The Mission church has entirely disappeared, an
earthquake in 1868 having completed the ruin begun by the spoliation at
the time of secularization. A modern parish church has since been built
upon the site. Nothing of the original Mission now remains except a
portion of the monastery. The corridor is without arches, and is plain
and unpretentious, the roof being composed of willows tied to the
roughly hewn log rafters with rawhide. Behind this is a beautiful old
alameda of olives, at the upper end of which a modern orphanage,
conducted by the Dominican Sisters, has been erected. This avenue of
olives is crossed by another one at right angles, and both were planted
by the padres in the early days, as is evidenced by the age of the
trees. Doubtless many a procession of Indian neophytes has walked up and
down here, even as I saw a procession of the orphans and their
white-garbed guardians a short time ago. The surrounding garden is kept
up in as good style under the care of the sisters as it was in early
days by the padres.

The orphanage was erected in 1884 by Archbishop Alemany as a seminary
for young men who wished to study for the priesthood, but it was never
very successful in this work. For awhile it remained empty, then was
offered to the Dominican Sisters as a boarding-school. But as this
undertaking did not pay, in 1891 Archbishop Riordan offered such terms
as led the Mother General of the Dominican Sisters to purchase it as an
orphanage, and as such it is now most successfully conducted. There are
at the present time about eighty children cared for by these sweet and
gentle sisters of our Lord.

Two of the old Mission bells are hung in the new church. On one of these
is the inscription: "S.S. Jose. Ano de 1826." And on the upper bell,
"S.S. Joseph 1815, Ave Maria Purisima."

The old Mission baptismal font is also still in use. It is of hammered
copper, about three feet in diameter, surmounted by an iron cross about
eight inches high. The font stands upon a wooden base, painted, and is
about four feet high.



CHAPTER XXIV

SAN JUAN BAUTISTA

The second of the "filling up the links of the chain" Missions was that
of San Juan Bautista. Three days after the commandant of San Francisco
had received his orders to furnish a guard for the founders of Mission
San Jose, the commandant of Monterey received a like order for a guard
for the founders of San Juan Bautista. This consisted of five men and
Corporal Ballesteros. By June 17 this industrious officer had erected a
church, missionary-house, granary, and guard-house, and a week later
Lasuen, with the aid of two priests, duly founded the new Mission. The
site was a good one, and by 1800 crops to the extent of 2700 bushels
were raised. At the same time 516 neophytes were reported--not bad for
two and a half years' work.

In 1798 the gentiles from the mountains twenty-five miles east of San
Juan, the Ansayames, surrounded the Mission by night, but were prevailed
upon to retire. Later some of the neophytes ran away and joined these
hostiles, and then a force was sent to capture the runaways and
administer punishment. In the ensuing fight a chief was killed and
another wounded, and two gentiles brought in to be forcibly educated.
Other rancherias were visited, fifty fugitives arrested, and a few
floggings and many warnings given.

[Illustration: RUINED WALLS AND NEW BELL TOWER, MISSION SAN JUAN
BAUTISTA]

