fight.

Now, it may perhaps seem to some readers that as the other men had been
disposed of so summarily, it was strange that Erling the Bold should be
so long in dispatching this one; but for our hero's credit, we must
point out several facts which may have perhaps been overlooked.  In the
first place, Kettle Flatnose was a thoroughly fresh man when he began
the fight, and although he killed two men, it must be remembered that
one of these was slain while off his guard.  Then, Glumm did indeed slay
his man promptly, but he was one of King Harald's ordinary men-at-arms;
whereas Erling was opposed by one of the most celebrated of the King's
warriors--Hake, the berserk of Hadeland--a man whose name and prowess
were known far and wide, not only in Norway, but in Denmark, and all
along the southern shores of the Baltic.  It would have been strange
indeed had such a man fallen easily before any human arm, much more
strange had he succumbed at once to one that had been already much
exhausted with fighting.

True to the brotherhood to which he belonged, the berserk attacked
Erling with incredible fury.  He roared more like a mad bull than a man
as he made the onset; his eyes glared, his mouth foamed, and he bit his
shield as he was driven back.  Being fresh, he danced round Erling
perpetually, springing in to cut and thrust, and leaping back to avoid
the terrific blows which the latter fetched at him with his weighty axe.
Once he made a cut at Erling's head, which the latter did not attempt
to parry, intending to trust to his helmet to defend him, and forgetting
for the moment that he had cast that useful piece of armour on the
plain.  Luckily the blow was not truly aimed.  It shore a lock from
Erling's head as he swung his axe against his opponent's shield, and
battered him down on his knees; but the berserk leaped up with a yell,
and again rushed at him.  Hake happened just then to cast his eyes on
the two men who were quietly looking on, and he so managed the fight for
a few moments afterwards that he got near to them.  Then turning towards
them with a howl of demoniacal fury, he made a desperate cut at the
unsuspecting Glumm, who was taken so thoroughly by surprise that he made
no movement whatever to defend himself.  Fortunately.  Kettle Flatnose
was on the alert, but he had only time to thrust his sword awkwardly
between Glumm's head and the descending weapon.  The act prevented a
fatal gash, but it could not altogether arrest the force of the blow,
which fell on the flat of his sword, and beat it down on Glumm's skull
so violently that he was instantly stretched upon the green sward.
Erling's axe fell on the helm of the berserk almost at the same time.
Even in that moment of victory a feeling of respect for the courage and
boldness of this man touched the heart of Erling, who, with the
swiftness of thought, put in force his favourite practice--he turned the
edge of the axe, and the broad side of it fell on the steel headpiece
with tremendous force, causing the berserk of Hadeland to stretch
himself on the green sward beside Glumm the Gruff; thus ending the
famous battle of the "Berserkers and the Bold", in regard to which
Thikskul the scald writes:--

  "The Bold one and his doughty friend,
  Glumm the Gruff of Horlingsend,
  Faced, fought, and felled, and bravely slew,
  Full twenty men--a berserk crew
  Sent by King Harald them to slay--
  But much he rued it--lack-a-day!
  The heroes cut and hacked them sore,
  Hit, split, and slashed them back and fore--
  And left them lying in their gore."



CHAPTER THIRTEEN.

SHOWS THAT ELOQUENCE DOES NOT ALWAYS FLOW WHEN IT IS EXPECTED, AND THAT
GLUMM BEGINS A NEW COURSE OF ACTION.

On examination it was found that Glumm's hurt was not severe.  He had
merely been stunned by the force of the blow, and there was a trifling
wound in the scalp from which a little blood flowed.  While Kettle held
a helmet full of water, and Erling bathed the wound, the latter said:

"How comes it, Kettle, that ye discovered our straits, and appeared so
fortunately?"

Kettle laughed and said: "The truth is, that accident brought me here.
You know that I had all but wrought out my freedom by this time, but in
consideration of my services in the battle at the Springs, Ulf set me
free at once, and this morning I left him to seek service with King
Harald Haarfager."

"That was thankless of thee," said Erling.

"So said Ulf," rejoined Kettle; "nevertheless, I came off, and was on my
way over the fells to go to the King when I fell in with Hake the
berserk--though I knew not that it was he--and joined him."

Erling frowned, and looked enquiringly at Kettle as he said:

"But what possessed thee, that thou shouldst quit so good a master for
one so bad, and how comes it thou hast so readily turned against the
King's men?"

"Little wonder that you are perplexed," said Kettle, "seeing that ye
know not my motive.  The truth is, that I had a plan in my head, which
was to enter Harald's service, that I might act the spy on him, and so
do my best for one who, all the time I have been in thraldom, has been
as kind to me as if he had been my own father."

"Thou meanest Ulf?" said Erling.

"I do," replied Kettle with enthusiasm, "and I'd willingly die for him
if need be.  As ye know full well, it needs no wizard to tell that such
men as Ulf and your father will not easily be made to bend their necks
to the King's yoke; and for this I honour them, because they respect the
law of the land more than they respect the King.  Happy is the nation
where such men abound; and in saying this I do no dishonour to the King,
but the reverse."

Erling looked in surprise at Kettle, while he continued to bathe the
face of his still unconscious friend, for his language and bearing were
much altered from what they had been when he was in thraldom, and there
was an air of quiet dignity about him, which seemed to favour the common
report that he had been a man of note in his own land.

"Well," continued Kettle, "it is equally certain that Harald is not a
man who will tamely submit to be thwarted in his plans, so I had made up
my mind to take service with him, in order that I might be able to find
out his intentions and observe his temper towards the men of Horlingdal,
and thus be in a position to give them timely warning of any danger that
threatened.  On my way hither I met Hake, as I have said.  On hearing
that he belonged to King Harald, I told him that I had just got my
freedom from Ulf, and wished to join the King.  He seemed very glad, and
said he thought I would make a good berserk; told me that he was out in
search of some of the King's enemies, and proposed that I should assist
him.  Of course this suited me well; but it was only when we found you
that I became aware who the King's enemies were, and resolved to act as
ye have seen me do.  I did not choose to tell Ulf my intention, lest my
plan should miscarry; but, now that I find who the King counts his foes,
and know how sharply he intends to treat them, it seems to me that I
need go no farther."

"Truly thou needst not," said Erling, "for Harald is in the worst
possible humour with us all, and did his best to stop me from going home
to tell the fact."

"Then is my mission ended.  I will return to Ulfstede," said Kettle,
throwing the water out of his helmet, and replacing it on his head, as
he rose and grasped his sword.  "Meanwhile, I will cut off Hake's head,
and take it back with me."

"Thou wilt do so at thy peril," said Erling; "Hake fell to my hand, and
I will finish the work which I have begun.  Do thou go catch three or
four of the horses, for I see that Glumm is recovering."

"I will not interfere with your business," said Kettle, with a laugh,
"only I thought you meant to leave his carcass lying there unheeded, and
was unwilling to go off without his head as a trophy."

Kettle went to catch the horses--three of which he tied to trees to be
ready for them, while he loaded the fourth with the most valuable of the
arms and garments of the slain.  Meanwhile Glumm groaned, and, sitting
up, rubbed his head ruefully.

"I thought someone had sent me to Valhalla," he said, fetching a deep
sigh.

"Not yet, friend Glumm, not yet.  There is still work for thee to do on
earth, and the sooner ye set about doing it the better, for methinks the
King will wonder what has become of his berserkers, and will send out
men in search of them ere long.  Canst mount thy horse?"

"Mount him? aye," said Glumm, leaping up, but staggering when he had
gained his legs, so that Erling had to support him for a few minutes.
He put his hand to his forehead, and, observing blood on it, asked: "Is
the wound deep?"

"Only a scratch," said Erling, "but the blow was heavy.  If the sword of
Kettle Flatnose had not caught it in time, it would have been thy
death."

"Truly it has not been far from that as it is, for my head rings as if
the brain were being battered with Thor's hammer!  Come, let us mount."

As he spoke, Kettle brought forward the horses.  Glumm mounted with
difficulty, and they all rode away.  But Erling had observed a slight
motion of life in the body of Hake, and after they had gone a few yards
he said: "Ride on slowly, Glumm, I will go back to get a ring from the
finger of the berserk, which I forgot."

He turned, and rode quickly back to the place where the berserk's body
lay, dismounted, and kneeled beside it.  There was a large silver ring
on the middle finger of Hake's right hand, which he took off and put on
his own finger, replacing it with a gold one of his own.  Then he ran to
the spring, and, filling his helmet with water, came back and laved the
man's temples therewith, at the same time pouring a little of it into
his mouth.  In a few minutes he began to show symptoms of revival, but
before he had recovered sufficiently to recognise who his benefactor
was, Erling had vaulted into the saddle and galloped away.

They arrived at Glummstede that evening about supper-time, but Glumm was
eager to hear the discussion that was sure to take place when the news
of the fight and of Harald's state of mind was told, so he rode past his
own home, and accompanied his friend to Ulfstede.  We cannot say for
certain that he was uninfluenced by other motives, for Glumm, as the
reader knows, was not a communicative man; he never spoke to anyone on
the subject; we incline, however, to the belief that there were mingled
ideas in his brain and mixed feelings in his heart as he rode to
Ulfstede!

Great was the sensation in the hall when Erling, Glumm, and Kettle
entered with the marks of the recent fight still visible upon them--
especially on Glumm, whose scalp wound, being undressed, permitted a
crimson stream to trickle down his face--a stream which, in his own
careless way, he wiped off now and then with the sleeve of his coat,
thereby making his aspect conspicuously bloody.  Tremendous was the
flutter in Ada's heart when she saw him in this plight, for well did she
know that deeds of daring had been done before such marks could have
been left upon her gruff lover.

The hall was crowded with armed men, for many bonders had assembled to
await the issue of the decision at the Thing, and much anxiety as well
as excitement prevailed.  Ulf recognised his late thrall with a look of
surprise, but each of them was made to quaff a brimming tankard of ale
before being allowed to speak.  To say truth, they were very willing to
accept the draught, which, after the fatigues they had undergone, tasted
like nectar.

Erling then stood up, and in the midst of breathless silence began to
recount the incidents which had befallen him and his companion while in
the execution of their mission.

"In the first place," he said, "it is right to let ye all know that the
King's countenance towards us is as black as a thundercloud, and that we
may expect to see the lightning flash out before long.  But it is some
comfort to add that Glumm and Kettle and I have slain, or rendered unfit
to fight, twenty of Harald's men."

In the midst of the murmur of congratulation with which this
announcement was received, Erling observed that Hilda, who had been
standing near the door, went out.  The result of this was, that the poor
youth's spirit sank, and it was with the utmost difficulty he plucked up
heart to relate the incidents of the fight, in which he said so little
about himself that one might have imagined he had been a mere spectator.
Passing from that subject as quickly as possible, he delivered his
opinion as to the hopes and prospects before them, and, cutting his
speech short, abruptly quitted the hall.

Any little feeling of disappointment that might have been felt at the
lame way in which Erling had recounted his exploits was, however, amply
compensated by Glumm, who, although usually a man of few words, had no
lack of ideas or of power to express them when occasion required, in a
terse, stern style of his own, which was very telling.  He gave a
faithful account of the fight, making mention of many incidents which
his friend had omitted to touch on, and dwelling particularly on the
deeds of Kettle.  As to that flat-nosed individual himself, when called
upon to speak, he addressed the assembly with a dignity of manner and a
racy utterance of language which amazed those who had only known him as
a thrall, and who now for the first time met him as a freed man.  He
moreover introduced into his speech a few touches of humour which
convulsed his audience with laughter, and commented on the condition of
affairs in a way that filled them with respect, so that from that hour
he became one of the noted men of the dale.

Erling meanwhile hurried towards one of the cliffs overlooking the
fiord.  He was well acquainted with Hilda's favourite haunts, and soon
found her, seated on a bank, with a very disconsolate look, which,
however, vanished on his appearing.

"Wherefore didst thou hasten away just as I began to speak, Hilda?" he
said, somewhat reproachfully, as he sat down beside her.

"Because I did not wish to hear details of the bloody work of which thou
art so fond.  Why wilt thou always be seeking to slay thy fellows?"

The girl spoke in tones so sad and desponding, that her lover looked
upon her for some time in silent surprise.

"Truly, Hilda," he said, "the fight was none of my seeking."

"Did I not hear thee say," she replied, "that Kettle and Glumm and thou
had slain twenty of the King's men, and that ye regarded this as a
comforting thought?"

"Aye, surely; but these twenty men did first attack Glumm and me while
alone, and we slew them in self-defence.  Never had I returned to tell
it, had not stout Kettle Flatnose come to our aid."

"Thank Heaven for that!" said Hilda, with a look of infinite relief.
"How did it happen?"

"Come.  I will tell thee all from first to last.  And here is one who
shall judge whether Glumm and I are to blame for slaying these men."

As he spoke, the hermit approached.  The old man looked somewhat paler
than usual, owing to the loss of blood caused by the wound he had
received in his recent defence of Ulfstede.  Erling rose and saluted him
heartily, for, since the memorable prowess in the defence of Ulfstede,
Christian had been high in favour among the people of the neighbourhood.

"Hilda and I were considering a matter of which we will make thee
judge," said Erling, as they sat down on the bank together.

"I will do my best," said the hermit, with a smile, "if Hilda consents
to trust my judgment."

"That she gladly does," said the maid.

"Well, then, I will detail the facts of the case," said Erling; "but
first tell me what strange marks are those on the skin thou holdest in
thy hand?"

"These are words," said the hermit, carefully spreading out a roll of
parchment, on which a few lines were written.

Erling and Hilda regarded the strange characters with much interest.
Indeed, the young man's look almost amounted to one of awe, for he had
never seen the scroll before, although Hilda, to whom it had several
times been shown and explained, had told him about it.

"These marks convey thoughts," said Christian, laying his forefinger on
the characters.

"Can they convey intricate thoughts," asked Erling, "such as are
difficult to express?"

"Aye; there is no thought which can quit the tongue of one man and enter
the understanding of another which may not be expressed by these letters
in different combinations."

"Dim ideas of this have been in my mind," said Erling, "since I went on
viking cruise to the south, when first I heard of such a power being
known to and used by many, but I believed it not.  If this be as thou
sayest, and these letters convey thy thoughts, then, though absent, thy
thoughts might be known to me--if I did but understand the tracing of
them."

"Most true," returned the hermit; "and more than that, there be some
who, though dead, yet speak to their fellows, and will continue to do so
as long as the records are preserved and the power to comprehend them be
maintained."

"Mysterious power," said Erling; "I should like much to possess it."

"If thou wilt come to my poor abode on the cliff I will teach it thee.
A few months, or less, will suffice.  Even Hilda knows the names of the
separate signs, and she has applied herself to it for little more than a
few days."

Hilda's face became scarlet when Erling looked at her in surprise, but
the unobservant hermit went on to descant upon the immense value of
written language, until Hilda reminded him that he had consented to sit
in judgment on a knotty point.

"True, I had forgotten.--Come now, Erling, let me hear it."

The youth at once began, and in a few minutes had so interested his
hearers that they gazed in his face and hung upon his words with rapt
attention, while he detailed the incidents of the combats with a degree
of fluency and fervour that would have thrown the oratory of Glumm and
Kettle quite into the shade had it been told in the hall.

While Erling was thus engaged, his friend Glumm, having finished the
recital of his adventures for the twentieth time, and at the same time
eaten a good supper, was advised by his companions to have the wound in
his head looked to.

"What! hast thou not had it dressed yet?" asked Ulf; "why, that is very
foolish.  Knowest thou not that a neglected wound may compass thy death?
Come hither, Ada; thy fingers are skilled in such offices.  Take Glumm
to an inner chamber, and see if thou canst put his head to rights."

"Methinks," cried Guttorm Stoutheart, with a laugh, "that she is more
