
"Madeleine," her father said, still trying to be a big brother after
years of failure. "I really don't understand this at all. Coming all the
way to Mars, and you act like--well--like we'd just stepped around the
corner in Chicago to some ridiculous carnival!"

"I am cursed," she whispered. "I'm tortured."

"What?" her mother said, and stared, with that child-like curiosity with
which she had greeted Madeleine's advent into the world, and which she
had never lost.

"Tortured by the insight that both enables and compels me to see through
the sham and pretense."

Her father grunted and blinked twice. He almost always blinked twice
when she began sounding pedantic like that. He suspected that she did it
deliberately to show off his ignorance.

"Funny," she said, mostly to herself, "that I allowed myself to be sold
this--Mars--the biggest piece of ersatz junk of all!"

"Madeleine!" her mother exclaimed.

"The advertisers got here first," Madeleine said, glancing at Don. "The
hucksters." She stopped talking. Mars offered none of itself, but the
others didn't understand. Mars was only what the hucksters wanted it to
be.

She wondered how she could hang on to the end of the season--even though
it was only three more days. They had committed themselves to a
rigidly-planned schedule, a clockwork program that had them and the
other "vacationing" tourists jumping and squeaking like automatons:
Exotic Martian sports. Martian tennis played on a hundred-yard court
with the players hopping through the rarified air and lower gravity with
an almost obscene abandon. Swimming in a strangely buoyant water,
called, of course, Martian water. Sandsled racing. Air-hopping with the
de-gravity balloons. Spectator sports, including gladiators who leaped
into the phony canals and fought to the death against the
hideous-looking Martian rat-fish. There were many other "activities", in
none of which Madeleine had been able to interest herself.

This last three days promised something called the "Martian Love Ritual
under the Double Moons." And a climactic treasure hunt among the
subterranean Martian labyrinths. They too, Madeleine was sure, were
artificial.

Mrs. Ericson adjusted her polaroid glasses and waved her rickshaw boy
into his harness, where his thighs tensed for the long haul. He was an
incredibly huge man, taller even than those specially-bred movie stars,
who averaged eight feet tall. Madeleine felt faint and clung to her
camel. The Martian camels were coughing and wheezing and the sun glared
horribly in the early afternoon.

Mr. Ericson looked with guarded apprehension at the six-legged camel.
Don pulled him aboard. "What a helluva beast!" laughed Ericson. Earth
camels specially bred by the big travel agencies to have a so-called
"unearthly" appearance. Sad creatures with two extra, dangling limbs and
a single, half-blind, blood-shot eye, watery and humbly resentful.

Pathetic mutation, Madeleine thought. Like those horrid rat-fish, like
the canals and the games and the ruins and those silly rituals. All
ersatz.

The caravan moved along the high ridge, a narrow trail that wound back
toward Martian Haven along the edge of the eroded cliffs.

"Maybe the only thing that would satisfy Madeleine," her father said,
"would be a real Martian."

"But that's not in the brochure," Don said.

"What's Mars without a Martian?" giggled Mrs. Ericson.

In her own insular little world, which had been the only one Madeleine
had ever been able to tolerate at all, she swayed and bumped to the
camel's movements. "One thing sure, Don," she said softly. "There were
_real_ Martians once. So why all the phony props? You can't tell me this
nonsense is better than the facts about the real Martians."

"Ask the boys who built this place. They hired me, they make the rules,"
Don said. He did not look at her.

"How did you ever end up with a job like this, Don?"

"The outfit that built the Haven hired all the old Martian colonists and
their descendants, any who wanted to work for them. So I took a job.
Pay's good. It's seasonal. Anyway, I like Mars."

"Sure," she said. "You must love it--to corrupt it like this."

"Mars was here, it'll still be here after the last tourist goes."

She laughed thinly. Don, with her, was trying to play another role, one
he hoped she might find interesting. "You're a symbol of the phoniness,
Don. Trained in the special host schools. Selected for your beautiful
resemblance to a statue of Adonis. Artificially created to be an
ever-smiling host of good-will, just like these pathetic camels have
been bred for an exotic touch. No real intelligence, Don, nor
originality. And everything you do or say is right out of the text book
on how to make friends and influence tourists."

Don didn't look at her. His fingers trembled on the camel's reins.

"What is this fascinating-sounding 'Ritual of Love' going to be like?"
giggled Mrs. Ericson.

"It's an authentic exploitation of actual rituals once held by the
Martians," Don said. "It has a pagan religious significance. The moons
were male and female, and when they--ah--united their light, the
Martians held feasts, fertility rituals--highly symbolic rites."

"Only symbolic?" said Mrs. Ericson, pretending blase disappointment.

"Well," grinned Don, "the Martians were only human. Just as--ah--well--I
