the war and the battle-cry arose. Now first did Aias Telamon's son slay
a man, Epikles great of heart, the comrade of Sarpedon. With a jagged
stone he smote him, a great stone that lay uppermost within the wall, by
the battlements. Not lightly could a man hold it in both hands, however
strong in his youth, of such mortals as now are, but Aias lifted it, and
cast it from above, and shattered the helm of fourfold crest, and broke
the bones of the head, and he fell like a diver from the lofty tower,
and his life left his bones. And Teukros smote Glaukos, the strong son
of Hippolochos, as he came on, with an arrow from the lofty wall; even
where he saw his shoulder bare he smote him, and made him cease from
delight in battle. Back from the wall he leapt secretly, lest any of the
Achaians should see him smitten, and speak boastfully. But sorrow came
on Sarpedon when Glaukos departed, so soon as he was aware thereof, but
he forgot not the joy of battle. He aimed at Alkmaon, son of Thestor,
with the spear, and smote him, and drew out the spear. And Alkmaon
following the spear fell prone, and his bronze-dight arms rang round
him. Then Sarpedon seized with strong hands the battlement, and dragged,
and it all gave way together, while above the wall was stripped bare,
and made a path for many.

Then Aias and Teukros did encounter him: Teukros smote him with an
arrow, on the bright baldric of his covering shield, about the breast,
but Zeus warded off the Fates from his son, that he should not be
overcome beside the ships' sterns. Then Aias leaped on and smote his
shield, nor did the spear pass clean through, yet shook he Sarpedon in
his eagerness. He gave ground a little way from the battlement, yet
retreated not wholly, since his heart hoped to win renown. Then he
turned and cried to the godlike Lykians: "O Lykians, wherefore thus are
ye slack in impetuous valour. Hard it is for me, stalwart as I am, alone
to break through, and make a path to the ships, nay, follow hard after
me, for the more men, the better work."

So spake he, and they, dreading the rebuke of their king, pressed on the
harder around the counsellor and king. And the Argives on the other side
made strong their battalions within the wall, and mighty toil began for
them. For neither could the strong Lykians burst through the wall of
the Danaans, and make a way to the ships, nor could the warlike Danaans
drive back the Lykians from the wall, when once they had drawn near
thereto. But as two men contend about the marches of their land, with
measuring rods in their hands, in a common field, when in narrow space
they strive for equal shares, even so the battlements divided them, and
over those they smote the round shields of ox hide about the breasts of
either side, and the fluttering bucklers. And many were wounded in the
flesh with the ruthless bronze, whensoever the back of any of the
warriors was laid bare as he turned, ay, and many clean through the very
shield. Yea, everywhere the towers and battlements swam with the blood
of men shed on either side, by Trojans and Achaians. But even so they
could not put the Argives to rout, but they held their ground, as an
honest woman that laboureth with her hands holds the balance, and raises
the weight and the wool together, balancing them, that she may win scant
wages for her children; so evenly was strained their war and battle,
till the moment when Zeus gave the greater renown to Hector, son of
Priam, who was the first to leap within the wall of the Achaians. In a
piercing voice he cried aloud to the Trojans: "Rise, ye horse-taming
Trojans, break the wall of the Argives, and cast among the ships fierce
blazing fire."

So spake he, spurring them on, and they all heard him with their ears,
and in one mass rushed straight against the wall, and with sharp spears
in their hands climbed upon the machicolations of the towers. And
Hector seized and carried a stone that lay in front of the gates, thick
in the hinder part, but sharp at point: a stone that not the two best
men of the people, such as mortals now are, could lightly lift from the
ground on to a wain, but easily he wielded it alone, for the son of
crooked-counselling Kronos made it light for him. And as when a shepherd
lightly beareth the fleece of a ram, taking it in one hand, and little
doth it burden him, so Hector lifted the stone, and bare it straight
against the doors that closely guarded the stubborn-set portals, double
gates and tall, and two cross bars held them within, and one bolt
fastened them. And he came, and stood hard by, and firmly planted
himself, and smote them in the midst, setting his legs well apart, that
his cast might lack no strength. And he brake both the hinges, and the
stone fell within by reason of its weight, and the gates rang loud
around, and the bars held not, and the doors burst this way and that
beneath the rush of the stone. Then glorious Hector leaped in, with face
like the sudden night, shining in wondrous mail that was clad about his
body, and with two spears in his hands. No man that met him could have
held him back when once he leaped within the gates: none but the gods,
and his eyes shone with fire. Turning towards the throng he cried to the
Trojans to overleap the wall, and they obeyed his summons, and speedily
some overleaped the wall, and some poured into the fair-wrought
gateways, and the Danaans fled in fear among the hollow ships, and a
ceaseless clamour arose.



BOOK XIII.

    Poseidon stirreth up the Achaians to defend the ships.
    The valour of Idomeneus.

Now Zeus, after that he had brought the Trojans and Hector to the ships,
left them to their toil and endless labour there, but otherwhere again
he turned his shining eyes, and looked upon the land of the Thracian
horsebreeders, and the Mysians, fierce fighters hand to hand, and the
proud Hippemolgoi that drink mare's milk, and the Abioi, the most
righteous of men. To Troy no more at all he turned his shining eyes, for
he deemed in his heart that not one of the Immortals would draw near, to
help either Trojans or Danaans.

But the mighty Earth-shaker held no blind watch, who sat and marvelled on
the war and strife, high on the topmost crest of wooded Samothrace, for
thence all Ida was plain to see; and plain to see were the city of
Priam, and the ships of the Achaians. Thither did he go from the sea and
sate him down, and he had pity on the Achaians, that they were subdued
to the Trojans, and strong was his anger against Zeus.

Then forthwith he went down from the rugged hill, faring with swift
steps, and the high hills trembled, and the woodland, beneath the
immortal footsteps of Poseidon as he moved. Three strides he made, and
with the fourth he reached his goal, even Aigae, and there was his
famous palace in the deeps of the mere, his glistering golden mansions
builded, imperishable for ever. Thither went he, and let harness to the
car his bronze-hooved horses, swift of flight, clothed with their golden
manes. He girt his own golden array about his body, and seized the
well-wrought lash of gold, and mounted his chariot, and forth he drove
across the waves. And the sea beasts frolicked beneath him, on all
sides out of the deeps, for well they knew their lord, and with gladness
the sea stood asunder, and swiftly they sped, and the axle of bronze was
not wetted beneath, and the bounding steeds bare him on to the ships
of the Achaians.

Now there is a spacious cave in the depths of the deep mere, between
Tenedos and rugged Imbros; there did Poseidon, the Shaker of the earth,
stay his horses, and loosed them out of the chariot, and cast before
them ambrosial food to graze withal, and golden tethers he bound about
their hooves, tethers neither to be broken nor loosed, that there the
horses might continually await their lord's return. And he went to the
host of the Achaians.

Now the Trojans like flame or storm-wind were following in close array,
with fierce intent, after Hector, son of Priam. With shouts and cries
they came, and thought to take the ships of the Achaians, and to slay
thereby all the bravest of the host. But Poseidon, that girdleth the
world, the Shaker of the earth, was urging on the Argives, and forth he
came from the deep salt sea, in form and untiring voice like unto
Kalchas. First he spake to the two Aiantes, that themselves were eager
for battle: "Ye Aiantes twain, ye shall save the people of the Achaians,
if ye are mindful of your might, and reckless of chill fear. For verily
I do not otherwhere dread the invincible hands of the Trojans, that have
climbed the great wall in their multitude, nay, the well-greaved
Achaians will hold them all at bay; but hereby verily do I greatly dread
lest some evil befall us, even here where that furious one is leading
like a flame of fire, Hector, who boasts him to be son of mighty Zeus.
Nay, but here may some god put it into the hearts of you twain, to stand
sturdily yourselves, and urge others to do the like; thereby might ye
drive him from the fleet-faring ships, despite his eagerness, yea, even
if the Olympian himself is rousing him to war."

Therewith the Shaker of the world, the girdler of the earth, struck the
twain with his staff, and filled them with strong courage, and their
limbs he made light, and their feet, and their hands withal. Then, even
as a swift-winged hawk speeds forth to fly, poised high above a tall
sheer rock, and swoops to chase some other bird across the plain, even
so Poseidon sped from them, the Shaker of the world. And of the twain
Oileus' son, the swift-footed Aias, was the first to know the god, and
instantly he spake to Aias, son of Telamon: "Aias, since it is one of
the gods who hold Olympus, that in the semblance of a seer commands us
now to fight beside the ships-not Kalchas is he, the prophet and
sooth-sayer, for easily I knew the tokens of his feet and knees as he
turned away, and the gods are easy to discern--lo, then mine own heart
within my breast is more eagerly set on war and battle, and my feet
beneath and my hands above are lusting for the fight."

Then Aias, son of Telamon, answered him saying: "Even so, too, my hands
invincible now rage about the spear-shaft, and wrath has risen within
me, and both my feet are swift beneath me; yea, I am keen to meet, even
in single fight, the ceaseless rage of Hector son of Priam."

So they spake to each other, rejoicing in the delight of battle, which
the god put in their heart. Then the girdler of the earth stirred up the
Achaians that were in the rear and were renewing their strength beside
the swift ships. Their limbs were loosened by their grievous toil, yea,
and their souls filled with sorrow at the sight of the Trojans, that had
climbed over the great wall in their multitude. And they looked on them,
and shed tears beneath their brows, thinking that never would they
escape destruction. But the Shaker of the earth right easily came among
them, and urged on the strong battalions of warriors. Teukros first he
came and summoned, and Leitos, and the hero Peneleos, and Thoas, and
Deipyros, and Meriones, and Antilochos, lords of the war-cry, all these
he spurred on with winged words: "Shame on you, Argives, shame, ye
striplings, in your battle had I trusted for the salvation of our ships.
But if you are to withdraw from grievous war, now indeed the day doth
shine that shall see us conquered by the Trojans. Out on it, for verily
a great marvel is this that mine eyes behold, a terrible thing that
methought should never come to pass, the Trojans advancing against our
ships! Of yore they were like fleeting hinds, that in the wild wood are
the prey of jackals, and pards, and wolves, and wander helpless,
strengthless, empty of the joy of battle. Even so the Trojans of old
cared never to wait and face the wrath and the hands of the Achaians,
not for a moment. But now they are fighting far from the town, by the
hollow ships, all through the baseness of our leader and the remissness
of the people, who, being at strife with the chief, have no heart to
defend the swift-faring ships, nay, thereby they are slain. But if
indeed and in truth the hero Agamemnon, the wide-ruling son of Atreus,
is the very cause of all, for that he did dishonour the swift-footed son
of Peleus, not even so may we refrain in any wise from war. Nay, let us
right our fault with speed, for easily righted are the hearts of the
brave. No longer do ye well to refrain from impetuous might, all ye that
are the best men of the host. I myself would not quarrel with one that,
being a weakling, abstained from war, but with you I am heartily wroth.
Ah, friends, soon shall ye make the mischief more through this
remissness,--but let each man conceive shame in his heart, and
indignation, for verily great is the strife that hath arisen. Lo, the
mighty Hector of the loud war-cry is fighting at the ships, and the
gates and the long bar he hath burst in sunder."

On this wise did the Earth-enfolder call to and spur on the Achaians.
And straightway they made a stand around the two Aiantes, strong bands
that Ares himself could not enter and make light of, nor Athene that
marshals the host. Yea, they were the chosen best that abode the Trojans
and goodly Hector, and spear on spear made close-set fence, and shield
on serried shield, buckler pressed on buckler, and helm on helm, and man
on man. The horse-hair crests on the bright helmet-ridges touched each
other as they nodded, so close they stood each by other, and spears
brandished in bold hands were interlaced; and their hearts were
steadfast and lusted for battle.

Then the Trojans drave forward in close array, and Hector led them,
pressing straight onwards, like a rolling rock from a cliff, that the
winter-swollen water thrusteth from the crest of a hill, having broken
the foundations of the stubborn rock with its wondrous flood; leaping
aloft it flies, and the wood echoes under it, and unstayed it runs its
course, till it reaches the level plain, and then it rolls no more for
all its eagerness,--even so Hector for a while threatened lightly to
win to the sea through the huts and the ships of the Achaians, slaying
as he came, but when he encountered the serried battalions, he was
stayed when he drew near against them. But they of the other part, the
sons of the Achaians, thrust with their swords and double-pointed
spears, and drave him forth from them, that he gave ground and reeled
backward. Then he cried with a piercing voice, calling on the Trojans:
"Trojans, and Lykians, and close-fighting Dardanians, hold your ground,
for the Achaians will not long ward me off, nay, though they have
arrayed themselves in fashion like a tower. Rather, methinks, they will
flee back before the spear, if verily the chief of gods has set me on,
the loud-thundering lord of Hera."

Therewith he spurred on the heart and spirit of each man; and Deiphobos,
the son of Priam, strode among them with high thoughts, and held in
front of him the circle of his shield, and lightly he stepped with his
feet, advancing beneath the cover of his shield. Then Meriones aimed at
him with a shining spear, and struck, and missed not, but smote the
circle of the bulls-hide shield, yet no whit did he pierce it; nay,
well ere that might be, the long spear-shaft snapped in the socket. Now
Deiphobos was holding off from him the bulls-hide shield, and his heart
feared the lance of wise Meriones, but that hero shrunk back among the
throng of his comrades, greatly in wrath both for the loss of victory,
and of his spear, that he had shivered. So he set forth to go to the
huts and the ships of the Achaians, to bring a long spear, that he had
left in his hut.

Meanwhile the others were fighting on, and there arose an
inextinguishable cry. First Teukros, son of Telamon, slew a man, the
spearman Imbrios, the son of Mentor rich in horses. In Pedaion he dwelt,
before the coming of the sons of the Achaians, and he had for wife a
daughter of Priam, born out of wedlock, Medesikaste; but when the curved
ships of the Danaans came, he returned again to Ilios, and was
pre-eminent among the Trojans, and dwelt with Priam, who honoured him
like his own children. Him the son of Telemon pierced below the ear with
his long lance, and plucked back the spear. Then he fell like an ash
that on the crest of a far-seen hill is smitten with the axe of bronze,
and brings its delicate foliage to the ground; even so he fell, and
round him rang his armour bedight with bronze. Then Teukros rushed
forth, most eager to strip his armour, and Hector cast at him as he came
with his shining spear. But Teukros, steadily regarding him, avoided by
a little the spear of bronze; so Hector struck Amphimachos, son of
Kteatos, son of Aktor, in the breast with the spear, as he was returning
to the battle. With a crash he fell, and his armour rang upon him.

Then Hector sped forth to tear from the head of great-hearted
Amphimachos the helmet closely fitted to his temples, but Aias aimed at
Hector as he came, with a shining spear, yet in no wise touched his
body, for he was all clad in dread armour of bronze; but he smote the
boss of his shield, and drave him back by main force, and he gave place
from behind the two dead men, and the Achaians drew them out of the
battle. So Stichios and goodly Menestheus, leaders of the Athenians,
conveyed Amphimachos back among the host of the Achaians, but Imbrios
the two Aiantes carried, with hearts full of impetuous might. And as
when two lions have snatched away a goat from sharp-toothed hounds, and
carry it through the deep thicket, holding the body on high above the
ground in their jaws, so the two warrior Aiantes held Imbrios aloft and
spoiled his arms. Then the son of Oileus cut his head from his delicate
neck, in wrath for the sake of Amphimachos, and sent it rolling like a
ball through the throng, and it dropped in the dust before the feet of
Hector.

Then verily was Poseidon wroth at heart, when his son's son fell in the
terrible fray. [Kteatos, father of Amphimachos, was Poseidon's son.] So
he set forth to go by the huts and the ships of the Achaians, to spur on
the Danaans, and sorrows he was contriving for the Trojans. Then
Idomeneus, spearman renowned, met him on his way from his comrade that
had but newly returned to him out of the battle, wounded on the knee
with the sharp bronze. Him his comrades carried forth, and Idomeneus
gave charge to the leeches, and so went on to his hut, for he still was
eager to face the war. Then the mighty Shaker of the earth addressed
him, in the voice of Thoas, son of Andraimon, that ruled over the
Aitolians in all Pleuron, and mountainous Kalydon, and was honoured like
a god by the people: "Idomeneus, thou counsellor of the Cretans, say,
whither have thy threats fared, wherewith the sons of the Achaians
threatened the Trojans?"

Then Idomeneus, leader of the Cretans, answered him again: "O Thaos, now
is there no man to blame, that I wot of, for we all are skilled in war.
Neither is there any man that spiritless fear holds aloof, nor any that
gives place to cowardice, and shuns the cruel war, nay, but even thus,
methinks, must it have seemed good to almighty Kronion, even that the
Achaians should perish nameless here, far away from Argos. But Thoas,
seeing that of old thou wert staunch, and dost spur on some other man,
wheresoever thou mayst see any give ground, therefore slacken not now,
but call aloud to every warrior."

Then Poseidon, the Shaker of the earth, answered him again: "Idomeneus,
never may that man go forth out of Troy-land, but here may he be the
sport of dogs, who this day wilfully is slack in battle. Nay, come, take
thy weapons and away: herein we must play the man together, if any avail
there may be, though we are no more than two. Ay, and very cowards get
courage from company, but we twain know well how to battle even with the
brave."

Therewith the god went back again into the strife of men, but Idomeneus,
so soon as he came to his well-builded hut, did on his fair armour about
his body, and grasped two spears, and set forth like the lightning that
Kronion seizes in his hand and brandishes from radiant Olympus, showing
forth a sign to mortal men, and far seen are the flames thereof. Even so
shone the bronze about the breast of Idomeneus as he ran, and Meriones,
his good squire, met him, while he was still near his hut,--he was going
to bring his spear of bronze,--and mighty Idomeneus spake to him:
"Meriones son of Molos, fleet of foot, dearest of my company, wherefore
hast thou come hither and left the war and strife? Art thou wounded at
all, and vexed by a dart's point, or dost thou come with a message for
me concerning aught? Verily I myself have no desire to sit in the huts,
but to fight."

Then wise Meriones answered him again, saying: "I have come to fetch a
spear, if perchance thou hast one left in the huts, for that which
before I carried I have shivered in casting at the shield of proud
Deiphobos."

Then Idomeneus, leader of the Cretans, answered him again: "Spears, if
thou wilt, thou shalt find, one, ay, and twenty, standing in the hut,
against the shining side walls, spears of the Trojans whereof I have
spoiled their slain. Yea, it is not my mood to stand and fight with
foemen from afar, wherefore I have spears, and bossy shields, and helms,
and corslets of splendid sheen."

Then wise Meriones answered him again: "Yea, and in mine own hut and my
black ship are many spoils of the Trojans, but not ready to my hand.
Nay, for methinks that neither am I forgetful of valour; but stand forth
among the foremost to face the glorious war, whensoever ariseth the
strife of battle. Any other, methinks, of the mail-clad Achaians should
sooner forget my prowess, but thou art he that knoweth it."

Then Idomeneus, leader of the Cretans, answered him again: "I know what
a man of valour thou art, wherefore shouldst thou tell me thereof? Nay,
if now beside the ships all the best of us were being chosen for an
ambush--wherein the valour of men is best discerned; there the coward,
and the brave man most plainly declare themselves: for the colour of the
coward changes often, and his spirit cannot abide firm within him, but
now he kneels on one knee, now on the other, and rests on either foot,
and his heart beats noisily in his breast, as he thinks of doom, and his
teeth chatter loudly. But the colour of the brave man does not change,
nor is he greatly afraid, from the moment that he enters the ambush of
heroes, but his prayer is to mingle instantly in woeful war. Were we
being chosen for such an ambush, I say, not even then would any man
reckon lightly of thy courage and thy strength. Nay, and even if thou
wert stricken in battle from afar, or smitten in close fight, the dart
would not strike thee in the hinder part of the neck, nor in the back,
but would encounter thy breast or belly, as thou dost press on, towards
the gathering of the foremost fighters. But come, no more let us talk
thus, like children, loitering here, lest any man be vehemently wroth,
but go thou to the hut, and bring the strong spear."

Thus he spake, and Meriones, the peer of swift Ares, quickly bare the
spear of bronze from the hut, and went after Idomeneus, with high
thoughts of battle. And even as Ares, the bane of men, goes forth into
the war, and with him follows his dear son Panic, stark and fearless,
that terrifies even the hardy warrior; and these twain leave Thrace, and
harness them for fight with the Ephyri, or the great-hearted Phlegyans,
yet hearken not to both peoples, but give honour to one only; like these
gods did Meriones and Idomeneus, leaders of men, set forth into the
fight, harnessed in gleaming bronze. And Meriones spake first to
Idomeneus saying: "Child of Deukalion, whither art thou eager to enter
into the throng: on the right of all the host, or in the centre, or on
the left? Ay, and no other where, methinks, are the flowing-haired
Achaians so like to fail in fight."

Then Idomeneus, the leader of the Cretans, answered him again: "In the
centre of the ships there are others to bear the brunt, the two Aiantes,
and Teukros, the best bowman of the Achaians, ay, and a good man in
close fight; these will give Hector Priam's son toil enough, howsoever
keen he be for battle; yea, though he be exceeding stalwart. Hard will
he find it, with all his lust for war, to overcome their strength and
their hands invincible, and to fire the ships, unless Kronion himself
send down on the swift ships a burning brand. But not to a man would he
yield, the great Telamonian Aias, to a man that is mortal and eateth
Demeter's grain, and may be chosen with the sword of bronze, and with
hurling of great stones. Nay, not even to Achilles the breaker of the
ranks of men would he give way, not in close fight; but for speed of
foot none may in any wise strive with Achilles. But guide us twain, as
thou sayest, to the left hand of the host, that speedily we may learn
whether we are to win glory from others, or other men from us."

So he spake, and Meriones, the peer of swift Ares, led the way, till
they came to the host, in that place whither he bade him go.

And when the Trojans saw Idomeneus, strong as flame, and his squire with
him, and their glorious armour, they all shouted and made for him
through the press. Then their mellay began, by the sterns of the ships.
And as the gusts speed on, when shrill winds blow, on a day when dust
lies thickest on the roads, and the winds raise together a great cloud
of dust, even so their battle clashed together, and all were fain of
heart to slay each other in the press with the keen bronze. And the
battle, the bane of men, bristled with the long spears, the piercing
spears they grasped, and the glitter of bronze from gleaming helmets
dazzled the eyes, and the sheen of new-burnished corslets, and shining
shields, as the men thronged all together. Right hardy of heart would he
