events, Samuel Adams appears to have been well acquainted with it. When he
became governor, he felt that he could have no more honorable seat, than
that which had been the ancient Chair of State. He therefore purchased it
for a trifle, and filled it worthily for three years, as governor of
Massachusetts."

"And what next?" asked Charley.

"That is all," said Grandfather, heaving a sigh; for he could not help
being a little sad, at the thought that his stories must close here.
"Samuel Adams died in 1803, at the age of above threescore and ten. He was
a great patriot but a poor man. At his death, he left scarcely property
enough to pay the expenses of his funeral. This precious chair, among his
other effects, was sold at auction; and your Grandfather, who was then in
the strength of his years, became the purchaser."

Laurence, with a mind full of thoughts, that struggled for expression, but
could find none, looked steadfastly at the chair.

He had now learned all its history, yet was not satisfied.

"Oh, how I wish that the chair could speak!" cried he. "After its long
intercourse with mankind--after looking upon the world for ages--what
lessons of golden wisdom it might utter! It might teach a private person
how to lead a good and happy life--or a statesman how to make his country
prosperous!"




Chapter XI


Grandfather was struck by Laurence's idea, that the historic chair should
utter a voice, and thus pour forth the collected wisdom of two centuries.
The old gentleman had once possessed no inconsiderable share of fancy;
and, even now, its fading sunshine occasionally glimmered among his more
sombre reflections.

As the history of the chair had exhausted all his facts, Grandfather
determined to have recourse to fable. So, after warning the children that
they must not mistake this story for a true one, he related what we shall
call,--



GRANDFATHER'S DREAM


Laurence and Clara, where were you last night? Where were you, Charley,
and dear little Alice? You had all gone to rest, and left old Grandfather
to meditate alone, in his great chair. The lamp had grown so dim, that its
light hardly illuminated the alabaster shade. The wood fire had crumbled
into heavy embers, among which the little flames danced, and quivered, and
sported about, like fairies.

And here sat Grandfather, all by himself. He knew that it was bedtime; yet
he could not help longing to hear your merry voices, or to hold a
comfortable chat with some old friend; because then his pillow would be
visited by pleasant dreams. But, as neither children nor friends were at
hand, Grandfather leaned back in the great chair, and closed his eyes, for
the sake of meditating more profoundly.

And, when Grandfather's meditations had grown very profound indeed, he
fancied that he heard a sound over his head, as if somebody were preparing
to speak.

"Hem!" it said, in a dry, husky tone. "H-e-m! Hem!"

As Grandfather did not know that any person was in the room, he started up
in great surprise, and peeped hither and thither, behind the chair, and
into the recess by the fireside, and at the dark nook yonder, near the
bookcase. Nobody could he see.

"Pooh!" said Grandfather to himself, "I must have been dreaming."

But, just as he was going to resume his seat, Grandfather happened to look
at the great chair. The rays of fire-light were flickering upon it in such
a manner that it really seemed as if its oaken frame were all alive. What!
Did it not move its elbow? There, too! It certainly lifted one of its
ponderous fore-legs, as if it had a notion of drawing itself a little
nearer to the fire. Meanwhile, the lion's head nodded at Grandfather, with
as polite and sociable a look as a lion's visage, carved in oak, could
possibly be expected to assume. Well, this is strange!

"Good evening, my old friend," said the dry and husky voice, now a little
clearer than before. "We have been intimately acquainted so long, that I
think it high time we have a chat together."

Grandfather was looking straight at the lion's head, and could not be
mistaken in supposing that it moved its lips. So here the mystery was all
explained.

"I was not aware," said Grandfather, with a civil salutation to his oaken
companion, "that you possessed the faculty of speech. Otherwise, I should
often have been glad to converse with such a solid, useful, and
substantial, if not brilliant member of society."

"Oh!" replied the ancient chair, in a quiet and easy tone, for it had now
cleared its throat of the dust of ages. "I am naturally a silent and
incommunicative sort of character. Once or twice, in the course of a
century, I unclose my lips. When the gentle Lady Arbella departed this
life, I uttered a groan. When the honest mint-master weighed his plump
daughter against the pine-tree shillings, I chuckled audibly at the joke.
When old Simon Bradstreet took the place of the tyrant Andros, I joined in
the general huzza, and capered upon my wooden legs, for joy. To be sure,
the bystanders were so fully occupied with their own feelings, that my
sympathy was quite unnoticed."

"And have you often held a private chat with your friends?" asked
Grandfather.

"Not often," answered the chair. "I once talked with Sir William Phips,
and communicated my ideas about the witchcraft delusion. Cotton Mather had
several conversations with me, and derived great benefit from my
historical reminiscences. In the days of the Stamp Act, I whispered in the
ear of Hutchinson, bidding him to remember what stock his countrymen were
descended of, and to think whether the spirit of their forefathers had
utterly departed from them. The last man whom I favored with a colloquy,
was that stout old republican, Samuel Adams."

"And how happens it," inquired Grandfather, "that there is no record nor
tradition of your conversational abilities? It is an uncommon thing to
meet with a chair that can talk."

"Why, to tell you the truth," said the chair, giving itself a hitch nearer
to the hearth, "I am not apt to choose the most suitable moments for
unclosing my lips. Sometimes I have inconsiderately begun to speak, when
my occupant, lolling back in my arms, was inclined to take an after-dinner
nap. Or, perhaps, the impulse to talk may be felt at midnight, when the
lamp burns dim, and the fire crumbles into decay, and the studious or
thoughtful man finds that his brain is in a mist. Oftenest, I have
unwisely uttered my wisdom in the ears of sick persons, when the
inquietude of fever made them toss about, upon my cushion. And so it
happens, that, though my words make a pretty strong impression at the
moment, yet my auditors invariably remember them only as a dream. I should
not wonder if you, my excellent friend, were to do the same, to-morrow
morning."

"Nor I either," thought Grandfather to himself. However, he thanked this
respectable old chair for beginning the conversation, and begged to know
whether it had any thing particular to communicate.

"I have been listening attentively to your narrative of my adventures,"
replied the chair, "and it must be owned, that your correctness entitles
you to be held up as a pattern to biographers. Nevertheless, there are a
few omissions, which I should be glad to see supplied. For instance, you
make no mention of the good knight, Sir Richard Saltonstall, nor of the
famous Hugh Peters, nor of those old regicide judges, Whalley, Goffe, and
Dixwell. Yet I have borne the weight of all these distinguished
characters, at one time or another."

Grandfather promised amendment, if ever he should have an opportunity to
repeat his narrative. The good old chair, which still seemed to retain a
due regard for outward appearance, then reminded him how long a time had
passed, since it had been provided with a new cushion. It likewise
expressed the opinion, that the oaken figures on its back would show to
much better advantage, by the aid of a little varnish.

"And I have had a complaint in this joint," continued the chair,
endeavoring to lift one of its legs, "ever since Charley trundled his
wheelbarrow against me."

"It shall be attended to," said Grandfather. "And now, venerable chair, I
have a favor to solicit. During an existence of more than two centuries,
you have had a familiar intercourse with men who were esteemed the wisest
of their day. Doubtless, with your capacious understanding, you have
treasured up many an invaluable lesson of wisdom. You certainly have had
time enough to guess the riddle of life. Tell us poor mortals, then, how
we may be happy!"

The lion's head fixed its eyes thoughtfully upon the fire, and the whole
chair assumed an aspect of deep meditation. Finally, it beckoned to
Grandfather with its elbow, and made a step sideways towards him, as if it
had a very important secret to communicate.

"As long as I have stood in the midst of human affairs," said the chair,
with a very oracular enunciation, "I have constantly observed that
JUSTICE, TRUTH, and LOVE, are the chief ingredients of every happy life."

"Justice, Truth, and Love!" exclaimed Grandfather. "We need not exist two
centuries to find out that these qualities are essential to our happiness.
This is no secret. Every human being is born with the instinctive
knowledge of it."

"Ah!" cried the chair, drawing back in surprise. "From what I have
observed of the dealings of man with man, and nation with nation, I never
should have suspected that they knew this all-important secret. And, with
this eternal lesson written in your soul, do you ask me to sift new wisdom
for you, out of my petty existence of two or three centuries?"

"But, my dear chair--" said Grandfather.

"Not a word more," interrupted the chair; "here I close my lips for the
next hundred years. At the end of that period, if I shall have discovered
any new precepts of happiness, better than what Heaven has already taught
you, they shall assuredly be given to the world."

In the energy of its utterance, the oaken chair seemed to stamp its foot,
and trod, (we hope unintentionally) upon Grandfather's toe. The old
gentleman started, and found that he had been asleep in the great chair,
and that his heavy walking stick had fallen down across his foot.



"Grandfather," cried little Alice, clapping her hands, "you must dream a
new dream, every night, about our chair!"

Laurence, and Clara, and Charley, said the same. But the good old
gentleman shook his head, and declared that here ended the history, real
or fabulous, of GRANDFATHER'S CHAIR.





BIOGRAPHICAL STORIES


BENJAMIN WEST,
SIR ISAAC NEWTON,
SAMUEL JOHNSON
OLIVER CROMWELL,
BENJAMIN FRANKLIN,
QUEEN CHRISTINA.


    This small volume, and others of a similar character, from the
    same hand, have not been composed without a deep sense of
    responsibility. The author regards children as sacred, and would
    not, for the world, cast any thing into the fountain of a young
    heart, that might embitter and pollute its waters. And, even in
    point of the reputation to be aimed at, juvenile literature is as
    well worth cultivating as any other. The writer, if he succeed in
    pleasing his little readers, may hope to be remembered by them
    till their own old age--a far longer period of literary existence
    than is generally attained, by those who seek immortality from the
    judgments of full grown men.




Chapter I


When Edward Temple was about eight or nine years old, he was afflicted
with a disorder of the eyes. It was so severe, and his sight was naturally
so delicate, that the surgeon felt some apprehensions lest the boy should
become totally blind. He therefore gave strict directions to keep him in a
darkened chamber, with a bandage over his eyes. Not a ray of the blessed
light of Heaven could be suffered to visit the poor lad.

This was a sad thing for Edward! It was just the same as if there were to
be no more sunshine, nor moonlight, nor glow of the cheerful fire, nor
light of lamps. A night had begun which was to continue perhaps for
months,--a longer and drearier night than that which voyagers are compelled
to endure, when their ship is ice-bound, throughout the winter, in the
Arctic Ocean. His dear father and mother, his brother George, and the
sweet face of little Emily Robinson, must all vanish, and leave him in
utter darkness and solitude. Their voices and footsteps, it is true, would
be heard around him; he would feel his mother's embrace, and the kind
pressure of all their hands; but still it would seem as if they were a
thousand miles away.

And then his studies! They were to be entirely given up. This was another
grievous trial; for Edward's memory hardly went back to the period when he
had not known how to read. Many and many a holiday had he spent at his
book, poring over its pages until the deepening twilight confused the
print, and made all the letters run into long words. Then would he press
his hands across his eyes, and wonder why they pained him so, and, when
the candles were lighted, what was the reason that they burned so dimly,
like the moon in a foggy night. Poor little fellow! So far as his eyes
were concerned, he was already an old man, and needed a pair of spectacles
almost as much as his own grandfather did.

And now, alas! the time was come, when even grandfather's spectacles could
not have assisted Edward to read. After a few bitter tears, which only
pained his eyes the more, the poor boy submitted to the surgeon's orders.
His eyes were bandaged, and, with his mother on one side, and his little
friend Emily on the other, he was led into a darkened chamber.

"Mother, I shall be very miserable," said Edward, sobbing.

"Oh, no, my dear child!" replied his mother, cheerfully. "Your eyesight
was a precious gift of Heaven, it is true; but you would do wrong to be
miserable for its loss, even if there were no hope of regaining it. There
are other enjoyments, besides what come to us through our eyes."

"None that are worth having," said Edward.

"Ah! but you will not think so long," rejoined Mrs. Temple, with
tenderness. "All of us--your father, and myself, and George, and our sweet
Emily--will try to find occupation and amusement for you. We will use all
our eyes to make you happy. Will not they be better than a single pair?"

"I will sit by you all day long," said Emily, in her low, sweet voice,
putting her hand into that of Edward.

"And so will I, Ned," said George, his elder brother,--"school time and
all, if my father will permit me."

Edward's brother George was three or four years older than himself, a
fine, hardy lad, of a bold and ardent temper. He was the leader of his
comrades in all their enterprises and amusements. As to his proficiency at
study, there was not much to be said. He had sense and ability enough to
have made himself a scholar, but found so many pleasanter things to do,
that he seldom took hold of a book with his whole heart. So fond was
George of boisterous sports and exercises, that it was really a great
token of affection and sympathy, when he offered to sit all day long in a
dark chamber, with his poor brother Edward.

As for little Emily Robinson, she was the daughter of one of Mr. Temple's
dearest friends. Ever since her mother went to Heaven, (which was soon
after Emily's birth,) the little girl had dwelt in the household where we
now find her. Mr. and Mrs. Temple seemed to love her as well as their own
children; for they had no daughter except Emily; nor would the boys have
known the blessing of a sister, had not this gentle stranger come to teach
them what it was. If I could show you Emily's face, with her dark hair
smoothed away from her forehead, you would be pleased with her look of
simplicity and loving-kindness, but might think that she was somewhat too
grave for a child of seven years old. But you would not love her the less
for that.

So brother George, and this loving little girl, were to be Edward's
companions and playmates, while he should be kept prisoner in the dark
chamber. When the first bitterness of his grief was over, he began to feel
that there might be some comforts and enjoyments in life, even for a boy
whose eyes were covered with a bandage.

"I thank you, dear mother," said he, with only a few sobs, "and you,
Emily; and you too, George. You will all be very kind to me, I know. And
my father--will not he come and see me, every day?"

"Yes, my dear boy," said Mr. Temple; for, though invisible to Edward, he
was standing close beside him. "I will spend some hours of every day with
you. And as I have often amused you by relating stories and adventures,
while you had the use of your eyes, I can do the same, now that you are
unable to read. Will this please you, Edward?"

"Oh, very much!" replied Edward.

"Well then," said his father, "this evening we will begin the series of
Biographical Stories, which I promised you some time ago."




Chapter II


When evening came, Mr. Temple found Edward considerably revived in
spirits, and disposed to be resigned to his misfortune. Indeed, the figure
of the boy, as it was dimly seen by the fire-light, reclining in a well
stuffed easy-chair, looked so very comfortable that many people might have
envied him. When a man's eyes have grown old with gazing at the ways of
the world, it does not seem such a terrible misfortune to have them
bandaged.

Little Emily Robinson sat by Edward's side, with the air of an
accomplished nurse. As well as the duskiness of the chamber would permit,
she watched all his motions, and each varying expression of his face, and
tried to anticipate her patient's wishes, before his tongue could utter
them. Yet it was noticeable, that the child manifested an indescribable
awe and disquietude, whenever she fixed her eyes on the bandage; for to
her simple and affectionate heart, it seemed as if her dear friend Edward
was separated from her, because she could not see his eyes. A friend's
eyes tell us many things, which could never be spoken by the tongue.

George, likewise, looked awkward and confused, as stout and healthy boys
are accustomed to do, in the society of the sick or afflicted. Never
having felt pain or sorrow, they are abashed, from not knowing how to
sympathize with the sufferings of others.

"Well, my dear Edward," inquired Mrs. Temple, "is your chair quite
comfortable? and has your little nurse provided for all your wants? If so,
your father is ready to begin his stories."

"Oh, I am very well now," answered Edward, with a faint smile. "And my
ears have not forsaken me, though my eyes are good for nothing. So, pray,
dear father, begin!"

It was Mr. Temple's design to tell the children a series of true stories,
the incidents of which should be taken from the childhood and early life
of eminent people. Thus he hoped to bring George, and Edward, and Emily,
into closer acquaintance with the famous persons who have lived in other
times, by showing that they also had been children once. Although Mr.
Temple was scrupulous to relate nothing but what was founded on fact, yet
he felt himself at liberty to clothe the incidents of his narrative in a
new coloring, so that his auditors might understand them the better.

"My first story," said he, "shall be about a painter of pictures."

"Dear me!" cried Edward, with a sigh. "I am afraid I shall never look at
pictures any more."

"We will hope for the best," answered his father. "In the mean time, you
must try to see things within your own mind."

Mr. Temple then began the following story:



BENJAMIN WEST


BORN 1738. DIED 1820.

In the year 1738, there came into the world, in the town of Springfield,
Pennsylvania, a Quaker infant, from whom his parents and neighbors looked
for wonderful things. A famous preacher of the Society of Friends had
prophesied about little Ben, and foretold that he would be one of the most
remarkable characters that had appeared on earth since the days of William
Penn. On this account, the eyes of many people were fixed upon the boy.
Some of his ancestors had won great renown in the old wars of England and
France; but it was probably expected that Ben would become a preacher, and
would convert multitudes to the peaceful doctrines of the Quakers. Friend
West and his wife were thought to be very fortunate in having such a son.

Little Ben lived to the ripe age of six years, without doing any thing
that was worthy to be told in history. But, one summer afternoon, in his
seventh year, his mother put a fan into his hand, and bade him keep the
flies away from the face of a little babe, who lay fast asleep in the
cradle. She then left the room.

The boy waved the fan to-and-fro, and drove away the buzzing flies
whenever they had the impertinence to come near the baby's face. When they
had all flown out of the window, or into distant parts of the room, he
bent over the cradle, and delighted himself with gazing at the sleeping
infant. It was, indeed, a very pretty sight. The little personage in the
cradle slumbered peacefully, with its waxen hands under its chin, looking
as full of blissful quiet as if angels were singing lullabies in its ear.
Indeed, it must have been dreaming about Heaven; for, while Ben stooped
over the cradle, the little baby smiled.

"How beautiful she looks!" said Ben to himself. "What a pity it is, that
such a pretty smile should not last forever!"

Now Ben, at this period of his life, had never heard of that wonderful
art, by which a look, that appears and vanishes in a moment, may be made
to last for hundreds of years. But, though nobody had told him of such an
art, he may be said to have invented it for himself. On a table, near at
hand, there were pens and paper, and ink of two colors, black and red. The
boy seized a pen and sheet of paper, and kneeling down beside the cradle,
began to draw a likeness of the infant. While he was busied in this
manner, he heard his mother's step approaching, and hastily tried to
