ends of fire clay perforated, the body being filled with fire clay
spirals of the shape clearly shown in elevation in Fig. 2. The injector
valve for the creosote is shown to a larger scale in Fig. 3. This valve
has, however, been since considerably modified and improved. The feed
and exhaust valves, M, are actuated by cams keyed to a countershaft
driven by bevel wheels from the main shaft. The creosote pump, F, is
also worked by a cam on the same shaft, but the pumps, G H J, are worked
by eccentrics. A stop valve, N, is fixed to the supply pipe, P, under
which is place a back pressure valve to retain the pressure in the
combustion chamber. The engine is regulated by an ordinary Porter
governor actuating the throttle valve, O. An engine, as described, has
been constructed by Messrs. Adair & Co., engineers, Waterloo Road,
Liverpool, and has been running most satisfactorily for several weeks,
the results being clearly shown by the indicator diagrams (Figs. 5 and
6). The results obtained by this motor are very remarkable, and are a
long way in advance of any previous performance, as only a little over 1/2
lb. of fuel is used per i.h.p. per hour. It may be mentioned that the
temperature of the combustion chamber is calculated to be about
2,500 deg.F., and that of the exhaust gases does not exceed
180 deg.F.--_Industries._

[Illustration: Diagram from cylinder--25 in. diam, 18 in. stroke.
I.H.P., 63. Scale, 1/30 in. Mean pressure, 28.2 lb. FIG. 5.]

[Illustration: Diagram from air pump--15 in. diam., 18 in. stroke.
I.H.P., 23. Scale, 1/30 in--Mean pressure, 28.5 lb. FIG. 6.

DIAGRAMS FROM CYLINDER AND AIR PUMP.

Net indicated horse power, 40; revolutions per minute, 100; coal tar
consumed per hour, 20.5 lb.; coal tar per I.H.P. per hour, 0.512 lb.]

       *       *       *       *       *




AN INVESTIGATION INTO THE INTERNAL STRESSES OCCURRING IN CAST IRON
AND STEEL.

BY GENERAL NICHOLAS KALAKOUTZKY.


NO. I.

_Determination of the Influence of Internal Stresses on the Strength of
Materials._--We call internal stresses those which exist within the mass
of any hollow cylinder or other body, when it appears to be in a state
of repose, or not under the influence of external forces. When pressure
is applied to a hollow cylinder, either externally or internally, the
interior layers into which its walls may be conceived to be divided are
subjected to a new series of stresses, the magnitude of which is
independent of those already existing. These additional stresses combine
with the former in such a manner that at every point of the thickness of
the cylinder they have common resultants acting in various directions.
Thus, if we call t the internal stress existing at a distance r_x
from the axis of the cylinder, and in a direction tangential to its
cross section, and T the additional stress due to pressure inside the
cylinder acting at the same point and in the same direction, then the
newly developed stress will be t + T.

If R and r0 be the external and internal radii of the cylinder, and
if we suppose the external pressure _nil_, then, if the pressure inside
the bore be P0, the stress on the radius r_x is determined by the
following expression deduced from the well-known fundamental formulae of
Lame:[1]

           r0 squared      R squared + (r_x) squared
  T = P0 ------- . -------------
          R squared-r0 squared      (r_x) squared

From which we see that T is a maximum when r_x = r0, i.e., for
the layer immediately next to the bore of the cylinder. Calling t0
the internal stress in this layer, and T0 the stress resulting from
the action inside the bore of the pressure P0, and allowing that the
sum of both these quantities must not exceed the elastic limit U of the
material, we have--T0 = U - t0. And for this value of T0, the
corresponding pressure inside the bore will be

                R squared - r0 squared
  P = (U - t0) ----------.
                R squared + r0 squared

This pressure increases with the term (U - t0). With t0 positive,
i.e., when the internal stresses in the thickness of the hollow
cylinder are such that the metal of the layers nearest to the bore is
in a state of tension and that of the outer layers in a state of
compression, then the cylinder will have the least strength when t0
has the greatest numerical value. Such stresses are termed injurious
or detrimental stresses. With t0 negative, the strength of the
cylinder increases with the numerical value of t0, and those stresses
which cause compression in the layers nearest to the bore of the
cylinder and tension in the outer layers are termed beneficial or
useful stresses.

   [Footnote 1: Lame holds that in a homogeneous tube subjected to
   the action of two pressures, external and internal, the
   difference between the tension and the compression developed at
   any point of the thickness of the tube is a constant quantity,
   and that the sum of these two stresses is inversely proportional
   to the square of the radius of the layer under consideration. Let
   r0, R, and r_x be the respective radii, p0, p¹, and p_x the
   corresponding pressures, and T0, T¹, and T_x, the tensions, then
   we have:

                T0 - p0 = T_x - p_x              (1)
          (T0 + p0) r0 squared = (T_x + p_x) (r_x) squared     (2)
              T_x - p_x = T¹ - p¹                (3)
      (T_x + p_x)(r_x) squared = (T¹ + P¹)R squared            (4)

   if the radii are known and p and p¹ be given, then deducing from
   the above equations the values T0 and T¹, and also the variable
   pressure p_x, we determine--

            p0 r0 squared(R squared + (r_x) squared) - p¹ R squared((r_x) squared + r0 squared)
      T_x = ------------------------------------------
                        (R squared + r0 squared) (r_x) squared

   This is the formula of Lame, from which, making p¹ = 0, we obtain
   the expression in the text.]

For these reasons, and in order to increase the power of resistance of a
cylinder, it is necessary to obtain on the inner layer a state of
initial compression approaching as nearly as possible to the elastic
limit of the metal. This proposition is in reality no novelty, since it
forms the basis of the theory of hooped guns, by means of which the
useful initial stresses which should be imparted to the metal throughout
the gun can be calculated, and the extent to which the gun is thereby
strengthened determined. The stresses which arise in a hollow cylinder
when it is formed of several layers forced on one upon another, with a
definite amount of shrinkage, we call the stress of built-up cylinders,
in order to distinguish them from natural stresses developed in
homogeneous masses, and which vary in character according to the
conditions of treatment which the metal has undergone. If we conceive a
hollow cylinder made up of a great number of very thin layers--for
instance, of wire wound on with a definite tension--in which case the
inner layer would represent the bore of the gun, then the distribution
of the internal stresses and their magnitude would very nearly approach
the ideally perfect useful stresses which should exist in a homogeneous
cylinder; but in hollow cylinders built up of two, three, and four
layers of great thickness, there would be a considerable deviation from
the conditions which should be aimed at.

The magnitude of the stresses in built-up cylinders is determined by
calculation, on the presumption that initial stresses do not exist in
the respective layers of the tube and of the hoops which make up the
walls of the cylinder. Nevertheless, Rodman, as early as the year 1857,
first drew attention to the fact that when metal is cast and then
cooled, under certain conditions, internal stresses are necessarily
developed; and these considerations led him, in the manufacture of cast
iron guns, to cool the bore with water and to heat the outside of the
moulds after casting. Although Rodman's method was adopted everywhere,
yet up to the present time no experiments of importance have been made
with the view of investigating the internal stresses which he had drawn
attention to, and in the transition from cast iron to steel guns the
question has been persistently shelved, and has only very lately
attracted serious attention. With the aid of the accepted theory
relating to the internal stresses in the metal of hooped guns, we can
form a clear idea of the most advantageous character for them to assume
both in homogeneous and in built-up hollow cylinders. In proof of this,
we can adduce the labors of Colonels Pashkevitch and Duchene, the former
of whom published an account of his investigations in the _Artillery
Journal_ for 1884--St. Petersburg--and the latter in a work entitled
"Basis of the Theory of Hooped Guns," from which we borrow some of the
following information.

The maximum resistance of a tube or hollow cylinder to external stresses
will be attained when all the layers are expanded simultaneously to the
elastic limit of the material employed. In that case, observing the same
notation as that already adopted, we have--

              R - r0
      P0 = T --------        (1)
               r0

But since the initial internal stresses before firing, that is previous
to the action of the pressure inside the bore, should not exceed the
elastic limit,[2] the value of R will depend upon this condition.

   [Footnote 2: We must, however, remark that in a built-up hollow
   cylinder the compression of the metal at the surface of the bore
   may exceed the elastic limit. This cannot occur in the case of
   natural stresses.]

In a hollow cylinder which in a state of rest is free from initial
stresses, the fiber of which, under fire, will undergo the maximum
extension, will be that nearest to the internal surface, and the amount
of extension of all the remaining layers will decrease with the increase
of the radius. This extension is thus represented--

                   (r0) squared        (r_x) squared + R squared
    (t_x)¹ = P0 ------------ . ------------
                 R squared - (r0) squared       (r_x) squared

Therefore, to obtain the maximum resistance in the cylinder, the value
t_x of the initial stress will be determined by the difference (T - t'_x),[*need to check the prime with library or work out the equations]
and since P0 is given by Equation (1), then

             /        r0        (r_x) squared + R squared \
    t_x = T ( 1 - ---------- . ------------- )     (2)
             \     R0 + r0         (r_x) squared   /

The greatest value t_x = t0 corresponds to the surface of the bore
and must be t0 = -T, therefore

       r0 squared + R squared
    --------------- = 2
      r0 (R + r0)

whence P0 = T sqrt(2) = 1.41 T.

From the whole of the preceding, it follows that in a homogeneous
cylinder under fire we can only attain simultaneous expansion of all the
layers when certain relations between the radii obtain, and on the
assumption that the maximum pressure admissible in the bore does not
exceed 1.41 U.

Equation (2) may be written thus--

                 R       r_x - Rr
     t_x = T -------- . ----------        (3)
               R + r0     (r_x) squared

Substituting successively r_x = r0 and r_x = R, we obtain
expressions for the stresses on the external and internal radii--

               R - r0                     R   R - r0
     t_R  = T --------  and  t_r0  = -T ---- --------
               R + r0                    r0   R + r0

Therefore, in a homogeneous hollow cylinder, in which the internal
stresses are theoretically most advantageous, the layer situated next to
the bore must be in a state of compression, and the amount of
compression relative to the tension in the external layer is measured by
the inverse ratio of the radii of these layers. It is further evident
that the internal stresses will obey a definite but very simple law,
namely, there will be in the hollow cylinder a layer whose radius is
sqrt(R r0), in which the stress is _nil_; from this layer the
stresses increase toward the external and the internal radii of the
cylinder, where they attain a maximum, being in compression in the
internal layers and in tension in the external ones.

The internal pressures corresponding to these stresses may be found by
means of very simple calculations. The expression for this purpose,
reduced to its most convenient form, is as follows:

                 R      /  R     \   /      r0 \
      p_x = T -------- (  --- - 1 ) ( 1 - ----- )     (4)
               R + r0   \ r_x    /   \     r_x /

In order to represent more clearly the distribution of stresses and
pressures in the metal of a homogeneous ideally perfect hollow cylinder,
let us take, as an example, the barrel of a 6 in. gun--153 mm. Let us
suppose T = 3,000 atmospheres; therefore, under the most favorable
conditions, P0 = 1.41 T, or 4,230 atmospheres. From Equation (1) we
determine R = 184.36 mm. With these data were calculated the internal
stresses and the pressures from which the curve represented in Fig. 1 is
constructed. The stresses developed under fire with a pressure in the
bore of 4,230 atmospheres are represented by a line parallel to the axis
of the abscissae, since their value is the same throughout all the layers
of metal and equal to the elastic limit, 3,000 atmospheres. If, previous
to firing, the metal of the tube were free from any internal stresses,
then the resistance of the tube would be

               R squared - r squared_0
      P0 = U ----------- ,
               R squared + r squared_0

or 2,115 atmospheres--that is, one-half that in the ideally perfect
cylinder. From this we perceive the great advantage of developing useful
initial stresses in the metal and of regulating the conditions of
manufacture accordingly. Unless due attention be paid to such
precautions, and injurious stresses be permitted to develop themselves
in the metal, then the resistance of the cylinder will always be less
than 2,115 atmospheres; besides which, when the initial stresses exceed
a certain intensity, the elastic limit will be exceeded, even without
the action of external pressures, so that the bore of the gun will not
be in a condition to withstand any pressure because the tensile stress
due to such pressure, and which acts tangentially to the circumference,
will increase the stress, already excessive, in the layers of the
cylinder; and this will occur, notwithstanding the circumstance that the
metal, according to the indications of test pieces taken from the bore,
possessed the high elastic limit of 3,000 atmospheres.

[Illustration: Fig. 1]

In order to understand more thoroughly the difference of the law of
distribution of useful internal stresses as applied to homogeneous or to
built-up cylinders, let us imagine the latter having the external and
internal radii of the same length as in the first case, but as being
composed of two layers--that is to say, made up of a tube with one hoop
shrunk on under the most favorable conditions--when the internal radius
of the hoop = sqrt(R v0) or 118.7 mm., Fig. 2, has been traced,
after calculating, by means of the usual well known formulae, the amount
of pressure exerted by the hoop on the tube, as well as the stresses and
pressures inside the tube and the hoop, before and after firing. A
comparison of these curves with those on Fig. 1 will show the difference
between the internal stresses in a homogeneous and in a built-up
cylinder. In the case of the hooped gun, the stresses in the layers
before firing, both in the tube and in the hoop, diminish in intensity
from the inside of the bore outward; but this decrease is comparatively
small. In the first place, the layer in which the stresses are = 0 when
the gun is in a state of rest does not exist. Secondly, under the
pressure produced by the discharge, all the layers do not acquire
simultaneously a strain equal to the elastic limit. Only two of them,
situated on the internal radii of the tube and hoop, reach such a
stress; whence it follows that a cylinder so constructed possesses less
resistance than one which is homogeneous and at the same time endowed
with ideally perfect useful initial stresses. The work done by the
forces acting on a homogeneous cylinder is represented by the area _a b
c d_, and in a built-up cylinder by the two areas _a' b' c' d'_ and _a"
b" c" d"_. Calculation shows also that the resistance of the built-up
cylinder is only 3,262 atmospheres, or 72 per cent. of the resistance of
a homogeneous cylinder. By increasing the number of layers or rows of
hoops shrunk on, while the total thickness of metal and the caliber of
the gun remains the same, we also increase the number of layers
participating equally in the total resistance to the pressure in the
bore, and taking up strains which are not only equal throughout, but are
also the greatest possible. We see an endeavor to realize this idea in
the systems advocated by Longridge, Schultz, and others, either by
enveloping the inner tubes in numerous coils of wire, or, as in the
later imitations of this system, by constructing guns with a greater
number of thin hoops shrunk on in the customary manner. But in wire
guns, as well as in those with a larger number of hoops--from four to
six rows and more--the increase in strength anticipated is acknowledged
to be obtained in spite of a departure from one of the fundamental
principles of the theory of hooping, since in the majority of guns of
this type the initial compression of the metal at the surface of the
bore exceeds its elastic limit.[3] We have these examples of departure
from first principles, coupled with the assumption that initial stresses
do not exist in any form in the metal of the inner tube previous to the
hoops having been shrunk on; but if the tube happen to be under the
influence of the most advantageous initial stresses, and we proceed
either to hoop it or to envelope it with wire, according to the
principles at present in vogue, then, without doubt, we shall injure the
metal of the tube; its powers of resistance will be diminished instead
of increased, because the metal at the surface of the bore would be
compressed to an amount exceeding twice its elastic limit. An example of
injury inflicted in this way is to be found in the method adopted for
hooping cast iron tubes cast by Rodman's process. If we take into
consideration the undoubted fact of the existence to a considerable
extent of useful initial stresses in these tubes, then the hoops should
be put on them either with very little shrinkage or none at all, whereas
ordnance authorities everywhere have applied to this case methods which
are only correct for tubes which are free from initial stresses.

   [Footnote 3: In certain cases this, of course, may be an
   advantage, as, for instance, when the inner tube is under
   injurious initial stresses; but then, in order to be able to
   apply the necessary shrinkage, we must know the magnitude of
   these stresses.]

[Illustration: Fig. 2]

During the process of hooping guns it is very important to know how to
take into account the value and mode of distribution of the prejudicial
stresses in the inner tube, should such exist. Knowing these stresses,
it is possible, by regulating the tension of the hoops, to reduce the
compression of the metal at the surface of the bore to the proper
extent, thus doing away with the previously existing tension, and by
that means removing a source of weakness in the tube. In precisely the
same way in the shrinkage of gun hoops attention must be paid to the
character and value of the stresses which arise in the course of their
manufacture; otherwise it will be impossible to hoop the barrel
throughout in a proper manner. If prejudicial stresses exist in the
metal of a hoop before it is put in its place, then, when the gun is
fired, if it had been shrunk on with the degree of tension usually
allowed, the layer situated in the internal radius will be extended
beyond admissible limits, thereby causing the resistance of the gun to
be less than that prescribed.[4]

   [Footnote 4: When the inner tube is strengthened by means of
   wire, the initial or natural stresses in the latter may be
   neglected on account of its thinness; but when the thickness of
   the hoops is reduced, and the number of layers thereby increased,
   then the value of the initial stresses in these hoops is a very
   important factor with respect to the decrease or increase Of the
   powers of resistance of the gun.]

It is evident, from what has been said, that in order to determine
precisely the resistance of hollow cylinders to internal pressures, and
to make the correct calculations for hooping tubes, it is absolutely
necessary to know whether internal initial stresses exist in the tube
and in the hoops, and to ascertain what their nature and intensity may
be--that is to say, whether they are useful or detrimental; yet it is
incontestable that in the construction of modern ordnance no attention
has been paid to the investigations indicated. If it be possible to
ignore these considerations in the manufacture of guns of small caliber,
and where the thickness of metal is not sufficiently great to admit of
strongly developed internal stresses, such is by no means the case with
the colossal and costly weapons of the present day. In these the
thickness of metal in the tube and hoops is very great; hence the
extreme probability of very considerable internal stresses developing
themselves. That the strength of large guns is often far below that
anticipated is demonstrated, year by year, by the repeated cases of
failure. Consciousness as to the want of strength in such guns is made
evident by the precautionary measures as to their use everywhere
adopted. The heavy artillery produced in the gun factories of Europe is
constructed with all the skill, science, and experience which engineers
and artillerists can command, and therefore it would seem that instances
of defective strength should not arise. Such cases, however, do occur
everywhere, and irresistibly give rise to the suspicion that not only is
the system of construction of guns of large caliber faulty, but also
that the conditions of their manufacture must be considered as
defective. Bearing in mind the enormous sums of money expended by every
nation in order to secure an armament of completely trustworthy guns,
this question demands speedy and searching investigation. The first step
in this direction is the study of the internal stresses inherent in the
metal; because, if such exist, and are capable of attaining, under
certain conditions, considerable magnitudes, then it is absolutely
necessary to take advantage of them in order to increase the resistance
of the metal, instead of allowing them to act to its detriment.

The study of natural internal stresses is of importance, not only with
reference to gun making, but also in respect of other structures where
great resistance is required. All have heard of the sudden failure of
crank shafts and piston rods, of the bursting of boiler shells and
tubes, of the breaking of tires, etc. In the majority of cases the
investigations into the causes of such sudden failures have not led to
any definite results. It has usually been found that the metal possessed
a satisfactory elastic resistance, and satisfied all the conditions set
down in the specifications. Had attention been paid during these
investigations to the state of the internal stresses in the metal, the
cause of unlooked-for accidents might have been explained, and steps
would consequently have been taken to avoid them in future.

We are also familiar with the development of considerable internal
stresses in various kinds of steel articles which are subjected to
hardening and tempering; for example, as dies, tools of various
description, sword blades, and thin plates rolled at a low temperature
or subjected to cold hammering. In the foundry the appearance of
internal stresses is of still more frequent occurrence. The neglect of
certain practical rules in casting, and during the subsequent cooling,
leads to the spontaneous breakage of castings after a few hours or days,
although taken out of the sand apparently perfectly sound. Projectiles
for penetrating armor plate, and made of cast steel, as well as shells
which have been forged and hardened, and in which the metal possessed an
ultimate resistance of over twelve thousand (12,000) atmospheres, with
an elastic limit of more than six or seven thousand atmospheres, will
crack to a serious extent, and even break up in the lathe, while the
recess for the copper ring is being turned out. In shell of this nature,
as well as in chilled cast iron shell, the heads are apt to fly off
spontaneously either while they are lying in store or during transport.
Such phenomena, it seems to me, demonstrate the existence of internal
