
"None at all, Hugh. The question is what do they mean to do with
us. We've got food enough here to last us with ease for a week; and
with our pistols and swords, to say nothing of the duck gun, we
could hold this cabin against any number."

Presently they heard the men on deck hailing another boat.

"I suppose that is that rascal Fulke," Rupert said. "I hope that I
am not quarrelsome by disposition, Hugh; but the next time I meet
that fellow I will, if time and place be suitable, come to a
reckoning with him."

There was a movement above, and then a bump came against the side.
The other boat had come up.

"Now we shall see what they are up to."

Nothing, however, came of it. There was some low talking above, and
some coarse laughter.

"Master Rupert," Hugh exclaimed suddenly, "I am standing in water!"

Rupert had half lain down again, but he leapt up now.

"They have scuttled the boat, Hugh, and mean to drown us like rats;
the cowards."

"What's to be done now, Master Rupert?" Hugh asked.

"Let us try the door, Hugh."

A single effort showed that they were powerless here. The door was
strong, it was fastened outside, and it was heavily weighted with
coils of rope and other substances.

"The water rises fast. It's over our ankles," Hugh said quietly.

The bumping of a boat was again heard outside, then a trampling of
feet, and all was still again.

"They have taken to the boats."

Not all, however, for through the door there came a shout,
"Goodbye, Master Holliday," and a loud, jeering laugh.

"Au revoir, Sir Richard Fulke," Rupert shouted back; "and when we
meet next, beware!"

"Ha, ha! it won't be in this world;" and they heard their enemy get
into the boat.

"Now, Hugh, we must set to work; we have got the boat to
ourselves."

"But what are we to do, Master Rupert?"

Rupert was silent for a minute.

"There is but one way, Hugh. We must blow up the boat."

"Blow up the boat!" Hugh repeated, in astonishment.

"Yes, Hugh. At least, blow the deck up. Give me that keg of
powder."

Hugh opened the locker. It was, fortunately, still above water.

"Now, Hugh, put it in that high locker there, just under the deck.
Knock its head out.

"Now tie a pistol to those hooks just above, so that its muzzle
points at the powder.

"Now for a piece of cord."

"But it will blow us into smash, Master Rupert."

"I hope not, Hugh; but we must take our chance. I would rather that
than be drowned gradually. But look, the water is up nearly to our
waists now; and the boat must be pretty nearly sinking. I will take
hold of the cord. Then both of us throw ourselves down to the
floor, and I will pull the string. Three feet of water over us
ought to save us; but mind, the instant you feel the shock, jump up
and rush for the opening, for it is pretty sure to sink her.

"Now!"

The lads dived under water, and the instant afterwards there was a
tremendous explosion. The deck of the boat was blown into the air
in a hundred fragments, and at the same moment the boat sank under
the water.

A few seconds later Rupert and Hugh were swimming side by side. For
a while neither spoke--they were shaken and half stunned by the
shock.

"It is a thick fog, Hugh. All the better; for if those scoundrels
come back, as is likely enough, there is no chance of their finding
us, for I can hardly see you, though I am touching you. Now we must
paddle about, and try to get hold of a spar or a bit of plank."



Chapter 12: The Sad Side Of War.

Before firing the keg of powder, Rupert and Hugh had rid themselves
of their jackboots, coats, and vests, and they therefore swam
easily and confidently.

"Listen, Hugh! Here is the boat coming back again," Rupert
exclaimed. "This thick mist is fortunate, for they can't see twenty
yards. We can always dive when they come near. Mind you go down
without making a splash. We are all right at present; the boat is
going to our right, let us swim quietly in the other direction."

Presently they heard a voice in English say, "It is no use our
troubling ourselves. It's a mere waste of time. The young rascals
are dead. Drowned or blown up, what matters it? They will never
trouble you again."

"You don't know the villains as well as I do. They have as many
lives as cats. I could have sworn that they were burned at that
mill, for I watched till it fell, and not a soul came out; and to
this moment I don't know how they escaped, unless they flew away in
the smoke. Then I thought at any rate the chief rogue was done for,
when Muller wrote to tell me he was going to finish him for me the
next day. Then they both got through that day's fighting by the
Scheldt, though I hear they were in the front of it. And now, when
I leave them fastened up like puppies in a basket, in a sinking
boat, comes this explosion, and all is uncertain again."

"Not a bit of it," the other voice said; "they simply preferred a
sudden death to a slow one. The matter is simple enough."

"I wish I could think so," the other said. "But I tell you, after
this night's work I shall never feel my life's safe for one hour,
till I hear certain news of their death.

"Stop rowing," he said, in Dutch. "There is a bit of a plank; we
must be just on the place where she blew up! Listen, does anyone
hear anything?"

There was a long silence, and then he said, "Row about for half an
hour. It's as dark as a wolf's mouth, but we may come upon them."

In the meantime, the two lads were swimming steadily and quietly
away.

Presently Hugh said, "I must get rid of my sword, Master Rupert, it
seems pulling me down. I don't like to lose it, for it was my
grandfather's."

"You had better lose the grandfather's sword, Hugh, than the
grandson's life. Loose your belt, Hugh, and let it go. Mine is no
weight in comparison. I'll stick to it as long as I can, for it may
be useful; but if needs be, it must follow yours."

"Which way do you think the shore lies?" Hugh asked, after having,
with a sigh of regret, loosed his sword belt and let it go.

"I have no idea, Hugh. It's no use swimming now, for with nothing
to fix our eyes on, we may be going round in a circle. All we need
do is to keep ourselves afloat till the mist clears up, or daylight
comes."

For an hour they drifted quietly.

Hugh exclaimed, "I hear a voice."

"So do I, Hugh. It may be on shore, it may be in a boat. Let us
make for it in either case."

In five minutes they saw close ahead of them a large boat, which,
with its sail hanging idly by the mast, was drifting downstream.
Two boatmen were sitting by the tiller, smoking their pipes.

"Heave us a rope," Hugh said in Dutch. "We have had an upset, and
shall be glad to be out of this."

The boatmen gave a cry of surprise, but at once leapt to their
feet, and would have thrown a rope, but by this time the lads were
alongside, and leaning over they helped them into the boat. Then
they looked with astonishment at their suddenly arrived guests.

"We are English soldiers," Hugh said, "on our way to Bergen op
Zoom, when by some carelessness a keg of powder blew up, our boat
went to the bottom, and we have been swimming for it for the last
couple of hours."

"Are you the English officer and soldier who left Dort this
afternoon?" one of the men said. "We saw you come down to the quay
with Mynheer Von Duyk and his daughter. Our boat lay next to the
boat you went by."

"That is so," Hugh said. "Are you going to Bergen? We have enough
dollars left to pay our passage."

"You would be welcome in any case," the boatman said. "Hans
Petersen is not a man to bargain with shipwrecked men. But go
below. There is a fire there. I will lend you some dry clothes, and
a glass of hot schnapps will warm your blood again."

Arrived at Bergen, one of the boatmen, at Rupert's request, went up
into the town, and returned with a merchant of ready-made clothes,
followed by his servant bearing a selection of garments such as
Rupert had said that they would require, and in another half hour,
after a handsome present to the boatmen, Rupert and Hugh landed,
dressed in the costume of a Dutch gentleman and burgher
respectively. Their first visit was to an armourer's shop, where
Hugh was provided with a sword, in point of temper and make fully
equal to that with which he had so reluctantly parted. Then, hiring
horses, they journeyed by easy stages to Huy, a town on the Meuse,
six leagues above Liege, which Marlborough, again forbidden by the
Dutch deputies to give battle when he had every prospect of a great
victory, was besieging.

The capture of the fortress, and subsequently of Limberg, was all
the campaign of 1703 effected; whereas, had the English commander
been allowed to have his way, the great results which were not
obtained until after three years' further fighting might at once
have been gained.

Rupert was greeted with enthusiasm by his comrades on his return.
After the battle before Antwerp the duke had caused inquiries to be
made as to the fate of his young friend, and had written to Dort,
and had received an answer from Rupert announcing his convalescence
and speedy return to duty.

Upon hearing his tale of the fresh attempt upon his life by Sir
Richard Fulke, the commander-in-chief wrote to the States General,
as the government of Holland was called, and requested that orders
should be issued for the arrest of Sir Richard Fulke, wherever he
might be found, upon a charge of attempt at murder. Nothing was,
however, heard of him, and it was supposed that he had either
returned to England or passed into Germany.

After the capture of Limberg the army went into winter quarters,
and the 5th dragoons were allotted their old quarters near Liege.

During the campaign of 1703, although slight advantages had been
gained by the allies in Flanders, it was otherwise in Germany and
Italy, where the greatest efforts of the French had been made.
Beyond the Rhine the French and Bavarians had carried all before
them, and Villars, who commanded their armies here, had almost
effected a junction across the Alps with Vendome, who commanded the
French troops in Italy. Had success crowned their efforts, the
armies could have been passed at will to either one side or the
other of the Alps, and could have thrown themselves with
overwhelming force either upon Austria, or upon Prince Eugene, who
commanded the imperial troops in Italy. The mountaineers of the
Tyrol, however, flew to arms, and held their passes with such
extreme bravery that neither the Bavarians on the north, nor the
French on the south, could make any progress, and the design had
for a time been abandoned.

Austria was paralyzed by the formidable insurrection of Hungary,
and it appeared certain that Vienna would in the ensuing campaign
fall into the hands of the French.

During the Winter Marlborough laboured earnestly to prepare for the
important campaign which must take place in the spring, and after
the usual amount of difficulties, arising from private and
political enemies at home and in Holland, he succeeded in carrying
out his plan, and in arranging that the Dutch should hold their
frontier line alone, and that he should carry the rest of his army
into Germany.

The position there seemed well-nigh desperate. Marshal Tallard,
with 45,000 men, was posted on the Upper Rhine, in readiness to
advance through the Black Forest and join the advanced force and
the Bavarians--who also numbered 45,000 men, and the united army
was to advance upon Vienna, which, so weakened was the empire, was
defended only by an army of 20,000 men, placed on the frontier.

On the 8th of May, Marlborough set out with his army, crossed the
Meuse at Maestricht, and arrived at Bonn on the 28th of that month.
Marching up the Rhine, he crossed it at Coblentz on the 26th, and
pushed on to Mundlesheim, where he met Prince Eugene, who now
commanded the allied force there. Next only to Marlborough himself,
Eugene was the greatest general of the age--skillful, dashing yet
prudent, brave to a fault--for a general can be too brave--frank,
sincere, and incapable of petty jealousy.

Between him and Marlborough, from the date of their first meeting,
the most cordial friendship, and the most loyal cooperation
prevailed. Each was always anxious to give the other credit, and
thought more of each other's glory than their own. So rapidly had
Marlborough marched, that only his cavalry had come up; and Prince
Eugene, reviewing them, remarked that they were the finest body of
men he had ever seen.

A few days later the Prince of Baden came down from the Austrian
army of the Danube to meet him. Eugene and Marlborough wished the
prince to take the command of the army of the Rhine, leaving the
army of the Danube to their joint command. The prince, however,
stood upon his rank; and it was finally arranged that Eugene should
command the army of the Rhine, and that Marlborough and the Prince
of Baden should command the army of the Danube on alternate
days--an arrangement so objectionable that it is surprising it did
not terminate in disaster.

Marlborough at once marched with his force, and making his way with
great difficulty through the long and narrow defile of Gieslingen,
effected a junction with the Prince of Baden's army; and found
himself on the 2nd of July at the head of an army of 96 battalions,
202 squadrons of horse, and 48 guns; confronting the French and
Bavarian army, consisting of 88 battalions, 160 squadrons, 90 guns,
and 40 mortars, in a strong position on the Danube.

The bulk of the army was on the right bank. On the left bank was
the height of Schellenberg, covering the passage of the river at
Donauwoerth, and held by 12,000 men, including 2500 horse. Along
the front of this hill was an old rampart, which the French were
engaged in strengthening when the allied army arrived. The latter
were not when they came up, according to the ordinary military
idea, in a condition to attack. Their camp had been broken up at
three in the morning, and it was two in the afternoon before they
arrived, after a long and fatiguing march, in front of the enemy's
position.

Thinking that it was probable that he would be forced to fight
immediately upon arriving, Marlborough had selected 530 picked men
from each battalion, amounting to 6000 men, together with thirty
squadrons of horse, as an advance guard; and close behind them
followed three regiments of Imperial grenadiers, under Prince
Louis. The total strength of this force was 10,500 men.

The French and Bavarian generals did not expect an attack, knowing
the distance that the troops had marched, and therefore quietly
continued their work of strengthening the entrenchments. The Duke
of Marlborough, seeing the work upon which they were engaged,
determined to attack at once, for, as he said to the Prince of
Baden, who wished to allow the men a night's rest, "Every hour we
delay will cost us a thousand men." Orders were therefore given for
an instant assault upon the hill of Schellenberg. Not only was the
position very strong in itself, but in front of it was a wood, so
thick that no attack could be made through it. It was necessary,
therefore, to attack by the flanks of the position, and one of
these flanks was covered by the fire of the fortress of
Donauwoerth.

"This is as bad as a siege," Rupert said, discontentedly, to his
friend Dillon, for their squadron formed part of the advance. "We
are always out of it."

"You are in a great hurry to get that bright cuirass of yours
dented, Rupert; but I agree with you, the cavalry are always out of
it. There go the infantry."

In splendid order the 6000 picked men moved forward against the
face of the enemy's position, extending from the wood to the
covered way of the fortress; but when they arrived within range of
grape, they were swept by so fearful a storm of shot that the line
wavered. General Goor and his bravest officers were struck down,
and the line fell into confusion.

The Bavarians seeing this, leapt from their entrenchment; and
pursued their broken assailants with the bayonet; but when
disordered by their rush, a battalion of English guards, which had
kept its ground, poured so tremendous a fire into their flank that
they fell back to their entrenchments.

"This looks serious," Dillon said, as the allies fell back. "The
enemy are two to our one, and they have got all the advantage of
position."

"There is the duke," Rupert exclaimed, "reforming them. There they
go again, and he is leading them himself. What a terrible fire!
Look how the officers of the staff are dropping! Oh, if the duke
should himself be hit! See, the infantry are slackening their
advance in spite of the shouts of their officers. They are
wavering! Oh, how dreadful; here they come back again."

"The duke is going to try again, Rupert. See how he is waving his
hand and exhorting the men to a fresh attack.

"That's right, lads, that's right.

"They have formed again; there they go."

Again the troops wavered and broke under the terrible rain of
bullets; and this time the Bavarians in great force leapt from
their entrenchments, and pounced down upon the broken line.

"Prepare to charge!" shouted General Lumley, who commanded the
cavalry. "Forward, trot, gallop, charge!"

With a cheer the cavalry, chafed at their long inaction while their
comrades were suffering so terribly, dashed forward, and threw
themselves furiously upon the Bavarians, driving them headlong back
to their lines, and then falling back under a tremendous fire,
which rolled over men and horses in numbers.

At this moment a cheer broke from the dispirited infantry, as the heads
of the three regiments of Imperial grenadiers, led by the Prince of
Baden, arrived on the ground. These, without halting, moved forward
towards the extreme left of the enemy's position--which had been left
to some extent unguarded, many of the troops having been called off to
repulse Marlborough's attack--pushed back two battalions of French
infantry, and entered the works.

General D'Arco, the French commanding officer, withdrew some of his
men from the centre to hold the Prince of Baden in check; and
Marlborough profited by the confusion so caused to endeavour, for
the fourth time, to carry the hill. His force was however, now
fearfully weakened; and General Lumley, after conferring with him
for a moment, rode back to the cavalry.

"The 5th dragoons will dismount and join the infantry," he said.
