another man's guidance."

"By my soul," said Sir Oliver, "you are as tart as verjuice this
morning! If you are bent upon a quarrel with me I must leave you to your
humor and drop into the 'Tete d'Or' here, for I marked a varlet pass
the door who bare a smoking dish, which had, methought, a most excellent
smell."

"Nenny, nenny," cried his comrade, laying his hand upon his knee; "we
have known each other over long to fall out, Oliver, like two raw pages
at their first epreuves. You must come with me first to the prince, and
then back to the hostel; though sure I am that it would grieve his heart
that any gentle cavalier should turn from his board to a common tavern.
But is not that my Lord Delewar who waves to us? Ha! my fair lord, God
and Our Lady be with you! And there is Sir Robert Cheney. Good-morrow,
Robert! I am right glad to see you."

The two knights walked their horses abreast, while Alleyne and Ford,
with John Norbury, who was squire to Sir Oliver, kept some paces behind
them, a spear's-length in front of Black Simon and of the Winchester
guidon-bearer. Norbury, a lean, silent man, had been to those parts
before, and sat his horse with a rigid neck; but the two young squires
gazed eagerly to right or left, and plucked each other's sleeves to call
attention to the many strange things on every side of them.

"See to the brave stalls!" cried Alleyne. "See to the noble armor set
forth, and the costly taffeta--and oh, Ford, see to where the scrivener
sits with the pigments and the ink-horns, and the rolls of sheepskin as
white as the Beaulieu napery! Saw man ever the like before?"

"Nay, man, there are finer stalls in Cheapside," answered Ford, whose
father had taken him to London on occasion of one of the Smithfield
joustings. "I have seen a silversmith's booth there which would serve to
buy either side of this street. But mark these houses, Alleyne, how they
thrust forth upon the top. And see to the coats-of-arms at every window,
and banner or pensil on the roof."

"And the churches!" cried Alleyne. "The Priory at Christchurch was a
noble pile, but it was cold and bare, methinks, by one of these, with
their frettings, and their carvings, and their traceries, as though some
great ivy-plant of stone had curled and wantoned over the walls."

"And hark to the speech of the folk!" said Ford. "Was ever such a
hissing and clacking? I wonder that they have not wit to learn English
now that they have come under the English crown. By Richard of Hampole!
there are fair faces amongst them. See the wench with the brown whimple!
Out on you, Alleyne, that you would rather gaze upon dead stone than on
living flesh!"

It was little wonder that the richness and ornament, not only of church
and of stall, but of every private house as well, should have impressed
itself upon the young squires. The town was now at the height of its
fortunes. Besides its trade and its armorers, other causes had combined
to pour wealth into it. War, which had wrought evil upon so many fair
cities around, had brought nought but good to this one. As her French
sisters decayed she increased, for here, from north, and from east,
and from south, came the plunder to be sold and the ransom money to be
spent. Through all her sixteen landward gates there had set for many
years a double tide of empty-handed soldiers hurrying Francewards, and
of enriched and laden bands who brought their spoils home. The prince's
court, too, with its swarm of noble barons and wealthy knights, many of
whom, in imitation of their master, had brought their ladies and their
children from England, all helped to swell the coffers of the burghers.
Now, with this fresh influx of noblemen and cavaliers, food and lodging
were scarce to be had, and the prince was hurrying forward his forces to
Dax in Gascony to relieve the overcrowding of his capital.

In front of the minster and abbey of St. Andrew's was a large square
crowded with priests, soldiers, women, friars, and burghers, who made it
their common centre for sight-seeing and gossip. Amid the knot of noisy
and gesticulating townsfolk, many small parties of mounted knights and
squires threaded their way towards the prince's quarters, where the
huge iron-clamped doors were thrown back to show that he held audience
within. Two-score archers stood about the gateway, and beat back from
time to time with their bow-staves the inquisitive and chattering crowd
who swarmed round the portal. Two knights in full armor, with lances
raised and closed visors, sat their horses on either side, while in the
centre, with two pages to tend upon him, there stood a noble-faced man
in flowing purple gown, who pricked off upon a sheet of parchment the
style and title of each applicant, marshalling them in their due order,
and giving to each the place and facility which his rank demanded. His
long white beard and searching eyes imparted to him an air of masterful
dignity, which was increased by his tabardlike vesture and the heraldic
barret cap with triple plume which bespoke his office.

"It is Sir William de Pakington, the prince's own herald and scrivener,"
whispered Sir Nigel, as they pulled up amid the line of knights who
waited admission. "Ill fares it with the man who would venture to
deceive him. He hath by rote the name of every knight of France or of
England; and all the tree of his family, with his kinships, coat-armor,
marriages, augmentations, abatements, and I know not what beside. We
may leave our horses here with the varlets, and push forward with our
squires."

Following Sir Nigel's counsel, they pressed on upon foot until they were
close to the prince's secretary, who was in high debate with a young and
foppish knight, who was bent upon making his way past him.

"Mackworth!" said the king-at-arms. "It is in my mind, young sir, that
you have not been presented before."

"Nay, it is but a day since I set foot in Bordeaux, but I feared lest
the prince should think it strange that I had not waited upon him."

"The prince hath other things to think upon," quoth Sir William de
Pakington; "but if you be a Mackworth you must be a Mackworth of
Normanton, and indeed I see now that your coat is sable and ermine."

"I am a Mackworth of Normanton," the other answered, with some
uneasiness of manner.

"Then you must be Sir Stephen Mackworth, for I learn that when old
Sir Guy died he came in for the arms and the name, the war-cry and the
profit."

"Sir Stephen is my elder brother, and I am Arthur, the second son," said
the youth.

"In sooth and in sooth!" cried the king-at-arms with scornful eyes. "And
pray, sir second son, where is the cadency mark which should mark your
rank. Dare you to wear your brother's coat without the crescent which
should stamp you as his cadet. Away to your lodgings, and come not
nigh the prince until the armorer hath placed the true charge upon your
shield." As the youth withdrew in confusion, Sir William's keen eye
singled out the five red roses from amid the overlapping shields and
cloud of pennons which faced him.

"Ha!" he cried, "there are charges here which are above counterfeit.
The roses of Loring and the boar's head of Buttesthorn may stand back
in peace, but by my faith! they are not to be held back in war. Welcome,
Sir Oliver, Sir Nigel! Chandos will be glad to his very heart-roots when
he sees you. This way, my fair sirs. Your squires are doubtless worthy
the fame of their masters. Down this passage, Sir Oliver! Edricson! Ha!
one of the old strain of Hampshire Edricsons, I doubt not. And Ford,
they are of a south Saxon stock, and of good repute. There are Norburys
in Cheshire and in Wiltshire, and also, as I have heard, upon the
borders. So, my fair sirs, and I shall see that you are shortly
admitted."

He had finished his professional commentary by flinging open a folding
door, and ushering the party into a broad hall, which was filled with
a great number of people who were waiting, like themselves, for an
audience. The room was very spacious, lighted on one side by three
arched and mullioned windows, while opposite was a huge fireplace in
which a pile of faggots was blazing merrily. Many of the company had
crowded round the flames, for the weather was bitterly cold; but the
two knights seated themselves upon a bancal, with their squires standing
behind them. Looking down the room, Alleyne marked that both floor and
ceiling were of the richest oak, the latter spanned by twelve arching
beams, which were adorned at either end by the lilies and the lions of
the royal arms. On the further side was a small door, on each side of
which stood men-at-arms. From time to time an elderly man in black with
rounded shoulders and a long white wand in his hand came softly forth
from this inner room, and beckoned to one or other of the company, who
doffed cap and followed him.

The two knights were deep in talk, when Alleyne became aware of a
remarkable individual who was walking round the room in their direction.
As he passed each knot of cavaliers every head turned to look after
him, and it was evident, from the bows and respectful salutations on
all sides, that the interest which he excited was not due merely to his
strange personal appearance. He was tall and straight as a lance, though
of a great age, for his hair, which curled from under his velvet cap of
maintenance, was as white as the new-fallen snow. Yet, from the swing of
his stride and the spring of his step, it was clear that he had not yet
lost the fire and activity of his youth. His fierce hawk-like face was
clean shaven like that of a priest, save for a long thin wisp of white
moustache which drooped down half way to his shoulder. That he had
been handsome might be easily judged from his high aquiline nose and
clear-cut chin; but his features had been so distorted by the seams and
scars of old wounds, and by the loss of one eye which had been torn
from the socket, that there was little left to remind one of the dashing
young knight who had been fifty years ago the fairest as well as the
boldest of the English chivalry. Yet what knight was there in that hall
of St. Andrew's who would not have gladly laid down youth, beauty, and
all that he possessed to win the fame of this man? For who could be
named with Chandos, the stainless knight, the wise councillor, the
valiant warrior, the hero of Crecy, of Winchelsea, of Poictiers, of
Auray, and of as many other battles as there were years to his life?

"Ha, my little heart of gold!" he cried, darting forward suddenly and
throwing his arms round Sir Nigel. "I heard that you were here and have
been seeking you."

"My fair and dear lord," said the knight, returning the warrior's
embrace, "I have indeed come back to you, for where else shall I go that
I may learn to be a gentle and a hardy knight?"

"By my troth!" said Chandos with a smile, "it is very fitting that we
should be companions, Nigel, for since you have tied up one of your
eyes, and I have had the mischance to lose one of mine, we have but a
pair between us. Ah, Sir Oliver! you were on the blind side of me and I
saw you not. A wise woman hath made prophecy that this blind side will
one day be the death of me. We shall go in to the prince anon; but in
truth he hath much upon his hands, for what with Pedro, and the King of
Majorca, and the King of Navarre, who is no two days of the same mind,
and the Gascon barons who are all chaffering for terms like so many
hucksters, he hath an uneasy part to play. But how left you the Lady
Loring?"

"She was well, my fair lord, and sent her service and greetings to you."

"I am ever her knight and slave. And your journey, I trust that it was
pleasant?"

"As heart could wish. We had sight of two rover galleys, and even came
to have some slight bickering with them."

"Ever in luck's way, Nigel!" quoth Sir John. "We must hear the tale
anon. But I deem it best that ye should leave your squires and come with
me, for, howsoe'er pressed the prince may be, I am very sure that he
would be loth to keep two old comrades-in-arms upon the further side of
the door. Follow close behind me, and I will forestall old Sir William,
though I can scarce promise to roll forth your style and rank as is
his wont." So saying, he led the way to the inner chamber, the two
companions treading close at his heels, and nodding to right and left as
they caught sight of familiar faces among the crowd.



CHAPTER XIX. HOW THERE WAS STIR AT THE ABBEY OF ST. ANDREW'S.


The prince's reception-room, although of no great size, was fitted up
with all the state and luxury which the fame and power of its owner
demanded. A high dais at the further end was roofed in by a broad canopy
of scarlet velvet spangled with silver fleurs-de-lis, and supported at
either corner by silver rods. This was approached by four steps carpeted
with the same material, while all round were scattered rich cushions,
oriental mats and costly rugs of fur. The choicest tapestries which the
looms of Arras could furnish draped the walls, whereon the battles of
Judas Maccabaeus were set forth, with the Jewish warriors in plate of
proof, with crest and lance and banderole, as the naive artists of the
day were wont to depict them. A few rich settles and bancals, choicely
carved and decorated with glazed leather hangings of the sort termed _or
basane_, completed the furniture of the apartment, save that at one side
of the dais there stood a lofty perch, upon which a cast of three solemn
Prussian gerfalcons sat, hooded and jesseled, as silent and motionless
as the royal fowler who stood beside them.

In the centre of the dais were two very high chairs with dorserets,
which arched forwards over the heads of the occupants, the whole covered
with light-blue silk thickly powdered with golden stars. On that to the
right sat a very tall and well formed man with red hair, a livid face,
and a cold blue eye, which had in it something peculiarly sinister and
menacing. He lounged back in a careless position, and yawned repeatedly
as though heartily weary of the proceedings, stooping from time to time
to fondle a shaggy Spanish greyhound which lay stretched at his feet. On
the other throne there was perched bolt upright, with prim demeanor, as
though he felt himself to be upon his good behavior, a little, round,
pippin faced person, who smiled and bobbed to every one whose eye he
chanced to meet. Between and a little in front of them on a humble
charette or stool, sat a slim, dark young man, whose quiet attire and
modest manner would scarce proclaim him to be the most noted prince in
Europe. A jupon of dark blue cloth, tagged with buckles and pendants of
gold, seemed but a sombre and plain attire amidst the wealth of silk and
ermine and gilt tissue of fustian with which he was surrounded. He sat
with his two hands clasped round his knee, his head slightly bent,
and an expression of impatience and of trouble upon his clear,
well-chiselled features. Behind the thrones there stood two men in
purple gowns, with ascetic, clean-shaven faces, and half a dozen other
high dignitaries and office-holders of Aquitaine. Below on either side
of the steps were forty or fifty barons, knights, and courtiers, ranged
in a triple row to the right and the left, with a clear passage in the
centre.

"There sits the prince," whispered Sir John Chandos, as they entered.
"He on the right is Pedro, whom we are about to put upon the Spanish
throne. The other is Don James, whom we purpose with the aid of God to
help to his throne in Majorca. Now follow me, and take it not to heart
if he be a little short in his speech, for indeed his mind is full of
many very weighty concerns."

The prince, however, had already observed their entrance, and, springing
to his feet, he had advanced with a winning smile and the light of
welcome in his eyes.

"We do not need your good offices as herald here, Sir John," said he in
a low but clear voice; "these valiant knights are very well known to me.
Welcome to Aquitaine, Sir Nigel Loring and Sir Oliver Buttesthorn. Nay,
keep your knee for my sweet father at Windsor. I would have your hands,
my friends. We are like to give you some work to do ere you see the
downs of Hampshire once more. Know you aught of Spain, Sir Oliver?"

"Nought, my sire, save that I have heard men say that there is a dish
named an olla which is prepared there, though I have never been clear in
my mind as to whether it was but a ragout such as is to be found in the
south, or whether there is some seasoning such as fennel or garlic which
is peculiar to Spain."

"Your doubts, Sir Oliver, shall soon be resolved," answered the prince,
laughing heartily, as did many of the barons who surrounded them. "His
majesty here will doubtless order that you have this dish hotly seasoned
when we are all safely in Castile."

"I will have a hotly seasoned dish for some folk I know of," answered
Don Pedro with a cold smile.

"But my friend Sir Oliver can fight right hardily without either bite or
sup," remarked the prince. "Did I not see him at Poictiers, when for two
days we had not more than a crust of bread and a cup of foul water, yet
carrying himself most valiantly. With my own eyes I saw him in the rout
sweep the head from a knight of Picardy with one blow of his sword."

"The rogue got between me and the nearest French victual wain," muttered
Sir Oliver, amid a fresh titter from those who were near enough to catch
his words.

"How many have you in your train?" asked the prince, assuming a graver
mien.

"I have forty men-at-arms, sire," said Sir Oliver.

"And I have one hundred archers and a score of lancers, but there are
two hundred men who wait for me on this side of the water upon the
borders of Navarre."

"And who are they, Sir Nigel?"

"They are a free company, sire, and they are called the White Company."

To the astonishment of the knight, his words provoked a burst of
merriment from the barons round, in which the two kings and the prince
were fain to join. Sir Nigel blinked mildly from one to the other, until
at last perceiving a stout black-bearded knight at his elbow, whose
laugh rang somewhat louder than the others, he touched him lightly upon
the sleeve.

"Perchance, my fair sir," he whispered, "there is some small vow of
which I may relieve you. Might we not have some honorable debate upon
the matter. Your gentle courtesy may perhaps grant me an exchange of
thrusts."

"Nay, nay, Sir Nigel," cried the prince, "fasten not the offence upon
Sir Robert Briquet, for we are one and all bogged in the same mire.
Truth to say, our ears have just been vexed by the doings of the same
company, and I have even now made vow to hang the man who held the rank
of captain over it. I little thought to find him among the bravest of my
own chosen chieftains. But the vow is now nought, for, as you have
never seen your company, it would be a fool's act to blame you for their
doings."

"My liege," said Sir Nigel, "it is a very small matter that I should be
hanged, albeit the manner of death is somewhat more ignoble than I had
hoped for. On the other hand, it would be a very grievous thing that
you, the Prince of England and the flower of knighthood, should make a
vow, whether in ignorance or no, and fail to bring it to fulfilment."

"Vex not your mind on that," the prince answered, smiling. "We have had
a citizen from Montauban here this very day, who told us such a tale of
sack and murder and pillage that it moved our blood; but our wrath was
turned upon the man who was in authority over them."

"My dear and honored master," cried Nigel, in great anxiety, "I fear me
much that in your gentleness of heart you are straining this vow which
you have taken. If there be so much as a shadow of a doubt as to the
form of it, it were a thousand times best----"

"Peace! peace!" cried the prince impatiently. "I am very well able to
look to my own vows and their performance. We hope to see you both
in the banquet-hall anon. Meanwhile you will attend upon us with our
train." He bowed, and Chandos, plucking Sir Oliver by the sleeve, led
them both away to the back of the press of courtiers.

"Why, little coz," he whispered, "you are very eager to have your neck
in a noose. By my soul! had you asked as much from our new ally Don
Pedro, he had not baulked you. Between friends, there is overmuch of
the hangman in him, and too little of the prince. But indeed this
White Company is a rough band, and may take some handling ere you find
yourself safe in your captaincy."

"I doubt not, with the help of St. Paul, that I shall bring them to some
order," Sir Nigel answered. "But there are many faces here which are new
to me, though others have been before me since first I waited upon my
dear master, Sir Walter. I pray you to tell me, Sir John, who are these
priests upon the dais?"

"The one is the Archbishop of Bordeaux, Nigel, and the other the Bishop
of Agen."

"And the dark knight with gray-streaked beard? By my troth, he seems to
be a man of much wisdom and valor."

"He is Sir William Felton, who, with my unworthy self, is the chief
counsellor of the prince, he being high steward and I the seneschal of
Aquitaine."

"And the knights upon the right, beside Don Pedro?"

"They are cavaliers of Spain who have followed him in his exile. The one
at his elbow is Fernando de Castro, who is as brave and true a man as
heart could wish. In front to the right are the Gascon lords. You may
well tell them by their clouded brows, for there hath been some ill-will
of late betwixt the prince and them. The tall and burly man is the
Captal de Buch, whom I doubt not that you know, for a braver knight
never laid lance in rest. That heavy-faced cavalier who plucks his
skirts and whispers in his ear is Lord Oliver de Clisson, known also as
the butcher. He it is who stirs up strife, and forever blows the dying
embers into flame. The man with the mole upon his cheek is the Lord
Pommers, and his two brothers stand behind him, with the Lord Lesparre,
Lord de Rosem, Lord de Mucident, Sir Perducas d'Albret, the Souldich de
la Trane, and others. Further back are knights from Quercy, Limousin,
Saintonge, Poitou, and Aquitaine, with the valiant Sir Guiscard d'Angle.
That is he in the rose-colored doublet with the ermine."

"And the knights upon this side?"

"They are all Englishmen, some of the household and others who like
yourself, are captains of companies. There is Lord Neville, Sir Stephen
Cossington, and Sir Matthew Gourney, with Sir Walter Huet, Sir Thomas
Banaster, and Sir Thomas Felton, who is the brother of the high steward.
Mark well the man with the high nose and flaxen beard who hath placed
his hand upon the shoulder of the dark hard-faced cavalier in the
rust-stained jupon."

"Aye, by St. Paul!" observed Sir Nigel, "they both bear the print of
their armor upon their cotes-hardies. Methinks they are men who breathe
freer in a camp than a court."

"There are many of us who do that, Nigel," said Chandos, "and the head
of the court is, I dare warrant, among them. But of these two men the
one is Sir Hugh Calverley, and the other is Sir Robert Knolles."

Sir Nigel and Sir Oliver craned their necks to have the clearer view of
these famous warriors, the one a chosen leader of free companies, the
other a man who by his fierce valor and energy had raised himself from
the lowest ranks until he was second only to Chandos himself in the
esteem of the army.

"He hath no light hand in war, hath Sir Robert," said Chandos. "If he
passes through a country you may tell it for some years to come. I have
heard that in the north it is still the use to call a house which hath
but the two gable ends left, without walls or roof, a Knolles' mitre."

"I have often heard of him," said Nigel, "and I have hoped to be so far
honored as to run a course with him. But hark, Sir John, what is amiss
with the prince?"

Whilst Chandos had been conversing with the two knights a continuous
stream of suitors had been ushered in, adventurers seeking to sell their
swords and merchants clamoring over some grievance, a ship detained
for the carriage of troops, or a tun of sweet wine which had the bottom
knocked out by a troop of thirsty archers. A few words from the prince
disposed of each case, and, if the applicant liked not the judgment, a
quick glance from the prince's dark eyes sent him to the door with the
grievance all gone out of him. The younger ruler had sat listlessly upon
his stool with the two puppet monarchs enthroned behind him, but of a
sudden a dark shadow passed over his face, and he sprang to his feet in
one of those gusts of passion which were the single blot upon his noble
and generous character.

"How now, Don Martin de la Carra?" he cried. "How now, sirrah? What
message do you bring to us from our brother of Navarre?"

The new-comer to whom this abrupt query had been addressed was a tall
and exceedingly handsome cavalier who had just been ushered into the
apartment. His swarthy cheek and raven black hair spoke of the fiery
south, and he wore his long black cloak swathed across his chest and
over his shoulders in a graceful sweeping fashion, which was neither
English nor French. With stately steps and many profound bows, he
advanced to the foot of the dais before replying to the prince's
question.

"My powerful and illustrious master," he began, "Charles, King of
Navarre, Earl of Evreux, Count of Champagne, who also writeth himself
Overlord of Bearn, hereby sends his love and greetings to his dear
cousin Edward, the Prince of Wales, Governor of Aquitaine, Grand
Commander of----"

"Tush! tush! Don Martin!" interrupted the prince, who had been beating
the ground with his foot impatiently during this stately preamble. "We
already know our cousin's titles and style, and, certes, we know our
own. To the point, man, and at once. Are the passes open to us, or does
your master go back from his word pledged to me at Libourne no later
than last Michaelmas?"

"It would ill become my gracious master, sire, to go back from
promise given. He does but ask some delay and certain conditions and
hostages----"

"Conditions! Hostages! Is he speaking to the Prince of England, or is it
to the bourgeois provost of some half-captured town! Conditions, quotha?
He may find much to mend in his own condition ere long. The passes are,
then, closed to us?"

"Nay, sire----"

"They are open, then?"

"Nay, sire, if you would but----"

"Enough, enough, Don Martin," cried the prince. "It is a sorry sight to
see so true a knight pleading in so false a cause. We know the doings of
our cousin Charles. We know that while with the right hand he takes our
fifty thousand crowns for the holding of the passes open, he hath his
left outstretched to Henry of Trastamare, or to the King of France, all
ready to take as many more for the keeping them closed. I know our good
Charles, and, by my blessed name-saint the Confessor, he shall learn
that I know him. He sets his kingdom up to the best bidder, like some
scullion farrier selling a glandered horse. He is----"

"My lord," cried Don Martin, "I cannot stand there to hear such words
of my master. Did they come from other lips, I should know better how to
answer them."

Don Pedro frowned and curled his lip, but the prince smiled and nodded
his approbation.

"Your bearing and your words, Don Martin, are such I should have looked
for in you," he remarked. "You will tell the king, your master, that he
hath been paid his price and that if he holds to his promise he hath my
word for it that no scath shall come to his people, nor to their houses
or gear. If, however, we have not his leave, I shall come close at the
heels of this message without his leave, and bearing a key with me
which shall open all that he may close." He stooped and whispered to Sir
Robert Knolles and Sir Huge Calverley, who smiled as men well pleased,
and hastened from the room.

"Our cousin Charles has had experience of our friendship," the prince
continued, "and now, by the Saints! he shall feel a touch of our
displeasure. I send now a message to our cousin Charles which his whole
kingdom may read. Let him take heed lest worse befall him. Where is my
Lord Chandos? Ha, Sir John, I commend this worthy knight to your care.
You will see that he hath refection, and such a purse of gold as may
