article to the _Century_."

Andy was rather surprised, for he knew that the _Century_ held high rank
among contemporary magazines. It did not occur to him that any one might
send an article to that magazine, but that to have it accepted and
published would be a different matter.

"I suppose you enjoy writing?"

"Yes; there is nothing I like so well."

"Perhaps you will show me some of your articles."

"I can show you a poem which appeared last week in the village paper at
home."

"Thank you, I should like to see it."

Mr. Warren went up to his room, and speedily returned with a small
weekly paper.

On the front page, at the head of the first column, was a short poem by
G. Byron Warren. This was the first stanza, which Mr. Warren volunteered
to read aloud:

  "'I'd like to be a robin,
    And flit from bough to bough;
  I'd pour sweet music on the air
    If God would teach me how.'"

"I don't quite like that last line," he said looking up from the paper.
"Can you suggest any improvement?"

"You might say, 'And charm the pensive cow,'" suggested Andy,
mischievously.

"True, that might be a striking figure. I will consider it when I revise
the poem for publication in book form."

The rest of the poem was of similar quality.

"I don't think they would accept that for the _Century_," thought Andy.

"Do you devote yourself to literary work, or are you in business?" he
asked.

"I may go into business, but at present I only write. I send a letter
once a month to the Greenville _Banner_."

"I suppose they pay?"

"Oh--ah, yes," answered the poet, in a hesitating voice, "but the terms
are strictly confidential. If you ever pick up any incidents in your
daily walks, Mr. Grant, I shall be glad if you will communicate them to
me, that I may weave them into my correspondence."

"With pleasure."

Then it occurred to Andy to tell his neighbor about the street
adventurer whom he had met three times that morning.

"Capital!" exclaimed Warren. "I will get that into my next letter. I
see, Mr. Grant, you have an observing eye. You would make a good
reporter for one of the city dailies."

"Do you think so?" asked Andy, feeling complimented.

"I am sure of it."

"How long have you lived in the city, Mr. Warren?"

"About three months. Some time I will tell you why I came here," he
continued, with an air of mystery.

"I shall be glad to hear."

"I will tell you now, for I see you have a sympathetic soul. I loved,
and my love was returned, but a heartless parent interposed and
separated two loving hearts."

He took out his handkerchief and wiped his eyes. Andy hardly knew
whether to laugh or to express sympathy.

"I suppose that often happens?" he said, rather lamely. "Perhaps he may
yet repent."

"I live in that hope. When I have become famous, I will go back and
offer myself again to Sophia. I suppose you have had no heart
experiences as yet, Mr. Grant?"

"Not as yet, but I can sympathize with you."

"I am so glad you have come. I shall make you my confidential friend."

Then the conversation drifted into other channels.




CHAPTER XVI.

ANDY AT WORK.


Punctually as the clock struck eight the next morning Andy entered the
store of Mr. Flint on Union Square. He looked for his employer, but the
jeweler seldom arrived before nine, his residence being in Harlem.

Behind the counter, arranging the goods in one of the cases, was a man
with reddish hair who might at a guess be thirty-five years of age. It
was Mr. Flint's head clerk, Simon Rich, who had been absent when Andy
made his first call.

"What can I do for you, boy?" he asked, superciliously.

"Is Mr. Flint in?"

"No. You can tell me your business."

"I have come here to work."

"Oh!"

This exclamation was long-drawn out. Mr. Rich then proceeded to examine
Andy from head to foot in a manner which was extremely offensive.

Andy understood that for some reason this man would be his enemy. He
would have understood his hostility better had he known that the boy
just discharged was the head clerk's nephew.

"I suppose you are well acquainted with the business?" remarked Rich,
with a sneer.

"I know nothing about it."

"Humph! you stand a chance of being very useful."

"I hope to become familiar with it soon," said Andy, coloring.

"Suppose you sweep out, to begin with."

He pointed out the broom, and Andy went to work.

"I wish he were a more agreeable man," thought Andy. "I am afraid he
will make my position unpleasant."

Here a customer came in, and Mr. Rich was occupied for the next ten
minutes.

The customer, a lady, bought a gold chain.

"Shall I send it?" asked the clerk.

"Yes, but not till twelve o'clock."

"To what address?"

She gave a number on Fifty-sixth Street.

"Very well."

"There will be an errand for you," said Rich, as he put back the chains
not selected.

Andy nodded. He felt that he would rather be absent on an errand than in
the company of Simon Rich.

"Where did Mr. Flint pick you up?" inquired Rich.

This was rude, but Andy felt that it would not be politic to get into a
quarrel with the head clerk so soon.

"We met at lunch," he said.

"Where?"

"At the Sinclair House."

"Had you never seen him before?"

"No."

"Queer that he should engage you at such short notice!"

"He was acquainted with the gentleman I was with."

"What name?"

"Walter Gale."

"Yes, I have seen him. Are you related to Mr. Gale?"

"No."

"Are you aware that the boy you have displaced--John Crandall--is my
nephew?"

"No, sir; I didn't know it. I am sorry he has lost his place."

"He is a good boy, but Mr. Flint became prejudiced against him. Did he
say anything about him when he engaged you?"

"I believe he said that he was not satisfactory, but as I did not know
him I did not notice."

Another customer came in, and at nine o'clock Mr. Flint entered.

"I see you are on hand," he said, pleasantly, to Andy.

"Yes, sir."

"When did you come to the city?"

"Yesterday, sir."

"Have you a boarding place?"

"Yes, sir, in Clinton Place. I was recommended to it by Mr. Gale."

"That is well. Mr. Rich, this is the new boy."

"So he told me," said Rich, coldly.

"Have you had any customers?"

"Yes, sir. There is one article to be sent--a gold chain--to Mrs. Mason,
of Fifty-sixth Street."

"Any time mentioned?"

"Twelve o'clock."

"You can send Andrew at that time."

"Very well, sir."

Andy was very glad of his employer's presence. It checked any
manifestation of rudeness on the part of the clerk.

At quarter to twelve a box containing the chain was handed to Andy,
addressed to Mrs. Mason.

"Did you notice the lady who purchased the chain?" asked Mr. Flint.

"Yes, sir."

"I wish this box placed in her hands. Ask her to give you a receipt for
it."

"Yes, sir."

"Here is money for car fare. You may go to lunch after delivering the
box."

"Yes, sir."

Andy took a Broadway car, and just after twelve reached the house. The
door was opened by a man-servant.

"I have a parcel for Mrs. Mason," said Andy.

"All right; I'll take it."

"I am only to deliver it into her hands."

"She isn't at home."

"Then I will wait for her. She said she would be here at twelve."

The man was about to speak rudely, when a lady mounted the steps.

"Are you from Mr. Flint?" she asked.

"Yes, madam."

"I am Mrs. Mason."

"I remember you," said Andy, bowing. "Will you be kind enough to give me
a receipt?"

"Certainly. Step into the hall, and I won't keep you waiting long."

Andy sat down.

"Why didn't you give me the parcel, boy?" asked the servant.

"Because you are not Mrs. Mason. I had strict orders to deliver it to
her."

"Humph! that is being mighty particular."

"I have nothing to do with Mr. Flint's rules."

Mrs. Mason returned almost immediately.

"Here is the receipt, and thank you," she said, pleasantly.

Andy bowed, and opened the door to go out.

"I am afraid I have interfered with your lunch," she said.

"I am going to it now, thank you."

"My lunch is just ready. Perhaps you will accept an invitation to lunch
with me?"

"I shall be very glad to do so."

