onderstan's," cried Larry, carrying a can of hot soup towards Wapaw.

"Oh, let me! _do_ let me!" cried Nelly, jumping up and seizing the can.

"Be all manes," said Larry, resigning it.

The child once more knelt by the side of the Indian and held the can to
him, while he conveyed the soup to his lips with a trembling, unsteady
hand.  The eyes of the poor man glittered as he gazed eagerly at the
food, which he ate with the avidity of a half-famished wolf.

His nurses looked on with great satisfaction, and when Wapaw glanced up
from time to time in their faces, he was advised to continue his meal
with nods and smiles of goodwill.

Great preparations were made for the dinner of that New Year's Day.
Those who "dwell at home at ease" have no idea of the peculiar feelings
with which the world's wanderers hail the season of Christmas and New
Year.  Surrounded as they usually are by strange scenes, and ignorant as
they are of what friends at home are doing or thinking, they lay hold of
this season as being one point at least in the circle of the year in
which they can unite with the home circle, and, at the _same time_,
commemorate with them the birth of the blessed Saviour of mankind, and
think with them of absent friends.  Much, therefore, as the "happy"
season is made of in the "old country," it is made more of, if possible,
in the colonies; especially on the outskirts of the world, where the
adventurous and daring have pitched their tents.

Of course Robin Gore and his household did not think of the "old
country," for they were descendants of settlers; but they had imbibed
the spirit of the old country from their forefathers, and thought of
those well-remembered friends whom they had left behind them in the
settlements.

Notwithstanding the delay caused by the conveying of Wapaw to the Fort,
the hunters had walked so fast that there was still some time to spare
before dinner should be ready.

Roy resolved to devote this time to a ramble in the woods with his
sister Nelly.  Accordingly the two put on their snow-shoes, and, merely
saying to their mother that they were going to take a run in the woods,
set forth.

Now, it must be known that Mrs Gore had looked forward to New Year's
Day dinner with great interest and much anxiety.  There was a general
feeling of hilarity and excitement among the male members of the
self-exiled family that extended itself to the good woman, and induced
her to resolve that the entire household should have what Walter styled
a "rare blow-out!"  During the whole morning she had been busy with the
preparation of the various dishes, among which were a tart made of
cloudberry jam, a salt goose, and a lump of bear's ham, besides the
rabbits and ptarmigan which had been shot that day.

"That's the way to do it, Molly," cried Robin, as he opened the door and
peeped in upon his wife during the height and heat of her culinary
labours; "keep the pot bilin', my dear, and don't spare the butter this
day.  It only comes once a year, you know."

"Twice," muttered Larry in a low voice, as he stirred the contents of a
large pot which hung over the fire.

"And see that you look after Wapaw," continued Robin.  "Don't give him
too much at first, it'll hurt him."

"No fear of that," replied Larry, "he's got so much a'ready that he
couldn't howld another morsel av he was to try."

"Well, well, take care of him, anyhow," said Robin, with a laugh;
"meanwhile I'll go see after the defences o' the Fort, and make all
snug."

By dint of unwearied perseverance the dinner was cooked, and then it
occurred to Robin to ask where the children were, but no one could tell,
so the hunter remarked quietly that they would "doubtless make their
appearance in a short while."

Gradually the dinner reached that interesting point which is usually
styled "ready to dish."  Whereupon Robin again asked where the children
were.  Still no one could tell, so he said he would go out and hail
them.  Loudly and long did the hunter call, but no one answered; then he
made a rapid search in and about the Fort, but they were not to be
found.  Moreover, a snow-storm had begun to set in, and the drift
rendered it difficult to distinguish tracks in the snow.

At last the day's labours were brought to a close.  Dinner was served,
and smoked invitingly on the table.  The party only awaited the return
of Robin with the children.  In a few minutes Robin entered hastily.

"Molly," said he, in a tone of anxiety, "the foolish things have gone
into the woods, I think.  Come, lads, we must hunt them down.  It's
snowin' hard, so we've no time to lose."

Walter and Larry at once put on their capotes, fur-caps, and snow-shoes,
and sallied forth, leaving Mrs Gore seated alone, and in a state of
deep anxiety, by the side of her untasted New Year's Day dinner.



CHAPTER FOUR.

LOST IN THE SNOW.

When Roy and Nelly set out for a ramble, they had at first no intention
of going beyond their usual haunts in the woods around the Fort; but Roy
had been inspirited by his successful march that day with his father and
Walter, and felt inclined to show Nelly some new scenes to which they
had not, up to that time, dared to penetrate together.

The snow-storm, already referred to, had commenced gradually.  When the
children set forth on their ramble only a few flakes were falling, but
they had not been away half an hour when snow fell so thickly that they
could not see distinctly more than a few yards ahead of them.  There was
no wind, however, so they continued to advance, rather pleased than
otherwise with the state of things.

"Oh, I _do_ like to see falling snow," cried Nelly, with a burst of
animation.

"So do I," said Roy, looking back at his sister with a bright smile,
"and I like it best when it comes down thick and heavy, in big flakes,
on a _very_ calm day, don't you?"

"Yes, oh it's so nice," responded Nelly sympathetically.

They paused for minutes to shake some of the snow from their garments,
and beat their hands together, for their fingers were cold, and to laugh
boisterously, for their hearts were merry.  Then they resumed their
march, Roy beating the track manfully and Nelly following in his
footsteps.

In passing beneath a tall fir-tree Roy chanced to touch a twig.  The
result was literally overwhelming, for in a moment he was almost buried
in snow, to the unutterable delight of his sister, who stood screaming
with laughter as the unfortunate boy struggled to disentomb himself.

In those northern wilds, where snow falls frequently and in great
abundance, masses are constantly accumulating on the branches of trees,
particularly on the pines, on the broad flat branches of which these
masses attain to considerable size.  A slight touch is generally
sufficient to bring these down, but, being soft, they never do any
injury worth mentioning.

When Roy had fairly emerged from the snow he joined his sister in the
laugh, but suddenly he stopped, and his face became very grave.

"What's the matter?" asked Nelly, with an anxious look.

"My snow-shoe's broken," said Roy.

There was greater cause for anxiety on account of this accident than the
reader is perhaps aware of.  It may be easily understood that in a
country where the snow averages four feet in depth, no one can walk
half-a-mile without snow-shoes without being thoroughly exhausted; on
the other hand, a man can walk thirty or forty miles a day by means of
snow-shoes.

"Can't you mend it?" asked Nelly.

Roy, who had been carefully examining the damaged shoe, shook his head.

"I've nothing here to do it with; besides, it's an awful smash.  I must
just try to scramble home the best way I can.  Come, it's not very far,
we'll only be a bit late for dinner."

The snow-shoe having been bandaged, after a fashion, with a
pocket-handkerchief, the little wanderers began to retrace their steps;
but this was now a matter of extreme difficulty, owing to the quantity
of snow which had fallen and almost obliterated the tracks.  The broken
shoe, also, was constantly giving way, so that ere long the children
became bewildered as well as anxious, and soon lost the track of their
outward march altogether.  To make matters worse, the wind began to blow
clouds of snow-drift into their faces, compelling them to seek the
denser parts of the forest for shelter.

They wandered on, however, in the belief that they were drawing nearer
home every step, and Roy, whose heart was stout and brave, cheered up
his sister's spirit so much that she began to feel quite confident their
troubles would soon be over.

Presently all their hopes were dashed to the ground by their suddenly
emerging upon an open space, close to the very spot where the snow-mass
had fallen on Roy's head.  After the first feeling of alarm and
disappointment had subsided, Roy plucked up heart and encouraged Nelly
by pointing out to her that they had at all events recovered their old
track, which they would be very careful not to lose sight of again.

Poor Nelly whimpered a little, partly from cold and hunger as well as
from disappointment, as she listened to her brother's words; then she
dried her eyes and said she was ready to begin again.  So they set off
once more.  But the difficulty of discerning the track, if great at
first, was greater now, because the falling and drifting snow had
well-nigh covered it up completely.  In a very few minutes Roy stopped,
and, confessing that he had lost it again, proposed to return once more
to their starting point to try to recover it.  Nelly agreed, for she was
by this time too much fatigued and alarmed to have any will of her own,
and was quite ready to do whatever she was told without question.

After wandering about for nearly an hour in this state of uncertainty,
Roy at last stopped, and, putting his arm round his sister's waist, said
that he had lost himself altogether!  Poor Nelly, whose heart had been
gradually sinking, fairly broke down; she hid her face in her brother's
bosom, and wept.

"Come now, don't do that, dear Nell," said Roy, tenderly, "I'll tell you
what we shall do--we'll camp in the snow!  We have often done it close
to the house, you know, for fun, so we'll do it now in earnest."

"But it's so dark and cold," sobbed Nelly, looking round with a shudder
into the dark recesses of the forest, which were by that time enshrouded
by the gathering shades of night; "and I'm _so_ hungry too!  Oh me! what
_shall_ we do?"

"Now _don't_ get so despairing," urged Roy, whose courage rose in
proportion as his sister's sank; "it's not such an awful business after
all, for father is sure to scour the woods in search of us, an' if we
only get a comfortable encampment made, an' a roarin' fire kindled, why,
we'll sit beside it an' tell stories till they find us.  They'll be sure
to see the fire, you know, so come--let's to work."

Roy said this so cheerfully that the child felt a little comforted,
dried her eyes, and said she would "help to make the camp."

This matter of making an encampment in the snow, although laborious
work, was by no means a novelty to these children of the backwoods.
They had often been taught how to do it by Cousin Walter and Larry
O'Dowd, and had made "playing at camps" their chief amusement in fine
winter days.  When, therefore, they found themselves compelled to
"camp-out" from necessity, neither of them was at a loss how to proceed.
Roy drew a circle in the snow, about three yards in diameter, at the
foot of a large tree, and then both set to work to dig a hole in this
space, using their snow-shoes as shovels.  It took an hour's hard work
to reach the ground, and when they did so the piled-up snow all round
raised the walls of this hole to the height of about six feet.

"Now for bedding," cried Roy, scrambling over the walls of their camp
and going into the woods in search of a young pine-tree, while Nelly sat
down on the ground to rest after her toil.

It was a dark night, and the woods were so profoundly obscured, that Roy
had to grope about for some time before he found a suitable tree.
Cutting it down with the axe which always hung at his girdle, he
returned to camp with it on his shoulder, and cut off the small soft
branches, which Nelly spread over the ground to the depth of nearly half
a foot.  This "pine-brush," as it is called, formed a soft elastic
couch.

The fire was the next business.  Again Roy went into the bush and
gathered a large bundle of dry branches.

"Now, Nelly, do you break a lot of the small twigs," said Roy, "and I'll
strike a light."

He pulled his firebag from his belt as he spoke, and drew from it flint,
steel, and tinder.  No one ever travels in the wilds of which we write
without such means of procuring fire.  Roy followed the example of his
elder companions in carrying a firebag, although he did not, like them,
carry tobacco and pipe in it.

Soon the bright sparks that flew from the flint caught on the tinder.
This was placed in a handful of dry grass, and whirled rapidly round
until it was fanned into a flame.  Nelly had prepared another handful of
dry grass with small twigs above it.  The light was applied, the fire
leaped up, more sticks were piled on, and at last the fire roared
upward, sending bright showers of sparks into the branches overhead,
lighting the white walls of the camp with a glow that caused them to
sparkle as with millions of gems, and filling the hearts of the children
with a sensation of comfort and gladness, while they stood before the
blaze and warmed themselves, rubbing their hands and laughing with glee.

No one, save those who have experienced it, can form any conception of
the cheering effect of a fire in the heart of a dark wood at night.  Roy
and Nelly quite forgot their lost condition for a short time, in the
enjoyment of the comforting heat and the bright gladsome blaze.  The
brother cut firewood until he was rendered almost breathless, the sister
heaped on the wood until the fire roared and leaped high above their
heads.  Strange though it may appear to some, the snow did not melt.
The weather was too cold for that; only a little of that which was
nearest the fire melted--the snow walls remained hard frozen all round.
Roy soon sat down to rest, as close to the fire as he could without
getting scorched; then Nelly seated herself by his side and nestled her
head in his breast.  There they sat, telling stories and gazing at the
fire, and waiting for "father to come."

Meanwhile Robin and his comrade ranged the forest far and near in
desperate anxiety.  But it was a wide and wild country.  The children
had wandered far away; a high ridge of land hid their fire from view.
Moreover, Robin, knowing the children's usual haunts, had chanced to go
off in the wrong direction.  When night set in the hunters returned to
Fort Enterprise to procure ammunition and provisions, in order to
commence a more thorough and prolonged search.  Poor Mrs Gore still sat
beside the cold and untasted feast, and there the hunters left her,
while they once more plunged into the pathless wilderness to search for
the lost ones on that luckless New Year's Day.



CHAPTER FIVE.

CARRIED OFF.

While Robin Gore and his companions were anxiously searching the woods
around Fort Enterprise for the lost children, a war-party of savages was
making its way swiftly towards the Fort.

A chief of the Indians, named Hawk, who was a shrewd as well as a bad
man, had suspected Wapaw's intentions in quitting the camp of his people
alone and in such unnecessary haste.  This man had great influence over
his fellows, and easily prevailed on them to set off on their murderous
expedition against the Fort of the "pale-faces" without delay.

Being well supplied with food, they travelled faster than their starving
comrade, and almost overtook him.  They finally encamped within a short
distance of the Fort the day after Wapaw's arrival, and prepared to
assault it early next morning.

"If the wicked skunk has got there before us," said Hawk to his fellows,
as they prepared to set out before daybreak, "the pale-faces will be
ready for us, and we may as well go back to our wigwams at once; but if
that badger's whelp has been slow of foot, we shall hang the scalps of
the pale-faces at our belts, and eat their food this day."

The polite titles above used by Hawk were meant to refer to Wapaw.

Indians are not naturally loquacious.  No reply was made to Hawk's
remark, except that one man with a blackened face, and a streak of red
ochre down the bridge of his nose, said, "Ho!" and another with an
equally black face, and three red streaks on each of his cheeks, said,
"Hum!" as the war-party put on their snowshoes and prepared to start.

They had not gone far when Hawk came to a sudden pause, and stood
transfixed and motionless like a dark statue.  His comrades also stopped
abruptly and crouched.  No question was asked, but Hawk pointed to a
spark of fire, which every Indian in the band had observed the instant
their leader had paused.  Silently they crept forward, with guns cocked
and arrows fitted to the bowstrings, until they all stood round an
encampment where the fire was still smouldering, and in the centre of
which lay a little boy and girl, fast asleep and shuddering with cold.

Poor Roy and Nelly had told each other stories until their eyes would
not remain open; then they fell asleep, despite their efforts to keep
awake, and, as the fire sank low, they began to shiver with the cold.
Lucky was it for them that the Indians discovered them, else they had
certainly been frozen to death that night.

Hawk roused them with little ceremony.  Roy, by an impulse which would
appear to be natural to those who dwell in wild countries, whether young
or old, seized his axe, which lay beside him, as he leaped up.  Hawk
grinned, and took the axe from him at once, and the poor boy, seeing
that he was surrounded by dark warriors, offered no resistance, but
sought to comfort Nelly, who was clinging to him and trembling with
terror.

Immediately the savages sat down in the encampment, and began an earnest
discussion, which the children watched with great eagerness.  They
evidently did not agree, for much gesticulation and great vehemence
characterised their debate.  Some pointed towards the Fort, and touched
their tomahawks, while others pointed to the woods in the direction
whence they had come, and shook their heads.  Not a few drew their
scalping knives partially from their sheaths, and, pointing to the
children, showed clearly that they wished to cut their career short
without delay, but several of the more sedate members of the party
evidently objected to this.  Finally, Hawk turned to Roy, and said
something to him in the Indian tongue.

Roy did not understand, and attempted to say so as well as he could by
signs, and the use of the few words of the Cree language which his
father had taught him.  In the course of his speech (if we may use that
term), he chanced to mention Wapaw's name.

"Ho! ho! ho!" said one and another of the Indians, while Hawk grinned
horribly.

A variety of questions were now put to poor Roy, who, not understanding,
of course could not answer them.  Hawk, however, repeated Wapaw's name,
and pointed towards the Fort with a look of inquiry, to which Roy
replied by nodding his head and repeating "Wapaw" once or twice, also
pointing to the Fort; for he began to suspect these must be Wapaw's
comrades, who had come to search for him.  He therefore volunteered a
little additional information by means of signs; rubbed his stomach,
looked dreadfully rueful, rolled himself as if in agony on the ground,
and then, getting up, pretended to eat and look happy!  By all of which
he meant to show how that Wapaw had been on the borders of starvation,
but had been happily saved therefrom.

Indians in council might teach a useful lesson to our members of
parliament, for they witnessed this rather laughable species of
pantomime with profound gravity and silence.  When Roy concluded, they
nodded their heads, and said, "Ho! ho!" which, no doubt, was equivalent
to "Hear hear!"

After a little more discussion they rose to depart, and made signs to
the children to get up and follow.  Roy then pointed out the broken
state of his snow-shoe, but this difficulty was overcome by Hawk, who
threw it away, and made him put on his sister's snow-shoes.  A stout
young warrior was ordered to take Nelly on his back, which he did
without delay, and the whole party left the encampment, headed by their
chief.

The children submitted cheerfully at first, under the impression that
the Indians meant to convey them to the Fort.  Great, however, was their
horror when they were taken through the woods by a way which they knew
to be quite in the opposite direction.

When Roy saw this he stopped and looked back, but an Indian behind him
gave him a poke with the butt of his gun, which there was no resisting.
For a moment the lad thought of trying to break away, run home, and tell
his father of Nelly's fate; but a second thought convinced him that this
course was utterly impracticable.  As for Nelly, she was too far from
her brother in the procession to hold converse with him; and, as she
knew not what to do, say, think, she was reduced to the miserable
consolation of bedewing with her tears the shoulders of the young
warrior who carried her.

The storm which had commenced the day before still continued, so that,
in the course of a few hours, traces of the track of the war-party were
almost obliterated, and the chance of their being followed by Robin and
his friends was rendered less and less likely as time ran on.

All that day they travelled without halt, and when they stopped at night
to encamp, Roy was nearly dead from exhaustion.  "My poor Nell," said
he, drawing his sobbing sister close to him, as they sat near the camp
fire, after having eaten the small quantity of dried venison that was
thrown to them by their captors, "don't despair; father will be sure to
hunt us down, if it's in the power of man to do it."

"I don't despair," sobbed Nelly; "but oh! what will darling mother do
when she finds that we're lost, and I'm so afraid they'll kill us."

"No fear o' that, Nell; it's not worth their while.  Remember, too, what
mother often told us--that--that--what is it she used to read so often
out of the Bible?  I forget."

"I think it was, `Call upon Me in the time of trouble, and I will
deliver thee.'  I've been thinkin' of that, Roy, already."

"That's right, Nell; now, come, cheer up!  Have you had enough to eat?"

"Yes," said Nelly, with a loud yawn, which she did not attempt to check.

Roy echoed it, as a matter of course, (who ever did see anyone yawn
without following suit?) and then the two lay down together, spread over
themselves an old blanket which one of the Indians had given them, and
fell asleep at once.

Day succeeded day, night followed night, and weeks came and went, yet
the Indians continued their journey through the snow-clad wilderness.
Roy's snow-shoes had been picked up and repaired by one of the savages,
and Nelly was made to walk a good deal on her own snowshoes; but it is
justice to the Indians to say that they slackened their pace a little
for the sake of the children, and when Nelly showed symptoms of being
fatigued, the stout young warrior who originally carried her took her on
his shoulders.

At length the encampment of the tribe was reached, and Nelly was handed
over to Hawk's wife to be her slave.  Soon after that, the tents were
struck, and the whole tribe went deeper into the northern wilds.
Several gales arose and passed away, completely covering their
footprints, so that no tracks were left behind them.
