
"Why, I thought you were going in here, in any case!" said Gus.

"Ah--well--yes, so I was, just for a little, to see what sort of affair
it was; but I meant to be home by nine."

"Well, just have a squint in at our place; and if you must go, you must.
Come along, old man; cut work for one evening, can't you?  You've
become an awfully reformed character all of a sudden; you usen't to be
so hot on your books."

Tom had no ambition before these two to figure in the light of a
reformed character, and he therefore abandoned further protest, and
proceeded to accompany Gus and his friend down the street.

"Have a weed?" asked Gus.

"Thanks, I hardly ever smoke," said Tom.

"They're very mild," said Gus, with a sneer.

Tom took the proffered cigar without another word, and did his best
first to light and then to smoke it as if he were an experienced smoker.

"Who's your fwend?" inquired Gus's languid acquaintance.

"By the way," said that young man, "I've never introduced you two.
Mortimer, allow me to introduce you to my friend Tom Drift."

Mr Mortimer gave a nod which Tom felt he would like greatly to have at
his command, there was something so very knowing and familiar about it.

"It was Tom got up that little race party I was telling you of, Jack,
you know.  He's a regular sporting card.  By the way, what's become of
that little mooney-face prig we took with us that day; eh, Tom?"

Tom was out in midstream now, floating fast out to sea.

"Who--oh, young Newcome?" said he; "he's still at Randlebury."

"Young puppy!  You never knew such a spree as that was, Jack," said Gus;
and then he launched forth into a highly-spiced account of the eventful
expedition to Gurley races, contriving to represent Tom as the hero of
the day, greatly to that youth's discomfort and confusion, and no less
to the amusement of Mr Mortimer.

"Here we are at last," said Gus, as the trio arrived at a gorgeously
illuminated and decorated restaurant.

Tom's heart sunk within him.  More than ever did he wish himself back in
his dull lodgings, never again to set foot abroad, if only he could have
got out of this fix.  But there was no drawing back.

"Shall we go in yet, or knock the balls about for a bit?" said Gus.
"This fellow Tom's a regular swell at billiards.  Do you remember
thrashing me last time we met, Tom--the summer after I'd left
Randlebury?"

Tom could not deny he had beaten Gus on the occasion referred to, and
felt it was useless for him to protest--what was the case--that he was
only a very indifferent player.  He agreed to the idea of a game,
however, as he hoped he might at its close be able to make his escape
without accompanying his two companions to the music-hall attached to
the restaurant, and which he already knew by reputation as one of the
lowest entertainments in London.  "You two play," said Gus, "and I'll
mark.  You'll have to give Jack points, Tom, you know, you're such a
dab."

It was vain for Tom to disclaim the distinction, and the game began.

"Hold hard!" said Gus, after the first stroke; "what are you playing
for?"

"Weally, I don't know; thillingth, I thuppothe," lisped Mr Mortimer.

"All serene!  Go on."

And they went on, and Mr Mortimer made no end of misses, so that, in
spite of the points he had received, Tom beat him easily.  In the two
games which followed the same success attended him, and he won all the
stakes.

"Didn't I tell you he was a swell?" said Gus.  "Upon my word, Tom, I
don't know how you do it!"

"It's just the sort of table I like to play on," said Tom, elated with
his success, and unwilling to own that half his lucky shots had been
"flukes."

"I tell you what," said Gus; "you owe me my revenge, you know, from last
time.  I'll play you to-morrow for half-crowns, if you'll give me the
same points as you did to Jack."

Tom was fast nearing the breakers now.  He had nothing for it but to
accept the challenge, and the table was consequently engaged for the
next evening.

"I must be off now, you fellows!" he said.

"Nonsense!  Why, you haven't yet seen the fun below.  You must stay for
that."

"I wish I could," faltered Tom; "but I really must do some reading to-
night."

"So you can; the thing only lasts an hour, and you're not obliged to go
to bed at eleven, are you?"

Still Tom hesitated.

"You don't mean to say you are squeamish about it?" said Gus, in
astonishment.  "I could fancy that young friend of your mother's turning
up _his_ eyes at it, but a fellow like you wouldn't be so particular, I
reckon; eh, Jack?"

And Mr John Mortimer, thus appealed to, laughed an amused laugh at the
bare notion.

That laugh and the term, "a fellow like you," destroyed the last of
Tom's wavering objections, and he yielded.



CHAPTER THIRTEEN.

HOW TOM DRIFT, STILL GOING DOWNHILL, MET MY OLD MASTER.

When Tom reached his lodgings that night he found a jubilant letter from
Charlie awaiting him.

"Just fancy," he said, "it's only three weeks more, old man, and then to
Jericho with books, and test-tubes, and anatomy!  I'll drag you out of
your study by the scruff of your neck, see if I don't; I'll clap a
knapsack on your back, and haul you by sheer force down into Kent.
There you shall snuff the ozone, and hold your hat on your head with
both hands on the cliff top.  I'll hound you through old castles, and
worry you up hills.  If I catch so much as a leaflet on chemistry in
your hands, I'll tear it up and send it flying after the sea-gulls.  In
short, I shouldn't like to say what I won't do, I'm so wild at the
prospect of a week with you.  Of course, the dear old people growl at me
for leaving them in the lurch; but they are glad for us to get the blow;
indeed, my pater insists on paying the piper, which is handsome of him.
I expect I shall get a day in London on my way, either going or
returning; and if you can put me up at your diggings for the night,
we'll have a jolly evening, and you can show me all your haunts."

Tom gasped as he got so far; and well he might.

"I'll tell you all the news when I come.  I suppose, by your not
writing, you are saving yours up for me.  Ta, ta, old boy, and _au
revoir_ in twenty-one days!  Hurrah!  Yours ever,--C.N."

Tom, in his misery, crushed the letter up in his fingers and flung it
from him.  If a passing pang shot through his breast, it was followed
almost instantly by other feelings of vexation and shame.  One moment he
was ready to sink to the floor in a passion of penitence and remorse--
the next, he was ready to resent Charlie's influence over him even at a
distance, and to sneer, as Gus and his friend had done, at the boy's
expense.  His brain was too muddled with the excitement and the strange
emotions of that evening to reason with himself; his head ached, and his
mind was poisoned.

"What right has the fellow always to be following me up in this way?" he
asked.  "I'm a fool to stand it.  Why can't I do as I choose without his
pulling a long face?"

Thus Tom questioned, and thus he proved that it was Charlie's influence
more than his letter that worried him; for what had the latter said,
either in the way of exhortation or reproof?

Then he threw himself on the bed, and lay with the wild memory of the
evening crowding on his feverish mind.  He rose, and, lighting a candle,
endeavoured to read; but even his novel was flat and stupid, and in the
midst of it he fell asleep, to dream of Gus and his friend all night
long.  Long ere he awoke my senses had left me, for he had neglected to
wind me up.  Next morning he went to lectures as usual.  To his fellow-
students he appeared the same shy, quiet youth he had always seemed; to
Mr

Newcome, whom he met in the street, he appeared still as Charlie's
chosen and dear friend, ready for his holiday and rejoicing in the
prospect of the coming meeting; to his professors he appeared still the
same steady, hard-working student, bent on making his way in his
profession.  But to himself, alas! how altered, how degraded he
appeared!

In the midst of his duties his thoughts ran continually--now back to the
strange experience of last evening, now forward to the doubtful events
of this.

The recollection of the past had lost a good deal of its repulsiveness
after twelve hours' interval, and although he still felt it to be low
and harmful, he yet secretly encouraged his curiosity to revisit the
place of his temptation.

"After all, it did me no harm," said he to himself; "it's not interfered
with my work, or made me feel worse than before.  What harm in going
again to-night?  When Charlie comes, and we get away from town, I shall
easily be able to break it off; and besides, Charlie's sure to help to
put me square; he always does.  Yes; I think I'll just go and see what's
on there to-night; it can't be worse than it was.  Besides," thought he,
glad to seize on any straw of excuse, "I'm bound in honour to play Gus a
return match; it would be ungentlemanly to back out of that."

But why sicken you, dear reader, and myself, with recapitulating the sad
workings of this poor fellow's mind?  The more he tried to convince
himself he was doing only a slight wrong, the more his conscience cried
out he was running to his ruin.  But he stopped his ears and shut his
eyes, and blindly dared his fate.  He went that evening to the music-
hall.  He met Gus and Mortimer, and two other friends.  He had taken
care to get himself up in a nearer approach to his companions' style.
He bought some cigars of his own on the way, and offered them with a
less awkward swagger than he had been able to assume the night before.
He found himself able to nod familiarly to the barmaid, and fancied that
even Mortimer must have approved of the way in which he ordered about
the billiard-marker.

In the match with Gus for half-crowns he lost, though only narrowly--so
narrowly that he was not content, without a further trial of skill, to
own himself beaten, and therefore challenged his adversary to a second
meeting the next evening.  Then he watched the others play, and betted
with Mortimer on the result--and alas! for him, he won.

It was Tom himself who said, at nine o'clock,--

"And now, suppose we see what's going on below."

It was the same stupid, disgusting spectacle, but to Tom it seemed less
repulsive than he had found it the night before.  True, he at times felt
a return of the old feeling of shame; the blush would occasionally
suffuse his face; but such fits were rare, and he was able to carry them
off more easily with joke and laughter.

"Jack," said Gus in a whisper to Mortimer, as Tom, after accepting a
very broad hint to treat the party to spirits, was turning to go, "that
fellow will be a credit to you and me.  Did you see how he smacked his
lips over the play, and yet all the while wanted to make us think he saw
that sort of thing every day of his life, eh?  He's a promising chap,
eh, Jack?"

"Wathah," replied Jack, laughing.

Meanwhile Tom, glad enough to get out into the pure air, though in not
so desperate a case as the night before, shouldered his way among the
loitering company towards the door.  He was just emerging into the
street, when the sound of voices arrested him.

"That's one of our men, isn't it?" said one.

"Why, so it is; I fancied he was anything but a festive blade.  Yes; and
upon my word he's half seas over!"

Tom had no difficulty in discovering that these hurried words had
reference to him, and turning instinctively towards the voices, he found
himself face to face with two, reputedly, of the wildest of his fellow-
students.

Gladly would he have avoided them; gladly would he have shrunk back and
lost himself in the crowd, but it was too late now; he stood discovered.

"How are you?" cried one of the two, as he passed; "isn't your name
Drift?"

Tom stared as if he would have denied his name; but the next moment he
put on his lately acquired swagger, and said, "Yes."

"Ah!  I thought so; one of the Saint Elizabeth men.  Hullo! he's in a
hurry, though," added he, as Tom made a dive forward and strode rapidly
down the street.

It was but a step deeper.  Well he knew that by to-morrow every one of
his fellow-students would know of him as a frequenter of that wretched
place.  Well he knew that, as far as they were concerned, the mask of
shyness and reticence under which he had sheltered in their midst was
for ever pulled away.  "One of us," indeed!  So truly the very worst of
them might now speak and think of him.  Oh, if he had but considered in
time; if he had but stemmed this flood at its source!  But it was too
late now.

And he strode home reckless and hardened.

The next day, as he expected, every one seemed to know of his visits to
the music-hall.  The two who had seen him accosted him with every show
of friendship and intelligence.  He was appealed to in the presence of
nearly a dozen of his fellow-students as to the name of one of the low
songs there given; he was asked if he was going to be there to-night,
and he was invited to join this party and that in similar expeditions to
similar places.  And to all these questions and greetings he was
constrained to reply in keeping with his assumed character of a gay
spark.  How sick, how vile he felt; yet in that one day how hardened and
desperate he became!

It was not in Tom Drift to cry "I have sinned!  I will return!"  No,
once loose from his moorings, he let himself float down the stream,
watching the receding banks in mute despair, raising no shout for
succour, venturing no plunge for safety.

You, who by this time have given him up, disgusted at his weakness, his
vanity, his low instincts, his cowardliness--who say let him wallow in
the mire he has prepared for himself, who know so glibly what you would
have done, what you would have said, what you would have felt, remember
once more that Tom Drift was not such as you; and unfortunately did not
know you.  He was not gifted with your heroic resolution or your all-
penetrating wisdom.  He was an ordinary sinful being of flesh and blood,
relying only on his own poor strength; and therefore, reader, try to
realise all he went through before you fling your stone.

The toils were closing round him fast.  His will had been the first to
suffer, his conscience next.  Then with a rush had gone honour,
temperance, and purity; and now finally the flimsy rag, his good name,
had been torn from him, and he stood revealed a prodigal--and a
hypocrite.

Even yet, however, help might have been forthcoming.

"I say, you fellow," said one of his fellow-students this same day,
"I've never spoken to you before, and perhaps shall never do so again;
but _don't be a fool_!"

"What do you mean?" said Tom sharply.

"Only this, and I can't help it if you are angry, keep clear of these
