Project Gutenberg's The Terror from the Depths, by Sewell Peaslee Wright

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Terror from the Depths

Author: Sewell Peaslee Wright

Release Date: June 14, 2009 [EBook #29118]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE TERROR FROM THE DEPTHS ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net





The Terror from the Depths

By Sewell Peaslee Wright

[Transcriber's note: This etext was produced from Astounding Stories
November 1931. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that
the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]



     Commander John Hanson challenges an appalling denizen of
     the watery world Hydrot.


[Illustration: _His head reared itself from the ground._]


"Good afternoon, sir," nodded Correy as I entered the navigating room.
He glanced down at the two glowing three-dimensional navigating charts,
and drummed restlessly on the heavy frames.

"Afternoon, Mr. Correy. Anything of interest to report?"

"Not a thing, sir!" growled my fire-eating first officer. "I'm about
ready to quit the Service and get a job on one of the passenger liners,
just on the off chance that something exciting might eventually happen."

"You were born a few centuries too late," I chuckled. Correy loved a
fight more than any man I ever knew. "The Universe has become pretty
well quieted down."

"Oh, it isn't that; it's just this infernal routine. Just one routine
patrol after another; they should call it the Routine Patrol Service.
That's what the silver-sleeves at the Base are making of it, sir."

At the moment, Correy meant every word he said. Even old-timers develop
cases of nerves, now and then, on long tours of duty in small ships like
the _Ertak_. Particularly men like Correy, whose bodies crave physical
action.

There wasn't much opportunity for physical activity on the _Ertak_; she
was primarily a fighting ship, small and fast, with every inch of space
devoted to some utilitarian use. I knew just how Correy felt, because
I'd felt the same way a great many times. I was young, then, one of the
youngest commanders the Special Patrol Service had ever had, and I
recognized Correy's symptoms in a twinkling.

"We'll be re-outfitting at the Arpan sub-base in a couple of days," I
said carelessly. "Give us a chance to stretch our legs. Have you seen
anything of the liner that spoke to us yesterday?" I was just making
conversation, to get his mind out of its unhealthy channel.

"The _Kabit_? Yes, sir; we passed her early this morning, lumbering
along like the big fat pig that she is." A pig, I should explain, is a
food animal of Earth; a fat and ill-looking creature of low
intelligence. "The old _Ertak_ went by her as though she were standing
still. She'll be a week and more arriving at Arpan. Look: you can just
barely make her out on the charts."

I glanced down at the twin charts Correy had indicated. In the center of
each the red spark that represented the _Ertak_ glowed like a coal of
fire; all around were the green pinpricks of light that showed the
position of other bodies around us. The _Kabit_, while comparatively
close, was just barely visible; her bulk was so small that it only
faintly activated the super-radio reflex plates upon the ship's hull.

"We're showing her a pretty pair of heels," I nodded, studying our
position in both dimensions. "Arpan isn't registering yet, I see. Who's
this over here; Hydrot?"

"Right, sir," replied Correy. "Most useless world in the Universe, I
guess. No good even for an emergency base."

"She's not very valuable, certainly," I admitted. "Just a ball of water
whirling through space. But she does serve one good purpose; she's a
sign-post it's impossible to mistake." Idly, I picked up Hydrot in the
television disk, gradually increasing the size of the image until I had
her full in the field, at maximum magnification.

       *       *       *       *       *

Hydrot was a sizable sphere, somewhat larger than Earth--my natural
standard of comparison--and utterly devoid of visible land. She was, as
I had said, just a ball of water, swinging along uselessly through
space, although no doubt there was land of some kind under that vast,
unending stretch of gray water, for various observers had reported, in
times past, bursts of volcanic steam issuing from the water.

Indeed, as I looked, I saw one such jet of steam, shooting into space
from a spot not far from the equator of the strange world. In the
television disk, it looked like a tiny wisp of white, barely visible
against the gray water, but in reality it must have been a mighty
roaring column of smoke and steam and erupted material.

"There's life in the old girl, anyway," I commented, indicating the
image in the disk. "See her spout?"

We bent over the disk together, watching the white feather of steam.

"First time I've ever seen that," said Correy. "I know volcanic activity
has been reported before, but--look, sir! There's another--two more!"

Undoubtedly, things were happening deep in the bowels of Hydrot. There
were now three wisps of steam rising from the water, two of them fairly
