The Project Gutenberg EBook of Pagan Passions, by
Gordon Randall Garrett and Laurence Mark Janifer

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Pagan Passions

Author: Gordon Randall Garrett
        Laurence Mark Janifer

Illustrator: Robert Stanley

Release Date: September 26, 2007 [EBook #22767]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PAGAN PASSIONS ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Geoffrey Kidd, Stephen Blundell
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net









[Cover Illustration]




                             PAGAN PASSIONS

                         Adult Science Fiction,
              with the supernatural making complete sense.

The Gods and Goddesses of Ancient Greece and Rome had returned to
Earth--with all their awesome powers intact, and Earth was transformed
almost overnight. War on any scale was outlawed, along with
boom-and-bust economic cycles, and prudery--no change was more startling
than the face of New York, where, for instance, the Empire State
Building became the Tower of Zeus!

In this totally altered world, William Forrester was an acolyte of
Athena, Goddess of Wisdom, and therefore a teacher, in this case of a
totally altered history--and Maya Wilson, girl student, evidently had a
totally altered way of grading in mind--but what else would a worshipper
of Venus, Goddess of Love, have in mind?

This was just the first of the many Trials of Forrester, every bit as
mighty and perilous as the Labors of Hercules. In love with Gerda Symes,
like him a devotee of Athena, like him a frequenter of the great Temple
of Pallas Athena (formerly known as the 42nd Street Library)--dedicated,
in short, to the pleasures of the mind--Forrester was under the soft,
compelling pressure of soft, compelling devotees of Venus, Bacchus and
the like, and in need of all the strength that he and his Goddess, the
beautiful and intellectual Athena, could muster to save him from the
endless temptations of this new Earth.

And into this sensuous strife strode Temple Myrmidons--religious cops
sworn to obey orders without question or hesitation--with a pickup order
for William Forrester.

Where he was taken, what happened to him, the truly fantastic
discoveries he made about himself and the Gods and Goddesses--here are
the ingredients that make up this science fiction novel of suspense,
intrigue, mystery and danger. For science fiction it is, with the
supernatural making complete sense, and fun too, despite the Sword of
Damocles hanging by a thread over Forrester's head!

                         _by Randall Garrett and
                             Larry M. Harris_




 P
 a
 g
 a
 n

  P
  a
  s
  s
  i
  o
  n
  s




 A GALAXY Selected Novel
 For
 BEACON BOOKS




 P
 a
 g
 a
 n

  P
  a
  s
  s
  i
  o
  n
  s

   _By
   Randall Garrett
   and
   Larry M. Harris_

   _Published by
   Galaxy Publishing Corp.
   New York 14, New York_




 ALL CHARACTERS IN THIS WORK ARE WHOLLY
 FICTITIOUS AND ANY RESEMBLANCE TO PERSONS
 LIVING OR DEAD IS PURELY COINCIDENTAL

 Copyright 1959 by Galaxy Publishing Corp.

 _Galaxy Novels_ are sturdy, inexpensive editions of choice
 works of imaginative suspense, both original and reprint,
 selected by the editors of _Galaxy Magazine_ for Beacon Books.

 THIS IS BEACON BOOK NO. 263

 _Cover by Robert Stanley_

 Printed in the U.S.A. by
 THE GUINN COMPANY INC.
 New York 14, N. Y.




Transcriber's Note

Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S. copyright
on this publication was renewed. Minor spelling and typographical errors
have been corrected without note.




CHAPTER ONE


The girl came toward him across the silent room. She was young. She was
beautiful. Her red hair curled like a flame round her eager,
heart-shaped face. Her arms reached for him. Her hands touched him. Her
eyes were alive with the light of pure love. I am yours, the eyes kept
saying. Do with me as you will.

Forrester watched the eyes with a kind of fascination.

Now the girl's mouth opened, the lips parted slightly, and her husky
voice murmured softly: "Take me. Take me."

Forrester blinked and stepped back.

"My God," he said. "This is ridiculous."

The girl pressed herself against him. The sensation was, Forrester
thought with a kind of awe, undeniably pleasant. He tried to remember
the girl's name, and couldn't. She wriggled slightly and her arms went
up around him. Her hands clasped at the back of his neck and her mouth
moved, close to his ear.

"Please," she whispered. "I want you...."

Forrester felt his head swimming. He opened his mouth but nothing
whatever came out. He shut his mouth and tried to think what to do with
his hands. They were hanging foolishly at his sides. The girl came even
closer, something Forrester would have thought impossible.

Time stopped. Forrester swam in a pink haze of sensations. Only one
small corner of his brain refused to lose itself in the magnificence of
the moment. In that corner, Forrester felt feverishly uncomfortable. He
tried again to remember the girl's name, and failed again. Of course,
there was really no reason why he should have known the name. It was,
after all, only the first day of class.

"Please," he said valiantly. "Miss--"

He stopped.

"I'm Maya Wilson," the girl said in his ear. "I'm in your class, Mr.
Forrester. Introductory World History." She bit his ear gently.
Forrester jumped.

None of the textbooks of propriety he had ever seen seemed to cover the
situation he found himself in. What did one do when assaulted
(pleasantly, to be sure, but assault was assault) by a lovely girl who
happened to be one of your freshman students? She had called him Mr.
Forrester. That was right and proper, even if it was a little silly. But
what should he call her? Miss Wilson?

That didn't sound right at all. But, for other reasons, Maya sounded
even worse.

The girl said: "Please," and added to the force of the word with another
little wriggle against Forrester. It solved his problems. There was now
only one thing to do, and he did it.

He broke away, found himself on the other side of his desk, looking
across at an eager, wet-lipped freshman student.

"Well," he said. There was a lone little bead of sweat trickling down
his forehead, across his frontal ridge and down one cheek. He ignored it
bravely, trying to think what to do next. "Well," he repeated at last,
in what he hoped was a gentle and fatherly tone. "Well, well, well,
well, well." It didn't seem to have any effect. Perhaps, he thought, an
attempt to put things back on the teacher-student level might have
better results. "You wanted me to see you?" he said in a grave,
scholarly tone. Then, gulping briefly, he amended it in a voice that had
suddenly grown an octave: "You wanted to see me? I mean, you--"

"Oh," Maya Wilson said. "Oh, my goodness, _yes_, Mr. Forrester!"

She made a sudden sensuous motion that looked to Forrester as if she had
suddenly abolished bones. But it wasn't unpleasant. Far from it. Quite
the contrary.

Forrester licked his lips, which were suddenly very dry. "Well," he
said. "What about, Miss--uh--Miss Wilson?"

"Please call me Maya, Mr. Forrester. And I'll call you--" There was a
second of hesitation. "Mr. Forrester," Maya said plaintively, "what is
your first name?"

"First name?" Forrester tried to think of his first name. "You want to
know my first name?"

"Well," Maya said, "I want to call you something. Because after all--"
She looked as if she were going to leap over the desk.

"You may call me," Forrester said, grasping at his sanity, "Mr.
Forrester."

Maya sidled around the desk quietly. "Mr. Forrester," she said, reaching
for him, "I wanted to talk to you about the Introductory World History
course."

Forrester shivered as if someone had thrown cold water on his rising
aspirations.

"Oh," he said.

"That's right," Maya whispered. Her mouth was close to his ear again.
Other parts of her were close to other parts of him once more. Forrester
found it difficult to concentrate.

"I've _got_ to pass the course, Mr. Forrester," Maya whispered. "I've
just _got_ to."

Somehow, Forrester retained just enough control of his faculties to
remember the standard answer to protestations like that one. "Well, I'm
sure you will," he said in what he hoped was a calm, hearty, hopeful
voice. He was reasonably sure it wasn't any of those, and even surer
that it wasn't all three. "You seem like a--like a fairly intelligent
young lady," he finished lamely.

"Oh, no," she said. "I'm sure I won't be able to remember all those
old-fashioned dates and things. Never. Never." Suddenly she pressed
herself wildly against him, throwing him slightly off balance. Locked
together, the couple reeled against the desk. Forrester felt it digging
into the small of his back. "I'll do anything to pass the course, Mr.
Forrester!" she vowed. "Anything!"

The insistent pressure of the desk top robbed the moment of some of its
natural splendor. Forrester disengaged himself gently and slid a little
out of the way. "Now, now," he said, moving rapidly across the room
toward a blank wall. "This sort of thing isn't usually done, Maya. I
mean, Miss Wilson. I mean--"

"But--"

"People just don't do such things," Forrester said sternly. He thought
of escaping through the door, but the picture that arose immediately in
his mind dissuaded him. He saw Maya pursuing him passionately through
the halls while admiring students and faculty stared after them.
"Anyhow," he added as an afterthought, "not at the _beginning_ of the
semester."

"Oh," Maya said. She was advancing on him slowly. "You mean, I ought to
see if I can pass the course on my own first, and _then_--"

"Not at all," Forrester cut in.

Maya sniffed sadly. "Oh, you just don't understand," she said. "You're
an Athenian, aren't you?"

"Athenan," Forrester said automatically. It was a correction he found
himself called upon to make ten or twelve times a week. "An Athenian is
