The Project Gutenberg EBook of Ministry of Disturbance, by Henry Beam Piper

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Ministry of Disturbance

Author: Henry Beam Piper

Release Date: February 24, 2007 [EBook #20659]
Last updated: January 19, 2009

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MINISTRY OF DISTURBANCE ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, LN Yaddanapudi and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net





[Illustration]





MINISTRY ... OF DISTURBANCE


BY H. BEAM PIPER


Illustrated by van Dongen


+----------------------------------------------------------------+
|                                                                |
| Transcriber's Note                                             |
|                                                                |
| This etext was produced from Astounding Science Fiction        |
| December 1958. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence |
| that the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.       |
+----------------------------------------------------------------+


     _Sometimes getting a job is harder than the job after you get
     it--and sometimes getting out of a job is harder than either!_


[Illustration]

The symphony was ending, the final triumphant paean soaring up and up,
beyond the limit of audibility. For a moment, after the last notes had
gone away, Paul sat motionless, as though some part of him had followed.
Then he roused himself and finished his coffee and cigarette, looking
out the wide window across the city below--treetops and towers, roofs
and domes and arching skyways, busy swarms of aircars glinting in the
early sunlight. Not many people cared for Joao Coelho's music, now, and
least of all for the Eighth Symphony. It was the music of another time,
a thousand years ago, when the Empire was blazing into being out of the
long night and hammering back the Neobarbarians from world after world.
Today people found it perturbing.

He smiled faintly at the vacant chair opposite him, and lit another
cigarette before putting the breakfast dishes on the serving-robot's
tray, and, after a while, realized that the robot was still beside his
chair, waiting for dismissal. He gave it an instruction to summon the
cleaning robots and sent it away. He could as easily have summoned them
himself, or let the guards who would be in checking the room do it for
him, but maybe it made a robot feel trusted and important to relay
orders to other robots.

Then he smiled again, this time in self-derision. A robot couldn't feel
important, or anything else. A robot was nothing but steel and plastic
and magnetized tape and photo-micro-positronic circuits, whereas a
man--His Imperial Majesty Paul XXII, for instance--was nothing but
tissues and cells and colloids and electro-neuronic circuits. There was
a difference; anybody knew that. The trouble was that he had never met
anybody--which included physicists, biologists, psychologists,
psionicists, philosophers and theologians--who could define the
difference in satisfactorily exact terms. He watched the robot pivot on
its treads and glide away, trailing steam from its coffee pot. It might
be silly to treat robots like people, but that wasn't as bad as treating
people like robots, an attitude which was becoming entirely too
prevalent. If only so many people didn't act like robots!

He crossed to the elevator and stood in front of it until a tiny
electroencephalograph inside recognized his distinctive brain-wave
pattern. Across the room, another door was popping open in response to
the robot's distinctive wave pattern. He stepped inside and flipped a
switch--there were still a few things around that had to be manually
operated--and the door closed behind him and the elevator gave him an
instant's weightlessness as it started to drop forty floors.

When it opened, Captain-General Dorflay of the Household Guard was
waiting for him, with a captain and ten privates. General Dorflay was
human. The captain and his ten soldiers weren't. They wore helmets,
emblazoned with the golden sun and superimposed black cogwheel of the
Empire, and red kilts and black ankle boots and weapons belts, and the
captain had a narrow gold-laced cape over his shoulders, but for the
rest, their bodies were covered with a stiff mat of black hair, and
their faces were slightly like terriers'. (For all his humanity,
Captain-General Dorflay's face was more like a bulldog's.) They were
hillmen from the southern hemisphere of Thor, and as a people they made
excellent mercenaries. They were crack shots, brave and crafty fighters,
totally uninterested in politics off their own planet, and, because they
had grown up in a patriarchial-clan society, they were fanatically loyal
to anybody whom they accepted as their chieftain. Paul stepped out and
gave them an inclusive nod.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Good morning, gentlemen."

"Good morning, Your Imperial Majesty," General Dorflay said, bowing the
couple of inches consistent with military dignity. The Thoran captain
saluted by touching his forehead, his heart, which was on the right
side, and the butt of his pistol. Paul complimented him on the smart
appearance of his detail, and the captain asked how it could be
otherwise, with the example and inspiration of his imperial majesty.
Compliment and response could have been a playback from every morning of
the ten years of his reign. So could Dorflay's question: "Your Majesty
will proceed to his study?"

He wanted to say, "No, to Niffelheim with it; let's get an aircar and
fly a million miles somewhere," and watch the look of shocked
incomprehension on the captain-general's face. He couldn't do that,
though; poor old Harv Dorflay might have a heart attack. He nodded
slowly.

"If you please, general."

Dorflay nodded to the Thoran captain, who nodded to his men. Four of
them took two paces forward; the rest, unslinging weapons, went
scurrying up the corridor, some posting themselves along the way and the
rest continuing to the main hallway. The captain and two of his men
started forward slowly; after they had gone twenty feet, Paul and
General Dorflay fell in behind them, and the other two brought up the
rear.

"Your Majesty," Dorflay said, in a low voice, "let me beg you to be most
cautious. I have just discovered that there exists a treasonous plot
against your life."

Paul nodded. Dorflay was more than due to discover another treasonous
plot; it had been ten days since the last one.

"I believe you mentioned it, general. Something about planting loose
strontium-90 in the upholstery of the Audience Throne, wasn't it?"

And before that, somebody had been trying to smuggle a fission bomb into
the Palace in a wine cask, and before that, it was a booby trap in the
elevator, and before that, somebody was planning to build a submachine
gun into the viewscreen in the study, and--

"Oh, no, Your Majesty; that was--Well, the persons involved in that plot
became alarmed and fled the planet before I could arrest them. This is
something different, Your Majesty. I have learned that unauthorized
alterations have been made on one of the cooking-robots in your private
kitchen, and I am positive that the object is to poison Your Majesty."

They were turning into the main hallway, between the rows of portraits
of past emperors, Paul and Rodrik, Paul and Rodrik, alternating over and
over on both walls. He felt a smile growing on his face, and banished
it.

"The robot for the meat sauces, wasn't it?" he asked.

"Why--! Yes, Your Majesty."

"I'm sorry, general. I should have warned you. Those alterations were
made by roboticists from the Ministry of Security; they were installing
an adaptation of a device used in the criminalistics-labs, to insure
more uniform measurements. They'd done that already for Prince Travann,
the Minister, and he'd recommended it to me."

That was a shame, spoiling poor Harv Dorflay's murder plot. It had been
such a nice little plot, too; he must have had a lot of fun inventing
it. But a line had to be drawn somewhere. Let him turn the Palace upside
down hunting for bombs; harass ladies-in-waiting whose lovers he
suspected of being hired assassins; hound musicians into whose
instruments he imagined firearms had been built; the emperor's private
kitchen would have to be off limits.

Dorflay, who should have been looking crestfallen but relieved, stopped
short--shocking breach of Court etiquette--and was staring in horror.

"Your Majesty! Prince Travann did that openly and with your consent?
But, Your Majesty, I am convinced that it is Prince Travann himself who
is the instigator of every one of these diabolical schemes. In the case
of the elevator, I became suspicious of a man named Samml Ganner, one of
Prince Travann's secret police agents. In the case of the gun in the
viewscreen, it was a technician whose sister is a member of the
household of Countess Yirzy, Prince Travann's mistress. In the case of
the fission bomb----"

The two Thorans and their captain had kept on for some distance before
they had discovered that they were no longer being followed, and were
returning. He put his hand on General Dorflay's shoulder and urged him
forward.

"Have you mentioned this to anybody?"

"Not a word, Your Majesty. This Court is so full of treachery that I can
trust no one, and we must never warn the villain that he is suspected--"

"Good. Say nothing to anybody." They had reached the door of the study,
now. "I think I'll be here until noon. If I leave earlier, I'll flash
you a signal."

       *       *       *       *       *

He entered the big oval room, lighted from overhead by the great
star-map in the ceiling, and crossed to his desk, with the viewscreens
and reading screens and communications screens around it, and as he sat
down, he cursed angrily, first at Harv Dorflay and then, after a
moment's reflection, at himself. He was the one to blame; he'd known
Dorflay's paranoid condition for years. Have to do something about it.
Any psycho-medic would certify him; be no problem at all to have him put
away. But be blasted if he'd do that. That was no way to repay loyalty,
even insane loyalty. Well, he'd find a way.

He lit a cigarette and leaned back, looking up at the glowing swirl of
billions of billions of tiny lights in the ceiling. At least, there were
supposed to be billions of billions of them; he'd never counted them,
and neither had any of the seventeen Rodriks and sixteen Pauls before
