
"Only that they have left our old home and gone no one knows where."

"That is strange."

By this time they had reached the humble dwelling occupied by Mrs.
Forbush.

"And so this is where Rebecca lives?" said Mr. Carter.

"Yes, sir. It is not quite so nice as Mrs. Pitkin's."

"No," returned Mr. Carter thoughtfully.

Philip rang the bell, and the two were admitted into the humble parlor.
They had not long to wait for Mrs. Forbush, who, with an agitation which
she could not overcome, entered the presence of her long estranged and
wealthy uncle.

"Rebecca!" exclaimed the old gentleman, rising, and showing some emotion
as he saw the changes which fifteen years had made in the niece whom he
had last met as a girl.

"Uncle Oliver! how kind you are to visit me!" cried Mrs. Forbush, the
tears starting from her eyes.

"Kind! Nonsense! I have been very unkind to neglect you so long. But it
wasn't all my fault. There were others who did all they could to keep us
apart. You have lost your husband?"

"Yes, uncle. He was poor, but he was one of the kindest and best of men,
and made me happy."

"I begin to think I have been an old fool, Rebecca. Philip thinks so,
too."

"Oh, Mr. Carter!" exclaimed our hero.

"Yes, you do, Philip," asserted Mr. Carter, "and you are quite right.
However, as you told me, it is never too late to mend."

"Mrs. Forbush will think I take strange liberties with you, sir."

"I don't object to good advice, even from a boy. But who is this?"

Julia had just entered the room. She was a bright, attractive girl, but
held back bashfully until her mother said:

"Julia, this is Uncle Oliver Carter. You have heard me speak of him."

"Yes, mamma."

"And scold about him, I dare say. Well, Julia, come and give your old
uncle a kiss."

Julia blushed, but obeyed her uncle's request.

"I should know she was your child, Rebecca. She looks as you did at her
age. Now tell me, have you any engagement this morning, you two?"

"No, Uncle Oliver."

"Then I will find one for you. I have a carriage at the door. You will
please put on your bonnets. We are going shopping."

"Shopping?"

"Yes, I am going to fit out both of you in a manner more befitting
relatives of mine. The fact is, Niece Rebecca, you are actually shabby."

"I know it, uncle, but there has been so many ways of spending money
that I have had to neglect my dress.

"Very likely. I understand. Things are different now. Now, don't be over
an hour getting ready!"

"We are not fashionable, uncle," said Mrs. Forbush, "and we haven't any
change to make."

They entered the carriage, and drove to a large and fashionable store,
where everything necessary to a lady's toilet, including dresses quite
complete, could be obtained. Mrs. Forbush was in favor of selecting very
plain articles, but her uncle overruled her, and pointed out costumes
much more costly.

"But, uncle," objected Mrs. Forbush, "these things won't at all
correspond with our plain home and mode of living. Think of a
boarding-house keeper arrayed like a fine lady."

"You are going to give up taking boarders--that is, you will have none
but Philip and myself."

"Will you really live with us, uncle? But the house is too poor."

"Of course it is, but you are going to move. I will speak further on
this point when you are through your purchases."

At length the shopping was over, and they re-entered the carriage.

"Drive to No.-- Madison Avenue," said Mr. Carter to the driver.

"Uncle Oliver, you have given the wrong direction."

"No, Rebecca, I know what I am about."

"Do you live on Madison Avenue?" asked Mrs. Forbush.

"I am going to and so are you. You must know that I own a furnished
house on Madison Avenue. The late occupants sailed for Europe last week,
and I was looking out for a tenant when I found you. You will move there
to-morrow, and act as house keeper, taking care of Philip and myself. I
hope Julia and you will like it as well as your present home."

"How can I thank you for all your kindness, Uncle Oliver?" said Mrs.
Forbush, with joyful tears. "It will be living once more. It will be
such a rest from the hard struggle I have had of late years."

"You can repay me by humoring all my whims," said Uncle Oliver, smiling.
"You will find me very tyrannical. The least infraction of my rules will
lead me to send you all packing."

"Am I to be treated in the same way, Mr. Carter?" asked Philip.

"Exactly."

"Then, if you discharge me, I will fly for refuge to Mr. Pitkin."

"That will be 'out of the frying-pan into the fire' with a vengeance."

By this time they had reached the house. It was an elegant brown-stone
front, and proved, on entrance, to be furnished in the most complete and
elegant manner. Mr. Carter selected the second floor for his own use;
a good-sized room on the third was assigned to Philip, and Mrs. Forbush
was told to select such rooms for Julia and herself as she desired.

"This is much finer than Mrs. Pitkin's house," said Philip.

"Yes, it is."

"She will be jealous when she hears of it."

"No doubt. That is precisely what I desire. It will be a fitting
punishment for her treatment of her own cousin."

It was arranged that on the morrow Mrs. Forbush and Julia should close
their small house, leaving directions to sell the humble furniture at
auction, while Mr. Carter and Philip would come up from the Astor House.

"What will the Pitkins say when they hear of it?" thought Philip. "I am
afraid they will feel bad."



CHAPTER XXVII.

AN UNPLEASANT SURPRISE.

While these important changes were occurring in the lives of Philip
Brent and the poor cousin, Mrs. Pitkin remained in blissful ignorance
of what was going on. Alonzo had told her of his encounter with Phil on
Broadway and the intelligence our hero gave him of his securing a place.

"You may rest assured the boy was lying, Lonny," said Mrs. Pitkin.
"Boys don't get places so easily, especially when they can't give a
recommendation from their last employer.

"That's just what I thought, ma," said Alonzo.

"Still Phil looked in good spirits, and he was as saucy as ever."

"I can believe the last very well, Lonny. The boy is naturally
impertinent. They were probably put on to deceive you."

"But how does he get money to pay his way?" said Alonzo puzzled.

"As to that, he is probably selling papers or blacking boots in the
lower part of the city. He could make enough to live on, and of course
he wouldn't let you know what he was doing."

"I hope you're right, ma. I'd give ever so much to catch him blacking
boots in City Hall Park, or anywhere else; I'd give him a job. Wouldn't
he feel mortified to be caught?"

"No doubt he would."

"I've a great mind to go down town to-morrow and look about for him."

"Very well, Lonny. You may to if you want to."

Alonzo did go; but he looked in vain for Phil. The latter was employed
in doing some writing and attending to some accounts for Mr. Carter, who
had by this time found that his protege was thoroughly well qualified
for such work.

So nearly a week passed. It so chanced that though Uncle Oliver had now
been in New York a considerable time, not one of the Pitkins had met him
or had reason to suspect that he was nearer than Florida.

One day, however, among Mrs. Pitkin's callers was Mrs. Vangriff, a
fashionable acquaintance.

"Mr. Oliver Carter is your uncle, I believe?" said the visitor.

"Yes."

"I met him on Broadway the other day. He was looking very well."

"It must have been a fortnight since, then. Uncle Oliver is in Florida."

"In Florida!" repeated Mrs. Vangriff, in surprise.

"When did he go?"

"When was it, Lonny?" asked Mrs. Pitkin, appealing to her son.

"It will be two weeks next Thursday."

"There must be some mistake," said the visitor.

"I saw Mr. Carter on Broadway, near Twentieth Street, day before
yesterday."

"Quite a mistake, I assure you, Mrs. Vangriff," said Mrs. Pitkin,
smiling. "It was some other person. You were deceived by a fancied
resemblance."

"It is you who are wrong, Mrs. Pitkin," said Mrs. Vangriff, positively.
"I am somewhat acquainted with Mr. Carter, and I stopped to speak with
him."

"Are you sure of this?" asked Mrs. Pitkin, looking startled.

"Certainly, I am sure of it."

"Did you call him by name?"

"Certainly; and even inquired after you. He answered that he believed
you were well. I thought he was living with you?"

"So he was," answered Mrs. Pitkin coolly as possible, considering the
startling nature of the information she had received. "Probably Uncle
Oliver returned sooner than he anticipated, and was merely passing
through the city. He has important business interests at the West."

"I don't think he was merely passing through the city, for a friend of
mine saw him at the Fifth Avenue Theater last evening."

Mrs. Pitkin actually turned as pale as her sallow complexion would
admit.

"I am rather surprised to hear this, I admit," she said. "Was he alone,
do you know?"

"No; he had a lady and a boy with him."

"Is it possible that Uncle Oliver has been married to some designing
widow?" Mrs. Pitkin asked herself. "It is positively terrible!"

She did not dare to betray her agitation before Mrs. Vangriff, and
sat on thorns till that lady saw fit to take leave. Then she turned to
Alonzo and said, in a hollow voice:

"Lonny, you heard what that woman said?"

"You bet!"

"Do you think Uncle Oliver has gone and got married again?" she asked,
in a hollow voice.

"I shouldn't wonder a mite, ma," was the not consolitary reply.

"If so, what will become of us? My poor boy, I looked upon you and
myself as likely to receive all of Uncle Oliver's handsome property. As
it is----" and she almost broke down.

"Perhaps he's only engaged?" suggested Alonzo.

"To be sure!" said his mother, brightening up.

"If so, the affair may yet be broken off. Oh, Lonny, I never thought
your uncle was so artful. His trip to Florida was only a trick to put us
off the scent."

"What are you going to do about it, ma?"

"I must find out as soon as possible where Uncle Oliver is staying. Then
I will see him, and try to cure him of his infatuation. He is evidently
trying to keep us in the dark, or he would have come back to his rooms."

"How are you going to find out, ma?"

"I don't know. That's what puzzles me."

"S'pose you hire a detective?"

"I wouldn't dare to. Your uncle would be angry when he found it out."

"Do you s'pose Phil knows anything about it?" suggested Alonzo.

"I don't know; it is hardly probable. Do you know where he lives?"

"With the woman who called here and said she was your cousin."

"Yes, I remember, Lonny. I will order the carriage, and we will go
there. But you must be very careful not to let them know Uncle Oliver is
in New York. I don't wish them to meet him."

"All right! I ain't a fool. You can trust me, ma."

Soon the Pitkin carriage was as the door, and Mrs. Pitkin and Alonzo
entered it, and were driven to the shabby house so recently occupied by
Mrs. Forbush.

"It's a low place!" said Alonzo contemptuously, as he regarded
disdainfully the small dwelling.

"Yes; but I suppose it is as good as she can afford to live in. Lonny,
will you get out and ring the bell? Ask if Mrs. Forbush lives there."

Alonzo did as requested.

The door was opened by a small girl, whose shabby dress was in harmony
with the place.

"Rebecca's child, I suppose!" said Mrs. Pitkin, who was looking out of
the carriage window.

"Does Mrs. Forbush live here?" asked Alonzo.

"No, she doesn't. Mrs. Kavanagh lives here."

"Didn't Mrs. Forbush used to live here?" further asked Alonzo, at the
suggestion of his mother.

"I believe she did. She moved out a week ago."

"Do you know where she moved to?"

"No, I don't."

"Does a boy named Philip Brent live here?"

"No, he doesn't."

"Do you know why Mrs. Forbush moved away?" asked Alonzo again, at the
suggestion of his mother.

"Guess she couldn't pay her rent."

"Very likely," said Alonzo, who at last had received an answer with
which he was pleased.

"Well, ma, there isn't any more to find out here," he said.

"Tell the driver--home!" said his mother.

When they reached the house in Twelfth Street, there was a surprise in
store for them.

"Who do you think's up-stairs, mum?" said Hannah, looking important.

"Who? Tell me quick!"

"It's your Uncle Oliver, mum, just got home from Florida; but I guess
he's going somewhere else mum, for he's packing up his things."

"Alonzo, we will go up and see him," said Mrs. Pitkin, excited. "I must
know what all this means."




CHAPTER XXVIII.

AN UNSATISFACTORY CONFERENCE.

Mr. Carter was taking articles from a bureau and packing them away in an
open trunk, when Mrs. Pitkin entered with Alonzo. It is needless to
say that his niece regarded his employment with dismay, for it showed
clearly that he proposed to leave the shelter of her roof.

"Uncle Oliver!" she exclaimed, sinking into a chair and gazing at the
old gentleman spell-bound.

Mr. Carter, whose back had been turned, turned about and faced his
niece.

"Oh, it is you, Lavinia!" he said quietly.

"What are you doing?" asked his niece.

"As you see, I am packing my trunk."

"Do you intend to leave us?" faltered Mrs. Pitkin.

"I think it will be well for me to make a change," said Mr. Carter.

"This is, indeed, a sad surprise," said Mrs Pitkin mournfully. "When did
you return from Florida?"

"I have never been there. I changed my mind when I reached Charleston."

"How long have you been in the city?"

"About a week."

"And never came near us. This is, indeed, unkind. In what way have we
offended you?" and Mrs. Pitkin put her handkerchief to her eyes.

There were no tears in them, but she was making an attempt to touch the
heart of her uncle.

"Are you aware that Rebecca Forbush is in the city?" asked the old
gentleman abruptly.

"Ye-es," answered Mrs. Pitkin, startled.

"Have you seen her?"

"Ye-es. She came here one day."

"And how did you treat her?" asked Mr. Carter, severely. "Did you not
turn the poor woman from the house, having no regard for her evident
poverty? Did you not tell her that I was very angry with her, and would
not hear her name mentioned?"

"Ye-es, I may have said so. You know, Uncle Oliver, you have held no
communication with her for many years."

"That is true--more shame to me!"

"And I thought I was carrying out your wishes in discouraging her
visits."

"You also thought that she might be a dangerous rival in my favor, and
might deprive you and Alonzo of an expected share in my estate."

"Oh, Uncle Oliver! how can you think so poorly of me?"
