The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Lonely Island, by R.M. Ballantyne

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Lonely Island
       The Refuge of the Mutineers

Author: R.M. Ballantyne

Release Date: June 7, 2007 [EBook #21747]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE LONELY ISLAND ***




Produced by Nick Hodson of London, England




THE LONELY ISLAND; OR, THE REFUGE OF THE MUTINEERS, BY R.M. BALLANTYNE.



CHAPTER ONE.

THE REFUGE OF THE MUTINEERS.

THE MUTINY.

On a profoundly calm and most beautiful evening towards the end of the
last century, a ship lay becalmed on the fair bosom of the Pacific
Ocean.

Although there was nothing piratical in the aspect of the ship--if we
except her guns--a few of the men who formed her crew might have been
easily mistaken for roving buccaneers.  There was a certain swagger in
the gait of some, and a sulky defiance on the brow of others, which told
powerfully of discontent from some cause or other, and suggested the
idea that the peaceful aspect of the sleeping sea was by no means
reflected in the breasts of the men.  They were all British seamen, but
displayed at that time none of the well-known hearty off-hand rollicking
characteristics of the Jack-tar.

It is natural for man to rejoice in sunshine.  His sympathy with cats in
this respect is profound and universal.  Not less deep and wide is his
discord with the moles and bats.  Nevertheless, there was scarcely a man
on board of that ship on the evening in question who vouchsafed even a
passing glance at a sunset which was marked by unwonted splendour.  The
vessel slowly rose and sank on a scarce perceptible ocean-swell in the
centre of a great circular field of liquid glass, on whose undulations
the sun gleamed in dazzling flashes, and in whose depths were reflected
the fantastic forms, snowy lights, and pearly shadows of cloudland.  In
ordinary circumstances such an evening might have raised the thoughts of
ordinary men to their Creator, but the circumstances of the men on board
of that vessel were not ordinary--very much the reverse.

"No, Bill McCoy," muttered one of the sailors, who sat on the breach of
a gun near the forecastle, "I've bin flogged twice for merely growlin',
which is an Englishman's birthright, an' I won't stand it no longer.  A
pretty pass things has come to when a man mayn't growl without tastin'
the cat; but if Captain Bligh won't let me growl, I'll treat him to a
roar that'll make him cock his ears an' wink six times without
speakin'."

The sailor who said this, Matthew Quintal by name, was a short,
thick-set young man of twenty-one or thereabouts, with a forbidding
aspect and a savage expression of face, which was intensified at the
moment by thoughts of recent wrongs.  Bill McCoy, to whom he said it,
was much the same in size and appearance, but a few years older, and
with a cynical expression of countenance.

"Whether you growl or roar, Matt," said McCoy, with a low-toned laugh,
"I'd advise you to do it in the minor key, else the Captain will give
you another taste of the cat.  He's awful savage just now.  You should
have heard him abusin' the officers this afternoon about his
cocoa-nuts."

"So I should," returned Quintal.  "As ill luck would have it, I was
below at the time.  They say he was pretty hard on Mr Christian."

"Hard on him!  I should think he was," rejoined McCoy.  "Why, if Mr
Christian had been one of the worst men in the ship instead of the best
officer, the Cap'n could not have abused him worse.  I heard and saw 'im
with my own ears and eyes.  The cocoa-nuts was lyin', as it might be
here, between the guns, and the Cap'n he came on deck an' said he missed
some of his nuts.  He went into a towerin' rage right off--in the old
style--and sent for all the officers.  When they came aft he says to
them, says he, `Who stole my cocoa-nuts?'  Of course they all said they
didn't know, and hadn't seen any of the people take 'em.  `Then,' says
the Cap'n, fiercer than ever, `you must have stole 'em yourselves, for
they couldn't have been taken away without your knowledge.'  So he
questioned each officer separately.  Mr Christian, when he came to him,
answered, `I don't know, sir, who took the nuts, but I hope you do not
think me so mean as to be guilty of stealing yours.'  Whereupon the
Cap'n he flared up like gunpowder.  `Yes, you hungry hound, I do,' says
he; `you must have stolen them from me, or you would have been able to
give a better account of them.'"

"That was pitchin' into 'im pretty stiff," said Quintal, with a grim
smile.  "What said Mr Christian?"

"He said nothin', but he looked thunder.  I saw him git as red as a
turkey cock, an' bite his lips till the blood came.  It's my opinion,
messmate," added McCoy, in a lower tone, "that if Cap'n Bligh don't
change his tone there'll be--"

"Come, come, mate," interrupted a voice behind him; "if you talk mutiny
like that you'll swing at the end o' the yard-arm some fine mornin'."

The sailor who joined the others and thus spoke was a short, sturdy
specimen of his class, and much more like a hearty hare-brained tar than
his two comrades.  He was about twenty-two years of age, deeply pitted
with small-pox, and with a jovial carelessness of manner that had won
for him the sobriquet of Reckless Jack.

"I'm not the only one that talks mutiny in this ship," growled McCoy.
"There's a lot of us whose backs have bin made to smart, and whose grog
has been stopped for nothin' but spite, John Adams, and you know it."

"Yes, I do know it," returned Adams, sharply; "and I also know that
there's justice to be had in England.  We've got a good case against the
Captain, so we'd better wait till we get home rather than take the law
into our own hands."

"I don't agree with you, Jack," said Quintal, with much decision, "and I
wonder to see you, of all men, show the white feather."

Adams turned away with a light laugh of contempt, and the other two
joined a group of their mates, who were talking in low tones near the
windlass.

Matthew Quintal was not the only man on board who did not agree with the
more moderate counsels of Reckless Jack, _alias_ John Adams, _alias_
John Smith, for by each of those names was he known.  On the
quarter-deck as well as on the forecastle mutterings of deep indignation
were heard.

The vessel was the celebrated _Bounty_, which had been fitted up for the
express purpose of proceeding to the island of Otaheite, (now named
Tahiti), in the Pacific for plants of the breadfruit tree, it being
thought desirable to introduce that tree into the West India Islands.
We may remark in passing, that the transplantation was afterwards
accomplished, though it failed at this time.

The _Bounty_ had been placed under the command of Lieutenant Bligh of
the Royal Navy.  Her burden was about 215 tons.  She had been fitted
with every appliance and convenience for her special mission, and had
sailed from Spithead on the 23rd December 1787.

Lieutenant Bligh, although an able and energetic seaman, was of an angry
tyrannical disposition.  On the voyage out, and afterwards at Otaheite,
he had behaved so shamefully, and with such unjustifiable severity, both
to officers and men, that he was regarded by a large proportion of them
with bitter hatred.  It is painful to be obliged to write thus of one
who rose to positions of honour in the service; but the evidence led in
open court, coupled with Bligh's own writings, and testimony from other
quarters, proves beyond a doubt that his conduct on board the _Bounty_
was not only dishonourable but absolutely brutal.

When the islanders were asked at first the name of the island, they
replied, "O-Tahiti," which means, "It is Tahiti", hence the earlier form
of the name--_Otaheite_.

It was after the _Bounty_ had taken in the breadfruit trees at Otaheite,
and was advanced a short distance on the homeward voyage, that the
events we are about to narrate occurred.

We have said that mutterings of deep discontent were heard on the
quarter-deck.  Fletcher Christian, acting lieutenant, or master's mate,
leaned over the bulwarks on that lovely evening, and with compressed
lips and frowning brows gazed down into the sea.  The gorgeous clouds
and their grand reflections had no beauty for him, but a shark, which
swam lazily alongside, showing a fin now and then above water, seemed to
afford him a species of savage satisfaction.

"Yes," he muttered, "if one of his legs were once within your ugly jaws,
we'd have something like peace again after these months of torment."

Fletcher Christian, although what is called a high-spirited youth, was
not quick to resent injury or insult.  On the contrary, he had borne
with much forbearance the oft-repeated and coarse insolence of his
superior.  His natural expression was bright and his temperament sunny.
He possessed a powerful frame and commanding stature, was agile and
athletic, and a favourite with officers and men.  But Bligh's conduct
had soured him.  His countenance was now changed.  The last insult about
the cocoa-nuts, delivered openly, was more than he could bear.  "When
Greek meets Greek, then comes the tug of war."  In this case the tug was
tremendous, the immediate results were disastrous, and the ultimate
issues amazing, as will be seen in the sequel of our tale.

"To whom does your amiable wish refer?" asked a brother-officer named
Stewart, who came up just then and leaned over the bulwarks beside him.

"Can you not guess?" said the other, sternly.

"Yes, I can guess," returned the midshipman, gazing contemplatively at
the shark's fin.  "But, I say, surely you don't really mean to carry out
your mad intention of deserting."

"Yes, I do," said Christian with emphasis.  "I've been to the
fore-cockpit several times to-day, and seen the boatswain and carpenter,
both of whom have agreed to help me.  I've had a plank rigged up with
staves into a sort of raft, on which I mean to take my chance.  There's
a bag all ready with some victuals in it, and another with a few nails,
beads, etcetera, to propitiate the natives.  Young Hayward is the only
other officer besides yourself to whom I have revealed my intention.
Like you, he attempts to dissuade me, but in vain.  I shall go
to-night."

"But where will you go to?" asked Stewart.

Christian pointed to Tofoa, one of the Friendly Islands, which was then
in sight like a little black speck on the glowing sky where the sun had
just disappeared.

"And how do you propose to escape _him_?" said the midshipman, pointing
significantly to the shark, which at the moment gave a wriggle with its
tail as if it understood the allusion and enjoyed it.

"I'll take my chance of that," said Christian, bitterly, and with a
countenance so haggard yet so fierce that his young companion felt
alarmed.  "See here," he added, tearing open his vest and revealing
within it a deep sea-lead suspended round his neck; "I had rather die
than live in the torments of the last three weeks.  If I fail to escape,
you see, there will be no chance of taking me alive."

"_Better try to take the ship_!" whispered a voice behind him.

Christian started and grew paler, but did not turn his head to see who
had spoken.  The midshipman at his side had evidently not heard the
whisper.

"I cannot help thinking you are wrong," said Stewart.  "We have only to
bear it a little longer, and then we shall have justice done to us in
England."

Well would it have been for Fletcher Christian, and well for all on
board the _Bounty_, if he had taken the advice of his young friend, but
his spirit had been tried beyond its powers of endurance--at least so he
thought--and his mind was made up.  What moral suasion failed to effect,
however, the weather accomplished.  It prevented his first intention
from being carried out.

While the shades of evening fell and deepened into a night of unusual
magnificence, the profound calm continued, and the ship lay motionless
on the sea.  The people, too, kept moving quietly about the deck, either
induced thereto by the sweet influences around them, or by some
indefinable impression that a storm sometimes succeeds a calm as well in
the moral as the material world.  As the ship had no way through the
water, it was impossible for the rash youth to carry out his plan either
during the first or middle watches.  He was therefore compelled to give
it up, at least for that night, and about half-past three in the morning
he lay down to rest a few minutes, as he was to be called by Stewart to
relieve the watch at four o'clock.

He had barely fallen into a troubled slumber when he was awakened by
Stewart, and rose at once to go on deck.  He observed in passing that
young Hayward, the mate of his watch, had lain down to take a nap on the
arm-chest.  Mr Hallet, the other midshipman of the watch, had also gone
to sleep somewhere, for he was not to be seen.  Whether the seriously
reprehensible conduct of these two officers roused his already excited
spirit to an ungovernable pitch, or their absence afforded a favourable
opportunity, we cannot tell, but certain it is that Fletcher Christian
opened his ear at that time to the voice of the tempter.

"_Better try to take the ship_," seemed burning in words of fire into
his brain.

Quick to act as well as to conceive, he looked lustily and earnestly at
the men of his watch.  The one who stood nearest him, looking vacantly
out upon the sea, was Matthew Quintal.  To him Christian revealed his
hastily adopted plan of seizing the ship, and asked if he would join
him.  Quintal was what men call a deep villain.  He was quite ripe for
mutiny, but from some motive known only to himself he held back, and
expressed doubt as to the possibility of carrying out the plan.

"I did not expect to find cowardice in _you_," said Christian, with a
look of scornful indignation.

"It is not cowardice, sir," retorted Quintal.  "I will join if others
do.  Try some one else.  Try Martin there, for instance."

Isaac Martin was a raw-boned, sallow, six-foot man of about thirty, who
had been undeservedly flogged by Bligh.  Christian went to him at once,
and put the question, "Will you join me in taking the ship?"

"The very thing, Mr Christian.  I'm with you," answered Martin,
promptly.

The eager readiness of this man at once decided Quintal.  Christian then
went to every man in his watch, all of whom had received more or less
harsh treatment from the Captain, and most of whom were more than
willing to join the conspirators.  Those who hesitated, whatever might
have been their motives, had not sufficient regard for their commander
to warn him of his danger.  Perhaps the very suddenness of the proposal,
as well as fear of the mutineers, induced them to remain silent.  In
passing along the deck Christian encountered a man named William Brown.
He was assistant-botanist, or gardener, to the expedition, and having
been very intimate with Christian, at once agreed to join him.  Although
a slenderly made young man, Brown was full of vigour and resolution.

"We must look sharp," said Christian to him, in that low eager whisper
in which the conversation among the mutineers had hitherto been carried
on.  "It will soon be daylight.  You know the men as well as I do.  Go
below and gain over those whom you feel sure of influencing.  Don't
waste your time on the lukewarm or cowardly.  Away with you.  Here,
Williams," he added, turning to another man who was already in the plot,
"go below and send up the gunner's mate, I want him; then call John
Adams,--I feel sure that Reckless Jack will join; but do it softly.  No
noise or excitement."

In a few seconds John Mills, the gunner's mate, a strongly-built
middle-aged man, came on deck, and agreeing at once to join, was sent to
fetch the keys of the arm-chest from the armourer, under pretence of
getting out a musket to shoot a shark which was alongside.

Meanwhile John Williams went to the hammock of John Adams and roused
him.

"I don't half like it," said Adams, when he was sufficiently awake to
understand the message of his mate.  "It's all very true what you say,
Williams; the ship _has_ been little better than a hell since we left
Spithead, and Captain Bligh don't deserve much mercy, but mutiny is
wrong any way you look at it, and I've got my doubts whether any
circumstances can make it right."

The reasoning of Adams was good, but his doubts were cleared away, if
not solved, by the abrupt entrance of Christian, who went to the
arm-chest just opposite Adams's hammock and began to distribute arms to
all the men who came for them.  Seeing this, and fearing to be left on
the weaker side, Adams rose, armed himself with a cutlass, and went on
deck.

The morning of the 28th of April was now beginning to dawn.  Before that
the greater part of the ship's company had been gained over and armed;
yet all this was done so quietly and with such firmness that the
remainder of the crew were ignorant of what was going on.  No doubt a
few who might have given the alarm were afraid to do so.  Among those
who were asleep was one deserving of special notice, namely, Peter
Heywood, a midshipman who was true as steel at heart, but whose extreme
youth and inexperience, coupled with the surprise and alarm of being
