
"I am very sorry, Aunt Jane," replied Iris, "but I had to come. He
would never have taken his medicine but for me. I had to remind him--"

"To remind him of his duty. He certainly wanted to be reminded. So he
has taken the medicine. I am glad of that; but all the same, Iris, you
did very wrong to leave the schoolroom."

"Please forgive me this one time, Aunt Jane."

"I really think Iris does try to be a good child," interrupted Miss
Ramsay.

"And she certainly can manage her little brother, ma'am," said
Simpson, speaking for the first time. "He would not touch his medicine
for me--no, not for anything I could do; but he drank it off when Miss
Iris talked some gibberish, all about giants and belts and swords."

"'Tisn't gibberish," said Orion, starting up from his pillow; "it's
the truest thing in all the world. I am a giant, and I has got a belt
and a sword. You can look up in the sky on starful nights and you can
see me. 'Tisn't gibberish."

"Well, lie down now, child, and go to sleep. I am afraid he is a bit
feverish, ma'am."

"No, that I aren't," said Orion. "Only I'm drefful sick," he added.

"Listen to me, Orion," said Mrs. Dolman, seating herself on the edge
of the bed and gazing very sternly at the little fellow. "I intend to
wring a confession out of you."

"What's to wring?" asked Orion.

"I am going to get you to tell me where you got the lollipops and
ginger-beer."

"I promised not to tell, and I aren't going to," answered Orion.

"But you must. I insist."

"Perhaps, Aunt Jane," said Iris, "I could get him to tell. You see he
is not accustomed to--not accustomed to----" Her little face turned
crimson.

"What do you mean, Iris? Do you object to the way I speak to this
child?"

"Mother never spoke to him like that," said Iris.

"And oh! it is so hot, and he is not well, and I think I can manage
him. I may get him to tell me."

"Yes, I'll tell you," said Orion, "'cos you'll be faithful."

"Well, really," said Mrs. Dolman, "I am absolutely perplexed. I
suppose I must give in on this occasion, or that child will be really
ill, and I by no means wish to have the expense of a doctor. Miss
Ramsay, you and I had better leave that little pair together. You can
remain with Orion until dinner-time, Iris."

"Thank you very much indeed, Aunt Jane," replied Iris.

That day at dinner Iris looked very grave. Orion was better, but was
not present. Mrs. Dolman waited until the meal had come to an end,
then she called the little girl to her side.

"Now, my dear Iris, what is all this mystery?" she asked.

"Orion has told me all about it, Aunt Jane, but I don't think I'll
tell. Please don't ask me."

"My dear. I insist upon knowing."

"It was not his fault, Aunt Jane, and I am almost sure he will never
do it again; he is very sorry indeed. I think he will try to be good
in future."

Mrs. Dolman was about to reply angrily, when a sudden memory came over
her. She recalled words her brother had used.

"I will give you the children," he had said, "but you must try to be
gentle with them."

She looked at Iris now, and did not speak for nearly a minute.

"Very well," she said then; "you are a queer child, but I am inclined
to trust you. Only please understand that if ever there is any
misconduct in the future, I shall insist on knowing everything."

"I am greatly obliged to you, Aunt Jane. I could love you for being so
kind. I will promise that Orion never does anything of that sort
again."

The children all filed out of the dining room. They had now, according
to the rule of the day, to return to the schoolroom and lie down for
an hour. This part of the daily programme was intensely distasteful to
the little Dolmans, and certainly the Delaneys did not appreciate it a
bit better, but at long last the wearisome lessons were over, and the
little people were free.

The moment they got into the garden Philip and Conrad might have been
seen scudding away as fast as their little feet could carry them.
Iris, however, had watched them disappearing.

"I want to speak to the boys," she said to Ann.

"Why?" asked Ann.

"Please ask them to come to me, Ann; I have something most particular
to say to them."

"I know what you mean," answered Ann, turning crimson; "it was Philip
and Conrad who got poor little Orion into mischief. Oh, Iris! it was
brave of you, and it was brave of Orion not to tell. I wondered how
you had the courage to defy mamma."

"I did not defy her," answered Iris. "But please, Ann, I must speak to
the boys. Send them to me at once."

"They are frightened, and are going to hide," said Ann; "but I'll soon
get them," she answered. "I know their ways."

After a minute or two she returned, leading Philip and Conrad by the
hands.

"Iris wants to talk to you," she said to them.

"Yes," said Iris, "I want to say something to you by yourselves."

Ann disappeared.

"I love Iris," whispered little Ann Dolman to herself. "I think she is
beautiful; and how brave she is! I wish I were like her."

"What do you want with us, Iris?" asked Philip, when he found himself
alone with his cousin. He raised defiant eyes, and put on an ugly
little scowl.

"I want to tell you, Phil," said Iris, "that I know everything. Poor
little Orion would not confess, because you got him to promise not to
tell; but, of course, he told me the truth. Don't you think you
behaved very badly indeed?"

"We don't want _you_ to lecture us," said Conrad.

"All right," replied Iris with spirit. "But please remember that I
promised Orion I would not tell, only so long as you make me a promise
that you will not tempt him again. If ever I hear that you have led
Orion into mischief, I will tell everything."

"I thought you looked like a tell-tale," said Conrad.

"No, I am not, nor is Orion; you know better, both of you. Now, please
understand that I will not have Orion made miserable nor tempted to do
naughty things. Aunt Jane thinks you are good boys, and she thinks
Diana and Orion very bad little children; but neither Orion nor Diana
would do the sort of thing you both did yesterday. Neither of them
would think of _that_ sort of naughtiness. I call it mean."

Iris walked away with her head in the air. The boys gazed after her
with a queer sinking of heart.




CHAPTER XIII.

BIRCH ROD.


Orion speedily recovered from his bad fit of indigestion, and matters
began to shake down a little in the schoolroom and nursery. No one
meant to be unkind to the little Delaneys; and although all things
were changed for them, in some ways both Iris and Apollo were all the
better for the strict and vigorous discipline they were now
undergoing. Iris really enjoyed her lessons, and when Apollo found
that he had no chance of going to school, and of being with "fellows,"
as he expressed it, until he had conquered certain difficult tasks
which Miss Ramsay set him, he began, for his own sake, to apply
himself to his lessons. He was a bright, clever little chap, and when
he tried to understand his governess' method of teaching, he did his
work fairly well. But Diana and Orion were much too young for the
somewhat severe transplantation which had taken place in their little
lives. Had Iris been allowed to be with them matters might not have
grown quite so bad, but she was much occupied with her lessons, and
the younger children spent the greater part of their time alone.

Philip and Conrad were afraid to make any further advances to Orion.
In consequence, he had no companion near his own age, except Diana,
and Diana's little heart, day by day, was growing fuller of
insubordinate and angry feelings. She was not at all by nature an
unforgiving little child, but the want of petting and the severe life
which she was obliged to lead began to tell on her high spirits. She
became defiant, and was always looking out for an opportunity to vent
her wrath upon the people whom she termed her enemies. Had Iris only
had a chance of talking to the little girl, she would soon have got to
the bottom of the matter, and things might not have turned out as they
did; but Iris did not even sleep in the room with Diana, and in her
sister's presence the little girl made a valiant effort to appear as
happy as usual. As a matter of fact, however, she and Orion spent most
of their playtime in perfecting their little scheme of revenge, and on
a certain hot day matters came to a crisis.

It had been much more trying than usual in the schoolroom; the sun
seemed to beat in with fiercer rays; there were more flies on the
window-panes, and the air seemed more charged with that terrible
sleepiness which poor little Diana could not quite conquer. At last
she dropped so sound asleep that Miss Ramsay took pity on her, and
told her she might go and have a run in the garden.

"Go into the Filbert walk," said the governess; "don't on any account
play where the sun is shining. You may stay out for half an hour.
There is a clock just by the stables, which you can see when you come
to the end of the walk; you will know then when the half-hour is out.
Run off now and enjoy yourself."

Diana scarcely wasted any time in thanking Miss Ramsay. She flew from
the schoolroom as though she were herself a little arrow shot from a
bow, she tumbled rather than walked downstairs, and with no hat over
her thick, black curls, careered out wildly, shouting as she did so.
The prospect of the walk and the look of the sunshine were making the
little girl very happy, and she might not have thought of any special
revenge had not Mrs. Dolman at that moment caught sight of her.

Mrs. Dolman was coming out of the kitchen garden. She had on her
invariable mushroom hat, her face was much flushed with exercise, and
she was by no means in the best of humors.

"Diana," she said, "what are you doing? Come here this minute."

"No, I won't," answered Diana. She backed before the good lady,
dancing and skipping and flinging her fat arms over her head. "Oh,
it's 'licious out!" she said: "I won't come. I has only got half an
hour; I hasn't any time; I won't come."

Mrs. Dolman began to run after her, which fact excited the little girl
very much. She instantly raced away, and the stout lady had to follow
her, panting and puffing.

"Diana, you are a dreadfully naughty little girl; if I catch you up,
won't I punish you!" panted Mrs. Dolman.

"I don't care," called back Diana. "You can't catch me up; you is fat;
you can't wun. See, let's have a wace--let's find out who'll be at the
end of the walk first. Now then, one, two, three, and away! Go it,
Aunt Jane! Now, then, k'ick, Aunt Jane; k'ick!"

Mrs. Dolman's rage at this great impertinence made her almost
speechless. She flew after Diana, but would have had little or no
chance of catching her, if the child had not suddenly tripped up
against a stone and measured her full length on the ground. Before
she could rise again Mrs. Dolman had caught her by the shoulder, and,
as a preliminary measure, began to shake her violently.

"You are a bad little thing," she said. "Why didn't you come to me
when I called you?"

"'Cos I didn't want to, Aunt Jane."

"But do you know that you have got to obey me, miss? What would your
mother say?"

"You isn't to dare to talk of mother to me," answered Diana.

"Highty-tighty! I'm not to dare. Do you suppose, Diana, that I will
allow a little child like you to defy me in my own house?"

"What's defy?" asked Diana.

"You are defying me now; you are a very naughty little girl, and I
shall punish you."

"I don't care," said Diana, tossing her head. "I was sent out by Miss
Wamsay 'cos I found the schoolroom too hot and I was sleepy. I can't
obey you and Miss Wamsay both at the same time, can I? I did not come
to you 'cos I don't like you."

"That's a pretty thing to say to your own aunt. Come, miss, I shall
punish you immediately."

"Oh, you's going to lock me up in the punishment woom. I don't care
one bit for that," said Diana. "I'll just lie on the floor and curl up
like a puppy and go to s'eep. I dweam beautiful when I s'eep. I dweam
that you is shotted, and that I is back again in the dear old garden
at home with all the pets; and that Rub-a-Dub is alive again. I dweam
that you is shotted down dead, and you can do no more harm, and----"

But Diana could not proceed any further. Mrs. Dolman, in her wild
indignation, had lifted her in her arms, clapped her hand over her
mouth, and carried her bodily into the study, where Mr. Dolman was
preparing his sermon.

"William," said his wife, "I am really very sorry to disturb you, but
I must ask you to come to my assistance."

"In what way, Jane?" he said. He pushed his spectacles, as his
invariable habit was, high up on the middle of his forehead, and
looked from his wife to Diana, and from Diana back again to his wife.

"Hi, Diana! is that you? Why, what is the matter, little one?" he
said.

"You are not to speak to this very naughty little girl," said Mrs.
Dolman. "I am sorry to trouble you, William, but matters have come to
a crisis, and if you don't support your wife on this occasion, I
really do not know what will happen."

"But, my dear Jane, do you mean to say that little Diana----"

"Little Diana!" repeated Mrs. Dolman. "She is quite a monster, I can
tell you--a monster of ingratitude, wickedness, and rudeness, and I
don't see how we can keep her any longer with our own children."

"But I am afraid, my dear wife, we cannot get David Delaney back now;
he must have reached the Himalayas by this time."

"Poor fellow!" said Mrs. Dolman, "I pity him for being the father of
such a very bad little girl."

