"I don't see how you could have the nerve to do such things, Mr.
Montgomery."

"Well, a man can do lots of things when he is driven to do them. I admit
the deals were rather barefaced, but, as I said before, I had to do
something. Some day, when I am rich, I'll return the money to the old
fellow," added the impostor.

He left the hotel that morning, and it may be said here that Joe did not
meet him again for several years.

Christmas came and went at the hotel, and our hero received several
presents from his friends, including a pair of gloves from Ned Talmadge
and a five-dollar gold piece from Felix Gussing. Some of the regular
boarders at the hotel also remembered him.

"And how do you like married life?" asked Joe, of Felix Gussing.

"We are getting along very nicely," said the dude.

"Have you told your wife about the duel yet?"

"No,--and I don't think I shall," added Felix Gussing. "You see
she--er--she thinks me a very brave man and--"

"And you don't want her to change her opinion," finished Joe, with a
smile!

"Why should I, Joe."

"Oh, I don't know as there is any reason, excepting that they usually
say men and their wives should have no secrets from each other."

"Mr. Montgomery is gone, I see," said the dude, changing the subject.

"Yes, sir."

"Then you are the only one who knows of this secret. You won't tell,
will you?"

"No, sir."

"We are having troubles enough as it is," went on the dude. "Both my
wife and I find housekeeping rather troublesome. It is hard to obtain
proper servants, and she does not care to do the work herself."

"Why don't you go to boarding?"

"Perhaps we will, later on."

With the new year came a heavy fall of snow and soon sleighs big and
little were in demand. Then came a slight fall of rain which made the
sidewalks a glare of ice.

"Got to be careful," announced Frank to Joe. "If you don't you'll go
down on your back."

"I intend to be careful," answered our hero. "I have no wish to break
any bones."

That afternoon Joe was sent on an errand to a place of business half a
mile away. On returning he chanced to stop at a street corner, to watch
a number of children who had made a long slide for themselves.

As he stood watching, a man came along bundled up in a great coat and
wearing a slouch hat and blue glasses. The man was walking rapidly, as
if in a hurry.

"That fellow looks familiar to me," thought Joe. "Wonder who he can be?"

He watched the stranger cross the street. Then the fellow happened to
step on the icy slide and in a twinkling he went down on his back, his
hat flying in one direction and a bundle he carried in another.

"Hurrah! Down goes the gent!" sang out a newsboy standing near.

"Come here an' I'll pick yer up!" said another street urchin.

"You rascals, you fixed this on purpose so I should fall!" cried the
man, starting to get up.

"Can I help you?" questioned Joe, coming up, and then he gave a start,
as he recognized the fellow.

It was Pat Malone, alias David Ball, from Montana!



CHAPTER XXII.


ABOUT SOME MINING SHARES.


"How do you do, Mr. Ball?" said our hero, coolly.

"Eh, what's that?" questioned Malone, in amazement. Then he recognized
Joe, and his face fell.

"I have often wondered what became of you," went on our hero. "Let me
help you up."

"I--that is--who are you, boy?" demanded Malone, getting to his feet and
picking up his hat and his bundle.

"You ought to remember me. I am Joe Bodley. I used to work for Mr.
Mallison, at Riverside."

"Don't know the man or the place," said Pat Malone, coolly. "You have
made a mistake."

"Then perhaps I had better call you Malone."

"Not at all. My name is Fry--John Fry."

"How often do you change your name, Mr. Fry."

"Don't get impudent!"

"I am not impudent,--I am only asking a plain question."

"I never change my name."

At that moment Joe saw a policeman on the opposite side of the street
and beckoned for the officer to come over.

"Hi! what's the meaning of this!" ejaculated Pat Malone.

"Officer, I want this man locked up," said Joe, and caught the rascal by
the arm, that he might not run away.

"What's the charge?" asked the bluecoat.

"He is wanted for swindling."

"Boy, are you really crazy?"

"No, I am not."

"Who are you?" asked the policeman, eyeing Joe sharply.

"My name is Joe Bodley. I work at the Grandon House. I will make a
charge against this man, and I'll bring the man who was swindled, too."

"That's fair talk," said the policeman. "I guess you'll both have to go
to the station with me."

"I'm willing," said Joe, promptly.

"I--I cannot go--I have a sick wife--I must get a doctor," stammered Pat
Malone. "Let me go. The boy is mistaken."

"You'll have to go with me."

"But my sick wife?"

"You can send for your friends and they can take care of her."

"I have no friends--we are strangers in Philadelphia. I don't want to
go."

Pat Malone tried to move on, but the policeman and Joe detained him, and
in the end he was marched off to the police station. Here Joe told what
he knew and Malone's record was looked up in the Rogues' Gallery.

"You've got the right man, that's sure," said the desk sergeant to our
hero. "Now where can you find this Mr. Maurice Vane?"

"I have his address at the hotel," answered our hero. "If I can go I'll
get it and send Mr. Vane a telegram."

"Bring the address here and we'll communicate with Mr. Vane."

Our hero agreed, and inside of half an hour a message was sent to
Maurice Vane, notifying him of the fact that Pat Malone had been caught.
Mr. Vane had gone to New York on business, but came back to Philadelphia
the next day.

When he saw that he was caught Pat Malone broke down utterly and made a
full confession, telling in detail how the plot against Maurice Vane had
been carried out.

"It was not my plan," said he. "Gaff Caven got the mining shares and he
arranged the whole thing."

"Where did you get the shares--steal them?" demanded Maurice Vane,
sharply.

"No, we didn't steal them. We bought them from an old miner for fifty
dollars. The miner is dead now."

"Can you prove this?"

"Yes."

"Then do so."

"Why?"

"I don't care to answer that question. But if you can prove to me that
you and Caven came by those shares honestly I won't prosecute you,
Malone."

"I will prove it!" was the quick answer, and that very afternoon Pat
Malone proved beyond a doubt that the shares had belonged to himself and
Gaff Caven when they sold them to Maurice Vane.

"That is all I want of you," said Maurice Vane. "I shan't appear against
you, Malone."

"Then those shares must be valuable after all?" queried the swindler.

"Perhaps they are. I am having them looked up. I am glad of this
opportunity of proving that they are now my absolute property."

"If Caven and I sold you good stocks we ought to be kicked full of
holes," grumbled Malone.

"That was your lookout, not mine," returned Maurice Vane. "Mind, I
don't say the shares are valuable. But they may be, and if so I shall be
satisfied with my bargain."

"Humph! where do I come in?"

"You don't come in at all--and you don't deserve to."

"If I didn't swindle you, you can't have me held for swindling."

"I don't intend to have you held. You can go for all I care."

Maurice Vane explained the situation to the police authorities and that
evening Pat Malone was allowed to go. He threatened to have somebody
sued for false imprisonment but the police laughed at him.

"Better not try it on, Malone," said one officer. "Remember, your
picture is in our Rogues' Gallery," and then the rascal was glad enough
to sneak away. The next day he took a train to Baltimore, where, after
an hour's hunt, he found Gaff Caven.

"We made a fine mess of things," he said, bitterly. "A fine mess!"

"What are you talking about, Pat?" asked Caven.

"Do you remember the mining stocks we sold to Maurice Vane?"

"Certainly I do."

"Well, he has got 'em yet."

"All right, he can keep them. We have his money too," and Gaff Caven
chuckled.

"I'd rather have the shares."

"Eh?"

"I said I'd rather have the shares, Gaff. We put our foot into it when
we sold 'em."

"Do you mean to say the shares are valuable?" demanded Gaff Caven.

"That's the size of it."

"Who told you this?"

"Nobody told me, but I can put two and two together as quick as
anybody."

"Well, explain."

"I was in Philadelphia when I ran into that hotel boy, Joe Bodley."

"What of that?"

"He had me arrested. Then they sent for Mr. Maurice Vane, and Vane made
me prove that the shares were really ours when we sold them to him. I
thought I'd go clear if I could prove that, so I went and did it. Then
Vane said he wouldn't prosecute me, for the shares might be valuable
after all."

"But the mine is abandoned."

"Maybe it is and maybe it isn't. I guess Mr. Maurice Vane knows what he
is doing, and we were fools to sell out to him."

"If that mine is valuable I'm going to have it!" cried Gaff Caven. "He
can have his money back!" and the rascal who had overreached himself
began to pace the floor.

"Maybe he won't take his money back."

"Then I'll claim the mine anyway, Pat--and you must help me."

"What can you do?"

"Go out to Montana, just as soon as the weather is fit, and relocate
the mine. If it's any good we can find some fellows to help us hold
it somehow. I'm not going to let this slip into Maurice Vane's hands
without a struggle."

"Talk is cheap, but it takes money to pay for railroad tickets," went on
Malone.

"I've got the dust, Pat."

"Enough to fight Vane off if he should come West?"

"I think so. I met a rich fellow last week and I got a loan of four
thousand dollars."

"Without security?" and Malone winked suggestively.

"Exactly. Oh, he was a rich find," answered Gaff Caven, and gave a short
laugh.

"I'm willing to go anywhere. I'm tired of things here. It's getting too
warm for comfort."

"Then let us start West next week--after I can finish up a little
business here."

"I am willing."

And so the two rascals arranged to do Maurice Vane out of what had
become his lawful property.



CHAPTER XXIII.


THE FIRE AT THE HOTEL.


On the day following the scene at the police station Maurice Vane
stopped at the Grandon House to interview our hero.

"I must thank you for the interest you have taken in this matter, Joe,"
said he. "It is not every lad who would put himself out to such an
extent."

"I wanted to see justice done, Mr. Vane," answered our hero, modestly.

"Things have taken a sudden change since I saw you last summer," went on
Maurice Vane. "Perhaps it will be as well if I tell my whole story."

"I'd like first rate to hear it."

"After I got those shares of stock I felt that I had been swindled, and
I was very anxious to get hold of the rascals. But as time went on and
I could not locate them I resolved to look into the deal a little more
minutely and see if there was any chance of getting my money, or a
portion of it, back."

"I should have done the same."

"I wrote to a friend out West and he put me in communication with a
mining expert who set to work to find out all about the mine. The expert
sent me word, late in the fall, that the mine was, in his opinion,
located on a vein of gold well worth working."

"What did you do then?"

"I wanted to go West at once and look into the matter personally, but an
aunt died and I had to settle up her estate and see to the care of her
two children, and that held me back. Then winter came on, and I knew I'd
have to let matters rest until spring."

"Are you going out there in the spring?"

"Yes,--as early as possible, too."

"I hope you find the mine a valuable one, Mr. Vane."

"I place great reliance on what the mining expert said, for he is known
