him who had sat under them. His hand moved to a control button on his
chair arm, and a red patch, roughly the shape of a pork chop, appeared
on the western side.

That was the Empire. Every one of the thousand three hundred and
sixty-five inhabited worlds, a trillion and a half intelligent beings,
fourteen races--fifteen if you counted the Zarathustran Fuzzies, who
were almost able to qualify under the talk-and-build-a-fire rule. And
that had been the Empire when Rodrik VI had seen the map completed, and
when Paul II had built the Palace, and when Stevan IV, the grandfather
of Paul I, had proclaimed Odin the Imperial planet and Asgard the
capital city. There had been some excuse for staying inside that patch
of stars then; a newly won Empire must be consolidated within before it
can safely be expanded. But that had been over eight centuries ago.

He looked at the Daily Schedule, beautifully embossed and neatly slipped
under his desk glass. Luncheon on the South Upper Terrace, with the
Prime Minister and the Bench of Imperial Counselors. Yes, it was time
for that again; that happened as inevitably and regularly as Harv
Dorflay's murder plots. And in the afternoon, a Plenary Session, Cabinet
and Counselors. Was he going to have to endure the Bench of Counselors
twice in the same day? Then the vexation was washed out of his face by a
spreading grin. Bench of Counselors; that was the answer! Elevate Harv
Dorflay to the Bench. That was what the Bench was for, a gold-plated
dustbin for the disposal of superannuated dignitaries. He'd do no harm
there, and a touch of outright lunacy might enliven and even improve the
Bench.

And in the evening, a banquet, and a reception and ball, in honor of His
Majesty Ranulf XIV, Planetary King of Durendal, and First Citizen Zhorzh
Yaggo, People's Manager-in-Chief of and for the Planetary Commonwealth
of Aditya. Bargain day; two planetary chiefs of state in one big
combination deal. He wondered what sort of prizes he had drawn this
time, and closed his eyes, trying to remember. Durendal, of course, was
one of the Sword-Worlds, settled by refugees from the losing side of the
System States War in the time of the old Terran Federation, who had
reappeared in Galactic history a few centuries later as the Space
Vikings. They all had monarchial and rather picturesque governments;
Durendal, he seemed to recall, was a sort of quasi-feudalism. About
Aditya he was less sure. Something unpleasant, he thought; the titles of
the government and its head were suggestive.

He lit another cigarette and snapped on the reading screen to see what
they had piled onto him this morning, and then swore when a graph chart,
with jiggling red and blue and green lines, appeared. Chart day, too.
Everything happens at once.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was the interstellar trade situation chart from Economics. Red line
for production, green line for exports, blue for imports, sectioned
vertically for the ten Viceroyalties and sub-sectioned for the
Prefectures, and with the magnification and focus controls he could even
get data for individual planets. He didn't bother with that, and
wondered why he bothered with the charts at all. The stuff was all at
least twenty days behind date, and not uniformly so, which accounted for
much of the jiggling. It had been transmitted from Planetary
Proconsulate to Prefecture, and from Prefecture to Viceroyalty, and from
there to Odin, all by ship. A ship on hyperdrive could log light-years
an hour, but radio waves still had to travel 186,000 mps. The
supplementary chart for the past five centuries told the real
story--three perfectly level and perfectly parallel lines.

It was the same on all the other charts. Population fluctuating slightly
at the moment, completely static for the past five centuries. A slight
decrease in agriculture, matched by an increase in synthetic food
production. A slight population movement toward the more urban planets
and the more densely populated centers. A trend downward in
employment--nonworking population increasing by about .0001 per cent
annually. Not that they were building better robots; they were just
building them faster than they wore out. They all told the same story--a
stable economy, a static population, a peaceful and undisturbed Empire;
eight centuries, five at least, of historyless tranquility. Well, that
was what everybody wanted, wasn't it?

He flipped through the rest of the charts, and began getting summarized
Ministry reports. Economics had denied a request from the Mining Cartel
to authorize operations on a couple of uninhabited planets; danger of
local market gluts and overstimulation of manufacturing. Permission
granted to Robotics Cartel to---- Request from planetary government of
Durendal for increase of cereal export quotas under consideration--they
wouldn't want to turn that down while King Ranulf was here. Impulsively,
he punched out a combination on the communication screen and got Count
Duklass, Minister of Economics.

Count Duklass had thinning red hair and a plump, agreeable, extrovert's
face. He smiled and waited to be addressed.

"Sorry to bother Your Lordship," Paul greeted him. "What's the story on
this export quota request from Durendal? We have their king here, now.
Think he's come to lobby for it?"

Count Duklass chuckled. "He's not doing anything about it, himself. Have
you met him yet, sir?"

"Not yet. He's to be presented this evening."

"Well, when you see him--I think the masculine pronoun is
permissible--you'll see what I mean, sir. It's this Lord Koreff, the
Marshal. He came here on business, and had to bring the king along, for
fear somebody else would grab him while he was gone. The whole object of
Durendalian politics, as I understand, is to get possession of the
person of the king. Koreff was on my screen for half an hour; I just got
rid of him. Planet's pretty heavily agricultural, they had a couple of
very good crop years in a row, and now they have grain running out their
ears, and they want to export it and cash in."

"Well?"

"Can't let them do it, Your Majesty. They're not suffering any hardship;
they're just not making as much money as they think they ought to. If
they start dumping their surplus into interstellar trade, they'll cause
all kinds of dislocations on other agricultural planets. At least,
that's what our computers all say."

And that, of course, was gospel. He nodded.

"Why don't they turn their surplus into whisky? Age it five or six years
and it'd be on the luxury goods schedule and they could sell it
anywhere."

Count Duklass' eyes widened. "I never thought of that, Your Majesty.
Just a microsec; I want to make a note of that. Pass it down to somebody
who could deal with it. That's a wonderful idea, Your Majesty!"

       *       *       *       *       *

He finally got the conversation to an end, and went back to the reports.
Security, as usual, had a few items above the dead level of bureaucratic
procedure. The planetary king of Excalibur had been assassinated by his
brother and two nephews, all three of whom were now fighting among
themselves. As nobody had anything to fight with except small arms and a
few light cannon, there would be no intervention. There had been
intervention on Behemoth, however, where a whole continent had tried to
secede from the planetary republic and the Imperial Navy had been
requested to send a task force. That was all right, in both cases. No
interference with anything that passed for a planetary government, but
only one sovereignty on any planet with nuclear weapons, and only one
supreme sovereignty in a galaxy with hyperdrive ships.

And there was rioting on Amaterasu, because of public indignation over a
fraudulent election. He looked at that in incredulous delight. Why, here
on Odin there hadn't been an election in the past six centuries that
hadn't been utterly fraudulent. Nobody voted except the nonworkers,
whose votes were bought and sold wholesale, by gangster bosses to
pressure groups, and no decent person would be caught within a hundred
yards of a polling place on an election day. He called the Minister of
Security.

Prince Travann was a man of his own age--they had been classmates at the
University--but he looked older. His thin face was lined, and his hair
was almost completely white. He was at his desk, with the Sun and
Cogwheel of the Empire on the wall behind him, but on the breast of his
black tunic he wore the badge of his family, a silver planet with three
silver moons. Unlike Count Duklass, he didn't wait to be spoken to.

"Good morning, Your Majesty."

"Good morning, Your Highness; sorry to bother you. I just caught an
interesting item in your report. This business on Amaterasu. What sort
of a planet is it, politically? I don't seem to recall."

"Why, they have a republican government, sir; a very complicated setup.
Really, it's a junk heap. When anything goes badly, they always build
something new into the government, but they never abolish anything. They
have a president, a premier, and an executive cabinet, and a tricameral
legislature, and two complete and distinct judiciaries. The premier is
always the presidential candidate getting the next highest number of
votes. In the present instance, the president, who controls the
planetary militia, is accusing the premier, who controls the police, of
fraud in the election of the middle house of the legislature. Each is
supported by the judiciary he controls. Practically every citizen
belongs either to the militia or the police auxiliaries. I am looking
forward to further reports from Amaterasu," he added dryly.

"I daresay they'll be interesting. Send them to me in full, and red-star
them, if you please, Prince Travann."

He went back to the reports. The Ministry of Science and Technology had
sent up a lengthy one. The only trouble with it was that everything
reported was duplication of work that had been done centuries before.
Well, no. A Dr. Dandrik, of the physics department of the Imperial
University here in Asgard announced that a definite limit of accuracy in
measuring the velocity of accelerated subnucleonic particles had been
established--16.067543333--times light-speed. That seemed to be typical;
the frontiers of science, now, were all decimal points. The Ministry of
Education had a little to offer; historical scholarship was still
active, at least. He was reading about a new trove of source-material
that had come to light on Uller, from the Sixth Century Atomic Era, when
the door screen buzzed and flashed.

       *       *       *       *       *

He lit it, and his son Rodrik appeared in it, with Snooks, the little
red hound, squirming excitedly in the Crown Prince's arms. The dog began
barking at once, and the boy called through the phone:

"Good morning, father; are you busy?"

"Oh, not at all." He pressed the release button. "Come on in."

Immediately, the little hound leaped out of the princely arms and came
dashing into the study and around the desk, jumping onto his lap. The
boy followed more slowly, sitting down in the deskside chair and drawing
his foot up under him. Paul greeted Snooks first--people can wait, but
for little dogs everything has to be right now--and rummaged in a drawer
until he found some wafers, holding one for Snooks to nibble. Then he
became aware that his son was wearing leather shorts and tall buskins.

"Going out somewhere?" he asked, a trifle enviously.

"Up in the mountains, for a picnic. Olva's going along."

And his tutor, and his esquire, and Olva's companion-lady, and a dozen
Thoran riflemen, of course, and they'd be in continuous screen-contact
with the Palace.

"That ought to be a lot of fun. Did you get all your lessons done?"

"Physics and math and galactiography," Rodrik told him. "And Professor
Guilsan's going to give me and Olva our history after lunch."

They talked about lessons, and about the picnic. Of course, Snooks was
going on the picnic, too. It was evident, though, that Rodrik had
something else on his mind. After a while, he came out with it.

"Father, you know I've been a little afraid, lately," he said.

"Well, tell me about it, son. It isn't anything about you and Olva, is
it?"

Rod was fourteen; the little Princess Olva thirteen. They would be
marriageable in six years. As far as anybody could tell, they were both
quite happy about the marriage which had been arranged for them years
ago.

"Oh, no; nothing like that. But Olva's sister and a couple others of
mother's ladies-in-waiting were to a psi-medium, and the medium told
