dial. "All clear," and both men removed their helmets. They wiped sweat
from their faces and glanced at each other.

The blonde man said, "The air's okay, Jarvis. Everything seems all
right. I don't get it."

Jarvis, his dark eyes wary, scowled as he looked about. "It seems all
right. But we know it isn't. It can't be."

"I'm shucking this suit."

"Don't be a fool, Mark!"

"But the dial read _clear_, man! And we know nobody is going to shoot
us. All life _had_ to be wiped out."

"How about minor power installations?"

Jarvis took a chocolate bar from his pocket, sat down on a piece of
broken rubble and began to eat. "You're too careless--far too careless,
Mark."

Mark laughed. "You've always been cautious enough for both of us. Got me
out of plenty of scrapes back in school, too. Don't think I've
forgotten." Affection warmed his blue eyes as they rested on the face of
his friend.

"Okay! Okay! But what happened to them? Where did they go?" Jarvis took
nervous bites from his second chocolate bar. Then he, too, peeled off
his suit. He sniffed the air distrustfully, as he wiggled his shoulders
to free them from the clinging, damp shirt. Then he took a few
experimental steps forward.

"Seems all right, Mark. But how do you explain about Hank and Garland?
Never were two more careful guys."

"Probably a simple miscalculation. Or an accident. We know it couldn't
have been enemy action. Tests prove conclusively that we wiped them
out--to a man." He took deep gulps of air into his lungs, and stretched
like a cat. "We'll find out soon enough. Boy, I feel great!"

       *       *       *       *       *

They deflated and folded their safety suits and added the bundles to the
other equipment on their backs. Then, with their instruments held before
them, they probed their way into the twisted wreckage, still following
the faint, dust-filled footprints.

Bent and rusted girders rose on all sides like the bones of prehistoric
monsters. Nothing stirred. The dust lay ages-thick on everything.

"Gives you the spooks, doesn't it?" Jarvis was still tense, poised to
respond to the first signal of danger. "Feels like we're the last men
alive!"

"Funny about Hank and Garland. There's nothing here to harm anyone."

Jarvis looked at his watch. "Better contact HQ for instructions."

The two stepped off the path, into the shade of a grotesque chunk of
broken masonry. Mark set up the radio and twirled the dials. "Team Four,
