everybody."

Burris nodded. "I've talked with the president," he said, "and he
feels this is the best way to handle matters."

Malone tried to imagine Burris explaining the incredible complexities
of the situation to the president, and was torn between relief that he
hadn't been there and a curious wish to have heard the scrambled
conversation that must have taken place. "The way it seems to me," he
said cautiously, "shipping those spies back to Russia is a worse
punishment than sending them to the federal pen."

"Maybe it is," Burris said. "Maybe it is. How would you feel if you
were being sent to jail?"

"Innocent," Malone said instantly.

"But that isn't the point," Burris went on. "You see, Malone, we don't
really have much damaging evidence against those spies, except for
their confessions. During all the time we were watching them, we took
care that they never did come up with anything dangerous; we weren't
fishing for them but for their superiors, for the rest of the
network."

"There doesn't seem to be any more network," Malone said. "Not in this
country, anyhow."

"Sure," Burris said. "We know that now, thanks to the confessions, and
to Her Majesty. But we can't prosecute on that sort of evidence. You
know what a good defense attorney could do with unsupported
confessions--and even if we wanted to take the lid off telepathy for
the general public, it would be absolute hell bringing it into court."

"So," Malone said, "we can't put them in prison, even if we want to."

"Oh, I didn't say that," Burris said hastily. "We could probably win,
even against a good defense. But they wouldn't get much time in
prison, and we'd only end up deporting them in any case."

Malone fished for a cigarette, lit it and blew out smoke. "So we're
going to save the taxpayers some money," he said. "That'll be nice for
a change."

"That's right," Burris said, beaming. "We're going to save Federal
funds by shipping them back to their motherland now. After all, they
did take out their naturalization papers under false names, and their
declarations are chockfull of false information. So all it takes is a
court order to declare their citizenships null and void, and hand all
three of them back to the Soviets."

"A nice, simple housecleaning," Malone said. "All open and
above-board. And the confessions will certainly stand up in a
deportation hearing."

"No question of it," Burris said. "But the reason I called you here,
Malone, is that there's still one thing bothering me."

Malone blew out some more smoke, thought wistfully about cigars, and
said: "What? Everything seems simple enough to me."

Burris frowned and leaned back in his chair. "It's this notion of
yours, Malone," he said.

"Notion?"

"About going over there," Burris said. "Now, I can understand your
wanting some facts on Moscow, current background and all that sort of
thing. So far, everything makes sense."

"Fine," Malone said warily.

"But, after all, Malone," Burris said, "we do have such a thing as the
Central Intelligence Agency. They send us reports. That's what they're
for. And why you want to ignore the reports and make a trip over there
to walk around and see for yourself--"

"It's because of everything that's happening," Malone said.

Burris looked puzzled. "What?" he said.

"Because of all the confusion," Malone said. "Frankly, I can't trust
the CIA, or any other branch of the government. I've got to see for
myself."

Burris considered this for a second. "It's going to look very
peculiar," he said.

Malone shrugged. "Everything looks peculiar," he said. "A little more
won't hurt anything. And if I do turn up anything we can use, the
whole trip will be worth it."

"But sending an FBI man along with Brubitsch, Borbitsch and Garbitsch
is a little strange," Burris said. "Not to mention Her Majesty."

"There is that," Malone said. "I wonder what our Red friends are going
to think of the Queen."

"God knows," Burris said. "If they take her seriously, they're liable
to call her some sort of capitalist deviationist."

"And if they don't take her seriously?" Malone said.

"Then they're going to wonder why she's _pretending_ to be a
capitalist deviationist," Burris said.

Malone flicked his cigarette at an ashtray. "You can't win," he said.

"Frankly," Burris said, "I wouldn't allow Her Majesty to go along
under any circumstances--except that there is an excuse for having an
older woman around."

"There is?" Malone said.

Burris nodded. "As a chaperone," he said.

"Now, wait a minute," Malone said. "Brubitsch, Borbitsch and
what's-his-name don't need a chaperone."

"I didn't say it was for them," Burris said.

"Me?" Malone asked in a tone of absolute wonder. "Now, Chief, I don't
need a chaperone. I'm a grown man. I know my way around. And the idea
of having Her Majesty along to chaperone me is going to make
everything look even stranger. After all, Chief--"

"Malone," Burris said, in a voice of steel.

"Sorry," Malone mumbled. "But, really, I'm not some young, innocent
girl in a Victorian novel."

"No," Burris said, a trifle sadly, "you're not. But there is one going
along on the trip with the rest of you."

"There is?" Malone said. "Who is she? Rebecca?"

"Her name's Luba," Burris said. "Luba Garbitsch."

"Garbitsch's wife?" Malone said.

Burris shook his head. "His daughter," he said. "And don't tell me
there isn't any such name as Luba. I know there isn't. But what would
you pick to go with Garbitsch?"

"Wastepaper basket," Malone said instantly. "Grapefruit rinds. Lemon
peels. Coffee grounds."

"Damn it, Malone," Burris said, "this is serious."

"Well," Malone said, "it doesn't sound serious. What are we doing,
deporting the entire family?"

"I suppose we could," Burris said, "if we really wanted to get
complicated about it. What with Garbitsch's false declaration, I
haven't the faintest idea what his daughter's status would be--but she
_was_ born here, Malone, and as far as we can tell she's perfectly
loyal to the United States."

"Fine," Malone said. "So you're sending her to Russia. This is making
less and less sense, you know."

Burris rubbed a hand over his face. "Malone," he said in a quiet,
patient voice, "why don't you wait for me to finish? Then everything
will make sense. I promise."

"Well, all right," Malone said doubtfully. "Luba Garbitsch is going
along to Russia, in spite of the fact that she's perfectly loyal."

"True," Burris said. "You see, Malone, she loves her traitorous old
daddy just the same. Family affection. Very touching."

"And if he's going to Moscow--"

"She wants to go along," Burris said. "That's right."

"And you're going to send her along," Malone said, "out of the
goodness of your kindly old heart. Just like Santa Claus. Or the
Easter bunny."

Burris looked acutely uncomfortable. "Now, Malone," he said. "It's not
exactly that, and you know it."

"It isn't?" Malone said, trying to look surprised.

Burris shook his head. "If we send Luba Garbitsch along," he said,
"that gives us a good excuse for Her Majesty. As a chaperone."

"Are you sure," Malone asked slowly, "that anybody with a name like
Luba Garbitsch could plausibly need a chaperone? Even in a den of
vice? Because somehow it doesn't sound right: Luba Garbitsch,
chaperoned by Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth I."

"Well," Burris said, "it won't be the Queen. I mean, she won't be
known as the Queen."

"Incognito?" Malone said.

Burris shrugged. "In away," he said. "What do you think would be a
good name for her to travel under?"

Malone considered. "I don't know," he said at last. "But no more
Lubas."

"I was thinking," Burris said carefully. "How about Rose Thompson?"

There was a long silence.

"I don't know whether she'll go for the idea," Malone said. "But I'll
try it."

"You can do it, Malone," Burris said instantly. "I know you can. I
just know it."

"Your faith," Malone said with a sigh, "is going to be too much for me
one of these days."

Burris shrugged. "Just take it easy, Malone," he said. "You said you
wanted to have Her Majesty over there to read a few minds, and you've
got her. But remember, don't get involved in anything complicated.
Don't start any fireworks."

"I hope not," Malone said.

"Stay out of political arguments," Burris said.

Malone blinked. "What do you think I'm going to do?" he said. "Bring
along a soapbox?"

"You never know," Burris said. "Just keep quiet, and don't go prowling
around where you're not wanted."

"That," Malone said decisively, "would keep me out of Russia
entirely."

"Damn it," Burris said, "you know what I mean. We don't want any
international incidents, understand?"

"Yes, sir," Malone said.

Burris nodded. "All right, then," he said. "Your plane leaves from the
airport in an hour. You'd better go and talk to Her Majesty first."

"Right," Malone said.

"And I hope you know what you're doing," Burris said.

_So do I,_ Malone thought privately. Aloud, he said, "I just want to
get the feel of things over there, that's all, sir. I won't cause any
more trouble than an ordinary tourist."

"Malone," Burris said, "don't be an ordinary tourist. They're
empty-headed morons and they do make trouble. Be an invisible tourist.
Be nice to everybody. Be polite and kind. Don't step on any toes, no
matter whose and no matter why."

"Yes, sir," Malone said.

"Remember, they're going to know who you are," Burris said.

"It's not as if we could keep it a secret."

"Yes, sir," Malone said. "I'll remember."

"All right." Burris extended his hand. "Good luck, Malone," he said,
with a deeper feeling of sincerity than Malone had experienced from
him in months.

Malone shook the hand. "Thank you, sir," he said.

* * * * *

A little less than an hour later, Malone sat on the steps of the
landing ramp that led up to the open door of the big Air Force
transport plane on the runway. The plane was waiting, and so was
Malone. He didn't feel confident, or even excited. He felt just a
little bit frightened. Burris' complicated warnings had had some
effect, and Malone was fighting down a minor case of the shakes.

Next to him, her face wreathed in happy smiles, sat a smartly-dressed
grey-haired woman in her sixties. She wore an unobtrusive tailored
suit and a light jacket, and she looked as if she might be one of the
elder matrons of the society set, very definitely an upper-crust type.
In spite of the normality of her clothing, Her Majesty looked every
inch a Queen, Malone thought.

"And that, Sir Kenneth, is only natural," she said sweetly. "Even when
traveling incognito, one must retain one's dignity. And I don't object
at all to using the name of Rose Thompson in a good cause; it was used
for so many years it almost feels like part of me."

"I shouldn't be at all surprised," Malone said mildly.

A voice from above and behind him interrupted his worried thoughts.
"Mr. Malone!" it said. "Mr. Malone?"

Malone screwed his head around and looked up. An Air Force colonel was
standing in the doorway of the plane, looking down with a stern,
worried expression. "Yes?" Malone said. "What is it?"

"Takeoff, Mr. Malone," the colonel said. "We're due to go in fifteen
minutes, and our clearance has been established."

"Fine," Malone said.

"But your passengers," the colonel said. "Where are they?"

Malone tried to look calm, cool and collected. "They'll be here," he
said. "Don't worry about a thing." Privately, he hoped he was right.
Boyd hadn't shown up yet, and Boyd was bringing the musical-comedy spy
trio. It wasn't, Malone thought, that Boyd was usually late. But with
Brubitsch, Borbitsch and Garbitsch in tow, almost anything could
happen, he thought. He hoped fervently that it wouldn't.

"It won't," Her Majesty said. "At least, it hasn't so far. They're all
in a car, and they're driving right here. Boyd is thinking that he
ought to be here within five minutes."

Malone nodded, wiping his forehead. "Five minutes, Colonel," he called
back to the figure at the door. The colonel nodded efficiently at him,
turned and disappeared inside the plane. Malone looked at his watch.
The second hand was going around awfully fast, he thought. He wondered
if it were possible for time to speed up while he waited, so that by
the time Boyd arrived he would be an old, old man. He felt about eight
years older already, he told himself, and a minute hadn't even passed.

He forced his eyes away from the moving second hand. Looking at it, he
knew, would only make him more nervous. Maybe there was some scenery
around that he could stare at. He raised his eyes and looked out
toward the gates that led to the interior of the air terminal.

Scenery, he told himself in sudden wonder, was no word for it.

He stared. He wanted to blink, but at the same time he felt that it
would be a shame to close his eyes for even a tenth of a second. He
held his eyelids apart by main force and went right on staring.

The girl walking toward him across the field was absolutely beautiful.
She seemed to make everything light up and start singing. Malone was
sure that, somewhere, he could hear birds plugging their favorite
numbers, and the soft rustle of the wind through pine branches. He
could feel the soft caress of the wind on his face, and he could smell
the odor of lilacs and honeysuckles and violets and whatever all those
other flowers were. They had all different colors and shapes, and he
couldn't remember many of their names, but he could tell they were all
around him. They had to be all around him. Especially all the red
ones.

The girl had red hair that tossed gently in the wind. The bottom
two-thirds of her figure, Malone was happy to note, was not only as
good as the top third but a good deal better. It took him several
seconds to reach this conclusion, because at first he was willing to
swear that he had never seen such a beautiful girl before.

