difficult to see what hope of progress can be placed upon this latest phase
of Muhammadan revival.

Shirk is defined to be of four kinds: Shirk-ul-'Ilm, ascribing knowledge to
others than God; Shirk-ut-tasarruf, ascribing power to others than God;
Shirk-ul-'Ibadat, offering worship to created things; Shirk-ul-'adat, the
performance of ceremonies which imply reliance on others than God. {107}

The first, Shirk-ul-'Ilm, is illustrated by the statement that prophets and
holy men have no knowledge of secret things unless as revealed to them by
God. Thus some wicked persons made a charge against 'Ayesha. The Prophet
was troubled in mind, but knew not the truth of the matter till God made it
known to him. To ascribe, then, power to soothsayers, astrologers, and
saints is Polytheism. "All who pretend to have a knowledge of hidden
things, such as fortune-tellers, soothsayers and interpreters of dreams, as
well as those who profess to be inspired are all liars." Again, "should any
one take the name of any saint, or invoke his aid in the time of need,
instead of calling on God, or use his name in attacking an enemy, or read
passages to propitiate him, or make him the object of contemplation--it is
Shirk-ul-'Ilm."

The second kind, Shirk-ut-tasarruf, is to suppose that any one has power
with God. He who looks up to any one as an intercessor with God commits
Shirk. Thus: "But they who take others beside Him as lords, saying, 'We
only serve them that they may bring us near God,'--God will judge between
them (and the Faithful) concerning that wherein they are at variance."
(Sura xxxix. 4.) Intercession may be of three kinds. For example, a
criminal is placed before the King. The Vizier intercedes. The King, having
regard to the rank of the Vizier, pardons the offender. This is called
Shafa'at-i-Wajahat, or 'intercession from regard.' But to suppose that God
so esteems the rank of any one as to pardon a sinner merely on account of
it is Shirk. Again, the Queen or the Princes intercede for the criminal.
The King, from love to them, pardons him. This is called
Shafa'at-i-muhabbat, or 'intercession from affection.' But to consider that
God so loves any one as to pardon a criminal on his account is to give that
loved one power, and this is Shirk, for such power is not possible in the
Court of God. "God may out of His bounty confer on His favourite servants
the epithets of Habib--favourite, or Khalil--friend, {108} &c.; but a
servant is but a servant, no one can put his foot outside the limits of
servitude, or rise beyond the rank of a servant." Again, the King may
himself wish to pardon the offender, but he fears lest the majesty of the
law should be lowered. The Vizier perceives the King's wish, and
intercedes. This intercession is lawful. It is called
Shafa'at-i-ba-izn--intercession by permission, and such power Muhammad will
have at the day of Judgment. Wahhabis hold that he has not that power now,
though all other Musalmans consider that he has, and in consequence (in
Wahhabi opinion) commit the sin of Shirk-ut-tasarruf. The Wahhabis quote
the following passages in support of their view. "Who is he that can
intercede with Him but by _His own permission_." (Sura ii. 256) "Say:
Intercession is wholly with God! His the kingdoms of the heavens and of the
earth." (Sura xxxix. 46). They also say: "whenever an allusion is made in
the Quran, or the Traditions to the intercession of certain prophets or
apostles, it is this kind of intercession and no other that is meant."

The third Shirk is prostration before any created beings with the idea of
worshipping it. It also includes perambulating the shrines of departed
saints. Thus: "Prostration, bowing down, standing with folded arms,
spending money in the name of an individual, fasting out of respect to his
memory, proceeding to a distant shrine in a pilgrim's garb and calling out
the name of the saint whilst so going is Shirk-ul-'Ibadat." It is wrong "to
cover the grave with a sheet (ghilaf), to say prayers at the shrine, to
kiss any particular stone, to rub the mouth and breast against the walls of
the shrine, &c." This is a stern condemnation of the very common practice
of visiting the tombs of saints and of some of the special practices of the
pilgrimage to Mecca. All such practices as are here condemned are called
Ishrak fi'l 'Ibadat--'association in worship.'

The fourth Shirk is the keeping up of superstitious customs, such as the
Istikhara--seeking guidance from beads {109} &c., trusting to omens, good
or bad, believing in lucky and unlucky days, adopting such names as
'Abd-un-Nabi (slave of the Prophet), and so on. In fact, the denouncing of
such practices and calling them Shirk brings Wahhabiism into daily contact
with the other sects, for scarcely any people in the world are such
profound believers in the virtue of charms and the power of astrologers as
Musalmans. The difference between the first and fourth Shirk, the
Shirk-ul-'Ilm and the Shirk-ul-'adat, seems to be that the first is the
_belief_, say in the knowledge of a soothsayer, and the second the _habit_
of consulting him.

To swear by the name of the Prophet, of 'Ali, of the Imams, or of Pirs
(Leaders) is to give them the honour due to God alone. It is Ishrak fi'l
adab--'Shirk in association.'

Another common belief which Wahhabis oppose is that Musalmans can perform
the Hajj (pilgrimage to Mecca), say prayers, read the Quran, abide in
meditation, give alms, and do other good works, the reward of which shall
be credited to a person already dead.[93] Amongst other Musalmans it is a
common practice to read the Quran in the belief that, if done with such an
intention, the reward will pass to the deceased object of the desire.
Wahabis entirely object to this.

The above technical exposition of Wahhabi tenets shows how much stress they
lay on a rigid adherence to the doctrine of the "Unity." "La-il-laha,
Il-lal-la-hu" (there is no God but God) is an eternal truth. Yet to the
Musalman God is a Being afar off. In rejecting the Fatherhood of God he has
accepted as the object of his worship, hardly of his affections, a Being
despotic in all He does, arbitrary in all His ways. He has accepted the
position of a slave instead of that of a son. Wahhabiism emphasizes the
ideas which flow from the first article of the Muslim creed. But {110} on
this subject we prefer to let Palgrave speak. He of all men knew the
Wahhabi best, and he, at least, can be accused of no sectarian bias. The
extract is rather long, but will repay perusal; indeed, the whole passage
from which this extract is taken should be read.

    "'There is no God but God,' are words simply tantamount in English to
    the negation of any deity save one alone; and thus much they certainly
    mean in Arabic, but they imply much more also. Their full sense is, not
    only to deny absolutely and unreservedly all plurality whether of
    nature or of person in the Supreme Being, not only to establish the
    unity of the Unbegetting and the Unbegot, in all its simple and
    incommunicable oneness, but besides this, the words, in Arabic and
    among Arabs, imply that this one Supreme Being is the only Agent, the
    only Force, the only Act existing throughout the universe, and leave to
    all beings else, matter or spirit, instinct or intelligence, physical
    or moral, nothing but pure unconditional passiveness, alike in movement
    or in quiescence, in action or in capacity. Hence in this one sentence
    is summed up a system which, for want of a better name, I may be
    permitted to call the 'Pantheism of Force.' 'God is One in the totality
    of omnipotent and omnipresent action, which acknowledges no rule,
    standard, or limit, save one sole and absolute will. He communicates
    nothing to His creatures, for their seeming power and act ever remain
    His alone, and in return He receives nothing from them.' 'It is His
    singular satisfaction to let created beings continually feel that they
    are nothing else than His slaves, that they may the better acknowledge
    His superiority.' 'He Himself, sterile in His inaccessible height,
    neither loving nor enjoying aught save His own and self-measured
    decree, without son, companion, or councillor, is no less barren for
    Himself than for His creatures, and His own barrenness and lone egoism
    in Himself is the cause and rule of His indifferent and unregarding
    despotism around.'[94]

Palgrave allows that such a notion of the Deity is monstrous, but maintains
that it is the "truest mirror of the mind and scope of the writer of the
Book" (Quran), and that, as such, it is confirmed by authentic Tradition
and learned commentaries. At all events, Palgrave possessed {111} the two
essential qualifications for a critic of Islam--a knowledge of the
literature, and intercourse with the people. So far as my experience goes I
have never seen any reason to differ from Palgrave's statement. Men are
often better than their creeds. Even the Prophet was not always consistent.
There are some redeeming points in Islam. But the root idea of the whole is
as described above, and from it no system can be deduced which will grow in
grace and beauty as age after age rolls by.

The Arab proverb states that "The worshipper models himself on what he
worships."[95] Thus a return to "first principles," sometimes proclaimed as
the hope of Turkey, is but the "putting back the hour-hand of Islam" to the
place where indeed Muhammad always meant it to stay, for

    "Islam is in its essence stationary, and was framed thus to remain.
    Sterile, like its God, lifeless like its first Principle and supreme
    Original in all that constitutes true life--for life is love,
    participation, and progress, and of these the Quranic Deity has
    none--it justly repudiates all change, all advance, all
    development."[96]

Muhammad Ibn 'Abd-ul Wahhab was a man of great intellectual power and
vigour. He could pierce through the mists of a thousand years, and see with
an eagle eye how one sect and another had laid accretions on the Faith. He
had the rare gift of intuition, and could see that change (Bida't) and
progress were alien to the truth. This recognition of his ability is due to
him; but what a sad prostration of great gifts it was to seek to arrest, by
the worship of the letter, all hope of progress, and to make "the
starting-point of Islam its goal." That he was a good Musalman in so doing
no one can doubt, but that his work gives any hope of the rise of an
enlightened form of Islam no one who really has studied Islam can believe.

Wahhabiism simply amounts to this, that while it denounces all other
Musalmans as polytheists, it enforces the {112} Sunnat of the Prophet with
all its energy.[97] It breaks down shrines, but insists on the necessity of
a pilgrimage to a black stone at Mecca. It forbids the use of a rosary, but
attaches great merit to counting the ninety-nine names of God on the
fingers. It would make life unsocial. The study of the Fine Arts with the
exception of Architecture can find no place in it. Isma'il quotes with
approval the following Tradition. "'Ayesha said: 'I purchased a carpet on
which were some figures. The Prophet stood in the doorway and looked
displeased.' I said: 'O messenger of God, I repent to God and His
Messenger; what fault have I committed that you do not enter?' His Highness
then said: 'What is this carpet?' I replied; 'I have bought it for you to
sit and rest upon.' Then the messenger of God replied: 'Verily, the maker
of pictures will be punished on the day of resurrection, when God will
desire them to bring them to life. A house which contains pictures is not
visited by the angels.'" In a Tradition quoted by Ibn 'Abbas, the Prophet
classes artists with murderers and parricides. Wahhabiism approves of all
this, and thus by forbidding harmless enjoyments it would make society "an
organised hypocrisy." It would spread abroad a spirit of contempt for all
mankind except its own followers, and, where it had the power, it would
force its convictions on others at the point of the sword.

Wahhabiism was reform after a fashion, in one direction; in the history of
Islam there have been attempts at reform in other directions; there will
yet be such attempts, but so long as the Quran and the Sunnat (or, in the
case of the Shia'h, its equivalent) are to form, as they have hitherto
{113} done for every sect, the sole law to regulate all conditions and
states of life, enlightened and continued progress is impossible. The
deadening influence of Islam is the greatest obstacle the Church of God has
to overcome in her onward march; its immobility is the bane of many lands;
connection with it is the association of the living with the dead; to speak
of it, as some do, as if it were a sort of sister religion to Christianity,
is but to show deplorable ignorance where ignorance is inexcusable. Thus it
is plain that Musalmans are not all of one heart and soul.[98] In the next
chapter I hope to show that Islam is a very dogmatic and complex system in
spite of the simple form of its creed.

{114}

    NOTE TO CHAPTER III.

    WAHHABIISM.

    In the Journal Asiatique, 4me Serie, tome 11, a curious account is
    given of the voyage of Mirza Muhammad 'Ali Khan, some time Persian
    Ambassador in Paris. This gentleman states that in one of his voyages
    from Persia to India he met with a Wahhabi, who had in his possession a
    tract written by the founder of the sect. This small pamphlet he
    allowed Mirza Muhammad to copy. I give the substance of the pamphlet in
    this note. The original Arabic will be found in the Journal Asiatique.
    It is of considerable interest as a protest against idolatry. It is as
    follows:--I know that God is merciful, that the sect of Abu Hanifa is
    orthodox and identical with the religion of Abraham. After thou hast
    known that God has created His servants for the purpose of being served
    by them, know also that this service or devotion is to worship God, One
    and alone; just as prayer (Salat) is not prayer (Salat), unless it is
    accompanied with the legal purification. God Most High has said: "It is
    not for the votaries of other gods with God, witnesses against
    themselves of infidelity, to visit the temples of God. These! vain
    their works: and in the fire shall they abide for ever!" (Sura ix. 17.)

    Those who in their prayers, address any other than God, in the hope of
    obtaining by them that which God alone can give--those bring unto their
    prayers the leaven of idolatry and make them of none effect, "and who
    erreth more than he who, beside God, calleth upon that which shall not
    answer him until the day of resurrection." (Sura xlvi. 4) On the
    contrary, when the day of resurrection comes, they will become their
    enemies and treat them as infidels for having served others than God.
    "But the gods whom ye call on beside Him have no power over the husk of
    a date-stone! If ye cry to them they will not hear your cry; and if
    they heard they would not answer you, and in the day of resurrection
    they will disown your joining them with God." (Sura xxxv. 14,15.)

    He who says: "O thou Prophet of God! O 'Ibn 'Abbas! O 'Abd-ul-Qadir!"
    &c. with the persuasion that the souls of these blessed ones can obtain
    from God that of which the suppliant has need, or that they can protect
    him, is an infidel whose blood any one may shed, and whose goods any
    one may appropriate with impunity unless he repent. There are four
    different classes of idolaters.

    {115}

    First, the infidels against whom the Prophet made war. These
    acknowledge that God is the creator of the world, that He supports all
    living creatures, that in wisdom He rules over all. "Say: who supplieth
    you from the heavens and the earth? who hath power over hearing and
    sight? and who bringeth forth the living from the dead, and bringeth
    forth the dead from the living? who ruleth all things? they will surely
    say: 'God,' then say: 'What! will ye not therefore fear Him.'" (Sura x.
    32.) It is difficult to distinguish idolatry of this kind; but under an
    outwardly orthodox appearance they go astray; for they have recourse to
    divinities of their own choosing and pray to them.

    Secondly, there are idolaters who say that they only call upon these
    intermediary powers to intercede in their favour with God, and that
    what they desire they seek from God. The Quran furnishes a proof
    against them. "They worship beside God what cannot hurt or help them,
    and say, these are our advocates with God! say: will ye inform God of
    aught in the heavens and in the earth which He knoweth not?" (Sura x.
    19.)

    Thirdly, those are idolaters who choose one idol as their patron, or
    rather those who, renouncing the worship of idols, become attached to
    one saint, as Jesus or His Mother, and put themselves under the
    protection of Guardian Angels. Against them we cite the verse: "Those
    whom ye call on, themselves desire union with their Lord, striving
    which of them shall be nearest to Him; they also hope for His mercy,
    and fear His chastisement." (Sura xvii. 59.) We see here that the
    Prophet drew no distinction between the worship of an idol and the
    worship of such and such a saint; on the contrary, he treated them all
    as infidels, and made war upon them in order to consolidate the
    religion of God upon a firm basis.

    Fourthly, those who worship God sincerely in the time of trouble, but
    at other times call on other Gods are idolaters. Thus: "Lo! when they
    embark on board a ship, they call upon God, vowing Him sincere worship,
    but when He bringeth them safe to land, behold they join partners with
    Him." (Sura xxix. 65.)

    In the age in which we live, I could cite still worse heresies. The
    idolaters, our contemporaries, pray to and invoke the lower divinities
    when they are in distress. The idolaters of the Prophet's time were
    less culpable than those of the present age are. They, at least, had
    recourse to God in time of great evil; these in good and evil states,
    seek the aid of their patrons, other than God, and pray to them.

{116}

       *       *       *       *       *


CHAPTER IV.

THE CREED OF ISLAM.[99]

Faith is defined by Muslim theologians as: "Confession with the tongue and
belief with the heart."[100] It is said to "stand midway between hope and
fear." It is sub-divided into Iman-i-mujmal and Iman-i-mufassal. The former
is an expression of the following faith: "I believe in God, His names and
attributes, and accept all His commands."[101] The latter is the acceptance
of the following dogmas: "I believe in God, Angels, Books, Prophets, the
Last Day, the Predestination by the Most High God of good and evil and the
Resurrection after death."[102] These form the articles of faith which
every Muslim must believe, to which belief, in order to render it perfect,
he must add the performance of the "acts of practice," _viz._: (1) "The
recital of the Kalima or creed:--'There is no deity but God, and Muhammad
is the Apostle of God.' (2) Sulat. The five daily prayers. (3) Roza. The
thirty days fast of Ramazan. (4) Zakat. The legal alms. (5) Hajj, or the
pilgrimage to Mecca." This chapter will contain an account of the Iman--the
dogmas of Islam. An account of the Din--the practical duties, will be given
in the next chapter. {117}

1. GOD.--This article of the faith includes a belief in the existence of
God, His unity and attributes, and has given rise to a large number of
sects. Some acquaintance with the various controversies which have thus
arisen is necessary to a correct knowledge of Islam. I commence the
consideration of this subject by giving the substance of a Sunni, or
orthodox treatise known as the Risala-i-Berkevi. The learned orientalist M.
Garcin de Tassy, considered it to be of such authority that in his
"L'Islamisme d'apres le Coran" he has inserted a translation of the
Risala.[103] Muhammad Al-Berkevi, speaking of the Divine attributes,
says:--

    (1). Life. (Hyat). God Most High is alone to be adored. He has neither
    associate nor equal. He is free from the imperfections of humanity. He
    is neither begotten nor does He beget. He is invisible. He is without
    figure, form, colour or parts. His existence has neither beginning nor
    end. He is immutable. If He so wills, He can annihilate the world in a
    moment of time and, if it seem good to Him, recreate it in an instant.
    Nothing is difficult to Him, whether it be the creation of a fly or
    that of the seven heavens. He receives neither profit nor loss from
    whatever may happen. If all the Infidels became Believers and all the
    irreligious pious, He would gain no advantage. On the other hand, if
    all Believers became Infidels, He would suffer no loss.
