The Project Gutenberg EBook of Decision, by Frank M. Robinson

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Decision

Author: Frank M. Robinson

Illustrator: H. R. Smith

Release Date: August 12, 2009 [EBook #29680]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DECISION ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









DECISION

BY FRANK M. ROBINSON

ILLUSTRATED BY H. R. SMITH


    The captain had learned to hate. It was his profession--and his
    personal reason for going on. But even hatred has to be channeled
    for its maximum use, and no truths exist forever.


The battle alarm caught him in the middle of a dream, a dream that took
place in a white house in a small town in Ohio, when both he and Alice
had been very young and the grown adults he now called his children had
really been little more than babies.

He rolled out of his bed immediately on hearing the gong, as any good
sailor would, and slipped into his pants and shoes and felt around the
bulkhead for his life jacket. He slipped into it and tightened the
buckles, then put on his cap with the captain's insignia.

He opened the hatch and stepped out into the passageway, blinking for a
moment in the unaccustomed light and trying to shake away the remnants
of his dream. Officers were boiling up the passageway and up the ladder,
some eager ensigns dressed only in their shorts and their life jackets.
It was more wise than funny, he thought slowly. Ships had gone down in a
matter of seconds and anybody who spent precious moments looking for his
pants or his wallet never got out.

Harry Davis, the Exec, a portly man in his fifties, burst out of his
stateroom, still trying to shake the sleep from gummy lids.

The Captain shook his head, trying to alert his mind to the point where
it could make sensible evaluations, and started up the corridor.

"Any idea what it is, Harry?"

Davis shook his head. "Not unless it's what we've been expecting."

What we've been expecting. The Captain grasped the iron piping that
served for railings and jogged up the ladder. Fifty miles north, lolling
in the North Sea and holding maneuvers, was the _Josef Dzugashvili_, a
hundred thousand tons of the finest aircraft carrier the Asiatic Combine
had produced, carrying close to a hundred Mig-72's and perhaps half a
dozen light bombers.

The _Josef_ had been operating there for nearly a week. The _Oahu_ had
been detached from the Atlantic Fleet only a few days ago, to combat the
possible threat. Maybe the ships were only acting as stake-outs for the
politicians, the Captain thought slowly. The tinder waiting for the
spark. And it wouldn't take much.

A curious pilot who might venture too close, a gunner with a nervous
temperament ...

And now, maybe, this was it. It had to come some day. You couldn't turn
the other cheek forever. And he, for one, was glad. He had spent almost
all his life waiting for this. A chance to get even ...

Davis opened the hatch to the wheelhouse and the Captain slipped in,
closing it tight behind him. It was pitch black and it took his eyes a
few moments to adjust to it. When they had, he could make out the
