
"Draw your revolvers and shoot!" cried Andy. "They are going to kill
us!"

"No! No!" shouted the old inventor. "To resist now would be folly. Have
patience a little longer!"

His voice was so earnest that all obeyed him. So, unresisting, the
captives were borne away. Then a strange thing happened.

The sun, which had been shining in the sky from which it would not
disappear for six months, suddenly seemed to darken. The captives
started in surprise.

"What's the matter?" asked the old inventor, struggling to escape from
the arms which held him. "Is it night?"

"I guess dey done gone and blindfolded us!" exclaimed Washington.

Indeed it was as black as if the prisoners had been plunged into a
gloomy pit. Then, as they looked up while being half led, half dragged
along they saw that they had left the outer air and were being conducted
into some sort of a cave.

"It's an ice-cavern!" groaned the old hunter, "They are going to torture
us as the Indians do!"

"Hush!" cautioned the inventor. "Do not think of such things. All is not
yet lost!"

In a little while the darkness, caused by the captives being suddenly
taken from the bright sunlight into the cave, was somewhat dispelled. It
grew gradually brighter, thought they were conducted farther and farther
into the recesses of the cavern. Then, as they were led around the turn
of a passage, they saw what made the light.

Scores of rude lamps, made from hollowed out stones, with twisted moss
for wicks, and burning seal oil, gave a smoky illumination, that lit up
the cave with a red glare. The lamps were set in niches in the icy walls
of the cavern, while some were placed upon the floor and others seemed
to be arranged about a sort of altar at the farther end of the big ice
chamber.

From the icy crystal walls the glare of the moss wicks was reflected
back in a thousand points of light, and amid the glow the captives
beheld a score or more of old men seated in a circle about a big centre
lamp, that shone with a flame five times as bright as any of the others.

"It looks as if we were being brought before the head men of the tribe,"
muttered the old hunter.

A short distance away from the circle of old men, the native in the
white furs, who seemed to have lost some of his authority on entering
the ice chamber, motioned the captives to be seated. They sat down,
crossed legs, and waited.

They were aware that the interior of the cave was much warmer than the
air outside, and soon were forced to lay aside some of their heavy
garments. In a little while several women approached bearing huge
platters on which rested smoked chunks of hot meat.

It did not look very inviting. There were no knives, no forks, no
napkins and no plates. None of the somewhat limited comforts of the
airship were to be had. But the captives were too hungry to mind such
things. Using their fingers, they ate ravenously, and found the meat
very good, though they did not know what it was.

"I feel much better," said Jack. "If I only had some place to wash my
hands now, I'd be quite satisfied."

"You ought to be thankful you got something to eat," returned Mark. "I
was almost starved."

"Dat was as good as roast beef, chicken, pork-chops, cranberry sauce,
celery an' potatoes," observed Washington with a sigh of satisfaction.

Since the native women had brought them food no one in the cave had
taken the slightest notice of the prisoners. The men in the centre about
the big stone lamp sat like so many dark and graven images, saying not a
word.

"I wonder what is next on the program?" asked Andy.

In a few minutes an old woman, bearing a stone basin full of some
liquid, and a horn cup, approached them, and, filling the smaller
vessel, offered the old professor something to drink. As she neared him
she caught sight of his white face and long whitish beard and hair, and
gave such a start that she nearly dropped the basin she was carrying.
She peered down into the old man's face and muttered something that
sounded like:

"Ingliss!"

"What has she got and what is she saying?" asked the hunter.

"I don't know what she said," replied Amos Henderson, "but she has
given me some good milk."

Then, going from one to the other, the old woman, who seemed strangely
agitated as she saw so many white faces, poured out the reindeers' milk,
which made a welcome drink.

"They are treating us better than I thought they would," remarked Andy.
"Maybe we will not be so badly off as I feared."

Suddenly, from the midst of the circle of natives, a voice arose. The
captives glanced quickly over in the direction, and saw that the man in
the white furs, who had superintended their capture, was addressing the
council.

His words were strange to the prisoners, but they could tell by his
gestures he was describing how he had found the white men, who had come
in the wonderful airship. At times the narrator would point in the
direction of the captives. Again he would show by gestures how the
airship had settled down on the ice. He was interrupted by many
questions and, at the end of his tale, a silence fell over the crowd of
natives.

Then, as if by some signal, all the lights save the large central lamp
were extinguished. By the glow from that the prisoners could see their
captors, one by one, filing from the cave.

"They are leaving us all alone," said the inventor. "At any rate they
have done us no harm, and perhaps may not. If we could only get back to
the ship; that would be all I'd ask," and he sighed as he thought of his
beloved craft.

For a long while the captives sat in silence, brooding over their fate.
Worn out by the trials of the day, the two farmers at last fell asleep.
Washington, too, was soon snoring, and the two boys felt drowsy. The
regular breathing of the professor told that he, also, had forgotten his
troubles in dreamland, and Andy was about to drop off nodding, when he
was startled by a soft foot-fall. He sat up on the icy floor of the cave
where he had stretched himself out.

"Who's there?" he asked sharply.

"Sh! Ingliss!" exclaimed a soft voice. "No spik! Me like Ingliss! Me
Dirola!"

"Who are you?" asked the old hunter again, but in a whisper.

"Me like Ingliss!" was the reply. "They kill! Me save! You come! All
Ingliss!"

Then, into the glare of the big lamp, glided the strange woman who had
brought the milk.




CHAPTER XVII

FIGHTING FOR THE SHIP


"Professor Henderson! Wake up!" called Andy. "Hey, boys, Bill, Tom,
Washington! This may mean something!"

In an instant the prisoners were sitting up, and blinking in the
direction of the big lamp.

"What is it all about?" asked Amos Henderson.

"As near as I can make out this lady is going to save us," replied the
hunter. "She says the natives want to kill us, and that she likes the
English, though how she can talk United States is more than I can
understand."

Dirola, as the Esquimaux woman had called herself, approached the old
inventor, and, kneeling down in front of him, spoke rapidly in her
broken tongue.

"Me save you!" she repeated. "Me Dirola! Me from way, way off," and she
pointed to the north. "Me been prisoner here long time. Me see white
Ingliss man once. He come my country. He go way. My people want kill
him, no like. He be take away. His name Andre!"

"Great Scott!" exclaimed the professor. "I believe this woman was
acquainted with the poor fellow whose bones we found! Can it be
possible!"

"You come; me save!" went on the strange woman. "Me no like it here;
want go to my people. Me learn spik Ingliss from Andre. Me young girl
then!"

"Well, of all the strange happenings!" exclaimed the inventor. "I
believe she is telling the truth. Probably poor Andre Christiansen got
among her people and she learned a little English from him."

"You come?" questioned Dirola. "Me show you where ship hid."

"I wonder if it's safe to trust her," said the old hunter. "According to
the message we found, the people Andre fell among were not very kind."

The woman seemed to understand that some objection was being raised. She
spoke rapidly and earnestly.

"My people no harm," she said. "Me tell 'um you save me, they no kill
you. You come. Much hurry now. You be killed here!"

"I think we might as well chance it," was Professor Henderson's
opinion. "Perhaps she does know where the ship is from hearing talk
among members of the fishing party that captured us. What do you say?
Shall we go?"

Every one agreed that it would be better than to stay in the cave and
face an unknown danger. So, wrapping their furs closely about them, the
captives rose silently and prepared to follow the woman, who seemed
pleased that they were going. She did not lead them out the way they had
been brought in, but by a smaller entrance.

"Go easy!" she cautioned. "No want bad mans to hear! They kill Dirola!"

Walking like cats in their soft boots of fur, the prisoners followed the
strange woman who had so opportunely come to their rescue. Though they
were very apprehensive, they met with no one. Leaving the glare of the
big lamp behind, they were soon in semi-darkness, but in a little while
they emerged into the bright sunlight.

"They all sleep!" muttered Dirola, motioning toward the camp of
Esquimaux which she indicated was behind the ice cavern they had just
left. "We walk; den we git dogs an' sleds. Den we ride so no can catch!"

At a sign from Dirola the seven prisoners stepped out briskly. It seemed
queer to see the sun shining after having been in the dark cave, where
it looked like night, and to get used to the appearance of Old Sol
shining steadily all night long, was something the adventurers had not
quite accomplished. They walked perhaps a mile before they came to where
the dog teams were, behind a hill of ice.

There were two big sleds, with room enough for all, and ten dogs to each
vehicle. The animals, which were securely tied to pinnacles of ice, were
snapping and snarling among themselves.

"Quick, git on!" commanded Dirola. "Maybe they chase us!"

The captives needed no second bidding. They piled on the sledges, the
professor, Andy and Washington on one and the two boys and the two
helpers on the other. Dirola took her seat in front of Professor
Henderson.

"Who's going to drive our dogs?" asked Jack.

"No drive. They follow me," said the woman, and then Jack saw that the
foremost animal of his team was tied by a long thong to the rear of the
first sleigh.

The Esquimaux woman snapped her whip, having first untied the dogs, and
away the teams went over the snow at a great pace.

The spirits of all arose as they went on, making mile after mile on
their journey, away from the ice cave and back to the _Monarch_. Dirola
seemed to know just where she was going, and never hesitated. With voice
and whip she guided the dog teams on, urging them to top speed, for she
was escaping as well as the adventurers.

For several hours the captives rode, becoming thoroughly chilled, for a
cold, cutting wind sprang up and blew in their faces.

"We most there," said the woman at length.

"I'm glad to hear it," remarked Andy. "I will be glad to get back to a
civilized place, even if it is an airship."

Suddenly Dirola turned her head and glanced behind. As she did so she
uttered an exclamation and called shrilly to the dogs, at the same time
snapping her long whip viciously.

"What's the matter?" asked Andy.

"They come after us."

Looking back, Andy was startled to see, about a mile in the rear, more
than a score of sleds, laden with fur-robed Esquimaux, in full pursuit.

"Now we're in for it!" he cried. "It will be a race to see who gets to
the ship first! Get out your revolvers! I'm not going to be captured
again!"

Each one of the adventurers brought out his weapon. The pursuing
Esquimaux seemed aware that their former captives had observed them, and
urged their dog teams to greater speed. It was indeed a race.

Dirola's animals had been urged almost to their limit, and were now
lagging. Voice and whip no longer served to send them forward. Several
of the beasts were limping.

"There ship!" cried the woman suddenly. The crew and owner of the
_Monarch_ glanced ahead. They saw, about a quarter of a mile in advance,
their airship, resting on an icy ledge.

"If we can only get there first!" cried the professor.

"You forget the leak in the gas bag," spoke up Andy. "That will have to
be mended before we can escape."

"With quick work we can do it!" exclaimed the inventor. "Hurry on,
Dirola!"

Dirola needed no urging. With fierce words she hurried on the dogs, her
whip sounding like a revolver as it snapped and cracked.

But fast as the escaping ones went, the pursuers seemed to come faster.
Now they were so close that they could be seen brandishing their spears,
bows and arrows. Their shouts, too, were borne forward on the cold wind.

At last the adventurers were at the side of the airship. Hastily they
dismounted from their sleds turning the dogs loose. The Esquimaux in
pursuit were about half a mile to the rear and would soon be upon them.

"Quick, Dirola! Into the ship with you!" called Andy. "We'll take you
with us if we go at all!"

"We must mend the tear first!" exclaimed the professor, scrambling up
the icy slope toward the cabin of the _Monarch_ in a fashion that would
have done credit to a much younger man. "Andy, you and the boys, with
Tom and Bill, hold the enemy at bay until Washington and I get the ship
in readiness for a start!"

