survivors scarce a handful got across the river.  Some of the unhurt
men, disdaining quarter and unable to fly, fought until they fell.  The
wounded, of whom there were many, were all captured out of hand.

Marteau, with the Eagle, had stood nearest the enemy.  They had swarmed
about him at last.  He found himself alone, save for the boy, Pierre.
He could see the red-faced, excited, shouting, yelling,
passion-animated Austrian soldiers crowding upon him.  His sword was
broken, his pistols empty and gone.  He was defenseless.  Retreat was
cut off.  The Eagle staff had been shot away.  The flag torn to pieces.
Hands were stretched out to seize it.  He could not escape with it, yet
it must not fall to the enemy.  It was the tradition of the service
that the Eagles were to be preserved at all hazards--not the flag, that
was a mere perishable adjunct to the Eagle, but the Eagle itself.  The
river ran but a few feet away.  Thrusting aside the nearest Austrian
with the stump of his blade, Marteau cleared a path for a second, and
into the swift deep waters he hurled the sacred emblem.

He, at least, he thought swiftly, had a right to dispose of it thus,
for out of the waters of the Elster he had brought it, so into the
waters of the Aube he threw it.

With cries of rage, for the Eagle was the most precious spoil of war,
and the regiment or the officer seizing it was distinguished above all
others, the Austrians would have cut him down where he stood with arms
crossed, facing the enemy, but officers who had ridden up had seen the
exploit and had interfered.  He had been made a prisoner and Pierre
with him.  He just had time to whisper to the boy to mark well the spot
where the Eagle had disappeared in the waters before they marched away.

While under guard with other prisoners at Salzburg he had heard the
story of the end.  How Napoleon, trusting the defense of Paris to
Marmont and Mortier, had resolved on the bold move of cutting the
communications of the allies with his little army, and how the allies
had decided to disregard their rear and march on Paris; how Marmont and
Mortier had battled for the capital, how the Emperor, hearing of their
straits, had begun that mad march toward his beloved city; how he had
ordered every soldier that could be reached to march in that direction;
how he had stopped at a wayside inn one night for a few hours' rest,
after a furious day's ride, only to be told that Marmont and Mortier
had gone over to the enemy, that Paris was lost!

The prisoners had learned how the Emperor, not yet despairing, had
striven to quicken the spirits of his marshals and soldiers for a last
try; how the marshals and great officers had failed him.  They had all
heard of those lonely hours at Fontainebleau, of the farewell to the
Guard, of the kiss on the Eagle, which he surrendered to General Petit,
of the abdication, of the exile to Elba, of the restoration of King
Louis.

It had made Marteau ill, frightfully so, and but for the tender nursing
and loving care of young Pierre he had died.  The lad had been devotion
itself, but Marteau missed more than anything else the companionship,
the sage advice, the bon camaraderie of old Bullet-Stopper.  He had
never seen him or heard from him after that day at the bridge-head at
Arcis.  Where was he now?

Oh, yes, those days and their tidings would never be forgot.  They all
came back to the young officer, as with his humble but devoted
companion he stood there on the heights above Grenoble looking at the
white flag.




CHAPTER XVI

THE GATE IN THE WALL

The two travelers were stopped by the guard at the main gate in the
walls that encircled the town.  Marteau had drawn his old cloak closely
about him, so that it was not evident that he was in uniform.  Pierre's
nondescript garments were so tattered and torn that neither would they
betray the pair.  The sentry was clad in the old uniform of the
Fifth-of-the-Line, except that he sported a white cockade in his
head-gear and every device that referred to the Empire had been
carefully eliminated.  Still he was the same soldier, and Marteau
recognized him at once as one of the veterans of the regiment.  The
recognition was not mutual.  Captivity, illness, privation had wrought
many changes in the officer's face.  The man looked at him curiously
and wonderingly, however, as he challenged him.

"My friend," asked the officer, "of what regiment are you, I pray?"

"The Fifth-of-the----" began the man instinctively, apparently, and
then he stopped.  "The regiment Dauphine," he answered, his face
clouding.

"And what battalion?"

"The first, sir."

"Are there other troops in garrison?"

"Another regiment of infantry, that was the Seventh.  I don't know its
new name.  And some artillery to man the walls."

"Good.  I should like----  Who is in command of the town?"

"There is a new one since yesterday.  He has just come down from Paris,
the King sent----"

At that instant the gruff voice of the subaltern in command of the
detachment at the gate rang out.

"Turn out the guard for the Commanding Officer."

"Back, monsieur," cried the soldier, falling into line with his
comrades, who came running from the guard-house and ranged themselves
in order.

Marteau stepped back into the shadow of the gate, just as a carriage
and four, carrying three people and attended by a brilliant cavalry
escort, dashed through the narrow street of the town and passed out of
the gate, the soldiers of the guard standing at attention in line and
presenting arms as the carriage and its following went on into the
country by the highroad.  The horses had been moving at a fast trot.
Marteau had time for but one glance as the vehicle passed.  One glance
was enough.  When the guard had been dismissed and the soldier on post
turned again to look at the officer, he was astonished at the change
that had come over him.  Marteau, pale as death, leaned against the
wall, his hand on his heart.

"What's the matter?" cried the soldier, staring at him curiously.

"Has monsieur seen a ghost?" asked young Pierre, running toward him in
great anxiety.

"Who--who was that?" asked Marteau, who had received a dreadful shock
apparently.

"The governor of the town."

"Yes, yes, I know, but his name?"

"I was about to tell you.  The Marquis de----  Upon my word, I have
forgot it."

"Was it by any chance the Marquis d'Aumenier?"

"That's it," said the soldier.

"And the man with him in the red coat?"

The soldier spat into the dust to show his contempt.

"An English milord."

"And the lady?"

"I don't know.  They say, the wife of that Englishman.  Things have
come to a pretty pass," growled the soldier, turning away, "when our
girls marry these English beef-eaters, and----  It was not so in the
day of the Em----"

He stopped suddenly, wondering fearfully whether his garrulousness had
betrayed him into an imprudence with this stranger.

"No," said Marteau reassuringly.  "Will you let me pass, comrade?  I am
an old soldier of--the Empire."  He had no hesitation in avowing
himself under the circumstances.  "See," he threw open his cloak,
disclosing his uniform.

"Why, that is the uniform of this regiment!" exclaimed the amazed
soldier.

"Yes."

"And you are----"

"I was Captain Marteau when with the regiment," returned the officer.

"I thought I knew you, sir.  Yes, I remember it all now.  You were cut
down at the bridge at Arcis."

"Yes."

"I, too, was there.  I was one of the few who managed to get away
alive.  But I did not run, monsieur.  I did not go back until the
order."

"I believe it."

"And this boy?"

"He is a young comrade, a faithful companion of my own."

"And you are come back----"

"To rejoin the regiment.  I have been months in an Austrian prison, and
afterward, ill."

"Pass freely, monsieur.  You rallied us with the Eagle.  We saw it go
into the river.  The Emperor himself commended us, those who were left.
He said we should have another Eagle, but alas, we never got it."

"Have patience," said Marteau.  "What is lost may be found."

He touched the small, well-wrapped parcel, which even in his agitation
he had not allowed to fall to the ground.  The soldier looked at him
wonderingly.

"You mean----"

"Never mind.  Be silent.  Will you call your officer?"

"Corporal of the guard," shouted the sentry, and, when that official
appeared, the lieutenant in command of the gate was soon summoned
through the usual military channels.

"Monsieur," said Marteau, walking up to him, "do you not know me?"

"By heaven!" cried the officer, after a long stare, "is it--it is
Captain Marteau!"

"The same."

"We thought you dead.  Your name is honored in the regiment.  We knew
how you rallied the line; how you took the Eagle; how you threw it into
the river rather than permit it to be taken.  We thought you were
killed."

"My life was spared," was the solemn answer.

"But why did you not rejoin the regiment?"

"I was in prison at Salzburg, and for some reason was overlooked,
perhaps because it was thought I was dead, and then for some months I
was helpless, ill of a horrible fever.  It was only two months ago that
I was set free, with this lad here, who stood beside me before the
bridge at Arcis.  We learned through unofficial sources that the
regiment was here.  Having nowhere else to go, I came back, and----"

"They will be glad to see you," said the officer.  "The regiment lost
heavily.  It was almost cut to pieces at Arcis."

"I know."

"But many officers and men of the old regiment have come back, like
you, from Russia, from Prussia and from Austria, where they had been
held prisoners.  They will be glad to welcome you at the barracks
yonder.  You are permitted to pass.  But stop.  I must do my duty.
What have you in that parcel?"

Marteau looked about him, moved a step away from the sentries and the
corporal and sergeant of the guard, and whispered a word into the ear
of the officer.  He threw up his hands in astonishment.

"Mon Dieu!" he exclaimed.  "Is it possible?"

"The same," said Marteau, "but say nothing about it until I have seen
our comrades."

"Of course not."

"And that carriage and four that just passed?"

"The governor of the town, the Marquis d'Aumenier, the new commander of
the regiment."

"I see; and our old Colonel?"

"Dead.  The Major commanding the first battalion has been in command
until they sent this old noble down here yesterday."

"And the lady?"

"His niece."

"You have met her?"

"Not I.  They care nothing for such as we.  He treats us as if we were
of the scum of the earth, dogs.  Oh, if only----"

"Hush," said Marteau.  "It is dangerous."

"I know.  And he brought with him an Englishman, one of the Duke of
Wellington's officers."

"Is he married to the young lady?"

"Not yet, I believe, but betrothed."

"And his name?"

"He has a barbarous name.  I can't pronounce it.  He had us out
inspecting us yesterday--he and that Englishman.  Bah!  To think of the
Fifth-of-the-Line being inspected by such a young red-coated cockerel."

The veteran spat in the dust as the soldier had done and swore roundly.
He hated the red-coated English.  He had fought them before, and he
would like nothing better than to fight them again.

"Patience," said Marteau.

"Do you wish to go to headquarters and report yourself?  You were a
Major on the Emperor's staff?"

"A Lieutenant-Colonel, by personal appointment that day at Arcis."

"Well, you will be lucky enough if they make you a subaltern.  Look at
me.  I am older than you.  I am a veteran of Italy and I am only a
sub-lieutenant, I, who was Captain when I was captured."

"Patience, my friend," said Marteau again.

"Here," said the officer, hailing a cabriolet, which suddenly turned
the corner.

"I have no money," said Marteau quickly.

"The King pays ill enough," answered the officer, "but what I have is
ever at the service of a good comrade."

He assisted Marteau into the cabriolet, allowed Pierre to climb up
beside him, paid the driver his fare, and bade him take the two to the
headquarters in the barracks.




CHAPTER XVII

A VETERAN OF THE ARMY OF ITALY

It was noon when Marteau presented himself before the house in which
the Major of the first battalion, an old veteran named Lestoype, was
quartered.

"Who shall I say wants to see him?" asked the orderly before the door.

"A soldier of the Empire," was the bold answer, and it proved an open
sesame to the astonished orderly.

Lestoype was writing at a table, but he looked up when Marteau came in.
He stared at him a moment and then rose to his feet.

"I report myself ready for duty, Major," said the young officer,
saluting.

"Good God, is it Marteau!" exclaimed the Major.

"The same."

"We thought you dead."

Rapidly the young officer explained the situation.

"You see," he said in closing, "I survived the Eagle."

"Ah, if we could only have got it back!" exclaimed the Major.

"It is back."
