mountain of flesh before it erupted with a volcanic succession of
Russian curses that shook the room with their volume and sincerity.

But Lou and Her Majesty were nowhere in sight. Major Petkoff was
staring, and Malone followed his line of sight.

A door in the rear of the restaurant was just closing. Behind it
Malone saw Her Majesty and Lou, disappearing from sight.

Malone knocked over a waiter and headed for Petkoff. "What's going on
here?" he bellowed over the crash of dishes and the rising wave of
Russian profanity.

Petkoff shrugged magnificently. "I have no ideas, colleague," he said.
"I have no ideas."

"But she--"

"Miss Garbitsch was taken suddenly ill," Petkoff said.

"Damn sudden," Malone growled.

"Her friend, Miss Thompson, has taken her to the ladies' room,"
Petkoff said. He gestured, narrowly missing a broken, lumpy face
Malone had seen before.

"You are under arrest," the face said. Its partner peered over
Petkoff's shoulder.

"I?" Petkoff said.

"Not you," the face said. "Him." He started for Malone and Petkoff
threw out both arms.

"Hold!" he said. "My orders are to see that this man is not molested."

The guests had suddenly and silently melted away. Malone backed off a
step, looking for something to stage a fight with.

"On the other hand, Comrade," one of the lumpy-faced men said, "we
have orders also."

"My orders--" Petkoff began.

"Your orders do not exist," the other lumpy man said. "We are to
arrest this man. Our orders say so."

"You are fools," Petkoff said. He spread his arms wider, blocking both
of them. Malone edged back against the bar, feeling behind him for a
bottle or maybe a bungstarter. Instead, his hand touched a sleeve.

A voice behind him bellowed: "Cease!"

The two lumpy-faced men goggled. Petkoff did not move.

Malone turned, and saw a tall, thin civilian with dark glasses.
"Cease," the civilian repeated. "It is the girl we are to arrest! The
girl!"

"This is not a girl," one of the lumpy men said. "Sir. We are to
arrest this man. Our orders say distinctly--"

"Never mind your orders!" Petkoff said. "Go and reduce your orders to
shreds and stuff them up your nostrils and die of suffocation! My
orders say--"

"The girl!" the civilian said. "Where is the girl?"

Malone darted forward. Petkoff caught him neatly with one arm as he
went by. "Until we decide what to do," the MVD man said, "you stay
here." Malone bucked against him, but could get nowhere. "Meanwhile,"
Petkoff said, "I am for letting you go."

"I appreciate it," Malone said through his teeth. "How about proving
it?"

"If you let him go," a lumpy man said, "you will answer to our group
head."

Petkoff tightened his hold protectively. Meanwhile, the civilian was
climbing up into a stratospheric rage.

"You are dolts, imbeciles, worms without brains and walking bellies
filled with carrion!" he said magnificently. "I have orders which I am
sworn to carry out!"

"You are not alone," Petkoff said.

Malone took another try at a getaway, and failed.

"We take precedence," a lumpy man said. "We can talk later. Arrest
comes first."

"But who?" the civilian snapped. "I insist--"

"There shall be no arrest!" Petkoff screamed. "No one is to be
arrested at all!"

"I swear by the bones of Stalin that my orders state--" the tall man
began.

"The bones of Stalin are with us!" a lumpy man said. "Go and die in a
kennel filled with fleas and old newspaper! Go and freeze to the
likeness of an obscene statue of a bourgeois deity! Go and hang by the
ears from a monument four thousand feet high in the center of the
great desert!"

Inspired, the other lumpy man screamed "Charge!" and came for Petkoff
and the civilian. Petkoff whirled, letting go of Malone in order to
beat back this wave of maddened attackers, and Malone took the
advantage. He ducked free under Petkoff's left arm and started around
the gesticulating, screaming, fighting group for the door at the back
of the restaurant. He took exactly four steps.

Then he stopped. The Mongol, his eyes red with a combination of vodka
and bull-roaring rage, was charging toward him, his hands outflung and
his fingers grasping at the air. "Warmonger!" he was shouting.
"Capitalist slave-owner! Leprous and ancient cannibal without culture!
You have begun a war you can not finish!"

"Ha!" Malone said, feeling inadequate to the occasion. As the Mongol
charged, he felt a wave of intense pragmatism come over him. He
reached back toward the bar, grabbed a bottle of vodka and tossed
several glassfuls into the giant's face. The Mongol, deluged and
screaming, clawed wildly at his eyes and spun round several times,
cursing Malone and all his kin for the next twenty-seven generations,
and grabbing thin air in his attempt to reach the _Amerikanski_.

All of the customers appeared to have discovered urgent engagements
elsewhere. There was little for the Mongol to collide with except
empty tables and chairs. But he did manage to swipe one of the
lumpy-faced men on the side of the head with one flail of his arms.
The lumpy-faced man said "Yoop!" and went staggering away into
Petkoff, who spun him around and threw him away in the general
direction of the bandstand. The diversion provided Malone with just
enough time to start moving again.

Four uniformed men were making their way toward the ladies' room from
the opposite side of the restaurant. They were carrying a stretcher,
which seemed pitifully inadequate for the carnage Malone had just
left.

He blocked their path. "Where are you going?" he said.

"You are American?" one of them said. "I speak English good, no?"

Behind him, Malone heard a yowl and a crunch, as of a body striking
wood. It sounded as if somebody had fetched up against the bar. "You
speak English fine," he said, feeling wildly out of place. "Have you
been taking lessons?"

"Me?" the man said. "It is no time for talk. We got to get lady for
hospital."

"Lady?" Malone said. "For hospital?"

"Miss Garbitsch her name is," the stretcher-man said, trying to get
past Malone. The FBI agent shifted slightly, blocking the path. "We
wait outside one revolution--"

"One what?"

"When hands revolve once," the man said. "One hour. Now we get call so
we take her to hospital."

It sounded suspicious to Malone. He heard more yells behind him, and
they sounded a little closer. The sound of running men came to his
ears. "Well," he said happily, "goodbye all."

The stretcher-bearer said, "Vot?" Malone shoved him backward into the
approaching mob, grabbed the stretcher away from the other three men,
who were acting a little dazed, and swung it in a wide arc. He caught
an MVD man in the stomach, and the man doubled up with a weird
whistling groan, turned slightly in agony, and hit another MVD man
with his bowed head. The second man fell; Malone heard more crashes
and screaming, but he didn't find out any details. Instead, he threw
the stretcher at the milling mob and turned, already in motion, racing
for the ladies' room.

He had no notion of what he was going to do when he got there, or what
he was going to find. Her Majesty and Lou were in there, all right,
but how were they going to get out without being arrested, clubbed,
disemboweled or taken to a Russian hospital for God alone knew what
novel purposes?

His mind was still a little foggy from the vast amounts of vodka he
had poured down, and he wasn't in the least sure that teleportation
would even work. He tried to figure out whether Her Majesty had
already carried Lou off that way--but he doubted it. Lou was quite a
burden for the old woman. And besides, he wasn't at all sure whether
it was possible to teleport a human being. A lump of inanimate matter
is one thing; an intelligent woman with a mind of her own is
definitely something else.

It seemed to take forever for him to reach the door, and he was
panting heavily when he reached for it. Suddenly, another hand shot in
front of his, turning the doorknob. Malone looked up.

It was impossible to figure out where she had come from, or what she
thought she was doing, but a bulging, slightly intoxicated Russian
matron with bluish hair piled high on her head, a rusty orange dress
and altogether too many jewels scattered here and there about her
ample person, stood regarding him with a mixture of scorn, surprise
and shock.

Malone crowded her aside without a thought and jerked the door open.
Behind her he could see the melee still continuing, though it looked
by now as if the Russians weren't very sure who they were supposed to
be fighting. The Mongol's great head rose for a second above the
storm, shouting something unintelligible, and dropped again into the
crowd.

Malone focused on the matron, who was standing with her mouth open
staring at him.

"Madam," he said with stern dignity, "wait your turn!"

He ducked inside and slammed the door behind him. There was a small
knob to bolt the door with, and he used it. But it wasn't going to
hold long, he knew. If the mob outside ever got straightened out, the
door would go down like a piece of cardboard, bolt or no bolt.
Undoubtedly the gigantic Mongol could do the job with one hand tied
behind his back.

Malone turned around and put his own back to the door. Women were
looking up and making up their minds whether or not to scream. Time
stood absolutely still, and nobody seemed to be moving--not even the
two directly before him: a frightened-looking little old lady, who was
trying to hold up a semiconscious redhead.

And, somewhere behind him, he knew, was a howling mob of thoroughly
maddened Russians.


8

The door rattled against Malone's back as a hand twisted the knob and
shook it. He braced himself for the next assault, and it came: the
shudder of a heavy body slamming up against it. Miraculously, the door
held, at least for the moment. But the roars outside were growing
louder and louder as the second team came up.

Where was the Mongol? he wondered. But there was no time for idle
contemplation. The scene inside the room demanded his immediate
attention.

He was in the anteroom, a gilded and decorated parlor filled with
overstuffed chairs and couches. There was a door at the far side of
the room, and a woman suddenly came out of it holding a pocketbook in
one hand and a large powder-puff in the other. She saw Malone and
reacted instantly.

Her scream seemed to be a signal. The two other women sitting on
couches screamed, too, and jumped up with their hands to their faces.
Malone shouted something unintelligible but very loud at them and
brandished a fist menacingly. They shrieked again and ran for the
interior room.

Malone heard the roaring outside, and pressed his back tighter against
the door. Then, suddenly, he broke away from it and ran over to Her
Majesty and Lou. He looked down. Lou was apparently completely
unconscious by this time, and there was a peaceful look on her face.
The Queen looked down at her, then up at Malone.

"I'm sorry, Sir Kenneth," she said, "but we really haven't time for
romantic thoughts just now."

Malone passed a hand over his brow. "We haven't got time for
anything," he said. "You can see what's going on outside."

"My goodness," Her Majesty said. "Oh, yes. My goodness, yes."

"Okay," Malone said. "We've got to teleport out, if we can--and if we
can take Lou with us."

"I don't know, Sir Kenneth," the Queen said.

"We've got to try," Malone said grimly, looking down. There was a
crash as something hit the door. It shuddered, creaked, and held.
Malone took a breath. Lou was too beautiful to leave behind, no matter
what.

"I'll mesh my mind with yours," Her Majesty said, "so we'll be
synchronized."

"Right," Malone said. "The plane. Let's go."

There was another crash, but he hardly heard it. He closed his eyes
and tried to visualize the interior of the plane that was waiting for
them at the airfield. He wasn't sure he could do it; the vodka might
have clouded his mental processes just enough to make teleporting
impossible. He concentrated. The crash came again, and a shout. He
almost had it ... he almost had it...

The last sound he heard was the splintering of the door, and a great
shout that was cut off in the middle.

Malone opened his eyes.

"We made it," he said softly. "And I wonder what the MVD is going to
think."

Her Majesty took a deep breath. "My goodness," she said. "That _was_
exciting, wasn't it?"

"Not half as exciting as it's going to be if we don't hurry now,"
Malone said. "If you know what I mean."

"I do," Her Majesty said.

"That's good," Malone said at random. "I don't." He helped the Queen
ease the unconscious body of Luba Garbitsch into one of the padded
seats, and Malone pushed a switch. The seat gave a tiny squeak of
protest, and then folded back into a flat bedlike arrangement. Lou was
arranged on this comfortable surface, and Malone took a deep breath.
"Take care of her for a minute, Your Majesty," he said.

"Of course," the Queen said.

Malone nodded. "I'm going to see who's up front," he said. He walked
through the corridors of the plane and rapped authoritatively on the
door of the pilot's cabin. A second passed, and he raised his hand to
knock again.

It never reached the door, which opened very suddenly. Malone found
himself facing a small black hole.

It was the muzzle and the bore of the barrel of an M-2 .45 revolver,
and it was pointing somewhere in the space between Malone's eyes.
Behind the gun was a hard-eyed air force colonel with a grim
expression.

"You know," Malone said pleasantly, "they're good guns, but they
really can't compare to the .44 Magnum."

The pilot blinked, and his gun wavered just a little. "What?" he said.

"Well," Malone said, "if you'd only join the FBI, like me, you'd have
a .44 Magnum, and you could compare the guns."

The pilot blinked again. "You're--"

"Malone," Malone said. "Kenneth J. Malone, FBI. My friends call me
Snookums, but don't try it. Why not let's put the gun away and be
friends?"

"Oh," the colonel said weakly. "Mr.--sure. I'm sorry, Mr. Malone.
Didn't recognize you for a second there."

"Perfectly all right," Malone said. The gun was still pointing at him,
and in spite of the fact that he felt pleasantly like Philip Marlowe,
or maybe the Saint, he was beginning to get a little nervous. "The
