Project Gutenberg's Crowded Out o' Crofield, by William O. Stoddard

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Crowded Out o' Crofield
       or, The Boy who made his Way

Author: William O. Stoddard

Release Date: June 16, 2007 [EBook #21846]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CROWDED OUT O' CROFIELD ***




Produced by Al Haines










[Frontispiece: _The Sorrel Mare was tugging hard at the Rein_.]






CROWDED OUT O' CROFIELD

OR

THE BOY WHO MADE HIS WAY


BY

WILLIAM O. STODDARD



_SIXTH EDITION_



NEW YORK

D. APPLETON AND COMPANY

1897




COPYRIGHT, 1890,

BY D. APPLETON AND COMPANY.




PREFACE.

Only a few of the kindly reviewers of the earlier editions of Crowded
Out o' Crofield have suggested that it has at all exaggerated the
possible career of its boy and girl actors.  If any others have
silently agreed with them, it may be worth while to say that the
pictures of places and the doings of older and younger people are
pretty accurately historical.  The story and the writing of it were
suggested in a conversation with an energetic American boy who was
crowded out of his own village into a career which led to something
much more surprising than a profitable junior partnership.

W. O. S.

NEW YORK, 1893.




CONTENTS.


CHAPTER

     I.--THE BLACKSMITH'S BOY
    II.--THE FISH WERE THERE
   III.--I AM ONLY A GIRL
    IV.--CAPTAIN MARY
     V.--JACK OGDEN'S RIDE
    VI.--OUT INTO THE WORLD
   VII.--MARY AND THE _EAGLE_
  VIII.--CAUGHT FOR A BURGLAR
    IX.--NEARER THE CITY
     X.--THE STATE-HOUSE AND THE STEAMBOAT
    XI.--DOWN THE HUDSON
   XII.--IN A NEW WORLD
  XIII.--A WONDERFUL SUNDAY
   XIV.--FRIENDS AND ENEMIES
    XV.--NO BOY WANTED
   XVI.--JACK'S FAMINE
  XVII.--JACK-AT-ALL-TRADES
 XVIII.--THE DRUMMER BOY
   XIX.--COMPLETE SUCCESS




LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS.


The Sorrel Mare was tugging hard at the Rein . . . _Frontispiece_

The Runaway

Along the Water's Edge

Fighting the Fire

"Run for Home"

He listened in silence

"There won't be any _Eagle_ this week"

Just out

"I'm the Editor, sir"

"There," said Mr. Murdoch, "jump right in"

"Your map's all wrong," said Jack

The hotel clerk looked at Jack

His traveler friend was sound asleep

On Broadway, at last!

"How would he get in?"

Coffee and clams

Jack is homesick

"I've lost my pocket-book"

"Ten cents left"

Jack dines with Mr. Keifelheimer

Buying a new hat

Jack speaks to the General

The return home




CROWDED OUT O' CROFIELD.


CHAPTER I.

THE BLACKSMITH'S BOY.

"I'm going to the city!"

He stood in the wide door of the blacksmith-shop, with his hands in his
pockets, looking down the street, toward the rickety old bridge over
the Cocahutchie.  He was a sandy-haired, freckled-faced boy, and if he
was really only about fifteen, he was tall for his age.  Across the top
of the door, over his head, stretched a cracked and faded sign, with a
horseshoe painted on one end and a hammer on the other, and the name
"John Ogden," almost faded out, between them.

The blacksmith-shop was a great, rusty, grimy clutter of work-benches,
vises, tools, iron in bars and rods, and all sorts of old iron scraps
and things that looked as if they needed making over.

The forge was in the middle, on one side, and near it was hitched a
horse, pawing the ground with a hoof that bore a new shoe.  On the
anvil was a brilliant, yellow-red loop of iron, that was not quite yet
a new shoe, and it was sending out bright sparks as a hammer fell upon
it--"thud, thud, thud," and a clatter.  Over the anvil leaned a tall,
muscular, dark-haired, grimy man.  His face wore a disturbed and
anxious look, and it was covered with charcoal dust.  There was
altogether too much charcoal along the high bridge of his Roman nose
and over his jutting eyebrows.

The boy in the door also had some charcoal on his cheeks and forehead,
but none upon his nose.  His nose was not precisely like the
blacksmith's.  It was high and Roman half-way down, but just there was
a little dent, and the rest of the nose was straight.  His complexion,
excepting the freckles and charcoal, was chiefly sunburn, down to the
neckband of his blue checked shirt.  He was a tough, wiry-looking boy,
and there was a kind of smiling, self-confident expression in his
blue-gray eyes and around his firm mouth.

"I'm going to the city!" he said, again, in a low but positive voice.
"I'll get there, somehow."

Just then a short, thick-set man came hurrying past him into the shop.
He was probably the whitest man going into that or any other shop, and
he spoke out at once, very fast, but with a voice that sounded as if it
came through a bag of meal.

"Ogden," said he, "got him shod?  If you have, I'll take him.  What do
you say about that trade?"

"I don't want any more room than there is here," said the blacksmith,
"and I don't care to move my shop."

"There's nigh onto two acres, mebbe more, all along the creek from
below the mill to Deacon Hawkins's line, below the bridge," wheezed the
mealy, floury, dusty man, rapidly.  "I'll get two hundred for it some
day, ground or no ground.  Best place for a shop."

"This lot suits me," said the smith, hammering away.  "'Twouldn't pay
me to move--not in these times."

The miller had more to say, while he unhitched his horse, but he led
him out without getting any more favorable reply about the trade.

"Come and blow, Jack," said the smith, and the boy in the door turned
promptly to take the handle of the bellows.

The little heap of charcoal and coke in the forge brightened and sent
up fiery tongues, as the great leathern lungs wheezed and sighed, and
Jack himself began to puff.

"I've got to have a bigger man than you are, for a blower and striker,"
said the smith.  "He's coming Monday morning.  It's time you were doing
something, Jack."

"Why, father," said Jack, as he ceased pulling on the bellows, and the
shoe came out of the fire, "I've been doing something ever since I was
twelve.  Been working here since May, and lots o' times before that.
Learned the trade, too."

"You can make a nail, but you can't make a shoe," said his father, as
he sizzed the bit of bent iron in the water-tub and then threw it on
the ground.  "Seven.  That's all the shoes I'll make this morning, and
there are seven of you at home.  Your mother can't spare Molly, but
you'll have to do something.  It is Saturday, and you can go fishing,
after dinner, if you'd like to.  There's nothin' to ketch 'round here,
either.  Worst times there ever were in Crofield."

There was gloom as well as charcoal on the face of the blacksmith, but
Jack's expression was only respectfully serious as he walked away,
without speaking, and again stood in the door for a moment.

"I could catch something in the city.  I know I could," he said, to
himself.  "How on earth shall I get there?"

The bridge, at the lower end of the sloping side-street on which the
shop stood, was long and high.  It was made to fit the road and was a
number of sizes too large for the stream of water rippling under it.
The side-street climbed about twenty rods the other way into what was
evidently the Main Street of Crofield.  There was a tavern on one
corner, and across the street from that there was a drug store and in
it was the post-office.  On the two opposite corners were shops, and
all along Main Street were all sorts of business establishments,
sandwiched in among the dwellings.

It was not yet noon, but Crofield had a sleepy look, as if all its work
for the whole week were done.  Even the horses of the farmers' teams,
hitched in front of the stores, looked sleepy.  Jack Ogden took his
longest look, this time, at a neat, white-painted frame-house across
the way.

"Seems to me there isn't nearly so much room in it as there used to
be," he said to himself.  "It's just packed and crowded.  I'm going!"

He turned and walked on up toward Main Street, as if that were the best
thing he could do till dinner time.  Not many minutes later, a girl
plainly but neatly dressed came slowly along in front of the village
green, away up Main Street.  She was tall and slender, and her hair and
eyes were as dark as those of John Ogden, the blacksmith.  Her nose was
like his, too, except that it was finer and not so high, and she wore
very much the same anxious, discontented look upon her face.  She was
walking slowly, because she saw, coming toward her, a portly lady, with
hair so flaxy that no gray would show in it.  She was elegantly
dressed.  She stopped and smiled and looked very condescending.

"Good-morning, Mary Ogden," she said.

"Good-morning, Miss Glidden," said Mary, the anxious look in her eyes
changing to a gleam that made them seem very wide awake.

"It's a fine morning, Mary Ogden, but so very warm.  Is your mother
well?"

"Very well, thank you," said Mary.

"And is your aunt well--and your father, and all the children?  I'm so
glad they are well.  Elder Holloway's to be here to-morrow.  Hope
you'll all come.  I shall be there myself.  You've had my class a
number of times.  Much obliged to you.  I'll be there to-morrow.  You
must hear the Elder.  He's to inspect the Sunday-school."

"Your class, Miss Glidden?" began Mary; and her face suggested that
somebody was blowing upon a kind of fire inside her cheeks, and that
they would be very red in a minute.

"Yes; don't fail to be there to-morrow, Mary.  The choir'll be full, of
course.  I shall be there myself."

"I hope you will, Miss Glidden--"

The portly lady saw something up the street at that moment.

"Oh my!  What is it?  Dear me!  It's coming!  Run!  We'll all be
killed!  Oh my!"

She had turned quite around, while she was speaking, and was once more
looking up the street; but the dark-haired girl had neither flinched
nor wavered.  She had only sent a curious, inquiring glance in the
direction of the shouts and the rattle and the cloud of dust that were
coming swiftly toward them.

"A runaway team," she said, quietly.  "Nobody's in the wagon."

"Dear me!" exclaimed Miss Glidden; but Mary began to move away, looking
not at her but at the runaway, and she did not hear the rest.  "Mary
Ogden's too uppish.--Somebody'll be killed, I know they will!--She's
got to be taken down.--There they come!--Dressed too well for a
blacksmith's daughter.  Doesn't know her place.--Oh dear!  I'm so
frightened!"

Perhaps she had been wise in getting behind the nearest tree.  It was a
young maple, two inches through, lately set out, but it might have
stopped a pair of very small horses.  Those in the road were
large--almost too large to run well.  They were well-matched grays, and
they came thundering along in a way that was really fine to behold;
heads down, necks arched, nostrils wide, reins flying, the wagon behind
them banging and swerving--no wonder everybody stood still and, except
Mary Ogden, shouted, "Stop 'em!"  One young fellow, across the street,
stood still only until the runaways were all but close by him.  Then he
darted out into the street, not ahead of them but behind them.  No man
on earth could have stopped those horses by standing in front of them.
They could have charged through a regiment.  Their heavy, furious
gallop was fast, too, and the boy who was now following them, must have
been as light of foot as a young deer.

"Hurrah!  Hurrah!  Go it, Jack!  Catch 'em!  Bully for you!" arose from
a score of people along the sidewalk, as he bounded forward.

"It's Jack!  Oh dear me!  But it's just like him!  There!  He's in!"
exclaimed Mary Ogden, her dark eyes dancing proudly.

"Why, it's that good-for-nothing brother of Mary Ogden.  He's the
blacksmith's boy.  I'm afraid he will be hurt," remarked Miss Glidden,
kindly and benevolently; but all the rest shouted "Hurrah!" again.

Fierce was the strain upon the young runner, for a moment, and then his
hands were on the back-board of the bouncing wagon.  A tug, a spring, a
swerve of the wagon, and Jack Ogden was in it, and in a second more the
loosely flying reins were in his hands.

The strong arms of his father, were they twice as strong, could not at
once have pulled in those horses, and one man on the sidewalk seemed to
be entirely correct when he said, "He's a plucky little fellow, but he
can't do a thing, now he's there."

[Illustration: _The Runaway_.]

His sister was trembling all over, but she was repeating: "He did it
splendidly!  He can do anything!"

Jack, in the wagon, was thinking only: "I know 'em.  They're old
Hammond's team.  They'll try to go home to the mill.  They'll smash
everything, if I don't look out!"

