realize that all the evil of which Christianity is said to have been
the cause, is only the result of human ignorance and passion. When
attention is called, for instance, to the intolerance and stubborn
opposition to science, of Christianity, the answer given is, that this
conduct is not only not inspired by the spirit of Christianity, but
that it is in direct contradiction to its teachings. The Christians
claim that all the luminous chapters in history have been inspired by
their religion, all its sorrowful and black pages have been written by
the passions of men. But this apology, which, we regret to say, is in
every preacher's mouth, is not an honest one. In our opinion, both
Mohammedanism and Christianity, as also Judaism, are responsible for
the evil as well as the good they have accomplished in the world. They
are responsible for the lives they have destroyed, as for the lives
they have saved. They are responsible for the passions they have
aroused,--for the hatred, the persecutions and the religious wars of
the centuries, as for the piety and charity they have encouraged.

The central idea in all the three religions mentioned above, is that
God has revealed his will to man. There is, we say frankly, the root
of all the evil which religion has inflicted upon our unfortunate
earth. The poison is in both the flower and the fruit which that idea
brings forth. If it be true that God has revealed his will, that he
has told us, for instance, to believe in the Trinity, the atonement,
the fall of man, and the dogma of eternal punishment, and we refuse to
do so, will we not, then, be regarded as the most odious, the most
heinous, the most rebellious, the most sacrilegious, the most stiff-
necked, the most criminal people in the world? Think of refusing to
believe as God has dictated to us! Think of saying _no!_ to one's
Creator and Father in Heaven! Think of the consequences of differing
with God, and tempting others to do the same! Is it at all strange
that during the early centuries of Christianity, the people who
hesitated to agree with the deity, or to believe as he wanted them to,
were looked upon as incarnate fiends, as the accomplices of the devil
and the enemies of the human race, and were treated accordingly?

The doctrine of salvation by faith makes persecution inevitable. If to
refuse to believe in the Trinity, or in the divinity of Christ, is a
crime against God and will be punished by an eternity of hell in the
next world, and if such a man endangers the eternal salvation of his
fellows, is it not the duty of all religious people to endeavor to
exterminate him and his race, now arid here? How can Christian people
tolerate the rebel against their God, when God himself has pronounced
sentence of death against him? Why not follow the example of the
deity, as set forth in the persecutions of the Old Testament?

When we have a God for a teacher, the highest and surest virtue is
unconditional acquiescence. Judaism, Mohammedanism and Christianity,
in giving us a God for a teacher, have taken away from us the liberty
to think for ourselves. Each one of these three religions makes
unconditional obedience the price of the salvation it offers, but do
you know what other word in the English language unconditional
obedience is a synonym of?--Silence! A dumb world, a tongue-tied
humanity alone can be saved! The good man is the man on his knees with
his mouth in the dust. But silence is sterility! Silence is slavery!
Think, then, of the character of a religion which makes free speech,
free thought, a crime--which hurls hell against the Protestant!

There is a third question to be answered: It is true, they say to us,
that there are many things in the Koran, the Old Testament and the
New, which are really injurious, and which ought to be discarded, but
there are also many beautiful principles, noble sentiments and high
educational maxims in these scriptures. Why not, then, dwell upon
these, and pass in silence over the objectionable teachings of these
religions? It is not necessary to repeat again that in all so-called
sacred scriptures, there are glorious truths. It could not have been
otherwise. All literature, whether secular or religious, is the voice
of man and sweeps the whole compass of human love and hope. We have no
objection to quoting from the Veddas, the Avestas, the Koran or the
Bible; nor do we hesitate to admire and enjoy and praise generously
the ravishingly beautiful utterances of the poets and prophets of all
times and climes. Nevertheless, it remains true that the modern world
finds more practical help and inspiration in secular authors, in the
books of science and philosophy, than in these so-called inspired
scriptures. Jesus, who is popularly believed to have preached the
Sermon on the Mount, has said little or nothing which can help the
modern world as much as the scientific revelations of a student like
Darwin, or of a philosopher like Herbert Spencer, or of a poet like
Goethe or Shakespeare. We know this will sound like blasphemy to the
believer, but a moment's honest and fearless reflection will convince
everyone of the fact that neither Mohammed nor Jesus had in view
modern conditions when they delivered their sermons. Jesus could have
had no idea of a world outside of his little Palestine. The thought of
the many races of the world mingling together in one country could
never have occurred to him. His vision did not embrace the vista of
two thousand years, nor did his mind rise to the level of the problems
which today tax the brain and heart of man. Jesus believed implicitly
that the world would speedily come to an end, that the sun and the
moon would soon fall from the face of the sky, and that people living
then in Palestine would not taste of death before they saw "the Son of
Man return upon the clouds." Jesus had no idea of a progressive
evolution of humanity. It was beyond him to conceive the consolidation
of the nations into one fellowship, the new resources which science
would tap, or the new energies which human industry would challenge.
Jesus was in peaceful ignorance of the social and international
problems which confront the world of today. The Sermon on the Mount,
then, which is said to be the best in our gospels, can be of little
help to us, for it could not have been meant for us. And it is very
easy to show that the modern world ignores, not out of disrespect to
Jesus, but by the force of circumstances and the evolution of society,
the principles contained in that renowned sermon.

I was waiting for transportation at the corner of one of the principal
streets of Chicago, the other day, when, looking about me, I saw the
tremendous buildings which commerce and wealth have reared in our
midst. On one hand was a savings bank, on the other a colossal
national bank, and up and down the street a thousand equally solid and
substantial buildings, devoted to the interests of commerce and
civilization. To bring out and emphasize the wide breach between the
man who preached the Sermon on the Mount, and progressive and
aggressive, busy and wealthy, modern Chicago, I took the words of
Jesus and mentally inscribed them upon the walls of these buildings.
Upon the savings bank--and a savings bank represents economy,
frugality, self-sacrifice, self-restraint,--the desire of the people
to provide for the uncertainties of the future, to lay by something
for the education of their children, for the maintenance of their
families when they themselves have ceased to live,--I printed upon the
facade of this institution, figuratively speaking, these words of the
Oriental Jesus:

"Take no thought of the morrow, for the morrow will take care of
itself."

And upon the imposing front of the national bank, I wrote: "Lay not up
for yourselves treasures on earth." If we followed these teachings,
would not our industrial and social life sink at once to the level of
the stagnating Asiatics?

Pursuing this comparison between Jesus and modern life, I inscribed
upon the handsome churches whose pews bring enormous incomes, and on
the palatial residences of Bishops, with salaries of from twenty-five
to a hundred thousand dollars, these words:

"How hardly shall a rich man enter into the kingdom of Heaven," and,
"It is easier for a camel to go through the eye of a needle than for a
rich man to enter the kingdom of Heaven."

In plain words, the gospel condemns wealth, and cries, "Woe unto you
rich," and "Sell all thou hast and give it to the poor," which, by the
way, would only be shifting the temptation of wealth from one class to
another. Buckle was nearer the truth, and more modern in spirit, when
he ascribed the progress of man to the pursuit of truth and the
acquisition of wealth.

But let us apply the teachings of Jesus to still other phases of
modern life. Some years ago our Cuban neighbors appealed to the United
States for protection against the cruelty and tyranny of Spanish rule.
We sent soldiers over to aid the oppressed and down-trodden people in the
Island. Now, suppose, instead of sending iron-clads and admirals,--Schley,
Sampson and Dewey,--we had advised the Cubans to "resist not evil,"
and to "_submit_ to the powers that be," or suppose the General of our
army, or the Secretary of our navy, had counseled seriously our
soldiers to remember the words of Jesus when fighting the Spaniards:
"If a man smite thee on one cheek," etc. Write upon our halls of
justice and courthouses and statute books, and on every lawyer's desk,
these solemn words of Jesus: "He that taketh away thy coat, let him
have thy cloak also."

Introduce into our Constitution, the pride and bulwark of our
liberties, guaranteeing religious freedom unto all,--these words of
Paul: "If any man preach any other gospel than that which I have
preached unto you, let him be accursed." Think of placing nearly fifty
millions of our American population under a curse!

Tell this to the workers in organized charities: "Give to every man
that asketh of thee," which, if followed, would make a science of
charity impossible.

To the workingmen, or the oppressed seeking redress and protesting
against evil, tell this: "Blessed are they that are persecuted," which
is equivalent to encouraging them to submit to, rather than to resist,
oppression.

 Or upon our colleges and universities, our libraries and laboratories
consecrated to science, write the words: "The wisdom of this world is
foolishness with God," and "God has chosen the foolish to confound the
wise."

Ah, yes, the foolish of Asia, it is true, succeeded in confounding the
philosophers of Europe. Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Moses, Jesus, did
replace Socrates, Plato, Aristotle, Seneca, Cicero, Caesar and the
Antonines! But it was a trance, a spell, a delirium only, and it did
not last,--it could not last. The charm is at last broken. Europe is
forever free from the exorcism of Asia.

I believe the health and sanity and virtue of our Europe would
increase a hundred fold, if we could, from this day forth, cease to
pretend professing by word of mouth what in our own hearts and lives
we have completely outgrown. If we could be sincere and brave; if our
leaders and teachers would only be honest with themselves and honest
with the modern world, there would, indeed, be a new earth and a new
humanity.

But the past is past. It is for us to sow the seeds which in the day
of their fruition shall emancipate humanity from the pressing yoke of
a stubborn Asiatic superstition, and push the future even beyond the
beauty and liberty of the old Pagan world!




[Illustration: Figures on a Phoenician Vase, Showing the Use of the
Cross, Evidently in Some Ceremony of a Religious Nature.]

CHRISTIANITY AND PAGANISM



Christianity as an Asiatic cult is not suitable to European races. To
prove this, let us make a careful comparison between Paganism and
Christianity. There are many foolish things, and many excellent
things, in both the Pagan and the Christian religions. We are not
concerned with particular beliefs and rites; it is Paganism as a
philosophy of life, and Christianity as a philosophy of life, that we
desire to investigate. And at the threshold of our investigation we
must bear in mind that Paganism was born and grew into maturity in
Europe, while Asia was the cradle of Christianity. It would be
superfluous to undertake to prove that in politics, in government, in
literature, in art, in science, in the general culture of the people,
Europe was always in advance of Asia.

Do we know of any good reason, when it comes to religion, why Asia
should be incomparably superior to anything Europe has produced in
that line? Unless we believe in miracles, the natural inference would
be that a people who were better educated in every way than the
Asiatics should have also possessed the better religion. I admit that
this is only inferential, or _a priori_ reasoning, and that it still
remains to be shown by the recital of facts, that Europe not only
ought to have produced a better religion than Asia, but that she
did.

In my opinion, between the Pagan and Christian view of life there is
the same difference that there is between a European and an Asiatic.
What makes a Roman a Roman, a Greek a Greek, and a Persian a Persian?
That is a very interesting, but also a very difficult question. Why
are not all nations alike? Why is the oak more robust than the spruce?
What are the subtle influences which operate in the womb of nature,
where "the embryos of races are nourished into form and
individuality?" I cannot answer that question satisfactorily, and I am
not going to attempt to answer it at all. We know there is a radical
difference between the European and the Asiatic; we know that Oriental
and Occidental culture are the antitheses of each other, and nowhere
else is this seen more clearly than in their interpretations of the
universe, that is to say, in their religions.

In order to understand the Oriental races, we must discover the
standpoint from which they take their observations.

But first, it is admitted, of course, that there are Europeans who are
more Asiatic in their habits of life and thought than the Asiatics
themselves, and, conversely, there are Asiatics who in spirit, energy
and progressiveness are abreast of the most advanced representatives
of European culture.

Nor has Asia been altogether barren; she has blossomed in many spots,
and she nursed the flame of civilization at a time when Europe was not
yet even cradled.

To show the intellectual point of view of the Asiatic, let me quote a
passage from the Book of Job, which certainly is an Oriental
composition, and one of the finest:

"How, then, can man be justified with God, or how can he be clean that
is born of a woman? _Man that is a worm, and the son of man, which
is a worm_."

This, then, is the standpoint of the Oriental. He believes he is a
poor little worm. His philosophy must necessarily _trail_ in the dust.
A worm cannot have the thoughts of an eagle; a worm cannot have the
imagination of a _Titan_; a worm sees the world only as a worm may.
This is the angle of vision of the Asiatic. He calls himself a worm,
and naturally his view of life shrinks to the limits of his
standpoint. To he perfectly fair, however, we must admit there are
passages in all the bibles of the Orient which are as daring as those
found in any European book, but they represent only the strayings of
the Oriental mind, not its normal pulse. The habitual accent of the
Oriental is that man, calling a woman his mother, is a worm. In the
Psalms of David, or whoever wrote the book, we read these words: "_I
am a worm, and not a man_." What did the Oriental see in the worm,
which induced him to select it out of all things as the original, so
to speak, of man? The worm _crawls_ and _creeps_ and _writhes_.
Nothing is so distressing as to see its helpless wiggling--and its
home is in the dust; dirt is its daily food. Moreover, it is in danger
of being stamped or trampled into annihilation at any instant. A worm
_represents the minimum_ of worth,--the dregs in the cup of existence;
it is the scum or the froth of life, which one may blow into the air.
It is impossible to descend lower than this in self-abasement.

When the Oriental, therefore, says that man is a worm or "I am a
worm," he is just as much _obeying the cumulative_ pressure of his
Asiatic ancestry, and voicing the inherited submission of the Oriental
mind, as Prometheus, with the vulture at his breast, and shaking his
hand in the face of the gods, expresses the revolt of the European
mind. The normal state for the Asiatic is submission; for the European
it is independence. Slavery has a fascination for the children of the
east. The air of independence is too sharp for them. They crave a
master, a Sultan or a Czar, who shall own them body and soul. Through
long practice, they have acquired the art of servility and flattery,
of salaams and prostrations--an art in which they have become so
efficient that it would be to them like throwing away so much capital
to abandon its practice. They expect to go to Heaven on their knees.
This is not said to hurt the feelings of the races of the Orient. We
are explaining the influence of absolutism upon the products and
tendencies of the human mind. The religion of the Orient, then,
notwithstanding its many beautiful features like its politics, is a
_product of the suppressed_ mind, which finds in the creeping worm of
the dust the measure of its own worth. How different is the European
from the Asiatic in this respect! The latter crawls upon the stage of
this magnificent universe with the timidity, hesitancy and tremblings
of a worm. True to his bringing up, he falls prostrate, overwhelmed by
the marvelous immensities opening before him and the abysses yawning
at his feet. He contracts and dwindles in size, imploring with
outstretched hands to be spared because he is a poor worm. It is a
part of his religion or philosophy that if he admits he is nothing but
a worm, the dread powers will not consider him a rival or a rebel, but
