The Project Gutenberg EBook Homo Sum, by Georg Ebers, Volume 2.
#57 in our series by Georg Ebers

Copyright laws are changing all over the world. Be sure to check the
copyright laws for your country before downloading or redistributing
this or any other Project Gutenberg eBook.

This header should be the first thing seen when viewing this Project
Gutenberg file.  Please do not remove it.  Do not change or edit the
header without written permission.

Please read the "legal small print," and other information about the
eBook and Project Gutenberg at the bottom of this file.  Included is
important information about your specific rights and restrictions in
how the file may be used.  You can also find out about how to make a
donation to Project Gutenberg, and how to get involved.


**Welcome To The World of Free Plain Vanilla Electronic Texts**

**EBooks Readable By Both Humans and By Computers, Since 1971**

*****These EBooks Were Prepared By Thousands of Volunteers*****


Title: Homo Sum, Volume 2.

Author: Georg Ebers

Release Date: April, 2004  [EBook #5495]
[Yes, we are more than one year ahead of schedule]
[This file was first posted on June 2, 2002]

Edition: 10

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII





*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HOMO SUM, BY GEORG EBERS, V2 ***



This eBook was produced by David Widger <widger@cecomet.net>



[NOTE: There is a short list of bookmarks, or pointers, at the end of the
file for those who may wish to sample the author's ideas before making an
entire meal of them.  D.W.]





HOMO SUM

By Georg Ebers

Volume 2.


CHAPTER V.

Thanks to the senator's potion Stephanus soon fell asleep.  Paulus sat
near him and did not stir; he held his breath, and painfully suppressed
even an impulse to cough, so as not to disturb the sick man's light
slumbers.

An hour after midnight the old man awoke, and after he had lain
meditating for some time with his eyes open, he said thoughtfully: "You
called yourself and us all egotistic, and I certainly am so.  I have
often said so to myself; not for the first time to day, but for weeks
past, since Hermas came back from Alexandria, and seems to have forgotten
how to laugh.  He is not happy, and when I ask myself what is to become
of him when I am dead, and if he turns from the Lord and seeks the
pleasures of the world, my heart sickens.  I meant it for the best when
I brought him with me up to the Holy Mountain, but that was not the only
motive--it seemed to me too hard to part altogether from the child.
My God! the young of brutes are secure of their mother's faithful love,
and his never asked for him when she fled from my house with her seducer.
I thought he should at least not lose his father, and that if he grew up
far away from the world he would be spared all the sorrow that it had so
profusely heaped upon me, I would have brought him up fit for Heaven, and
yet through a life devoid of suffering.  And now--and now?  If he is
miserable it will be through me, and added to all my other troubles comes
this grief."

"You have sought out the way for him," interrupted Paulus, "and the rest
will be sure to come; he loves you and will certainly not leave you so
long as you are suffering."

"Certainly not?" asked the sick man sadly.  "And what weapons has he to
fight through life with?"

"You gave him the Saviour for a guide; that is enough," said Paulus
soothingly.  "There is no smooth road from earth to Heaven, and none can
win salvation for another."

Stephanus was silent for a long time, then he said: "It is not even
allowed to a father to earn the wretched experience of life for his son,
or to a teacher for his pupil.  We may point out the goal, but the way
thither is by a different road for each of us."

"And we may thank God for that," cried Paulus.  "For Hermas has been
started on the road which you and I had first to find for ourselves."

"You and I," repeated the sick man thoughtfully.  "Yes, each of us has
sought his own way, but has enquired only which was his own way, and has
never concerned himself about that of the other.  Self! self!--How many
years we have dwelt close together, and I have never felt impelled to ask
you what you could recall to mind about your youth, and how you were led
to grace.  I learnt by accident that you were an Alexandrian, and had
been a heathen, and had suffered much for the faith, and with that I was
satisfied.  Indeed you do not seem very ready to speak of those long past
days.  Our neighbor should be as dear to us as our self, and who is
nearer to me than you?  Aye, self and selfishness!  There are many gulfs
on the road towards God."

"I have not much to tell," said Paulus.  "But a man never forgets what
he once has been.  We may cast the old man from us, and believe we have
shaken ourselves free, when lo! it is there again and greets us as an old
acquaintance.  If a frog only once comes down from his tree he hops back
into the pond again."

"It is true, memory can never die!" cried the sick man.  "I can not sleep
any more; tell me about your early life and how you became a Christian.
When two men have journeyed by the same road, and the moment of parting
is at hand, they are fain to ask each other's name and where they came
from."

Paulus gazed for some time into space, and then he began: "The companions
of my youth called me Menander, the son of Herophilus.  Besides that, I
know for certain very little of my youth, for as I have already told you,
I have long since ceased to allow myself to think of the world.  He who
abandons a thing, but clings to the idea of the thing, continues--"

"That sounds like Plato," said Stephanus with a smile.

"All that heathen farrago comes back to me today," cried Paulus.  "I used
to know it well, and I have often thought that his face must have
resembled that of the Saviour."

"But only as a beautiful song might resemble the voice of an angel," said
Stephanus somewhat drily.  "He who plunges into the depths of philosophic
systems--"

"That never was quite my case," said Paulus.  "I did indeed go through
the whole educational course; Grammar, Rhetoric, Dialectic and Music--"

"And  Arithmetic,  Geometry, and Astronomy," added Stephanus.

"Those were left to the learned many years since," continued Paulus,
"and I was never very eager for learning.  In the school of Rhetoric I
remained far behind my fellows, and if Plato was dear to me I owe it to
Paedonomus of Athens, a worthy man whom my father engaged to teach us."

"They say he had been a great merchant," interrupted Stephanus.  "Can it
be that you were the son of that rich Herophilus, whose business in
Antioch was conducted by the worthy Jew Urbib?"

"Yes indeed," replied Paulus, looking down at the ground in some
confusion.  "Our mode of life was almost royal, and the multitude of our
slaves quite sinful.  When I look back on all the vain trifles that my
father had to care for, I feel quite giddy.  Twenty sea-going ships in
the harbor of Eunostus, and eighty Nile-boats on Lake Mareotis belonged
to him.  His profits on the manufacture of papyrus might have maintained
a cityfull of poor.  But we needed our revenues for other things.  Our
Cyraenian horses stood in marble stalls, and the great hall, in which my
father's friends were wont to meet, was like a temple.  But you see how
the world takes possession of us, when we begin to think about it!
Rather let us leave the past in peace.  You want me to tell you more of
myself?  Well; my childhood passed like that of a thousand other rich
citizens' sons, only my mother, indeed, was exceptionally beautiful and
sweet, and of angelic goodness."

"Every child thinks his own mother the best of mothers," murmured the
sick man.

"Mine certainly was the best to me," cried Paulus.  "And yet she was a
heathen.  When my father hurt me with severe words of blame, she always
had a kind word and loving glance for me.  There was little enough,
indeed, to praise in me.  Learning was utterly distasteful to me, and
even if I had done better at school, it would hardy have counted for much
to my credit, for my brother Apollonius, who was about a year younger
than I, learned all the most difficult things as if they were mere
child's play, and in dialectic exercises there soon was no rhetorician in
Alexandria who could compete with him.  No system was unknown to him, and
though no one ever knew of his troubling himself particularly to study,
he nevertheless was master of many departments of learning.  There were
but two things in which I could beat him--in music, and in all athletic
exercises; while he was studying and disputing I was winning garlands in
the palaestra.  But at that time the best master of rhetoric and argument
was the best man, and my father, who himself could shine in the senate as
an ardent and elegant orator, looked upon me as a half idiotic ne'er-do-
weel, until one clay a learned client of our house presented him with a
pebble on which was carved an epigram to this effect: 'He who would see
the noblest gifts of the Greek race, should visit the house of
Herophilus, for there he might admire strength and vigor of body in
Menander, and the same qualities of mind in Apollonius.'  These lines,
which were written in the form of a lute, passed from mouth to mouth, and
gratified my father's ambition; from that time he had words of praise for
me when my quadriga won the race in the Hippodrome, or when I came home
crowned from the wrestling-ring, or the singing match.  My whole life was
spent in the baths and the palaestra, or in gay feasting."

"I know it all," exclaimed Stephanus interrupting him, "and the memory of
it all often disturbs me.  Did you find it easy to banish these images
from your mind?"

"At first I had a hard fight," sighed Paulus.  "But for some time now,
since I have passed my fortieth year, the temptations of the world
torment me less often.  Only I must keep out of the way of the carriers
who bring fish from the fishing towns on the sea, and from Raithu to the
oasis."

Stephanus looked enquiringly at the speaker, and Paulus went on: "Yes, it
is very strange.  I may see men or women--the sea yonder or the mountain
here, without ever thinking of Alexandria, but only of sacred things; but
when the savor of fish rises up to my nostrils I see the market and fish
stalls and the oysters--"

"Those of Kanopus are famous," interrupted Steplianus, "they make little
pasties there--"Paulus passed the back of his hand over his bearded lips,
exclaiming, "At the shop of the fat cook--Philemon--in the street of
Herakleotis."  But he broke off, and cried with an impulse of shame, "It
were better that I should cease telling of my past life.  The day does
not dawn yet, and you must try to sleep."

