translation), noting its picture of conditions in the universe
before the actual work of creation began.  The creative power is
the spirit or breath of God.  The Hebrew word for spirit (_ruah_)
represents the sound of the breath as it emerges from the mouth or
the sound of the wind as it sighs through the trees.  It is the
effective symbol of a real and mighty force that cannot be seen or
touched yet produces terrific effects, as when the cyclone rends
the forest or transforms the sea into a mountain of billows and
twists like straws the masts of wood and steel.  In the Old
Testament the "spirit of God" or the "spirit of the Holy One" is
God working (1) in the material universe, as in the work of
creation, (2) in human history, as when he directs the life of
nations, or (3) in the lives of men.

Note the method of creation and the distinctive work of each day.
The process is that of separation.  It is orderly and progressive.
The first three days of preparation in which (1) light and
darkness, (2) air and water (separated by the firmament) and (3)
land and vegetation are created, correspond to the work of the
second three days in which are created (1) the heavenly bodies, (2)
the birds and fishes (which live in the air and water) and (3) land
animals and man.  The underlying conception of the universe is that
held by most early peoples.  Compare the diagram in _Hastings'
Dictionary of the Bible_ I, 503 or Kent's _Student's Old
Testament_, Vol. I, p.  52 which illustrates it.

God's benign plan is revealed by the recurring words: "God saw that
it was good."  What was the culminating act of creation?  "Created
man in his image" can not mean with a body like that of God (for in
this story God is thought of as a spirit), but rather with a
God-like spirit, mind, will, and power to rule.


III

THE EARLY PROPHETIC STORY OF CREATION.

The opening words of the second account of creation, which begins
in the fourth verse of the second chapter of Genesis, imply that
the earth and the heavens have already been created.

"In the day that Jehovah made earth and heaven, no plant of the
field was yet on the earth, and no herb of the field had yet sprung
up, for Jehovah had not caused it to rain upon the earth, and there
was no man to till the ground; but a mist used to rise from the
earth and water the whole face of the ground."

It is possible that here only a part of the original story is
preserved.  What is the order in the story of creation found in
this second chapter?  The method of man's creation?

According to this account, the tree of life was planted in the
garden that man, while he lived there, might enjoy immortality.
Was the tree of the knowledge of good and evil placed in the garden
to develop man's moral nature by temptation or merely to inculcate
obedience?

The love between the sexes is apparently implanted in all living
beings primarily for the conservation of the species, but the early
prophet also recognized clearly the broader intellectual and moral
aspects of the relation.  "It is not good for man to be alone" were
the significant words of Jehovah.  Hence animals, birds, and, last
of all, woman, were created to meet man's innate social needs.
Man's words on seeing woman were:

  "This, now, is bone of my bone
    And flesh of my flesh.
  This one shall be called woman,
    For from man was she taken."

What fundamental explanation is here given of the institution of
marriage?  Compare Jesus' confirmation of this teaching in Matthew
19:4-5:

"And he answered and said, Have ye not read, that he who made them
from the beginning made them male and female, and said, For this
cause shall a man leave his father and mother, and shall cleave to
his wife: and the two shall become one flesh?"


IV.

A COMPARISON OF THE TWO ACCOUNTS OF CREATION.

The account of creation found in the second chapter suggests the
simple, direct ideas of a primitive people; while the account in
Genesis 1 has the exact, repetitious, majestic literary style of a
legal writer.  Are the differences between these two accounts of
creation greater than those between the parallel narratives in the
Gospels?  We recognize that the differences in detail between the
Gospel accounts of the same event are due to the fact that no two
narrators tell the same story in the same way.  Are the variations
between the two Biblical accounts of creation to be similarly
explained?  A growing body of Biblical scholars hold, though many
differ in judgment, that the account in the first chapter of
Genesis was written by a priestly writer who lived about four
hundred B.C., and the second account four hundred years earlier by
a patriotic, prophetic historian.

Observe that the two accounts agree in the following fundamental
teachings: (1) One supreme God is the Creator; (2) man is closely
akin to God; (3) all else is created for man's best and noblest
development.

Is the primary aim of these accounts to present scientific facts or
to teach religious truths?  Paul says in Timothy that "Every
scripture inspired of God is also profitable for teaching, for
reproof, for correction, for instruction which is in
righteousness."  Is their religious value, even as in the parables
of the New Testament, entirely independent of their historical or
scientific accuracy?  Is there any contradiction between the
distinctive teachings of the Bible and modern science?  Do not the
Bible and science deal with two different but supplemental fields
of life: the one with religion and morals, the other with the
physical world?


V.

MAN'S CONQUEST AND RULERSHIP OF THE WORLD.

In the story of Genesis 1 man is commanded to subdue the earth and
to have dominion over the fish of the sea and over the birds of the
heavens and over every living thing that creeps upon the earth.
How far has man already subdued the animals and made them serve
him? How far has he conquered the so-called natural forces and
learned to utilize them?  Is the latter day conquest of the air but
a step in this progress?  Are all inventions and developments of
science in keeping with the purpose expressed in Genesis 1?  Does
the command imply the immediate or the gradual conquest of nature?
Why?  Do science and the Bible differ or agree in their answers to
these questions?


VI.

MAN'S RESPONSIBILITY AS THE RULER OF THE WORLD.

Consider the different ways in which the Biblical accounts of
creation state that man is akin to God.  In the one account man was
created in the image of God; in the other Jehovah formed man of the
dust of the ground and breathed into his nostrils his own
life-giving breath.  In what sense is man God-like?  Are all men
"made in the image of God"?  Does this story imply that every man
has the right and capacity to become God-like?

A high official of China, whose power of authority extends to
questions of life and death, is called "the father and mother of
his people."  If he fails in the responsibility which his authority
imposes upon him, and the people in consequence create a
disturbance, he is severely punished, sometimes by death.  Does
authority always imply responsibility?  Of what value to man is the
conquest of the forces of nature?  President Roosevelt said that he
considered the conservation of the natural resources of the United
States the most important question before the American people.  Is
this political question also a religious question?

Why did God give man authority over the animal world?  Does the
responsibility that comes from this authority rest upon every man?
One of the laws of the Boy Scouts reads:

"A scout is kind.  He is a friend to animals.  He will not kill nor
hurt any living creature needlessly, but will strive to save and
protect all harmless life."  Is this a practical application of the
teaching in Genesis 1?

If God's purpose is to make everything good, man's highest
privilege, as well as duty, is to co-operate with him in realizing
that purpose.  Are men to-day as a whole growing happier and
nobler?  In what practical ways may a man contribute to the
happiness and ennobling of his fellow men?

Is your community growing better?  What would be the result if you
and others like yourself did your best to improve conditions?  If
so, how?


_Questions for Further Consideration_.

Is man's possession of knowledge and power the ultimate object of
creation?  If not, what is?  Does human experience suggest that
man's life on earth is, in its ultimate meaning, simply a school
for the development of individual character and for the perfecting
of the human race?

Is there any other practical way in which a man can serve God
except by serving his fellowmen?  If so, how?


_Subjects for Further Study_.

(1) The Origin and Content of the Babylonian Stories of
Creation.--Hastings, _Dictionary of the Bible_, 1, 501-7; Kent,
_Student's O. T._, I, 360-9.

(2) The Relation of the Biblical Story of the Creation to the
Babylonian.--Kent, _Student's O. T._, I, 369-70.

(3) The Seeming Conflict Between the Teachings of the Bible and
Science and the Practical Reconciliation.--Sir Oliver Lodge:
_Science and Immortality_, Section 1.




STUDY II

MAN'S RESPONSIBILITY FOR HIS ACTS.

THE STORY OF THE GARDEN OF EDEN.--Gen.  3.

_Parallel Readings_.

  _Hist. Bible_, Vol. I, 37-42.
  Drummond, _Ideal Life_, Chaps. on Sin.

And when the woman saw that the tree was good for food and that it
was a delight to the eye, and that the tree was to be desired to
make one wise, she took of the fruit thereof, and did eat; and she
gave also unto her husband with her and he did eat.  And the eyes
of them both were opened and they beard the voice of Jehovah God
walking in the garden in the cool of the day: and the man and his
wife hid themselves from the presence of Jehovah God amongst the
trees of the garden.--_Gen. 3:6-8_.

Blessed is the man that endureth temptation; for when he hath been
approved, he shall receive a crown of life, which the Lord promised
to them that love him.  Let no man say when he is tempted, I am
tempted of God; for God cannot be tempted with evil, and he himself
tempteth no man; but each man is tempted when he is drawn away by
his own lust and enticed.  Then the lust, when it hath conceived,
beareth sin: and the sin, when it is full grown, bringeth forth
death.--_James 1:12-15_.

  For the love of God is broader
    Than the measure of man's mind,
  And the heart of the eternal
    Is most wonderfully kind.--_Frederick W. Faber_.

None could enter into life but those who were in downright earnest
and unless they left the wicked world behind them; for there was
only room for body and soul, but not for body and soul and
sin.--_John Bunyan_.


I.

THE NATURE OF SIN.

Henry Drummond has said that sin is a little word that has wandered
out of theology into life.

Members of a secret organization known as the Thugs of India feel
at times that it is their solemn duty to strangle certain of their
fellow men.  Do they thereby commit a sin?  A Parsee believes that
it is wrong to light a cigar, for it is a desecration of his emblem
of purity--fire.  Others in the western world for very different
reasons regard the same act as wrong.  Is the lighting or smoking
of a cigar a sin for these classes?  Is the act necessarily wrong
in itself?

When a trained dog fails to obey his master, does he sin?  Is man
alone capable of sinning?


II.

THE DIFFERENT THEORIES REGARDING THE ORIGIN OF SIN.

Many and various have been the definitions of sin and the
explanations of its origin.  Most primitive peoples defined it as
failure to perform certain ceremonial acts, or to bring tribute to
the gods.  Morality and religion were rarely combined.  The Hebrew
people were the first to define right and wrong in terms of
personal life and service.  Sin as represented in Genesis 3 was the
result of individual choice.  It was yielding to the common rather
than the nobler impulses, to desire rather than to the sense of
duty.  The temptation came from within rather than from without,
and the responsibility of not choosing the best rested with the
individual.  The explanation is as simple and as true to human
experience to-day as in the childhood of the race.

The Persian religion, on the contrary, conceived of the world as
controlled by two hostile gods, with their hosts of attendant
angels.  One god, Ormuzd, was the embodiment of light and goodness.
The other, Ahriman, represented darkness and evil.  They traced all
sin to the direct influence of Ahriman and the evil spirits that
attended him.  During the Persian period a somewhat similar
explanation of the origin of evil appeared in Jewish thought.
Satan, who in the book of Job appears to be simply the prosecuting
attorney of heaven, began to be thought of as the enemy of man,
until in later times all sin was traced directly or indirectly to
his influence.  This was the conception prevalent among the
Puritans.  This view tended to relieve man of personal
responsibility for he was regarded as the victim of assaults of
hosts of malignant spirits.  Does your knowledge of the heart of
man confirm the insight of the prophet who speaks through the
wonderful story of Genesis 3?


III.

THE ORIGIN OF SIN ACCORDING TO THE STORY IN GENESIS 3.

In your judgment is the story of the man and the woman in Genesis 3
a chapter from the life of a certain man and woman, or a faithful
reflection of universal human experience?  Most of the elements
which are found in the story may likewise be traced in earlier
Semitic traditions.  The aim of the prophet who has given us the
story was, according to the view of certain interpreters, to
present in vivid, concrete form the origin, nature, and
consequences of sin.  This method of teaching was similar to that
which Jesus used, for example, in the parable of Dives and Lazarus.
The tree of the knowledge of good and evil, with the command not to
eat of it, apparently symbolizes temptation.  Is temptation
necessary for man's moral development? The serpent was evidently
chosen because of its reputation for craft and treachery.  The
serpent's words represent the natural inclinations that were
struggling in the mind of the woman against her sense of duty.
Note that in the story the temptation did not come to man through
his appetite or his curiosity or his esthetic sense but through his
wife whom God had given him.  Was the man's act in any way
excusable?  Strong men and women often sin through the influence of
those whom they love and admire.  Are they thereby excused?  What
natural impulses impelled the woman to disobey the divine command?
Were these impulses of themselves wrong?  How far did her
experience reflect common human experience?  What was the real
nature of her act?  Was it wrong or praise-worthy for her to desire
knowledge?

In what form did temptation come to the man in Genesis 3.  Does
temptation appeal in a different form to each individual?  The
Hebrew word for sin (which means to miss the mark placed before
each individual) vividly and aptly describes the real nature of
sin.  The ideal placed before each individual represents his sense
of what is right.  If he acts contrary to that ideal or fails to
strive to realize it, does he sin?


IV.

THE EFFECTS OF SIN UPON THE WRONG-DOER.

What was the effect of their consciousness of having disobeyed upon
the man and woman in the ancient story?  Did they believe that they
had done wrong, or merely that they had incurred a penalty?  Does
sin tend to make cowards of men?  Were the feelings of shame, and
the sense of estrangement in the presence of one who loved them,
the most tragic effect of their sin?  When a child disobeys a
parent or a friend wrongs a friend is the sense of having injured a
loved one the most painful consequence of sin?  Was the penalty
imposed on the man and woman the result of a divine judgment or the
natural and inevitable effect of wrong-doing?  Why did the man and
woman try to excuse their disobedience?  Was it natural?  Was it
good policy?  Was it right?  If not, why not?


V.

GOD'S ATTITUDE TOWARD THE SINNER.

Jehovah in the story evidently asked the man and woman a question,
the answer to which he already knew, in order to give them an
opportunity to confess their wrong-doing.  Parents and teachers
often seek to give the culprit the opportunity to confess his sin.
What is the attitude of the law towards the criminal who pleads
guilty?  What is the reason for this attitude?  A loving parent or
even the state might forgive an unrepentant sinner, but the effect
of the wrong-doing upon the sinner and upon others may still remain.

While the man and woman remained conscious of their wrong-doing,
though defiant, to abide in Jehovah's presence was for them
intolerable.  Are toil and pain essential to the moral development
of sinners who refuse to confess their crime?  Are toil and pain in
themselves curses or blessings to those who have done wrong?  The
picture in Genesis 3 clearly implies that God's intention was not
that man should suffer but that he should enjoy perfect health and
happiness.  Jehovah's preparation of the coats of skin for the man
and woman is convincing evidence that his love and care continued
unremittingly even for the wrong doers.  Modern psychology is
making it clear that the effect of sin upon the unrepentant sinner
is to increase his inclination toward sinning.  But when a man in
penitence for his sin has turned toward God and changed his
relation to his fellow men, God becomes to him a new Being with a
nearness and intimacy impossible before!  May the Christian believe
that this new sense of nearness and love to God is met by a
corresponding feeling on God's part?  In the light of Christian
experience is there not every reason to believe that God himself
also enters into a new and joyous relationship with the man?  This
thought was evidently in the mind of Jesus when be declared that
there was joy in heaven over one sinner that repented.


VI.

THE EFFECT OF SIN UPON SOCIETY.

Men are often heard to remark that they are willing to bear the
consequences of their sin.  Is it possible for any individual to
experience in himself the entire result of his wrong-doing?  In the
Genesis story the woman's deliberate disobedience would seem to
have had very direct influence upon her husband.  Mankind has
almost universally come to regard certain acts as wrong and to
prescribe definite modes of punishment.  Such decisions have come
about not simply because of the effect of sin upon the individual
but more especially because the sin of the individual affects
society.  State the different influences that deter men from sin
and note those which from your experience seem the strongest.


_Questions for Further Consideration_.

Is an act that is wrong for one man necessarily a sin if committed
by another?  Are men's tendencies to sin due to their inheritance
or to impulses which they share in common with brutes, or to
influences that come from their environment?  In the light of this
discussion formulate your own definition of sin.

Is the final test of sin a man's consciousness of guilt, or the
ultimate effect of his act upon himself, or upon society?

May the woman in the Garden of Eden be regarded as the prototype of
the modern scientist?  Are there ways in which the scientist may
sin in making his investigations?  Illustrate.  How about
vivisection?

Does sin bring moral enlightenment?  Distinguish between Jesus'
attitude toward sin and toward the sinner.  What should be our
attitude toward the sinner?

If the man and woman had frankly confessed their sin, what, by
implication, would have been the effect: first, upon themselves,
and second, upon the attitude and action of God?

Does temptation to sin, as in the case of Adam, often come in the
guise of virtue?  What is the value of confession to the sinner?
To society?


_Subjects for Further Study_.

(1) The Babylonian and Egyptian Idea of Sin.  _Hastings, Dictionary
of the Bible_, extra vol. 566-567; Breasted, _History of Egypt_,
173-175; Jastrow, _Religion of the Babylonians and Assyrians_,
313-327.

(2) Milton's Interpretation of Genesis 3 in Paradise Lost.

(3) The Right and Wrong of the Attempted Surrender of West Point
from the Point of View of Benedict Arnold, Andre and Washington.




STUDY III

THE CRIMINAL AND HIS RELATION TO SOCIETY.

THE STORY OF CAIN.--Gen. 4:1-16.

_Parallel Readings_.

  _Hist. Bible_, Vol. 1, 42-46.
  Jenks, _Prin. of Pol_. 1-16.
  August Drahms, _The Criminal_.

Now in the course of time it came to pass, that Cain brought some
of the fruit of the ground as an offering to Jehovah.  And Abel
also brought some of the firstlings of his flock and of their fat.
And Jehovah looked favorably upon Abel and his offering: but for
Cain and his offering he had no regard.

Therefore, Cain was very angry and his countenance fell.  And
Jehovah said to Cain,

  Why art thou angry?
  And why is thy countenance fallen?
  If thou doest well, is there not acceptance?
  But if thou doest not well,
  Does not sin crouch at the door?
  And to thee shall be its desire,
  But thou shouldst rule over it.

Then Cain said to Abel his brother, Let us go into the field.  And
while they were in the field, Cain rose up against Abel his brother
and slew him.

And when Jehovah said to Cain, Where is Abel thy brother? he said,
I, know not; am I my brother's keeper.--Gen. 4:3-9 (_Hist. Bible_).

And the Scribes and the Pharisees bring a woman taken in adultery;
and having set her in the midst, they say unto Jesus, Teacher, this
woman hath been taken in adultery, in the very act.  Now in the law
Moses commanded us to stone such: what then sayest thou of her?
And this they said trying him, that they might have whereof to
accuse him.  But Jesus stooped down and with his finger wrote on
the ground.  And when they continued asking him, he lifted himself,
and said unto them, He that is without sin among you, let him first
cast a stone at her.  And again he stooped down and with his finger
wrote on the ground.  And they, when they heard it, went out one by
one, beginning from the eldest, even unto the last: and Jesus was
left alone, and the woman, where she was, in the midst.  And Jesus
lifted himself up and said unto her, Woman, where are they?  Did no
man condemn thee?  And she said, No man, Lord.  And Jesus said,
Neither do I condemn thee.  Go thy way; from henceforth sin no
more.--_John 8:3-11_.

Every experiment by multitudes or individuals that has a sensual or
selfish aim will fail.--_Emerson_.

When you meet one of these men or women be to them a Divine man; be
to them thought and virtue; let their timid aspirations find in you
a friend; let their trampled instincts be genially tempted out in
your atmosphere; let their doubts know that you have doubted, and
their wonder feel that you have wondered.--_Emerson_.

But I still have a good heart and believe in myself and fellow men
and the God who made us all.--_Robert Louis Stevenson_.


I.

THE MEANING OF THE STORY OF CAIN.

In Arabia and Palestine to-day, as in the past, a man's prosperity
or misfortune is universally regarded as the evidence of divine
approval or disapproval.  Even Jesus' disciples on seeing a blind
man by the wayside, raised the question: "Did this man sin or his
parents?"  Among the Arabs of the desert the tribal mark, either
tattooing or a distinctive way of cutting the hair, insures the
powerful protection of the tribe.  Each tribesman is under the most
sacred obligation to protect the life of a member of his tribe, or
to avenge, if need be with his own life-blood, every injury done
him.  Without the tribal mark a man becomes an outlaw.  Many
scholars, therefore, think that the mark placed upon Cain was not
primarily a stigma proclaiming his guilt, but rather a token that
protected him from violence at the hands of Jehovah's people and
compelled them to avenge any wrongs that might befall him.

In the light of these facts would it not seem possible that Cain's
character and conduct are the reason why his offering was not
accepted?

What is the meaning and purpose of Jehovah's question, Where is
Abel thy brother?  Is it probable that in the question, Am I my
brother's keeper, the writer intended to assert the responsibility
of society for the acts of its members?  In China where to-day, far
more than in the West, there exists the responsibility of
neighbors, those who fail to exert the proper influence over the
character and conduct of a criminal neighbor often have their
houses razed to the ground and the sites sown with salt.  Is
society responsible for producing criminals?  How far am I
personally responsible for my neighbor's acts?


II.

THE MAKING OF A CRIMINAL.

Paul said, "All men have sinned."  Are all men therefore criminals?
What constitutes a criminal?  Was Cain a criminal before he slew
his brother?  Legally?  Morally?

Was Cain's motive in the worship of God truly religious or merely
mercenary?  This portrait of Cain illustrates the fact that formal
religious worship does not necessarily deter a man from becoming a
criminal.  Sometimes men prominent in religious work become
defaulters or commit other crimes.  Does this story suggest the
fundamental reason why great crimes are sometimes committed by
religious leaders?  The motive rather than the form is clearly the
one thing absolutely essential in religious worship.

