The governing factors under this head are the local land valuation and
tax. The system necessitating a spread eagle policy on the land
question will cost. What could be a more perfect illustration than the
horse railroad system? The motive power of the New York Central
Railroad between New York and Albany could be comfortably stowed in
the barns of some of the New York City street railways. What a
contrast! The real estate, buildings, and fixtures of the Third Ave.
line are valued at $1,524,000, and what buildings! Cattle sheds in the
metropolis of America. Surely they did not cost a tithe of this great
sum. What did? The land, a whole block and more. Henry George
advocates might find food for thought here. All this is true of the
other lines in every city in the Union. Enormous expenditures for
land. A good one half of their capital sunk in purchasing the
necessary room. Go where you will, a good fifty per cent. of the
capital is used for land for their stables. This obviously does not
include equipment.

How is it with mechanical systems? The land is one of the minor
considerations, the last thing considered. Let us look at some
figures. From careful examination of many engine plants, considering
the ratio between a certain number of horses with their necessary
adjuncts and a steam plant of numerically equal power, I find it
stands as 1 to 30. That is, a steam plant complete of 30 horse power
capacity would need only one thirtieth the floor space of thirty
horses. With larger powers this ratio is still greater, and from one
estimate I found that it stood as 1 to 108, i.e., for horses I should
have to have 108 times more floor space than for an equal number of
mechanical horse power. It must be remembered also that the mechanical
horse power is 50 per cent. greater than the best animal horsepower.

From one maker, taking the engine alone, I found that a rated 100
horse power engine, guaranteed in every particular, would have ample
room in the stall for one horse in the average stable. Another
instance showed that I could get a steam plant complete, engine,
boiler, etc., of 50 horse power, in a space 5 by 6 feet, which is
smaller than the average stall. Here is shown the enormous saving in
land purchase.

For car room a building several stories high would answer perfectly,
since quick-hoisting elevators could be put in and the tracks on each
floor have wire connections with the dynamos, so that the cars could
be run across the floor to where you please, facilitating storage and
dispensing with handling. This would not be possible with the cable.

Comparing electricity and cable on this point, all things favor the
former clearly and beyond all question. Furthermore, if locality so
favored, the subject of land purchase for electricity could be tabooed
entirely, since distance can be so readily overcome. Way out in the
suburbs or back in the country by the side of some waterfall, your
station might be, while the current is sent to the great city over
heavy conductors. Here land rent or tax would be at the minimum. With
horses or cable plainly proximity must be had. It is estimated that
the land occupied by the Madison Avenue line of New York City is worth
the cost of 40 miles of ordinary double track.

3d. Equipment at station and rolling stock.

The rolling stock would be in each case approximately the same.
Consisting of cars of equal seating capacity, the difference of cost
would be the necessary attachments for the mechanical systems.

  A first class 16 foot horse car costs $1,200;
  A first class 16 foot cable car costs about $1,800; and
  A first class 16 foot electric car costs about $2,200.
  Rates: Electricity, 1; horse, 0.54; cable, 0.81.

I believe, however, that the mechanical system is bound to work
material changes in car construction, in fact it is almost imperative.
In all probability a car with 15 to 20 per cent. greater seating
capacity than the horse car can be constructed on a different plan for
the price given for the electric car. This price, it must be noted, is
the one for attachment of motor to the present horse car. The horse
cars produced to-day are most carefully planned, thoroughly built, and
admirably adapted to their service, but the inexorable law of progress
decrees their extinction, for something better.

Motive power. To represent clearly the costs, etc., of the three
systems under this head, let us assume a road. Take, if you please, a
double line 6 miles long, and operating 24 cars with speed of 6 miles
an hour, and running 20 hours out of 24. This would call for 48 horses
on the track and 192 horses in the stables, or a total of 240 horses;
at $160, counting harness, etc., this would cost $38,400.

With electricity we will proceed as follows: The weight of car with 30
passengers and motor attachments would be about 9,000 lb. It is easily
calculated that to propel the same at the specified rate on a level
would take about 1.75 horse power, a total of 42 horse power. To make
allowances for grades we can calculate that, if the entire road was
one gradient of three per cent., each car would take about 6.4 horse
power, or since only 12 are going up, a total of 76.8 horse power. It
will be fair now to take the average of these two, or 59.4 horse power
for an average road. Allowing 35 per cent. loss from engine to work
done in actually propelling car, we would have to have 91.3 horse
power. Allowing a good safety factor, it would be well to put in a 150
horse power plant. This would cost complete $7,000; necessary dynamos,
$3,500. Among these figures should be counted cost of conductor of
sufficient size to allow of but three per cent. in energy to overcome
its resistance. This I have calculated using a potential of 600 volts;
and find that the total cost of six miles copper conductor is $16,000
with above conditions. The total cost is now seen to be $26,500.

As to cables, since the recovery of energy available for tractive
purposes is but 35 percent., then the engine of 169 horse power
represents what must be had. Allowing a generous factor of safety, let
us say that a 250 is all sufficient. This would cost complete and
erected about $12,000. The cable would cost $15.000, and gears, etc.,
$8,000, making a total of $35,000.

The ratio of the three systems stands: Electricity, 1; cable, 1.09;
horse, 1.45.

4th. Construction of tramway.

Figures upon this point must necessarily be either averages or
approximations. The nature of the locality socially, naturally, and we
grieve to say it, politically, has a strong influence upon its
construction. Estimating on single track only, a horse road would cost
as an average $9,000 per mile. With electricity we have several
methods we can avail ourselves of: Surface, costing about $10,000;
overhead double conductor, $15.696; underground, $23,500.

With cable but one method, the underground, is possible. This cost is
variously estimated at from $30,000 to $110,000 per mile; however, the
latter figure is excessive. A fair average would be $35,000.

The ratio of constructions could be fairly placed as follows, putting
electricity as 1, by taking the average of the three methods at
$16,732: Horse road, 0.53; cable, 2.09.

Unquestionably a great majority of roads of the past have not been
constructions of engineering, and of all places requiring care, skill,
and engineering, the street roads are the places.

5th. Cost of operation.

A fair figure for cost of one horse for one year is $220.

For electricity, allowing 35 per cent. loss in transmission, etc.,
1.54 horsepower would be the work done by engine to get 1 horse power
on the track. There are to-day plenty of steam plants producing 1
horse power for work at from $30 to $50 per annum. Take the average,
$40. With electricity then $65 would well represent the price of
producing 1.54 horsepower.

With cable these figures would hold true, but more work is required. A
greater loss is entailed. Since but 32 per cent. is recovered, the
figure for 1 horse power on the track would be 2.86 horse power. At
the above rates this would be $110 per horse power per year.

Our ratio here is: Electricity, 1; cables, 1.71; horses, 3.38.

This is by no means the whole of the story, for just here must we
compute the depreciation and hence repairs due to time. Let us take
the road figured on heretofore, and make three tables.

In the following I have under each system taken the estimated costs,
allowed a fair per cent. for depreciation, summed up and obtained the
ratios.

Any figure then like interest, etc., which would not affect ratios, I
have omitted.

    ELECTRICITY.

  Conductors, 1 per cent.                  $160.00
  Engine and dynamos, 5 per cent.           525.00
  Cars, 10 per cent.                      5,280.00
  Roadway, 10 per cent.                   2,007.00
                                       -----------
  Total.                                 $7,972.00

    HORSES.

  Horses and appurtenances, 20 per cent. $7,780.00
  Cars, 10 per cent.                      2,880.00
  Roadway, etc., 10 per cent.             3,500.00
                                        -----------
  Total.                                $11,740.00

    CABLES.

  Cable, 50 per cent.                    $7,500.00
  Engine and boiler, etc., 5 per cent.    1,000.00
  Cars, 10 per cent.                      4,320.00
  Roadway, 10 per cent.                   3,500.00
                                       ------------
  Total.                                $16,320.00

These totals put in ratio are as follows: Electricity, 1; cable, 2.04;
and horses, 1.47.

Placing all the ratios obtained in a table, we have the following:

                       Electricity.   Horses.   Cables.
  Depreciation.             1           1.47     2.04
  Operating expenses.       1           3.38     1.71
  Construction of tramway.  1           0.53     2.09
  Motors, cars, etc.        1           1.63     1.21
  Cars.                     1           0.54     0.81
                           ---          ----     ----
  Totals.                   5           7.55     7.86
  Average.                  1           1.51     1.57

Now this table must stand by itself for what it represents, and no
more. It will be noted that I have not introduced the subject of men.
This would unquestionably show favorably for both electricity and
cable. Again, note, please, that this table does not represent your
profits exactly as per ratios. I have to get them operated the same
number of cars and under the same headway. Now with either electricity
or cable a higher rate of speed can be maintained with but a very
small proportionate increase of cost. This means quicker time, more
trips, and greater receipts.

Evidently, as a financial investment, even if cost of maintenance and
operating is greater, the cable is to be preferred to horses.

How is it with electricity? The ratios of expenses, etc., stand for
themselves, the law of speed is far simpler than with cable, bringing
even greater receipts, and again in practice the saving of coal in
proportion to work done on track day or night is immensely more
economical than with the cable. This point will be touched upon later.

6th. Individual characteristics and advantages.

Under this head a few of the salient features of each system will be
mentioned. As the possibilities and limitations of the horse railroad
system are, however, so well known, it is needless to go over them. I
therefore will confine myself to the electric and cable systems.

With electricity single track lines, crooked streets, all descriptions
of turnouts, crossings, branches, etc., are as easy to construct and
operate as with horses. With the cable system they are either
impossible or enormously expensive.

With electricity the line is not a unit, so that the complete stoppage
of the whole line is absolutely impossible. With cable it is a unit
and it is possible.

With electricity the life of the conductor is infinite; with cable,
two years.

With electricity, and the improvements now being made in traction
wheels, etc., the heaviest grades are as easily surmounted as with the
cable; although it is true that for grades exceptional in character,
such as 20 per cent. grades or over, I should be willing to give the
contract to cable.

With electricity any speed can be attained by the individual cars.
They are absolutely independent. Lost time can be made up, etc. With
cable the cars are dependent upon speed of cable. Lost time cannot be
made up except on down grades.

With electricity work done by engine is synchronous with work done on
the track at any time of the day or night, with the loss of 35 per
cent. due to the conversions in each case. In other words, for every
horse power of useful work done on track the engine does 1.54 horse
power. This ratio is constant. It makes no difference whether 1 or 100
horse power of work is necessary on the track, the engine has but to
do 35 per cent. in excess.

With cable, if 1 horse power of work is all that is required on the
track, the engine may be doing 25 horse power to get that amount there
through the gears and cable. With heavier loads this is somewhat
diminished, but about the very best figure that can be put forth is
but 35 per cent. recovery, with 65 per cent. loss--the exact converse
of electricity under heavy loads.--_Street Railway Journal._

       *       *       *       *       *




ELECTRICAL ALARM FOR PHARMACIES.


[Illustration: FIG. 1.]

To avoid the errors which sometimes occur in a pharmacy or in a
laboratory, where one bottle is taken for another, especially in the
case of those containing highly poisonous or dangerous substances, a
simple arrangement, shown in the cuts, has been proposed. The
apparatus, in principle, is a species of electrical alarm, in circuit
with an ordinary house telegraph line. It consists essentially, as
shown in Fig. 1, of a battery, bell, and pedestal, provided with an
electric contact on which the flask rests. Fig. 2 shows this contact
or break piece. On a series of pedestals thus arranged and
intercalated in the same circuit the flasks containing poisonous or
dangerous substances, whose inadvertent handling might cause trouble,
are placed. In removing one of these flasks the circuit is closed, and
the electric bell notifies the pharmacist of the danger attendant on
the use of the substances contained in the flask referred to, thus
guarding against the errors due to carelessness, and quite too
frequent, especially in pharmacies.--_Chronica Cientifica._

[Illustration: FIG. 2.]

       *       *       *       *       *




APPARATUS FOR DETERMINING MECHANICALLY THE REACTION PERIOD OF
HEARING.


The following apparatus, constructed after the designs of Dr. Loeb,
assistant in the Physiological Institute at Wurzburg, is for the
purpose of measuring the reaction period of hearing, that is, the
period which elapses between the time when a sound wave affects the
auditory nerve and is thence transferred to the brain, then affecting
the consciousness, and the moment when the motor nerves can be thrown
into action by the will. It is, therefore, necessary to fix both
instants--when the sound is produced and when the observer has, from
its warning, received the impulse so as to press down a key. The great
advantage of this instrument over others adapted for the same end
consists in this, that the determination in its essentials is effected
entirely by mechanism, and, therefore, the graphic results attained by
it are free from all sources of error, which errors other methods
always introduce to a greater or less extent. Thus its results are
quite unexceptionable.

[Illustration: REACTION PERIOD OF HEARING.]

The apparatus shown in the cut rests on three feet, two of them
consisting of strong screws, so that by aid of the circular level,
_l_, on the base plate, it can be adjusted perfectly level. On a
little shelf attached to a square rod, seen on the left of the
instrument, rising from the base plate, and near its top, is a
horizontal tube, through which, by a bulb not shown in the cut, a
blast of air can be blown. In front of the other opening of the tube
is a horizontal fork of ebonite, whose arms carry on the side opposite
the tube a metallic ball. Through the arms of the fork pass the wires
of the circuit of an electric battery. These terminate in two rounded
ends, which, when the arms approach each other, are touched by the
metallic ball, so that the latter also closes the metallic circuit. By
the blast of air a wooden wedge contained in the tube is driven
between the arms of the fork, the ball falls from them, and the
electric stream is cut off. The ball drops upon the inclined metallic
plate, _p_, bounces off it, and is received in a little sack, S. When
the observer hears the ball strike the plate, he presses on the key,
_t_, and the interval between the two instants, namely, the falling of
the ball upon the plate and the pressing of the key, _t_, is what is
to be mechanically fixed and measured.

The electric current, which is closed by the ball as long as it lies
on the jaws of the fork, flows around the arms of the electro-magnet,
_m_, which continually attracts an armature fastened to a lever arm,
and coming over the poles of the magnet. If the circuit is broken by
the fall of the ball, the armature at once rises upward. By this a
spring contained in the tube, _g_, and hitherto kept compressed, is
released, which gives a shock to the right angled frame, _a a_,
containing a blackened or smoked plate of glass, so that, following
the wire, _b_, acting as a guide, the plate flies from left to right
of the apparatus. To prevent the plate from recoiling, a catch, _d_,
is fastened to the side bar, _c_. Furthermore, lest the friction of
the wire, _b_, in the guiding apertures of the frame should impair its
velocity as it moves from left to right, it is connected with a weight
pan by a cord passing over the pulley, _g_, which is so loaded that by
the added velocity with which it strives to fall, the retardation
already alluded to is overcome, so that the frame moves from left to
right with even speed.

In front of the frame, _a a_, is the tuning fork, _f_, which as
estimated makes 184 vibrations in a second. By the stylus, _y_, on the
upper limb of the fork these oscillations are marked upon the sliding
plate of glass as a wave line. Lest, after the first impulses of the
fork have been registered, they should soon die away, in front of it
is an electro-magnet, H, whose pole-faces near the arms of the tuning
fork pass over them. The latter, to be more strongly affected by the
magnet, are provided with faces of soft iron. To the lower face of the
lower arm of the fork a small sharp stylus is fastened, which, with
each beat of the fork, comes into contact with the mercury in the
little cup, _n_, or a spring used instead of it. This closes an
electric circuit, which passes around the magnet, thence going through
the tuning fork by the binding screw, _k_, and thence by connections
not shown in the cut back to the battery. In consequence of the
magnetism thus excited, the arms of the tuning fork are attracted by
the poles of the magnet, and forced to beat with increased amplitude.
In a short time a constant amplitude of oscillation is reached, when
the magnetic impulses are of equal influence with the atmospheric
resistance and the internal force of the tuning fork restraining its
movements.

Finally, the stylus, _s_, which touches the glass plate directly above
_y_, is for registering the moments when by the falling ball the sound
is produced and when the observer presses the key. This is brought
about by the rod, _i_, to which _s_ is firmly screwed, being jerked
upward a short distance at each of these instants, so that the
horizontal lines which the stylus, _s_, marks upon the screen passing
in front of it are broken at both places.

The mechanism which jerks the rod, _i_, upward is thus arranged: The
inclined plate, _p_, on which the ball drops, is carried by the upper
horizontal arm of an angular lever turning on the axis, _x_, and
counterpoised by the balancing weight, _x'_. By the falling ball this
arm is pressed downward, and the lower horizontal arm, _w_, of the
lever is also moved. On a second horizontal axis the lever, _v_,
partly concealed, moves, restricted as to its length of swing by the
screws, _n_. As long as the concealed arm is not moved, _v_ is lightly
pressed by the small spring, _e_, against _w_. The projection, _z_, at
the upper end of _v_ holds the rod, _i_, which the strong spring, _h_,
is continually pressing upward. When the ball falls upon the plate,
_p_, the arm, _w_, presses against the lower end of _v_, the
projection, _z_, sets free the rod, and it springs upward. This
movement is soon arrested, as the projection, _z'_, engages with a
stud situated on the right side of the rod, _i_. This projection is
situated on the vertical arm of an angular lever whose other arm is
the key, _t_. When the observer presses the key, the rod, _i_, again
is jerked upward by the spring, _h_. The screw, _o_, tapped into the
rod, _i_, prevents the rod going higher than necessary, by striking a
plate, which also serves as guide for _i_.

To determine the interval between the falling of the ball and pressing
of the key, one has finally to count the waves inscribed by the tuning
fork, which come under the portion of the line inscribed by _s_, which
is bounded by the two breaks produced by the successive movements of
the rod.

To make the glass plate carried by the frame available for more
observations, which plate can be used as a photographic negative, the
frame, T, is adjustable up and down upon the pillars, N. This frame
carries the tuning fork, mercury cup, _n_, and the electro-magnet, M.
The spring, _s_, can also be moved up and down along the rod, i.--_H.
Heele in Zeitschrift fur Instrumentenkunde._

       *       *       *       *       *




A NEW DISINFECTOR.


The accompanying engravings represent a new disinfecting apparatus
invented by Mr. W.E. Thursfield, M. Inst. C.E., of Victorgasse,
Vienna. The principle on which its action is based is that the
complete destruction of all germs in wearing apparel and bedding,
without any material injury whatever to the latter, is only to be
obtained by subjecting the articles infected, for a period
proportionate to their structural resistance, to a moist heat of at
least 212 deg. Fah. Recent experiences in Berlin have shown that, for
security's sake, a temperature of 220 deg. is better. To insure the
thorough penetration of this temperature in every fiber, a heat of
from 260 deg. to 270 deg. must be maintained in the disinfecting
chamber itself. To obtain this by means of ordinary or superheated
steam involves the employment of boilers working under a pressure of
21/2 to 3 atmospheres, of disinfecting chambers capable of resisting an
equal tension, and of skilled labor in attending to the same; in other
words, a large initial outlay and correspondingly heavy working
expenses in fuel and wages.

[Illustration: Fig. I and II THE AERO-STEAM DISINFECTOR.]

The disinfecting apparatus, illustrated in a portable and stationary
form, of the dimensions adopted by the sanitary authorities of Vienna,
Budapest, Prague, Lemberg, Teplitz, etc., and by the Imperial and
Royal Theresianum Institute, and sanctioned for use in barracks,
military hospitals, etc., by the Austrian Ministry of War, and for
ambulance hospitals by the Red Cross, acts by means of a mixture of
steam and hot air in such proportion that the steam, after expending
its mechanical energy in inducting the hot air into the disinfecting
chamber, is, by contact with the clothes or bedding of a lower
temperature, not only condensed, but by condensation completely
neutralizes the risk of injury through any chance excess of hot air.
The boiler being practically open is inexplosive, and requires neither
safety valves nor skilled attendance.
