together might be of opinions diametrically opposed.

Harvey and Harold were introduced to visitors simply as friends from New
York, and, although the suspicions as to their character and position
might be strong, no one thought of asking questions.

"I do not like that fellow Chermside," Harvey said one night, as he and
his friend were returning to their quarters.

They were mounted; for, although when on duty the scouts worked on foot,
many of them, who were men of property, kept horses which they used when
not engaged. Harvey had two horses, and one of these was always at
Harold's service.

"I am not surprised you don't like him," Harold replied with a laugh,
"and I imagine the dislike is mutual. When two gentlemen are paying
attentions to one young lady they seldom appreciate each other's merits
very cordially."

"I don't think it is entirely that," Harvey laughed. "Isabella and I
understand each other, and I have no fear of his rivalry; but I do not
like him."

"I do not think I like him myself," Harold said more seriously; "and yet
I do not know why I should not. When he has been there alone with us and
the family, he has frequently used expressions showing his strong
leaning toward the loyalists' side."

"I don't put much faith in that," Harvey said. "He knows how strongly
Mr. Jackson and the girls lean toward the Crown, and would say anything
that he thought would please Isabelle. I have spoken to her and she
thinks that he is sincere; in fact, she has rather a good opinion of
him. However, we shall see. It was rather curious that that party of
Morgan's cavalry should have ridden up the other night and searched the
house two hours after we left. You see, we had agreed to sleep there
that night, and only changed our minds after the others had all left,
when we remembered that we were both for duty early next morning. It
might have been a coincidence, of course, but it had an ugly look. I
think Mr. Jackson thought so, too, for he did not ask us to stop
to-night; anyhow, I wish Chermside's plantation was not so near this and
that he did not drop in so often."

A week later they paid another visit. When dinner was over Harold
was chatting with Mr. and Mrs. Jackson. Harvey was sitting at the
piano, where the eldest girl was playing, and the younger was
looking out of window.

"We are going to have another fall of snow," she said. "There is not a
star to be seen. Oh!" she exclaimed suddenly.

"What is it, my dear?" Mr. Jackson asked.

"There is a rocket gone up from the woods."

"A rocket!" Mr. Jackson repeated.

"Yes, papa; there are the stars falling now."

"That is a curious thing," Mr. Jackson said, while the others went
to the window. They stood watching for some minutes, but nothing
was to be seen.

"I do not like that rocket," Mr. Jackson said as they left the window.
"It means something. It can only be a signal. People don't let off
rockets for amusement nowadays. Did you meet anyone on the road?"

"No, sir," Harvey said, "not a soul."

"I do not like it," their host repeated. "It means mischief of some sort
or other. I do not wish to seem inhospitable, but my advice to you is,
get on your horses at once and ride to your quarters. You are on duty
to-morrow, and you told me you would pass near here on your way toward
the enemy's lines. You might look in as you go past and hear whether
anything came of it. If I mistake not, we shall have another visit from
Morgan's horse this evening."

Much against their inclination the young men followed Mr.
Jackson's advice.

The next day they, with Peter and Jake, stopped at the house as
they passed.

"I was right," their host said, as the two young men entered. "An hour
after you left twenty of Morgan's horse rode up here. They would not
take my word that we were alone, but searched the house from top to
bottom, and were evidently greatly disappointed at finding no one. I
have been making inquiries this morning and find that all the servants
were in the house at the time my daughter saw the rocket, so I hope that
I have no traitor here. Still, it is clear that someone must be keeping
watch over your movements."

"Have you asked, sir," Harvey said, after a pause, "whether anyone came
after we had arrived?"

"I do not see how anyone could come, but I will ask."

He rang the bell and a negro servant appeared.

"Did anyone come to the house yesterday, Caesar, after these gentleman
came--any beggar or peddler, or anyone of that sort?"

"No, sir; no one came except Massa Chermside. He get off his horse and
ask if you, hab any visitors. I said that Massa Harvey and Massa Wilson
were here. He say he call again another night when the family alone, and
rode off."

"Just what I expected, sir," Harvey said, when the servant left the
room. "I have always doubted that fellow's honesty."

"Oh, nonsense!" Mr. Jackson replied. "You must be mad, Harvey.
Chermside's father was an old friend of mine, and I have known the young
fellow since he was a child. I should as soon suspect one of my own
daughters of being capable of such an act of gross treachery as laying a
plot to bring the American cavalry down upon guests of mine. The idea is
preposterous. Bless me, how amused the girls will be at your suspecting
their old playfellow!"

"I hope I may be mistaken, sir," Harvey said, "but Harold's opinion of
him agrees with mine; and, in talking it over last night, we both put
our finger on him as the man who fired the rocket. Well, now, we must be
pushing on. We are bound for the ford where Morgan's horse must have
come over, and shall hear from our fellows there whether they rode
straight here after crossing, as, if so, there can be no doubt whatever
that the rocket was a signal."

Upon arriving at the ford they found that Morgan's horse had only
crossed an hour before the time at which they arrived at Mr. Jackson's.
One of the scouts had instantly taken word to the nearest cavalry
outpost, but the enemy had recrossed the river before these had arrived
on the spot.

After three days on duty at the front, the party returned to their
lines, and the next time that the young men rode out to their friends
they took with them Jake and Peter, to whom they related the
circumstances.

The scouts proceeded on foot and separated from the others a mile before
reaching the house, having arranged that Peter should scout round it,
while Jake should proceed to the plantation of Mr. Chermside and keep a
sharp lookout there.

They had arranged with Mr. Jackson that no mention of the rocket should
be made to anyone, however intimate with the family.

"I am glad to see you again," the host said, as they entered the room
where the family were assembled, "although I own that these two raids of
Morgan's horse have made me uneasy. The girls have been immensely amused
at your suspicions of young Chermside."

"How could you think such a thing?" Isabelle said. "He was here on the
following evening, and was as indignant as we were at the thought of
treachery being at work. He quite agreed with us that the coming of the
Yankees could hardly have been accidental."

"You said nothing about the rocket, I hope?" Harvey asked.

"No, we kept quite silent about that, as you made such a point of it;
but it seemed ridiculous with him. But I shall be in a fright, now,
every time you come."

"We have brought two of our men with us," Harvey said, "and they are
scouting round, so we shall hear if another rocket goes up; and, even if
the person who let it up suspects that the last was seen,--as he might
do from our having left so suddenly,--and tries some other plan to warn
the enemy, we can trust our men to fire a shot and so give us warning in
time. We have told the groom not to take the saddles off the horses, as
we may stop but a short time."

At eight o'clock a disturbance was heard outside, and Jake entered the
room, dragging with him by main force the young planter.

"What is the meaning of this?" Mr. Jackson asked, as they rose from
their seats in surprise.

"Me tell you, sar," Jake answered. "Me had orders from Massa Harold to
watch outside ob de house ob dis feller and see what going on dere.
About half an hour after me got dere a nigger come along running from
dis direction. Dat no business of Jake's, so he stood in de trees and
let him pass. He go into de house; five minutes afterward dis feller he
come out and he walk away. Jake follow him bery quiet to see what him
after. He walk more dan a mile, den he get on to de oder side of dat big
hill; den me see him stop, and Jake tink it time to interfere, so he ran
up and catch him. He had put dis ting against a stump of a tree, and had
him pistol in him hand, and was on de point of firing it close to dis
ting, so as to light him."

As Jake spoke he held out a rocket. Several times while Jake had been
speaking the planter had tried to interrupt him, but each time Jake, who
had not released his hold of him, gave him so violent a shake that he
was fain to be silent.

"This is a scandalous indignity," he exclaimed furiously when Jake
finished. "What do you mean, sir," he demanded of Harvey, "by setting
this nigger to watch my abode? I will have satisfaction for this
treatment."

"It seems, sir," Mr. Jackson said, signing to Harvey to be silent,
"that you have been detected in a gross act of treachery. My friends
have suspected you of it, but I indignantly denied it. Could we
believe, I and my family, that you, whom we have known as a child,
would betray our guests to the Americans? Loyalists and republicans are
alike welcome here. I do not ask my friends their opinions. My house is
neutral ground, and I did not think that anyone who used it would have
had the treachery to turn it into a trap; still less did I imagine you
would do so. These gentlemen would be perfectly within their right did
they take you out and hang you from the nearest tree; but, for my sake,
I trust that they will not do so; but should the American cavalry ever
again visit this house under circumstances which may lead it to be
supposed that they have been brought here to capture my guests, I shall
let them punish you as you deserve. No word of mine will be raised in
your favor. Now, sir, go, and never again enter this house, where the
loathing and contempt that I feel for you will, I know, be shared by
the ladies of my family."

At a nod from Harold Jake released his hold of the captive, who, without
a word, turned and left the room.

Not a word was spoken for a minute or two after he had left. The
youngest girl was the first to speak.

"The wretch!" she exclaimed. "To think that Herbert Chermside should
turn out such a mean traitor! Papa, I would have let them hang him at
once. It would have served him right. Now he may do us all harm."

"I do not know that you are not right, Ada," Mr. Jackson replied
gravely. "I am far from saying that I acted wisely. Young Chermside has
many friends among the Americans, and it is possible that he may work us
harm. However, my position as a neutral is well established. Officers on
both sides have at times been welcomed here, and his report, therefore,
that our friends here are often with us can do us no harm. Henceforth he
must be regarded as an enemy, and there will always be danger in these
visits. So long as the American outposts are within an hour's ride he
can have the road watched; and, although he is not likely to venture
upon signaling with rockets, he may send or take word on horseback. A
bonfire, too, might be lit at the other side of the hill to call them
over. Altogether you will never be safe from home except when you have a
strong body of your own troops between this and the river."

"I am glad to say," Harvey said, "that in consequence of the news of
Morgan's raids on this side a body of 200 infantry and a troop of
cavalry are to move to-morrow and take up their position by the ford, so
we shall be safe from any surprise from that direction."

"I am very glad to hear it," Mr. Jackson said. "It will relieve me of a
great anxiety. But pray be watchful when you are in this neighborhood.
You have made a bitter enemy, and, after what he has proved himself
capable of, we cannot doubt that he would hesitate at nothing. I
understand," he went on with a smile toward his eldest daughter, "what
is at the bottom of his conduct, and, as I have long suspected his hopes
in that quarter, I am not surprised that he is somewhat hostile to you.
Still, I never for a moment deemed him capable of this."

The next day Mr. Jackson learned that his neighbor had left his
plantation, and had told his servants that he was not likely to return
for some time.

Shortly after this a series of bad luck attended the doings of the
British scouts. Several parties were killed or captured by the enemy,
and they were constantly baffled by false reports, while the Americans
appeared to forestall all their movements. It was only when enterprises
were set on foot and carried out by small bodies that they were ever
successful, anything like combined action by the orders of the officers
constantly turning out ill.

"There must be a traitor somewhere," Peter said upon the return of a
party from an attempt which, although it promised well, had been
frustrated, to carry off a number of cattle from one of the American
depots. "It aint possible that this can be all sheer bad luck. It aint
no one in our company, I'll be bound. We aint had any new recruits
lately, and there aint a man among us whom I could not answer for. There
must be a black sheep in Gregory's or Vincent's corps. The enemy seem up
to every move, and, between us, we have lost more than thirty men in the
last few weeks. There aint no doubt about it--there's a traitor
somewhere and he must be a clever one, and he must have pals with him,
or he couldn't send news of what we are doing so quickly. It beats me
altogether, and the men are all furious."

"I've been talking with some of our men," Peter said a few days
afterward, "and we agree that we are bound to get to the bottom of this
matter. We're sartin sure that the traitor don't belong to us. What we
propose is this, that the hull of us shall go up together, without
saying a word to a soul, and scatter ourselves along the river at all
the points where a chap going with a message to the enemy would be
likely to cross. The night we go out we'll get the three captains all to
give orders to their men for an expedition, so that whoever it is that
sends messages from here would be sure to send over word to the Yankees;
and it'll be hard if we don't ketch him. What do you say?"

"I think the plan is a very good one," Harold answered. "If you like, I
will go with my father and ask Gregory and Vincent to send their men."

Captain Wilson at once went to these officers. They were as much
irritated and puzzled as were their men by the failures which had taken
place, and agreed that, next evening, an order should be issued for the
men of the three corps to act in combination, and to allow it to leak
out that they intended to surprise an American post situated near the
river, twenty-one miles distant. Captain Wilson's scouts, instead of
going with the others, were to act on their own account.

On the day arranged, as soon as it became dark, the forty scouts quietly
left their quarters in small parties and made their way toward the
river, striking it at the point where a messenger would be likely to
cross upon his way to give warning to the American post of the attack
intended to be made upon it. They took post along the river, at a
distance of fifty or sixty yards apart, and silently awaited the result.
Several hours passed and no sound broke the stillness of the woods. An
hour before dawn Peter Lambton heard a slight crack, as that of a
breaking twig. It was some distance back in the woods, but it seemed to
him, by the direction, that the man who caused it would strike the river
between himself and Jake, who was stationed next to him. He noiselessly
stole along toward the point. Another slight sound afforded him a sure
indication of the direction in which the man, whoever he might be, was
approaching. He hastened his steps, and a minute later a negro issued
from the wood close to him. He stood for an instant on the river bank
and was about to plunge in, when Peter threw his arms around him.

Although taken by surprise, the negro struggled desperately and would
have freed himself from the grip of the old scout had not Jake run up
instantly to his comrade's assistance. In a minute the negro was bound
and two shots were then fired, the concerted signal by which it would be
known along the line that a capture had been effected. In a few minutes
the whole body was assembled. The negro, who refused to answer any
questions, was carried far back into the woods and a fire was lighted.

"Now, nigger," Peter said, taking, as captor, the lead in the matter,
"jest tell us right away where you was going and who sent you."

The negro was silent.

"Now, look ye here, darky, you're in the hands of men who are no
jokers. Ef you tell us at once who put ye on to this trick no harm will
happen to you; but ef ye don't we'll jest burn the skin off your body,
bit by bit."

Still the negro was silent.

"Half a dozen of yez," Peter said, "as have got iron ramrods shove them
into the fire. We'll soon find this nigger's tongue."

Not a word was spoken until the ramrods were heated red-hot.

"Now," Peter said, "two of yez clap your ramrods against this
darky's flanks."

The negro struggled as the men approached him, and gave a terrific yell
as the hot iron was applied to his sides.

"I will tell you, sars--oh! have mercy upon me and I will tell you
eberything!"

"I thought," Peter said grimly, "that you'd find a tongue soon enough.
Now, then, who sent you?"

"My massa," the negro answered.

"And who is your master?"

The negro was again silent, but as, at a nod from Peter, the men again
raised the ramrods, he blurted out:

"Massa Chermside."

The name was known to many of the scouts, and a cry of anger broke
from them.

"I thought as much," Harvey said. "I suspected that scoundrel was at the
bottom of it all along. Where is he?" he asked the negro.

"Me not know, sar."

"You mean you won't say," Peter said. "Try the vartue of them
ramrods again."

"No, no!" the negro screamed. "Me swear me do not know where him be. You
may burn me to death if you will, but I could not tell you."

"I think he is speaking the truth," Harvey said. "Wait a minute. Have
you done this before?" he asked the negro.

"Yes, sar. Eight or ten times me swim de river at night."

"With messages to the Americans?"

"Yes, sar; messages to American officers."

"Have you any written message--any letter?"

"No, sar, me never take no letter. Me only carry dis." And he took out
from his hair a tiny ball of paper smaller than a pea.
