four separate states.  The government consisted of a senate, composed
of the rulers of the four states or clans of the tribe.  Tlascala was
completely hemmed in by provinces of the Aztec Empire, with which it
was always in a state of constant and bitter warfare.  The inhabitants
had no access to the sea, consequently they had never enjoyed the use
of salt.  They had no access to the lowlands, so they were without
cotton, a fabric then universally used throughout the country.  They
had no trade or commerce.  They were completely shut in and eternal
vigilance was the price of their liberty.  They lacked the arts, the
grace, and the refinement of the Mexicans, but they were as hardy, as
bold, as skilful in the use of arms, and as determined, as well as
cruel, as the Aztecs.  Neither Montezuma nor his predecessors with the
power of millions had been able to make them acknowledge any
sovereignty but their own.  They were protected by the mountain ranges
and here and there they had built high walls across the valley.
Tlascala was a large and imposing city.  Cortes thus describes it:

"This city is so extensive and so well worthy of admiration, that
although I omit much that I could {139} say of it, I feel assured that
the little I shall say will be scarcely credited, for it is larger than
Granada, and much stronger, and contains as many fine houses and a much
larger population than that city did at the time of its capture; and it
is much better supplied with the products of the earth, such as corn,
and with fowls and game, fish from the rivers, various kinds of
vegetables, and other exellent articles of food.  There is in this city
a market, in which every day thirty thousand people are engaged in
buying and selling, besides many other merchants who are scattered
about the city.  The market contains a great variety of articles both
of food and clothing, and all kinds of shoes for the feet; jewels of
gold and silver, and precious stones, and ornaments of feathers, all as
well arranged as they can possibly be found in any public squares or
markets in the world.  There is much earthenware of every style and a
good quality, equal to the best Spanish manufacture.  Wood, coal,
edible and medicinal plants, are sold in great quantities.  There are
houses where they wash and shave the head as barbers, and also for
baths.  Finally, there is found among them a well-regulated police; the
people are rational and well disposed, and altogether greatly superior
to the most civilized African nations.  The country abounds in level
and beautiful valleys all tilled and sown, without any part lying
unimproved.  In its constitution of government that has existed until
the present time, it resembles the states of Venice, Genoa and Pisa;
since the supreme authority is not reposed in one person.  There are
many nobles, all of whom reside in the city; the common people are
laborers and the vassals of the nobility, but each one possesses land
of his own, some more than others.  In war all unite and have a voice
in its management {140} and direction.  It may be supposed that they
have tribunals of justice for the punishment of the guilty; since when
one of the natives of the province stole some gold of a Spaniard, and I
mentioned the circumstance to Magiscacin, the most powerful of the
nobility, they made search for the thief, and traced him to a city in
the neighborhood called Churultecal (Cholula) from whence they brought
him prisoner, and delivered him to me with the gold, saying that I must
have him punished.  I acknowledged in suitable terms the pains they had
taken in the matter, but remarked to them that since the prisoner was
in their country, they should punish him according to their custom, and
that I chose not to interfere with the punishment of their people while
I remained among them.  They thanked me and, taking the man, carried
him to the great market, a town crier making public proclamations of
his offense; they then placed him at the base of a structure resembling
a theatre, which stands in the midst of the market-place, while the
crier went to the top of the building, and with a loud voice again
proclaimed his offense; whereupon the people beat him with sticks until
he was dead.  We likewise saw many persons in prison who were said to
be confined for theft and other offenses they had committed.  There are
in this province, according to the report made by my order, five
hundred thousand inhabitants, besides those in another smaller province
adjacent to this, called Guazincango, who live in the manner, not
subject to any native sovereign and are not less the vassals of Your
Highness than the people of Tlascala."

Montezuma gave another reason for permitting the Tlascalans their
liberty and independence.  He said that he was allowing them to
maintain their existence {141} and remain a republic because everything
else in the vicinity had been conquered; and as there was no field for
the young warriors of the Aztec nation to obtain that military training
which it was always best to learn by actual experience, he kept
Tlascala in a state of enmity because it furnished him a place where he
could get the human beings for sacrifices to his gods that he required
and at the same time train his young soldiery.  In other words,
Tlascala was regarded as a sort of game preserve from a religious point
of view.  Doubtless, Tlascala did not acknowledge the justice, the
propriety and the correctness of this attitude of scorn and contempt on
the part of the Aztecs.  The other tribes of Mexico bore the yoke
uneasily, and cherished resentment, but even the enmity between the
Jews and the Samaritans was not more bitter than the enmity between the
Tlascalans and the people of the city of Anahuac.

When Cortes drew near Tlascala, the senate debated what course it
should pursue toward him.  One of the four regents, so called, of the
republic was a man of great age, feeble and blind, but resolute of
spirit.  His name was Xicotencatl.  He was all for war.  He was opposed
by a young man named Maxixcatzin.  The debate between the two and the
other participants was long and furious.  Finally the desire of
Xicotencatl prevailed in a modified form.  There was a tribe occupying
part of the Tlascalan territory and under Tlascalan rule called
Otumies.  It was decided to cause the Otumies to attack Cortes and his
force.  If Cortes was annihilated, the problem would be solved.  If the
Otumies were defeated their action would be disavowed by the Tlascalans
and no harm would be done to anybody but the unfortunate {142} Otumies,
for whom no one in Tlascala felt any great concern.

The Otumies were placed in the front of the battle, but the Tlascalans
themselves followed under the command of another Xicotencatl, son of
the old regent, who was a tried and brilliant soldier.  The battles
along the coast had been more like massacres, but this was a real
fight, and a number of Spaniards were killed, three horses also, more
valuable than the men, were despatched, and at the close of the
engagement the Spaniards had lost about fifty, a serious diminution of
the forces of Cortes, but the unfortunate Otumies and the Tlascalans
were overwhelmed with a fearful slaughter.  Of course, the action of
the Otumies was disavowed, Cortes was invited into Tlascala and an
alliance between the Spaniards and the republic was consummated.  The
Tlascalans threw themselves, heart and soul, into the project, which
they dimly perceived was in the mind of Cortes, the conquest of Mexico.
Nothing was said about all of this.  Cortes simply declared his design
to pay a friendly visit to Montezuma to whom he sent repeated and
solemn assurances that he intended him no harm, that Montezuma could
receive him with the utmost frankness and without fear and without
anticipating any violence whatever on the part of the Spaniards.  But
the wise in Tlascala knew that a collision between the Spaniards and
the Aztecs would be inevitable.  They saw a chance to feed fat their
ancient grudge, and to exact bitter revenge for all that they had
suffered at the hands of the Aztecs.

To anticipate, they were faithful to the alliance and loyally carried
out their part of the agreement in the resulting campaigns.  Without
them on several {143} occasions Cortes' fortunes would have been even
more desperate than they were.  Montezuma's envoys, heartily detesting
the Tlascalans, sought to persuade Cortes against any dealings with
them whatsoever.  They gave a very bad character to the dusky allies of
the Spaniards and the Tlascalans returned the compliment in kind.

When his wounded had recovered, accompanied by a large army of
Tlascalans under young Xicotencatl, Cortes set forth about the middle
of October on the last stage of his wonderful journey.  By this time,
Montezuma had concluded to make a virtue out of a necessity, and he had
sent word to him that he would welcome him to his capital.  He received
return reiterations of the statement that Cortes' intentions were
entirely pacific, that he represented the greatest monarch in the world
who lived beyond the seas, and all that he would require of Montezuma
was the acknowledgment of his dependence in common with every earthly
monarch upon this mysterious potentate across the ocean.  This
Montezuma was quite willing to give.  He was also willing to pay any
tribute exacted if only these children of the Sun would go away, and he
could be left to the undisturbed enjoyment of his kingdom.

He suggested a way for Cortes to approach the capital.  The Tlascalans
did some scouting and informed Cortes that the way was filled with
pitfalls, blocked with stones, and the opportunities for ambuscade were
many and good.  No one can blame Montezuma for taking these
precautions, although he afterwards disowned any participation in them
and said that the arrangements had been made by some irresponsible
subjects, and Cortes passed it over.

The Tlascalans, who knew all the passes of the {144} mountains, offered
to lead Cortes and his followers by another way.  Although he was
warned not to trust them by the envoys of Montezuma, Cortes with that
judgment of men which so distinguished him, elected the harder and
shorter way across the mountains.  Nature had made the pass a difficult
one, but the indomitable Spaniards struggled over it, enduring terrible
fatigue and periods of piercing cold.  They got far above the timber
line and approached the boundaries of eternal snow.  It is
characteristic of them, that on one point of their journey, they
stopped and despatched a party under Ordaz to scale and explore the
smoking volcano Popocatepetl, which with Ixtaccihuatl guarded the
beautiful valley of Mexico.  Ordaz and his twelve companions followed
the guides as far as they would lead them and then they climbed far up
the sides.  They were unable to reach the top, but they accomplished a
prodigious ascent, and Ordaz was afterwards allowed to add to his coat
of arms a flaming volcano.

The summit of the mountain was at last passed, and the magnificent
valley of Mexico opened to their view.  It was a scene which caused
even the hearts of these rugged and hardened adventurers to thrill with
pleasure and satisfaction.  No fairer land had ever burst upon human
vision.  The emerald verdure was broken by beautiful lakes, bordered by
luxuriant vegetation, diversified by mountains and plateaus, while here
and there magnificent cities glistened in the brilliant tropical sun
among the sparkling waters.  As far as one could see the land was under
cultivation.

The descent of the mountains was easy, comparatively speaking, and the
Spaniards, after some journeying, {145} found themselves in the
populous and wealthy city of Cholula, remarkable for the splendid
pyramid temple--Teocalli--which rose in the centre of its encircling
walls.

Here a plan was devolved to massacre the whole force which had been
quartered in one of the vast palaces or houses of the town.  The women
and the children left the city in large numbers, a vast body of Mexican
soldiers was secretly assembled near by.  The provisions, which had
always been supplied them generously, were suddenly withdrawn.  The
suspicions of the Spaniards were of course awakened and extra good
watch was kept.  They did not know what to suspect, until a Cholulan
woman, who had formed an acquaintance with Marina, told her of the
purpose of the Mexicans, and advised her to flee from the Spanish camp
if she valued her life.  The faithful Marina immediately disclosed the
whole plan to Cortes.  He acted with remarkable celerity and decision.
There were many Cholulan lords and attendants about the Spanish camp
and there were many others in town, evidently to lull any suspicions
which the Spaniards might feel and to make whatever excuse they could
for the lack of provisions.  On one pretense or another, Cortes
summoned the whole body to his house, which was a great rambling
structure of many rooms and thick walls and enclosures.  He got them
assembled in one room and then proceeded to slaughter most of them,
reserving only a few for use after the event had been determined.
While this butchering was going on he sent others of his troops into
the streets and squares of the town, where they killed without
hesitation and without mercy all with whom they came in contact,
including several bodies of soldiers who {146} were more or less
helpless without their leaders, whom Cortes had so craftily disposed of.

This was the celebrated massacre of Cholula.  Whether it was
justifiable or not, each reader must settle for himself.  Cortes'
situation then was certainly desperate; for that matter, it was
desperate at all times.  His life and the lives of his comrades hung
upon a thread.  He certainly had a right to protect himself.
Personally, I do not think such a slaughter was necessary for his
protection.  However, Cortes thought so, and he was there.  It was his
life that was concerned, and not mine.  Other monarchs in more
civilized days have done practically the same as this, as for instance,
the famous Barmecide feast, the wholesale assassination of the
Abencerrages in Spain, the massacre of the Mamelukes by Napoleon in
Egypt, and many others.

To be sure these massacres did not include the helpless inhabitants of
the towns.  However, with his usual policy, Cortes spared some of the
Cholulan lords and when he had shown his power over them, he released
them and told them to summon back the people who had left the city.  He
had no more trouble with the Cholulans after that victory, and he
presently took up his journey toward Mexico.

Now, the City of Mexico to the Spaniards was one of the wonders of the
world.  They have described it in such terms as show the impression it
made upon them, but they have not described it in such terms as to
enable us to understand from their stories exactly what the city was.
It was described as an island city.  Some believed it to have been an
enormous Pueblo city, such as may be seen in Arizona or New Mexico,
surrounded by thousands of squalid huts.  {147} Others conjectured it
as a city as beautiful as Venice, as great as Babylon, and as wonderful
as hundred-gated Thebes.

Cortes shall tell himself the impression it made upon him in the next
section which is lifted bodily from one of his famous letters to the
emperor Charles V.


VI. Cortes' Description of Mexico, written by his own hand to Charles
V., Emperor of Germany and King of Spain

In order, most potent Sire, to convey to your Majesty a just conception
of the great extent of this noble city of Temixtitan, and of the many
rare and wonderful objects it contains; of the government and dominions
of Muteczuma, the sovereign; of the religious rites and customs that
prevail, and the order that exists in this as well as other cities,
appertaining to his realm; it would require the labor of many
accomplished writers, and much time for the completion of the task.  I
shall not be able to relate an hundredth part of what could be told
respecting these matters; but I will endeavor to describe, in the best
manner in my power, what I have myself seen; and, imperfectly as I may
succeed in that attempt, I am fully aware that the account will appear
so wonderful as to be deemed scarcely worthy of credit; since even we
who have seen these things with our own eyes, are yet so amazed as to
be unable to comprehend their reality.  But your Majesty may be assured
that if there is any fault in my relation, either in regard to the
present subject, or to any other matters of which I shall give your
Majesty an account, it will arise from too great brevity rather than
extravagance or prolixity in the details; and it seems to me {148} but
just to my Prince and Sovereign to declare the truth in the clearest
manner, without saying anything that would detract from it, or add to
it.

Before I begin to describe this great city and the others already
mentioned, it may be well for the better understanding of the subject
to say something of the configuration of Mexico,[1] in which they are
situated, it being the principal seat of Muteczuma's power.  This
province is in the form of a circle, surrounded on all sides by lofty
and rugged mountains; its level surface comprises an area of about
seventy leagues in circumference, including two lakes, that overspread
nearly the whole valley, being navigated by boats more than fifty
leagues round.  One of these lakes contains fresh, and the other, which
is the larger of the two, salt water.  On one side of the lakes, in the
middle of the valley, a range of highlands divides them from one
another, with the exception of a narrow strait which lies between the
highlands and the lofty sierras.  This strait is a bow-shot wide, and
connects the two lakes; and by this means a trade is carried on by the
cities and other settlement on the lakes in canoes, without the
necessity of traveling by land.  As the salt lake rises and falls with
the tides like the sea, during the time of high water it pours into the
other lake with the rapidity of a powerful stream; and on the other
hand, when the tide has ebbed, the water runs from the fresh into the
salt lake.

This great city of Temixtitan (Mexico) is situated in this salt lake,
and from the main land to the denser parts of it, by which ever route
one choses to enter, {149} the distance is two leagues.  There are four
avenues or entrances to the city, all of which are formed by artificial
causeways, two spears' length in width.  The city is as large as
Seville or Cordova; its streets, I speak of principal ones, are very
wide and straight; some of these, and all the inferior ones, are half
land and half water, and are navigated by canoes.  All the streets at
intervals have openings, through which the water flows, crossing from
one street to another; and at these openings, some of which are very
wide, there are also very wide bridges, composed of large pieces of
lumber, of great strength and well put together; on many of these
bridges ten horses can go abreast.  Foreseeing that if the inhabitants
of this city should prove treacherous, they would possess great
advantages from the manner in which the city is constructed, since by
removing the bridges at the entrances and abandoning the place, they
could leave us to perish by famine without our being able to reach the
mainland--as soon as I had entered it, I made great haste to build four
brigantines, which were soon finished, and were large enough to take
ashore three hundred men and the horses, whenever it became necessary.

This city has many public squares, in which are situated the markets
and other places for buying and selling.  There is one square twice as
large as that of the city of Salamanca, surrounded by porticoes, where
are daily assembled more than sixty thousand souls, engaged in buying
and selling; and where are found all kinds of merchandise that the
world affords, embracing the necessities of life, as, for instance,
articles of food, as well as jewels of gold, silver, lead, brass,
copper, tin, precious stones, bones, shells, snails and feathers.
There were also exposed for sale wrought and unwrought {150} stone,
bricks burnt and unburnt, timber hewn and unhewn of different sorts.
There is a street for game, where every variety of birds found in the
country is sold, as fowls, partridges, quails, wild ducks,
fly-catchers, widgeons, turtle-doves, pigeons, reedbirds, parrots,
sparrows, eagles, hawks, owls, and kestrels; they sell, likewise, the
skins of some birds of prey, with their feathers, head and beak and
claws.  There they also sold rabbits, hares, deer, and little dogs
which are raised for eating and castrated.  There is also an herb
street, where may be obtained all sorts of roots and medicinal herbs
that the country affords.  There are apothecaries' shops, where
prepared medicines, liquids, ointments, and plasters are sold; barber
shops where they wash and shave the head; and restauranteurs that
furnish food and drink at a certain price.  There is also a class of
men like those called in Castile porters, for carrying burdens.  Wood
and coal are seen in abundance, and brasiers of earthenware for burning
coals; mats of various kinds for beds, others of a lighter sort for
