revealed to De Warenne who was the assassin; and though struck to the
soul with the turpitude of the deed, he thought the honor of England
would not allow him to accuse the perpetrator, and he remained silent.

The inanimate form of Wallace was now drawn from under that of Helen;
and, in the act, discovered the tapestry-seat clotted with blood, and
the regent's back bathed in the same vital stream.  Having found his
wound, the priests laid him on the ground; and were administering their
balsams, when Helen opened her eyes.  Her mind was too strongly
possessed with the horror which had entered it before she became
insensible, to lose the consciousness of her fears; and immediately
looking around with an aghast countenance, her sight met the
outstretched body of Wallace.  "Oh! is it so?" cried she, throwing
herself into the bosom of her father.  He understood what she meant.
"He lives, my child! but he is wounded like yourself.  Have courage;
revive, for his sake and for mine!"

"Helen!  Helen! dear Helen!" cried Murray, clinging to her hand; "while
you live, what that loves you can die?"

While these acclamations surrounded her couch, Edwin, in speechless
apprehension, supported the insensible head of Wallace; and De Warenne,
inwardly execrating the perfidy of De Valence, knelt down to assist the
good friars in their office.

A few minutes longer, and the staunched blood refluxing to the
chieftain's heart, he too opened his eyes; and instantly turning on his
arm-"What has happened to me?  Where is Lady Helen?" demanded he.

At his voice, which aroused Helen, who, believing that he was indeed
dead, was relapsing into her former state; she could only press her
father's hand to her lips, as if he had given the life she so valued,
and bursting into a shower of relieving tears, breathed out her
rapturous thanks to God.  Her low murmurs reached the ears of Wallace.

The dimness having left his eyes, and the blood (the extreme loss of
which, from his great agitation, had alone caused him to swoon), being
stopped by an embalmed bandage, he seemed to feel no impediment from
his wound; and rising, hastened to the side of Helen.  Lord Mar softly
whispered his daughter-"Sir William Wallace is at your feet, my dearest
child; look on him, and tell him that you live."

"I am well, my father," returned she, in a faltering voice; "and may it
indeed please the Almighty to preserve him!"

"I, too, am alive and well," answered Wallace; "but thanks to God, and
to you, blessed lady, that I am so!  Had not that lovely arm received
the greater part of the dagger, it must have reached my heart."

An exclamation of horror at what might have been burst from the lips of
Edwin.  Helen could have re-echoed it, but she now held her feelings
under too severe a rein to allow them so to speak.

"Thanks to the Protector of the just," cried she, "for your
preservation!  Who raised my eyes to see the assassin!  His cloak was
held before his face, and I could not discern it; but I saw a dagger
aimed at the bank of Sir William Wallace!  How I caught it I cannot
tell, for I seemed to die on the instant."

Lady Mar having recovered, re-entered the hall just as Wallace had
knelt down beside Helen.  Maddened with the sight of the man on whom
her soul doted, in such a position before her rival, she advanced
hastily; and in a voice, which she vainly attempted to render composed
and gentle, sternly addressed her daughter-in-law: "Alarmed as I have
been by your apparent danger, I cannot but be uneasy at the attendant
circumstances; tell me, therefore, and satisfy this anxious company,
how it happened that you should be with the regent, when we supposed
you an invalid in your room, and were told he was gone to the citadel?"

A crimson blush overspread the cheeks of Helen at this question, for it
was delivered in a tone which insinuated that something more than
accident had occasioned their meeting, but as innocence dictated, she
answered, "I was in the chapel at prayers; Sir William Wallace entered
with the same design; and at the moment he desired me to mingle mine
with his, this assassin appeared and (she repeated) I saw his dagger
raised against our protector, and I saw no more."

There was not a heart present that did not give credence to this
account, but the polluted one of Lady Mar.  Jealousy almost laid it
bare.  She smiled incredulously, and turning to the company, "Our noble
friends will accept my apology, if in so delicate an investigation, I
should beg that my family alone may be present."

Wallace perceived the tendency of her words, and not doubting the
impression they might make on the minds of men ignorant of the virtues
of Lady Helen, he instantly rose.  "For once," cried he, "I must
counteract a lady's orders.  It is my wish, lords, that you will not
leave this place till I explain how I came to disturb the devotions of
Lady Helen.  Wearied with festivities, in which my alienated heart can
so little share, I thought to pass an hour with Lord Montgomery in the
citadel; and in seeking to avoid the crowded avenues of the palace, I
entered the chapel.  To my surprise, I found Lady Helen there, I heard
her pray for the happiness of Scotland, for the safety of her
defenders; and my mind being in a frame to join in such petitions, I
apologized for my unintentional intrusion, and begged permission to
mingle my devotions with hers.  Nay, impressed and privileged by the
sacredness of the place, I presumed still further, and before the altar
of purity poured forth my gratitude for the duties she had paid to the
remains of my murdered wife.  It was at this moment that the assassin
appeared.  I heard Lady Helen scream, I felt her fall on my breast, and
at that instant the dagger entered my back.

"This is the history of our meeting; and the assassin, whomsoever he
may be, and how long soever he was in the church, before he sought to
perpetrate the deed--were he to speak, and capable of uttering truth,
could declare no other."

"But where is he to be found?" intemperately and suspiciously demanded
Lady mar.

"If his testimony be necessary to validate mine," returned Wallace,
with dignity, "I believe the Lady Helen can point to his name."

"Name him, Helen; name him, my dear cousin," cried Murray, "that I may
have some link with thee.  O! let me avenge this deed!  Tell me his
name! and so yield to me all that thou canst now bestow on Andrew
Murray!"

There was something in the tone of Murray's voice that penetrated to
the heart of Helen.  "I cannot name him whom I suspect to any but Sir
William Wallace; and I would not do it to him," replied she, "were it
not to warn him against future danger.  I did not see the assassin's
face, therefore, how dare I set you to take vengeance on one who
perchance may be innocent?  I forgive him, my blood, since Heaven has
spared to Scotland its protector."

"If he be a Southron," cried Baron Hilton, coming forward, "name him,
gracious lady, and I will answer for it, that were he the son of a
king, he would meet death from our monarch for this unknightly outrage."

"I thank your zeal, brave chief," replied she; "but I would not abandon
to certain death even a wicked man.  May he repent!  I will name him to
Sir William Wallace alone; and when he knows his secret enemy, the
vigilance of his own honor, I trust, will be his guard.  Meanwhile, my
father, I would withdraw."  Then whispering to him, she was lifted in
his arms and Murray's and carried from the hall.

As she moved away her eyes met those of Wallace.  He arose; but she
waved her hand to him, with an expression in her countenance of an
adieu so firm, yet so tender, that feeling as if he were parting from a
beloved sister, who had just risked her life for him, and whom he might
never see again, he uttered not a word to any that were present, but
leaning on Edwin, left the hall by an opposite door.




Chapter XLIII.

The Carse of Stirling.


Daybreak gleamed over the sky before the wondering spectators of the
late extraordinary scene had dispersed to their quarters.

De Warenne was so well convinced by what had dropped from De Valence,
of his having been the assassin, that when they met at sunrise to take
horse for the borders, he made him no other salutation than an
exclamation of surprise, "not to find him under an arrest for the last
night's work!"

"The wily Scot knew better," replied De Valence, "than so to expose the
reputation of the lady.  He knew that she received the wound in his
arms, and he durst not seize me, for fear I should proclaim it."

"He cannot fear that," replied De Warenne, "for he has proclaimed it
himself.  He has told every particular of his meeting with Lady Helen
in the chapel, even her sheltering him with her arms; so there is
nothing for you to declare but your own infamy.  For infamous I must
call it, Lord Aymer; and nothing but the respect I owe my country,
prevents me pointing the eyes of the indignant Scots to you; nothing
but the stigma your exposure would bring upon the English name, could
make me conceal the dead."

De Valence laughed at this speech of De Warenne's.  "Why, my lord
warden," said he, "have you been taking lessons of this doughty Scot,
that you talk thus?  It was not with such sentiments you overthrew the
princes of Wales, and made the kings of Ireland fly before you!  You
would tell another story were your own interest in question; and I can
tell you that any vengeance is not satisfied, I will yet see the
brightness of those eyes on which the proud daughter of Mar hangs so
fondly, extinguished in death.  Maid, or wife, Helen shall be torn from
his arms, and if I cannot make her a virgin bride, she shall at least
be mine as his widow; for I swear not to be disappointed."

"Shame, De Valence!  I should blush to owe my courage to rivalry, or my
perseverance in the field to a licentious passion!  You know what you
have confessed to me were once your designs on Helen Mar."

"Every man according to his nature!" returned De Valence; and shrugging
his shoulders, he mounted his horse.

The cavalcade of Southrons now appeared.  They were met on the Carse by
the regent, who, not regarding the smart of a closing wound, advanced
at the head of ten thousand men to see his prisoners over the borders.
By Helen's desire, Lord Mar had informed Wallace what had been the
threats of De Valence, and that she suspected him to be the assassin.
But this suspicion was put beyond a doubt by the evidence of the
dagger, which Edwin had found in the chapel; its hilt was enameled with
the martlets of De Valence.

At sight of it a general indignation filled the Scottish chiefs, and
assembling round their regent, with one breath they demanded that the
false earl should be detained and punished as became the honor of
nations, for so execrable a breach of all laws, human and divine.
Wallace replied that he believed the attack to have been instigated by
a personal motive, and therefore, as he was the object, not the state
of Scotland, he should merely acquaint the earl that his villainy was
known, and let the shame of disgrace be his punishment.

"Ah," observed Lord Bothwell, "men who trample on conscience soon get
over shame."

"True," replied Wallace, "but I suit my actions to my mind, not to my
enemy's; and if he cannot feel dishonor, I will not so far disparage
myself as to think one so base worthy my resentment."

While he was quieting the reawakened indignation of his nobles, whose
blood began to boil afresh at sight of the assassin, the Southron
lords, conducted by Lord Mar, approached.  When that nobleman drew
near, Wallace's first inquiry was for Lady Helen.  The earl informed
him he had received intelligence of her having slept without fever, and
that she was not awake when the messenger came off with his good
tidings.  That all was likely to be well with her was comfort to
Wallace; and, with an unruffled brow, riding up to the squadron of
Southrons which was headed by De Warenne and De Valence, he immediately
approached the latter, and drawing out the dagger, held it toward him:
"The next time, sir earl," said he, "that you draw this dagger, let it
be with a more knightly aim than assassination!"

De Valence, surprised, took it in confusion, and without answer; but
his countenance told the state of his mind.  He was humbled by the man
he hated; and while a sense of the disgrace he had incurred tore his
proud soul, he had not dignity enough to acknowledge the generosity of
his enemy in again giving him a life which his treachery had so often
forfeited.  Having taken the dagger, he wreaked the exasperated
vengeance of his malice upon the senseless steel, and breaking it
asunder, threw the pieces into the air; while turning from Wallace with
an affected disdain, he exclaimed to the shivered weapon, "You shall
not betray me again!"

"Nor you betray our honors, Lord de Valence," exclaimed Earl de
Warenne; "and therefore, though the nobleness of the William Wallace
leaves you at large after this outrage on his person, we will assent
our innocence of connivance with the deed; and, as lord warden of this
realm, I order you under arrest till we pass the Scottish lines."

"'Tis well," cried Hilton, "that such is your determination, my lord,
else no honest man could have continued in the same company with one
who has so tarnished the English name."

"No!" cried his brother baron, venerable Blenkinsopp, reining up his
steed; "I would forfeit house and lands first."

De Valence, with an ironical smile, looked toward the squadron, which
approached to obey De Warenne, and haughtily answered, "Though it be
dishonor to march with me out of Scotland, the proudest of you all will
deem it an honor to be allowed to return with me hither.  I have an eye
on those who stand with cap in hand to rebellion.  And for you, Sir
William Wallace," added he, turning to him, who was also curbing his
impatient charger, "I hold no terms with a rebel; and deem all honor
that would rid my sovereign and the earth of such low-born arrogance."

Before Wallace could answer he saw De Valence struck from his horse by
the Lochaberax of Edwin.  Indignant at the insult offered to his
beloved commander, he had suddenly raised his arm, and aiming a blow
with all his strength, the earl was immediately stunned and
precipitated to the ground.

At sight of the fall of the Southron chief, the Scottish troops, aware
of there being some misunderstanding between their regent and the
English lords, uttered a shout.  Wallace, to prevent accidents, sent
instantly to the lines, to appease the tumult, and throwing himself off
his horse, hastened to the prostrate earl.  A fearful pause reigned
throughout the Southron ranks.  They did not know but that the enraged
Scots would now fall on them, and, in spite of their regent,
exterminate them on the spot.  The troops were running forward when
Wallace's messengers arrived and checked them, and himself, calling to
Edwin, stopped his further chastisement of the recovering earl.

"Edwin, you have done wrong," cried he; "give me that weapon which you
have sullied by raising it against a prisoner totally in our power."

With a vivid blush the noble boy resigned the weapon to his general;
yet, with an unappeased glance on the prostrate De Valence, he
exclaimed, "But have you not granted life twice to this prisoner? and
has he not, in return, raised his hand against his life and Lady Helen?
You pardon him again! and in the moment of your clemency, he insults
the Lord Regent of Scotland in the face of both nations!  I could not
hear this and live without making him feel that you have those about
you who will not forgive such crimes."

"Edwin," returned Wallace, "had not the lord regent power to punish?
And if he see right to hold his hand, those who strike for him invade
his dignity.  I should be unworthy the honor of protecting a brave
nation, did I stoop to tread on every reptile that stings me in my
path.  Leave Lord de Valence to the sentence his commander has
pronounced, and as an expiation for your having offended both military
and moral law this day, you must remain at Stirling till I return into
Scotland."

De Valence, hardly awake from the stupor which the blow of the
battle-ax had occasioned (for indignation had given to the young
warrior the strength of manhood), was raised from the ground; and soon
after coming to himself and being made sensible of what had happened,
he was taken, foaming with rage and mortification, into the center of
the Southron lines.

Alarmed at the confusion he saw at a distance, Lord Montgomery ordered
his litter round from the rear to the front, and hearing all that had
passed, joined with De Warenne in pleading for the abashed Edwin.

"His youth and zeal," cried Montgomery, "are sufficient to excuse the
intemperance of the deed."

"No!" interrupted Edwin; "I have offended and I will explate.  Only, my
honored lord," said he, approaching Wallace, while he checked the
emotion which would have flowed from his eyes, "when I am absent,
sometimes remember that it was Edwin's love which hurried him to this
disgrace."

"My dear Edwin," returned Wallace, "there are many impetuous spirits in
Scotland who need the lesson I now enforce upon you; and they will be
brought to maintain the law of honor when they see that their regent
spares not its slightest violation, even when committed by his best
beloved friend.  Farewell till we meet again!"

Edwin kissed Wallace's hand in silence--it was not wet with his
tears--and drawing his bonnet hastily over his eyes, he retired into the
rear of Lord Mar's party.  That nobleman soon after took leave of the
regent, who, placing himself at the head of his legions, the trumpets
blew the signal of march.  Edwin, at the sound which a few minutes
before he would have greeted with so much joy, felt his grief-swollen
heart give way; he sobbed aloud, and striking his heel on the side of
his horse, galloped to a distance, to bide from all eyes the violence
of his regrets.  The trampling of the departing troops rolled over the
ground like receding thunder.  Edwin at last stole a look toward the
plain; he beheld a vast cloud of dust, but no more the squadrons of his
friend.




Chapter XLIV.

The Cheviots.


As Wallace pursued his march along the once fertile and well-peopled
valleys of Clydesdale, their present appearance affected him like the
sight of a friend whom he had seen depart in all the graces of youth
and prosperity, but met again overcome with disease and wretchedness.

The pastures of Carstairs on the east of the river, which used at this
season to be whitened with sheep, and sending forth the lowings of
abundant cattle; and the vales, which had teemed with reapers rejoicing
in the harvest, were now laid waste and silent.  The plain presented
one wide flat of desolation.  Where once was the enameled meadow, a
dreary swamp extended its vapory surface; and the road which a happy
peasantry no longer trod, lay choked up with thistles and rank grass;
while birds and animals of chase would spring from its thickets, on the
lonely traveler, to tell him by their wild astonishment that he was
distant from even the haunts of men.  The remains of villages were
visible; but the blackness of ashes marked the walls of the ruined
dwellings.

Wallace felt that he was passing through the country in which his
Marion had been rifled of her life; and as he moved along, nature all
around seemed to have partaken of her death.  As he rode over the moors
which led toward the district of Crawford Lammington, those hills
amidst which the beloved of his soul first drew breath, he became
totally silent.  Time rolled back; he was no longer the Regent of
Scotland, but the fond lover of Marion Braidfoot.  His heart beat as it
was wont to do in turning his horse down the defile which led direct to
Lammington; but the scene was completely changed; the groves in which
he had so often wandered with her were gone; they had been cut down for
the very purpose of destroying that place, which had once been the
abode of beauty and innocence, and of all the tender charities.

One shattered tower alone remained of the house of Lammington.  The
scathing of fire embrowned its sides, and the uprooted garden marked
where the ravager had been.  While his army marched before him along
the heights of Crawford, Wallace slowly moved forward, musing on the
scene.  In turning the angle of a shattered wall, his horse started;
and the next moment he perceived an aged figure, with a beard white as
snow, and wrapped in a dark plaid, emerging from the ground.  At sight
of the apparition, Murray, who accompanied his friend, and had hitherto
kept silent, suddenly exclaimed, "I conjure you, honest Scot, ghost or
man, give us a subject for conversation! and, as a beginning, pray tell
me to whom this ruined tower belonged?"

The sight of two warriors in the Scottish garb encouraged the old man;
and stepping out on the ground, he drew near to Murray.  "Ruined,
indeed, sir," replied he; "and its story is very sad.  When the
Southrons, who hold Annandale, heard of the brave acts of Sir William
Wallace, they sent an army to destroy this castle and domains, which
are his, in right of the Lady Marion of Lammington.  Sweet creature!  I
hear they foully murdered her in Lanark."

Murray was smitten speechless at this information; for had he suspected
there was any private reason with Wallace for his silent lingering
about this desolate spot, he would rather have drawn him away than have
stopped to ask questions.

"And did you know Lady Marion, venerable old man?" inquired Wallace, in
a voice so descriptive of what was passing in his heart, that the old
man turned toward him; and struck with his noble mien, he pulled off
his bonnet, and bowing, answered, "Did I know her?  She was nursed on
these knees.  And my wife, who cherished her sweet infancy, is now
within yon brae.  It is our only home, for the Southrons burnt us out
of the castle, where our young lady left us, when she went to be
married to the brave young Wallace.  He was as handsome a youth as ever
the sun shone upon, and he loved my lady from a boy.  I never shall
forget the day when she stood on the top of that rock, and let a
garland he had made for her fall into the Clyde.  Without more ado,
never caring because it is the deepest here of any part of the river,
he jumps in after it, and I after him; and well I did, for when I
caught him by his bonny golden locks, he was insensible.  His head had
struck against a stone in the plunge, and a great cut was over his
forehead.  God bless him, a sorry scar it left! but many, I warrant,
have the Southrons now made on his comely countenance.  I have never
seen him since he grew a man."

Gregory, the honest steward of Lammington, was now recognized in this
old man's narration; but time and hardship had so altered his
appearance, that Wallace could not have otherwise recollected the ruddy
face and active figure of his well-remembered companion, in the shaking
limbs and pallid visage of the hoary speaker.  When he ended, the chief
threw himself from his horse.  He approached the old man; with one hand
he took off his helmet, and with the other putting back the same golden
locks, he said, "Was the scar you speak of anything like this?"  His
face was now close to the eye of Gregory, who in the action, the words,
and the mark, immediately recognizing the young playmate of his
happiest days, with an almost shriek of joy, threw himself on his neck
and wept; then looking up, with tears rolling over his cheeks, he
exclaimed, "O Power of Mercy, take me to thyself, since my eyes have
seen the deliverer of Scotland!"

"Not so, my venerable friend," returned Wallace; "you must make these
desolated regions bloom anew!  Decorate them, Gregory, as you would do
the tomb of your mistress.  I give them to you and yours.  Marion and I
have no posterity!  Let her foster-brother, if he still live--let him be
now the Laird of Lammington."

"He does live," replied the old man, "but the shadow of what he was.
In attempting, with a few resolute lads, to defend these domains, he
was severely wounded.  His companions were slain, and I found him on
the other side of my lady's garden left for dead.  We fled with him to
the woods, and there remained till all about here was laid in ashes.
Finding the cruel Southrons had made a general waste, yet fearful of
fresh incursions, we and others who had been driven from their homes,
dug us subterraneous dwellings, and ever since have lived like fairies
in the green hillside.  My son and his young wife and babes are now in
our cavern, but reduced by sickness and want, for famine is here.
Alas, the Southrons, in conquering Scotland, have not gained a kingdom,
but made a desert!"

"And there is a God who marks," returned Wallace; "I go to reap the
harvests of Northumberland.  What our enemies have ravished hence in
part they shall refund; a few days, and your granaries shall overflow.
Meanwhile, I leave you with my friend," said he, pointing to Murray,
"at the head of five hundred men.  To-morrow he may commence the
reduction of every English fortress that yet casts a shade on the
stream of our native Clyde; for when the sun next rises, the Southrons
will have passed the Scottish borders and then the truce expires."

Gregory fell at his feet, and begged that he be allowed to bring his
Nannie to see the husband of her once dear child.

"Not now," replied Wallace, "I could not bear the interview--she shall
see me when I return."

He then spoke apart to Murray, who cheerfully acquiesced in a
commission that promised him not only the glory of being a conqueror,
but the private satisfaction, he hoped, of driving the Southron
garrison out of his own paternal castle.  To send such news to his
noble father at Stirling, would indeed be a wreath of honor to his aged
and yet warlike brow.  It was then arranged between the young chief and
his commander that watchtowers should be thrown up on every conspicuous
eminence which skirted the Scottish borders; whence concerted signals
of victories, or other information, might be severally interchanged.
These preliminaries adjusted, the regent's bugle brought Ker and Sir
John Graham to his side.  The appointed number of men was left with
Murray; and Wallace, joining his other chieftains, bade his friend and
honest servant adieu.

He now awakened to a sense of the present scene, and speeded his
legions over his and dale, till they entered on the once luxuriant
banks of the Annan--this territory of some of the noblest in Scotland,
till Bruce, their chief, deserted them.  It lay in more terrific ruin
than even the tracts he had left.  There reigned the silence of the
tomb; there existed the expiring agonies of men left to perish.  Recent
marks of devastation smoked from the blood-stained earth; and in the
midst of a barren waste, a few houseless wretches rushed forward at the
sight of the regent, threw themselves before his horse, and begged a
morsel of food for their famishing selves and dying infants.  "Look,"
cried an almost frantic mother, holding toward him the living skeleton
of a child; "my husband was slain by the Southrons, who hold Lochmaben
Castle; my subsistence was carried away, and myself turned forth, to
give birth to this child on the rocks.  We have fed till this hour on
the wild berries; but I die, and my child expires before me!"  A second
group, with shrieks of despair, cried aloud, "Here are our young ones
exposed to equal miseries.  Give us bread, Regent of Scotland, or we
perish!"

Wallace turned to his troops: "Fast for a day, my brave friends," cried
he; "lay the provisions you have brought with you before these hapless
people.  To-morrow you shall feed largely on Southron tables."

He was instantly obeyed.  As his men marched on, they threw their
loaded wallets amongst the famishing groups; and, followed by their
blessings, descended with augmented speed the ravaged hills of
Annandale.  Dawn was brightening the dark head of Brunswark, as they
advanced toward the Scottish boundary.  At a distance, like a wreath of
white vapors, lay the English camp, along the southern bank of the Esk.
At this sight, Wallace ordered his bugles to sound.  They were
immediately answered by those of the opposite host.  The heralds of
both armies advanced, and the sun rising from behind the eastern hills,
shone full upon the legions of Scotland, winding down the romantic
precipices of Wauchope.

Two hours arranged every preliminary to the exchange of prisoners; and
when the clarion of the trumpet announced that each party was to pass
over the river to the side of its respective country, Wallace stood in
the midst of his chieftains to receive the last adieus of his
illustrious captives.  When De Warenne approached, the regent took off
his helmet; the Southron had already his in his hand.  "Farewell,
gallant Scot," said he, "if aught could imbitter this moment of
recovered freedom, it is that I leave a man I so revere, still
confident in a finally hopeless cause!"

"It would not be the less just were it indeed desparate," replied
Wallace; "but had not Heaven shown on which side it fought, I should
not now have the honor of thus bidding the brave De Warenne farewell."

The earl passed on, and the other lords, with grateful and respectful
looks, paid their obeisance.  The litter of Montgomery drew near--the
curtains were thrown open-Wallace stretched out his hand to him: "The
prayers of sainted innocence are thine!"

"Never more shall her angel spirit behold me here, as you now behold
me," returned Montgomery; "I must be a traitor to virtue, before I ever
again bear arms against Sir William Wallace!"

Wallace pressed his hand, and they parted.

The escort which guarded De Valence advanced; and the proud earl,
seeing where his enemy stood, took off his gauntlet, and throwing it
fiercely toward him, exclaimed, "Carry that to your minion Ruthven, and
tell him the hand that wore it will yet be tremendously revenged!"

As the Southron ranks filed off toward Carlisle, those of the returning
Scottish prisoners approached their deliverer.  Now it was that the
full clangor of joy burst from every breast and triumph-breathing
instrument in the Scottish legions; now it was that the echoes rung
with loud huzzas of "Long live the valiant Wallace, who brings our
nobles out of captivity!  Long live our matchless regent!"

As these shouts rent the air, the Lords Badenoch and Athol drew near.
The princely head of the former bent with proud acknowledgement to the
mild dignity of Wallace.  Badenoch's penetrating eye saw that it was
indeed the patriotic guardian of his country to whom he bowed, and not
the vain affector of regal power.  At his approach, Wallace alighted
form his horse, and received his offered hand and thanks with every
grace inherent in his noble nature.  "I am happy," returned he, "to have
been the instrument of recalling to my country one of the princes of
her royal blood."  "And while one drop of it exists in Scotland,"
replied Badenoch, "its possessors must acknowledge the bravest of our
defenders in Sir William Wallace."

Athol next advanced, but his gloomy countenance contradicted his words
when he attempted to utter a similar sense of obligation.  Sir John
Monteith was eloquent in his thanks.  And Sir William Maitland was not
less sincere in his gratitude, than Wallace was in joy, at having given
liberty to so near a relation of Helen Mar.  The rest of the captive
Scots, to the number of several hundred, were ready to kiss the feet of
the man who thus restored them to their honors, their country, and
their friends, and Wallace bowed his happy head under a shower of
blessings which poured on him from a thousand grateful hearts.

In pity to the wearied travelers, he ordered tents to be pitched; and
for the sake of their distant friends, he dispatched a detachment to
the top of Langholm Hill, to send forth a smoke in token to the
Clydesdale watch, of the armistice being ended.  He had hardly seen it
ascend the mountain, when Graham arrived from reconnoitering, and told
him that an English army of great strength was approaching by the foot
of the more southern hills, to take the reposing Scots by surprise.

"They shall find us ready to receive them," was the prompt reply of
Wallace; and his actions were ever the companions of his words.
Leaving the new-arrived Scots to rest on the banks of the Esk, he put
himself at the head of five thousand men; and dispatching a thousand
more, with Sir John Graham, to pass the Cheviots, and be in ambush to
attack the Southrons when he should give the signal, he marched swiftly
forward, and soon fell in with some advanced squadrons of the enemy,
amongst the recesses of those hills.  Little expecting such a
rencounter, they were marching in defiles upon the lower ridgy craigs,
to avoid the swamps which occupied the broader way.

At sight of the Scots, Lord Percy, the Southron commander, ordered a
party of his archers to discharge their arrows.  The artillery of war
being thus opened afresh, Wallace drew his bright sword, and waving it
before him, just as the sun set, called aloud to his followers.  His
inspiring voice echoed from hill to hill; and the higher detachments of
the Scots, pouring downward with the resistless impetuosity of their
own mountain streams, precipitated their enemies into the valley; while
Wallace, with his pikemen, charging the horses in those slippery paths,
drove the terrified animals into the morasses, where some sunk at once,
and others, plunging, threw their riders, to perish in the swamp.

Desperate at the confusion which now ensued, as his archers fell
headlong from the rocks, and his cavalry lay drowning before him, Lord
Percy called up his infantry; they appeared, but though ten thousand
strong, the determined Scots met their first ranks breast to breast;
and leveling them with their companions, rushed on the rest with the
force of a thunder-storm.  It was at this period, that the signal was
given from the horn of Wallace; and the division of Graham, meeting the
retreating Southrons as they attempted to form behind the hill,
completed their defeat.  The slaughter became dreadful, the victory
decisive.  Sir Ralph Lattimer, the second in command, was killed in the
first onset; and Lord Percy himself, after fighting as became his brave
house, fled, covered with wounds, toward Alnwick.




Chapter XLV.

Lochmaben Castle.


This being the seasons of harvest in the northern counties of England,
Wallace carried his reapers, not to lay their sickle to the field, but,
with their swords, to open themselves a way into the Southron granaries.

The careful victor, meanwhile, provided for the wants of his friends on
the other side of the Esk.  The plunder of Percy's camp was dispatched
to them; which being abundant in all kinds of provisions, was more than
sufficient to keep them in ample store till they could reach Stirling.
From that point, the released chiefs had promised their regent they
would disperse to their separate estates, collect recruits, and reduce
the distracted state of the country into some composed order.  Wallace
had disclosed his wish, and mode of effecting this renovation of public
happiness, before he left Stirling.  It contained a plan of military
organization, by which each youth, able to bear arms, should not only
be instructed in the dexterous use of the weapons of war, but in the
duties of subordination, and above all, have the nature of the rights
for which he was to contend explained to him.

"They only require to be thoroughly known, to be regarded as
inestimable," added he; "but while we raise around us the best bulwark
of any nation, a brave and well-disciplined people; while we teach them
to defend their liberties, let us see that they deserve them.  Let them
be men, contending for virtuous independence; not savages, fighting for
licentious unrestraint.  We must have our youth of both sexes, in towns
and villages, from the castle to the cot, taught the saving truths of
Christianity.  From that root will branch all that is needful to make
them useful members of the state-virtuous and happy.  And, while war is
in our hands, let us in all things prepare for peace, that the sword
may gently bend into the sickle, the dirk to the pruning-hook."

There was an expansive providence in all this, a concentrating plan of
public weal, which few of the nobles had ever even glanced at, as a
design conceivable for Scotland.  There were many of these warrior
chiefs who could not even understand it.

"Ah! my lords," replied he to their warlike objections, "deceive not
yourselves with the belief that by the mere force of arms, a nation can
render itself great and secure.  Industry, temperance, and discipline
amongst the people; with moderation and justice in the higher orders,
are the only aliments of independence.  They bring you riches and
power, which make it the interest of those who might have been your
enemies to court your friendship."

The graver council at Stirling had received his plan with enthusiasm.
And when, on the day of his parting with the released chiefs on the
banks of the Esk, with all the generous modesty of his nature, he
submitted his design to them, rather to obtain their approbation as
friends, than to enforce it with the authority of a regent; when they
saw him, thus coming down from the dictatorship to which his unrivaled
talents had raised him, to equal himself still with them, all were
struck with admiration, and Lord Badenoch could not but mentally
exclaim, "The royal qualities of this man can well afford this expense
of humility.  Bend as he will, he has only to speak, to show his
superiority over all, and to be sovereign again."

There was a power in the unostentatious virtues of Wallace, which,
declaring themselves rather in their effects than by display, subdued
the princely spirit of Badenoch; and, while the proud chief recollected
how he had contemned the pretensions of Bruce, and could not brook the
elevation of Baliol; how his soul was in arms when, after he had been
persuaded to acknowledge the supremacy of Edward, the throne was given
to one of his rivals; he wondered at himself to find that his very
heart bowed before the gentle and comprehensive wisdom of an untitled
regent.

Athol alone, of the group, seemed insensible to the benefits his
country was deriving from its resistless protector; but he expressed
his dissent from the general sentiment with no more visible sign than a
cold silence.

When the messenger from Wallace arrived on the banks of the Esk with so
large a booty, and the news of his complete victory over the gallant
Percy, the exultation of the Scottish nobles knew no bounds.

On Badenoch opening the regent's dispatches, he found they repeated his
wish for his brave coadjutors to proceed to the execution of the plan
they had sanctioned with their approbation; they were to march directly
for Stirling, and on their way dispense the superabundance of the
plunder amongst the perishing inhabitants of the land.  He then
informed the earl, that while the guard he had left him with would
escort the liberated Scots beyond the Forth, the remainder of the
troops should be thus disposed: Lord Andrew Murray was to remain chief
in command in Clydesdale; Sir Eustace Maxwell, to give up the wardship
of Douglas to Sir John Monteith; and then advance into Annandale, to
assist Sir Roger Kirkpatrick, who must now have begun the reduction of
the castles in the west of that province.  At the close of this
account, Wallace added, that himself, with his brave band, were going
to traverse the English counties to the Tees' mouth; and should Heaven
bless his arms, he would send the produce round by the Berwick fleet,
to replenish the exhausted stores of the Highlands.  "Next year,"
continued he, "I trust they will have ample harvests of their own."

And what Wallace said he hoped to do, he did.

The Southrons' country was panic-struck at the defeat of Percy, his
beaten army, flying in all directions before the conquering legions,
gave such dreadful and hyperbolical accounts of their might, and of the
giant prowess of their leader, that as soon as ever the Scottish spears
were seen rising the summit of any hill, or even gleaming along the
horizon, every village was deserted, every cot left without inhabitant;
and corn, and cattle, and every kind of property fell into the hands of
the Scots.

Lord Precy lay immovable with wounds in his castle at Alnwick;** and
his hopeless state, by intimidating his followers, contradicted the
orders he gave, to face the marauding enemy.  Several times they
attempted to obey, but as often showed their inability.  They collected
under arms; but the moment their foe appeared, they fled within the
castle walls, or buried themselves in deep obscurities amongst the
surrounding hills.  Not a sheaf in the fields of Northumberland did the
Scots leave, to knead into bread for its earl; not a head of cattle to
smoke upon his board.  The country was sacked from sea to sea.  But far
different was its appearance from that of the trampled valleys of
Scotland.  There, fire had burned up the soil; the hand of violence had
leveled the husbandman's cottage; had buried his implements in the
ruins; had sacrificed himself on its smoking ashes!  There, the
fatherless babe wept its unavailing wants, and at its side sat the
distracted widow, wringing her hands in speechless misery; for there
lay her murdered husband--here, her perishing child!

**This famous castle, of so many heroic generations, is still the
princely residence of the head of the house of Percy.

With such sights the heart of Wallace had been pierced, when he passed
through the lowland counties of his country; nay, as he scoured the
highland districts of the Grampians, even there had he met the foot of
barbarian man, and cruel desolation.  For thus it was that the Southron
garrisons had provisional themselves; by robbing the poor of their
bread; and, when they resisted, firing their dwellings, and punishing
the refractory with death.

But not so the generous enmity of Sir William Wallace.  His commission
was, not to destroy, but to save; and though he carried his victorious
army to feed on the Southron plains, and sent the harvests of England
to restore the wasted fields of Scotland, yet he did no more.  No fire
blasted his path; no innocent blood cried against him from the ground!
When the impetuous zeal of his soldiers, flushed with victory, and in
the heat of vengeance, would have laid several hamlets in ashes, he
seized the brand from the destroying party, and throwing it into an
adjoining brook: "Show yourselves worthy the advantages you have
gained," cried he, "by the moderation with which you use them.
Consider yourselves as the soldiers of the all powerful God, who alone
has conducted you to victory; for, with a few, has he not enabled us to
subdue a host?  Behave as becomes your high destiny; and debase not
yourselves by imitating the hirelings of ambition, who receive, as the
wages of their valor, the base privilege to ravage and to murder.

"I wish you to distinguish between a spirit of reprisal, in what I do,
and that of retaliation, which actuates your present violence.  What
our enemies had robbed us of, as far as they can restore, I take again.
Their bread shall feed our famishing country; their wool clothe its
nakedness.  But blood for blood, unless the murderer could be made to
bleed, is a doctrine abhorrent to God and to humanity.  What justice is
there in destroying the habitations and lives of a set of harmless
people, because the like cruelty has been committed by a lawless army
of their countrymen, upon our unoffending brethren?  Your hearts may
make the answer.  But if they are hardened against the pleadings of
humanity, let prudence show your interest in leaving those men alive,
and with their means unimpaired, who will produce other harvests, if
need be, to fill our scantier granaries.

"Thus I reason with you, and I hope many are convinced; but they who
are insensible to argument must fear authority, and I declare that
every man who inflicts injury on the houses, or on the persons of the
quietest peasantry of this land, shall be punished as a traitor to the
state."

According to the different dispositions of men, this reasoning
prevailed.  And from the end of September (the time when Wallace first
entered Northumberland), to the month of November, when (having scoured
the counties of England, even to the gates of York) he returned to
Scotland, not an offense was committed which could occasion his
merciful spirit regret.  It was on All Saints Day when he again
approached the Esk; and so great was his spoil that his return seemed
more like some vast caravan moving the merchandise of half the world,
than the march of an army which had so lately passed that river, a
famishing, though valourous host.

The outposts of Carlaveroch soon informed Maxwell the lord regent was
in sight.  At the joyful intelligence a double smoke streamed from
every watch-hill in Annandale; and Sir Eustace had hardly appeared on
the Solway bank, to meet his triumphant chief, when the eager speed of
the rough knight of Torthorald brought him there also.  Wallace, as his
proud charger plunged into the ford, and the heavy wagons groaned after
him, was welcomed to the shore by the shouts, not only of the soldiers
which had followed Maxwell and Kirkpatrick, but by the people who came
in crowds to hail their preserver.  The squalid hue of famine had left
every face, and each smiling countenance, beaming with health,
security, and gratitude, told Wallace more emphatically than a thousand
tongues, the wisdom of the means he had used to regenerate his country.

Maxwell had prepared the fortress of Lochmaben, once the residence of
Bruce, for the reception of the regent.  And thither Wallace was
conducted, in prouder triumph than ever followed the chariot-wheels of
Caesar.  Blessings were the clarions that preceeded him; and hosts of
people, whom he had saved when ready to perish, were voluntary actors
in his pageant.

When he arrived in sight of the two capacious lochs, which spread like
lucid wings on each side of the castle, he turned to Graham.  "What
pity," said he, "that the rightful owner of his truly regal dwelling
does not act as becomes his blood!  He might now be entering its gates
as king, and Scotland find rest under its lawful monarch."

"But he prefers being a parasite in the court of a tyrant," replied Sir
John; "and from such a school, Scotland would reject its king."

"But he has a son," replied Wallace; "a brave and generous son!  I am
told by Lord Montgomery, who knew him in Guienne, that a nobler spirit
does not exist.  On his brows, my dear Graham, we must hope one day to
see the crown."

"Then only as your heir, my lord regent," interrupted Maxwell; "for
while you live, I can answer for it that no Scot will acknowledge any
other ruler."

"I will first eat my own sword," cried Kirkpatrick.

At this moment the portcullis of the gate was raised, and Maxwell
falling back to make way for the regent, Wallace had not time to answer
a sentiment, now so familiar to him by hearing it from every grateful
heart, that he hardly remarked its tendency, a fact the more easily to
be believed, from the ambition of such reward never receiving
acceptance in his well-principled mind.

Ever pressing toward establishing the happiness of his country, he
hastened over the splendid repast that was prepared for him; and
dispensing with the ceremonials with which the zeal of Maxwell sought
to display his respect for the virtues and station of his commander, he
retired with Graham to write dispatches, and to apportion shares of the
spoil to the necessities of the provinces.  In these duties, his
wakeful eye was kept open the greatest part of the night.  They for
whom he labored slept securely!  That thought was rest to him.  But
they closed not their eyes without praying for the sweet repose of
their benefactor.  And he found it; not in sleep, but in that peace of
heart which the world cannot give.




Chapter XLVI.

Lammington.


Day succeeded day in the execution of these beneficial designs.  When
fulfilled, the royal halls of Lochmaben did not long detain him who
knew no satisfaction but when going about doing good.  While he was
thus employed, raising with the quickness of magic, by the hands of his
soldiers, the lately ruined hamlets into well-built villages--while the
gray smoke curled from a thousand russet cottages which now spotted the
sides of the snow-clad hills--while all the lowlands, whithersoever he
directed his steps, breathed of comfort and abundance--he felt like the
father of a large family, in the midst of a happy and vast home, where
every eye turned on him with reverence, every lip with gratitude.

He had hardly gone the circuit of these now cheerful valleys, when an
embassy from England, which had first touched at Lochmaben, overtook
him at the Tower of Lammington.  The ambassadors were Edmund, Earl of
Arundel (a nobleman who had married the only sister of De Warenne), and
Anthony Beck, Bishop of Durham.

At the moment their splendid cavalcade, escorted by a party from Sir
Eustace Maxwell, entered the gate of Lammington, Wallace was in the
hourly expectation of Edwin, and hearing the trampling of horses, he
hastened into the courtyard, attended by Gregory's grandchildren.  One
was in his arms, two others held by his plaid, and a third played with
the sword he had unbuckled from his side.  It was a clear frosty day,
and the keenness of the air brightened the complexion of Wallace, while
it deepened the roses of his infant companions.  The leader of the
Scottish escort immediately proclaimed to the embassadors that this was
the regent.  At the sight of so uncourtly a scene the haughty prelate
of Durham drew back.

"This man will not understand his own interest," said he, in a
disdainful whisper, to Lord Arundel.

"I am inclined to think his estimation of it will be beyond ours."  As
the earl made this reply, the officer of Maxwell informed Wallace of
the names and errand of the illustrious strangers.  At the mention of a
Southron, the elder children ran screaming into the house, leaving the
youngest, who continued on the breast of Wallace.

The bishop drew near.

"We come, Sir William Wallace," cried the prelate, in a tone whose
lordly pitch lowered when his surprised eye saw the princely dignity
which shone over the countenance of the man whose domestic appearance,
when descried at a distance, had excited his contempt; "we come from
the King of England, with a message for your private ear."

"And I hope, gallant chief," joined Lord Arundel, "what we have to
impart will give peace to both nations, and establish in honor the most
generous as well as the bravest of enemies."

Wallace bowed to the earl's compliment (he knew by his title that he
must be the brother of De Warenne), and, resigning the child into the
arms of Graham, with a graceful welcome he conducted the Southron lords
into the hall.

Lord Arundel, looking around, said, "Are we alone, Sir William?"

"Perfectly," he replied, "and I am ready to receive any proposals for
peace which the rights of Scotland will allow her to accept."

The earl drew from his bosom a gold casket, and laying it on a table
before him, addressed the regent:-"Sir William Wallace, I come to you,
not with the denunciation of an implacable liege lord, whom a rash
vassal has offended, but in the grace of the most generous of monarchs,
anxious to convert a brave insurgent into the loyal friend.  My lord
the king having heard by letters from my brother-in-law, the Earl de
Warenne, of the honorable manner with which you treated the English
whom the fate of battle threw into your power, his majesty, instead of
sending over from Flanders a mighty army to overwhelm this rebellious
kingdom, has deputed me, even as an embassador, to reason with the
rashness he is ready to pardon.  Also, with this diadem," continued the
earl, drawing a circlet of jewels from the casket, "which my brave
sovereign tore from the brows of a Saracen prince, on the ramparts of
Acre, he sends the assurance of his regard for the heroic virtues of
his enemy.  And to these jewels, he will add a more efficient crown, if
Sir William Wallace will awake from this trance of false enthusiasm,
and acknowledge, as he is in duty bound to do, the supremacy of England
over this country.  Speak but the word, noblest of Scots," added the
earl, "and the bishop of Durham has orders from the generous Edward
immediately to anoint you king of Scotland--that done, my royal master
will support you in your throne against every man who may dare in
dispute your authority."

At these words Wallace rose from his seat.  "My lord," said he, "since
I took up arms for injured Scotland, I have been used to look into the
hearts of men; I therefore estimate with every due respect the
compliment which this message of your king pays to my virtues.  Had he
thought that I deserved the confidence of Scotland, he would not have
insulted me with offering a price for my allegiance.  To be even a
crowned vassal of King Edward is far beneath my ambition.  Take back
the Saracen's diadem; it shall never dishonor the brows of him who has
sworn by the cross to maintain the independence of Scotland, or to lay
down his life in the struggle!"

"Weigh well, brave sir," resumed the earl, "the consequences of this
answer.  Edward will soon be in England; he will march hither himself;
not at the head of such armies as you have discomfited, but with
countless legions; and when he falls upon any country in indignation,
the places of its cities are known no more."

"Better for a brave people so to perish," replied Wallace, "than to
exist in dishonor."

"What dishonor, noble Scot, can accrue from acknowledging the supremacy
of your liege lord; or to what can the proudest ambition in Scotland
extend beyond that of possessing its throne?"

"I am not such a slave," cried Wallace, "as to prefer what men might
call aggrandizement before the higher destiny of preserving to my
country its birthright, independence.  To be the guardian of her laws,
and of the individual right of every man born on Scottish ground, is my
ambition.  Ill should I perform the one duty, were I to wrong the
posterity of Alexander by invading their throne; and horrible would be
my treason against the other, could I sell my confiding country for a
name and a bauble into the grasp of a usurper."

"Brand not with so unjust an epithet the munificent Edward!"
interrupted Lord Arundel; "let your own noble nature be a witness of
