courage, they followed her, still cautiously to the station.

Dodd shouted as he saw a water-tank, and a receptacle above it with a
water-cock. They let Haidia drink, then followed suit, and for a few
moments, as they appeased their thirst, the beetles were forgotten.

Then they turned back. There had been no movement in that line of shells
that glinted in the morning sunlight.

"Come, I shall show you," said Haidia confidently, advancing toward the
trench.

Dodd would have stopped her, but the girl moved forward quickly, eluded
him with a graceful, mirthful gesture, and stooped down over the trench.

She rose up, raising in her arms an empty beetle-shell!

Dodd, who had reached the trench before Tommy, turned round and yelled
to him excitedly. Tommy ran forward--and then he understood.

The shells were empty. The swarm, whose life cycle Bram had admitted he
did not understand, had just moulted!

It had moulted because the bodies, gorged with food, had grown too large
for the shells. In time, if left alone, the monsters would grow larger
shells, become invincible again. But just now they were defenseless as
new-born babes--and knew it.

Deep underneath the empty shells they had burrowed into the ground.
Everywhere at the bottom of the deep trenches were the naked, bestial
creatures, waving helpless tentacles and squirming over one another as
they strove to find shelter and security.

A sudden madness came over Tommy and Dodd. "Dynamite--there must be
dynamite!" Dodd shouted, as he ran back to the station.

"Something better than dynamite," shouted Tommy, holding up one of a
score of drums of petrol!


CHAPTER XI

_The World Set Free_

They waited two days at Settler's Station. To push along the line into
the desert would have been useless, and both men were convinced that an
airplane would arrive for them. But it was not until the second
afternoon that the aviator arrived, half-dead with thirst and fatigue,
and almost incoherent.

His was the last plane on the Australian continent. He brought the news
of the destruction of Adelaide, and of the siege of Melbourne and
Sydney, as he termed it. He told Dodd and Tommy that the two cities had
been surrounded with trenches and barbed wire. Machine guns and
artillery were bombarding the trenches in which the beetles had taken
shelter.

"Has any one been out on reconnaissance?" asked Tommy.

Nobody had been permitted to pass through the barbed wire, though there
had been volunteers. It meant certain death. But, unless the beetles
were sapping deep in the ground, what their purpose was, nobody knew.

       *       *       *       *       *

Tommy and Dodd led him to the piles of smoking, stinking debris and told
him.

That was where the aviator fainted from sheer relief.

"The Commonwealth wants you to take supreme command against the
beetles," he told Tommy, when he had recovered. "I'm to bring you back.
Not that they expect me back. But--God, what a piece of news! Forgive my
swearing--I used to be a parson. Still am, for the matter of that."

"How are you going to bring us three back in your plane?" asked Tommy.

"I shall stay here with Jimmydodd," said Haidia suavely. "There is not
the least danger any more. You must destroy the beetles before their
shells have grown again, that's all."

"Used to be a parson, you say? Still are?" shouted Dodd excitedly.
"Thank God! I mean, I'm glad to hear it. Come inside, and come quick. I
want you too, Tommy!"

Then Tommy understood. And it seemed as if Haidia understood, by some
instinct that belongs exclusively to women, for her cheeks were flushed
as she turned and smiled into Dodd's eyes.

Ten minutes later Tommy hopped into the biplane, leaving the happy
married couple at Settler's Station. His eyes grew misty as the plane
took the air, and he saw them waving to him from the ground. Dodd and
Haidia and he had been through so many adventures, and had reached
safety. He must not fail.

       *       *       *       *       *

He did not fail. He found himself at Sydney in command of thirty
thousand men, all enthusiastic for the fight for the human race,
soldiers and volunteers ready to fight until they dropped. When the news
of the situation was made public, an immense wave of hope ran through
the world.

National differences were forgotten, color and creed and race grew more
tolerant of one another. A new day had dawned--the day of humanity's
true liberation.

Tommy's first act was to call out the fire companies and have the
beetles' trenches saturated with petrol from the fire hoses. Then
incendiary bullets, shot from guns from a safe distance, quickly
converted them into blazing infernos.

But even so only a tithe of the beetle army had been destroyed. Two
hundred planes had already been rushed from New Zealand, and their
aviators went up and scoured the country far and wide. Everywhere they
found trenches, and, where the soil was stony, millions of the beetles
clustered helplessly beneath great mounds of discarded shells.

An army of black trackers had been brought in planes from all parts of
the country, and they searched out the beetle masses everywhere along
the course that the invaders had taken. Then incendiary bombs were
dropped from above.

       *       *       *       *       *

Day after day the beetle massacre went on. By the end of a week the
survivors of the invasion began to take heart again. It was certain that
the greater portion of the horde had been destroyed.

There was only one thing lacking. No trace of Bram had been seen since
his appearance at the head of his beetle army in front of Broken Hill.
And louder and more insistent grew the world clamor that he should be
found, and put to death in some way more horrible than any yet devised.

The ingenuity of a million minds worked upon this problem. Newspapers
all over the world offered prizes for the most suitable form of death.
Ingenious Oriental tortures were rediscovered.

The only thing lacking was Bram.

A spy craze ran through Australia. Five hundred Brams were found, and
all of them were in imminent danger of death before they were able to
prove an alias.

And, oddly enough, it was Tommy and Dodd who found Bram. For Dodd had
been brought back east, together with his bride, and given an important
command in the Army of Extermination.

       *       *       *       *       *

Dodd had joined Tommy not far from Broken Hill, where a swarm of a
hundred thousand beetles had been found in a little known valley. The
monsters had begun to grow new shells, and the news had excited a fresh
wave of apprehension. The airplanes had concentrated for an attack upon
them, and Tommy and Dodd were riding together, Tommy at the controls,
and Dodd observing.

Dodd called through the tube to Tommy, and indicated a mass that was
moving through the scrub--some fifty thousand beetles, executing short
hops and evidently regaining some vitality. Tommy nodded.

He signalled, and the fleet of planes circled around and began to drop
their incendiary bombs. Within a few minutes the beetles were ringed
with a wall of fire. Presently the whole terrain was a blazing furnace.

Hours later, when the fires had died away, Tommy and Dodd went down to
look at the destruction that had been wrought. The scene was horrible.
Great masses of charred flesh and shell were piled up everywhere.

"I guess that's been a pretty thorough job," said Tommy. "Let's get
back, Jim."

"What's that?" cried Dodd, pointing. Then, "My God, Tommy, it's one of
our men!"

       *       *       *       *       *

It was a man, but it was not one of their men, that creeping, maimed,
half-cinder and half-human thing that was trying to crawl into the
hollow of a rock. It was Bram, and recognition was mutual.

Bram dropping, moaning; he was only the shell of a man, and it was
incredible how he had managed to survive that ordeal of fire. The
remainder of his life, which only his indomitable will had held in that
shattered body, was evidently a matter of minutes, but he looked up at
Dodd and laughed.

"So--you're--here, damn you!" he snarled. "And--you think--you've won.
I've--another card--another invasion of the world--beside which this is
child's play. It's an invasion--"

Bram was going, but he pulled himself together with a supreme effort.

"Invasion by--new species of--monotremes," he croaked. "Deep
down in--earth. Was saving to--prove you the liar you are.
Monotremes--egg-laying platypus big as an elephant--existent long
before pleistocene epoch--make you recant, you lying fool!"

Bram died, an outburst of bitter laughter on his lips. Dodd stood silent
for a while; then reverently he removed his hat.

"He was a madman and a devil, but he had the potentialities of a god,
Tommy," he said.

       *       *       *       *       *

  SUCH WELL-KNOW WRITERS AS

  Murray Leinster, Ray Cummings, Victor Rousseau, R. F. Starzl, A.
  T. Locke, Capt. S. P. Meek and Arthur J. Burks

  Write for

  =ASTOUNDING STORIES=

       *       *       *       *       *




Mad Music

_By Anthony Pelcher_


    The sixty stories of the perfectly constructed Colossus building
    had mysteriously crashed! What was the connection between this
    catastrophe and the weird strains of the Mad Musician's violin?

[Illustration: _In an inner room they found a diabolical machine._]


To the accompaniment of a crashing roar, not unlike rumbling thunder,
the proud Colossus Building, which a few minutes before had reared its
sixty stories of artistic architecture towards the blue dome of the sky,
crashed in a rugged, dusty heap of stone, brick, cement and mortar. The
steel framework, like the skeleton of some prehistoric monster, still
reared to dizzy heights but in a bent and twisted shape of grotesque
outline.

No one knew how many lives were snuffed out in the avalanche.

As the collapse occurred in the early dawn it was not believed the
death list would be large. It was admitted, however, that autos, cabs
and surface cars may have been caught under the falling rock. One train
was known to have been wrecked in the subway due to a cave-in from the
surface under the ragged mountain of debris.

The litter fairly filled a part of Times Square, the most congested
cross-roads on God's footstool. Straggling brick and rock had rolled
across the street to the west and had crashed into windows and doors of
innocent small tradesmen's shops.

A few minutes after the crash a mad crowd of people had piled from
subway exits as far away as Penn Station and Columbus Circle and from
cross streets. These milled about, gesticulating and shouting
hysterically. All neighboring police stations were hard put to handle
the growing mob.

Hundreds of dead and maimed were being carried to the surface from the
wrecked train in the subway. Trucks and cabs joined the ambulance crews
in the work of transporting these to morgues and hospitals. As the
morning grew older and the news of the disaster spread, more milling
thousands tried to crowd into the square. Many were craning necks
hopelessly on the outskirts of the throng, blocks away, trying vainly to
get a view of what lay beyond.

The fire department and finally several companies of militia joined the
police in handling the crowd. Newsies, never asleep, yowled their
"Wuxtras" and made much small money.

The newspapers devoted solid pages in attempting to describe what had
happened. Nervously, efficient reporters had written and written, using
all their best adjectives and inventing new ones in attempts to picture
the crash and the hysterics which followed.

       *       *       *       *       *

When the excitement was at its height a middle-aged man, bleeding at the
head, clothes torn and dusty, staggered into the West 47th street
police station. He found a lone sergeant at the desk.

The police sergeant jumped to his feet as the bedraggled man entered and
stumbled to a bench.

"I'm Pat Brennan, street floor watchman of the Colossus," he said. "I
ran for it. I got caught in the edge of the wreck and a brick clipped
me. I musta been out for some time. When I came around I looked back
just once at the wreck and then I beat it over here. Phone my boss."

"I'll let you phone your boss," said the sergeant, "but first tell me
just what happened."

"Earthquake, I guess. I saw the floor heaving in waves. Glass was
crashing and falling into the street. All windows in the arcade buckled,
either in or out. I ran into the street and looked up. God, what a
sight! The building from sidewalk to towers was rocking and waving and
twisting and buckling and I saw it was bound to crumple, so I lit out
and ran. I heard a roar like all Hell broke loose and then something
nicked me and my light went out."

"How many got caught in the building?"

"Nobody got out but me, I guess. There weren't many tenants. The
building is all rented, but not everybody had moved in yet and those as
had didn't spend their nights there. There was a watchman for every five
stories. An engineer and his crew. Three elevator operators had come in.
There was no names of tenants in or out on my book after 4 A.M. The
crash musta come about 6. That's all."

       *       *       *       *       *

Throughout the country the news of the crash was received with great
interest and wonderment, but in one small circle it caused absolute
consternation. That was in the offices of the Muller Construction
Company, the builders of the Colossus. Jason V. Linane, chief engineer
of the company, was in conference with its president, James J. Muller.

Muller sat with his head in his hands, and his face wore an expression
of a man in absolute anguish. Linane was pacing the floor, a wild
expression in his eyes, and at times he muttered and mumbled under his
breath.

In the other offices the entire force from manager to office boys was
hushed and awed, for they had seen the expressions on the faces of the
heads of the concern when they stalked into the inner office that
morning.

Muller finally looked up, rather hopelessly, at Linane.

"Unless we can prove that the crash was due to some circumstance over
which we had no control, we are ruined," he said, and there actually
were tears in his eyes.

"No doubt about that," agreed Linane, "but I can swear that the Colossus
went up according to specifications and that every ounce and splinter of
material was of the best. The workmanship was faultless. We have built
scores of the biggest blocks in the world and of them all this Colossus
was the most perfect. I had prided myself on it. Muller, it was
perfection. I simply cannot account for it. I cannot. It should have
stood up for thousands of years. The foundation was solid rock. It
positively was not an earthquake. No other building in the section was
even jarred. No other earthquake was ever localized to one half block of
the earth's crust, and we can positively eliminate an earthquake or an
explosion as the possible cause. I am sure we are not to blame, but we
will have to find the exact cause."

"If there was some flaw?" questioned Muller, although he knew the
answer.

"If there was some flaw, then we're sunk. The newspapers are already
clamoring for probes, of us, of the building, of the owners and
everybody and everything. We have got to have something damned plausible
when we go to bat on this proposition or every dollar we have in the
world will have to be paid out."

"That is not all," said Muller: "not only will we be penniless, but we
may have to go to jail and we will never be able to show our faces in
reputable business circles again. Who was the last to go over that
building?"

"I sent Teddy Jenks. He is a cub and is swell headed and too big for his
pants, but I would bank my life on his judgment. He has the judgment of
a much older man and I would also bank my life and reputation on his
engineering skill and knowledge. He pronounced the building positively
O.K.--100 per cent."

"Where is Jenks?"

"He will be here as soon as his car can drive down from Tarrytown. He
should be here now."

       *       *       *       *       *

As they talked Jenks, the youngest member of the engineering force,
entered. He entered like a whirlwind. He threw his hat on the floor and
drew out a drawer of a cabinet. He pulled out the plans for the
Colossus, big blue prints, some of them yards in extent, and threw them
on the floor. Then he dropped to his knees and began poring over them.

"This is a hell of a time for you to begin getting around," exploded
Muller. "What were you doing, cabareting all night?"

"It sure is terrible--awful," said Jenks, half to himself.

"Answer me," thundered Muller.

"Oh yes," said Jenks, looking up. He saw the look of anguish on his
boss's face and forgot his own excitement in sympathy. He jumped to his
feet, placed his arm about the shoulders of the older man and led him to
a chair. Linane only scowled at the young man.

"I was delayed because I stopped by to see the wreck. My God, Mr.
Muller, it is awful." Jenks drew his hand across his eye as if to erase
the scene of the wrecked building. Then patting the older man
affectionately on the back he said:

"Buck up. I'm on the job, as usual. I'll find out about it. It could not
have been our fault. Why man, that building was as strong as Gibraltar
itself!"

"You were the last to inspect it," accused Muller, with a break in his
voice.

"Nobody knows that better than I, and I can swear by all that's square
and honest that it was no fault of the material or the construction. It
must have been--"

"Must have been what?"

"I'll be damned if I know."

"That's like him," said Linane, who, while really kindly intentioned,
had always rather enjoyed prodding the young engineer.

"Like me, like the devil," shouted Jenks, glaring at Linane. "I suppose
you know all about it, you're so blamed wise."

"No, I don't know," admitted Linane. "But I do know that you don't like
me to tell you anything. Nevertheless, I am going to tell you that you
had better get busy and find out what caused it, or--"

"That's just what I'm doing," said Jenks, and he dived for his plans on
the floor.

Newspaper reporters, many of them, were fighting outside to get in.
Muller looked at Linane when a stenographer had announced the reporters
for the tenth time.

"We had better let them in," he said, "it looks bad to crawl for cover."
