fight. They've all bought tickets by now, and Fieschi will have to
protect them."

"Then we'll kick the blankety-blank spaceport apart," somebody
shouted.

That started it up again. Oscar wondered if getting silence was worth
another clip of cartridges, and decided it wasn't. He managed to make
himself heard without it.

"We'll do nothing of the kind. We need that spaceport to stay alive.
But we will take Ravick and Belsher and Hallstock--"

"And that etaoin shrdlu traitor of a Ware!" Joe Kivelson added.

"And Bish Ware," Oscar agreed. "They only have fifty police; we have
three or four thousand men."

Three or four thousand undisciplined hunters, against fifty trained,
disciplined and organized soldiers, because that was what the
spaceport police were. I knew their captain, and the lieutenants. They
were old Regular Army, and they ran the police force like a military
unit.

"I'll bet Ware was working for Ravick all along," Joe was saying.

That wasn't good thinking even for Joe Kivelson. I said:

"If he was working for Ravick all along, why did he tip Dad and Oscar
and the Mahatma on the bomb aboard the _Javelin_? That wasn't any help
to Ravick."

"I get it," Oscar said. "He never was working for anybody but Bish
Ware. When Ravick got into a jam, he saw a way to make something for
himself by getting Ravick out of it. I'll bet, ever since he came
here, he was planning to cut in on Ravick somehow. You notice, he knew
just how much money Ravick had stashed away on Terra? When he saw the
spot Ravick was in, Bish just thought he had a chance to develop
himself another rich uncle."

I'd been worse stunned than anybody by Dad's news. The worst of it was
that Oscar could be right. I hadn't thought of that before. I'd just
thought that Ravick and Belsher had gotten Bish drunk and found out
about the way the men were posted around Hunters' Hall and the lone
man in the jeep on Second Level Down.

Then it occurred to me that Bish might have seen a way of getting
Fenris rid of Ravick and at the same time save everybody the guilt of
lynching him. Maybe he'd turned traitor to save the rest of us from
ourselves.

I turned to Oscar. "Why get excited about it?" I asked. "You have what
you wanted. You said yourself that you couldn't care less whether
Ravick got away or not, as long as you got him out of the Co-op. Well,
he's out for good now."

"That was before the fire," Oscar said. "We didn't have a couple of
million sols' worth of wax burned. And Tom Kivelson wasn't in the
hospital with half the skin burned off his back, and a coin toss
whether he lives or not."

"Yes. I thought you were Tom's friend," Joe Kivelson reproached me.

I wondered how much skin hanging Steve Ravick would grow on Tom's
back. I didn't see much percentage in asking him, though. I did turn
to Oscar Fujisawa with a quotation I remembered from _Moby Dick_, the
book he'd named his ship from.

"_How many barrels will thy vengeance yield thee, even if thou gettest
it, Captain Ahab?_" I asked. "_It will not fetch thee much in our
Nantucket market._"

He looked at me angrily and started to say something. Then he
shrugged.

"I know, Walt," he said. "But you can't measure everything in barrels
of whale oil. Or skins of tallow-wax."

Which was one of those perfectly true statements which are also
perfectly meaningless. I gave up. My job's to get the news, not to
make it. I wondered if that meant anything, either.

They finally got the mob sorted out, after a lot of time wasted in
pillaging Ravick's living quarters on the fourth floor. _However, the
troops stopped to loot the enemy's camp._ I'd come across that line
fifty to a hundred times in history books. Usually, it had been
expensive looting; if the enemy didn't counterattack, they managed, at
least, to escape. More to the point, they gathered up all the cannon
and machine guns around the place and got them onto contragravity in
the street. There must have been close to five thousand men, by now,
and those who couldn't crowd onto vehicles marched on foot, and the
whole mass, looking a little more like an army than a mob, started up
Broadway.

Since it is not proper for reporters to loot on the job, I had gotten
outside in my jeep early and was going ahead, swinging my camera back
to get the parade behind me. Might furnish a still-shot illustration
for somebody's History of Fenris in a century or so.

Broadway was empty until we came to the gateway to the spaceport area.
There was a single medium combat car there, on contragravity halfway
to the ceiling, with a pair of 50-mm guns and a rocket launcher
pointed at us, and under it, on the roadway, a solitary man in an
olive-green uniform stood.

I knew him; Lieutenant Ranjit Singh, Captain Courtland's
second-in-command. He was a Sikh. Instead of a steel helmet, he wore a
striped turban, and he had a black beard that made Joe Kivelson's
blond one look like Tom Kivelson's chin-fuzz. On his belt, along with
his pistol, he wore the little kirpan, the dagger all Sikhs carry. He
also carried a belt radio, and as we approached he lifted the phone to
his mouth and a loudspeaker on the combat car threw his voice at us:

"All right, that's far enough, now. The first vehicle that comes
within a hundred yards of this gate will be shot down."

One man, and one combat car, against five thousand, with twenty-odd
guns and close to a hundred machine guns. He'd last about as long as a
pint of trade gin at a Sheshan funeral. The only thing was, before he
and the crew of the combat car were killed, they'd wipe out about ten
or fifteen of our vehicles and a couple of hundred men, and they would
be the men and vehicles in the lead.

Mobs are a little different from soldiers, and our Rebel Army was
still a mob. Mobs don't like to advance into certain death, and they
don't like to advance over the bodies and wreckage of their own
forward elements. Neither do soldiers, but soldiers will do it.
Soldiers realize, when they put on the uniform, that some day they may
face death in battle, and if this is it, this is it.

I got the combat car and the lone soldier in the turban--that would
look good in anybody's history book--and moved forward, taking care
that he saw the _Times_ lettering on the jeep and taking care to stay
well short of the deadline. I let down to the street and got out,
taking off my gun belt and hanging it on the control handle of the
jeep. Then I walked forward.

"Lieutenant Ranjit," I said, "I'm representing the _Times_. I have
business inside the spaceport. I want to get the facts about this. It
may be that when I get this story, these people will be satisfied."

"We will, like Nifflheim!" I heard Joe Kivelson bawling, above and
behind me. "We want the men who started the fire my son got burned
in."

"Is that the Kivelson boy's father?" the Sikh asked me, and when I
nodded, he lifted the phone to his lips again. "Captain Kivelson," the
loudspeaker said, "your son is alive and under skin-grafting treatment
here at the spaceport hospital. His life is not, repeat not, in
danger. The men you are after are here, under guard. If any of them
are guilty of any crimes, and if you can show any better authority
than an armed mob to deal with them, they may, may, I said, be turned
over for trial. But they will not be taken from this spaceport by
force, as long as I or one of my men remains alive."

"That's easy. We'll get them afterward," Joe Kivelson shouted.

"Somebody may. You won't," Ranjit Singh told him. "Van Steen, hit that
ship's boat first, and hit it at the first hostile move anybody in
this mob makes."

"Yes, sir. With pleasure," another voice replied.

Nobody in the Rebel Army, if that was what it still was, had any
comment to make on that. Lieutenant Ranjit turned to me.

"Mr. Boyd," he said. None of this sonny-boy stuff; Ranjit Singh was a
man of dignity, and he respected the dignity of others. "If I admit
you to the spaceport, will you give these people the facts exactly as
you learn them?"

"That's what the _Times_ always does, Lieutenant." Well, almost all
the facts almost always.

"Will you people accept what this _Times_ reporter tells you he has
learned?"

"Yes, of course." That was Oscar Fujisawa.

"I won't!" That was Joe Kivelson. "He's always taking the part of that
old rumpot of a Bish Ware."

"Lieutenant, that remark was a slur on my paper, as well as myself," I
said. "Will you permit Captain Kivelson to come in along with me? And
somebody else," I couldn't resist adding, "so that people will believe
him?"

Ranjit Singh considered that briefly. He wasn't afraid to die--I
believe he was honestly puzzled when he heard people talking about
fear--but his job was to protect some fugitives from a mob, not to die
a useless hero's death. If letting in a small delegation would prevent
an attack on the spaceport without loss of life and ammunition--or
maybe he reversed the order of importance--he was obliged to try it.

"Yes. You may choose five men to accompany Mr. Boyd," he said. "They
may not bring weapons in with them. Sidearms," he added, "will not
count as weapons."

After all, a kirpan was a sidearm, and his religion required him to
carry that. The decision didn't make me particularly happy. Respect
for the dignity of others is a fine thing in an officer, but like
journalistic respect for facts, it can be carried past the point of
being a virtue. I thought he was over-estimating Joe Kivelson's
self-control.

Vehicles in front began grounding, and men got out and bunched
together on the street. Finally, they picked their delegation: Joe
Kivelson, Oscar Fujisawa, Casmir Oughourlian the shipyard man, one of
the engineers at the nutrient plant, and the Reverend Hiram Zilker,
the Orthodox-Monophysite preacher. They all had pistols, even the
Reverend Zilker, so I went back to the jeep and put mine on. Ranjit
Singh had switched his radio off the speaker and was talking to
somebody else. After a while, an olive-green limousine piloted by a
policeman in uniform and helmet floated in and grounded. The six of us
got into it, and it lifted again.

The car let down in a vehicle hall in the administrative area, and the
police second lieutenant, Chris Xantos, was waiting alone, armed only
with the pistol that was part of his uniform and wearing a beret
instead of a helmet. He spoke to us, and ushered us down a hallway
toward Guido Fieschi's office.

I get into the spaceport administrative area about once in twenty or
so hours. Oughourlian is a somewhat less frequent visitor. The others
had never been there, and they were visibly awed by all the gleaming
glass and brightwork, and the soft lights and the thick carpets. All
Port Sandor ought to look like this, I thought. It could, and maybe
now it might, after a while.

There were six chairs in a semicircle facing Guido Fieschi's desk, and
three men sitting behind it. Fieschi, who had changed clothes and
washed since the last time I saw him, sat on the extreme right.
Captain Courtland, with his tight mouth under a gray mustache and the
quadruple row of medal ribbons on his breast, was on the left. In the
middle, the seat of honor, was Bish Ware, looking as though he were
presiding over a church council to try some rural curate for heresy.

As soon as Joe Kivelson saw him, he roared angrily:

"There's the dirty traitor who sold us out! He's the worst of the lot;
I wouldn't be surprised if--"

Bish looked at him like a bishop who has just been contradicted on a
point of doctrine by a choirboy.

"Be quiet!" he ordered. "I did not follow this man you call Ravick
here to this ... this running-hot-and-cold Paradise planet, and I did
not spend five years fraternizing with its unwashed citizenry and
creating for myself the role of town drunkard of Port Sandor, to have
him taken from me and lynched after I have arrested him. People do not
lynch my prisoners."

"And who in blazes are you?" Joe demanded.

Bish took cognizance of the question, if not the questioner.

"Tell them, if you please, Mr. Fieschi," he said.

"Well, Mr. Ware is a Terran Federation Executive Special Agent,"
Fieschi said. "Captain Courtland and I have known that for the past
five years. As far as I know, nobody else was informed of Mr. Ware's
position."

After that, you could have heard a gnat sneeze.

Everybody knows about Executive Special Agents. There are all kinds of
secret agents operating in the Federation--Army and Navy Intelligence,
police of different sorts, Colonial Office agents, private detectives,
Chartered Company agents. But there are fewer Executive Specials than
there are inhabited planets in the Federation. They rank, ex officio,
as Army generals and Space Navy admirals; they have the privilege of
the floor in Parliament, they take orders from nobody but the
President of the Federation. But very few people have ever seen one,
or talked to anybody who has.

And Bish Ware--_good ol' Bish; he'sh everybodysh frien'_--was one of
them. And I had been trying to make a man of him and reform him. I'd
even thought, if he stopped drinking, he might make a success as a
private detective--at Port Sandor, on Fenris! I wondered what color
my face had gotten now, and I started looking around for a crack in
the floor, to trickle gently and unobtrusively into.

And it should have been obvious to me, maybe not that he was an
Executive Special, but that he was certainly no drunken barfly. The
way he'd gone four hours without a drink, and seemed to be just as
drunk as ever. That was right--just as drunk as he'd ever been; which
was to say, cold sober. There was the time I'd seen him catch that
falling bottle and set it up. No drunken man could have done that; a
man's reflexes are the first thing to be affected by alcohol. And the
way he shot that tread-snail. I've seen men who could shoot well on
liquor, but not quick-draw stuff. That calls for perfect
co-ordination. And the way he went into his tipsy act at the
_Times_--veteran actor slipping into a well-learned role.

He drank, sure. He did a lot of drinking. But there are men whose
systems resist the effects of alcohol better than others, and he must
have been an exceptional example of the type, or he'd never have
adopted the sort of cover personality he did. It would have been
fairly easy for him. Space his drinks widely, and never take a drink
unless he _had_ to, to maintain the act. When he was at the Times with
just Dad and me, what did he have? A fruit fizz.

Well, at least I could see it after I had my nose rubbed in it. Joe
Kivelson was simply gaping at him. The Reverend Zilker seemed to be
having trouble adjusting, too. The shipyard man and the chemical
engineer weren't saying anything, but it had kicked them for a loss,
too. Oscar Fujisawa was making a noble effort to be completely
unsurprised. Oscar is one of our better poker players.

"I thought it might be something like that," he lied brazenly. "But,
Bish ... Excuse me, I mean, Mr. Ware..."

"Bish, if you please, Oscar."

"Bish, what I'd like to know is what you wanted with Ravick," he said.
"They didn't send any Executive Special Agent here for five years to
investigate this tallow-wax racket of his."

"No. We have been looking for him for a long time. Fifteen years, and
I've been working on it that long. You might say, I have made a career
of him. Steve Ravick is really Anton Gerrit."

Maybe he was expecting us to leap from our chairs and cry out, "Aha!
The infamous Anton Gerrit! Brought to book at last!" We didn't. We
just looked at one another, trying to connect some meaning to the
name. It was Joe Kivelson, of all people, who caught the first gleam.

"I know that name," he said. "Something on Loki, wasn't it?"

Yes; that was it. Now that my nose was rubbed in it again, I got it.

"The Loki enslavements. Was that it?" I asked. "I read about it, but I
never seem to have heard of Gerrit."

"He was the mastermind. The ones who were caught, fifteen years ago,
were the underlings, but Ravick was the real Number One. He was
responsible for the enslavement of from twenty to thirty thousand
Lokian natives, gentle, harmless, friendly people, most of whom were
worked to death in the mines."

No wonder an Executive Special would put in fifteen years looking for
him. You murder your grandmother, or rob a bank, or burn down an
orphanage with the orphans all in bed upstairs, or something trivial
like that, and if you make an off-planet getaway, you're reasonably
safe. Of course there's such a thing as extradition, but who bothers?
Distances are too great, and communication is too slow, and the
Federation depends on every planet to do its own policing.

But enslavement's something different. The Terran Federation is a
government of and for--if occasionally not by--all sapient peoples of
all races. The Federation Constitution guarantees equal rights to all.
Making slaves of people, human or otherwise, is a direct blow at
everything the Federation stands for. No wonder they kept hunting
