In spite of all these efforts, they were being overhauled slowly, but
Seymour still held on and did not despair.  There was one chance of
escape.  Right before them, not a half league away, lay a long shoal
known as George's Shoal, extending several leagues across the path of
the two ships; through the middle of this dangerous shoal there existed
a channel, narrow and tortuous, but still practicable for ships of a
certain size.  He was familiar with its windings, as was Bentley, as
they both had examined it carefully in the previous summer with a view
to just such a contingency as now occurred.  The Mellish was a large
and clumsy ship, heavily laden, and drawing much water, but he felt
confident that he could take her through the pass.  At any rate the
attempt was worth making, and if he did fail, it would be better to
wreck her, he thought, than allow her to be recaptured.  The English
captain either knew or did not know of the shoal and the channel.  If
he knew it, he would have to make a long detour, for in no case would
the depth of water in the pass permit a heavy ship as was the pursuing
vessel to follow them; and, aided by the darkness rapidly closing down,
the Mellish would be enabled to escape.

If the English captain were a new man on the station, and unacquainted
with the existence of the shoal, as was most likely--well, then he was
apt to lose his ship and all on board of her, if he chased too far and
too hard.  The problem resolved itself into this: if the Mellish could
maintain her distance from the pursuer until it was necessary to come
by the wind for a short tack, and still have sufficient space and time
left to enable her to run up to the mouth of the channel without being
sunk, or forced to strike by the batteries of the frigate, they might
escape; if not--God help them all! thought Seymour, desperately, for in
that event he resolved to run the vessel on the rocky edge of the shoal
at the pass mouth and sink her.

They were rapidly drawing down upon the shoal at the point from which
they must come by the wind, on the starboard tack.  Some far-away
lights on Cape Cod had just been lighted, which enabled Seymour to get
his bearing exactly.  He had talked the situation over quietly with
Bentley, and they had not yet lost hope of escaping.  The men had
worked hard and faithfully, carrying out the various orders and
lightening ship, and now, having done all, some few were lying about
the deck resting, while the remainder hung over the rails gazing at
their pursuer.  One of the men, the sea philosopher Thompson, of the
Ranger's crew, finally went aft to the quarter-deck to old Bentley, who
was privileged to stand there under the circumstances, and asked if he
might have a look through the glass for a moment at the frigate.




CHAPTER XVI

_'Twixt Love and Duty_

"Ay, it's as I thought," he remarked, returning the glass after a long
gaze; "that's the Radnor, curse her!"

"The Radnor, mate?  Are you quite sure?"

"Bosun, does a man live in a hell like that for a year and a half, and
forget how it looks?  I 'd know her among a thousand ships!"

"What's that you say, my man?" eagerly asked Seymour, stopping
suddenly, having caught some part of the conversation as he was passing
by.

"Why, that that 'ere ship is the Radnor, sir."

Talbot and his men were busy with the gun aft; no one heard but Seymour
and Bentley.

"The Radnor!  How do you know it, man?"

"I served aboard her for eighteen months, sir.  I knows every line of
her,--that there spliced fore shroud, the patch in the mainsail,--I put
it on myself,--besides, I know her; I don't know how, but know her I
do, every stick in her.  Curse her--saving your honor's presence--I 'm
not likely to forget her.  I was whipped at the grating till I was
nearly dead, just for standing up for this country, on board of her,
and me a freeborn American too!  I 've got her sign manual on my back,
and her picture here, and I 'd give all the rest of my life to see her
smashed and sunk, and feel that I 'd had some hand in the doing of it.
Ay, I know her.  Could a man ever forget her!" continued the seaman,
turning away white with passion, and shaking his fist in convulsive
rage at the frigate, which made a handsome picture in spite of all.
Seymour's face was as white as Thompson's was.

"The Radnor!  The Radnor!  Why, that's the ship Miss Wilton is on.  Oh,
Bentley, what can be done now?" he said, the whole situation rising
before him.  "If we lead that ship through the pass it means wreck for
her.  Dacres, who commands the Radnor, is a new man on this station.
And if we don't try the pass, this ship is captured.  And our country,
our cause, receives a fatal blow!  Was ever a man in such a situation
before?"

Bentley looked at him with eyes full of pity.  "We are approaching the
shoal now, sir, and unless we would be on it, we will have to bring the
ship by the wind at once."

This, at least, was a respite.  Seymour glanced ahead, and at once gave
the necessary orders.  When the course was altered it became necessary
to take in the fore and main topgallantsails, on account of the wind,
now blowing a half gale and steadily rising.  The speed of the ship,
therefore, was unfortunately sensibly diminished, and she was soon
pitching and heaving on the starboard tack, much to the astonishment of
Talbot and the crew, who were ignorant of the existence of the shoal,
and the latter of whom could see no necessity for the dangerous
alteration in the course; they, however, of course said nothing, and
Talbot, whose ignorance of seamanship did not qualify him to decide
difficult questions, after a glance at Seymour's stern, pale face,
decided to ask nothing about it.  This present course being at right
angles to that of their pursuer, whom neither Seymour nor Bentley
doubted to be the Radnor, would speedily bring the two ships together.
They had gained a small but precious advantage, however, as the
frigate, apparently as much surprised by the unexpected manoeuvre as
their own men, had allowed some moments to elapse before her helm was
shifted and the wind brought on the other quarter; the courses of the
two ships now intersected at an angle of perhaps seventy degrees, which
would bring them together in a short time.

The people on the Mellish could plainly hear the drums of the frigate,
now almost in range, beating to quarters.  They were near enough to
count the gunports; it was indeed a heavy frigate,--a thirty-six, just
the rating of the Radnor.  Talbot had made ready his field-piece, and
in a moment the heavy boom of the gun echoed over the waters.  The shot
fell a little short, but was in good line.  Much encouraged, the men
hastened to load the piece again, while the Mellish crept along, all
too slowly for the eager anxiety of her crew, toward the mouth of the
channel, of which most of them, however, knew nothing.  The frigate,
partly because in order to bring a gun to bear on the chase it would
have to luff up into the wind and thus lose valuable distance, and also
because the rapidity with which the Mellish was being overhauled
rendered it unnecessary, had hitherto refrained from using its
batteries.  The chances of escape under the present conditions were
about even, had it not been for the complication introduced by the
presence of Katharine and her father upon the frigate.

Seymour was in a painful and frightful state of indecision.  What
should he do?  The dilemma forced upon him was one of those which
Katharine had foreseen, and of which they had talked together.  He,
apparently, must decide between his love and his country.  If he held
on when he reached the mouth of the channel and passed it by, the
capture of the ship was absolutely inevitable.  If he went through the
channel and enticed the English ship after him, the death of his
sweetheart was likewise apparently inevitable.

Chasing with the determination shown by the English captain, who had
his topgallantsails still set, and with the little warning he would
have of the existence of the shoal, owing to the rapid closing of the
day, the frigate would have to attempt the channel, and in that way for
that ship lay destruction.

Save Katharine--  Lose the ship.  Save the ship--  Lose Katharine.
Love or Duty--which should it be?  The man was attacked in the two most
powerful sources of human action.  He saw on one side Katharine tossed
about by the merciless waves, white-faced with terror, and stretching
out her hands to him in piteous appeal from that angry sea in the
horror of darkness and death.  And every voice which spoke to the human
heart was eloquent of her.  And then on the other side there stood
those grim and frozen ranks, those gaunt, hungry, naked men.  They too
stretched out hands to him.  "Give us arms, give us raiment," they
seemed to say.  "You had the opportunity and you threw it away for
love.  What's love--to liberty?"

And every incentive which awakens the soul of honor in men appealed to
him then.  Behind him stood the destinies of a great people, the fate
of a great cause; on him they trusted, upon his honor they had
depended, and before him stood one woman.  He saw her again as he had
seen her before on the top of the hill on that memorable night in
Virginia.  What had she said?--

"_If I stood in the pathway of liberty for one single instant, I should
despise the man who would not sweep me aside without a moment's
hesitation._"

Oh, Katharine, Katharine, he groaned in spirit, pressing his hands upon
his face in agony, while every breaking wave flung the words, "duty and
honor," into his face, and every throb of his beating heart whispered
"love--love."




CHAPTER XVII

_An Incidental Passage at Arms_

There were two entrances to the channel, lying perhaps a half mile
apart, the first the better and more practicable, and certainly, with
the frigate rapidly drawing near, the safer.  They were almost abreast
of the first one now.  Bentley, who had been observing him keenly, came
up to him.

"We are almost abreast the first pass, Mr. Seymour," he said
respectfully.

Seymour turned as if he had been struck.  Was the decision already upon
him?  He could not make it.

"We--we will try the second, Bentley."

"Sir," said the old man, hesitating, and yet persisting, "the frigate
is coming down fast; we may not be able to make the second pass."

"We will try the second, nevertheless," said the young man,
imperatively.

"But, Mr. John--"

"Silence, sir!  When have you bandied words with me before?" shouted
Seymour, in a passion of temper.  "Go forward where you belong."

The old man looked at him steadily: "When, sir?  Why, ever since I took
you from your dead father's arms near a score of years ago.  Oh, sir, I
know what you feel, but you know what you must do.  It's not for me to
tell you your duty," said the old man, laying heavy emphasis upon that
talismanic word "duty," which seems to appeal more powerfully to seamen
than to any other class of men.  "Love is a mighty thing, sir.  I know
it, yes, even I," he went on with rude eloquence, "ever since I took
you when you were a little lad, and swore to watch over you, and care
for you, and make a man of you--Ay, and I 've done it too--and the love
of woman, they say, is stronger than the love of man, though of that I
know nothing, but honor and duty are above love, sir; and upon your
honor, and your doing your duty, our country depends.  Yes, love of
woman, Mr. Seymour, but before that love of country; and now," said the
old man, mournfully, "after twenty years of--of friendship, if I may
say it, you order me forward like a dog.  But that's neither here nor
there, if you only save the ship.  Oh, Mr. John, in five minutes more
you must decide.  See," pointing to the frigate, "how she rises!  Think
of it.  Think of it once more before you jeopard the safety of this
ship for any woman.  Honor, sir, and duty--it's laid upon you, you must
do it--they come before everything."

Seymour looked at the old man tenderly, and then grasped him by the
hand.  "You are right, old friend.  Forgive my rough words.  I will do
it.  It kills me, but I will do it--the country first of all.  O God,
pity me and help me!" he cried.

"Amen," said Bentley, his face working with grief, yet iron in its
determination and resolution.

Seymour turned on his heel and sprang aft, bringing his hand the while
up to his heart.  As he did so, his fingers instinctively went to the
pocket of his waistcoat and sought the letter he carried there.

He took it out half mechanically and glanced at the familiar writing
once more, when a sudden gust of wind snatched it out of his hand and
blew it to the feet of Talbot.

"My letter!" cried Seymour, impulsively.

The soldier courteously stooped and picked it up and glanced down at
the open scrap mechanically, as he extended his hand toward Seymour;
then the next moment he cried,--

"Why, it's from Katharine!"

One unconscious inspection sufficed to put him in possession of the
contents.  "Where did you get this note, sir?" he exclaimed, his face
flushing with jealousy and sudden suspicion; "it is mine, I am the one
she loves.  How came it in your possession?" he continued, in rising
heat.

Seymour, already unstrung by the fearful strain he had gone through and
the frightful decision he would have to make later on, nay, had made
after Bentley's words, was in no mood to be catechized.

"I am not in the habit of answering such personal questions, sir.  And
I recognize no right in you to so question me."

"Right, sir!  I find a letter in your possession with words of love in
it, from my betrothed, a note plainly meant for me, and which has been
withheld.  How comes it so?"

"And I repeat, sir, I have nothing to say except to demand the return
of my letter instantly; it is mine, and I will have it."

"Do you not know, Mr. Seymour, that we have been pledged to each other
since childhood, that we have been lovers, she is to be my wife?  I
love her and she loves me; explain this letter then."

"It is false, Mr. Talbot; she has pledged herself to me,--yes, sir, to
me.  I care nothing for your childish love-affairs.  She is mine, if I
may believe her words, as is the letter which you have basely read.
You will return it to me at once, or I shall have it taken from you by
force."

"I give you the lie, sir, here and now," shrieked Talbot, laying his
hand upon his sword.  "It is not true, she is mine; as for the note--I
keep it!"

Seymour controlled himself by a violent effort, and looked around for
some of his men.  Wilton and Bentley had come aft in great anxiety, and
the whole crew were looking eagerly at them, attracted by the aroused
voices and the passionate attitude of the two men.  For a moment the
chase was forgotten.

"Oh, Hilary," said Philip, addressing his friend.

"Hush, Philip, this man insults your sister.  I am defending her honor."

The lad hesitated a moment; discipline was strong in his young soul.
"That is my duty--Mr. Seymour," he said.

Seymour turned swiftly upon him.  "What are you doing here, Mr. Wilton?
All hands are called, are they not?  Your station is on the forecastle,
then, I believe," he said with deadly calm.  "Oblige me by going
forward at once, sir."

"Go, Philip," cried Talbot; "I can take care of this man."

"Aft here, two or three of you," continued Seymour, his usually even
voice trembling a little.  "Seize Lieutenant Talbot.  Arrest him.  Take
his sword from him, and hand me the letter he has in his hand, and then
confine him in his cabin."

Two or three of the seamen came running aft.  Talbot whipped out his
sword.

"The first man that touches me shall have this through his heart," he
said fiercely.  But the seamen would have made short work of him, if it
had not been for the restraining hand of Bentley.

"Gentlemen, gentlemen!" he said.

"Out of the way, Bentley.  You have changed my plans once.  I will not
be balked again.  I am the captain of this ship, and I intend to be
obeyed."

"'T is well that Mr. Seymour is on his ship and surrounded by his
bullies.  He dare not meet me man to man, sword to sword.  Would we
were on shore!  You coward!" screamed Talbot, advancing toward him,
"shall I strike you?"

"You will have it then, sir," said Seymour, at last giving way.  "No
man so speaks to me and lives.  Back, men!" and white with passion and
rage he drew his own sword and sprang forward.  No less resolutely did
Talbot meet him.  Their blades crossed and rang against each other.
Bentley wrung his hands in dreadful indecision, not knowing what to do;
he dared not lay hands upon his superior officer, yet this combat must
cease.  But the fierce sword-play, both men being masters of the
