The Project Gutenberg EBook of Mother America, by Sam McClatchie

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Mother America

Author: Sam McClatchie

Illustrator: Dan Adkins

Release Date: August 3, 2008 [EBook #26180]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MOTHER AMERICA ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









    _When a country is as champion-conscious as America, it's surprising
    that no one has yet developed the ultimate contest. Dr. McClatchie,
    whose recent novel, "The Last Vial," established him as a
    top-ranking sf writer, now tells us the engaging story of the
    geneticists' search for ..._


_Mother America_

By SAM McCLATCHIE, M.D.

Illustrated by ADKINS


The tall young man faded back quickly, poised for an instant and then
threw a long high pass. The crowd came up roaring. Twenty yards from the
goal line a smaller, sturdier player swerved quickly around the end and
took the pass in his stride. With a beautiful curving run he tricked the
fullback, crossed the line and then, showing no sign of effort, trotted
back up the field and threw the ball to the umpire.

"Wonderful! What a magnificent runner that lad is! You're lucky to have
him, George." The speaker, a trimly built, athletic man in his middle
forties turned to his companion, talking loudly above the buzz of the
crowd.

George Turner nodded agreement. "We are. Every other University in the
States was after him. He's the first Boy America you know. We've been
watching him for years."

"The first Boy America?" John Harmon echoed in surprise. "I didn't know
that. You did say Boy America ... not All American?"

"He's both; All American in football and a Boy America too."

The gun signalled the end of the game and the two men rose from their
box seats to go out. Directly below them the players trotted quickly
towards the dressing rooms. Harmon leaned over to watch.

[Illustration]

"There he is now. A fine-looking boy too!" He studied the young man's
face intently. "Y'know he reminds me of somebody ... somebody I know
well, but I can't put my finger on it."

"I'm not surprised. He's Gloria Manson's boy."

Harmon frowned. "No, that's not it, George. Of course there's the
resemblance to his mother ... and who could forget the glorious Gloria
even after twenty years. But it was the way he moved, and that smile."
He shook his head. "It'll come to me yet."

They took the belt walk to the parking area and stepped off it at
George's car. Moving quietly on its air cushion, the car joined the
line-up out on the main road where George locked the controls on to
Route 63. The speed rose to eighty and steadied as the car settled into
its place in the traffic pattern. Relaxed in their seats the two men lit
their anticancers and puffed contentedly as they watched the scenery. It
would be another hour before George would need to touch the controls as
they neared home.

"So he looks like someone you know?" George asked. "I'd like to know who
it is just out of curiosity. As you are aware, no one but the Genetic
Panel knows whose sperm is used to impregnate the Mother America."

"I haven't got it yet, George, but I will. Were you the geneticist for
this boy?"

"Yes, I was. I told you he was Gloria Manson's. Don't you remember when
you met her?"

"Soaring satellites!" Harmon exclaimed. "How could I forget? You
introduced me to her."

