growed, an' spread an' spread, till they's a wonder. See here!" and he
pulled down a thick gray, dry-looking branch. "A body might think this
was dead wood, but I don't believe it is--down to th' root. I'll cut it
low down an' see."

He knelt and with his knife cut the lifeless-looking branch through, not
far above the earth.

"There!" he said exultantly. "I told thee so. There's green in that
wood yet. Look at it."

Mary was down on her knees before he spoke, gazing with all her might.

"When it looks a bit greenish an' juicy like that, it's wick," he
explained. "When th' inside is dry an' breaks easy, like this here piece
I've cut off, it's done for. There's a big root here as all this live
wood sprung out of, an' if th' old wood's cut off an' it's dug round,
an' took care of there'll be--" he stopped and lifted his face to look
up at the climbing and hanging sprays above him--"there'll be a fountain
o' roses here this summer."

They went from bush to bush and from tree to tree. He was very strong
and clever with his knife and knew how to cut the dry and dead wood
away, and could tell when an unpromising bough or twig had still green
life in it. In the course of half an hour Mary thought she could tell
too, and when he cut through a lifeless-looking branch she would cry out
joyfully under her breath when she caught sight of the least shade of
moist green. The spade, and hoe, and fork were very useful. He showed
her how to use the fork while he dug about roots with the spade and
stirred the earth and let the air in.

They were working industriously round one of the biggest standard roses
when he caught sight of something which made him utter an exclamation of
surprise.

"Why!" he cried, pointing to the grass a few feet away. "Who did that
there?"

It was one of Mary's own little clearings round the pale green points.

"I did it," said Mary.

"Why, I thought tha' didn't know nothin' about gardenin'," he exclaimed.

"I don't," she answered, "but they were so little, and the grass was so
thick and strong, and they looked as if they had no room to breathe. So
I made a place for them. I don't even know what they are."

Dickon went and knelt down by them, smiling his wide smile.

"Tha' was right," he said. "A gardener couldn't have told thee better.
They'll grow now like Jack's bean-stalk. They're crocuses an' snowdrops,
an' these here is narcissuses," turning to another patch, "an' here's
daffydowndillys. Eh! they will be a sight."

He ran from one clearing to another.

"Tha' has done a lot o' work for such a little wench," he said, looking
her over.

"I'm growing fatter," said Mary, "and I'm growing stronger. I used
always to be tired. When I dig I'm not tired at all. I like to smell
the earth when it's turned up."

"It's rare good for thee," he said, nodding his head wisely. "There's
naught as nice as th' smell o' good clean earth, except th' smell o'
fresh growin' things when th' rain falls on 'em. I get out on th' moor
many a day when it's rainin' an' I lie under a bush an' listen to th'
soft swish o' drops on th' heather an' I just sniff an' sniff. My nose
end fair quivers like a rabbit's, mother says."

"Do you never catch cold?" inquired Mary, gazing at him wonderingly. She
had never seen such a funny boy, or such a nice one.

"Not me," he said, grinning. "I never ketched cold since I was born. I
wasn't brought up nesh enough. I've chased about th' moor in all
weathers same as th' rabbits does. Mother says I've sniffed up too much
fresh air for twelve year' to ever get to sniffin' with cold. I'm as
tough as a white-thorn knobstick."

He was working all the time he was talking and Mary was following him
and helping him with her fork or the trowel.

"There's a lot of work to do here!" he said once, looking about quite
exultantly.

"Will you come again and help me to do it?" Mary begged. "I'm sure I can
help, too. I can dig and pull up weeds, and do whatever you tell me.
Oh! do come, Dickon!"

"I'll come every day if tha' wants me, rain or shine," he answered
stoutly. "It's th' best fun I ever had in my life--shut in here an'
wakenin' up a garden."

"If you will come," said Mary, "if you will help me to make it alive
I'll--I don't know what I'll do," she ended helplessly. What could you
do for a boy like that?

"I'll tell thee what tha'll do," said Dickon, with his happy grin.
"Tha'll get fat an' tha'll get as hungry as a young fox an' tha'll learn
how to talk to th' robin same as I do. Eh! we'll have a lot o' fun."

He began to walk about, looking up in the trees and at the walls and
bushes with a thoughtful expression.

"I wouldn't want to make it look like a gardener's garden, all clipped
an' spick an' span, would you?" he said. "It's nicer like this with
things runnin' wild, an' swingin' an' catchin' hold of each other."

"Don't let us make it tidy," said Mary anxiously. "It wouldn't seem like
a secret garden if it was tidy."

Dickon stood rubbing his rusty-red head with a rather puzzled look.

"It's a secret garden sure enough," he said, "but seems like some one
besides th' robin must have been in it since it was shut up ten year'
ago."

"But the door was locked and the key was buried," said Mary. "No one
could get in."

"That's true," he answered. "It's a queer place. Seems to me as if
there'd been a bit o' prunin' done here an' there, later than ten year'
ago."

"But how could it have been done?" said Mary.

He was examining a branch of a standard rose and he shook his head.

"Aye! how could it!" he murmured. "With th' door locked an' th' key
buried."

Mistress Mary always felt that however many years she lived she should
never forget that first morning when her garden began to grow. Of
course, it did seem to begin to grow for her that morning. When Dickon
began to clear places to plant seeds, she remembered what Basil had sung
at her when he wanted to tease her.

"Are there any flowers that look like bells?" she inquired.

"Lilies o' th' valley does," he answered, digging away with the trowel,
"an' there's Canterbury bells, an' campanulas."

"Let us plant some," said Mary.

"There's lilies o' th' valley here already; I saw 'em. They'll have
growed too close an' we'll have to separate 'em, but there's plenty. Th'
other ones takes two years to bloom from seed, but I can bring you some
bits o' plants from our cottage garden. Why does tha' want 'em?"

Then Mary told him about Basil and his brothers and sisters in India and
of how she had hated them and of their calling her "Mistress Mary Quite
Contrary."

"They used to dance round and sing at me. They sang--

          'Mistress Mary, quite contrary,
              How does your garden grow?
           With silver bells, and cockle shells,
              And marigolds all in a row.'

I just remembered it and it made me wonder if there were really flowers
like silver bells."

She frowned a little and gave her trowel a rather spiteful dig into the
earth.

"I wasn't as contrary as they were."

But Dickon laughed.

"Eh!" he said, and as he crumbled the rich black soil she saw he was
sniffing up the scent of it, "there doesn't seem to be no need for no
one to be contrary when there's flowers an' such like, an' such lots o'
friendly wild things runnin' about makin' homes for themselves, or
buildin' nests an' singin' an' whistlin', does there?"

Mary, kneeling by him holding the seeds, looked at him and stopped
frowning.

"Dickon," she said. "You are as nice as Martha said you were. I like
you, and you make the fifth person. I never thought I should like five
people."

Dickon sat up on his heels as Martha did when she was polishing the
grate. He did look funny and delightful, Mary thought, with his round
blue eyes and red cheeks and happy looking turned-up nose.

"Only five folk as tha' likes?" he said. "Who is th' other four?"

"Your mother and Martha," Mary checked them off on her fingers, "and the
robin and Ben Weatherstaff."

Dickon laughed so that he was obliged to stifle the sound by putting his
arm over his mouth.

"I know tha' thinks I'm a queer lad," he said, "but I think tha' art th'
queerest little lass I ever saw."

Then Mary did a strange thing. She leaned forward and asked him a
question she had never dreamed of asking any one before. And she tried
to ask it in Yorkshire because that was his language, and in India a
native was always pleased if you knew his speech.

"Does tha' like me?" she said.

"Eh!" he answered heartily, "that I does. I likes thee wonderful, an' so
does th' robin, I do believe!"

"That's two, then," said Mary. "That's two for me."

And then they began to work harder than ever and more joyfully. Mary was
startled and sorry when she heard the big clock in the courtyard strike
the hour of her midday dinner.

"I shall have to go," she said mournfully. "And you will have to go too,
won't you?"

Dickon grinned.

"My dinner's easy to carry about with me," he said. "Mother always lets
me put a bit o' somethin' in my pocket."

He picked up his coat from the grass and brought out of a pocket a lumpy
little bundle tied up in a quiet clean, coarse, blue and white
handkerchief. It held two thick pieces of bread with a slice of
something laid between them.

"It's oftenest naught but bread," he said, "but I've got a fine slice o'
fat bacon with it to-day."

Mary thought it looked a queer dinner, but he seemed ready to enjoy it.

"Run on an' get thy victuals," he said. "I'll be done with mine first.
I'll get some more work done before I start back home."

He sat down with his back against a tree.

"I'll call th' robin up," he said, "and give him th' rind o' th' bacon
to peck at. They likes a bit o' fat wonderful."

Mary could scarcely bear to leave him. Suddenly it seemed as if he might
be a sort of wood fairy who might be gone when she came into the garden
again. He seemed too good to be true. She went slowly half-way to the
door in the wall and then she stopped and went back.

"Whatever happens, you--you never would tell?" she said.

His poppy-colored cheeks were distended with his first big bite of bread
and bacon, but he managed to smile encouragingly.

"If tha' was a missel thrush an' showed me where thy nest was, does tha'
think I'd tell any one? Not me," he said. "Tha' art as safe as a missel
thrush."

And she was quite sure she was.




CHAPTER XII

"MIGHT I HAVE A BIT OF EARTH?"


Mary ran so fast that she was rather out of breath when she reached her
room. Her hair was ruffled on her forehead and her cheeks were bright
pink. Her dinner was waiting on the table, and Martha was waiting near
it.

"Tha's a bit late," she said. "Where has tha' been?"

"I've seen Dickon!" said Mary. "I've seen Dickon!"

"I knew he'd come," said Martha exultantly. "How does tha' like him?"

"I think--I think he's beautiful!" said Mary in a determined voice.

Martha looked rather taken aback but she looked pleased, too.

"Well," she said, "he's th' best lad as ever was born, but us never
thought he was handsome. His nose turns up too much."

"I like it to turn up," said Mary.

"An' his eyes is so round," said Martha, a trifle doubtful. "Though
they're a nice color."

"I like them round," said Mary. "And they are exactly the color of the
sky over the moor."

Martha beamed with satisfaction.

"Mother says he made 'em that color with always lookin' up at th' birds
an' th' clouds. But he has got a big mouth, hasn't he, now?"

"I love his big mouth," said Mary obstinately. "I wish mine were just
like it."

Martha chuckled delightedly.

"It'd look rare an' funny in thy bit of a face," she said. "But I knowed
it would be that way when tha' saw him. How did tha' like th' seeds an'
th' garden tools?"

"How did you know he brought them?" asked Mary.

"Eh! I never thought of him not bringin' 'em. He'd be sure to bring 'em
if they was in Yorkshire. He's such a trusty lad."

Mary was afraid that she might begin to ask difficult questions, but she
did not. She was very much interested in the seeds and gardening tools,
and there was only one moment when Mary was frightened. This was when
she began to ask where the flowers were to be planted.

"Who did tha' ask about it?" she inquired.

"I haven't asked anybody yet," said Mary, hesitating.

"Well, I wouldn't ask th' head gardener. He's too grand, Mr. Roach is."

"I've never seen him," said Mary. "I've only seen under-gardeners and
Ben Weatherstaff."

"If I was you, I'd ask Ben Weatherstaff," advised Martha. "He's not half
as bad as he looks, for all he's so crabbed. Mr. Craven lets him do what
he likes because he was here when Mrs. Craven was alive, an' he used to
make her laugh. She liked him. Perhaps he'd find you a corner somewhere
out o' the way."

