This the Queen remembered, and with a loud shriek fled from the
apartment where Sir Kenneth was disclosed to view in a compartment of
the ample pavilion, now no longer separated from that in which they
stood. The grief and agitation of the Lady Edith, as well as the deep
interest she felt in a hasty explanation with the Scottish knight,
perhaps occasioned her forgetting that her locks were more dishevelled
and her person less heedfully covered than was the wont of high-born
damsels, in an age which was not, after all, the most prudish or
scrupulous period of the ancient time. A thin, loose garment of
pink-coloured silk made the principal part of her vestments, with
Oriental slippers, into which she had hastily thrust her bare feet, and
a scarf hurriedly and loosely thrown about her shoulders. Her head had
no other covering than the veil of rich and dishevelled locks falling
round it on every side, that half hid a countenance which a mingled
sense of modesty and of resentment, and other deep and agitated
feelings, had covered with crimson.

But although Edith felt her situation with all that delicacy which is
her sex's greatest charm, it did not seem that for a moment she placed
her own bashfulness in comparison with the duty which, as she thought,
she owed to him who had been led into error and danger on her account.
She drew, indeed, her scarf more closely over her neck and bosom, and
she hastily laid from her hand a lamp which shed too much lustre over
her figure; but, while Sir Kenneth stood motionless on the same spot in
which he was first discovered, she rather stepped towards than retired
from him, as she exclaimed, "Hasten to your post, valiant knight!--you
are deceived in being trained hither--ask no questions."

"I need ask none," said the knight, sinking upon one knee, with the
reverential devotion of a saint at the altar, and bending his eyes on
the ground, lest his looks should increase the lady's embarrassment.

"Have you heard all?" said Edith impatiently. "Gracious saints! then
wherefore wait you here, when each minute that passes is loaded with
dishonour!"

"I have heard that I am dishonoured, lady, and I have heard it from
you," answered Kenneth. "What reck I how soon punishment follows? I
have but one petition to you; and then I seek, among the sabres of the
infidels, whether dishonour may not be washed out with blood."

"Do not so, neither," said the lady. "Be wise--dally not here; all may
yet be well, if you will but use dispatch."

"I wait but for your forgiveness," said the knight, still kneeling,
"for my presumption in believing that my poor services could have been
required or valued by you."

"I do forgive you--oh, I have nothing to forgive! have been the means of
injuring you. But oh, begone! I will forgive--I will value you--that is,
as I value every brave Crusader--if you will but begone!"

"Receive, first, this precious yet fatal pledge," said the knight,
tendering the ring to Edith, who now showed gestures of impatience.

"Oh, no, no " she said, declining to receive it. "Keep it--keep it as a
mark of my regard--my regret, I would say. Oh, begone, if not for your
own sake, for mine!"

Almost recompensed for the loss even of honour, which her voice had
denounced to him, by the interest which she seemed to testify in his
safety, Sir Kenneth rose from his knee, and, casting a momentary glance
on Edith, bowed low, and seemed about to withdraw. At the same instant,
that maidenly bashfulness, which the energy of Edith's feelings had till
then triumphed over, became conqueror in its turn, and she hastened from
the apartment, extinguishing her lamp as she went, and leaving, in Sir
Kenneth's thoughts, both mental and natural gloom behind her.

She must be obeyed, was the first distinct idea which waked him from
his reverie, and he hastened to the place by which he had entered the
pavilion. To pass under the canvas in the manner he had entered required
time and attention, and he made a readier aperture by slitting the
canvas wall with his poniard. When in the free air, he felt rather
stupefied and overpowered by a conflict of sensations, than able to
ascertain what was the real import of the whole. He was obliged to spur
himself to action by recollecting that the commands of the Lady Edith
had required haste. Even then, engaged as he was amongst tent-ropes and
tents, he was compelled to move with caution until he should regain
the path or avenue, aside from which the dwarf had led him, in order to
escape the observation of the guards before the Queen's pavilion; and he
was obliged also to move slowly, and with precaution, to avoid giving an
alarm, either by falling or by the clashing of his armour. A thin cloud
had obscured the moon, too, at the very instant of his leaving the tent,
and Sir Kenneth had to struggle with this inconvenience at a moment when
the dizziness of his head and the fullness of his heart scarce left him
powers of intelligence sufficient to direct his motions.

But at once sounds came upon his ear which instantly recalled him to the
full energy of his faculties. These proceeded from the Mount of Saint
George. He heard first a single, fierce, angry, and savage bark, which
was immediately followed by a yell of agony. No deer ever bounded with
a wilder start at the voice of Roswal than did Sir Kenneth at what he
feared was the death-cry of that noble hound, from whom no ordinary
injury could have extracted even the slightest acknowledgment of pain.
He surmounted the space which divided him from the avenue, and, having
attained it, began to run towards the mount, although loaded with his
mail, faster than most men could have accompanied him even if unarmed,
relaxed not his pace for the steep sides of the artificial mound, and in
a few minutes stood on the platform upon its summit.

The moon broke forth at this moment, and showed him that the Standard of
England was vanished, that the spear on which it had floated lay broken
on the ground, and beside it was his faithful hound, apparently in the
agonies of death.



CHAPTER XIV.

     All my long arrear of honour lost,
     Heap'd up in youth, and hoarded up for age.
     Hath Honour's fountain then suck'd up the stream?
     He hath--and hooting boys may barefoot pass,
     And gather pebbles from the naked ford!
          DON SEBASTIAN.

After a torrent of afflicting sensations, by which he was at first
almost stunned and confounded, Sir Kenneth's first thought was to look
for the authors of this violation of the English banner; but in no
direction could he see traces of them. His next, which to some persons,
but scarce to any who have made intimate acquaintances among the canine
race, may appear strange, was to examine the condition of his faithful
Roswal, mortally wounded, as it seemed, in discharging the duty which
his master had been seduced to abandon. He caressed the dying animal,
who, faithful to the last, seemed to forget his own pain in the
satisfaction he received from his master's presence, and continued
wagging his tail and licking his hand, even while by low moanings he
expressed that his agony was increased by the attempts which Sir Kenneth
made to withdraw from the wound the fragment of the lance or javelin
with which it had been inflicted; then redoubled his feeble endearments,
as if fearing he had offended his master by showing a sense of the pain
to which his interference had subjected him. There was something in
the display of the dying creature's attachment which mixed as a bitter
ingredient with the sense of disgrace and desolation by which Sir
Kenneth was oppressed. His only friend seemed removed from him, just
when he had incurred the contempt and hatred of all besides. The
knight's strength of mind gave way to a burst of agonized distress, and
he groaned and wept aloud.

While he thus indulged his grief, a clear and solemn voice, close beside
him, pronounced these words in the sonorous tone of the readers of the
mosque, and in the lingua franca mutually understood by Christians and
Saracens:--

"Adversity is like the period of the former and of the latter
rain--cold, comfortless, unfriendly to man and to animal; yet from that
season have their birth the flower and the fruit, the date, the rose,
and the pomegranate."

Sir Kenneth of the Leopard turned towards the speaker, and beheld the
Arabian physician, who, approaching unheard, had seated himself a little
behind him cross-legged, and uttered with gravity, yet not without a
tone of sympathy, the moral sentences of consolation with which the
Koran and its commentators supplied him; for, in the East, wisdom is
held to consist less in a display of the sage's own inventive talents,
than in his ready memory and happy application of and reference to "that
which is written."

Ashamed at being surprised in a womanlike expression of sorrow, Sir
Kenneth dashed his tears indignantly aside, and again busied himself
with his dying favourite.

"The poet hath said," continued the Arab, without noticing the knight's
averted looks and sullen deportment, "the ox for the field, and the
camel for the desert. Were not the hand of the leech fitter than that of
the soldier to cure wounds, though less able to inflict them?"

"This patient, Hakim, is beyond thy help," said Sir Kenneth; "and,
besides, he is, by thy law, an unclean animal."

"Where Allah hath deigned to bestow life, and a sense of pain and
pleasure," said the physician, "it were sinful pride should the sage,
whom He has enlightened, refuse to prolong existence or assuage agony.
To the sage, the cure of a miserable groom, of a poor dog and of a
conquering monarch, are events of little distinction. Let me examine
this wounded animal."

Sir Kenneth acceded in silence, and the physician inspected and handled
Roswal's wound with as much care and attention as if he had been a human
being. He then took forth a case of instruments, and, by the judicious
and skilful application of pincers, withdrew from the wounded shoulder
the fragment of the weapon, and stopped with styptics and bandages the
effusion of blood which followed; the creature all the while suffering
him patiently to perform these kind offices, as if he had been aware of
his kind intentions.

"The animal may be cured," said El Hakim, addressing himself to Sir
Kenneth, "if you will permit me to carry him to my tent, and treat him
with the care which the nobleness of his nature deserves. For know,
that thy servant Adonbec is no less skilful in the race and pedigree and
distinctions of good dogs and of noble steeds than in the diseases which
afflict the human race."

"Take him with you," said the knight. "I bestow him on you freely, if
he recovers. I owe thee a reward for attendance on my squire, and have
nothing else to pay it with. For myself, I will never again wind bugle
or halloo to hound!"

The Arabian made no reply, but gave a signal with a clapping of his
hands, which was instantly answered by the appearance of two black
slaves. He gave them his orders in Arabic, received the answer that "to
hear was to obey," when, taking the animal in their arms, they removed
him, without much resistance on his part; for though his eyes turned to
his master, he was too weak to struggle.

"Fare thee well, Roswal, then," said Sir Kenneth--"fare thee well, my
last and only friend--thou art too noble a possession to be retained
by one such as I must in future call myself!--I would," he said, as the
slaves retired, "that, dying as he is, I could exchange conditions with
that noble animal!"

"It is written," answered the Arabian, although the exclamation had not
been addressed to him, "that all creatures are fashioned for the
service of man; and the master of the earth speaketh folly when he would
exchange, in his impatience, his hopes here and to come for the servile
condition of an inferior being."

"A dog who dies in discharging his duty," said the knight sternly, "is
better than a man who survives the desertion of it. Leave me, Hakim;
thou hast, on this side of miracle, the most wonderful science which man
ever possessed, but the wounds of the spirit are beyond thy power."

"Not if the patient will explain his calamity, and be guided by the
physician," said Adonbec el Hakim.

"Know, then," said Sir Kenneth, "since thou art so importunate, that
last night the Banner of England was displayed from this mound--I was
its appointed guardian--morning is now breaking--there lies the broken
banner-spear, the standard itself is lost, and here sit I a living man!"

"How!" said El Hakim, examining him; "thy armour is whole--there is no
blood on thy weapons, and report speaks thee one unlikely to return thus
from fight. Thou hast been trained from thy post--ay, trained by the
rosy cheek and black eye of one of those houris, to whom you Nazarenes
vow rather such service as is due to Allah, than such love as may
lawfully be rendered to forms of clay like our own. It has been thus
assuredly; for so hath man ever fallen, even since the days of Sultan
Adam."

"And if it were so, physician," said Sir Kenneth sullenly, "what
remedy?"

"Knowledge is the parent of power," said El Hakim, "as valour supplies
strength. Listen to me. Man is not as a tree, bound to one spot of
earth; nor is he framed to cling to one bare rock, like the scarce
animated shell-fish. Thine own Christian writings command thee, when
persecuted in one city, to flee to another; and we Moslem also know
that Mohammed, the Prophet of Allah, driven forth from the holy city of
Mecca, found his refuge and his helpmates at Medina."

"And what does this concern me?" said the Scot.

"Much," answered the physician. "Even the sage flies the tempest which
he cannot control. Use thy speed, therefore, and fly from the vengeance
of Richard to the shadow of Saladin's victorious banner."

"I might indeed hide my dishonour," said Sir Kenneth ironically, "in a
camp of infidel heathens, where the very phrase is unknown. But had I
not better partake more fully in their reproach? Does not thy advice
stretch so far as to recommend me to take the turban? Methinks I want
but apostasy to consummate my infamy."

"Blaspheme not, Nazarene," said the physician sternly. "Saladin makes
no converts to the law of the Prophet, save those on whom its precepts
shall work conviction. Open thine eyes to the light, and the great
Soldan, whose liberality is as boundless as his power, may bestow on
thee a kingdom; remain blinded if thou will, and, being one whose second
life is doomed to misery, Saladin will yet, for this span of present
time, make thee rich and happy. But fear not that thy brows shall be
bound with the turban, save at thine own free choice."

"My choice were rather," said the knight, "that my writhen features
should blacken, as they are like to do, in this evening's setting sun."

"Yet thou art not wise, Nazarene," said El Hakim, "to reject this fair
offer; for I have power with Saladin, and can raise thee high in his
grace. Look you, my son--this Crusade, as you call your wild enterprise,
is like a large dromond [The largest sort of vessels then known were
termed dromond's, or dromedaries.] parting asunder in the waves. Thou
thyself hast borne terms of truce from the kings and princes, whose
force is here assembled, to the mighty Soldan, and knewest not,
perchance, the full tenor of thine own errand."

"I knew not, and I care not," said the knight impatiently. "What avails
it to me that I have been of late the envoy of princes, when, ere night,
I shall be a gibbeted and dishonoured corpse?"

"Nay, I speak that it may not be so with thee," said the physician.
"Saladin is courted on all sides. The combined princes of this league
formed against him have made such proposals of composition and peace,
as, in other circumstances, it might have become his honour to have
granted to them. Others have made private offers, on their own
separate account, to disjoin their forces from the camp of the Kings of
Frangistan, and even to lend their arms to the defence of the standard
of the Prophet. But Saladin will not be served by such treacherous and
interested defection. The king of kings will treat only with the Lion
King. Saladin will hold treaty with none but the Melech Ric, and with
him he will treat like a prince, or fight like a champion. To Richard he
will yield such conditions of his free liberality as the swords of all
Europe could never compel from him by force or terror. He will permit
a free pilgrimage to Jerusalem, and all the places where the Nazarenes
list to worship; nay, he will so far share even his empire with his
brother Richard, that he will allow Christian garrisons in the six
strongest cities of Palestine, and one in Jerusalem itself, and suffer
them to be under the immediate command of the officers of Richard, who,
he consents, shall bear the name of King Guardian of Jerusalem.
Yet further, strange and incredible as you may think it, know, Sir
Knight--for to your honour I can commit even that almost incredible
secret--know that Saladin will put a sacred seal on this happy union
betwixt the bravest and noblest of Frangistan and Asia, by raising to
the rank of his royal spouse a Christian damsel, allied in blood to King
Richard, and known by the name of the Lady Edith of Plantagenet." [This
may appear so extraordinary and improbable a proposition that it is
necessary to say such a one was actually made. The historians, however,
substitute the widowed Queen of Naples, sister of Richard, for the
bride, and Saladin's brother for the bridegroom. They appear to have
been ignorant of the existence of Edith of Plantagenet.--See MILL'S
History of the Crusades, vol. ii., p. 61.]

"Ha!--sayest thou?" exclaimed Sir Kenneth, who, listening with
indifference and apathy to the preceding part of El Hakim's speech,
was touched by this last communication, as the thrill of a nerve,
unexpectedly jarred, will awaken the sensation of agony, even in the
torpor of palsy. Then, moderating his tone, by dint of much effort he
restrained his indignation, and, veiling it under the appearance of
contemptuous doubt, he prosecuted the conversation, in order to get as
much knowledge as possible of the plot, as he deemed it, against the
honour and happiness of her whom he loved not the less that his passion
had ruined, apparently, his fortunes, at once, and his honour.--"And
what Christian," he said, With tolerable calmness, "would sanction a
union so unnatural as that of a Christian maiden with an unbelieving
Saracen?"

"Thou art but an ignorant, bigoted Nazarene," said the Hakim. "Seest
thou not how the Mohammedan princes daily intermarry with the noble
Nazarene maidens in Spain, without scandal either to Moor or Christian?
And the noble Soldan will, in his full confidence in the blood of
Richard, permit the English maid the freedom which your Frankish manners
have assigned to women. He will allow her the free exercise of her
religion, seeing that, in very truth, it signifies but little to which
faith females are addicted; and he will assign her such place and rank
over all the women of his zenana, that she shall be in every respect his
sole and absolute queen."

"What!" said Sir Kenneth, "darest thou think, Moslem, that Richard would
give his kinswoman--a high-born and virtuous princess--to be, at best,
the foremost concubine in the haram of a misbeliever? Know, Hakim, the
meanest free Christian noble would scorn, on his child's behalf, such
splendid ignominy."

"Thou errest," said the Hakim. "Philip of France, and Henry of
Champagne, and others of Richard's principal allies, have heard the
proposal without starting, and have promised, as far as they may, to
forward an alliance that may end these wasteful wars; and the wise
arch-priest of Tyre hath undertaken to break the proposal to Richard,
not doubting that he shall be able to bring the plan to good issue. The
Soldan's wisdom hath as yet kept his proposition secret from others,
such as he of Montserrat, and the Master of the Templars, because he
knows they seek to thrive by Richard's death or disgrace, not by his
life or honour. Up, therefore, Sir Knight, and to horse. I will give
thee a scroll which shall advance thee highly with the Soldan; and deem
not that you are leaving your country, or her cause, or her religion,
since the interest of the two monarchs will speedily be the same. To
Saladin thy counsel will be most acceptable, since thou canst make him
aware of much concerning the marriages of the Christians, the treatment
of their wives, and other points of their laws and usages, which, in
the course of such treaty, it much concerns him that he should know. The
right hand of the Soldan grasps the treasures of the East, and it is the
fountain or generosity. Or, if thou desirest it, Saladin, when allied
with England, can have but little difficulty to obtain from Richard, not
only thy pardon and restoration to favour, but an honourable command in
the troops which may be left of the King of England's host, to maintain
their joint government in Palestine. Up, then, and mount--there lies a
plain path before thee."

"Hakim," said the Scottish knight, "thou art a man of peace; also thou
hast saved the life of Richard of England--and, moreover, of my own poor
esquire, Strauchan. I have, therefore, heard to an end a matter which,
being propounded by another Moslem than thyself, I would have cut short
with a blow of my dagger! Hakim, in return for thy kindness, I advise
thee to see that the Saracen who shall propose to Richard a union
betwixt the blood of Plantagenet and that of his accursed race do put on
a helmet which is capable to endure such a blow of a battle-axe as that
which struck down the gate of Acre. Certes, he will be otherwise placed
beyond the reach even of thy skill."

"Thou art, then, wilfully determined not to fly to the Saracen host?"
said the physician. "Yet, remember, thou stayest to certain destruction;
and the writings of thy law, as well as ours, prohibit man from breaking
into the tabernacle of his own life."

"God forbid!" replied the Scot, crossing himself; "but we are also
forbidden to avoid the punishment which our crimes have deserved. And
since so poor are thy thoughts of fidelity, Hakim, it grudges me that I
have bestowed my good hound on thee, for, should he live, he will have a
master ignorant of his value."

"A gift that is begrudged is already recalled," said El Hakim; "only
we physicians are sworn not to send away a patient uncured. If the dog
recover, he is once more yours."

"Go to, Hakim," answered Sir Kenneth; "men speak not of hawk and hound
when there is but an hour of day-breaking betwixt them and death. Leave
me to recollect my sins, and reconcile myself to Heaven."

"I leave thee in thine obstinacy," said the physician; "the mist hides
the precipice from those who are doomed to fall over it."

He withdrew slowly, turning from time to time his head, as if to observe
whether the devoted knight might not recall him either by word or
signal. At last his turbaned figure was lost among the labyrinth of
tents which lay extended beneath, whitening in the pale light of the
dawning, before which the moonbeam had now faded away.

But although the physician Adonbec's words had not made that impression
upon Kenneth which the sage desired, they had inspired the Scot with a
motive for desiring life, which, dishonoured as he conceived himself
to be, he was before willing to part from as from a sullied vestment no
longer becoming his wear. Much that had passed betwixt himself and the
hermit, besides what he had observed between the anchorite and Sheerkohf
(or Ilderim), he now recalled to recollection, and tended to confirm
what the Hakim had told him of the secret article of the treaty.

"The reverend impostor!" he exclaimed to himself; "the hoary hypocrite!
He spoke of the unbelieving husband converted by the believing wife; and
what do I know but that the traitor exhibited to the Saracen, accursed
of God, the beauties of Edith Plantagenet, that the hound might judge if
the princely Christian lady were fit to be admitted into the haram of
a misbeliever? If I had yonder infidel Ilderim, or whatsoever he is
called, again in the gripe with which I once held him fast as ever hound
held hare, never again should HE at least come on errand disgraceful
to the honour of Christian king or noble and virtuous maiden. But
I--my hours are fast dwindling into minutes--yet, while I have life and
breath, something must be done, and speedily."

He paused for a few minutes, threw from him his helmet, then strode down
the hill, and took the road to King Richard's pavilion.



CHAPTER XV.

     The feather'd songster, chanticleer,
     Had wound his bugle-horn,
     And told the early villager
     The coming of the morn.
     King Edward saw the ruddy streaks
     Of light eclipse the grey,
     And heard the raven's croaking throat
     Proclaim the fated day.
     "Thou'rt right," he said, "for, by the God
     That sits enthron'd on high,
     Charles Baldwin, and his fellows twain,
     This day shall surely die."
                   CHATTERTON.

On the evening on which Sir Kenneth assumed his post, Richard, after the
stormy event which disturbed its tranquillity, had retired to rest in
the plenitude of confidence inspired by his unbounded courage and the
superiority which he had displayed in carrying the point he aimed at in
presence of the whole Christian host and its leaders, many of whom, he
was aware, regarded in their secret souls the disgrace of the Austrian
