"It is painful to part with even you, good woman," he said, "but the
hour has come, and I must go. What is left in the house is yours; to me
it could be of no use, and it may serve to make you more comfortable.
Farewell--we shall meet hereafter."

"In the regions of darkness!" cried a voice that caused the peddler to
sink on the chest from which he had risen, in despair.

"What! another pack, Mr. Birch, and so well stuffed so soon!"

"Have you not done evil enough?" cried the peddler, regaining his
firmness, and springing on his feet with energy. "Is it not enough to
harass the last moments of a dying man--to impoverish me; what more
would you have?"

"Your blood!" said the Skinner, with cool malignity.

"And for money," cried Harvey, bitterly. "Like the ancient Judas, you
would grow rich with the price of blood!"

"Aye, and a fair price it is, my gentleman; fifty guineas; nearly the
weight of that carcass of yours in gold."

"Here," said Katy, promptly, "here are fifteen guineas, and these
drawers and this bed are all mine; if you will give Harvey but one
hour's start from the door, they shall be yours."

"One hour?" said the Skinner, showing his teeth, and looking with a
longing eye at the money.

"But a single hour; here, take the money."

"Hold!" cried Harvey. "Put no faith in the miscreant."

"She may do what she pleases with her faith," said the Skinner, with
malignant pleasure, "but I have the money in good keeping; as for you,
Mr. Birch, we will bear your insolence, for the fifty guineas that are
to pay for your gallows."

"Go on," said the peddler, proudly; "take me to Major Dunwoodie; he, at
least, may be kind, although just."

"I can do better than by marching so far in such disgraceful company;
this Mr. Dunwoodie has let one or two Tories go at large; but the troop
of Captain Lawton is quartered some half mile nearer, and his receipt
will get me the reward as soon as his major's. How relish you the idea
of supping with Captain Lawton, this evening, Mr. Birch?"

"Give me my money, or set Harvey free," cried the spinster in alarm.

"Your bribe was not enough, good woman, unless there is money in this
bed." Thrusting his bayonet through the ticking and ripping it for some
distance, he took a malicious satisfaction in scattering its contents
about the room.

"If," cried the housekeeper, losing sight of her personal danger in care
for her newly-acquired property, "there is law in the land, I will
be righted!"

"The law of the neutral ground is the law of the strongest; but your
tongue is not as long as my bayonet; you had, therefore, best not set
them at loggerheads, or you might be the loser."

A figure stood in the shadow of the door, as if afraid to be seen in the
group of Skinners; but a blaze of light, raised by some articles thrown
in the fire by his persecutors, showed the peddler the face of the
purchaser of his little domain. Occasionally there was some whispering
between this man and the Skinner nearest him, that induced Harvey to
suspect he had been the dupe of a contrivance in which that wretch had
participated. It was, however, too late to repine; and he followed the
party from the house with a firm and collected tread, as if marching to
a triumph, and not to a gallows. In passing through the yard, the leader
of the band fell over a billet of wood, and received a momentary hurt
from the fall; exasperated at the incident, the fellow sprang on his
feet, filling the air with execrations.

"The curse of heaven light on the log!" he exclaimed. "The night is too
dark for us to move in; throw that brand of fire in yon pile of tow, to
light up the scene."

"Hold!" roared the speculator; "you'll fire the house."

"And see the farther," said the other, hurling the brand in the midst
of the combustibles. In an instant the building was in flames. "Come on;
let us move towards the heights while we have light to pick our road."

"Villain!" cried the exasperated purchaser, "is this your
friendship--this my reward for kidnapping the peddler?"

"'Twould be wise to move more from the light, if you mean to entertain
us with abuse, or we may see too well to miss our mark," cried the
leader of the gang. The next instant he was as good as his threat, but
happily missed the terrified speculator and equally appalled spinster,
who saw herself again reduced from comparative wealth to poverty, by the
blow. Prudence dictated to the pair a speedy retreat; and the next
morning, the only remains of the dwelling of the peddler was the huge
chimney we have already mentioned.




CHAPTER XV


     Trifles, light as air,
     Are to the jealous confirmations strong
     As proofs of holy writ.

                                   --_Othello_.

The weather, which had been mild and clear since the storm, now changed
with the suddenness of the American climate. Towards evening the cold
blasts poured down from the mountains, and flurries of snow plainly
indicated that the month of November had arrived; a season whose
temperature varies from the heats of summer to the cold of winter.
Frances had stood at the window of her own apartment, watching the slow
progress of the funeral procession, with a melancholy that was too deep
to be excited by the spectacle. There was something in the sad office
that was in unison with her feelings. As she gazed around, she saw the
trees bending to the force of the wind, that swept through the valley
with an impetuosity that shook even the buildings; and the forest, that
had so lately glittered in the sun with its variegated hues, was fast
losing its loveliness, as the leaves were torn from the branches, and
were driving irregularly before the eddies of the blast. A few of the
Southern dragoons, who were patrolling the passes which led to the
encampment of the corps, could be distinguished at a distance on the
heights, bending to their pommels as they faced the keen air which had
so lately traversed the great fresh-water lakes, and drawing their watch
coats about them in tighter folds.

Frances witnessed the disappearance of the wooden tenement of the
deceased, as it was slowly lowered from the light of day; and the sight
added to the chilling dreariness of the view. Captain Singleton was
sleeping under the care of his own man, while his sister had been
persuaded to take possession of her room, for the purpose of obtaining
the repose of which her last night's journeying had robbed her. The
apartment of Miss Singleton communicated with the room occupied by the
sisters, through a private door, as well as through the ordinary passage
of the house; this door was partly open, and Frances moved towards it,
with the benevolent intention of ascertaining the situation of her
guest, when the surprised girl saw her whom she had thought to be
sleeping, not only awake, but employed in a manner that banished all
probability of present repose. The black tresses, that during the dinner
had been drawn in close folds over the crown of the head, were now
loosened, and fell in profusion over her shoulders and bosom, imparting
a slight degree of wildness to her countenance; the chilling white of
her complexion was strongly contrasted with eyes of the deepest black,
that were fixed in rooted attention on a picture she held in her hand.
Frances hardly breathed, as she was enabled, by a movement of Isabella,
to see that it was the figure of a man in the well-known dress of the
Southern horse; but she gasped for breath, and instinctively laid her
hand on her heart to quell its throbbings, as she thought she recognized
the lineaments that were so deeply seated in her own imagination.
Frances felt she was improperly prying into the sacred privacy of
another; but her emotions were too powerful to permit her to speak, and
she drew back to a chair, where she still retained a view of the
stranger, from whose countenance she felt it to be impossible to
withdraw her eyes. Isabella was too much engrossed by her own feelings
to discover the trembling figure of the witness to her actions, and she
pressed the inanimate image to her lips, with an enthusiasm that denoted
the most intense passion. The expression of the countenance of the fair
stranger was so changeable, and the transitions were so rapid, that
Frances had scarcely time to distinguish the character of the emotion,
before it was succeeded by another, equally powerful and equally
attractive. Admiration and sorrow were however the preponderating
passions; the latter was indicated by large drops that fell from her
eyes on the picture, and which followed each other over her cheek at
such intervals, as seemed to pronounce the grief too heavy to admit of
the ordinary demonstrations of sorrow. Every movement of Isabella was
marked by an enthusiasm that was peculiar to her nature, and every
passion in its turn triumphed in her breast. The fury of the wind, as it
whistled round the angles of the building, was in consonance with those
feelings, and she rose and moved to a window of her apartment. Her
figure was now hid from the view of Frances, who was about to rise and
approach her guest, when tones of a thrilling melody chained her in
breathless silence to the spot. The notes were wild, and the voice not
powerful, but the execution exceeded anything that Frances had ever
heard; and she stood, endeavoring to stifle the sounds of her own gentle
breathing, until the following song was concluded:--

     Cold blow the blasts o'er the tops of the mountain,
       And bare is the oak on the hill;
     Slowly the vapors exhale from the fountain,
       And bright gleams the ice-bordered rill;
     All nature is seeking its annual rest,
     But the slumbers of peace have deserted my breast.

     Long has the storm poured its weight on my nation,
       And long have her braves stood the shock;
     Long has her chieftain ennobled his station,
       A bulwark on liberty's rock;
     Unlicensed ambition relaxes its toil,
     Yet blighted affection represses my smile.

     Abroad the wild fury of winter is lowering,
       And leafless and drear is the tree;
     But the vertical sun of the south appears pouring
       Its fierce, killing heats upon me:
     Without, all the season's chill symptoms begin--
     But the fire of passion is raging within.

Frances abandoned her whole soul to the suppressed melody of the music,
though the language of the song expressed a meaning, which, united with
certain events of that and the preceding day, left a sensation of
uneasiness in the bosom of the warm-hearted girl, to which she had
hitherto been a stranger. Isabella moved from the window as her last
tones melted on the ear of her admiring listener, and, for the first
time, her eye rested on the pallid face of the intruder. A glow of fire
lighted the countenance of both at the same instant, and the blue eye of
Frances met the brilliant black one of her guest for a single moment,
and both fell in abashed confusion on the carpet; they advanced,
however, until they met, and had taken each other's hand, before either
ventured again to look her companion in the face.

"This sudden change in the weather, and perhaps the situation of my
brother, have united to make me melancholy, Miss Wharton," said
Isabella, in a low tone, and in a voice that trembled as she spoke.

"'Tis thought you have little to apprehend for your brother," said
Frances, in the same embarrassed manner. "Had you seen him when he was
brought in by Major Dunwoodie--"

Frances paused, with a feeling of conscious shame, for which she could
not account; and, in raising her eyes, she saw Isabella studying her
countenance with an earnestness that again drove the blood tumultuously
to her temples.

"You were speaking of Major Dunwoodie," said Isabella, faintly.

"He was with Captain Singleton."

"Do you know Dunwoodie? Have you seen him often?"

Once more Frances ventured to look her guest in the face, and again she
met the piercing eyes bent on her, as if to search her inmost heart.
"Speak, Miss Wharton; is Major Dunwoodie known to you?"

"He is my relative," said Frances, appalled at the manner of the other.

"A relative!" echoed Miss Singleton; "in what degree?--speak, Miss
Wharton, I conjure you to speak."

"Our parents were cousins," faintly replied Frances.

"And he is to be your husband?" said the stranger, impetuously.

Frances felt shocked, and all her pride awakened, by this direct attack
upon her feelings, and she raised her eyes from the floor to her
interrogator a little proudly, when the pale cheek and quivering lip of
Isabella removed her resentment in a moment.

"It is true! My conjecture is true! Speak to me, Miss Wharton; I conjure
you, in mercy to my feelings, to tell me--do you love Dunwoodie?" There
was a plaintive earnestness in the voice of Miss Singleton that disarmed
Frances of all resentment, and the only answer she could make was to
hide her burning face between her hands, as she sank back in a chair to
conceal her confusion.

Isabella paced the floor in silence for several minutes, until she had
succeeded in conquering the violence of her feelings, when she
approached the place where Frances yet sat, endeavoring to exclude the
eyes of her companion from reading the shame expressed in her
countenance, and, taking the hand of the other, she spoke with an
evident effort at composure.

"Pardon me, Miss Wharton, if my ungovernable feelings have led me into
impropriety; the powerful motive--the cruel reason"--she hesitated.
Frances now raised her face, and their eyes once more met; they fell in
each other's arms, and laid their burning cheeks together. The embrace
was long--was ardent and sincere--but neither spoke; and on separating,
Frances retired to her own room without further explanation.

While this extraordinary scene was acting in the room of Miss Singleton,
matters of great importance were agitated in the drawing-room. The
disposition of the fragments of such a dinner as the one we have
recorded was a task that required no little exertion and calculation.
Notwithstanding several of the small game had nestled in the pocket of
Captain Lawton's man, and even the assistant of Dr. Sitgreaves had
calculated the uncertainty of his remaining long in such good quarters,
still there was more left unconsumed than the prudent Miss Peyton knew
how to dispose of to advantage. Caesar and his mistress had, therefore,
a long and confidential communication on this important business; and
the consequence was, that Colonel Wellmere was left to the hospitality
of Sarah Wharton. All the ordinary topics of conversation were
exhausted, when the colonel, with a little of the uneasiness that is in
some degree inseparable from conscious error, touched lightly on the
transactions of the preceding day.

"We little thought, Miss Wharton, when I first saw this Mr. Dunwoodie in
your house in Queen Street, that he was to be the renowned warrior he
has proved himself," said Wellmere, endeavoring to smile away
his chagrin.

"Renowned, when we consider the enemy he overcame," said Sarah, with
consideration for her companion's feelings. "'Twas unfortunate, indeed,
in every respect, that you met with the accident, or doubtless the royal
arms would have triumphed in their usual manner."

"And yet the pleasure of such society as this accident has introduced me
to, would more than repay the pain of a mortified spirit and wounded
body," added the colonel, in a manner of peculiar softness.

"I hope the latter is but trifling," said Sarah, stooping to hide her
blushes under the pretext of biting a thread from the work on her knee.

"Trifling, indeed, compared to the former," returned the colonel, in the
same manner. "Ah! Miss Wharton, it is in such moments that we feel the
full value of friendship and sympathy."

Those who have never tried it cannot easily imagine what a rapid
progress a warm-hearted female can make in love, in the short space of
half an hour, particularly where there is a predisposition to the
distemper. Sarah found the conversation, when it began to touch on
friendship and sympathy, too interesting to venture her voice with a
reply. She, however, turned her eyes on the colonel, and saw him gazing
at her fine face with an admiration that was quite as manifest, and much
more soothing, than any words could make it.

Their tete-a-tete was uninterrupted for an hour; and although nothing
that would be called decided, by an experienced matron, was said by the
gentleman, he uttered a thousand things that delighted his companion,
who retired to her rest with a lighter heart than she had felt since the
arrest of her brother by the Americans.




CHAPTER XVI


    And let me the canakin clink, clink,
    And let me the canakin clink.
        A soldier's a man;
        A life's but a span;
    Why, then, let a soldier drink.
                                                --_Othello_.

The position held by the corps of dragoons, we have already said, was a
favorite place of halting with their commander. A cluster of some half
dozen small and dilapidated buildings formed what, from the circumstance
of two roads intersecting each other at right angles, was called the
village of the Four Corners. As usual, one of the most imposing of these
edifices had been termed, in the language of the day, "a house of
entertainment for man and beast." On a rough board suspended from the
gallows-looking post that had supported the ancient sign, was, however,
written in red chalk, "Elizabeth Flanagan, her hotel," an ebullition of
the wit of some of the idle wags of the corps. The matron, whose name
had thus been exalted to an office of such unexpected dignity,
ordinarily discharged the duties of a female sutler, washerwoman, and,
to use the language of Katy Haynes, petticoat doctor to the troops. She
was the widow of a soldier who had been killed in the service, and who,
like herself, was a native of a distant island, and had early tried his
fortune in the colonies of North America. She constantly migrated with
the troops; and it was seldom that they became stationary for two days
at a time but the little cart of the bustling woman was seen driving
into the encampment loaded with such articles as she conceived would
make her presence most welcome. With a celerity that seemed almost
supernatural, Betty took up her ground and commenced her occupation.
Sometimes the cart itself was her shop; at others the soldiers made her
a rude shelter of such materials as offered; but on the present
occasion she had seized on a vacant building, and, by dint of stuffing
the dirty breeches and half-dried linen of the troopers into the broken
windows, to exclude the cold, which had now become severe, she formed
what she herself had pronounced to be "most illigant lodgings." The men
were quartered in the adjacent barns, and the officers collected in the
"Hotel Flanagan," as they facetiously called headquarters. Betty was
well known to every trooper in the corps, could call each by his
Christian or nickname, as best suited her fancy; and, although
absolutely intolerable to all whom habit had not made familiar with her
virtues, was a general favorite with these partisan warriors. Her faults
were, a trifling love of liquor, excessive filthiness, and a total
disregard of all the decencies of language; her virtues, an unbounded
love for her adopted country, perfect honesty when dealing on certain
known principles with the soldiery, and great good nature. Added to
these, Betty had the merit of being the inventor of that beverage which
is so well known, at the present hour, to all the patriots who make a
winter's march between the commercial and political capitals of this
great state, and which is distinguished by the name of "cocktail."
Elizabeth Flanagan was peculiarly well qualified, by education and
circumstances, to perfect this improvement in liquors, having been
literally brought up on its principal ingredient, and having acquired
from her Virginian customers the use of mint, from its flavor in a julep
to its height of renown in the article in question. Such, then, was the
mistress of the mansion, who, reckless of the cold northern blasts,
showed her blooming face from the door of the building to welcome the
arrival of her favorite, Captain Lawton, and his companion, her master
in matters of surgery.

"Ah! by my hopes of promotion, my gentle Elizabeth, but you are
welcome!" cried the trooper, as he threw himself from his saddle. "This
villainous fresh-water gas from the Canadas has been whistling among my
bones till they ache with the cold, but the sight of your fiery
countenance is as cheery as a Christmas fire."

"Now sure, Captain Jack, ye's always full of your complimentaries,"
replied the sutler, taking the bridle of her customer. "But hurry in for
the life of you, darling; the fences hereabouts are not so strong as in
the Highlands, and there's that within will warm both sowl and body."

"So you have been laying the rails under contribution, I see. Well, that
may do for the body," said the captain coolly; "but I have had a pull at
a bottle of cut glass with a silver stand, and I doubt my relish for
your whisky for a month to come."

"If it's silver or goold that ye're thinking of, it's but little I have,
though I've a trifling bit of the continental," said Betty, with a look
of humor; "but there's that within that's fit to be put in vissils of
di'monds."

"What can she mean, Archibald?" asked Lawton. "The animal looks as if it
meant more than it says!"

"'Tis probably a wandering of the reasoning powers, created by the
frequency of intoxicating drafts," observed the surgeon, as he
deliberately threw his left leg over the pommel of the saddle, and slid
down on the right side of his horse.

"Faith, my dear jewel of a doctor, but it was this side I was expicting
you; the whole corps come down on this side but yeerself," said Betty,
winking at the trooper; "but I've been feeding the wounded, in yeer
absence, with the fat of the land."

"Barbarous stupidity!" cried the panic-stricken physician, "to feed men
laboring under the excitement of fever with powerful nutriment. Woman,
woman, you are enough to defeat the skill of Hippocrates!"

"Pooh!" said Betty, with infinite composure, "what a botheration ye make
about a little whisky; there was but a gallon betwixt a good dozen of
them, and I gave it to the boys to make them sleep asy; sure, jist as
slumbering drops."

Lawton and his companion now entered the building, and the first
objects which met their eyes explained the hidden meaning of Betty's
comfortable declaration. A long table, made of boards torn from the side
of an outbuilding, was stretched through the middle of the largest
apartment, or the barroom, and on it was a very scanty display of
crockery ware. The steams of cookery arose from an adjoining kitchen,
but the principal attraction was in a demijohn of fair proportions,
which had been ostentatiously placed on high by Betty as the object most
worthy of notice. Lawton soon learned that it was teeming with the real
amber-colored juice of the grape, and had been sent from the Locusts, as
an offering to Major Dunwoodie, from his friend Captain Wharton of the
royal army.

"And a royal gift it is," said the grinning subaltern, who made the
explanation. "The major gives us an entertainment in honor of our
victory, and you see the principal expense is borne as it should be, by
the enemy. Zounds! I am thinking that after we have primed with such
stuff, we could charge through Sir Henry's headquarters, and carry off
the knight himself."

The captain of dragoons was in no manner displeased at the prospect of
terminating so pleasantly a day that had been so agreeably commenced. He
was soon surrounded by his comrades, who made many eager inquiries
concerning his adventures, while the surgeon proceeded, with certain
quakings of the heart, to examine into the state of his wounded.
Enormous fires were snapping in the chimneys of the house, superseding
the necessity of candles, by the bright light which was thrown from the
blazing piles. The group within were all young men and tried soldiers;
in number they were rather more than a dozen, and their manners and
conversation were a strange mixture of the bluntness of the partisan
with the manners of gentlemen. Their dresses were neat, though plain;
and a never-failing topic amongst them was the performance and quality
of their horses. Some were endeavoring to sleep on the benches which
lined the walls, some were walking the apartments, and others were
seated in earnest discussion on subjects connected with the business of
their lives. Occasionally, as the door of the kitchen opened, the
hissing sounds of the frying pans and the inviting savor of the food
created a stagnation in all other employments; even the sleepers, at
such moments, would open their eyes, and raise their heads, to
reconnoiter the state of the preparations. All this time Dunwoodie sat
by himself, gazing at the fire, and lost in reflections which none of
his officers presumed to disturb. He had made earnest inquiries of
Sitgreaves after the condition of Singleton, during which a profound and
respectful silence was maintained in the room; but as soon as he had
ended, and resumed his seat, the usual ease and freedom prevailed.

The arrangement of the table was a matter of but little concern to Mrs.
Flanagan; and Caesar would have been sadly scandalized at witnessing the
informality with which various dishes, each bearing a wonderful
resemblance to the others, were placed before so many gentlemen of
consideration. In taking their places at the board, the strictest
attention was paid to precedency; for, notwithstanding the freedom of
manners which prevailed in the corps, the points of military etiquette
were at all times observed, with something approaching to religious
veneration. Most of the guests had been fasting too long to be in any
degree fastidious in their appetites; but the case was different with
Captain Lawton; he felt an unaccountable loathing at the exhibition of
Betty's food, and could not refrain from making a few passing comments
on the condition of the knives, and the clouded aspect of the plates.
The good nature and the personal affection of Betty for the offender,
restrained her, for some time, from answering his innuendoes, until
Lawton, having ventured to admit a piece of the black meat into his
mouth, inquired, with the affectation of a spoiled child,--

"What kind of animal might this have been when living, Mrs. Flanagan?"

"Sure, captain, and wasn't it the ould cow?" replied the sutler, with a
warmth that proceeded partly from dissatisfaction at the complaints of
her favorite, and partly from grief at the loss of the deceased.

"What!" roared the trooper, stopping short as he was about to swallow
his morsel, "ancient Jenny!"

"The devil!" cried another, dropping his knife and fork, "she who made
the campaign of the Jerseys with us?"

"The very same," replied the mistress of the hotel, with a piteous
aspect of woe; "a gentle baste, and one that could and did live on less
than air, at need. Sure, gentlemen, 'tis awful to have to eat sitch an
ould friend."

"And has she sunk to this?" said Lawton, pointing with his knife, to the
remnants on the table.

"Nay, captain," said Betty, with spirit, "I sould two of her quarters to
some of your troop; but divil the word did I tell the boys what an ould
frind it was they had bought, for fear it might damage their appetites."

"Fury!" cried the trooper, with affected anger, "I shall have my fellows
as limber as supple-jacks on such fare; afraid of an Englishman as a
Virginian negro is of his driver."

"Well," said Lieutenant Mason, dropping his knife and fork in a kind of
despair, "my jaws have more sympathy than many men's hearts. They
absolutely decline making any impression on the relics of their old
acquaintance."

"Try a drop of the gift," said Betty, soothingly, pouring a large
allowance of the wine into a bowl, and drinking it off as taster to the
corps. "Faith, 'tis but a wishy-washy sort of stuff after all!"

The ice once broken, however, a clear glass of wine was handed to
Dunwoodie, who, bowing to his companions, drank the liquor in the midst
of a profound silence. For a few glasses there was much formality
observed, and sundry patriotic toasts and sentiments were duly noticed
by the company. The liquor, however, performed its wonted office; and
before the second sentinel at the door had been relieved, all
recollection of the dinner and their cares was lost in the present
festivity. Dr. Sitgreaves did not return in season to partake of Jenny,
but he was in time to receive his fair proportion of Captain
Wharton's present.

"A song, a song from Captain Lawton!" cried two or three of the party in
a breath, on observing the failure of some of the points of
good-fellowship in the trooper. "Silence, for the song of
Captain Lawton."

"Gentlemen," returned Lawton, his dark eyes swimming with the bumpers he
had finished, though his head was as impenetrable as a post; "I am not
much of a nightingale, but, under the favor of your good wishes, I
consent to comply with the demand."

"Now, Jack," said Sitgreaves, nodding on his seat, "remember the air I
taught you, and--stop, I have a copy of the words in my pocket."

"Forbear, forbear, good doctor," said the trooper, filling his glass
with great deliberation; "I never could wheel round those hard names.
Gentlemen, I will give you a humble attempt of my own."

"Silence, for Captain Lawton's song!" roared five or six at once; when
the trooper proceeded, in a fine, full tone, to sing the following words
to a well-known bacchanalian air, several of his comrades helping him
through the chorus with a fervor that shook the crazy edifice they
were in:--

     Now push the mug, my jolly boys,
       And live, while live we can;
     To-morrow's sun may end your joys,
