"Circus! Oh, Ben, do take me!" cried Bab, falling into a state of great
excitement at the mere thought of such delight.

"You couldn't walk four miles," began Ben.

"Yes, I could, as easy as not."

"You haven't got any money."

"You have; I saw you showing your dollar, and you could pay for me, and
Ma would pay it back."

"Can't wait for you to get ready."

"I'll go as I am.  I don't care if it is my old hat," and Bab jerked it
on to her head.

"Your mother wouldn't like it."

"She won't like your going, either."

"She isn't my missis now.  Miss Celia wouldn't care, and I'm going, any
way."

"Do, do take me, Ben! I'll be just as good as ever was, and I'll take
care of Sanch all the way," pleaded Bab, clasping her hands and looking
round for some sign of relenting in the faces of the boys.

"Don't you bother; we don't want any girls tagging after us," said Sam,
walking off to escape the annoyance.

"I'll bring you a roll of chickerberry lozengers, if you won't tease,"
whispered kind-hearted Billy, with a consoling pat on the crown of the
shabby straw hat.

"When the circus comes here you shall go, certain sure, and Betty too,"
said Ben, feeling mean while he proposed what he knew was a hollow
mockery.

"They never do come to such little towns; you said so, and I think you
are very cross, and I won't take care of Sanch, so, now!" cried Bab,
getting into a passion, yet ready to cry, she was so disappointed.

"I Suppose it wouldn't do--" hinted Billy, with a look from Ben to the
little girl, who stood winking hard to keep the tears back.

"Of Course it wouldn't.  I'd like to see her walking eight miles. I
don't mind paying for her; it's getting her there and back. Girls are
such a bother when you want to knock round. No, Bab, you can't go.
Travel right home and don't make a fuss. Come along, boys; it 's most
eleven, and we don't want to walk fast."

Ben spoke very decidedly; and, taking Billy's arm, away they went,
leaving poor Bab and Sanch to watch them out of sight, one sobbing, the
other whining dismally.

Somehow those two figures seemed to go before Ben all along the pleasant
road, and half spoilt his fun; for though he laughed and talked, cut
canes, and seemed as merry as a grig, he could not help feeling that he
ought to have asked leave to go, and been kinder to Bab.

"Perhaps Mrs. Moss would have planned somehow so we could all go, if I'd
told her, I'd like to show her round, and she's been real good to me. No
use now. I'll take the girls a lot of candy and make it all right."

He tried to settle it in that way and trudged gayly off, hoping Sancho
wouldn't feel hurt at being left, wondering if any of "Smithers's lot"
would be round, and planning to do the honors handsomely to the boys.

It was very warm; and just outside of the town they paused by a wayside
watering-trough to wash their dusty faces, and cool off before plunging
into the excitements of the afternoon. As they stood refreshing
themselves, a baker's cart came jingling by; and Sam proposed a hasty
lunch while they rested. A supply of gingerbread was soon bought; and,
climbing the green bank above, they lay on the grass under a wild
cherry-tree, munching luxuriously, while they feasted their eyes at the
same time on the splendors awaiting them; for the great tent, with all
its flags flying, was visible from the hill.

"We'll cut across those fields,--it 's shorter than going by the road,--and
then we can look round outside till it's time to go in. I want to
have a good go at every thing, especially the lions," said Sam,
beginning on his last cookie.

"I heard 'em roar just now;" and Billy stood up to gaze with big eyes at
the flapping canvas which hid the king of beasts from his longing sight.

"That was a cow mooing.  Don't you be a donkey, Bill.  When you hear a
real roar, you'll shake in your boots," said Ben, holding up his
handkerchief to dry, after it had done double duty as towel and napkin.

"I wish you'd hurry up, Sam.  Folks are going in now. I see 'em!" and
Billy pranced with impatience; for this was his first circus, and he
firmly believed that he was going to behold all that the pictures
promised.

"Hold on a minute, while I get one more drink. Buns are dry fodder,"
said Sam, rolling over to the edge of the bank and preparing to descend
with as little trouble as possible.

He nearly went down head first, however; for, as he looked before he
leaped, he beheld a sight which caused him to stare with all his might
for an instant, then turn and beckon, saying in an eager whisper,
"Look here, boys,--quick!"

Ben and Billy peered over, and both suppressed an astonished "Hullo!"
for there stood Bab, waiting for Sancho to lap his fill out of the
overflowing trough.

Such a shabby, tired-looking couple as they were! Bab with a face as red
as a lobster and streaked with tears, shoes white with dust, playfrock
torn at the gathers, something bundled up in her apron, and one shoe
down at the heel as if it hurt her. Sancho lapped eagerly, with his eyes
shut; all his ruffles were gray with dust, and his tail hung wearily
down, the tassel at half mast, as if in mourning for the master whom he
had come to find. Bab still held the strap, intent on keeping her charge
safe, though she lost herself; but her courage seemed to be giving out,
as she looked anxiously up and down the road, seeing no sign of the three
familiar figures she had been following as steadily as a little Indian
on the war-trail.

"Oh, Sanch, what shall I do if they don't come along?  We must have gone
by them somewhere, for I don't see any one that way, and there isn't any
other road to the circus, seems to me."

Bab spoke as if the dog could understand and answer; and Sancho looked
as if he did both, for he stopped drinking, pricked up his cars, and,
fixing his sharp eyes on the grass above him, gave a suspicious bark.

"It's only squirrels; don't mind, but come along and be good; for I 'm
so tired, I don't know what to do!" sighed Bab, trying to pull him after
her as she trudged on, bound to see the outside of that wonderful tent,
even if she never got in.

But Sancho had heard a soft chirrup; and, with a sudden bound, twitched
the strap away, sprang up the bank, and landed directly on Ben's back as
he lay peeping over. A peal of laughter greeted him; and, having got the
better of his master in more ways than one, he made the most of the
advantage by playfully worrying him as he kept him down, licking his
face in spite of his struggles, burrowing in his neck with a ticklish
nose, snapping at his buttons, and yelping joyfully, as if it was the
best joke in the world to play hide-and-seek for four long miles.

Before Ben could quiet him, Bab came climbing up the bank, with such a
funny mixture of fear, fatigue, determination, and relief in her dirty
little face, that the boys could not look awful if they tried.

"How dared you come after us, miss?" demanded Sam, as she looked calmly
about her, and took a seat before she was asked.

"Sanch would come after Ben; I couldn't make him go home, so I had to
hold on till he was safe here, else he'd be lost, and then Ben would
feel bad."

The cleverness of that excuse tickled the boys immensely; and Sam tried
again, while Ben was getting the dog down and sitting on him.

"Now you expect to go to the circus, I suppose."

"Course I do.  Ben said he didn't mind paying, if I could get there
without bothering him, and I have; and I'll go home alone. I ain't
afraid. Sanch will take care of me, if you won't," answered Bab,
stoutly.

"What do you suppose your mother will say to you?" asked Ben, feeling
much reproached by her last words.

"I guess she'll say you led me into mischief; and the sharp child
nodded, as if she defied him to deny the truth of that.

"You'll catch it when you get home, Ben; so you'd better have a good
time while you can," advised Sam, thinking Bab great fun, since none of
the blame of her pranks would fall on him. "What would you have done if
you hadn't found us?" asked Billy, forgetting his impatience in his
admiration for this plucky young lady.

"I'd have gone on and seen the circus, and then I'd have gone home again
and told Betty all about it," was the prompt answer.

"But you haven't any money."

"Oh, I'd ask somebody to pay for me.  I 'm so little, it wouldn't be
much."

"Nobody would do it; so you'd have to stay outside, you see."

"No, I wouldn't.  I thought of that, and planned how I'd fix it if I
didn't find Ben. I'd make Sanch do his tricks, and get a quarter that
way; so, now! answered Bab, undaunted by any obstacle.

"I do believe she would! You are a smart child, Bab; and if I had enough
I'd take you in myself," said Billy, heartily; for, having sisters of
his own, he kept a soft place in his heart for girls, especially
enterprising ones.

"I'll take care of her.  It was very naughty to come, Bab; but, so long
as you did, you needn't worry about any thing. I'll see to you; and you
shall have a real good time," said Ben, accepting his responsibilities
without a murmur, and bound to do the handsome thing by his persistent
friend.

"I thought you would;" and Bab folded her arms, as if she had nothing
further to do but enjoy herself.

"Are you hungry?" asked Billy, fishing out several fragments of
gingerbread.

"Starving!" and Bab ate them with such a relish that Sam added a small
contribution; and Ben caught some water for her in his hand, where the
little spring bubbled up beside a stone.

"Now, you wash your face and spat down your hair, and put your hat on
straight, and then we'll go," commanded Ben, giving Sanch a roll on the
grass to clean him.

Bab scrubbed her face till it shone; and, pulling down her apron to wipe
it, scattered a load of treasures collected in her walk. Some of the
dead flowers, bits of moss, and green twigs fell near Ben, and one
attracted his attention,--a spray of broad, smooth leaves, with a
bunch of whitish berries on it.

"Where did you get that?" he asked, poking it with his foot.

"In a swampy place, coming along.  Sanch saw something down there; and I
went with him, 'cause I thought may be it was a musk-rat, and you'd like
one if we could get him."

"Was it?" asked the boys all at once, and with intense interest.

"No; only a snake, and I don't care for snakes. I picked some of that,
it was so green and pretty. Thorny likes queer leaves and berries, you
know," answered Bab, "spatting," down her rough locks.

"Well, he won't like that, nor you either; it's poisonous, and I
shouldn't wonder if you'd got poisoned, Bab. Don't touch it!
Swamp-sumach is horrid stuff,--Miss Celia said so;" and Ben looked
anxiously at Bab, who felt her chubby face all over, and examined her
dingy hands with a solemn air, asking, eagerly,--

"Will it break out on me 'fore I get to the circus?"

"Not for a day or so, I guess; but it's bad when it does come."

"I don't care, if I see the animals first.  Come quick, and never mind
the old weeds and things," said Bab, much relieved; for present bliss
was all she had room for now in her happy little heart.



CHAPTER XIV

SOMEBODY GETS LOST

Putting all care behind them, the young folks ran down the hill, with a
very lively dog gambolling beside them, and took a delightfully
tantalizing survey of the external charms of the big tent. But people
were beginning to go in, and it was impossible to delay when they came
round to the entrance.

Ben felt that now "his foot was on his native heath," and the superb air
of indifference with which he threw down his dollar at the
ticket-office, carelessly swept up the change, and strolled into the
tent with his hands in his pockets, was so impressive that even big Sam
repressed his excitement and meekly followed their leader, as he led
them from cage to cage, doing the honors as if he owned the whole
concern. Bab held tight to the flap of his jacket, staring about her
with round eyes, and listening with little gasps of astonishment or
delight to the roaring of lions, the snarling of tigers, the chatter of
the monkeys, the groaning of camels, and the music of the very brass
band shut up in a red bin.

Five elephants were tossing their hay about in the middle of the
menagerie, and Billy's legs shook under him as he looked up at the big
beasts whose long noses and small, sagacious eyes filled him with awe.
Sam was so tickled by the droll monkeys that the others left him before
the cage and went on to see the zebra, "striped just like Ma's muslin
gown," Bab declared. But the next minute she forgot all about him in her
raptures over the ponies and their tiny colts; especially one mite of a
thing who lay asleep on the hay, such a miniature copy of its little
mouse-colored mamma that one could hardly believe it was alive.

"Oh, Ben, I must feel of it!--the cunning baby horse!" and down went
Bab inside the rope to pat and admire the pretty creature, while its
mother smelt suspiciously at the brown hat, and baby lazily opened one
eye to see what was going on.

"Come out of that, it isn't allowed," commanded Ben, longing to do the
same thing, but mindful of the proprieties and his own dignity.

Bab reluctantly tore herself away to find consolation in watching the
young lions, who looked so like big puppies, and the tigers washing
their faces just as puss did.

"If I stroked 'em, wouldn't they purr?" she asked, bent on enjoying
herself, while Ben held her skirts lest she should try the experiment.

"You'd better not go to patting them, or you'll get your hands clawed
up. Tigers do purr like fun when they are happy, but these fellers never
are, and you'll only see 'em spit and snarl," said Ben, leading the way
to the humpy carrels, who were peacefully chewing their cud and longing
for the desert, with a dreamy, far-away look in their mournful eyes.

Here, leaning on the rope, and scientifically biting a straw while he
talked, Ben played showman to his heart's content till the neigh of a
horse from the circus tent beyond reminded him of the joys to come.

"We'd better hurry along and get good seats before folks begin to crowd.
I want to sit near the curtain and see if any of Smitthers's lot are
'round."

"I ain't going way off there; you can't see half so well, and that big
drum makes such a noise you can't hear yourself think," said Sam, who
had rejoined them.

