in vain.

The influence of the insinuating eunuchs (a race who had never been seen
within the gates of Cyrus until the incorporation of Media, Lydia and
Babylon, in which countries they had filled many of the highest offices
at court and in the state), was now waning, and the importance of the
noble Achaemenidae increasing in proportion; for Cambyses applied oftener
to the latter than to the former for advice in matters relating to the
welfare of the country.

The aged Hystaspes, father of Darius, governor of Persia proper and
cousin to the king; Pharnaspes, Cambyses' grandfather on the mother's
side; Otanes, his uncle and father-in-law.  Intaphernes, Aspathines,
Gobryas, Hydarnes, the general Megabyzus, father of Zopyrus, the envoy
Prexaspes, the noble Croesus, and the old warrior Araspes; in short, the
flower of the ancient Persian aristocracy, were now at the court of
Cambyses.

To this must be added that the entire nobility of the realm, the satraps
or governors of the provinces, and the chief priests from every town were
also assembled at Babylon to celebrate the king's birthday.

     [The king's birthday was the principal feast among the Persians, and
     called "the perfect feast."  Herod. I. 133.  Birthdays were held in
     much honor by the ancients, and more especially those of their
     kings.  Both the great bilingual Egyptian tablets, which we possess
     (the Rosetta stone, line 10 of hieroglyphic text; Gr. text, line 46.
     and the edict of Canopus ed. Lepsius, hieroglyphic text 1. 3.  Gr.
     text 1. 5.) mention the celebration of the birthday of one of the
     Ptolemies; and even of Rameses II., so early as the 14th century B.
     C.  we read: "There was joy in heaven on his birthday."]

The entire body of officials and deputies streamed from the provinces up
to the royal city, bringing presents to their ruler and good wishes; they
came also to take part in the great sacrifices at which horses, stags,
bulls and asses were slaughtered in thousands as offerings to the gods.

At this festival all the Persians received gifts, every man was allowed
to ask a petition of the king, which seldom remained unfulfilled, and in
every city the people were feasted at the royal expense.  Cambyses had
commanded that his marriage with Nitetis should be celebrated eight days
after the birthday, and all the magnates of the realms should be invited
to the ceremony.

The streets of Babylon swarmed with strangers, the colossal palaces on
both shores of the Euphrates were overfilled, and all the houses stood
adorned in festal brightness.

The zeal thus displayed by his people, this vast throng of human beings,
--representing and bringing around him, as it were, his entire kingdom,
contributed not a little to raise the king's spirits.

His pride was gratified; and the only longing left in his heart had been
stilled by Nitetis' love.  For the first time in his life he believed
himself completely happy, and bestowed his gifts, not only from a sense
of his duty as king of Persia, but because the act of giving was in
itself a pleasure.

Megabyzus could not extol the deeds of Bartja and his friends too highly.
Cambyses embraced the young warriors, gave them horses and gold chains,
called them "brothers" and reminded Bartja, that he had promised to grant
him a petition if he returned victorious.

At this Bartja cast down his eyes, not knowing at first in what form to
begin his request, and the king answered laughing: "Look, my friends; our
young hero is blushing like a girl!  It seems I shall have to grant
something important; so he had better wait until my birthday, and then,
at supper, when the wine has given him courage, he shall whisper in my
ear what he is now afraid to utter.  Ask much, Bartja, I am happy myself,
and wish all my friends to be happy too."  Bartja only smiled in answer
and went to his mother; for he had not yet opened his heart to her on the
matter which lay so near it.

He was afraid of meeting with decided opposition; but Croesus had cleared
the way far him by telling Kassandane so much in praise of Sappho, her
virtues and her graces, her talents and skill, that Nitetis and Atossa
maintained she must have given the old man a magic potion, and
Kassandane, after a short resistance, yielded to her darling's
entreaties.

"A Greek woman the lawful wife of a Persian prince of the blood!"  cried
the blind woman.  "Unheard of! What will Cambyses say?  How can we gain
his consent?"

"On that matter you may be at ease, my mother," answered Bartja, "I am as
certain that my brother will give his consent, as I am that Sappho will
prove an ornament and honor to our house."

"Croesus has already told me much in favor of this maiden," answered
Kassandane," and it pleases me that thou hast at last resolved to marry;
but never-the-less this alliance does not seem suitable for a son of
Cyrus.  And have you forgotten that the Achaemenidae; will probably
refuse to recognize the child of a Greek mother as their future king,
if Cambyses should remain childless?"

"Mother, I fear nothing; for my heart is not set upon the crown.  And
indeed many a king of Persia has had a mother of far lower parentage than
my Sappho."  I feel persuaded that when my relations see the precious
jewel I have won on the Nile, not one of them will chide me."

"The gods grant that Sappho may be equal to our Nitetis!"  answered
Kassandane, "I love her as if she were my own child, and bless the day
which brought her to Persia.  The warm light of her eyes has melted your
brother's hard heart; her kindness and gentleness bring beauty into the
night of my blind old age, and her sweet earnestness and gravity have
changed your sister Atossa from an unruly child into a gentle maiden.
But now call them, (they are playing in the garden), and we will tell
them of the new friend they are to gain through you."

"Pardon me, my mother," answered Bartja, "but I must beg you not to tell
my sister until we are sure of the king's consent."

"You are right, my son.  We must conceal your wish, to save Nitetis and
Atossa from a possible disappointment.  A bright hope unfulfilled is
harder to bear than an unexpected sorrow.  So let us wait for your
brother's consent, and may the gods give their blessing!"  Early in the
morning of the king's birthday the Persians offered their sacrifices on
the shores of the Euphrates.  A huge altar of silver had been raised on
an artificial hill.  On this a mighty fire had been kindled,  from which
flames and sweet odors rose towards heaven.  White-robed magi fed the
fire with pieces of daintily-cut sandal-wood, and stirred it with bundles
of rods.

A cloth, the Paiti-dhana, was bound round the  heads of the priests, the
ends of which covered the mouth, and thus preserved the pure fire from
pollution by human breath.

     [The Persians were ordered to hold this little square piece of cloth
     before their mouths when they prayed.  It was from 2 to 7 fingers
     broad.  Anquetil gives a drawing of it in his Zend-Avesia.  Strabo
     speaks of the Paiti-dhana p. 733.  He says the ends of the cloth
     used as a covering for the head hung down over the mouth.]

The victims had been slaughtered in a meadow near the river, the flesh
cut into pieces, sprinkled with salt, and laid out on tender grasses,
sprouts of clover, myrtle-blossoms, and laurel-leaves, that the beautiful
daughter of Ormuzd, the patient, sacred Earth, might not be touched by
aught that was dead or bleeding.

Oropastes, the chief Destur,--[Priest]--now drew near the fire and cast
fresh butter into it.  The flames leapt up into the air and all the
Persians fell on their knees and hid their faces, in the belief that the
fire was now ascending to their great god and father.  The Magian then
took a mortar, laid some leaves and stalks of the sacred herb Haomas
within it, crushed them and poured the ruddy juice, the food of the gods,
into the flames.

After this he raised his hands to heaven, and, while the other priests
continually fed the flames into a wilder blaze by casting in fresh
butter, sang a long prayer out of the sacred books.  In this prayer the
blessing of the gods was called down on everything pure and good, but
principally on the king and his entire realm.  The good spirits of light,
life and truth; of all noble deeds; of the Earth, the universal giver; of
the refreshing waters, the shining metals, the pastures, trees and
innocent creatures, were praised: the evil spirits of darkness; of lying,
the deceiver of mankind; of disease, death and sin; of the rigid cold;
the desolating heat; of all odious dirt and vermin, were cursed, together
with their father the malignant Ahriman.  At the end all present joined
in singing the festival prayer: "Purity and glory are sown for them that
are pure and upright in heart."

The sacrificial ceremony was concluded with the king's prayer, and then
Cambyses, arrayed in his richest robes, ascended a splendid chariot drawn
by four snow-white Nicoean horses, and studded with topazes, cornelian
and amber, and was conveyed to the great reception-hall, where the
deputies and officers from the provinces awaited him.

As soon as the king and his retinue had departed, the priests selected,
for themselves, the best pieces of the flesh which had been offered in
sacrifice, and allowed the thronging crowd to take the rest.

The Persian divinities disdained sacrifices in the light of food,
requiring only the souls of the slaughtered animals, and many a poor man,
especially among the priests, subsisted on the flesh of the abundant
royal sacrifices.

The prayer offered up by the Magian was a model for those of the Persian
people.  No man was allowed to ask anything of the gods for himself
alone.  Every pious soul was rather to implore blessings for his nation;
for was not each only a part of the whole? and did not each man share in
the blessings granted to the whole kingdom?  But especially they were
commanded to pray for the king, in whom the realm was embodied and
shadowed forth.  It was this beautiful surrender of self for the public
weal, that had made the Persians great.  The doctrines of the Egyptian
priesthood represented the Pharaohs as actual divinities, while the
Persian monarchs were only called "sons of the gods;" yet the power of
the latter was far more absolute and unfettered than that of the former;
the reason for this being that the Persians had been wise enough to free
themselves from priestly domination, while the Pharaohs, as we have seen,
if not entirely under the dominion of the priestly caste, were yet under
its influence in the most important matters.

The Egyptian intolerance of all strange religions was unknown in Asia.
The conquered Babylonians were allowed by Cyrus to retain their own gods,
after their incorporation in the great Asiatic kingdom.  The Jews,
Ionians and inhabitants of Asia Minor, in short, the entire mass of
nations subject to Cambyses remained unmolested in possession of their
hereditary religions and customs.

Beside the great altar, therefore, might be seen many a smaller
sacrificial flame, kindled in honor of their own divinities, by the
envoys from the conquered provinces to this great birthday feast.

Viewed from a distance, the immense city looked like a gigantic furnace.
Thick clouds of smoke hovered over its towers, obscuring the light of the
burning May sun.

By the time the king had reached the palace, the multitude who had come
to take part in the festival had formed themselves into a procession of
interminable length, which wandered on through the straight streets of
Babylon towards the royal palace.

Their road was strewn with myrtle and palm-branches, roses, poppy and
oleander-blossoms, and with leaves of the silver poplar, palm and laurel;
the air perfumed with incense, myrrh, and a thousand other sweet odors.
Carpets and flags waved and fluttered from the houses.

Music too was there; the shrill peal of the Median trumpet, and soft tone
