depending on him, yet all ready to give him up when he was needed. A
plain man, but honest and true, and loving as a woman; I soon saw that
as he went on talking, half to me and half to himself, for sometimes
he wandered a little toward the end. I've read books, heard sermons,
and seen good folks, but nothing ever came so close or did me so much
good as seeing this man die. He had one chance and gave it cheerfully.
He longed for those he loved, and let 'em go with a good-by they
couldn't hear. He suffered all the pains we most shrink from without a
murmur, and kept my heart warm while his own was growing cold. It's
no use trying to tell that part of it; but I heard prayers that night
that meant something, and I saw how faith could hold a soul up when
everything was gone but God."

Saul stopped there with a sudden huskiness in his deep voice, and when
he went on it was in the tone of one who speaks of a dear friend.

"Joe grew still by and by, and I thought he was asleep, for I felt his
breath when I tucked him up, and his hand held on to mine. The cold
sort of numbed me, and I dropped off, too weak and stupid to think or
feel. I never should have waked up if it hadn't been for Joe. When I
came to, it was morning, and I thought I was dead, for all I could see
was that great field of white mounds, like graves, and a splendid sky
above. Then I looked for Joe, remembering; but he had put my coat back
over me, and lay stiff and still under the snow that covered him like
a shroud, all except his face. A bit of my cape had blown over it, and
when I took it off and the sun shone on his dead face, I declare to
you it was so full of heavenly peace I felt as if that common man had
been glorified by God's light, and rewarded by God's 'Well done.'
That's all."

No one spoke for a moment, while the women wiped their eyes, and Saul
dropped his as if to hide something softer than tears.

"It was very noble, very touching. And you? how did you get off at
last?" asked Randal, with real admiration and respect in his usually
languid face.

"Crawled off," answered Saul, relapsing into his former brevity of
speech.

"Why not before, and save yourself all that misery?"

"Couldn't leave Joe."

"Ah, I see; there were two heroes that night."

"Dozens, I've no doubt. Those were times that made heroes of men, and
women, too."

"Tell us more;" begged Emily, looking up with an expression none of
her admirers ever brought to her face by their softest compliments or
wiliest gossip.

"I've done my part. It's Mr. Randal's turn now;" and Saul drew himself
out of the ruddy circle of firelight, as if ashamed of the prominent
part he was playing.

Sophie and her friend had often heard Randal talk, for he was an
accomplished _raconteur_, but that night he exerted himself, and was
unusually brilliant and entertaining, as if upon his mettle. The
Bassets were charmed. They sat late and were very merry, for
Aunt Plumy got up a little supper for them, and her cider was as
exhilarating as champagne. When they parted for the night and Sophie
kissed her aunt, Emily did the same, saying heartily,--

"It seems as if I'd known you all my life, and this is certainly the
most enchanting old place that ever was."

"Glad you like it, dear. But it ain't all fun, as you'll find out
to-morrow when you go to work, for Sophie says you must," answered
Mrs. Basset, as her guests trooped away, rashly promising to like
everything.

They found it difficult to keep their word when they were called at
half past six next morning. Their rooms were warm, however, and
they managed to scramble down in time for breakfast, guided by the
fragrance of coffee and Aunt Plumy's shrill voice singing the good old
hymn--

  "Lord, in the morning Thou shalt hear
  My voice ascending high."

An open fire blazed on the hearth, for the cooking was done in
the lean-to, and the spacious, sunny kitchen was kept in all its
old-fashioned perfection, with the wooden settle in a warm nook, the
tall clock behind the door, copper and pewter utensils shining on the
dresser, old china in the corner closet and a little spinning wheel
rescued from the garret by Sophie to adorn the deep window, full of
scarlet geraniums, Christmas roses, and white chrysanthemums.

The young lady, in a checked apron and mob-cap, greeted her friends
with a dish of buckwheats in one hand, and a pair of cheeks that
proved she had been learning to fry these delectable cakes.

"You do 'keep it up' in earnest, upon my word; and very becoming it
is, dear. But won't you ruin your complexion and roughen your hands if
you do so much of this new fancy-work?" asked Emily, much amazed at
this novel freak.

"I like it, and really believe I've found my proper sphere at last.
Domestic life seems so pleasant to me that I feel as if I'd better
keep it up for the rest of my life," answered Sophie, making a pretty
picture of herself as she cut great slices of brown bread, with the
early sunshine touching her happy face.

"The charming Miss Vaughan in the role of a farmer's wife. I find it
difficult to imagine, and shrink from the thought of the wide-spread
dismay such a fate will produce among her adorers," added Randal, as
he basked in the glow of the hospitable fire.

"She might do worse; but come to breakfast and do honor to my
handiwork," said Sophie, thinking of her worn-out millionnaire, and
rather nettled by the satiric smile on Randal's lips.

"What an appetite early rising gives one. I feel equal to almost
anything, so let me help wash cups," said Emily, with unusual energy,
when the hearty meal was over and Sophie began to pick up the dishes
as if it was her usual work.

Ruth went to the window to water the flowers, and Randal followed to
make himself agreeable, remembering her defence of him last night.
He was used to admiration from feminine eyes, and flattery from soft
lips, but found something new and charming in the innocent delight
which showed itself at his approach in blushes more eloquent than
words, and shy glances from eyes full of hero-worship.

"I hope you are going to spare me a posy for to-morrow night, since
I can be fine in no other way to do honor to the dance Miss Sophie
proposes for us," he said, leaning in the bay window to look down
on the little girl, with the devoted air he usually wore for pretty
women.

"Anything you like! I should be so glad to have you wear my flowers.
There will be enough for all, and I've nothing else to give to people
who have made me as happy as cousin Sophie and you," answered Ruth,
half drowning her great calla as she spoke with grateful warmth.

"You must make her happy by accepting the invitation to go home with
her which I heard given last night. A peep at the world would do you
good, and be a pleasant change, I think."

"Oh, very pleasant! but would it do me good?" and Ruth looked up with
sudden seriousness in her blue eyes, as a child questions an elder,
eager, yet wistful.

"Why not?" asked Randal, wondering at the hesitation.

"I might grow discontented with things here if I saw splendid houses
and fine people. I am very happy now, and it would break my heart to
lose that happiness, or ever learn to be ashamed of home."

"But don't you long for more pleasure, new scenes and other friends
than these?" asked the man, touched by the little creature's loyalty
to the things she knew and loved.

"Very often, but mother says when I'm ready they will come, so I wait
and try not to be impatient." But Ruth's eyes looked out over the
green leaves as if the longing was very strong within her to see more
of the unknown world lying beyond the mountains that hemmed her in.

"It is natural for birds to hop out of the nest, so I shall expect to
see you over there before long, and ask you how you enjoy your first
flight," said Randal, in a paternal tone that had a curious effect on
Ruth.

To his surprise, she laughed, then blushed like one of her own roses,
and answered with a demure dignity that was very pretty to see.

"I intend to hop soon, but it won't be a very long flight or very far
from mother. She can't spare me, and nobody in the world can fill her
place to me."

"Bless the child, does she think I'm going to make love to her,"
thought Randal, much amused, but quite mistaken. Wiser women had
thought so when he assumed the caressing air with which he beguiled
them into the little revelations of character he liked to use, as the
south wind makes flowers open their hearts to give up their odor, then
leaves them to carry it elsewhere, the more welcome for the stolen
sweetness.

"Perhaps you are right. The maternal wing is a safe shelter for
confiding little souls like you, Miss Ruth. You will be as comfortable
here as your flowers in this sunny window," he said, carelessly
pinching geranium leaves, and ruffling the roses till the pink petals
of the largest fluttered to the floor.

As if she instinctively felt and resented something in the man which
his act symbolized, the girl answered quietly, as she went on with her
work, "Yes, if the frost does not touch me, or careless people spoil
me too soon."

Before Randal could reply Aunt Plumy approached like a maternal hen
who sees her chicken in danger.

"Saul is goin' to haul wood after he's done his chores, mebbe you'd
like to go along? The view is good, the roads well broke, and the day
uncommon fine."

"Thanks; it will be delightful, I dare say," politely responded the
lion, with a secret shudder at the idea of a rural promenade at 8 A.M.
in the winter.

"Come on, then; we'll feed the stock, and then I'll show you how to
yoke oxen," said Saul, with a twinkle in his eye as he led the way,
when his new aide had muffled himself up as if for a polar voyage.

"Now, that's too bad of Saul! He did it on purpose, just to please
you, Sophie," cried Ruth presently, and the girls ran to the window to
behold Randal bravely following his host with a pail of pigs' food in
each hand, and an expression of resigned disgust upon his aristocratic
face.

"To what base uses may we come," quoted Emily, as they all nodded and
smiled upon the victim as he looked back from the barn-yard, where he
was clamorously welcomed by his new charges.

"It is rather a shock at first, but it will do him good, and Saul
won't be too hard upon him, I'm sure," said Sophie, going back to her
work, while Ruth turned her best buds to the sun that they might be
ready for a peace-offering to-morrow.

There was a merry clatter in the big kitchen for an hour; then Aunt
Plumy and her daughter shut themselves up in the pantry to perform
some culinary rites, and the young ladies went to inspect certain
antique costumes laid forth in Sophie's room.

"You see, Em, I thought it would be appropriate to the house and
season to have an old-fashioned dance. Aunt has quantities of ancient
finery stowed away, for great-grandfather Basset was a fine old
gentleman and his family lived in state. Take your choice of the
crimson, blue or silver-gray damask. Ruth is to wear the worked muslin
and quilted white satin skirt, with that coquettish hat."

"Being dark, I'll take the red and trim it up with this fine lace.
You must wear the blue and primrose, with the distracting high-heeled
shoes. Have you any suits for the men?" asked Emily, throwing herself
at once into the all-absorbing matter of costume.

"A claret velvet coat and vest, silk stockings, cocked hat and
snuff-box for Randal. Nothing large enough for Saul, so he must wear
his uniform. Won't Aunt Plumy be superb in this plum-colored satin and
immense cap?"

A delightful morning was spent in adapting the faded finery of the
past to the blooming beauty of the present, and time and tongues flew
till the toot of a horn called them down to dinner.

The girls were amazed to see Randal come whistling up the road with
his trousers tucked into his boots, blue mittens on his hands, and an
unusual amount of energy in his whole figure, as he drove the oxen,
while Saul laughed at his vain attempts to guide the bewildered
beasts.

"It's immense! The view from the hill is well worth seeing, for the
snow glorifies the landscape and reminds one of Switzerland. I'm going
to make a sketch of it this afternoon; better come and enjoy the
delicious freshness, young ladies."

Randal was eating with such an appetite that he did not see the
glances the girls exchanged as they promised to go.

"Bring home some more winter-green, I want things to be real nice, and
we haven't enough for the kitchen," said Ruth, dimpling with girlish
delight as she imagined herself dancing under the green garlands in
her grandmother's wedding gown.

It was very lovely on the hill, for far as the eye could reach lay the
wintry landscape sparkling with the brief beauty of sunshine on virgin
snow. Pines sighed overhead, hardy birds flitted to and fro, and in
all the trodden spots rose the little spires of evergreen ready for
its Christmas duty. Deeper in the wood sounded the measured ring of
axes, the crash of falling trees, while the red shirts of the men
added color to the scene, and a fresh wind brought the aromatic breath
of newly cloven hemlock and pine.

"How beautiful it is! I never knew before what winter woods were like.
Did you, Sophie?" asked Emily, sitting on a stump to enjoy the novel
pleasure at her ease.

"I've found out lately; Saul lets me come as often as I like, and this
fine air seems to make a new creature of me," answered Sophie, looking
about her with sparkling eyes, as if this was a kingdom where she
reigned supreme.

"Something is making a new creature of you, that is very evident. I
haven't yet discovered whether it is the air or some magic herb among
that green stuff you are gathering so diligently;" and Emily laughed
to see the color deepen beautifully in her friend's half-averted face.

"Scarlet is the only wear just now, I find. If we are lost like babes
in the woods there are plenty of redbreasts to cover us with leaves,"
and Randal joined Emily's laugh, with a glance at Saul, who had just
pulled his coat off.

"You wanted to see this tree go down, so stand from under and I'll
show you how it's done," said the farmer, taking up his axe, not
unwilling to gratify his guests and display his manly accomplishments
at the same time.

It was a fine sight, the stalwart man swinging his axe with
magnificent strength and skill, each blow sending a thrill through the
stately tree, till its heart was reached and it tottered to its fall.
Never pausing for breath Saul shook his yellow mane out of his eyes,
and hewed away, while the drops stood on his forehead and his arm
ached, as bent on distinguishing himself as if he had been a knight
tilting against his rival for his lady's favor.

"I don't know which to admire most, the man or his muscle. One doesn't
often see such vigor, size and comeliness in these degenerate days,"
said Randal, mentally booking the fine figure in the red shirt.

"I think we have discovered a rough diamond. I only wonder if Sophie
