the beginning of a series of monstrous craters where men had begun
rebuilding underground, the ruined landing field, and a section of what
had been the great business district. Now it was only a field of
rubble, with bits of windowless walls leading up to a crazy tangle of
twisted girders. Only memory could locate where the major streets had
been. Over everything lay the green wash of _incandite_, and the wind
carried the smell of a charnel house. There was no sign of the
apartment where he and Ronda had lived.

He started down the ramp at last, seeing for the first time the motley
crew that had come out to meet the heroes of the battle of Throm. They
had spotted him already, however, and some were deserting the men at
the sight of his officer's uniform. Their cries mingled into an insane,
whining babble in his ears.

"... Just a scrap for an old man, general ... three children at home
starving ... fought under Jones, captain ... cigarette?"

It was a sea of clutching hands, ragged bodies with scrawny arms and
bloated stomachs, trembling and writhing in its eagerness to get to him
first. Then as one of the temporary officers swung back with a couple
of field attendants, it broke apart to let him pass, its gaze riveted
on him as he stumbled between the lines.

He spotted a billboard one man was wearing, and his eyes focused
sharply on it. "Honest Feroiya," it announced. "Credit exchange. Best
rates in all Kordule." Below that, chalked into a black square, was the
important part: "2,345 credits the dollar."

Duke shook his head but the sign did not change. A quarter million
credits for a hundred dollars. And he'd thought--

"Help a poor old widow." A trembling hand plucked at his sleeve, and he
swung to face a woman in worse rags than the others, her eyes dull and
unfocused, her lips mouthing the words only by habit. "Help the widow
of General Dayole!"

He gasped as he recognized her. Five years before, he'd danced with her
at a party given by Dayole--danced and agreed that the war was ruining
them and that it couldn't get worse.

He reached into his pocket, before remembering the worthlessness of his
bills. But there was half a pack of the wretched cigarettes issued the
men. He tossed them to her and fled, while the other beggars scrambled
toward her.

He walked woodenly across the leprous field, skirting away from the
Earth ships, toward a collection of tents and tin huts that had
swallowed the other veterans. Then he stopped and cursed to himself as
a motorcycle sprang into life near the Earth freighters and came toward
him. Naturally, they'd spotted his hair and skin color.

The well-fed, smooth-faced young man swung the machine beside him.
"Captain O'Neill?" he asked, but his voice indicated that he was
already certain. "Hop in, sir. Director Flannery has been looking
forward to meeting you!"

Duke went steadily on, not varying his steps. The machine paced him
uncertainly. "Director Flannery of Earth Foreign Office, Captain
O'Neill. He requests your presence," he shouted over the purr of his
machine. He started to swing ahead of the marching man.

Duke kept his eyes on his goal. When his steady steps almost brought
him against the cycle, it roared out of his way. He could hear it
behind him as he walked, but it faded.

There was only the sight and smell of Kordule ahead of him.




II


Senators were already filing through the Presidium as Edmonds of South
Africa came out of his office with Daugherty of the Foreign Office. The
youngest senator stopped beside the great bronze doors, studying the
situation. Then he sighed in relief. "It's all right," he told
Daugherty. "Premier Lesseur's presiding."

He hadn't been sure the premier's words were a full promise before. And
while he hadn't been too worried, it was good to see that the doubtful
vice-premier wouldn't be presiding.

"It better be all right," the diplomat said. "Otherwise, it's my neck.
Cathay's counting on Earth to help against the Kloomirians, and if
Director Flannery ever finds I committed us--"

Edmonds studied the seats that were filling, and nodded with more
confidence as he saw that most of the senators on whom he counted were
there. "I've got enough votes, as I told you. And with Lesseur
presiding, the opposition won't get far with parliamentary tricks
against me. This time, Earth's going to act."

Daugherty grunted, obviously still worried, and headed up the steps to
the reserved Visitors' Gallery, while Edmonds moved to his seat in the
assembly room. Today he didn't even mind the fact that it was back in
the section reserved for the newest members--the unknowns and
unimportants, from the way the press treated them. He would be neither
unknown nor unimportant, once his bill was passed, and his brief
experience would only add to the miracle he was working.

Looking back on his efforts, he found the results something of a
miracle to himself. It had taken two years of vote-swapping, of careful
propaganda, and of compromise with his principles. That business of
voting for the combined Throm-Meloa Aid Bill had been a bitter thing;
but old Harding was scared sick of antagonizing the aliens by seeming
partiality, and Edmonds' switch was the step needed to start the
softening up.

At that, he'd been lucky. In spite of what he'd learned of the
manipulation of sociological relationships, in spite of the long
preparation in advertising dynamics and affective psychology, he
couldn't have made it if Cathay hadn't been a human colony!

Now, though, Lesseur was calling the chamber to order. The senators
quieted quickly, and there was almost complete silence as the old man
picked up the paper before him.

"The Senate will consider Resolution 1843 today," Lesseur said quietly.
"_A Resolution that Earth shall grant assistance to the Colony of
Cathay in the event of any aggressive alien act__, proposed by Sir
Alfred Edmonds. Since the required time for deliberation has elapsed,
the chair will admit discussion on this resolution. Senator Edmonds!"

Edmonds was on his feet, and every face turned to him. The spotlight
came down on him, blinding him to the others. He picked up the
microphone, polishing the words in his mind. The vote might already be
decided, but the papers would still print what he said now! And those
words could mean his chance to work his way up through the Committee of
Foreign Affairs and perhaps on to becoming Earth's youngest premier.

It might even mean more. Once Earth shook off her lethargy and moved to
her rightful position of power and strength among the humanoid worlds,
anything could happen. There was the Outer Federation being formed
among the frontier worlds and the nucleus of close relations with
hundreds of planets. Some day there might be the position of premier of
a true Interstellar Congress!

                    *      *      *      *      *

Edmonds began quietly, listening to his voice roll smoothly from the
speakers, giving the long history of Earth and her rise to a position
as the richest and most respected of planets. He retold the story of
how she had been the first to discover the interstellar drive, and how
it had inevitably spread. He touched on the envy of the alien worlds,
and the friendship of the humanoid planets that had enabled Earth to
found her dozen distant colonies. He couldn't wisely discuss her
cowardice and timidity in avoiding her responsibilities to help her
friends; but there was another approach.

"In the forefront of every battle against alien aggression," he
declaimed proudly, "have been men from Earth. Millions of our young men
have fought gloriously and died gladly to protect the human--and
humanoid--civilizations from whatever forms of life have menaced them.
Djamboula led the forces of Hera against Clovis, just as Captain
O'Neill so recently directed the final battle that saved Meloa from the
hordes of Throm. In our own ranks, we have a man who spent eight long
and perilous years in such a gallant struggle to save a world for
humanoid decency. Senator Harding--"

From the darkened sea of faces, a voice suddenly sounded. "Will the
senator yield?" It was the deep baritone of Harding.

Edmonds frowned in irritation, but nodded. A few words of confirmation
on his point from Harding couldn't hurt. "I yield to the senator from
Dixie," he answered.

The spotlight shifted as Harding got slowly to his feet, making a white
halo of his hair. He did not look at Edmonds, but turned to face
Lesseur.

"Mr. Chairman," he said, "I move that Resolution 1843 be tabled!"

"Second!" The light shifted to another man, but Edmonds had no time to
see who it was as he stood staring open-mouthed at Harding.

He shouted for the chair's attention, but Lesseur brought the gavel
down sharply once, and his voice rang over the speakers. "It has been
moved and seconded that Resolution 1843 be tabled. The senators will
now vote."

Edmonds stood frozen as the voting began. Then he dropped back hastily
to press the button that would turn the square bearing his number a
negative red. He saw his light flash on, while other squares were
lighting. When the voting was finished, there were three such red
squares in a nearly solid panel of green.

"The resolution is tabled," Lesseur announced needlessly.

Harding stood up and began moving towards the rear where Edmonds sat.
The junior senator was too stunned for thought. Dimly he heard
something about regrets and explanations, but the words had no meaning.
He felt Harding help him to his feet and begin to guide him toward the
door, where someone had already brought a shocked, white-faced
Daugherty.

It was then he thought of Cathay, and what his ambition and Earth's
ultimate deceit and cowardice would mean to the millions there.

[Illustration: RONDA]




III


A week of the dust-filled air of Meloa had left its mark on Captain
Duke O'Neill. It had spread filth over his uniform, added another year
to his face, and made waking each morning a dry-throated torture. Now
he stopped at the entrance to the ship where he had been reassigned a
berth for the night shift. An attendant handed him a small bottle,
three biscuits, and a magazine. He tasted the chemically purified water
sickly, stuffed the three ersatz biscuits into his pocket, and moved
down the ramp, staring at the magazine.

It was from Earth, of course, since no printing was being done yet on
Meloa. It must have come in on one of the three big Earth freighters
he'd heard land during the night. Tucked into it was another of the
brief notes he'd been receiving: "Director Flannery will be pleased to
call on Captain O'Neill at the captain's convenience."

He shredded the note as he went across the field; he started to do the
same with the news magazine, until the headlines caught his attention.

Most of the news meant nothing to him. But he skimmed the article on
the eleventh planet to join the Outer Federation; the writer was
obviously biased against the organization, but Duke nodded approvingly.
At least someone was doing something. He saw that Cathay was in for
trouble. Earth was living up to her old form! Then he shoved the
magazine into his pocket and trudged on toward the veteran's
reassignment headquarters.

Machinery was being moved from the Earth freighters, and Duke swore
again. Five billion Earthmen would read of their "generosity" to Meloa,
and any guilt they felt for their desertion would vanish in a smug
satisfaction at their charity. Smugness was easy in a world without
dust or carrion smell or craters that had been factories.

There were only a few Meloans in the crude tent that served as their
headquarters. Duke went back toward the cubbyhole where a thin, haggard
man sat on a broken block behind a makeshift desk.

