had time."

"Have you the rest of the letter?"

"No, sir; I tore it up just now."

"Will you be kind enough to produce your uncle's letter?" said the
principal, quietly.

"I don't keep my letters, sir; and I destroyed it as soon as I had read
it."

"I suppose you did," replied Mr. Lowington, significantly. "But if you
don't go to Germany, what then? I think you wrote the words, 'I will
start with you.'"

"Yes, sir."

"Start from where?"

"From here."

"I don't understand it."

"I was going to write to uncle Donald, that, if I went to Germany, I
would see him in Paris as we pass through that city. If I did not go, I
wanted him to come here, and take me to Paris with him."

"And you think this explains what you wrote upon your note paper?"
inquired the principal.

"As I understand it, sir, it does."

"Was Herman expected to join your party?"

"No, sir."

"I observed that he seemed to be much interested in what you were
writing, and that you took some pains to let him see your paper. Your
explanation is not satisfactory, and I should not dare to take you to
Germany, lest you should miss your uncle on the way. Perhaps he had
better come to Brest himself. When do you expect him?"

"I don't know when he is coming, sir," replied Perth, rather abashed to
find his explanation had obtained so little consideration.

"Have you any money, Perth?" asked Mr. Lowington, suddenly.

"No, sir."

"Not a few francs, even?"

"Perhaps I have a few English pence."

"Haven't you a few English pounds?"

"No, sir."

"Just think a little, before you answer."

"If I had even a pound, I should be likely to remember it, sir."

"I should say you would; and twenty times as likely to remember it, if
you had twenty pounds," added the principal.

"O, I haven't anything like that, sir."

"You have an astonishingly bad memory, Perth. You received a letter
from your uncle in Glasgow, while you were at Havre. Do you remember
that?"

"Certainly I do, sir," replied Perth, wondering what the principal
could mean by such pointed questions.

Was it possible that Mr. Lowington had read what he wrote on the first
sheet of note paper? He thrust his hand into his pocket, and the sheet
was there as he had taken it from the atlas.

"You do remember the letter?"

"To be sure I do, sir."

"And don't you remember that there were four five-pound notes in it,
numbering from thirty-three thousand eight hundred forty-five to eight,
inclusive? It is very singular, indeed, that you have forgotten this
little circumstance."

Perth was confounded by this revelation. He saw that he was caught, and
that it was useless for him to say anything more; so he wisely held his
peace.

"If your uncle has not changed his mind within three days, he has no
more intention of coming to France than I have of going to Glasgow. I
received a letter from him to-day, since the ship came to anchor,
forwarded from Havre after we left. The writer was confined to the
house with a severe attack of rheumatism. In the quiet of his chamber,
he had an opportunity to consider whether he had done right to send you
twenty pounds, even with the advice of your father, without informing
me of the fact. He thought the sum was a large one for a young man to
have, and he desires me to see that you make a proper use of it. I will
trouble you to hand me the money, which shall be placed to your credit,
and receipted for by the pursers."

"I haven't the money now, sir," replied Perth, who was fully resolved
to run away at the first convenient opportunity, and wanted the money
to pay his expenses.

"Where is it?"

"I sent it to a banker--"

"Silence! Don't blacken your soul with any more falsehoods, Perth,"
interrupted the principal, sternly.

"You may search me, sir," replied the second master, throwing out his
arms, as though he were ready to submit to the operation.

"I may, but I do not choose to do so at present. Keep your eye on him,
Peaks," added the principal, as he walked forward to his usual stand on
the hatch.

"You are foolish, Master Perth," said the old boatswain, shaking his
head; for he had been the only person who had listened to the
interview, and appeared to be present for a purpose.

Perth put his hands in his pockets. He felt the paper on which he had
written during the lecture. It would be a dangerous document in case he
should be searched; for its contents would expose him, and implicate
others. As slyly and as quickly as he could, he took it out, tore it
into small bits, and threw it out the open port into the water.

"What's that?" demanded Peaks, seizing him by the collar.

"You are too late," answered Perth.

"What was it you tore up?"

"The five-pound notes."

"Tell that to the marines!" exclaimed the old sailor.

"They are gone to Davy Jones's locker now," replied Perth, shaking his
head.

Peaks instantly reported the matter to the principal, who, however, did
not deem it necessary to take any immediate action. Probably he did not
believe the young wretch had destroyed the bills; or, if he had, it was
his own loss. Perth stood silent and sullen, while Mr. Lowington spoke
to the students, announcing the arrangements for the excursion to the
Rhine. The delinquent was certain, by this time, that he was not to be
one of the party; but he hoped, if he saved his money, that he should
find an opportunity to escape from the squadron soon after his
shipmates started on their journey.




CHAPTER XII.

A MYSTERIOUS MOVEMENT.


"Young gentlemen," said Mr. Lowington, as he stepped upon the hatch,
after disposing of Perth's case, "we shall commence our tour to the
Rhine to-morrow morning."

A hearty demonstration of applause greeted this announcement, and
doubtless those who had been faithful from the beginning realized a
certain sense of triumph, because they were justified in their hopes.

"We shall leave in the first train for Paris, where we will spend the
night, and proceed to Strasburg the next day. From this point we shall
enter Germany, and after visiting several places of interest, such as
Fribourg, Baden, Schaffhausen, Stuttgart, Carlsruhe, Heidelberg, and
Frankfort, we shall take the steamer at Mayence, and go down the Rhine
as far as Cologne. This excursion will enable you to see all of the
river which is worth seeing. You have already seen the Rhine in
Holland, and at Basle. All its picturesque portions are crowded into
the space of less than a hundred miles, which you can witness from the
deck of a steamer in a single day, if such haste were necessary.

"As we leave at an early hour in the morning, it will be best to make
our arrangements to-night. On our return to Havre, Captain Shuffles
requested me to allow all hands to join in this excursion."

A few half-suppressed hisses from some of the runaways were promptly
drowned in a sea of applause from the Order of the Faithful.

"I had the subject under consideration, and it would have afforded me
very great pleasure to grant the request; but the conduct of those in
whose favor it was made has been such, since we left Havre, that I am
unable to grant it. I shall, therefore, be obliged again to leave
thirty-one of your number on board of the Josephine during the absence
of the others."

The runaways, to the astonishment, if not the horror, of the Faithful,
warmly applauded this announcement. It was equivalent to saying they
did not wish to join the excursion. The principal made no remark,
though the applause was certainly impudent; but doubtless he was fully
reconciled to the little arrangement he had made with Mr. Fluxion.

"Those who are to go will bring their bags on board of the ship, and
sleep here to-night," continued Mr. Lowington. "Those who are not to go
will take their bags on board the Josephine. If there is any doubt as
to who the thirty-one are, their names will be read."

No one called for the reading of the names, for there was no one who
needed to be enlightened. The students were dismissed, and the boats
from the consort returned. In a short time, the runaways, who belonged
to the ship's company, appeared upon deck with their luggage. They
seemed to be rather jubilant than otherwise; and though their manner
was very offensive, the principal took no notice of it, as it was not
openly insolent, consisting only of a real or assumed expression of
pleasure at the sentence pronounced against them. All of them expected
to escape from the consort during the administration of Dr. Carboy, and
they regarded a couple of weeks in Paris and Switzerland, free from
restraint, as ample compensation for the deprivation.

"Let those laugh that win," said Herman, when Horne, one of the
Faithful, ventured to sympathize with him in the misfortune of being
left behind.

"I don't see what you can win doing duty and learning your lessons on
board of the Josephine," added Horne.

"Don't you cry, my hearty. You will hear from us by the time you get
halfway down the Rhine; and if we don't have a better time than you do,
it will be because we don't know how."

"Well, I suppose you do know Howe," answered Horne, with a smile, which
indicated that he enjoyed even a sickly pun. "I should think you had
known him to your sorrow."

"Howe has played out. I expect Lowington will get boozy on this
excursion."

"Why so?"

"Because he's going to take a Horne on the trip."

"Pretty good! I see you know Howe."

"We know how to have a good time, and we can do it without any sheep's
wool."

"Are you going to run away in the Josephine again, Herman?"

"No; that's played out."

But the runaway was reminded, by this question, that he had been
talking rather imprudently, and he left his companion for more genial
associates.

Perth still stood on the quarter-deck, waiting the action of the
principal, who had sent the head steward to overhaul the state-room of
the delinquent. The money could not be found in the cabin, though
several of the officers, who were there, assisted in the search.

"What have you done with the twenty pounds sent you by your uncle,
Perth?" asked Mr. Lowington, when the steward had reported to him.

"Thrown it overboard, sir," replied Perth, with a malignant glance at
the boatswain.

"He threw some bits of paper he had torn up into the water," added
Peaks. "Whether it was the bank bills or not, I don't know, but I don't
think it was."

"Very well," added Mr. Lowington, who never permitted a delinquent
pupil to see that he was disturbed and annoyed, even if he was so. "You
will bring your bag on deck, and go on board of the Josephine."

"I'm ready, sir," replied Perth, with brazen assurance.

"As your conduct is hardly becoming an officer and a gentleman, you
will clothe yourself in a seaman's dress," added the principal, taking
the shoulder-straps from his coat. "When a young man can stand up and
reel off a string of lies without blushing, he is not fit to associate
with those who are competent to be officers of this ship."

"I earned my rank, sir," said Perth, who had an idea that he should
sleep in the cabin of the Josephine during his intended short stay on
board of her.

"And forfeited it by your gross misconduct. You will obey the orders
given you," added the principal, as he turned and walked away.

Peaks did not take his eye off the offender, but attended him to the
cabin, where he was supplied with a seaman's suit. Perth objected to
changing his clothing with a pertinacity which provoked the boatswain.

"If you say you won't change the clothes, I will report to Mr.
Lowington," said Peaks.

"Well, I won't."

"All right, my hearty;" and the old sailor left the state-room.

But he had not reached the deck before Perth hailed him.

"I will put them on, Mr. Peaks. I've thought better of it," said he,
throwing off his frock coat, as the boatswain appeared at the door of
the room.

"All the better for you, my lad. I thought you wanted to spend a week
or two in the brig," replied Peaks.

"I think it is a hard case, after a fellow has earned his rank, to take
it from him," muttered Perth, as he proceeded to put on the sailor's
suit.

"An officer should be a gentleman," growled the old sailor.

But the boatswain had been overreached, after all. The four five-pound
notes had been sewed into the waistband of Perth's trousers; and this
was the particular reason why he objected to losing his rank, if he had
to lose his pants with it. Peaks would not take his eye off him long
enough to allow him to tear out the bills; but when the boatswain went
to report to the principal, the opportunity was obtained, and promptly
used. The money was saved, and he yielded the point. He was conducted
to the deck, and when the boats brought the Josephines, who were to
visit Germany, to the ship, the runaways were sent to their new
quarters, or rather their old ones, for they had spent three weeks in
her before, under the superintendence of Mr. Fluxion. Before supper
time the change was effected. Dr. Carboy, at his own request,--for he
preferred the trip to the Mediterranean to that into Germany,--was
transferred to the consort for the cruise, with Peaks and Bitts.

The "happy family" were now united on board the ship, and all the
active discordant elements of the squadron were collected in the
consort. With only a very few exceptions, both parties were satisfied
with the arrangement. The runaways perhaps experienced a feeling of
relief that they were no longer in danger of being watched and
overheard by the "lambs." They had only to look out for the adult
officers now, and in the steerage they were by themselves.

Yet the appearance of Peaks on board of the consort with his bag was
rather ominous. Bitts was not regarded with the same dread. There were
now four adult forward officers in the Josephine; but the old boatswain
was the only one who inspired any special terror. Little's brilliant
scheme to enable his small party to escape seemed to be endangered by
Peak's coming, for he was an exceedingly prompt, decided and vigilant
man. The four old sailors, on an emergency, could handle the Josephine
alone.

"What do you think now?" said Herman, when everything on board the
consort had settled down into order and quiet.

"I don't like to see old Peaks on board," replied the little villain.
"He is a tough customer, and may bother us."

"That's so."

"But I think we can wax him."

"I hope so. We have Tom Perth now to help us. We must take him into our
squad, and then we shall just make up a crew for the third or fourth
cutter."

"I don't like too many."

"But Perth has the rocks in his pocket now--twenty pounds, or five
hundred francs," suggested Herman.

"That's an inducement."

"Certainly it is. We can cut for Paris the moment we get on shore."

"All right. We will try it on about to-morrow night. But don't say a
word to a single other fellow. We must look out for ourselves this
time, and not attempt to carry all the rest of the fellows on our
backs," added the prudent Little.

"It looks mean to do so."

"No, it don't. I have told them all to look out for themselves."

"But they don't even know how the thing is to be managed."

"No; and they shall not know it. If they don't know enough to go ashore
when the vessel is adrift, let them stay on board."

"Well, Perth is the only fellow to whom I mentioned it."

"That's all right; but don't let him say anything about how the thing
