word to my little girl. The sight of you will do her good; and you have
just the right way of comforting people, without making a fuss."

"Have I?" said Polly, looking much gratified by the words.

"Yes, dear, you've the gift of sympathy, and the rare art of showing it
without offending. I would n't let many girls in to see my poor Jenny,
because they'd only flutter and worry her; but you'll know what to do;
so go, and take this wrapper with you; it's done now, thanks to your
nimble fingers."

Polly threw the warm garment over her arm, feeling a thrill of gratitude
that it was to wrap a living girl in, and not to hide away a young heart
that had grown cold too soon. Pushing open the door, she went quietly
into the dimly lighted room, and on the pillow saw a face that drew her
to it with an irresistible power, for it was touched by a solemn shadow
that made its youth pathetic. As she paused at the bedside, thinking the
girl asleep, a pair of hollow, dark eyes opened wide, and looked up at
her; startled at first, then softening with pleasure, at sight of the
bonny face before them, and then a humble, beseeching expression filled
them, as if asking pardon for the rash act nearly committed, and pity
for the hard fate that prompted it. Polly read the language of these
eyes, and answered their mute prayer with a simple eloquence that said
more than any words for she just stooped down and kissed the poor child,
with her own eyes full, and lips that trembled with the sympathy she
could not tell. Jenny put both arms about her neck, and began to shed
the quiet tears that so refresh and comfort heavy hearts when a tender
touch unseals the fountain where they lie.

"Everybody is so kind," she sobbed, "and I was so wicked, I don't
deserve it."

"Oh, yes, you do; don't think of that, but rest and let us pet you. The
old life was too hard for such a little thing as you, and we are going
to try and make the new one ever so much easier and happier," said
Polly, forgetting everything except that this was a girl like herself,
who needed heartening up.

"Do you live here?" asked Jenny, when her tears were wiped away, still
clinging to the new-found friend.

"Yes, Miss Mills lets me have a little room up stairs, and there I have
my cat and bird, my piano and my posy pots, and live like a queen. You
must come up and see me to-morrow if you are able. I'm often lonely,
for there are no young people in the house to play with me," answered
Polly, smiling hospitably.

"Do you sew?" asked Jenny.

"No, I'm a music teacher, and trot round giving lessons all day."

"How beautiful it sounds, and how happy you must be, so strong and
pretty, and able to go round making music all the time," sighed Jenny,
looking with respectful admiration at the plump, firm hand held in both
her thin and feeble ones.

It did sound pleasant even to Polly's ears, and she felt suddenly so
rich, and so contented, that she seemed a different creature from the
silly girl who cried because she could n't go to the party. It passed
through her mind like a flash, the contrast between her life, and that
of the wan creature lying before her, and she felt as if she could not
give enough out of her abundance to this needy little sister, who had
nothing in the wide world but the life just saved to her. That minute
did more for Polly than many sermons, or the wisest books, for it
brought her face to face with bitter truths, showed her the dark side
of life, and seemed to blow away her little vanities, her frivolous
desires, like a wintry wind, that left a wholesome atmosphere behind.
Sitting on the bedside, Polly listened while Jane told the story, which
was so new to her listener, that every word sank deep into her heart,
and never was forgotten.

"Now you must go to sleep. Don't cry nor think, nor do anything but
rest. That will please Miss Mills best. I'll leave the doors open, and
play you a lullaby that you can't resist. Good night, dear." And with
another kiss, Polly went away to sit in the darkness of her own room,
playing her softest airs till the tired eyes below were shut, and little
Jane seemed to float away on a sea of pleasant sounds, into the happier
life which had just dawned for her.

Polly had fully intended to be very miserable, and cry herself to sleep;
but when she lay down at last, her pillow seemed very soft, her little
room very lovely, with the firelight flickering on all the home-like
objects, and her new-blown roses breathing her a sweet good-night. She
no longer felt an injured, hard-working, unhappy Polly, but as if quite
burdened with blessings, for which she was n't half grateful enough. She
had heard of poverty and suffering, in the vague, far-off way, which is
all that many girls, safe in happy homes, ever know of it; but now she
had seen it, in a shape which she could feel and understand, and life
grew more earnest to her from that minute. So much to do in the great,
busy world, and she had done so little. Where should she begin?
Then, like an answer came little Jenny's words, now taking a'new
significance' to Polly's mind, "To be strong, and beautiful, and go
round making music all the time." Yes, she could do that; and with a
very earnest prayer, Polly asked for the strength of an upright soul,
the beauty of a tender heart, the power to make her life a sweet and
stirring song, helpful while it lasted, remembered when it died.

Little Jane's last thought had been to wish with all her might, that
"God would bless the dear, kind girl up there, and give her all she
asked." I think both prayers, although too humble to be put in words,
went up together, for in the fulness of time they were beautifully
answered.




CHAPTER X. BROTHERS AND SISTERS


POLLY'S happiest day was Sunday, for Will never failed to spend it with
her. Instead of sleeping later than usual that morning, she was always
up bright and early, flying round to get ready for her guest, for Will
came to breakfast, and they made a long day of it. Will considered his
sister the best and prettiest girl going, and Polly, knowing well that a
time would come when he would find a better and a prettier, was grateful
for his good opinion, and tried to deserve it. So she made her room and
herself as neat and inviting as possible, and always ran to meet him
with a bright face and a motherly greeting, when he came tramping in,
ruddy, brisk, and beaming, with the brown loaf and the little pot of
beans from the bake-house near by.

They liked a good country breakfast, and nothing gave Polly more
satisfaction than to see her big boy clear the dishes, empty the little
coffee-pot, and then sit and laugh at her across the ravaged table.
Another pleasure was to let him help clear away, as they used to do
at home, while the peals of laughter that always accompanied this
performance did Miss Mills' heart good to hear, for the room was so
small and Will so big that he seemed to be everywhere at once, and Polly
and Puttel were continually dodging his long arms and legs. Then they
used to inspect the flower pots, pay Nick a visit, and have a little
music as a good beginning for the day, after which they went to church
and dined with Miss Mills, who considered Will "an excellent young
man." If the afternoon was fair, they took a long walk together over
the bridges into the country, or about the city streets full of Sabbath
quietude. Most people meeting them would have seen only an awkward young
man, with a boy's face atop of his tall body, and a quietly dressed,
fresh faced little woman hanging on his arm; but a few people, with eyes
to read romances and pleasant histories everywhere, found something very
attractive in this couple, and smiled as they passed, wondering if they
were young, lovers, or country cousins "looking round."

If the day was stormy, they stayed at home, reading, writing letters,
talking over their affairs, and giving each other good advice; for,
though Will was nearly three years younger than Polly, he could n't for
the life of him help assuming amusingly venerable airs, when he became
a Freshman. In the twilight he had a good lounge on the sofa, and Polly
sung to him, which arrangement he particularly enjoyed, it was so "cosy
and homey." At nine o'clock, Polly packed his bag with clean clothes,
nicely mended, such remnants of the festive tea as were transportable,
and kissed him "good-night," with many injunctions to muffle up his
throat going over the bridge, and be sure that his feet were dry
and warm when he went to bed. All of which Will laughed at, accepted
graciously, and did n't obey; but he liked it, and trudged away for
another week's work, rested, cheered, and strengthened by that quiet,
happy day with Polly, for he had been brought up to believe in home
influences, and this brother and sister loved one another dearly, and
were not ashamed to own it.

One other person enjoyed the humble pleasures of these Sundays quite as
much as Polly and Will. Maud used to beg to come to tea, and Polly, glad
to do anything for those who had done a good deal for her, made a point
of calling for the little girl as they came home from their walk, or
sending Will to escort her in the carriage, which Maud always managed
to secure if bad weather threatened to quench her hopes. Tom and Fanny
laughed at her fancy, but she did not tire of it, for the child was
lonely, and found something in that little room which the great house
could not give her.

Maud was twelve now; a pale, plain child, with sharp, intelligent eyes,
and a busy little mind, that did a good deal more thinking than anybody
imagined. She was just at the unattractive, fidgety age when no one
knew what to do with her, and so let her fumble her way up as she could,
finding pleasure in odd things, and living much alone, for she did not
go to school, because her shoulders were growing round, and Mrs.
Shaw would not "allow her figure to be spoiled." That suited Maud
excellently; and whenever her father spoke of sending her again, or
getting a governess, she was seized with bad headaches, a pain in her
back, or weakness of the eyes, at which Mr. Shaw laughed, but let her
holiday go on. Nobody seemed to care much for plain, pug-nosed little
Maudie; her father was busy, her mother nervous and sick, Fanny absorbed
in her own affairs, and Tom regarded her as most young men do their
younger sisters, as a person born for his amusement and convenience,
nothing more. Maud admired Tom with all her heart, and made a little
slave of herself to him, feeling well repaid if he merely said, "Thank
you, chicken," or did n't pinch her nose, or nip her ear, as he had a
way of doing, "just as if I was a doll, or a dog, and had n't got any
feelings," she sometimes said to Fanny, when some service or sacrifice
had been accepted without gratitude or respect. It never occurred to
Tom, when Maud sat watching him with her face full of wistfulness, that
she wanted to be petted as much as ever he did in his neglected boyhood,
or that when he called her "Pug" before people, her little feelings were
as deeply wounded as his used to be, when the boys called him "Carrots."
He was fond of her in his fashion, but he did n't take the trouble to
show it, so Maud worshipped him afar off, afraid to betray the affection
that no rebuff could kill or cool.

One snowy Sunday afternoon Tom lay on the sofa in his favorite attitude,
reading "Pendennis" for the fourth time, and smoking like a chimney as
he did so. Maud stood at the window watching the falling flakes with an
anxious countenance, and presently a great sigh broke from her.

"Don't do that again, chicken, or you'll blow me away. What's the
matter?" asked Tom, throwing down his book with a yawn that threatened
dislocation.

"I'm afraid I can't go to Polly's," answered Maud, disconsolately.

"Of course you can't; it's snowing hard, and father won't be home
with the carriage till this evening. What are you always cutting off to
Polly's for?"

"I like it; we have such nice times, and Will is there, and we bake
little johnny-cakes in the baker before the fire, and they sing, and it
is so pleasant."

"Warbling johnny-cakes must be interesting. Come and tell me all about
it."

"No, you'll only laugh at me."

"I give you my word I won't, if I can help it; but I really am dying of
curiosity to know what you do down there. You like to hear secrets, so
tell me yours, and I'll be as dumb as an oyster."

"It is n't a secret, and you would n't care for it. Do you want another
pillow?" she added, as Tom gave his a thump.

"This will do; but why you women always stick tassels and fringe all
over a sofa-cushion, to tease and tickle a fellow, is what I don't
understand."

"One thing that Polly does Sunday nights, is to take Will's head in her
lap, and smooth his forehead. It rests him after studying so hard, she
says. If you don't like the pillow, I could do that for you,'cause you
look as if you were more tired of studying than Will," said Maud, with
some hesitation, but an evident desire to be useful and agreeable.

"Well, I don't care if you do try it, for I am confoundedly tired." And
Tom laughed, as he recalled the frolic he had been on the night before.

Maud established herself with great satisfaction, and Tom owned that a
silk apron was nicer than a fuzzy cushion.

"Do you like it?" she asked, after a few strokes over the hot forehead,
which she thought was fevered by intense application to Greek and Latin.

"Not bad; play away," was the gracious reply, as Tom shut his eyes,
and lay so still that Maud was charmed at the success of her attempt.
Presently, she said, softly, "Tom, are you asleep?"

"Just turning the corner."

"Before you get quite round would you please tell me what a Public
Admonition is?"

"What do you want to know for?" demanded Tom, opening his eyes very
wide.

"I heard Will talking about Publics and Privates, and I meant to ask
him, but I forgot."

"What did he say?"

"I don't remember; it was about somebody who cut prayers, and got
a Private, and had done all sorts of bad things, and had one or two
Publics. I did n't hear the name and did n't care; I only wanted to know
what the words meant."

"So Will tells tales, does he?" and Tom's forehead wrinkled with a
frown.

"No, he did n't; Polly knew about it and asked him."

"Will's a'dig,'" growled Tom, shutting his eyes again, as if nothing
more could be said of the delinquent William.

"I don't care if he is; I like him very much, and so does Polly."

"Happy Fresh!" said Tom, with a comical groan.

"You need n't sniff at him, for he is nice, and treats me with respect,"
cried Maud, with an energy that made Tom laugh in her face.

"He's good to Polly always, and puts on her cloak for her, and says'my
dear,' and kisses her'good-night,' and don't think it's silly, and I
wish I had a brother just like him, yes, I do!" And Maud showed signs of
woe, for her disappointment about going was very great.

"Bless my boots! what's the chicken ruffling up her little feathers and
pecking at me for? Is that the way Polly soothes the best of brothers?"
said Tom, still laughing.

"Oh, I forgot! there, I won't cry; but I do want to go," and Maud
swallowed her tears, and began to stroke again.

Now Tom's horse and sleigh were in the stable, for he meant to drive out
to College that evening, but he did n't take Maud's hint. It was less
trouble to lie still, and say in a conciliatory tone, "Tell me some more
about this good boy, it's very interesting."

"No, I shan't, but I'll tell about Puttel's playing on the piano," said
Maud, anxious to efface the memory of her momentary weakness. "Polly
points to the right key with a little stick, and Puttel sits on the
stool and pats each key as it's touched, and it makes a tune. It's
so funny to see her, and Nick perches on the rack and sings as if he'd
kill himself."

"Very thrilling," said Tom, in a sleepy tone.

Maud felt that her conversation was not as interesting as she hoped, and
tried again.

"Polly thinks you are handsomer than Mr. Sydney."

"Much obliged."

"I asked which she thought had the nicest face, and she said yours was
the handsomest, and his the best."

"Does he ever go there?" asked a sharp voice behind them; and looking
round Maud saw Fanny in the big chair, cooking her feet over the
register.

"I never saw him there; he sent up some books one day, and Will teased
her about it."

"What did she do?" demanded Fanny. "Oh, she shook him."

"What a spectacle!" and Tom looked as if he would have enjoyed seeing
it, but Fanny's face grew so forbidding, that Tom's little dog, who was
approaching to welcome her, put his tail between his legs and fled under
the table.

"Then there is n't any 'Sparking Sunday night'?" sung Tom, who appeared
to have waked up again.

"Of course not. Polly is n't going to marry anybody; she's going to
keep house for Will when he's a minister, I heard her say so," cried
Maud, with importance.

"What a fate for pretty Polly!" ejaculated Tom.

"She likes it, and I'm sure I should think she would; it's beautiful
to hear'em plan it all out."

"Any more gossip to retail, Pug?" asked Tom a minute after, as Maud
seemed absorbed in visions of the future.

"He told a funny story about blowing up one of the professors. You
never told us, so I suppose you did n't know it. Some bad fellow put a
torpedo, or some sort of powder thing, under the chair, and it went off
in the midst of the lesson, and the poor man flew up, frightened most
to pieces, and the boys ran with pails of water to put the fire out. But
the thing that made Will laugh most was, that the very fellow who did it
got his trousers burnt trying to put out the fire, and he asked the is
it Faculty or President?"

"Either will do," murmured Tom, who was shaking with suppressed
laughter.

"Well, he asked'em to give him some new ones, and they did give him
money enough, for a nice pair; but he got some cheap ones, with horrid
great stripes on'em, and always wore'em to that particular class,
'which was one too many for the fellows,' Will said, and with the rest
of the money he had a punch party. Was n't it dreadful?"

"Awful!" And Tom exploded into a great laugh, that made Fanny cover her
ears, and the little dog bark wildly.

"Did you know that bad boy?" asked innocent Maud.

"Slightly," gasped Tom, in whose wardrobe at college those identical
trousers were hanging at that moment.

"Don't make such a noise, my head aches dreadfully," said Fanny,
fretfully.

"Girls' heads always do ache," answered Tom, subsiding from a roar into
a chuckle.

"What pleasure you boys can find in such ungentlemanly things, I don't
see," said Fanny, who was evidently out of sorts.

"As much a mystery to you as it is to us, how you girls can like to
gabble and prink from one week's end to the other," retorted Tom.

