week. Then pay-day will come.' It was done. The baby was handed over.
That is what civilization has done for the Indian. Its virtues escapes
him; its vices inoculate him."

One of these vices is gambling. The Indian is kept poor all the year
round and plucked of every pinfeather. That is the principal reason why
he steals, not only to reimburse himself for loss, but also to avenge
himself upon the white man, who he knows well enough has constantly
robbed him.

Gambling, as witnessed in the Indian camp at night, is a very different
affair from the cache. The tom-tom notifies all that the bouts with
fortune are about to begin. During the game the music is steadily kept
up. In the intervals between the games the players all sing. Crowds
surround the camp. When a man loses heavily the whole camp knows it in a
few minutes, and not infrequently the wife rushes in and puts a stop to
the stake by driving her chief away. Gambling is the great winter game.
It is often played from morning till night, and right along all night
long. Cheating and trickery of every sort are practiced.

"Lizwin" or "mescal" are the two drinks made by the Indians themselves,
one from corn and the other from the "maguay" plant. The plains Indians
drink whisky. To gamble is to drink, and to drink is to lose. Gambling
is the hardest work that you can persuade an Indian to do, unless
threatened by starvation. Different tribes gamble differently.

The Comanches, undoubtedly, have by far the most exciting and
fascinating gambling games. The Comanche puzzles, tricks and problems
are also decidedly superior to those of any other nation. The gambling
bone is used by the Comanches. The leader of the game holds it up before
the eyes of all, so that all can see it; he then closes his two hands
over it, and manipulates it so dexterously in his fingers that it is
simply impossible to tell which hand the bone is in. In a moment he
suddenly flings each closed hand on either side of him down into the
outreaching hand of the player next to him.

The game commences at this point. The whole line of players passes, or
pretends to pass, this bone on from one to another, until at last every
hand is waving. All this time the eyes along the opposite line of
gamblers are eagerly watching each shift and movement of the hands, in
hopes of discovering the white flash of the bone. At last some one
descries the hand that holds the bone, or thinks so. He points out and
calls out for his side. The hand must instantly be thrown up. If it is
right, the watching side scores a point and takes the bone. The sides
change off in this way until the game is won. The full score is
twenty-one points. The excitement produced by this game is at times
simply indescribable.

The Utes play with two bones in each hand, one of which is wrapped about
with a string. The game is to guess the hand that holds the wrapped
bone. The plum-stone game is played by the plains Indians. It is only
another name for dice throwing. The plum-stones are graved with
hieroglyphics, and counts are curiously made in a way that often defies
computation by white men. The women gamble quite as much as the men,
when they dare, and grow even more excited over the game than their
lords. Their game, as witnessed among the Cheyennes, is played with
beads, little loops and long horn sticks made of deer foot.

The children look on and learn to gamble from their earliest childhood,
and soon learn to cheat and impose on their juniors. Their little
juvenile gambling operations are done principally with arrows. Winter
breeds sloth, and sloth begets gambling, and gambling, drink. There is
no conviviality in Indian drinking bouts. The Indian gets drunk, and
dead drunk, as soon as he possibly can, and finds his highest enjoyment
in sleeping it off. His nature reacts viciously under drink, however, in
many cases, and he is then a dangerous customer.

The women of many tribes are a most pitiable lot of hard working, ragged
and dirty humanity. Upon them falls all the drudgery of the camp; they
are "hewers of wood and drawers of water," and bend under immense
burdens piled upon their backs, while thousands of ponies browse,
undisturbed, in every direction. As the troops are withdrawn, the squaws
swoop down upon the deserted camps, and rapidly glean them of all that
is portable, for use in their domestic economy. An Indian fire would be
considered a very cheerless affair by the inmates of houses heated by
modern appliances; but such as it is--a few sticks burning with feeble
blaze and scarcely penetrating the dense smoke filling the tepee from
the ground to the small opening at the top--it consumes fuel, and the
demand is always greater than the supply, for the reason that an Indian
has no idea of preparation for future necessities. If the fire burns,
all right; when the last stick is laid on, a squaw will start for a
fresh supply, no matter how cold and stormy the weather may be.

The poetical Indian maiden may still exist in the vivid imagination of
extreme youth, but she is not common to-day. The young girls affect gay
attire, and are exempt from the hardships of toil which are imposed on
their elder sisters, mothers and grandams, but their fate is infinitely
worse. Little beauty is to be discerned among them, and in this regard
time seems to have effaced the types which were prevalent a few years
ago.

Annuity day is a great event in the life of every Agency Indian, and if
the reader would see Indian life represented in some of its most
interesting features, there is no more suitable time to select for a
visit to any Agency. It is a "grand opening," attended by the whole
tribe; but the squaws do not enjoy quite the freedom of choice in the
matter of dress goods, or receive such prompt attention from the clerks
as our city ladies are accustomed to. Even at 9 o'clock in the morning,
notwithstanding the fact that the actual distribution would not take
place until noon, the nation's wards are there, patiently waiting for
the business of the day to begin. Stakes have been driven into the
ground to mark the space to be occupied by each band, and behind them,
arranged in a semicircle, are the different families, under the charge
of a head man. The bands vary in numbers, both of families and
individuals, but they all look equally solemn as they sit on the ground,
with their knees drawn up under their chins, or cross-legged like Turks
and tailors.

The scene now becomes one of bustle and activity on the part of the
Agency people, who begin rapidly filling wagon after wagon with goods
from the store-houses. Blankets of dark blue material, cotton cloth,
calico of all colors and patterns, red flannel, gay woolen shawls, boots
and shoes that make one's feet ache to look at them, coffee pots, water
buckets, axes, and numerous other articles, are piled into each wagon in
the proportion previously determined by conference with the head men. A
ticket is then given to the driver, bearing the number of the stake and
the name of the head man. Away goes the wagon; the goods are thrown out
on the ground in a pile at the proper stake, and that completes the
formal transfer to the head man, who then takes charge of them, and,
with, the assistance of a few of the bucks designated by himself,
divides the various articles, according to the wants of the families and
the amount of goods supplied.

During the rush and fury of the issue and division of the goods, the
sombre figures in the background have scarcely moved. Not one has
ventured to approach the center where the bucks are at work, measuring
off the cloth, etc.; they are waiting for the tap of the bell, when they
will receive just what the head man chooses to give them. There is no
system of exchange there; it is take what you get or get nothing. In a
great many cases they do not use the goods at all, but openly offer them
for sale to the whites, who, no doubt, find it profitable to purchase at
Indian prices.

As soon as the issue is completed, a crowd of Indians gather in front of
the trader's store to indulge their passion for gambling, and in a short
space of time a number of blankets and other articles change hands on
the result of pony races, foot races or any other species of excitement
that can be invented. There is a white man on the ground who is, no
doubt, a professional runner, and the Indians back their favorite
against him in a purse of over $30.00, which the white man covers, and
wins the race by a few inches. The Indians will not give up, and make
similar purses on the two succeeding days, only to lose by an inch or
two. There is a master of ceremonies, who displays a wonderful control
over the Indians. He makes all the bets for the red men, collecting
different amounts for a score or more, but never forgetting a single
item or person.

Ration day brings out the squaws and dogs in full force; the one to pack
the rations to camp, and the latter to pick up stray bits. A few at a
time the squaws enter the store-house and receive their week's supply of
flour, coffee, sugar, salt, etc., for themselves and families. The beef
is issued directly from the slaughter-house, and the proceeding is
anything but appetizing to watch. The beeves to be killed are first
driven into a corral, where they are shot by the Indian butchers; when
the poor beasts have been shot to death, they are dragged to the door of
the slaughter-house and passed through the hands of half-naked bucks,
who seem to glory in the profusion of blood, and eagerly seek the
position on account of the perquisites attached to it in the way of
tempting (?) morsels which usually go to the dogs or on the refuse heap.
The beef is issued as fast as it can be cut up, at the rate of half a
pound a day for each person, regardless of age; bacon is also issued as
a part of the meat ration.





CHAPTER IX.


CIVILIZATION--ACTUAL AND ALLEGED.

Tried in the Balances and Found Wanting--Indian Archers--Bow and Arrow
Lore--Barbarous Customs that Die Slowly--"Great Wolf," the Indian
Vanderbilt--How the Seri were Taught a Valuable Lesson--Playing with
Rattlesnakes with Impunity.


Does Prohibition prohibit? is a question politicians and social
reformers ask again and again. Does civilization civilize? is a question
which is asked almost exclusively by persons who are interested in the
welfare of the American Indian, and who come in daily contact with him.

In the preceding chapter we have seen some little of the peculiar habits
of the American Indian, civilized and otherwise, and it will be
interesting now to see to what extent the white man's teaching has
driven away primeval habits of living, hunting and fighting. Within the
last few weeks, evidence of a most valuable character on this question
has been furnished by the report submitted to the Secretary of the
Interior by the Commission sent to investigate matters concerning the
five civilized tribes of Indians in the Indian Territory. This says that
they have demonstrated their incapacity to govern themselves, and
recommends that the trust that has been reposed in them by the
Government should be revoked.

The courts of justice have become helpless and paralyzed. Murder,
violence and robbery are an every-day occurrence. It was learned by the
Commission that fifty-three murders occurred in the months of September
and October in one tribe only, and not one of the culprits was brought
to justice. The Dawes Commission recommends that a large portion of the
Indian reservation be annexed to Oklahoma; this action to be followed by
forming that country into a Territory. But to accomplish this, it would
be necessary that the consent of the Indians be obtained, and this is
doubtful.

The statement that the Indians have cast aside their ancient weapons and
adopted more modern ones, and that through the use of them, they are
gradually extending their hunting grounds beyond the lines of their
reservations, is false. The report of the Commission makes this clearly
known. Throughout the West the Indians still trust to their bows and
arrows. On the northwest coast most of the Indians live by hunting and
fishing. They use principally the bow and arrow, knife, war club and
lance. In the North Pacific Ocean are several islands inhabited only by
Indians. In the Queen Charlotte and the Prince of Wales Archipelago is
found one of the most remarkable races of aborigines on the American
continent. These are the Haida tribes, and consist of strikingly
intelligent Indians. They acquire knowledge readily; learn trades and
exhibit much ingenuity in following the teachings of missionaries and
traders. But for all that, they still cling with something bordering
upon affection to the primitive weapons of their race.

During the long winter nights the old Indians seat themselves before the
fire and carve bows, ornament club handles, and feather and point
arrows. Perhaps in some of the tepees hang polished guns furnished by
the Government, but they are more for ornament than use. This evening
work is accompanied by the low croaking of some old Indian, who tells
over again the legends, folk-lore and nursery tales of their
grandfathers and grandmothers.

The Haida tribe is more rapidly advancing in civilization than any of
its neighbors, yet they still carve and paint bows, arrows, club handles
and paddles. The Indians still cling to other rude implements and take
not kindly to metal ones. Rude knives are still used for skinning deer,
especially by the old Indians. The axe, of course, is employed for
cutting trees and excavating canoes and mortars. It has really taken the
place of the stone chisel, yet many old men prefer burning the roots of
the tree until it can be made to fall by giving it a few hacks with the
rude stone hatchet.

In archery, the Indian has scarcely been excelled. With a quick eye and
a powerful muscle, he sends the arrow as unerringly as the archers of
olden time.

The Indian bow is usually from three and one-half to four feet in
length, with such a difficult spring that one with no experience can
scarcely bend it sufficiently to set the string. Different tribes, of
course, carry bows of different lengths, the Senecas having the longest.
The best of woods for making bows are Osage orange, hickory, ash, elm,
cedar, plum and cherry; some of these are strengthened with sinews and
glue. Almost every tribe has three sizes, the largest being used for war
purposes, and until an Indian can handle this war bow, he is not
considered entitled to be called a warrior.

Some claim the Sioux and the Crows make the best bows, although the
Apaches come close in the rank. When the Sioux bow is unstrung, it is a
straight piece of wood, while the Apaches and the Southern Indians make
a perfect Cupid's bow. The Crows often use elk horns as material, and
carve them beautifully. The Sioux, to make the straight piece of wood
more elastic, string the backs with sinews. Often these are beautifully
beaded and leathered, quite equaling, as a piece of art, the elaborate
elk horn bows made by the Crows. The Comanches' bows are covered with
sinew, much like those of the Apaches. The object of practice is to
enable the bowman to draw the bow with sudden and instant effect. It is
seldom that the Indian has need of throwing the arrow to a great
distance.

The bow of the Western Indian is small and apparently insignificant,
though its owner makes it very powerful, indeed. From his babyhood days
he has habituated it to his use, until it has become, as it were, a very
part of his nature. The Indian studies to get the greatest power out of
the smallest possible compass, and he finds a short bow on horseback far
more easily used and much more reliable in its execution. In the Far
West, bows are made largely of ash, and are lined with layers of buffalo
or deer sinews on the back. The Blackfeet have in use very valuable bows
of bone. Other tribes make use of the horns of mountain sheep. Sometimes
the bone bows will fetch very large sums of money, and deals have been
noticed in which the consideration for one of them was a pair of ponies,
with five pounds of butter thrown in as make-weight.

An athletic Indian on a fleet horse can do terrible execution with one
of these bows, which, even in these days of repeating rifles, is by no
means to be despised as a weapon. No one can estimate the force of a
throw from one of them when an artistic archer is in charge. The effects
from a wound from an arrow are so distressing that it is quite common to
accuse an Indian of using poisoned arrows, when possibly such a fiendish
idea never entered his head. Only those who have ridden side by side
with an Indian hunter really know how much more powerful an arrow shot
is than the average man supposes.

In war the Indians would even now arm themselves in part with bow,
quiver, lance, war club and shield. The Northwestern tribes are partial
to fighting with the bow and lance, protected with a shield. This shield
is worn outside of the left arm, after the manner of the Roman and
Grecian shield.

The Western Indians are fonder of horseback riding than the Eastern
tribes, and have learned to wield their weapons while mounted. They are
taught to kill game while running at full speed, and prefer to fight on
horseback. Some of them are great cowards when dismounted, but seated on
an Indian pony they are undaunted.

It is a mistake to suppose that arrow-heads are no longer manufactured;
the art of fashioning them is not lost. Almost every tribe manufactures
its own. Bowlders of flint are broken with a sledge-hammer made of a
rounded pebble of hornstone set in a twisted withe. This bone is thought
to be the tooth of the sperm whale. In Oregon the Indian arrow is still
pointed with flint. The Iroquois also used flint until they laid aside
the arrow for the lack of anything to hunt. The Iroquois youth, though
the rifle has been introduced largely into his tribe, will have none of
it, but takes naturally to the bow and arrow. Steel for arrow-heads is
furnished by the fur-traders in the Rocky Mountains, and iron heads are
often made from old barrel hoops, fashioned with a piece of sandstone.
In shooting with the bow and arrow on horseback, the Indian horse is
taught to approach the animal attacked on the right side, enabling its
rider to throw the arrow to the left. Buffalo Bill was an adept at
slaughtering game on horseback, and he won his great bet at killing the
greatest number of buffaloes, by following the custom of the Indians and
shooting to the left. The horse approaches the animal, his halter
hanging loose upon his neck, bringing the rider within three or four
paces of the game, when the arrow or rifle ball is sent with ease and
certainty through the heart.

Indians who have the opportunity to ride nowadays, still exercise with a
lance twelve or fifteen feet in length. In their war games and dances
they always appear with this lance and shield. The spears are modern and
have a blade of polished steel, and the shields are made of skin. Those
of old make are of buffalo neck. The skin is soaked and hardened with a
glue extracted from the hoofs. The shields are arrow-proof, and will
throw off a rifle shot if held obliquely, and this the Indian can do
with great skill. Since there is no war or the occasion for the use of
these arms, except in games of practice, many of the Indians, for a few
bottles of "fire water," have sold their best shields, and now they are
seen scattered over the country, preserved as curios.

It is folly to assume that the Indians have wholly or partly done away
with their barbaric customs. In their celebrations it is their great joy
to cast off their clothing and to paint their bodies all colors of the
rainbow, wear horns on their heads and make themselves look as hideous
as possible. The arrow game is introduced--never are there
demonstrations with the modern weapons--and the man is esteemed above
all others who can throw the greatest number of arrows in the sky before
the first one falls. In hunting, the Sioux kill muskrats with spears, as
they did in early days spear the buffaloes, managing to get close to
them by being dressed in wolf skin, and going on all fours. There are
Indians who would, on horseback, attack and kill a bear with a lance,
but are afraid to molest the animal unless they have the Indian pony as
a means of escape.
