the agreement may come to an end, and I may be a free man once more."

So honest Harry laid his train, and fired it: but, the explosion over,
no harm was found to be done, except that William Esmond's nose was
swollen, and his eye black for a week. He did not send a challenge to
his cousin, Harry Warrington; and, in consequence, neither killed Harry,
nor was killed by him. Will was knocked down, and he got up again. How
many men of sense would do the same, could they get their little account
settled in a private place, with nobody to tell how the score was paid!
Maria by no means took her family's side in the quarrel, but declared
for her cousin, as did my lord, when advised of the disturbance. Will
had struck the first blow, Lord Castlewood said, by the chaplain's
showing. It was not the first or the tenth time he had been found
quarrelling in his cups. Mr. Warrington only showed a proper spirit in
resenting the injury, and it was for Will, not for Harry, to ask pardon.

Harry said he would accept no apology as long as his horse was not
returned or his bet paid. The chronicler has not been able to find out,
from any of the papers which have come under his view, how that affair
of the bet was finally arranged; but 'tis certain the cousins presently
met in the houses of various friends, and without mauling each other.

Maria's elder brother had been at first quite willing that his sister,
who had remained unmarried for so many years, and on the train of whose
robe, in her long course over the path of life, so many briars, so much
mud, so many rents and stains had naturally gathered, should marry
with any bridegroom who presented himself, and if with a gentleman from
Virginia, so much the better. She would retire to his wigwam in the
forest, and there be disposed of. In the natural course of things, Harry
would survive his elderly bride, and might console himself or not, as he
preferred, after her departure.

But, after an interview with Aunt Bernstein, which his lordship had on
his coming to London, he changed his opinion: and even went so far as
to try and dissuade Maria from the match; and to profess a pity for the
young fellow who was made to undergo a life of misery on account of a
silly promise given at one-and-twenty!

Misery, indeed! Maria was at a loss to know why he was to be miserable.
Pity, forsooth! My lord at Castlewood had thought it was no pity at all.
Maria knew what pity meant. Her brother had been with Aunt Bernstein:
Aunt Bernstein had offered money to break this match off. She understood
what my lord meant, but Mr. Warrington was a man of honour, and she
could trust him. Away, upon this, walks my lord to White's, or to
whatever haunts he frequented. It is probable that his sister had
guessed too accurately what the nature of his conversation wit Madame
Bernstein had been.

"And so," thinks he, "the end of my virtue is likely to be that the
Mohock will fall a prey to others, and that there is no earthly use in
my sparing him. 'Quem deus vult'--what was that schoolmaster's adage? If
I don't have him, somebody else will, that is clear. My brother has had
a slice; my dear sister wants to swallow the whole of him bodily.
Here have I been at home respecting his youth and innocence forsooth,
declining to play beyond the value of a sixpence, and acting guardian
and Mentor to him. Why, I am but a fool to fatten a goose for other
people to feed off! Not many a good action have I done in this life,
and here is this one, that serves to benefit whom?--other folks. Talk of
remorse! By all the fires and furies, the remorse I have is for things I
haven't done and might have done! Why did I spare Lucretia? She hated me
ever after, and her husband went the way for which he was predestined.
Why have I let this lad off?--that March and the rest, who don't want
him, may pluck him! And I have a bad repute; and I am the man people
point at, and call the wicked lord, and against whom women warn their
sons! Pardi, I am not a penny worse, only a great deal more unlucky
than my neighbours, and 'tis only my cursed weakness that has been my
greatest enemy!" Here, manifestly, in setting down a speech which a
gentleman only thought, a chronicler overdraws his account with
the patient reader, who has a right not to accept this draft on his
credulity. But have not Livy, and Thucydides, and a score more of
historians, made speeches for their heroes, which we know the latter
never thought of delivering? How much more may we then, knowing my Lord
Castlewood's character so intimately as we do, declare what was passing
in his mind, and transcribe his thoughts on this paper? What? a whole
pack of the wolves are on the hunt after this lamb, and will make a meal
of him presently, and one hungry old hunter is to stand by, and not have
a single cutlet? Who has not admired that noble speech of my Lord Clive,
when reproached on his return from India with making rather too free
with jaghires, lakhs, gold mohurs, diamonds, pearls, and what not? "Upon
my life," said the hero of Plassy, "when I think of my opportunities, I
am surprised I took so little!"

To tell disagreeable stories of a gentleman, until one is in a manner
forced to impart them, is always painful to a feeling mind. Hence,
though I have known, before the very first page of this history was
written, what sort of a person my Lord Castlewood was, and in what
esteem he was held by his contemporaries, I have kept back much that was
unpleasant about him, only allowing the candid reader to perceive that
he was a nobleman who ought not to be at all of our liking. It is true
that my Lord March, and other gentlemen of whom he complained, would
have thought no more of betting with Mr. Warrington for his last
shilling, and taking their winnings, than they would scruple to pick the
bones of a chicken; that they would take any advantage of the game, or
their superior skill in it, of the race, and their private knowledge
of the horses engaged; in so far, they followed the practice of all
gentlemen: but when they played, they played fair; and when they lost,
they paid.

Now Madame Bernstein was loth to tell her Virginian nephew all she knew
to his family's discredit; she was even touched by my lord's forbearance
in regard to Harry on his first arrival in Europe; and pleased with his
lordship's compliance with her wishes in this particular. But in the
conversation which she had with her nephew Castlewood regarding Maria's
designs on Harry, he had spoken his mind out with his usual cynicism,
voted himself a fool for having spared a lad whom no sparing would
eventually keep from ruin; pointed out Mr. Harry's undeniable
extravagances and spendthrift associates, his nights at faro and hazard,
and his rides to Newmarket, and asked why he alone should keep his hands
from the young fellow? In vain Madame Bernstein pleaded that Harry was
poor. Bah! he was heir to a principality which ought to have been his,
Castlewood's, and might have set up their ruined family. (Indeed Madame
Bernstein thought Mr. Warrington's Virginian property much greater than
it was.) Were there not money-lenders in the town who would give him
money on postobits in plenty? Castlewood knew as much to his cost: he
had applied to them in his father's lifetime, and the cursed crew
had eaten up two-thirds of his miserable income. He spoke with such
desperate candour and ill-humour, that Madame Bernstein began to be
alarmed for her favourite, and determined to caution him at the first
opportunity.

That evening she began to pen a billet to Mr. Warrington: but all her
life long she was slow with her pen, and disliked using it. "I never
knew any good come of writing more than bon jour or business," she used
to say. "What is the use of writing ill, when there are so many clever
people who can do it well? and even then it were best left alone." So
she sent one of her men to Mr. Harry's lodgings, bidding him come and
drink a dish of tea with her next day, when she proposed to warn him.

But the next morning she was indisposed, and could not receive Mr. Harry
when he came: and she kept her chamber for a couple of days, and the
next day there was a great engagement, and the next day Mr. Harry was
off on some expedition of his own. In the whirl of London life, what man
sees his neighbour, what brother his sister, what schoolfellow his old
friend? Ever so many days passed before Mr. Warrington and his aunt had
that confidential conversation which the latter desired.

She began by scolding him mildly about his extravagance and madcap
frolics (though, in truth, she was charmed with him for both)--he
replied that young men will be young men, and that it was in dutifully
waiting in attendance on his aunt, he had made the acquaintance with
whom he mostly lived at present. She then with some prelude, began to
warn him regarding his cousin, Lord Castlewood; on which he broke into a
bitter laugh, and said the good-natured world had told him plenty about
Lord Castlewood already. "To say of a man of his lordship's rank, or
of any gentleman, 'Don't play with him,' is more than I like to do,"
continued the lady; "but..."

"Oh, you may say on, aunt!" said Harry, with something like an
imprecation on his lips.

"And have you played with your cousin already?" asked the young man's
worldly old monitress.

"And lost and won, madam!" answers Harry, gallantly. "It don't become me
to say which. If we have a bout with a neighbour in Virginia, a bottle,
or a pack of cards, or a quarrel, we don't go home and tell our mothers.
I mean no offence, aunt!" And, blushing, the handsome young fellow went
up and kissed the old lady. He looked very brave and brilliant, with his
rich lace, his fair face and hair, his fine new suit of velvet and gold.
On taking leave of his aunt he gave his usual sumptuous benefaction to
her servants, who crowded round him. It was a rainy wintry day, and my
gentleman, to save his fine silk stockings, must come in a chair. "To
White's!" he called out to the chairmen, and away they carried him to
the place where he passed a great deal of his time.

Our Virginian's friends might have wished that he had been a less
sedulous frequenter of that house of entertainment; but so much may be
said in favour of Mr. Warrington that, having engaged in play, he fought
his battle like a hero. He was not flustered by good luck, and perfectly
calm when the chances went against him. If Fortune is proverbially
fickle to men at play, how many men are fickle to Fortune, run away
frightened from her advances; and desert her, who, perhaps, had never
thought of leaving them but for their cowardice. "By George, Mr.
Warrington," said Mr. Selwyn, waking up in a rare fit of enthusiasm,
"you deserve to win! You treat your luck as a gentleman should, and
as long as she remains with you, behave to her with the most perfect
politeness. Si celeres quatit pennas--you know the rest--no? Well, you
are not much the worse off--you will call her ladyship's coach, and make
her a bow at the step. Look at Lord Castlewood yonder, passing the box.
Did you ever hear a fellow curse and swear so at losing five or six
pieces? She must be a jade indeed, if she long give her favours to such
a niggardly canaille as that!"

"We don't consider our family canaille, sir," says Mr. Warrington, "and
my Lord Castlewood is one of them."

"I forgot. I forgot, and ask your pardon! And I make you my compliment
upon my lord, and Mr. Will Esmond, his brother," says Harry's neighbour
at the hazard-table. "The box is with me. Five's the main! Deuce Ace! my
usual luck. Virtute mea me involvo!" and he sinks back in his chair.

Whether it was upon this occasion of taking the box, that Mr. Harry
threw the fifteen mains mentioned in one of those other letters of Mr.
Walpole's, which have not come into his present learned editor's hands,
I know not; but certain it is, that on his first appearance at White's,
Harry had five or six evenings of prodigious good luck, and seemed more
than ever the Fortunate Youth. The five hundred pounds withdrawn from
his patrimonial inheritance had multiplied into thousands. He bought
fine clothes, purchased fine horses, gave grand entertainments, made
handsome presents, lived as if he had been as rich as Sir James Lowther,
or his Grace of Bedford, and yet the five thousand pounds never seemed
to diminish. No wonder that he gave where giving was so easy; no wonder
that he was generous with Fortunatus's purse in his pocket. I say no
wonder that he gave, for such was his nature. Other Fortunati tie up the
endless purse, drink small beer, and go to bed with a tallow candle.

During this vein of his luck, what must Mr. Harry do, but find out from
Lady Maria what her ladyship's debts were, and pay them off to the
last shilling. Her stepmother and half-sister, who did not love her, he
treated to all sorts of magnificent presents. "Had you not better get
yourself arrested, Will?" my lord sardonically said to his brother.
"Although you bit him in that affair of the horse, the Mohock will
certainly take you out of pawn." It was then that Mr. William felt a
true remorse, although not of that humble kind which sent the repentant
Prodigal to his knees. "Confound it," he groaned, "to think that I have
let this fellow slip for such a little matter as forty pound! Why, he
was good for a thousand at least."

As for Maria, that generous creature accepted the good fortune sent
her with a grateful heart; and was ready to accept as much more as you
pleased. Having paid off her debts to her various milliners, tradesmen,
and purveyors, she forthwith proceeded to contract new ones. Mrs. Betty,
her ladyship's maid, went round informing the tradespeople that her
mistress was about to contract a matrimonial alliance with a young
gentleman of immense fortune; so that they might give my lady credit
to any amount. Having heard the same story twice or thrice before, the
tradesfolk might not give it entire credit, but their bills were paid:
even to Mrs. Pincott, of Kensington, my lady showed no rancour, and
affably ordered fresh supplies from her: and when she drove about from
the mercer to the toy-shop, and from the toy-shop to the jeweller in
a coach, with her maid and Mr. Warrington inside, they thought her a
fortunate woman indeed, to have secured the Fortunate Youth, though they
might wonder at the taste of this latter in having selected so elderly a
beauty. Mr. Sparks, of Tavistock Street, Covent Garden, took the liberty
of waiting upon Mr. Warrington at his lodgings in Bond Street, with the
pearl necklace and the gold etwee which he had bought in Lady Maria's
company the day before; and asking whether he, Sparks, should leave them
at his honour's lodging, or send them to her ladyship with his honour's
compliments? Harry added a ring out of the stock which the jeweller
happened to bring with him, to the necklace and the etwee; and
sumptuously bidding that individual to send him in the bill, took a
majestic leave of Mr. Sparks, who retired, bowing even to Gumbo, as he
quitted his honour's presence.

Nor did his bounties end here. Ere many days the pleased young fellow
drove up in his phaeton to Mr. Sparks' shop, and took a couple of
trinkets for two young ladies, whose parents had been kind to him, and
for whom he entertained a sincere regard. "Ah!" thought he, "how I wish
I had my poor George's wit, and genius for poetry! I would send these
presents with pretty verses to Hetty and Theo. I am sure, if goodwill
and real regard could make a poet of me, I should have no difficulty in
finding rhymes." And so he called in Parson Sampson, and they concocted
a billet together.




CHAPTER XLIII. In which Harry flies High


So Mr. Harry Warrington, of Virginia, had his lodgings in Bond Street,
London, England, and lived upon the fat of the land, and drank bumpers
of the best wine thereof. His title of Fortunate Youth was pretty
generally recognised. Being young, wealthy, good-looking, and fortunate,
the fashionable world took him by the hand and made him welcome.
And don't, my dear brethren, let us cry out too loudly against the
selfishness of the world for being kind to the young, handsome, and
fortunate, and frowning upon you and me, who may be, for argument's
sake, old, ugly, and the miserablest dogs under the sun. If I have a
right to choose my acquaintance, and--at the club, let us say prefer the
company of a lively, handsome, well-dressed, gentleman like young
man, who amuses me, to that of a slouching, ill-washed, misanthropic
H-murderer, a ceaselessly prating coxcomb, or what not; has not
society--the aggregate you and I--a right to the same choice? Harry was
liked because he was likeable; because he was rich, handsome, jovial,
well-born, well-bred, brave; because, with jolly topers, he liked a
jolly song and a bottle; because, with gentlemen sportsmen, he loved
any game that was a-foot or a-horseback; because, with ladies, he had a
modest blushing timidity which rendered the lad interesting; because,
to those humbler than himself in degree he was always magnificently
liberal, and anxious to spare annoyance. Our Virginian was very
grand, and high and mighty, to be sure; but, in those times, when the
distinction of ranks yet obtained, to be high and distant with his
inferiors, brought no unpopularity to a gentleman. Remember that, in
those days, the Secretary of State always knelt when he went to the king
with his despatches of a morning, and the Under-Secretary never dared to
sit down in his chief's presence. If I were Secretary of State (and such
there have been amongst men of letters since Addison's days) I should
not like to kneel when I went in to my audience with my despatch-bog. If
I were Under-Secretary, I should not like to have to stand, whilst the
Right Honourable Benjamin or the Right Honourable Sir Edward looked over
the papers. But there is a modus in rebus: there are certain lines
which must be drawn: and I am only half pleased for my part, when Bob
Bowstreet, whose connection with letters is through Policeman X and
Y, and Tom Garbage, who is an esteemed contributor to the Kennel
Miscellany, propose to join fellowship as brother literary men, slap me
on the back, and call me old boy, or by my Christian name.

As much pleasure as the town could give in the winter season of 1756-57,
Mr. Warrington had for the asking. There were operas for him, in which
he took but moderate delight. (A prodigious deal of satire was brought
to bear against these Italian Operas, and they were assailed for being
foolish, Popish, unmanly, unmeaning; but people went, nevertheless.)
There were the theatres, with Mr. Garrick and Mrs. Pritchard at one
house, and Mrs. Clive at another. There were masquerades and ridottos
frequented by all the fine society; there were their lordships' and
ladyships' own private drums and assemblies, which began and ended with
cards, and which Mr. Warrington did not like so well as White's, because
the play there was neither so high nor so fair as at the club-table.

One day his kinsman, Lord Castlewood, took him to court, and presented
Harry to his Majesty, who was now come to town from Kensington. But that
gracious sovereign either did not like Harry's introducer, or had other
reasons for being sulky. His Majesty only said, "Oh, heard of you from
Lady Yarmouth. The Earl of Castlewood" (turning to his lordship, and
speaking in German) "shall tell him that he plays too much!" And so
saying, the Defender of the Faith turned his royal back.

Lord Castlewood shrank back quite frightened at this cold reception of
his august master.

"What does he say?" asked Harry.

"His Majesty thinks they play too high at White's, and is displeased,"
whispered the nobleman.

"If he does not want us, we had better not come again, that is all,"
said Harry, simply. "I never, somehow, considered that German fellow a
real King of England."

"Hush! for Heaven's sake, hold your confounded colonial tongue!" cries
out my lord. "Don't you see the walls here have ears!"

"And what then?" asks Mr. Warrington. "Why, look at the people! Hang me,
if it is not quite a curiosity! They were all shaking hands with me, and
bowing to me, and flattering me just now; and at present they avoid me
as if I were the plague!"

"Shake hands, nephew," said a broad-faced, broad-shouldered gentleman,
in a scarlet-laced waistcoat, and a great old-fashioned wig. "I heard
what you said. I have ears like the wall, look you. And, now, if other
people show you the cold shoulder, I'll give you my hand;" and so
saying, the gentleman put out a great brown hand, with which he grasped
Harry's. "Something of my brother about your eyes and face. Though I
suppose in your island you grow more wiry and thin like. I am thine
uncle, child. My name is Sir Miles Warrington. My lord knows me well
enough."

My lord looked very frightened and yellow. "Yes, my dear Harry. This is
your paternal uncle, Sir Miles Warrington."

"Might as well have come to see us in Norfolk, as dangle about playing
the fool at Tunbridge Wells, Mr. Warrington, or Mr. Esmond,--which do
you call yourself?" said the Baronet. "The old lady calls herself Madam
Esmond, don't she?"

"My mother is not ashamed of her father's name, nor am I, uncle," said
Mr. Harry, rather proudly.

"Well said, lad! Come home and eat a bit of mutton with Lady Warrington,
at three, in Hill Street,--that is if you can do without your White's
kickshaws. You need not look frightened, my Lord Castlewood! I shall
tell no tales out of school."

"I--I am sure Sir Miles Warrington will act as a gentleman!" says my
lord, in much perturbation.

"Belike, he will," growled the Baronet, turning on his heel. "And thou
wilt come, young man, at three; and mind, good roast mutton waits for
nobody. Thou hast a great look of thy father. Lord bless us, how we used
to beat each other! He was smaller than me, and in course younger; but
many a time he had the best of it. Take it he was henpecked when he
married, and Madam Esmond took the spirit out of him when she got him in
her island. Virginia is an island. Ain't it an island?"

Harry laughed, and said "No!" And the jolly Baronet, going off, said,
"Well, island or not, thou must come and tell all about it to my lady.
She'll know whether 'tis an island or not."

"My dear Mr. Warrington," said my lord, with an appealing look, "I need
not tell you that, in this great city, every man has enemies, and that
there is a great, great deal of detraction and scandal. I never spoke
to you about Sir Miles Warrington, precisely because I did know him,
and because we have had differences together. Should he permit himself
remarks to my disparagement, you will receive them cum grano, and
remember that it is from an enemy they come." And the pair walked out
of the King's apartments and into Saint James's Street. Harry found the
news of his cold reception at court had already preceded him to White's.
The King had turned his back upon him. The King was jealous of Harry's
favour with the favourite. Harry was au mieux with Lady Yarmouth. A
score of gentlemen wished him a compliment upon his conquest. Before
night it was a settled matter that this was amongst the other victories
of the Fortunate Youth.

Sir Miles told his wife and Harry as much, when the young man appeared
at the appointed hour at the Baronet's dinner-table, and he rallied
Harry in his simple rustic fashion. The lady, at first a grand and
stately personage, told Harry, on their further acquaintance, that the
reputation which the world had made for him was so bad, that at first
she had given him but a frigid welcome. With the young ladies, Sir
Miles's daughters, it was "How d'ye do, cousin?" and "No, thank you,
cousin," and a number of prim curtseys to the Virginian, as they greeted
him and took leave of him. The little boy, the heir of the house, dined
at table, under the care of his governor; and, having his glass of port
by papa after dinner, gave a loose to his innocent tongue, and asked
many questions of his cousin. At last the innocent youth said, after
looking hard in Harry's face, "Are you wicked, cousin Harry? You don't
look very wicked!"

"My dear Master Miles!" expostulates the tutor, turning very red.

"But you know you said he was wicked!" cried the child.

"We are all miserable sinners, Miley," explains papa. "Haven't you heard
the clergyman say so every Sunday?"

"Yes, but not so very wicked as cousin Harry. Is it true that you
gamble, cousin, and drink all night with wicked men, and frequent the
company of wicked women? You know you said so, Mr. Walker--and mamma
said so, too, that Lady Yarmouth was a wicked woman."

"And you are a little pitcher," cries papa: "and my wife, nephew Harry,
is a staunch Jacobite--you won't like her the worse for that. Take Miles
to his sisters, Mr. Walker, and Topsham shall give thee a ride in the
park, child, on thy little horse." The idea of the little horse consoled
Master Miles; for, when his father ordered him away to his sisters, he
had begun to cry bitterly, bawling out that he would far rather stay
with his wicked cousin.

"They have made you a sad reputation among 'em, nephew!" says the jolly
Baronet. "My wife, you must know, of late years, and since the death of
my poor eldest son, has taken to,--to, hum!--to Tottenham Court Road and
Mr. Whitfield's preaching: and we have had one Ward about the house, a
friend of Mr. Walker's yonder, who has recounted sad stories about you
and your brother at home."

"About me, Sir Miles, as much as he pleases," cries Harry, warm with
port: "but I'll break any man's bones who dares say a word against my
brother! Why, sir, that fellow was not fit to buckle my dear George's
shoe; and if I find him repeating at home what he dared to say in our
house in Virginia, I promise him a second caning."

"You seem to stand up for your friends, nephew Harry," says the Baronet.
"Fill thy glass, lad, thou art not as bad as thou hast been painted.
I always told my lady so. I drink Madam Esmond Warrington's health, of
Virginia, and will have a full bumper for that toast."

Harry, as in duty bound, emptied his glass, filled again, and drank Lady
Warrington and Master Miles.

"Thou wouldst be heir to four thousand acres in Norfolk, did he die,
though," said the Baronet.

"God forbid, sir, and be praised that I have acres enough in Virginia
of my own!" says Mr. Warrington. He went up presently and took a dish of
coffee with Lady Warrington: he talked to the young ladies of the house.
He was quite easy, pleasant, and natural. There was one of them somewhat
like Fanny Mountain, and this young lady became his special favourite.
When he went away, they all agreed their wicked cousin was not near so
wicked as they had imagined him to be: at any rate, my lady had strong
hopes of rescuing him from the pit. She sent him a good book that
evening, whilst Mr. Harry was at White's; with a pretty note, praying
that Law's Call might be of service to him: and, this despatched, she
and her daughters went off to a rout at the house of a minister's lady.
But Harry, before he went to White's, had driven to his friend Mr.
Sparks, in Tavistock Street, and purchased more trinkets for his female
cousins--"from their aunt in Virginia," he said. You see, he was full of
kindness: he kindled and warmed with prosperity. There are men on whom
wealth hath no such fortunate influence. It hardens base hearts: it
makes those who were mean and servile, mean and proud. If it should
please the gods to try me with ten thousand a year, I will, of course,
meekly submit myself to their decrees, but I will pray them to give me
strength enough to bear the trial. All the girls in Hill Street were
delighted at getting the presents from Aunt Warrington in Virginia and
addressed a collective note, which must have astonished that good lady
when she received it in spring-time, when she and Mountain and Fanny
were on a visit to grim deserted Castlewood, when the snows had cleared
away and a thousand peach-trees flushed with blossoms. "Poor boy!" the
mother thought "This is some present he gave his cousins in my name,
in the time of his prosperity--nay, of his extravagance and folly. How
quickly his wealth has passed away! But he ever had a kind heart for the
poor Mountain; and we must not forget him in his need. It behoves us to
be more than ever careful of our own expenses, my good people!" And so,
I dare say, they warmed themselves by one log, and ate of one dish, and
worked by one candle. And the widow's servants, whom the good soul began
to pinch more and more I fear, lied, stole, and cheated more and more:
and what was saved in one way, was stole in another.

One afternoon, Mr. Harry sate in his Bond Street lodgings, arrayed in
his dressing-gown, sipping his chocolate, surrounded by luxury, encased
in satin, and yet enveloped in care. A few weeks previously when the
luck was with him, and he was scattering his benefactions to and fro,
he had royally told Parson Sampson to get together a list of his debts
which he, Mr. Warrington, would pay. Accordingly Sampson had gone to
work, and had got together a list, not of all his debts--no man ever
does set down all,--but such a catalogue as he thought sufficient to
bring in to Mr. Warrington, at whose breakfast-table the divine had
humbly waited until his honour should choose to attend it.

Harry appeared at length, very pale and languid, in curl-papers, and
scarce any appetite for his breakfast; and the chaplain, fumbling with
his schedule in his pocket, humbly asked if his patron had had a bad
night? He had been brought home from White's by two chairmen at five
o'clock in the morning; had caught a confounded cold, for one of the
windows of the chair would not shut, and the rain and snow came in,
finally, was in such a bad humour, that all poor Sampson's quirks and
jokes could scarcely extort a smile from him.

At last, to be sure, Mr. Warrington burst into a loud laugh. It was when
the poor chaplain, after a sufficient discussion of muffins, eggs, tea,
the news, the theatres, and so forth, pulled a paper out of his pocket
and in a piteous tone said, "Here is that schedule of debts which your
honour asked for--two hundred and forty-three pounds--every shilling I
owe in the world, thank Heaven!--that is--ahem!--every shilling of which
the payment will in the least inconvenience me--and I need not tell my
dearest patron that I shall consider him my saviour and benefactor!"

It was then that Harry, taking the paper and eyeing the chaplain with
rather a wicked look, burst into a laugh, which was, however, anything
but jovial. Wicked execrations, moreover, accompanied this outbreak of
humour, and the luckless chaplain felt that his petition had come at the
wrong moment.

"Confound it, why didn't you bring it on Monday?" Harry asked.

"Confound me, why did I not bring it on Monday?" echoed the chaplain's
timid soul. "It is my luck--my usual luck. Have the cards been against
you, Mr. Warrington?"

"Yes: a plague on them. Monday night, and last night, have both gone
against me. Don't be frightened, chaplain, there's money enough in the
locker yet. But I must go into the City and get some."

"What, sell out, sir?" asks his reverence, with a voice that was
reassured, though it intended to be alarmed.

"Sell out, sir? Yes! I borrowed a hundred off Mackreth in counters last
night, and must pay him at dinner-time. I will do your business for you
nevertheless, and never fear, my good Mr. Sampson. Come to breakfast
to-morrow, and we will see and deliver your reverence from the
Philistines." But though he laughed in Sampson's presence, and strove
to put a good face upon the matter, Harry's head sank down on his chest
when the parson quitted him, and he sate over the fire, beating the
coals about with the poker, and giving utterance to many disjointed
naughty words, which showed, but did not relieve, the agitation of his
spirit.

In this mood, the young fellow was interrupted by the appearance of a
friend, who, on any other day--even on that one when his conscience was
so uneasy--was welcome to Mr. Warrington. This was no other than Mr.
Lambert, in his military dress, but with a cloak over him, who had come
from the country, had been to the Captain-General's levee that morning,
and had come thence to visit his young friend in Bond Street.

Harry may have thought Lambert's greeting rather cold; but being
occupied with his own affairs, he put away the notion. How were the
ladies of Oakhurst, and Miss Hetty, who was ailing when he passed
through in the autumn? Purely? Mr. Warrington was very glad. They were
come to stay a while in London with their friend, Lord Wrotham? Mr.
Harry was delighted--though it must be confessed his face did not
exhibit any peculiar signs of pleasure when he heard the news.

"And so you live at White's, and with the great folks; and you fare
sumptuously every day, and you pay your court at St. James's, and make
one at my Lady Yarmouth's routs, and at all the card-parties in the
Court end of the town?" asks the Colonel.

"My dear Colonel, I do what other folks do," says Harry, with rather a
high manner.

"Other folks are richer folks than some folks, my dear lad."

"Sir!" says Mr. Warrington, "I would thank you to believe that I owe
nothing for which I cannot pay!"

"I should never have spoken about your affairs," said the other, not
noticing the young man's haughty tone, "but that you yourself confided
them to me. I hear all sorts of stories about the Fortunate Youth. Only
at his Royal Highness's even today, they were saying how rich you were
already, and I did not undeceive them----"

"Colonel Lambert, I cannot help the world gossiping about me!" cries Mr.
Warrington, more and more impatient.

"--And what prodigious sums you had won. Eighteen hundred one night--two
thousand another--six or eight thousand in all! Oh! there were gentlemen
from White's at the levee too, I can assure you, and the army can fling
a main as well as you civilians!"

"I wish they would meddle with their own affairs," says Harry, scowling
at his old friend.

"And I, too, you look as if you were going to say. Well, my boy, it is
my affair and you must let Theo's father and Hetty's father, and Harry
Warrington's father's old friend say how it is my affair." Here the
Colonel drew a packet out of his pocket, whereof the lappets and the
coat-tails and the general pocket accommodations were much more ample
than in the scant military garments of present warriors. "Look you,
Harry. These trinkets which you sent with the kindest heart in the world
to people who love you, and would cut off their little hands to spare
you needless pain, could never be bought by a young fellow with two or
three hundred a year. Why, a nobleman might buy these things, or a rich
City banker, and send them to his--to his daughters, let us say."

"Sir, as you say, I meant only kindness," says Harry, blushing
burning-red.

"But you must not give them to my girls, my boy. Hester and Theodosia
Lambert must not be dressed up with the winnings off the gaming-table,
saving your presence. It goes to my heart to bring back the trinkets.
Mrs. Lambert will keep her present, which is of small value, and sends
you her love and a God bless you--and so say I, Harry Warrington, with
all my heart." Here the good Colonel's voice was much moved, and his
face grew very red, and he passed his hand over his eyes ere he held it
out.

But the spirit of rebellion was strong in Mr. Warrington. He rose up
from his seat, never offering to take the hand which his senior held out
to him. "Give me leave to tell Colonel Lambert," he said, "that I have
had somewhat too much advice from him. You are for ever volunteering it,
sir, and when I don't ask it. You make it your business to inquire about
my gains at play, and about the company I keep. What right have you to
control my amusements or my companions? I strive to show my sense
of your former kindness by little presents to your family, and you
fling--you bring them back."

"I can't do otherwise, Mr. Warrington," says the Colonel, with a very
sad face.

"Such a slight may mean nothing here, sir, but in our country it means
war, sir!" cries Mr. Warrington. "God forbid I should talk of drawing a
sword against the father of ladies who have been as mother and sister
to me: but you have wounded my heart, Colonel Lambert--you have, I won't
say insulted, but humiliated me, and this is a treatment I will bear
from no man alive! My servants will attend you to the door, sir!" Saying
which, and rustling in his brocade dressing-gown, Mr. Warrington, with
much state, walked off to his bedroom.




CHAPTER XLIV. Contains what might, perhaps, have been expected


On the rejection of his peace-offerings, our warlike young American
chief chose to be in great wrath not only against Colonel Lambert, but
the whole of that gentleman's family. "He has humiliated me before
the girls!" thought the young man. "He and Mr. Wolfe, who were forever
preaching morality to me, and giving themselves airs of superiority and
protection, have again been holding me up to the family as a scapegrace
and prodigal. They are so virtuous that they won't shake me by the hand,
forsooth; and when I want to show them a little common gratitude, they
fling my presents in my face!"

"Why, sir, the things must be worth a little fortune!" says Parson
Sampson, casting an eye of covetousness on the two morocco boxes,
in which, on their white satin cushions, reposed Mr. Sparks's golden
gewgaws.

"They cost some money, Sampson," says the young man. "Not that I would
grudge ten times the amount to people who have been kind to me."

"No, faith, sir, not if I know your honour!" interjects Sampson, who
never lost a chance of praising his young patron to his face.

"The repeater, they told me, was a great bargain, and worth a hundred
pounds at Paris. Little Miss Hetty I remember saying that she longed to
have a repeating watch."

"Oh, what a love!" cries the chaplain, "with a little circle of pearls
on the back, and a diamond knob for the handle! Why, 'twould win any
woman's heart, Sir!"

"There passes an apple-woman with a basket. I have a mind to fling the
thing out to her!" cries Mr. Warrington, fiercely.

When Harry went out upon business, which took him to the City and the
Temple, his parasite did not follow him very far into the Strand;
but turned away, owning that he had a terror of Chancery Lane, its
inhabitants, and precincts. Mr. Warrington went then to his broker, and
they walked to the Bank together, where they did some little business,
at the end of which, and after the signing of a trifling signature or
two, Harry departed with a certain number of crisp bank-notes in his
pocket. The broker took Mr. Warrington to one of the great dining-houses
for which the City was famous then as now; and afterwards showed Mr.
Warrington the Virginian walk upon 'Change, through which Harry passed
rather shamefacedly. What would a certain lady in Virginia say, he
thought, if she knew that he was carrying off in that bottomless
gambler's pocket a great portion of his father's patrimony? Those are
all Virginia merchants, thinks he, and they are all talking to one
another about me, and all saying, "That is young Esmond, of Castlewood,
on the Potomac, Madam Esmond's son; and he has been losing his money at
play, and he has been selling out so much, and so much, and so much."

His spirits did not rise until he had passed under the traitors' heads
of Temple Bar, and was fairly out of the City. From the Strand Mr. Harry
walked home, looking in at St. James's Street by the way; but there was
nobody there as yet, the company not coming to the Chocolate-House till
a later hour.

Arrived at home, Mr. Harry pulls out his bundle of bank-notes; puts
three of them into a sheet of paper, which he seals carefully, having
previously written within the sheet the words, "Much good may they
do you. H. E. W." And this packet he directs to the Reverend Mr.
Sampson,--leaving it on the chimney-glass, with directions to his
servants to give it to that divine when he should come in.

And now his honour's phaeton is brought to the door, and he steps in,
thinking to drive round the park; but the rain coming on, or the east
wind blowing, or some other reason arising, his honour turns his horses'
heads down St. James's Street, and is back at White's at about three
o'clock. Scarce anybody has come in yet. It is the hour when folks are
at dinner. There, however, is my cousin Castlewood, lounging over the
Public Advertiser, having just come off from his duty at Court hard by.

Lord Castlewood is yawning over the Public Advertiser. What shall they
do? Shall they have a little piquet? Harry has no objections to a little
piquet. "Just for an hour," says Lord Castlewood. "I dine at Arlington
Street at four." "Just for an hour," says Mr. Warrington; and they call
for cards.

"Or shall we have 'em in upstairs?" says my lord. "Out of the noise?"

"Certainly, out of the noise," says Harry.

At five o'clock a half-dozen of gentlemen have come in after their
dinner, and are at cards, or coffee, or talk. The folks from the
ordinary have not left the table yet. There the gentlemen of White's
will often sit till past midnight.

One toothpick points over the coffee-house blinds into the street.
"Whose phaeton?" asks Toothpick 1 of Toothpick 2.

"The Fortunate Youth's," says No. 2.

"Not so fortunate the last three nights. Luck confoundedly against him.
Lost, last night, thirteen hundred to the table. Mr. Warrington been
here to-day, John?"

"Mr. Warrington is in the house now, sir. In the little tea-room with
Lord Castlewood since three o'clock. They are playing at piquet," says
John.

"What fun for Castlewood!" says No. 1, with a shrug.

The second gentleman growls out an execration. "Curse the fellow!" he
says. "He has no right to be in this club at all. He doesn't pay if he
loses. Gentlemen ought not to play with him. Sir Miles Warrington told
me at court the other day, that Castlewood has owed him money on a bet
these three years."

"Castlewood," says No. 1, "don't lose if he plays alone. A large company
flurries him, you see--that's why he doesn't come to the table." And the
facetious gentleman grins, and shows all his teeth, polished perfectly
clean.

"Let's go up and stop 'em," growls No. 2.

"Why?" asks the other. "Much better look out a-window. Lamplighter going
up the ladder--famous sport. Look at that old putt in the chair: did you
ever see such an old quiz?"

"Who is that just gone out of the house? As I live, it's Fortunatus! He
seems to have forgotten that his phaeton has been here, waiting all the
time. I bet you two to one he has been losing to Castlewood."

"Jack, do you take me to be a fool?" asks the one gentleman of the
other. "Pretty pair of horses the youth has got. How he is flogging
'em!" And they see Mr. Warrington galloping up the street, and scared
coachmen and chairmen clearing before him: presently my Lord Castlewood
is seen to enter a chair, and go his way.

Harry drives up to his own door. It was but a few yards, and those poor
horses have been beating the pavement all this while in the rain. Mr.
Gumbo is engaged at the door in conversation with a countrified-looking
lass, who trips off with a curtsey. Mr. Gumbo is always engaged with
some pretty maid or other.

"Gumbo, has Mr. Sampson been here?" asks Gumbo's master from his
driving-seat.

"No, sar. Mr. Sampson have not been here!" answers Mr. Warrington's
gentleman. Harry bids him to go upstairs and bring down a letter
addressed to Mr. Sampson.

"Addressed to Mr. Sampson? Oh yes, sir," says Mr. Gumbo, who can't read.

"A sealed letter, stupid! on the mantelpiece, in the glass!" says Harry;
and Gumbo leisurely retires to fetch that document. As soon as Harry has
it, he turns his horses' heads towards St. James's Street, and the
two gentlemen, still yawning out of the window at White's, behold the
Fortunate Youth, in an instant, back again.

As they passed out of the little tea-room where he and Lord Castlewood
had had their piquet together, Mr. Warrington had seen that several
gentlemen had entered the play-room, and that there was a bank there.
Some were already steadily at work, and had their gaming jackets on:
they kept such coats at the club, which they put on when they had a mind
to sit down to a regular night's play.

Mr. Warrington goes to the clerk's desk, pays his account of the
previous night, and, sitting down at the table, calls for fresh
counters. This has been decidedly an unlucky week with the Fortunate
Youth, and to-night is no more fortunate than previous nights have been.
He calls for more counters, and more presently. He is a little pale and
silent, though very easy and polite when talked to. But he cannot win.

At last he gets up. "Hang it! stay and mend your luck!" says Lord March,
who is sitting by his side with a heap of counters before him, green and
white. "Take a hundred of mine, and go on!"

"I have had enough for to-night, my lord," says Harry, and rises and
goes away, and eats a broiled bone in the coffee-room, and walks back to
his lodgings some time about midnight. A man after a great catastrophe
commonly sleeps pretty well. It is the waking in the morning which is
sometimes queer and unpleasant. Last night you proposed to Miss Brown:
you quarrelled over your cups with Captain Jones, and valorously pulled
his nose: you played at cards with Colonel Robinson, and gave him--oh,
how many I O U's! These thoughts, with a fine headache, assail you
in the morning watches. What a dreary, dreary gulf between to-day and
yesterday! It seems as if you are years older. Can't you leap back over
that chasm again, and is it not possible that Yesterday is but a dream?
There you are, in bed. No daylight in at the windows yet. Pull your
nightcap over your eyes, the blankets over your nose, and sleep away
Yesterday. Psha, man, it was but a dream! Oh no, no! The sleep won't
come. The watchman bawls some hour--what hour? Harry minds him that he
has got the repeating watch under his pillow which he had bought for
Hester. Ting, ting, ting! the repeating watch sings out six times in
the darkness, with a little supplementary performance indicating the
half-hour. Poor dear little Hester!--so bright, so gay, so innocent! he
would have liked her to have that watch. What will Maria say? (Oh, that
old Maria! what a bore she is beginning to be! he thinks.) What will
Madam Esmond at home say when she hears that he has lost every shilling
of his ready money--of his patrimony? All his winnings, and five
thousand pounds besides, in three nights. Castlewood could not have
played him false? No. My lord knows piquet better than Harry does, but
he would not deal unfairly with his own flesh and blood. No, no. Harry
is glad his kinsman, who wanted the money, has got it. And for not one
more shilling than he possessed, would he play. It was when he counted
up his losses at the gaming-table, and found they would cover all the
remainder of his patrimony, that he passed the box and left the table.
But, O cursed bad company! O extravagance and folly! O humiliation and
remorse! "Will my mother at home forgive me?" thinks the young prodigal.
"Oh, that I were there, and had never left it!"

The dreary London dawn peeps at length through shutters and curtains.
The housemaid enters to light his honour's fire and admit the dun
morning into his windows. Her Mr. Gumbo presently follows, who warms his
master's dressing-gown and sets out his shaving-plate and linen. Then
arrives the hairdresser to curl and powder his honour, whilst he reads
his morning's letters; and at breakfast-time comes that inevitable
Parson Sampson, with eager looks and servile smiles, to wait on his
patron. The parson would have returned yesterday according to mutual
agreement, but some jolly fellows kept him to dinner at the St. Alban's,
and, faith, they made a night of it.

"Oh, Parson!" groans Harry, "'twas the worst night you ever made in your
life! Look here, sir!"

"Here is a broken envelope with the words, 'Much good may it do you,'
written within," says the chaplain, glancing at the paper.

"Look on the outside, sir!" cries Mr. Warrington. "The paper was
directed to you." The poor chaplain's countenance exhibited great alarm.
"Has some one broke it open, sir?" he asks.

"Some one, yes. I broke it open, Sampson. Had you come here as you
proposed yesterday afternoon, you would have found that envelope full of
bank-notes. As it is, they were all dropped at the infernal macco-table
last night."

"What, all?" says Sampson.

"Yes, all, with all the money I brought away from the city, and all the
ready money I have left in the world. In the afternoon I played piquet
with my cous--with a gentleman at White's--and he eased me of all the
money I had about me. Remembering that there was still some money left
here, unless you had fetched it, I came home and carried it back and
left it at the macco-table, with every shilling besides that belongs to
me--and--great heaven, Sampson, what's the matter, man?"

"It's my luck, it's my usual luck," cries out the unfortunate chaplain,
and fairly burst into tears.

"What! You are not whimpering like a baby at the loss of a loan of a
couple of hundred pounds?" cries out Mr. Warrington, very fierce and
angry. "Leave the room, Gumbo! Confound you! why are you always poking
your woolly head in at that door!"

"Some one below wants to see master with a little bill," says Mr. Gumbo.

"Tell him to go to Jericho!" roars out Mr. Warrington. "Let me see
nobody! I am not at home, sir, at this hour of the morning!"

A murmur or two, a scuffle is heard on the landing-place, and silence
finally ensues. Mr. Warrington's scorn and anger are not diminished by
this altercation. He turns round savagely upon unhappy Sampson, who sits
with his head buried in his breast.

"Hadn't you better take a bumper of brandy to keep your spirits up, Mr.
Sampson?" he asks. "Hang it, man! don't be snivelling like a woman!"

"Oh, it's not me!" says Sampson, tossing his head. "I am used to it,
sir."

"Not you! Who, then? Are you crying because somebody else is hurt,
pray?" asks Mr. Warrington.

"Yes, sir!" says the chaplain, with some spirit; "because somebody else
is hurt, and through my fault. I have lodged for many years in London
with a bootmaker, a very honest man: and, a few days since, having a
perfect reliance upon--upon a friend who had promised to accommodate me
with a loan--I borrowed sixty pounds from my landlord which he was about
to pay to his own. I can't get the money. My poor landlord's goods will
be seized for rent; his wife and dear young children will be turned into
the street; and this honest family will be ruined through my fault. But,
as you say, Mr. Warrington, I ought not to snivel like a woman. I will
remember that you helped me once, and will bid you farewell, sir."

And, taking his broad-leafed hat, Mr. Chaplain walked out of the room.

An execration and a savage laugh, I am sorry to say, burst out of
Harry's lips at this sudden movement of the chaplain's. He was in such
a passion with himself, with circumstances, with all people round about
him, that he scarce knew where to turn, or what he said. Sampson heard
the savage laughter, and then the voice of Harry calling from the
stairs, "Sampson, Sampson! hang you! come back! It's a mistake! I beg
your pardon!" But the chaplain was cut to the soul, and walked on. Harry
heard the door of the street as the parson slammed it. It thumped on his
own breast. He entered his room, and sank back on his luxurious chair
there. He was Prodigal, amongst the swine--his foul remorses; they had
tripped him up, and were wallowing over him. Gambling, extravagance,
debauchery, dissolute life, reckless companions, dangerous women--they
were all upon him in a herd, and were trampling upon the prostrate young
sinner.

Prodigal was not, however, yet utterly overcome, and had some fight left
in him. Dashing the filthy importunate brutes aside, and, as it were,
kicking his ugly remembrances away from him, Mr. Warrington seized
a great glass of that fire-water which he had recommended to poor
humiliated Parson Sampson, and, flinging off his fine damask robe, rang
for the trembling Gumbo, and ordered his coat. "Not that!" roars he, as
Gumbo brings him a fine green coat with plated buttons and a gold cord.
"A plain suit--the plainer the better! The black clothes." And Gumbo
brings the mourning-coat which his master had discarded for some months
past.

Mr. Harry then takes:--1, his fine new gold watch; 2, his repeater (that
which he had bought for Hetty), which he puts into his other fob; 3,
his necklace, which he had purchased for Theo; 4, his rings, of which
my gentleman must have half a dozen at least (with the exception of
his grandfather's old seal ring, which he kisses and lays down on the
pincushion again); 5, his three gold snuff boxes: and 6, his purse,
knitted by his mother, and containing three shillings and sixpence and a
pocket-piece brought from Virginia: and, putting on his hat, issues from
his door.

At the landing he is met by Mr. Ruff, his landlord, who bows and cringes
and puts into his honour's hand a strip of paper a yard long. "Much
obliged if Mr. Warrington will settle. Mrs. Ruff has a large account
to make up to-day." Mrs. Ruff is a milliner. Mr. Ruff is one of the
head-waiters and aides-de-camp of Mr. Mackreth, the proprietor of
White's Club. The sight of the landlord does not add to the lodger's
good-humour.

"Perhaps his honour will have the kindness to settle the little
account?" asks Mr. Ruff.

"Of course I will settle the account," says Harry, glumly looking down
over Mr. Ruffs head from the stair above him.

"Perhaps Mr. Warrington will settle it now?"

"No, Sir, I will not settle it now!" says Mr. Warrington, bullying
forward.

"I'm very--very much in want of money, sir," pleads the voice under him.
"Mrs. Ruff is----"

"Hang you, sir, get out of the way!" cries Mr. Warrington, ferociously,
and driving Mr. Ruff backward to the wall, sending him almost
topsy-turvy down his own landing, he tramps down the stair, and walks
forth into Bond Street.

The Guards were at exercise at the King's Mews at Charing Cross, as
Harry passed, and he heard their drums and fifes, and looked in at the
gate, and saw them at drill. "I can shoulder a musket at any rate,"
thought he to himself gloomily, as he strode on. He crossed St. Martin's
Lane (where he transacted some business), and so made his way into Long
Acre, and to the bootmaker's house where friend Sampson lodged. The
woman of the house said Mr. Sampson was not at home, but had promised to
be at home at one; and, as she knew Mr. Warrington, showed him up to the
parson's apartments, where he sate down, and, for want of occupation,
tried to read an unfinished sermon of the chaplain's. The subject was
the Prodigal Son. Mr. Harry did not take very accurate cognisance of the
sermon.

Presently he heard the landlady's shrill voice on the stair, pursuing
somebody who ascended, and Sampson rushed into the room, followed by the
sobbing woman.

At seeing Harry, Sampson started, and the landlady stopped. Absorbed
in her own domestic cares, she had doubtless forgot that a visitor was
awaiting her lodger. "There's only thirteen pound in the house, and he
will be here at one, I tell you!" she was bawling out, as she pursued
her victim.

"Hush, hush! my good creature!" cries the gasping chaplain, pointing
to Harry, who rose from the window-seat. "Don't you see Mr. Warrington?
I've business with him--most important business. It will be all right, I
tell you!" And he soothed and coaxed Mrs. Landlady out of the room, with
the crowd of anxious little ones hanging at her coats.

"Sampson, I have come to ask your pardon again," says Mr. Warrington,
rising up. "What I said to-day to you was very cruel and unjust, and
unlike a gentleman."

"Not a word more, sir," says the other, coldly and sadly, bowing and
scarcely pressing the hand which Harry offered him.

"I see you are still angry with me," Harry continues.

"Nay, sir, an apology is an apology. A man of my station can ask for no
more from one of yours. No doubt you did not mean to give me pain. And
what if you did? And you are not the only one of the family who has," he
said, as he looked piteously round the room. "I wish I had never known
the name of Esmond or Castlewood," he continues, "or that place yonder
of which the picture hangs over my fireplace, and where I have buried
myself these long, long years. My lord, your cousin, took a fancy to me,
said he would make my fortune, has kept me as his dependant till fortune
has passed by me, and now refuses me my due."

"How do you mean your due, Mr. Sampson?" asks Harry.

"I mean three years' salary which he owes me as chaplain of Castlewood.
Seeing you could give me no money, I went to his lordship this morning
and asked him. I fell on my knees, and asked him, sir. But his lordship
had none. He gave me civil words, at least (saving your presence, Mr.
Warrington), but no money--that is, five guineas, which he declared was
all he had and which I took. But what are five guineas amongst so many
Oh, those poor little children! those poor little children!"

"Lord Castlewood said he had no money?" cries out Harry. "He won eleven
hundred pounds, yesterday, of me at piquet--which I paid him out of this
pocket-book."

"I dare say, sir, I dare say, sir. One can't believe a word his lordship
says, sir," says Mr. Sampson; "but I am thinking of execution in this
house, and ruin upon these poor folks to-morrow."

"That need not happen," says Mr. Warrington. "Here are eighty guineas,
Sampson. As far as they go, God help you! 'Tis all I have to give you.
I wish to my heart I could give more as I promised; but you did not come
at the right time, and I am a poor devil now until I get my remittances
from Virginia."

The chaplain gave a wild look of surprise, and turned quite white. He
flung himself down on his knees and seized Harry's hand.

"Great powers, sir!" says he, "are you a guardian angel that Heaven hath
sent me? You quarrelled with my tears this morning, Mr. Warrington. I
can't help them now. They burst, sir, from a grateful heart. A rock of
stone would pour them forth, sir, before such goodness as yours! May
Heaven eternally bless you, and give you prosperity! May my unworthy
prayers be heard in your behalf, my friend, my best benefactor! May----"

"Nay, nay! get up, friend--get up, Sampson!" says Harry, whom the
chaplain's adulation and fine phrases rather annoyed.

"I am glad to have been able to do you a service--sincerely glad.
There--there! Don't be on your knees to me!"

"To Heaven who sent you to me, sir!" cries the chaplain. Mrs. Weston!
Mrs. Weston!"

"What is it, sir?" says the landlady, instantly, who, indeed, had been
at the door the whole time. "We are saved, Mrs. Weston! We are saved!"
cries the chaplain. "Kneel, kneel, woman, and thank our benefactor!
Raise your innocent voices, children, and bless him!" A universal
whimper arose round Harry, which the chaplain led off, whilst the
young Virginian stood, simpering and well pleased, in the midst of this
congregation. They would worship, do what he might. One of the children,
not understanding the kneeling order, and standing up, the mother
fetched her a slap on the ear, crying, "Drat it, Jane, kneel down, and
bless the gentleman, I tell 'ee!"... We leave them performing this sweet
benedictory service. Mr. Harry walks off from Long Acre, forgetting
almost the griefs of the former four or five days, and tingling with the
consciousness of having done a good action.


The young woman with whom Gumbo had been conversing on that evening
when Harry drove up from White's to his lodging, was Mrs. Molly, from
Oakhurst, the attendant of the ladies there. Wherever that fascinating
Gumbo went, he left friends and admirers in the servants'-hall. I think
we said it was on a Wednesday evening he and Mrs. Molly had fetched a
walk together, and they were performing the amiable courtesies incident
upon parting, when Gumbo's master came up, and put an end to their
twilight whisperings and what not.

For many hours on Wednesday, on Thursday, on Friday, a pale little
maiden sate at a window in Lord Wrotham's house, in Hill Street, her
mother and sister wistfully watching her. She would not go out. They
knew whom she was expecting. He passed the door once, and she might
have thought he was coming, but he did not. He went into a neighbouring
house. Papa had never told the girls of the presents which Harry had
sent, and only whispered a word or two to their mother regarding his
quarrel with the young Virginian.

On Saturday night there was an opera of Mr. Handel's, and papa brought
home tickets for the gallery. Hetty went this evening. The change would
do her good, Theo thought, and--and, perhaps there might be Somebody
amongst the fine company; but Somebody was not there; and Mr. Handel's
fine music fell blank upon the poor child. It might have been Signor
Bononcini's, and she would have scarce known the difference.

As the children are undressing and taking off those smart new satin
sacks in which they appeared at the Opera, looking so fresh and so
pretty amongst all the tawdry rouged folks, Theo remarks how very sad
and woebegone Mrs. Molly their maid appears. Theo is always anxious when
other people seem in trouble; not so Hetty, now, who is suffering, poor
thing, one of the most selfish maladies which ever visits mortals. Have
you ever been amongst insane people, and remarked how they never, never
think of any but themselves?

"What is the matter, Molly?" asks kind Theo: and indeed, Molly has been
longing to tell her young ladies. "Oh, Miss Theo! Oh, Miss Hetty!"
she says. "How ever can I tell you? Mr. Gumbo have been here, Mr.
Warrington's coloured gentleman, miss; and he says Mr. Warrington have
been took by two bailiffs this evening, as he comes out of Sir Miles
Warrington's house three doors off."

"Silence!" cries Theo, quite sternly. Who is it that gives those three
shrieks? It is Mrs. Molly, who chooses to scream, because Miss Hetty has
fallen fainting from her chair.




CHAPTER XLV. In which Harry finds two Uncles


We have all of us, no doubt, had a fine experience of the world, and a
vast variety of characters have passed under our eyes; but there is one
sort of men not an uncommon object of satire in novels and plays--of
whom I confess to have met with scarce any specimens at all in my
intercourse with this sinful mankind. I mean, mere religious hypocrites,
preaching for ever, and not believing a word of their own sermons;
infidels in broad brims and sables, expounding, exhorting, comminating,
blessing, without any faith in their own paradise, or fear about their
pandemonium. Look at those candid troops of hobnails clumping to church
on a Sunday evening; those rustling maid-servants in their ribbons whom
the young apprentices follow; those little regiments of schoolboys;
those trim young maidens and staid matrons, marching with their
glistening prayer-books, as the chapel bell chinks yonder (passing
Ebenezer, very likely, where the congregation of umbrellas, great
bonnets, and pattens, is by this time assembled under the flaring
gas-lamps). Look at those! How many of them are hypocrites, think you?
Very likely the maid-servant is thinking of her sweetheart: the grocer
is casting about how he can buy that parcel of sugar, and whether the
County Bank will take any more of his paper: the head-schoolboy is
conning Latin verses for Monday's exercise: the young scapegrace
remembers that after his service and sermon, there will be papa's
exposition at home, but that there will be pie for supper: the clerk who
calls out the psalm has his daughter in trouble, and drones through his
responses scarcely aware of their meaning: the very moment the parson
hides his face on his cushion, he may be thinking of that bill which is
coming due on Monday. These people are not heavenly-minded; they are of
the world, worldly, and have not yet got their feet off of it; but they
are not hypocrites, look you. Folks have their religion in some handy
mental lock-up, as it were--a valuable medicine, to be taken in
ill health; and a man administers his nostrum to his neighbour, and
recommends his private cure for the other's complaint. "My dear madam,
you have spasms? You will find these drops infallible!" "You have been
taking too much wine, my good sir? By this pill you may defy any evil
consequences from too much wine, and take your bottle of port daily." Of
spiritual and bodily physic, who are more fond and eager dispensers than
women? And we know that, especially a hundred years ago, every lady
in the country had her still-room, and her medicine chest, her pills,
powders, potions, for all the village round.

My Lady Warrington took charge of the consciences and the digestions of
her husband's tenants and family. She had the faith and health of the
servants'-hall in keeping. Heaven can tell whether she knew how to
doctor them rightly: but, was it pill or doctrine, she administered one
or the other with equal belief in her own authority, and her disciples
swallowed both obediently. She believed herself to be one of the most
