nearly three tons of matter in doing so. They were constantly oppressed
by a load of five gravities except for the short intervals when they
stopped to eat and when they were moving in the space control field.
Even in sleeping, they were forced to stand the load.

The massive sun was their principal and most effective brake. At no time
did they go more than a few dozen million miles from the primary, for
the more intense the gravity, the better effect they got.

Morey divided his time between piloting the ship while Arcot rested, and
observing the system. By the end of the third day, he had made very
creditable progress with his map.

He had located only six planets, but he was certain there were others.
For the sake of simplicity, he had assumed circular orbits and
calculated their approximate orbital velocities from their distance from
the sun. He had determined the mass of the sun from direct weighings
aboard their ship. He soon had a fair diagram of the system constructed
mathematically, and experimental observation showed it to be a very
close approximation.

The planets were rather more massive than those of Sol. The innermost
planet had a third again the diameter of Mercury and was four million
miles farther from the primary. He named it Hermes. The next one, which
he named Aphrodite, the Greek goddess corresponding to the Roman Venus,
was only a little larger than Venus and was some eight million miles
farther from its primary--seventy-five million miles from the central
sun.

The next, which Morey called Terra, was very much like Earth. At a
distance of a hundred and twenty-four million miles from the sun, it
must have received almost the same amount of heat that Earth does, for
this sun was considerably brighter than Sol.

Terra was eight thousand two hundred miles in diameter, with a fairly
clear atmosphere and a varying albedo which indicated clouds in the
atmosphere. Morey had every reason to believe that it might be
inhabited, but he had no proof because his photographs were consistently
poor due to the glare of the sun.

The rest of the planets proved to be of little interest. In the place
where, according to Bode's Law, another planet, corresponding to Mars,
should have been, there was only a belt of asteroids. Beyond this was
still another belt. And on the other side of the double asteroid belt
was the fourth planet, a fifty-thousand-mile-in-diameter methane-ammonia
giant which Morey named Zeus in honor of Jupiter.

He had picked up a couple of others on his plates, but he had not been
able to tell anything about them as yet. In any case, the planets
Aphrodite and Terra were by far the most interesting.

"I think we picked the right angle to come into this system," said
Arcot, looking at Morey's photographs of the wide bands of asteroids.
They had come into the planetary group at right angles to the plane of
the ecliptic, which had allowed them to miss both asteroid belts.

They started moving toward the planet Terra, reaching their objective in
less than three hours.

The globe beneath them was lit brightly, for they had approached it from
the daylight side. Below them, they could see wide, green plains and
gently rolling mountains, and in a great cleft in one of the mountain
ranges was a shimmering lake of clearest blue.

The air of the planet screamed about them as they dropped down, and the
roar in the loudspeaker grew to a mighty cataract of sound. Morey turned
down the volume.

The sparkling little lake passed beneath them as they shot on,
seventy-five miles above the surface of the planet. When they had first
entered the atmosphere, they had the impression of looking down on a
vast, inverted bowl whose edge rested on a vast, smooth table of deep
violet velvet. But as they dropped and the violet became bluer and
bluer, they experienced the strange optical illusion of "flopping" of
the scene. The bowl seemed to turn itself inside out, and they were
looking down at its inner surface.

They shot over a mountain range, and a vast plain spread out before
them. Here and there, in the far distance, they could see darker spots
caused by buckled geological strata.

Arcot swung the ship around, and they saw the vast horizon swing about
them as their sensation of "down" changed with the acceleration of the
turn. They felt nearly weightless, for they were lifting again in a high
arc.

Arcot was heading back toward the mountains they had passed over. He
dropped the ship again, and the foothills seemed to rise to meet them.

"I'm heading for that lake," Arcot explained. "It seems absolutely
deserted, and there are some things we want to do. I haven't had any
decent exercise for the past two weeks, except for straining under high
gravity. I want to do some swimming, and we need to distill some water
for drink; we need to refill the tanks in case of emergencies. If the
atmosphere contains oxygen, fine; if it doesn't, we can get it out of
the water by electrolysis.

"But I hope that air is good to breathe, because I've been wanting a
swim and a sun bath for a long time!"




XIII


The _Ancient Mariner_ hung high in the air, poised twenty-five miles
above the surface of the little lake. Wade, as chemist, tested the air
while the others readied the distillation and air condensation
apparatus. By the time they had finished, Wade was ready with his
report.

"Air pressure about 20 psi at the surface; temperature around
ninety-five Fahrenheit. Composition: eighteen percent oxygen,
seventy-five percent nitrogen, four-tenths of one percent carbon
dioxide, residue--inert gasses. That's not including water vapor, of
which there is a fair amount.

"I put a canary into the air, and the bird liked it, so I imagine it's
quite safe except for bacteria, perhaps. Naturally, at this altitude the
air is germ-free."

"Good," said Morey, "then we can take our swim and work without worrying
about spacesuits."

"Just a minute!" Fuller objected. "What about those germs Wade
mentioned? If you think I'm going out in my shorts where some flock of
bacteria can get at my tender anatomy, you've got another think coming!"

"I wouldn't worry about it," Wade said. "The chances of organisms
developing along the same evolutionary line is quite slim. We may find
the inhabitants of the same shape as those of another world, because the
human body is fairly well constructed anatomically. The head is in a
place where it will be able to see over a wide area and it's in a safe
place. The hand is very useful and can be improved upon but little.
True, the Venerians have a second thumb, but the principle is the same.

"But chemically, the bodies are probably very different. The people of
Venus are widely different chemically; the bacteria that can make a
Venerian deathly ill is killed the instant it enters our body, or else
it starves to death because it can't find the kind of chemical food it
needs to live. And the same thing happens when a Venerian is attacked by
an Earthly microorganism.

"Even on Earth, evolution has produced such widely varying types of life
that an organism that can feed on one is totally incapable of feeding on
another. You, for instance, couldn't catch tobacco mosaic virus, and the
tobacco plant can't catch the measles virus.

"You couldn't expect a microorganism to evolve here that was capable of
feeding on Earth-type tissues; they would have starved to death long
ago."

"What about bigger animals?" Fuller asked cautiously.

"That's different. You would probably be indigestible to an alien
carnivore, but he'd probably kill you first to find out. If he ate you,
it might kill him in the end, but that would be small consolation.
That's why we're going to go out armed."

Arcot dropped the ship swiftly until they were hovering a bare hundred
feet over the waters of the lake. There was a little stream winding its
way down the mountainside, and another which led the clear overflow
away.

"I doubt if there's anything of great size in that lake," Arcot said
slowly and thoughtfully. "Still, even small fish might be deadly. Let's
play safe and remove all forms of life, bacterial and otherwise. A
little touch of the molecular motion ray, greatly diffused, will do the
trick."

Since the molecular ray directed the motion of the molecules of matter,
it prevented chemical reactions from taking place, even when greatly
diffused; all the molecules tend to go in the same direction to such an
extent that the delicate balance of chemical reactions that is life is
upset. It is too delicate a thing to stand any power that upsets the
reactions so violently. All things are killed instantly.

As the light haze of the ionized air below them glowed out in a huge
cone, the water of the lake heaved and seemed to move in its depths, but
there was no great movement of the waters; they lost only a fraction of
their weight. But every living thing in that lake died instantly.

Arcot turned the ship, and the shining hull glided softly over to one
side of the lake where a little sandy beach invited them. There seemed
no indication of intelligent life about.

Each of them took a load of the supplies they had brought, and carried
them out under the shade of an immense pine-like tree--a gigantic column
of wood that stretched far into the sky to lose its green leaves in a
waving sea of foliage. The mottled sunlight of the bright star above
them made them feel very much at home. Its color, intensity, and warmth
were all exactly the same as on Earth.

Each of the men wore his power suit to aid in carrying the things they
had brought, for the gravity here was a bit higher than that of Earth.
The difference in air pressure was so little as to be scarcely
noticeable; they even adjusted the interior of the ship to it.

They had every intention of staying here for awhile. It was pleasant to
lie in the warm sun once more; so pleasant that it became difficult to
remember that they were countless trillions of long miles from their own
home planet. It was hard to realize that the warm, blazing star above
them was not Old Sol.

Arcot was carrying a load of food in a box. He had neutralized his
weight until, load and all, he weighed about a hundred pounds. This was
necessary in order to permit him to drag a length of hose behind him
toward the water, so it could be used as an intake for the pumps.

Morey, meanwhile, was having trouble. He had been carrying a load of
assorted things to use--a few pneumatic pillows, a heavy iron pot for
boiling the water, and a number of other things.

He reached his destination, having floated the hundred or so feet from
the ship by using his power suit. He forgot, momentarily, and dropped
his load. Immediately, he too began to "drop"--upward! He had a
buoyancy of around three hundred pounds, and a weight of only two fifty.
In dropping the load, the sudden release had caused the power unit to
jerk him upward, and somehow the controlling knob on the power pack was
torn loose.

Morey shot up into the air, showing a fair rate of progress toward his
late abode--space! And he had no way to stop himself. His hand power
unit was far too weak to overcome the pull of his power-pack, and he was
rising faster and faster!

He realized that his friends could catch him, and laughingly called
down: "Arcot! Help! I'm being kidnapped by my power suit! To the
rescue!"

Arcot looked up quickly at Morey's call and realized immediately that
his power control had come off. He knew there was twenty miles or so of
breathable air above, and long before Morey rose that far, he could
catch him in the _Ancient Mariner_, if necessary.

He turned on his own power suit, using a lift of a hundred pounds, which
gave him double Morey's acceleration. Quickly he gathered speed that
shot him up toward his helpless friend, and a moment later, he had
caught up with him and passed him. Then he shut off his power and
drifted to a halt before he began to drop again. As Morey rose toward
him, Arcot adjusted the power in his own suit to match Morey's velocity.

Arcot grabbed Morey's leg and turned his power down until he had a
weight of fifty pounds. Soon they were both falling again, and when
their rate of fall amounted to approximately twenty miles per hour,
Arcot cut their weight to zero and they continued down through their
momentum. Just short of the ground, he leaped free of Morey, who,
carried on by momentum, touched the ground a moment later. Wade at once
jumped in and held him down.

"Now, now! Calm yourself," said Wade solicitously. "Don't go up in the
air like that over the least little thing."

"I won't, if you'll get busy and take this damned thing off--or fasten
some lead to my feet!" replied Morey, starting to unstrap the mechanism.

"You'd better hold your horses there," said Arcot. "If you take that off
now, we sure will need the _Ancient Mariner_ to catch up with it. It
will produce an acceleration that no man could ever stand--something on
the order of five thousand gravities, if the tubes could stand it. And
since that one is equipped with the invisibility apparatus, you'd be out
one good invisibility suit. Restrain yourself, boy, and I'll go get a
new knob control.

"Wade, get the boy a rock to hold him down. Better tie it around his
neck so he won't forget it and fly off into space again. It's a nuisance
locating so small an object in space and I promised his father I'd bring
the body back if there was anything left of it." He released Morey as
Wade handed him a large stone.

A few minutes later, he returned with a new adjustment dial and repaired
Morey's apparatus. The strain was released when he turned it, and Morey
parted with the rock with relief.

Morey grunted in relief, and looked at the offending pack.

"You know, that being stuck with a sky-bound gadget that you can't turn
off is the nastiest combination of feeling stupid, helpless, comical,
silly and scared I've hit yet. It now--somewhat late--occurs to me that
this is powered with a standard power coil, straight off the production
line, and that it has a standard overload cut-out for protection of
associated equipment. I want to install an emergency cutoff switch, in
case a knob, or something else, goes sour. But I want to have the
emergency overload where I can decide whether or not an emergency
overload is to be accepted. I'd feel a sight more than silly if that
overload relay popped while I was a couple thousand feet up.

"Trouble with all this new stuff of ours is that we simply haven't had
time to find out all the 'I never thought of that' things that can go
wrong. If the grid resistor on that oscillator went out, for instance,
what would it do?"

Arcot cocked an eye at the power pack, visualizing the circuits. "Full
blast, straight up, and no control. But modern printed resistors don't
fail."

"That's what it says in all the books." Wade nodded wisely. "And you
should see the stock of replacement units every electronics shop stocks
for purposes of replacing infallible units, too. You've got a point, my
friend."

"I can see four ways we can change these things to fail-safe operation,
if we add Morey's emergency cut-off switch. If it did go on-full then,
you could use intermittent operation and get down," Arcot acknowledged.

"Anybody know what silly fail-unsafe tricks we overlooked in the
_Ancient Mariner_?" Fuller asked.

"That," said Wade with a grimace, "is a silly question. The 'I didn't
think of that' type of failure occurs because I didn't think of that,
and the reason I didn't think of it is because it never occurred to me.
If we'd been able to think of 'em, we would have. We'll probably get
stuck with a few more yet, before we get back. But at least we can clean
up a few bugs in these things now."

"Forget it for now, Wade, and get that chow on," suggested Fuller. He
was lying on his back, clad only in a pair of short trunks, completely
relaxed and enjoying life. "We can do that when it's dark here."

"Fuller has the right idea," said Morey, looking at Fuller with a
judicious eye. "I think I'll follow his example."

"Which makes three in favor and one on the way," said Arcot, as he came
out of the ship and sank down on the soft sand of the beach.

They lay around for a while after lunch, and then decided to swim in the
cool waters of the lake. One of them was to stand guard while the others
went in swimming. Standing guard consisted of lying on his back on the
soft sand, and staring up at the delightful contrast of lush green
foliage and deep blue sky.

It was several hours before they gathered up their things and returned
to the ship. They felt more rested than they had before their exercise.
They had not been tired before, merely restless, and the physical
exercise had made them far more comfortable.

They gathered again in the control room. All the apparatus had been
taken in; the tanks were filled, and the compressed oxygen replenished.
They closed the airlock and were ready to start again.

As they lifted into the air, Arcot looked at the lake that was shrinking
below them. "Nice place for a picnic; we'll have to remember that place.
It isn't more than twenty million light years from home."

"Yes," agreed Morey, "it is handy. But suppose we find out where home is
first; let's go find the local inhabitants."

"Excellent idea. Which way do we go to look?" Wade asked.

"This lake must have an outlet to the sea," Morey answered. "I suggest
we follow it. Most rivers of any size have a port near the mouth, and a
port usually means a city."

"Let's go," said Arcot, swinging the shining ship about and heading
smoothly down along the line of the little stream that had its beginning
at the lake. They moved on across the mountains and over the green
foothills until they came to a broad, rolling plain.

"I wonder if this planet _is_ inhabited," Arcot mused. "None of this
land seems to be cultivated."

Morey had been scanning the horizon with a pair of powerful binoculars.
"No, the land isn't cultivated, but take a look over there--see that
range of little hills over to the right? Take a look." He handed the
binoculars to Arcot.

Arcot looked long and quietly. At last he lowered the binoculars and
handed them to Wade, who sat next to him.

"It looks like the ruins of a city," Arcot said. "Not the ruins that a
storm would make, but the ruins that high explosives would make. I'd say
there had been a war and the people who once lived here had been driven
off."

"So would I," rejoined Morey. "I wonder if we could find the
conquerors?"

"Maybe--unless it was mutual annihilation!"

They rose a bit higher and raised their speed to a thousand miles an
hour. On and on they flew, high above the gently rolling plain, mile
after mile. The little brooklet became a great river, and the river kept
growing more and more. Ahead of them was a range of hills, and they
wondered how the river could thread its way among them. They found that
it went through a broad pass that twisted tortuously between high
mountains.

A few miles farther on, they came to a great natural basin in the pass,
a wide, level bowl. And in almost the exact center, they saw a looming
mass of buildings--a great city!

"Look!" cried Morey. "I told you it was inhabited!"

Arcot winced. "Yes, but if you shout in my ear like that again, you'll
have to write things out for me for ever after." He was just as excited
as Morey, nevertheless.

The great mass of the city was shaped like a titanic cone that stood
half mile high and was fully a mile and a half in radius. But the
remarkable thing about it was the perfect uniformity with which the
buildings and every structure seemed to conform to this plan. It seemed
as though an invisible, but very tangible line had been drawn in the
air.

