and a very stupid way. They would have begun by scolding the idiotic
cabman; and next they would make his wife angry by saying it must be her
fault as well as his, and by leaving ill-bred though well-meant shabby
little books for them to read, which they were sure to hate the sight
of; while all the time they would not have put out a finger to touch the
wailing baby. But Diamond had him out of the cradle in a moment, set
him up on his knee, and told him to look at the light. Now all the light
there was came only from a lamp in the yard, and it was a very dingy and
yellow light, for the glass of the lamp was dirty, and the gas was bad;
but the light that came from it was, notwithstanding, as certainly
light as if it had come from the sun itself, and the baby knew that, and
smiled to it; and although it was indeed a wretched room which that lamp
lighted--so dreary, and dirty, and empty, and hopeless!--there in the
middle of it sat Diamond on a stool, smiling to the baby, and the baby
on his knees smiling to the lamp. The father of him sat staring at
nothing, neither asleep nor awake, not quite lost in stupidity either,
for through it all he was dimly angry with himself, he did not know
why. It was that he had struck his wife. He had forgotten it, but was
miserable about it, notwithstanding. And this misery was the voice of
the great Love that had made him and his wife and the baby and Diamond,
speaking in his heart, and telling him to be good. For that great Love
speaks in the most wretched and dirty hearts; only the tone of its voice
depends on the echoes of the place in which it sounds. On Mount Sinai,
it was thunder; in the cabman's heart it was misery; in the soul of St.
John it was perfect blessedness.

By and by he became aware that there was a voice of singing in the room.
This, of course, was the voice of Diamond singing to the baby--song
after song, every one as foolish as another to the cabman, for he was
too tipsy to part one word from another: all the words mixed up in his
ear in a gurgle without division or stop; for such was the way he spoke
himself, when he was in this horrid condition. But the baby was more
than content with Diamond's songs, and Diamond himself was so contented
with what the songs were all about, that he did not care a bit about the
songs themselves, if only baby liked them. But they did the cabman good
as well as the baby and Diamond, for they put him to sleep, and the
sleep was busy all the time it lasted, smoothing the wrinkles out of his
temper.

At length Diamond grew tired of singing, and began to talk to the baby
instead. And as soon as he stopped singing, the cabman began to wake up.
His brain was a little clearer now, his temper a little smoother,
and his heart not quite so dirty. He began to listen and he went on
listening, and heard Diamond saying to the baby something like this, for
he thought the cabman was asleep:

"Poor daddy! Baby's daddy takes too much beer and gin, and that makes
him somebody else, and not his own self at all. Baby's daddy would never
hit baby's mammy if he didn't take too much beer. He's very fond of
baby's mammy, and works from morning to night to get her breakfast and
dinner and supper, only at night he forgets, and pays the money away for
beer. And they put nasty stuff in beer, I've heard my daddy say, that
drives all the good out, and lets all the bad in. Daddy says when a man
takes a drink, there's a thirsty devil creeps into his inside, because
he knows he will always get enough there. And the devil is always crying
out for more drink, and that makes the man thirsty, and so he drinks
more and more, till he kills himself with it. And then the ugly devil
creeps out of him, and crawls about on his belly, looking for some other
cabman to get into, that he may drink, drink, drink. That's what my
daddy says, baby. And he says, too, the only way to make the devil come
out is to give him plenty of cold water and tea and coffee, and nothing
at all that comes from the public-house; for the devil can't abide that
kind of stuff, and creeps out pretty soon, for fear of being drowned
in it. But your daddy will drink the nasty stuff, poor man! I wish he
wouldn't, for it makes mammy cross with him, and no wonder! and then
when mammy's cross, he's crosser, and there's nobody in the house to
take care of them but baby; and you do take care of them, baby--don't
you, baby? I know you do. Babies always take care of their fathers and
mothers--don't they, baby? That's what they come for--isn't it, baby?
And when daddy stops drinking beer and nasty gin with turpentine in it,
father says, then mammy will be so happy, and look so pretty! and daddy
will be so good to baby! and baby will be as happy as a swallow, which
is the merriest fellow! And Diamond will be so happy too! And when
Diamond's a man, he'll take baby out with him on the box, and teach him
to drive a cab."

He went on with chatter like this till baby was asleep, by which time
he was tired, and father and mother were both wide awake--only rather
confused--the one from the beer, the other from the blow--and staring,
the one from his chair, the other from her bed, at Diamond. But he was
quite unaware of their notice, for he sat half-asleep, with his eyes
wide open, staring in his turn, though without knowing it, at the
cabman, while the cabman could not withdraw his gaze from Diamond's
white face and big eyes. For Diamond's face was always rather pale, and
now it was paler than usual with sleeplessness, and the light of the
street-lamp upon it. At length he found himself nodding, and he knew
then it was time to put the baby down, lest he should let him fall. So
he rose from the little three-legged stool, and laid the baby in the
cradle, and covered him up--it was well it was a warm night, and he did
not want much covering--and then he all but staggered out of the door,
he was so tipsy himself with sleep.

"Wife," said the cabman, turning towards the bed, "I do somehow believe
that wur a angel just gone. Did you see him, wife? He warn't wery big,
and he hadn't got none o' them wingses, you know. It wur one o' them
baby-angels you sees on the gravestones, you know."

"Nonsense, hubby!" said his wife; "but it's just as good. I might say
better, for you can ketch hold of him when you like. That's little
Diamond as everybody knows, and a duck o' diamonds he is! No woman could
wish for a better child than he be."

"I ha' heerd on him in the stable, but I never see the brat afore. Come,
old girl, let bygones be bygones, and gie us a kiss, and we'll go to
bed."

The cabman kept his cab in another yard, although he had his room in
this. He was often late in coming home, and was not one to take notice
of children, especially when he was tipsy, which was oftener than not.
Hence, if he had ever seen Diamond, he did not know him. But his wife
knew him well enough, as did every one else who lived all day in the
yard. She was a good-natured woman. It was she who had got the fire
lighted and the tea ready for them when Diamond and his mother came home
from Sandwich. And her husband was not an ill-natured man either, and
when in the morning he recalled not only Diamond's visit, but how he
himself had behaved to his wife, he was very vexed with himself, and
gladdened his poor wife's heart by telling her how sorry he was. And for
a whole week after, he did not go near the public-house, hard as it was
to avoid it, seeing a certain rich brewer had built one, like a trap to
catch souls and bodies in, at almost every corner he had to pass on his
way home. Indeed, he was never quite so bad after that, though it was
some time before he began really to reform.




CHAPTER XIX. DIAMOND'S FRIENDS


ONE day when old Diamond was standing with his nose in his bag between
Pall Mall and Cockspur Street, and his master was reading the newspaper
on the box of his cab, which was the last of a good many in the row,
little Diamond got down for a run, for his legs were getting cramped
with sitting. And first of all he strolled with his hands in his pockets
up to the crossing, where the girl and her broom were to be found in all
weathers. Just as he was going to speak to her, a tall gentleman stepped
upon the crossing. He was pleased to find it so clean, for the streets
were muddy, and he had nice boots on; so he put his hand in his pocket,
and gave the girl a penny. But when she gave him a sweet smile in
return, and made him a pretty courtesy, he looked at her again, and
said:

"Where do you live, my child?"

"Paradise Row," she answered; "next door to the Adam and Eve--down the
area."

"Whom do you live with?" he asked.

"My wicked old grannie," she replied.

"You shouldn't call your grannie wicked," said the gentleman.

"But she is," said the girl, looking up confidently in his face. "If you
don't believe me, you can come and take a look at her."

The words sounded rude, but the girl's face looked so simple that
the gentleman saw she did not mean to be rude, and became still more
interested in her.

"Still you shouldn't say so," he insisted.

"Shouldn't I? Everybody calls her wicked old grannie--even them that's
as wicked as her. You should hear her swear. There's nothing like it in
the Row. Indeed, I assure you, sir, there's ne'er a one of them can shut
my grannie up once she begins and gets right a-going. You must put her
in a passion first, you know. It's no good till you do that--she's so
old now. How she do make them laugh, to be sure!"

Although she called her wicked, the child spoke so as plainly to
indicate pride in her grannie's pre-eminence in swearing.

The gentleman looked very grave to hear her, for he was sorry that such
a nice little girl should be in such bad keeping. But he did not know
what to say next, and stood for a moment with his eyes on the ground.
When he lifted them, he saw the face of Diamond looking up in his.

"Please, sir," said Diamond, "her grannie's very cruel to her sometimes,
and shuts her out in the streets at night, if she happens to be late."

"Is this your brother?" asked the gentleman of the girl.

"No, sir."

"How does he know your grandmother, then? He does not look like one of
her sort."

"Oh no, sir! He's a good boy--quite."

Here she tapped her forehead with her finger in a significant manner.

"What do you mean by that?" asked the gentleman, while Diamond looked on
smiling.

"The cabbies call him God's baby," she whispered. "He's not right in the
head, you know. A tile loose."

Still Diamond, though he heard every word, and understood it too, kept
on smiling. What could it matter what people called him, so long as he
did nothing he ought not to do? And, besides, God's baby was surely the
best of names!

"Well, my little man, and what can you do?" asked the gentleman, turning
towards him--just for the sake of saying something.

"Drive a cab," said Diamond.

"Good; and what else?" he continued; for, accepting what the girl had
said, he regarded the still sweetness of Diamond's face as a sign of
silliness, and wished to be kind to the poor little fellow.

"Nurse a baby," said Diamond.

"Well--and what else?"

"Clean father's boots, and make him a bit of toast for his tea."

"You're a useful little man," said the gentleman. "What else can you
do?"

"Not much that I know of," said Diamond. "I can't curry a horse, except
somebody puts me on his back. So I don't count that."

"Can you read?"

"No. But mother can and father can, and they're going to teach me some
day soon."

"Well, here's a penny for you."

"Thank you, sir."

"And when you have learned to read, come to me, and I'll give you
sixpence and a book with fine pictures in it."

"Please, sir, where am I to come?" asked Diamond, who was too much a
man of the world not to know that he must have the gentleman's address
before he could go and see him.

"You're no such silly!" thought he, as he put his hand in his pocket,
and brought out a card. "There," he said, "your father will be able to
read that, and tell you where to go."

"Yes, sir. Thank you, sir," said Diamond, and put the card in his
pocket.

The gentleman walked away, but turning round a few paces off, saw
Diamond give his penny to the girl, and, walking slower heard him say:

"I've got a father, and mother, and little brother, and you've got
nothing but a wicked old grannie. You may have my penny."

The girl put it beside the other in her pocket, the only trustworthy
article of dress she wore. Her grandmother always took care that she had
a stout pocket.

"Is she as cruel as ever?" asked Diamond.

"Much the same. But I gets more coppers now than I used to, and I can
get summats to eat, and take browns enough home besides to keep her from
grumbling. It's a good thing she's so blind, though."

"Why?" asked Diamond.

"'Cause if she was as sharp in the eyes as she used to be, she would
find out I never eats her broken wittles, and then she'd know as I must
get something somewheres."

"Doesn't she watch you, then?"

"O' course she do. Don't she just! But I make believe and drop it in my
lap, and then hitch it into my pocket."

"What would she do if she found you out?"

"She never give me no more."

"But you don't want it!"

"Yes, I do want it."

"What do you do with it, then?"

"Give it to cripple Jim."

"Who's cripple Jim?"

"A boy in the Row. His mother broke his leg when he wur a kid, so he's
never come to much; but he's a good boy, is Jim, and I love Jim dearly.
I always keeps off a penny for Jim--leastways as often as I can.--But
there I must sweep again, for them busses makes no end o' dirt."

"Diamond! Diamond!" cried his father, who was afraid he might get no
good by talking to the girl; and Diamond obeyed, and got up again
upon the box. He told his father about the gentleman, and what he had
promised him if he would learn to read, and showed him the gentleman's
card.

"Why, it's not many doors from the Mews!" said his father, giving him
back the card. "Take care of it, my boy, for it may lead to something.
God knows, in these hard times a man wants as many friends as he's ever
likely to get."

"Haven't you got friends enough, father?" asked Diamond.

"Well, I have no right to complain; but the more the better, you know."

"Just let me count," said Diamond.

And he took his hands from his pockets, and spreading out the fingers of
his left hand, began to count, beginning at the thumb.

"There's mother, first, and then baby, and then me. Next there's old
Diamond--and the cab--no, I won't count the cab, for it never looks at
you, and when Diamond's out of the shafts, it's nobody. Then there's the
man that drinks next door, and his wife, and his baby."

"They're no friends of mine," said his father.

"Well, they're friends of mine," said Diamond.

His father laughed.

"Much good they'll do you!" he said.

"How do you know they won't?" returned Diamond.

"Well, go on," said his father.

"Then there's Jack and Mr. Stonecrop, and, deary me! not to have
mentioned Mr. Coleman and Mrs. Coleman, and Miss Coleman, and Mrs.
Crump. And then there's the clergyman that spoke to me in the garden
that day the tree was blown down."

"What's his name!"

"I don't know his name."

"Where does he live?"

"I don't know."

"How can you count him, then?"

"He did talk to me, and very kindlike too."

His father laughed again.

"Why, child, you're just counting everybody you know. That don't make
'em friends."

"Don't it? I thought it did. Well, but they shall be my friends. I shall
make 'em."

"How will you do that?"

"They can't help themselves then, if they would. If I choose to be their
friend, you know, they can't prevent me. Then there's that girl at the
crossing."
