
Belle and Garlock looked at each other and grinned. James was surprised
and shocked. This woman blowing her top was no Brownie Montandon any of
them knew.

"We do everything we possibly can," the Inspector was not only shocked,
but injured and abused. "If there's any one possible thing we haven't
done, even the tiniest...."

"There's plenty!" she snapped. "Plain, dumb stupidity, then, it must be.
There must be _somebody_ around here who has been at least exposed to
elementary biology! You should have exterminated these Ozobe vermin ages
ago. All you have to do is find out what its life cycle is. How many
stages and what they are. How the adults get into space and where they
go," and she went on, in flashing thoughts, to explain in full detail.

"Are you smart enough to understand that?"

"Oh, yes. Your thought may be the truth, at that."

"And are you interested enough to find out whose business it would be,
and follow through on it?"

"Yes, of course. If it works, I'll be quite famous for suggesting it.
I'll give you part of the credit...."

"Keep the credit--just see to it that it gets _done_!" She whirled on
James. "This loss of human life is so _appallingly_ unnecessary! This
time we're going to Clamer, and nowhere else. Push the button, Jim."

"All I can do is set up for it, pet. Whether we...."

"We'll get there!" she blazed. "It's high time we got a break. _Punch_
it! _This_ time the ship's going to _Clamer_, if we have to all get out
and _push_ it there! Now punch that button!"

James pushed the button, glanced into his scanner, and froze; eyes
staring. He did not even whistle. Belle, however, did; with
ear-shattering volume. Garlock's mouth fell open in the biggest surprise
of his life. They were in the same galaxy!

All three had studied charts of nebular configurations so long and so
intensely that recognition of a full-sphere identity was automatic and
instantaneous.

Lola, head buried in scanner, had already checked in with the Port
Inspector.

"It _is_ Clamer!" she shrieked aloud. "I _told_ you it was time for our
luck to change, if we pulled hard enough! They are being invaded by
Ozobes and they did call for help and they didn't think we could
possibly get here this fast and we don't need to be inspected because
we're compatible or we couldn't have landed on Groobe!"

For five long minutes Garlock held the starship motionless while he
studied the entire situation. Then he drove a probe through the mental
shield of the general in charge of the whole defense operation.

"Battle-Cruiser _Pleiades_, Captain Garlock commanding, reporting for
duty in response to your S.O.S. received on Groobe."

The general, furiously busy as he was, dropped all other business. "But
you're _human_! You can't fight!"

"Watch us. You don't know, apparently, that the Ozobe bases are on the
far side of your moon. They're bringing their fighters in most of the
way in transports."

"Why, they can't be! They're coming in from all directions from deep
space!"

"That's what they want you to think. They're built to stand many hours
of zero pressure and almost absolute zero cold. Question: if we destroy
all their transport, say in three hours, can you handle all the fighters
who will be in the air or in nearby space at that time?"

"Very easily. They've hardly started yet. I appoint you Admiral-pro-tem
Garlock, in command of Space Operations, and will refer to you any other
space-fighters who may come. I thank you, sir. Good luck."

The general returned his attention to his boiling office. His mind was
seething with questions as to what these not-human beings were, how or
if they knew so much, and so on; but he forced them out of his mind and
went, fast and efficient, back to work. James shot the _Pleiades_ up to
within a thousand miles or so of the moon.

"How long does it take to learn this bombing business, Jim?" Lola asked.

"About fifteen seconds. All you have to do is _want_ to. Do you,
really?"

"I really do. If I don't do something to help these people," it did not
occur to her that she had already done a tremendous job, "I'll never
forgive myself."

James showed her; and, much to her surprise, she found it very easy to
do.

        *           *           *

The vessels transporting the invading forces were huge, spherical shells
equipped with short-range drives--and with nothing else. No
accommodations, no facilities, no food, no water, not even any air. Each
transport, when filled to the bursting-point with as-yet-docile cargo,
darted away; swinging around to approach Clamer from some
previously-assigned direction. It did not, however, approach the
planet's surface. At about two thousand miles out, great ports opened
and the load was dumped out into space, to fall the rest of the way by
gravity. Then the empty shell, with only its one pilot aboard, rushed
back for another load.

"How heavy shots, Clee?" James asked. He and Lola were getting into
their scanners. "Wouldn't take as much as a kiloton equivalent, would
it?"

"Half a kilo is plenty, but no use being too fussy about precision out
here."

        *           *           *

Garlock and Belle were already bombing; James and Lola began. Slow and
awkward at first, Lola soon picked up the technique and was firing blast
for blast with the others. No more loaded transport vessels left the
moon. No empty one, returning toward the moon, reached there. In much
less than the three hours Garlock had mentioned, every Ozobian transport
craft had been destroyed.

"And now the real job begins," Garlock said, as James dropped the
starship down to within a few miles of the moon's surface.

That surface was cratered and jagged, exactly like that of the half
always facing Clamer. No sign of activity could be seen by eye, nor
anything unusual. Even the immense trap-doors, all closed now, matched
exactly their surroundings. Underground, however, activity was violently
intense; and, now, confused in the extreme.

"Why, there isn't a single adult anywhere!" Lola exclaimed. "I thought
the whole place would be full of 'em!"

"So did I," Belle said. "However, by hindsight, it's plain enough. Their
job done, they were killed and eaten. Last meal, perhaps."

"I'm afraid so. Whatever they were, they had hands and brains. Just
_look_ at those shops and machines!"

"What do we do, boss?" James asked. "Run a search pattern first?"

"We'll have to, I guess, before we can lay the job out."

It was run and Garlock frowned in thought. "Almost half the moon
covered--honeycombed. We'll have to fine-tooth it. Around the periphery
first, then spiral into the center. This moon isn't very big, but even
so this is going to be a hell of a long job. Any suggestions, anybody?
Jim?"

"The only way, I guess. You can't do it hit-or-miss. I'm _damn_ glad
we've got plenty of stuff in our Op field and plenty of hydride for the
engines. The horses will all know they've been at work before they get
the field filled up again."

"So will you, Junior, believe me.... Ready, all? Start blasting."

Then, for three hours, the _Pleiades_ moved slowly--for her--along a
plotted and automatically-controlled course. It was very easy to tell
where she had been; the sharply-cut, evenly-spaced, symmetrical pits
left by the Galaxian's full-conversion blasts were entirely different
from the irregularly-cratered, ages-old original surface.

"Knock off, Brownie," Garlock said then. "Go eat all you can hold and
get some sleep. Come back in three hours. Jim, cut our speed to
seventy-five percent."

Lola shed her scanner, heaved a tremendous sigh of relief, and
disappeared.

Three silent hours later--all three were too intensely busy to think of
anything except the work in hand--Lola came back.

"Take Belle's swath, Brownie. Okay, Belle, you can lay off. Three
hours."

"I'll stay," Belle declared. "Go yourself; or send Jim."

"Don't be any more of a damn fool than you have to. I said beat it."

"And I said I wouldn't. I'm just as good...."

"Chop it off!" Garlock snapped. "It isn't a case of being just as good
as. It's a matter of physical reserves. Jim and I have more to draw on
for the long shifts than you have. So get the hell out of here or I'll
stop the ship and slap you even sillier than you are now."

Belle threw up her head, tossing her shoulder-length green mop in her
characteristic gesture of defiance; but after holding Garlock's hard
stare for a moment she relaxed and smiled.

"Okay, Clee--and thanks for the kind words."

She disappeared and the work went on.

And finally, when all four were so groggy that they could scarcely
think, the job was done and checked. Clamer's moon was as devoid of life
as any moon had ever been.

        *           *           *

Lola pitched her scanner at its rack and threw herself face-down on a
davenport, sobbing uncontrollably. James sat down beside her and soothed
her until she quieted down.

"You'd better eat something, sweetheart, and then for a good, long
sleep."

"Eat? Why, I couldn't, Jim, not possibly."

"Let her sleep first, I think, Jim," Belle said, and followed with her
eyes as Jim picked his wife up and carried her into the corridor.

"We'd better eat _something_, I suppose," Belle said, thoughtfully. "I
don't feel like eating, either, but I never realized until this minute
just how much this has taken out of me and I'd better start putting it
back in.... She did a wonderful job, Clee, even if she couldn't take it
full shift toward the last."

"I'll say she did. I hated like the devil to let her work that way, but
... you knew I was scared witless every second until we topped off."

Exhausted and haggard as she was, Belle laughed. "I know damn-blasted
well you weren't; but I know what you mean. Fighting something you don't
know anything about, and can't guess what may happen next, is tough.
Seconds count." Side by side, they strolled toward the alcove.

"I simply didn't think she had it in her," Belle marveled.

"She didn't. She hasn't. It'll take her a week to get back into shape."

"Right. She was going on pure nerve at the last--nothing else ... but
she did a job, and she's so sweet and fine.... I wonder, Clee, if ... if
I've been missing the boat...."

"You have not." Garlock sent the thought so solidly that Belle jumped.
"If you'd just let yourself be, you'd be worth a million of her, just as
you stand."

"Yes? You lie in your teeth, Cleander, but I love it.... Oh, I don't
know what I want to eat--if anything."

"I'll think up yours, too, along with mine."

"Please. Something light, and just a little."

"Yeah. Sit down. Just a light snack--a two-pound steak, rare; a bowl of
mushrooms fried in butter; French fries, french dips, salad, and a quart
of coffee. The same for me, except more of each. Here we are."

"Why, Clee, I couldn't _possibly_ eat half of that...." Then, after a
quarter of it was gone, "I _am_ hungry, at that--simply ravenous. I
could eat a horse and saddle, and chase the rider."

"That's what I thought. I knew I could, and figured you accordingly."

        *           *           *

They ate those tremendous meals slowly, enjoying every bite and sip; in
an atmosphere of friendliness and good fellowship; chatting on a wide
variety of subjects as they ate. Neither was aware of the fact that this
was the first time they had ever been on _really_ friendly terms. And
finally every dish and container was empty, almost polished clean.

"One hundred percent capacity--can chew but can't swallow," Garlock said
then, lighting two cigarettes and giving Belle one. "How's that for a
masterly job of calibration?"

"Me, too. It'll pass." Belle sighed in repletion. "Your ability to
estimate the exact capacity of containers is exceeded only by your good
looks and by the size of your feet. And now to hit the good old sack for
an indefinite but very long period of time."

"You chirped it, birdie." Still eminently friendly, the two walked
together to their doors. Belle put up a solid block and paused,
irresolute, twisting the toe of one slipper into the carpet.

"Clee, I ... I wonder ... if...." Her voice died away.

"I know what you mean." He put his arms around her gently, tenderly, and
looked deep into her eyes. "I want to tell you something, Belle. You're
a woman, not in seven thousand million women, but in that many planets
full of women. What it takes, you very definitely and very abundantly
have got. And you aren't the only one that's pooped. I don't need
company tonight, either. I'm going to sleep until I wake up, if it takes
all day. Or say, if you wake up first, why not punch me and we'll have
breakfast together?"

"That's a thought. Do the same for me. Good night, Clee."

"Good night, ace." He kissed her, as gently as he had been holding her,
opened her door, closed it after her, and stepped across the corridor
into his own room.

"_What_ a man!" Belle breathed to herself, behind the solid screens of
her room. "He thought I was too tired, not just scared to death too.
What a _man_! Belle Bellamy, you ought to be kicked from here to
Tellus...." Then she threw back her head, drove a hard little fist into
a pillow, and spoke aloud through clenched teeth. "No, damn and blast
it, I _won't_ give in. I _won't_ love him. I'll take the Project away
from him if it's the last thing I ever do in this life!"

        *           *           *

She woke up the next morning--not morning, either, since it was well
after noon--a little before Garlock did, but not much. When she went
into his room he was shaved and fully dressed except for one shoe, which
