when the young pair would have pulled up--had they not met with a sudden
check by the pony putting his foot into a badger-hole.  The result was
frightful to witness, though trifling in result.  The pony went heels
over head upon the plain like a rolling wheel, and its rider shot into
the air like a stone from a catapult.  Describing a magnificent curve,
and coming down head foremost, Tolly would then and there have ended his
career if he had not fortunately dropped into a thick bush, which broke
his fall instead of his neck, and saved him.  Indeed, excepting several
ugly scratches, he was none the worse for the misadventure.

Poor horrified Betty attempted to pull up, but the obstinate horse had
got the bit in his teeth and declined, so that when Tolly had scrambled
out of the bush she was barely visible in the far distance, heading
towards the blue hills.

"Hallo!" was her protector's anxious remark as he gazed at the flying
fair one.  Then, without another word, he leaped on the pony and went
after her at full speed, quite regardless of recent experience.

The blue hills had become green hills, and the Long Gap was almost
reached, before the obstinate horse suffered itself to be reined in--
probably because it was getting tired.  Soon afterwards the pony came
panting up.

"You're not hurt, I hope?" said Betty, anxiously, as Tolly came
alongside.

"Oh no.  All right," replied the boy; "but I say what a run you have
given me!  Why didn't you wait for me?"

"Ask that of the horse, Tolly."

"What!  Did he bolt with you?"

"Truly he did.  I never before rode such a stubborn brute.  My efforts
to check it were useless, as it had the bit in its teeth, and I did my
best, for I was terribly anxious about you, and cannot imagine how you
escaped a broken neck after such a flight."

"It was the bush that saved me, Betty.  But, I say, we seem to be
nearing a wildish sort of place."

"Yes; this is the Long Gap," returned the girl, flinging back her curls
and looking round.  "It cuts right through the range here, and becomes
much wilder and more difficult to traverse on horseback farther on."

"And what d'ye mean to do, Betty?" inquired the boy as they rode at a
foot-pace towards the opening, which seemed like a dark portal to the
hills.  "Suppose you discover that the Redskins _have_ carried Tom
Brixton off in this direction, what then?  You and I won't be able to
rescue him, you know."

"True, Tolly.  If I find that they have taken him this way I will ride
straight to father's encampment--he told me before starting where he
intends to sleep to-night, so I shall easily find him--tell him what we
have discovered and lead him back here."

"And suppose you don't find that the Redskins have come this way,"
rejoined Tolly, after a doubtful shake of his head, "what then?"

"Why, then, I shall return to our tent and leave father and Mr Westly
to hunt them down."

"And suppose," continued Tolly--but Tolly never finished the
supposition, for at that moment two painted Indians sprang from the
bushes on either side of the narrow track, and, almost before the riders
could realise what had happened, the boy found himself on his back with
a savage hand at his throat and the girl found herself on the ground
with the hand of a grinning savage on her shoulder.

Tolly Trevor struggled manfully, but alas! also boyishly, for though his
spirit was strong his bodily strength was small--at least, as compared
with that of the savage who held him.  Yes, Tolly struggled like a hero.
He beheld the Rose of Oregon taken captive, and his blood boiled!  He
bit, he kicked, he scratched, and he hissed with indignation--but it
would not do.

"Oh, if you'd only let me up and give me _one_ chance!" he gasped.

But the red man did not consent--indeed, he did not understand.
Nevertheless, it was obvious that the savage was not vindictive, for
although Tolly's teeth and fists and toes and nails had wrought him some
damage, he neither stabbed nor scalped the boy.  He only choked him into
a state of semi-unconsciousness, and then, turning him on his face, tied
his hands behind his back with a deerskin thong.

Meanwhile the other savage busied himself in examining the saddle-bags
of the obstinate horse.  He did not appear to think it worth while to
tie the hands of Betty!  During the short scuffle between his comrade
and the boy he had held her fast, because she manifested an intention to
run to the rescue.  When that was ended he relieved her of the weapons
she carried and let her go, satisfied, no doubt that, if she attempted
to run away, he could easily overtake her, and if she were to attempt
anything else he could restrain her.

When, however, Betty saw that Tolly's antagonist meant no harm, she
wisely attempted nothing, but sat down on a fallen tree to await the
issue.  The savages did not keep her long in suspense.  Tolly's foe,
having bound him, lifted him on the back of the pony, and then, taking
the bridle, quietly led it away.  At the same time the other savage
assisted Betty to remount the horse, and, grasping the bridle of that
obstinate creature, followed his comrade.  The whole thing was so
sudden, so violent, and the result so decisive, that the boy looked back
at Betty and burst into a half-hysterical fit of laughter, but the girl
did not respond.

"It's a serious business, Tolly!" she said.

"So it is, Betty," he replied.

Then, pursing his little mouth, and gathering his eyebrows into a frown,
he gave himself up to meditation, while the Indians conducted them into
the dark recesses of the Long Gap.



CHAPTER TWELVE.

Now, the Indians, into whose hands the Rose of Oregon and our little
hero had fallen, happened to be part of the tribe to which the three who
had discovered Tom Brixton belonged, and although his friends little
knew it, Tom himself was not more than a mile or so distant from them at
the time, having been carried in the same direction, towards the main
camp or headquarters of the tribe in the Sawback Hills.

They had not met on the journey, because the two bands of the tribe were
acting independently of each other.

We will leave them at this point and ask the reader to return to another
part of the plain over which Tolly and Betty had galloped so furiously.

It is a small hollow, at the bottom of which a piece of marshy ground
has encouraged the growth of a few willows.  Paul Bevan had selected it
as a suitable camping-ground for the night, and while Paddy Flinders
busied himself with the kettle and frying-pan, he and Fred Westly went
among the bushes to procure firewood.

Fred soon returned with small twigs sufficient to kindle the fire; his
companion went on further in search of larger boughs and logs.

While Fred was busily engaged on hands and knees, blowing the fire into
a flame, a sharp "hallo!" from his companion caused him to look up.

"What is it?" he asked.

"Goliath of Gath--or his brother!" said Paddy, pointing to a little
eminence behind which the sun had but recently set.

The horseman, who had come to a halt on the eminence and was quietly
regarding them, did indeed look as if he might have claimed kinship with
the giant of the Philistines, for he and his steed looked stupendous.
No doubt the peculiarity of their position, with the bright sky as a
glowing background, had something to do with the gigantic appearance of
horse and man, for, as they slowly descended the slope towards the fire,
both of them assumed a more natural size.

The rider was a strange-looking as well as a large man, for he wore a
loose shooting-coat, a tall wideawake with a broad brim, blue spectacles
with side-pieces to them, and a pair of trousers which appeared to have
been made for a smaller man, as, besides being too tight, they were much
too short.  Over his shoulder was slung a green tin botanical box.  He
carried no visible weapons save a small hatchet and a bowie-knife,
though his capacious pockets might easily have concealed half a dozen
revolvers.

"Goot night, my frunds," said the stranger, in broken English, as he
approached.

"The same to yersilf, sor," returned Flinders.

Anyone who had been closely watching the countenance of the stranger
might have observed a sudden gleam of surprise on it when the Irishman
spoke, but it passed instantly, and was replaced by a pleasant air of
good fellowship as he dismounted and led his horse nearer the fire.

"Good night, and welcome to our camp.  You are a foreigner, I perceive,"
said Fred Westly in French, but the stranger shook his head.

"I not un'erstan'."

"Ah! a German, probably," returned Fred, trying him with the language of
the Fatherland; but again the stranger shook his head.

"You mus' spok English.  I is a Swedish man; knows noting but a leetil
English."

"I'm sorry that I cannot speak Swedish," replied Fred, in English; "so
we must converse in my native tongue.  You are welcome to share our
camp.  Have you travelled far?"

Fred cast a keen glance of suspicion at the stranger as he spoke, and,
in spite of himself, there was a decided diminution in the heartiness of
his tones, but the stranger did not appear to observe either the change
of tone or the glance, for he replied, with increased urbanity and
openness of manner, "Yis; I has roden far--very far--an' moche wants
meat an' sleep."

As he spoke Paul Bevan came staggering into camp under a heavy load of
wood, and again it may be said that a close observer might have noticed
on the stranger's face a gleam of surprise much more intense than the
previous one when he saw Paul Bevan.  But the gleam had utterly vanished
when that worthy, having thrown down his load, looked up and bade him
good evening.

The urbanity of manner and blandness of expression increased as he
returned the salutation.

"T'anks, t'anks.  I vill go for hubble--vat you call--hobble me horse,"
he said, taking the animal's bridle and leading it a short distance from
the fire.

"I don't like the look of him," whispered Fred to Paul when he was out
of earshot.

"Sure, an' I howld the same opinion," said Flinders.

"Pooh!  Never judge men by their looks," returned Bevan--"specially in
the diggin's.  They're all blackguards or fools, more or less.  This one
seems to be one o' the fools.  I've seed sitch critters before.  They
keep fillin' their little boxes wi' grass an' stuff; an' never makes any
use of it that I could see.  But every man to his taste.  I'll be bound
he's a good enough feller when ye come to know him, an' git over yer
contempt for his idle ways.  Very likely he draws, too--an' plays the
flute; most o' these furriners do.  Come now, Flinders, look alive wi'
the grub."

When the stranger returned to the fire he spread his huge hands over it
and rubbed them with apparent satisfaction.

"Fat a goot t'ing is supper!" he remarked, with a benignant look all
round; "the very smell of him be deliciowse!"

"An' no mistake!" added Flinders.  "Sure, the half the good o' victuals
would be lost av they had no smell."

"Where have you come from, stranger?" asked Bevan, as they were about to
begin supper.

"From de Sawbuk Hills," answered the botanist, filling his mouth with an
enormous mass of dried meat.

"Ay, indeed!  That's just where _we_ are goin' to," returned Bevan.

"An' vere may you be come from?" asked the stranger.

"From Simpson's Gully," said Fred.

"Ha! how cooriouse!  Dat be joost vere I be go to."

The conversation flagged a little at this point as they warmed to the
work of feeding; but after a little it was resumed, and then their
visitor gradually ingratiated himself with his new friends to such an
extent that the suspicions of Fred and Flinders were somewhat, though
not altogether, allayed.  At last they became sufficiently confidential
to inform the stranger of their object in going to the Sawback Hills.

"Ha!  Vat is dat you say?" he exclaimed, with well-feigned surprise;
"von yoong man carried avay by Ridskins.  I saw'd dem!  Did pass dem not
longe ago.  T'ree mans carry von man.  I t'ink him a sick comrade, but
now I reklect hims face vas vhitish."

"Could ye guide us to the place where ye met them?" asked Bevan,
quickly.

The botanist did not reply at once, but seemed to consider.

"Vell, I has not moche time to spare; but come, I has pity for you, an'
don't mind if I goes out of de vay to help you.  I vill go back to the
Sawbuk Hills so far as need be."

"Thank 'ee kindly," returned Bevan, who possessed a grateful spirit;
"I'll think better of yer grass-gatherin' after this, though it does
puzzle me awful to make out what's the use ye put it to.  If you kep'
tame rabbits, now, I could understand it, but to carry it about in a
green box an' go squeezin' it between the leaves o' books, as I've seed
some of 'ee do, seems to me the most outrageous--"

"Ha, ha!" interrupted the botanist, with a loud laugh; "you is not the
first what t'ink hims nonsense.  But you mus' know dere be moche sense
in it,"--(he looked very grave and wise here)--"very moche.  First, ye
finds him; den ye squeezes an' dries him; den ye sticks him in von book,
an' names him; den ye talks about him; oh! dere is moche use in him,
very moche!"

"Well, but arter you've found, an' squeezed, an' dried, an' stuck, an'
named, an' talked about him," repeated Paul, with a slight look of
contempt, "what the better are ye for it all?"

"Vy, ve is moche de better," returned the botanist, "for den ve tries to
find out all about him.  Ve magnifies him, an' writes vat ve zee about
him, an' compares him vid oders of de same family, an' boils, an' stews,
an' fries, an' melts, an' dissolves, an' mixes him, till ve gits
somet'ing out of him."

"It's little I'd expect to git out of him after tratin' him so badly,"
remarked Flinders, whose hunger was gradually giving way before the
influence of venison steaks.

"True, me frund," returned the stranger, "it is ver' leetil ve gits; but
den dat leetil is ver' goot--valooable you calls it."

"Humph!" ejaculated Bevan, with an air that betokened doubt.  Flinders
and Fred said nothing, but the latter felt more than ever inclined to
believe that their guest was a deceiver, and resolved to watch him
narrowly.  On his part, the stranger seemed to perceive that Fred
suspected him, but he was not rendered less hearty or free-and-easy on
that account.

In the course of conversation Paul chanced to refer to Betty.

"Ah! me frund," said the stranger, "has you brought you's vife to dis
vile contry!"

"No, I haven't," replied Paul, bluntly.

"Oh, pardon.  I did t'ink you spoke of Bettie; an surely dat is vooman's
name?"

"Ay, but Betty's my darter, not my wife," returned Paul, who resented
this inquisition with regard to his private affairs.

"Is you not 'fraid," said the botanist, quietly helping himself to a
marrow-bone, "to leave you's darter at Simpson's Gully?"

"Who told you I left her there?" asked Bevan, with increasing asperity.

"Oh!  I only t'ink so, as you's come from dere."

"An' why should I be afraid?"

"Because, me frund, de contry be full ob scoundrils."

"Yes, an' you are one of the biggest of them," thought Fred Westly, but
he kept his thoughts to himself, while Paul muttered something about
being well protected, and having no occasion to be afraid.

Perceiving the subject to be distasteful, the stranger quickly changed
it.  Soon afterwards each man, rolling himself in his blanket, went to
sleep--or appeared to do so.  In regard to Paddy Flinders, at least,
there could be no doubt, for the trombone-tones of his nose were
eloquent.  Paul, too, lay on his back with eyes tight shut and mouth
wide open, while the regular heaving of his broad chest told that his
slumbers were deep.  But more than once Fred Westly raised his head
gently and looked suspiciously round.  At last, in his case also, tired
Nature asserted herself, and his deep regular breathing proved that the
"sweet restorer" was at work, though an occasional movement showed that
his sleep was not so profound as that of his comrades.

The big botanist remained perfectly motionless from the time he lay
down, as if the sleep of infancy had passed with him into the period of
manhood.  It was not till the fire had died completely down, and the
moon had set, leaving only the stars to make darkness visible, that he
moved.  He did so, not as a sleeper awaking, but with the slow stealthy
action of one who is already wide awake and has a purpose in view.

Gradually his huge shoulders rose till he rested on his left elbow.

A sense of danger, which had never left him even while he slept, aroused
Fred, but he did not lose his self-possession.  He carefully watched,
from the other side of the extinct fire, the motions of the stranger,
and lay perfectly still--only tightening his grasp on the knife-handle
that he had been instinctively holding when he dropped asleep.

The night was too dark for Fred to distinguish the man's features.  He
could only perceive the outline of his black figure, and that for some
time he rested on his elbow without moving, as if he were contemplating
the stars.  Despite his efforts to keep awake, Fred felt that drowsiness
was again slowly, but surely, overcoming him.  Maintaining the struggle,
however, he kept his dreamy eyes riveted on their guest until he seemed
to swell into gigantic proportions.

Presently Fred was again thoroughly aroused by observing that the right
arm of the man moved slowly upwards, and something like a knife appeared
in the hand; he even fancied he saw it gleam, though there was not light
enough to render that possible.

Feeling restrained, as if under the horrible influence of nightmare,
Fred lay there spell-bound and quite unable to move, until he perceived
the stranger's form bend over in the direction of Paul Bevan, who lay on
the other side of him.

Then, indeed, Fred's powers returned.  Shouting, "look out, Paul!" he
sprang up, drew his bowie-knife, and leaped over the blackened logs,
but, to his surprise and confusion, found that the stranger lay extended
on the ground as if sound asleep.  He roused himself, however, and sat
up, as did the others, on hearing Fred's shout.

"Fat is wrong, yoong man?" he inquired, with a look of sleepy surprise.

"Ye may well ax that, sor," said Flinders, staggering to his feet and
seizing his axe, which always lay handy at his side.  Paul had glanced
round sharply, like a man inured to danger, but seeing nothing to alarm
him, had remained in a sitting position.

"Why, Westly, you've been dreaming," he said with a broad grin.

"So I must have been," returned the youth, looking very much ashamed,
"but you've no notion what a horrible dream I had.  It seemed so real,
too, that I could not help jumping up and shouting.  Pardon me,
comrades, and, as bad boys say when caught in mischief, `I won't do it
again!'"

"Ve pardon you, by all means," said the botanist stretching himself and
yawning, "and ve do so vid de more pleasure for you has rouse us in time
for start on de joorney."

"You're about right.  It's time we was off," said Paul, rising slowly to
his feet and looking round the horizon and up at the sky, while he
proceeded to fill a beloved little black pipe, which invariably
constituted his preliminary little breakfast.

Pat Flinders busied himself in blowing up the embers of the fire.

A slight and rapidly eaten meal sufficed to prepare these hardy
backwoodsmen for their journey, and, long before daybreak illumined the
plains, they were far on their way towards the Sawback mountain range.

During the journey of two days, which this trip involved, the botanist
seemed to change his character to some extent.  He became silent--almost
morose; did not encourage the various efforts made by his companions to
draw him into conversation, and frequently rode alone in advance of the
party, or occasionally fell behind them.

The day after the stranger had joined them, as they were trotting slowly
over the plains that lay between the Rangers Hill and the Sawbacks, Fred
rode close up to Bevan, and said in a low voice, glancing at the
botanist, who was in advance--

"I am convinced, Paul, that he is a scoundrel."

"That may be so, Mr Fred, but what then?"

"Why, then I conclude that he is deceiving us for some purpose of his
own."

"Nonsense," replied Bevan, who was apt to express himself bluntly, "what
purpose can he serve in deceiving strangers like us!  We carry no
gold-dust and have nothing worth robbing us of, even if he were fool
