having damaged them slightly, to whatever degree the limited time would
allow, they would proceed against others and then still others, in
order that their assault upon any vessel might be so far as possible
unexpected. Since they dreaded the defence of the enemy from a distance
and likewise the battle at close quarters, they delayed neither in the
approach nor in the encounter, but running up suddenly with the object of
arriving before the opposing archers could work, they would inflict some
wounds and cause a disturbance merely, so as to escape being held, and
then retire out of range. The enemy tried to strike the approaching
ships with many stones and arrows flying thick and fast, and to cast the
grapnels upon the assailants. And in case they could reach them, they got
the better of it, but if they missed, their boats would be pierced and
they begin to sink, or else in their endeavor to avoid this calamity they
would waste time and lay themselves open to attack on the part of some
others. For when two or three at once fell upon the same ship, part
would do all the damage they could and the rest suffer the brunt of the
injuries. On the one side the pilots and the rowers endured the most
annoyance and fatigue, and on the other the marines: and the one side
resembled cavalry, now making a charge, now withdrawing, on account of
the manoeuvres on their part in assaulting and backing water, and the
other was like heavy-armed men guarding against the approach of foes and
trying as much as possible to hold them. As a result they gained mutual
advantages: the one party fell unobserved upon the lines of oars
projecting from the ships and shattered the blades, whereas the other
party with rocks and engines from above tried to sink them. There
were also certain disadvantages: the one party could not injure those
approaching it, and the other party, if it failed to sink some vessels by
its ramming, was hemmed in and found no longer an equal contest.

[-33-] The battle was an even one for a long time and neither antagonist
could get the upper hand, but the outcome of it was finally like this.
Cleopatra, riding at anchor behind the warriors, could not endure the
long, obscure uncertainty and delay, but harassed with worry (which was
due to her being a woman and an Egyptian) at the struggle which for so
long continued doubtful, and at the fearful expectancy on both sides,
suddenly herself started to flee and raised the signal for the remainder
of her subjects. So, as they at once raised their sails and sped out to
sea, while a wind of some force had by chance arisen, Antony thought they
were fleeing not at the bidding of Cleopatra, but through fear because
they felt themselves vanquished, and followed them. When this took place
the rest of the soldiers became both discouraged and confused, and rather
wishing themselves to escape likewise kept raising their sails, and the
others kept throwing the towers and the furnishings into the sea in order
to lighten the vessels and make good their departure. While they were
occupied in this way their adversaries fell upon them, not pursuing the
fugitives, because they themselves were without sails and prepared only
for a naval battle, and many contended with one ship, both from afar
and alongside. Then on the part of both alike the conflict became most
diverse and fierce. Caesar's men damaged the lower parts of the ships all
around, crushed the oars, knocked off the rudders, and climbed on the
decks, where they took hold of some and pulled them down, pushed off
others, and fought with still others, since they were now equal to them
in numbers. Antony's soldiers pushed them back with boathooks, cut them
down with axes, threw down upon them rocks and other masses of material
made ready for just this purpose, repulsed those that tried to climb up,
and joined issue with such as came close enough.

And one viewing the business might have compared it, likening small
things to great, to walls or many thickset islands being besieged by sea.
Thus the one party strove to scale the boats like some land or fortress
and eagerly brought to bear everything that contributed to this result.
The others tried to repel them, devising every means that is commonly
used in such, a case.

[-34-] As the fight continued equal, Caesar, at a loss what he should do,
sent for fire from the camp. Previously he had wished to avoid using
it, in order to gain possession of the money. Now he saw that it was
impossible for him to win in any other way, and had recourse to this, as
the only thing that would assist him. Thus another form of battle was
brought about. The assailants would approach their victims from many
directions at once, shoot blazing missiles at them, and hurl torches
fastened to javelins from their hands, and with the aid of engines threw
pots full of charcoal and pitch upon some boats from a distance. The
defenders tried to ward these off individually and when any of them flew
past and caught the timbers and at once started a great flame, as must be
the case in a ship, they used first the drinking-water which they carried
on board and extinguished some conflagrations: when that was gone they
dipped up the sea-water. And in case they could use great quantities of
it at once, they would stop the fire by main force: but they were unable
to do this everywhere, for they did not have many buckets or large ones,
and in their confusion brought them up half full, so that far from doing
any service they only quickened the flame. For salt water poured on
a fire in small quantities makes it burn up brightly. As they found
themselves getting the worst of it in this, they heaped on the blaze
their thick mantles and the corpses. For a time these checked the fire
and it seemed to abate; later, especially as the wind came upon it in
great gusts, it shot up more brilliant than ever and was increased by the
fuel. While only a part of a ship was burning, others stood by it and the
men would leap into it and hew down some parts and carry away others.
These detached parts some threw into the sea and others upon their
opponents, in case they could do them any damage. Others were constantly
going to the sound portion of the vessel and now more than ever they used
the grappling irons and the long spears with the purpose of attaching
some hostile ship to theirs and transferring themselves to it; or, if
that was out of the question, they tried to set it on fire likewise.
[-35-] But the hostile fleet was guarding against this very attempt and
none of it came near enough; and as the fire spread to the encircling
walls and descended to the flooring, the most terrible of fates
confronted them. Some, and particularly the sailors, perished by the
smoke before the flame approached them, while others were roasted in the
midst of it as though in ovens. Others were cooked in their armor, which
became red-hot. There were still others, who, before suffering such a
death, or when they were half burned, threw off their armor and were
wounded by the men shooting from a distance, or again were choked by
leaping into the sea, or were struck by their opponents and drowned, or
were mangled by sea-monsters. The only ones to obtain an endurable death,
considering the sufferings round about, were such as killed one another
or themselves before any calamity befell them. These did not have to
submit to torture, and as corpses had the burning ships for their funeral
pyre. The Caesarians, who saw this, at first so long as any of the foe
were still able to defend themselves would not come near; but when the
fire began to consume the ships and the men so far from being able to do
any harm to an enemy could not even help themselves, they eagerly sailed
up to them to see if they could in any way gain possession of the money,
and they endeavored to extinguish the fire which they themselves had
caused. As a result many of them also perished in the course of their
plundering in the flame.




DIO'S ROMAN HISTORY

51

The following is contained in the Fifty-first of Dio's Rome:

How Caesar after his victory at Actium transacted business requiring
immediate attention (chapters 1-4).

About Antony and Cleopatra and their movements after the defeat (chapters
5-8).

How Antony, defeated in Egypt, killed himself (chapters 9-14).

How Caesar subdued Egypt (chapters 15-18).

How Caesar came to Rome and conducted a triumph (chapters 19-21).

How the Curia Julia was dedicated (chapter 22).

How Moesia was reduced (chapters 23-27).

Duration of time the remainder of the consulships of Caesar (3rd) and M.
Valerius Corvinus Messala, together with two additional years, in which
there were the following magistrates here enumerated:

Caesar (IV), M. Licinius M.F. Crassus. (B.C. 30 = a. u. 724.)

Caesar (V), Sextus Apuleius Sexti F. (B.C. 29 = a. u. 725.)

(_BOOK 51, BOISSEVAIN_.)

[B.C. 31 (_a. u_. 723)]

[-1-] Such was the naval battle which occurred between them on the second
of September. I have not elsewhere used a like expression, not being in
the habit of giving precise dates, but I do it here because then for
the first time Caesar alone held the entire power. Consequently the
enumeration of the years of his supremacy starts from precisely that day.
And before it had gone he set up as an offering to Apollo of Actium a
trireme, a four-banked ship, and so on up to one of ten banks, from the
captive vessels; and he built a larger temple. He also instituted a
quinquennial musical and gymnastic contest involving horseracing,--a
"sacred" festival, as they call all which include distribution of
food,--and entitled it Actia. Further, by gathering some settlers and
ousting others who dwelt nearby from their homes, he founded a city on
the site of the camp and named it Nicopolis.[67] On the spot where he
had had his tent he laid a foundation of square stones, and put there a
shrine of Apollo open to the sky, adorning it with the captured beaks.

But this was done later. At the time he despatched one division of the
ships to pursue Antony and Cleopatra; so these followed in their wake,
but as it seemed impossible to overtake the fugitives they returned. With
his remaining vessels he took the enemy's ramparts, where no one opposed
him because of small numbers, and then overtook and without a battle got
possession of the other army which was retreating into Macedonia. Various
important contingents had already made their escape, the Romans to Antony
and the rest of the allies to their homes. The latter moreover evinced
no further hostility to Caesar, but both they and all the peoples who had
formerly belonged to Rome remained quiet, and some at once and others
later made terms. Caesar now proceeded to teach the cities a lesson
by levying money and taking away the remnant of authority over their
citizens that they possessed in their assemblies. From all the potentates
and kings, save Amyntas and Archelaus, he took all the lands that they
had received from Antony. Philopator son of Tarcondimotus, Lycomedes
ruler in a portion of Cappadocian Pontus, and Alexander the brother of
Iamblichus he even removed from their principalities. The last named,
because he had secured his appointment as a reward for accusing the
conqueror, he placed in his triumphal procession and afterward killed.
The kingdom of Lycomedes he gave to one Medeus, because the latter had
previous to the naval engagement detached the Mysians in Asia from Antony
and with them had waged war upon such as followed Antony's fortunes. The
people of Cydonea and Lampea he set free, because they had rendered him
some assistance, and he helped the Lampeans found anew their city, from
which they had been uprooted. As for the senators and knights and other
prominent men who had been active in Antony's cause, he imposed fines
upon many of them, executed many of them, and some he spared entirely.
Among the last Sosius was a distinguished example: for though he had
often fought against Caesar and now fled and hid himself, but was
subsequently discovered, his life was nevertheless preserved. Likewise
one Marcus Scaurus, a half-brother of Sextus on the mother's side, had
been condemned to death, but was later released for the sake of his
mother Mucia. Of those who underwent the extreme punishment the Aquilii
Flori and Curio were the most noted. The latter met death because he was
a son of the former Curio who had once been of great assistance to the
former Caesar. And the Flori both perished because Octavius commanded that
one of them should draw the lot to be slain. They were father and
son, and when the latter, before any drawing took place, voluntarily
surrendered himself to the executioner the former felt such great grief
that he died also by his own hand.

[-3-] This, then, was the end of these persons. The mass of Antony's
soldiers was included in the ranks of Caesar's legions and later he sent
back to Italy the citizens over age of both forces, without giving any
of them anything, and the remainder he disbanded. They had shown an ugly
temper toward him in Sicily after the victory, and he feared they might
create a disturbance again. Hence he hastened before the least signs of
an uprising were manifested to discharge some entirely from the service
under arms and to scatter the great majority of the rest. As he was even
at this time suspicious of the freedmen, he remitted their one-quarter
contribution[68] which they were still owing of the money assessed upon
them. And they no longer bore him any malice for deprivations they had
endured, but rejoiced as if they had received as a gift what they had
not been obliged to contribute. The men still left in the rank and file
showed no disposition to rebel, partly because they were held in check
by their commanding officers, but mostly through hopes of the wealth of
Egypt. The men, however, who had helped Caesar to gain the victory and had
been dismissed from the service, were irritated at having obtained no
meed of valor, and not much later they began a revolutionary movement.
Caesar was suspicious of them, and fearing that they might despise
Maecenas, to whom at that time Rome and the remainder of Italy had been
entrusted, because he was a knight, he sent Agrippa to Italy as if on
some routine business. He also gave to Agrippa and to Maecenas so great
authority over everything that they might read beforehand the letters
which he often wrote to the senate and to various officials, and then
change whatever they wished in them. Therefore they received also from
him a ring, so that they should have the means of sealing the epistles.
He had had the seal which he used most at that time made double, with a
sphinx raised on both sides alike. Subsequently he had his own image made
in _intaglio_, and sealed everything with that. Later emperors likewise
employed it, except Galba. The latter gave his sanction with an ancestral
device which showed a dog bending forward from the prow of a ship. The
way that Octavius wrote both to these two magistrates and to the rest of
his intimate friends whenever there was need of forwarding information to
them secretly was to write in place of the proper letter in each word the
second one following.

[-4-] Octavius, with the idea that there would be no more danger from the
veterans, administered affairs in Greece and took part in the Mysteries
of the two goddesses. He then went over into Asia and settled matters
there, all the time keeping a sharp lookout for Antony's movements. For
he had not yet received any definite information regarding the course his
rival had followed in his escape, and so he kept making preparations
to proceed against him, if he should find out exactly. Meantime the
ex-soldiers made an open demonstration, because he was so far separated
from them, and he began to fear that if they got a leader they might do
some damage.

[B.C. 30 (_a. u._ 724)]

Consequently he assigned to others the task of searching for Antony, and
hurried to Italy himself, in the middle of the winter of the year that he
was holding office for the fourth time, with Marcus Crassus. The latter,
in spite of having been attached to the cause of Sextus and of Antony,
was then his fellow consul without having even passed through the
praetorship. Caesar came, then, to Brundusium but progressed no farther.
The senate on ascertaining that his boat was Hearing Italy went there
to meet him, save the tribunes and two praetors, who by decree stayed at
home; and the class of knights as well as the majority of the people
and still others, some represented by embassy and many as voluntary
followers, came together there, so that there was no further sign of
rebellion on the part of any one, so brilliant was his arrival, and so
enthusiastic over him were the masses. They, too, some through fear,
others through hopes, others obeying a summons, had come to Brundusium.
To certain of them Caesar gave money, but to the rest who had been the
constant companions of his campaigns, he assigned land also. By turning
the townspeople in Italy who had sided with Antony out of their homes he
was able to grant to his soldiers their cities and their farms. To most
of the outcasts from the settlements he granted permission in turn to
dwell in Dyrrachium, Philippi, and elsewhere. To the remainder he either
distributed or promised money for their land. Though he had now acquired
great sums by his victory, he was spending still more. For this reason
he advertised in the public market his own possessions and those of his
companions, in order that any one who desired to buy or claim any of them
might do so. Nothing was sold, however, and nothing repaid. Who, pray,
would have dared to undertake to do either? But he secured by this means
a reasonable excuse for a delay in carrying out his offers, and later he
discharged the debt out of the spoils of the Egyptians.

[-5-] He settled this and the rest of the urgent business, and gave to
such as had received a kind of semi-amnesty the right to live in Italy,
not before permitted. After this he forgave the populace left behind
in Rome for not having come to him, and on the thirtieth day after his
arrival set sail again for Greece. In the midst of winter he dragged his
ships across the isthmus of the Peloponnesus and got back to Asia
so quickly that Antony and Cleopatra received each piece of news
simultaneously,--that he had departed and that he had returned. They,
on fleeing from the naval battle, had gone as far as the Peloponnesus
together. From there they sent away some of their associates,--all, in
fact, whom they suspected,--while many withdrew against their will, and
Cleopatra hastened to Egypt, for fear that her subjects might perhaps
revolt, if they heard of the disaster before her coming. In order to
make her approach safe, at any rate, she crowned her prows, as a sign
of conquest, with garlands, and had some songs of victory sung by
flute-players. When she reached safety, she murdered many of the foremost
men, who had ever been restless under her rule and were now in a state
of excitement at her disaster. From their estates and from various
repositories hallowed and sacred she gathered a vast store of wealth,
sparing not even the most revered of consecrated treasures. She fitted
out her forces and looked about for possible alliances. The Armenian king
she killed and sent his head to the Median, who might be influenced by
this act, she thought, to aid them. As for Antony, he sailed to Pinarius
Scarpus in Libya, and to the army previously collected under him there
for the protection of Egypt. This general, however, would[69] not receive
him and also slew the first men that Antony sent, besides destroying some
of the soldiers under his command who showed displeasure at this act.
Then Antony, too, proceeded to Alexandria, having accomplished nothing.

[-6-] Now among the other preparations that they made for speedy warfare
they enrolled among the ephebi their sons, Cleopatra Caesarion and Antony
Antyllus, who was borne to him by Fulvia and was then with him. Their
purpose was to arouse interest among the Egyptians, who would feel that
they already had a man for king, and that the rest might recognize these
children as their lords, in case any untoward accident should happen to
the parents, and so continue the struggle. This proved the lads' undoing.
For Caesar, on the ground that they were men and held a certain form
of sovereignty, spared neither of them. But to return: the two were
preparing to wage war in Egypt with ships and infantry, and to this end
they called also upon the neighboring tribes and the kings that were
friendly to them. Nor did they relax their readiness also to sail to
Spain, if there should be urgent need, believing that they could alienate
the inhabitants of that land by their money if nothing more, and again
they thought of transferring the seat of the conflict to the Red Sea. To
the end that while engaged in these plans they might escape observation
for the longest possible time or deceive Caesar in some way or slay him by
treachery, they despatched men who carried letters to him in regard to
peace, but money for his followers. Meantime, also, unknown to Antony,
Cleopatra sent to him a golden scepter and a golden crown and the royal
throne, through which she signified that she delivered the government
to him. He might hate Antony, if he would only take pity on her. Caesar
accepted the gifts as a good omen, but made no answer to Antony. To
Cleopatra he forwarded publicly threatening messages and an announcement
that if she would renounce the use of arms and her sovereignty, he would
deliberate what ought to be done in her case. Secretly he sent word that,
if she would kill Antony, he would grant her pardon and leave her empire
unmolested.

[-7-] While these negotiations were going on, the Arabians, influenced by
Quintus Didius, the governor of Syria, burned the ships which had been
built in the Arabian Gulf for the voyage to the Red Sea, and all the
peoples and the potentates refused their assistance. And it occurs to me
to wonder that many others also, though they had received many gifts from
Antony and Cleopatra, now left them in the lurch. The men, however, of
lowest rank who were being supported for gladiatorial combats showed
the utmost zeal in their behalf and contended most bravely. These were
practicing in Cyzicus for the triumphal games which they were expecting
to hold in honor of Caesar's overthrow, and as soon as they were made
aware of what had taken place, they set out for Egypt with the intention
of aiding their superiors. Many were their contests with Amyntas in Gaul,
and many with the children of Tarcondimotus in Cilicia, who had been
their strongest friends but now in view of the changed circumstances
had gone over to the other side; and many were their struggles against
Didius, who hindered them while passing through. They proved unable,
after all, to make their way to Egypt. Yet even when they had been
encompassed on all sides, not even then would they accept any terms of
surrender, though Didius made them many promises. They sent for Antony,
feeling that they could fight with him better in Syria: then, when he
neither came himself nor sent them any message, they decided that he had
perished, and reluctantly made terms with the condition that they should
never take part in a gladiatorial show. They received from Didius Daphne,
the suburb of Antioch, to dwell in, until the matter was called to
Caesar's attention. Then they were tricked (somewhat later) by Messala and
were sent in different directions under the pretext that they were to be
enlisted in different legions and were in some convenient way destroyed.

[-8-] When Antony and Cleopatra heard from the envoys the commands which
Caesar issued regarding them, they sent to him again. The queen promised
that she would give him large amounts of money. Antony reminded him of
their friendship and kinship, and also made a defence of his association
with the Egyptian woman; he enumerated the occasions on which they had
helped each other gain the objects of their loves,[70] and all the wanton
pranks in which they two had shared as young men. Finally he surrendered
to him Publius Turullius, a senator, who had been an assassin of Caesar,
but was then living with him as a friend. He actually offered to commit
suicide, if in that way Cleopatra might be saved. Caesar put Turullius
to death; it happened that this man had cut wood for the fleet from the
forest of Asclepius in Cos, and by his punishment in the same place he
was thought to have paid the penalty to the god. But to Antony Caesar did
not even then answer a word. The latter consequently despatched a third
embassy, sending him his son Antyllus with considerable gold coin. His
rival accepted the money, but sent the boy back empty-handed and gave him
no answer. To Cleopatra, however, as the first time so the second and the
third time he sent many threats and promises alike. Yet he was afraid,
even so, that they might despair of in any way obtaining pardon from him
and so hold out, and that they would survive by their own efforts, or set
sail for Spain and Gaul, or destroy the money, the bulk of which he
heard was immense. Cleopatra had gathered it all in the monument she was
constructing in the palace; and she threatened to burn all of it with
her, in case she should miss the smallest of her demands. Octavius sent
therefore Thyrsus, a freedman of his, to speak to her kindly in every way
and to tell her further that it so happened that he was in love with her.
He hoped at least by this means, since she thought she had the power to
arouse passion in all mankind, that he might remove Antony from the scene
and keep her and her money intact. And so it proved.

[-9-] Before quite all this had occurred Antony learned that Cornelius
Gallus had taken charge of Scarpus's army and with the men had suddenly
marched upon Paxaetonium and occupied it. Hence, though he wished to set
out and follow the summons of the gladiators, he did not go into Syria.
He proceeded against Gallus, believing that he could certainly win over
his soldiers without effort; they had been with him on campaigns and were
well disposed. At any rate he could subdue them by main strength, since
he was leading a large force both of ships and of infantry upon them.
However, he found himself unable even to hold converse with them,
although he approached their wall and shouted and hallooed. For Gallus by
ordering his trumpeters to sound their instruments all together gave no
one a chance to hear a word. Antony further failed in a sudden assault
and subsequently met a reverse with his ships. Gallus by night had chains
stretched across the mouth of the harbor under water and took no open
measures to guard against them but quite disdainfully allowed them to
sail freely in. When, however, they were inside, he drew up the chains by
means of machines and encompassing his opponent's ships on all sides,--on
land, from the houses, and on the sea,--he burned some and sank others.
The next event was that Caesar took Pelusium, pretendedly by storm, but
really betrayed by Cleopatra. She saw that no one came to her aid and
perceived that Caesar was not to be withstood; most important of all,
she heard the message sent to her by Thyrsus, and believed that she was
really the object of affection. Her confidence was strengthened first
of all by her wish that it be true, and second by the fact that she had
enslaved his father and Antony alike. As a result she expected that she
should gain not only forgiveness and sovereignty over the Egyptians, but
empire over the Romans as well. At once she yielded Pelusium to him.
After this, when he marched against the city, she secretly prevented the
