instructors and psychologists. Other than having exceptional attributes
in one or more designated fields, they are as normal as you and I--if
you will pardon my hopeful attitude about myself."

There was a ripple of subdued laughter. The doctor cleared his throat
and shifted his position. "They are the children of normal Earth
parents, and are selected quietly, with parental approval, when certain
combinations of factors appear on their school entrance examination
records. They are naturally gifted; we try to encourage and improve
these gifts, so that when they reach adulthood they will have a
particular skill or skills to employ in the research and developmental
laboratories. They are citizens, of course--and extremely valuable ones;
they receive salaries commensurate with their military rank; they are
free to travel, but we try to guard them against accident and mishap.
Their real names are not revealed for security reasons; their laboratory
names, such as Sykin Supcel AA-87, are a sort of code which designates
their capabilities to their instructors and teammates."

He pressed a button on his desk. "To establish their complete normalcy,
you might like to meet Arna Matt A-94, who happens to be waiting in the
next room."

A door opened. A girl stopped on the threshold, a picture of poised
surprise. The men looked at her appreciatively.

"Come in, my dear."

She moved to the doctor's side, lithely and with an easy grace. The
shining metallic cloth of her brief uniform rustled in the silence. Many
breaths were expelled at the same time, and she repressed a smile.

Dr. Wilton introduced her. "You will notice--" he coughed "--you have
noticed," he continued broadly, "that Arna possesses several
attributes." There were low murmurings. "But the single A in her number
indicates that she ranks at the top of one field, and the number itself
means that she is the ninety-fourth to become a trainee in the program
which develops these unique humans; her code name reveals that she
possesses Awareness in Mathematics--which is to say that she somehow
immediately knows the answer to any mathematical problem presented,
without having to consciously calculate or even think about it. Her
particular gift was known on Earth as far back as the Seventeenth
Century, but it has always been extremely rare and relatively
undeveloped."

"Can she talk?" questioned a voice good-humoredly.

The psychologist chuckled. "Say something for the boys, Arna," he
invited.

With the timing of a video star the girl parted her lips provocatively,
leaned slightly forward and then, when expectancy was at its height,
said "Boo!"

[Illustration]

Friendly laughter echoed through the paneled room, coming from all but
the Venusian. He rose stiffly. "This is all very well, but we're here
t'get _all_ the dope on Sykin Supcel. Aren't you holding out something?"

Dr. Wilton looked at the man squarely. "Yes," he said softly. "Yes, I
am." His gaze swept the others. "The interview is terminated,
gentlemen--I hope your news stories will be sufficiently popular to make
your trip worthwhile. Your lapel cameras and their eyepieces will be
returned as you enter your 'copters."

The Venusian was the first to voice his thanks, with a ring of sincerity
as true as in the others' polite speeches.

Alone with Arna, Dr. Wilton punched several buttons on the desk,
consulted a memo and spoke briskly to a blank video screen.
"Start--all--in. Step seven two eight of Operation Catskin successful.
Sur-Malic spy among reporters, as predicted by eighty-two point
six probability. Lor'lsoon, posing as Venusian, exposed by his
inadequate training--probability about sixty; his unconscious
belligerency--probability about ninety. He is to be undisturbed for
forty-eight hours, then detained after an apparently routine round-up.
Any contacts he may reveal during the next two days are to be observed
but not disturbed. End--all--out."

Arna leaned over the desk and kissed him lightly. "Nice work, Dad."
Then she went on, tensely: "Any word from Sy--or is he supposed to make
contact later?"

       *       *       *       *       *

It was by merest chance that Sykin Supcel happened to be at the military
spaceport of Dirik when the prisoner was made to land--and he had
brought along an alibi to prove it. A year after his capture and removal
to the key city of Pronuleon II, he had successfully convinced the
Sur-Malic High Command that he would have been a willing traitor even
without the rank and gold and promises. "Damned, dirty Earth lice," he
had been wont to growl--at precisely propitious moments--"murdered my
folks and stuck me in a stinking lab and cut up my insides--can't even
be comfortable in a room with regular people because my temperature's
too high. I'll wreck the whole League for that!" And he would angrily
swipe at a perspiring brow.

It was easily established that his normal body temperature stayed about
two degrees above average; he early established his need for long,
cooling outdoor walks through the semi-tropical city and surrounding
countryside. He had become the most trusted of all renegade aliens after
voluntarily becoming a Sur-Malic citizen of Pronuleon II.

This afternoon he had insisted that Commander Rilth, his immediate
superior in war fleet construction, walk with him in one of his restless
moods. They had left the mighty hangars where Sy was supervising
experimental work with the Earth-developed cosmic ray engines, and were
lounging on a stone bench at the edge of the field, shaded from blazing
yellow Pronuleon by a huge tree.

"It's the theoretical math, Rilth," complained Sy. "We just haven't got
the calculators that Earth has. Slows things no end."

The thin, grim commandant turned to him. "Cursed theory is always a
problem to a Sur-Malic. We hoped that your weak genius would be of
avail!"

"Well, it's availing, isn't it?" Sy demanded gruffly. "If I had
assistants that were anything but idiots, the job would be done!" In the
cruel, ruthless culture of the Sur-Malic, this was no argument, but an
accepted form of discussion, without rancor.

