Ssassaror seemed to have touched off a rocket of expansion in his body
with his protein-eating. Those Ssassarors who shared his guilt--became
meat-eaters--became ostracized and eventually moved off to live by
themselves. They were called Ssassaror-Giants and were pointed to as
an object lesson to the young of the normal Ssassarors and Humans on
the land.

       *       *       *       *       *

If a stranger had landed shortly before Rastignac was born, however,
he would have noticed that all was not as serene as it was supposed to
be among the different species. The cause for the flaw in the former
Eden might have puzzled him if he had not known the previous history
of _L'Bawfey_ and the fact that the situation had not changed for the
worst until the introduction of Human Changelings among the
Amphibians.

Then it had been that blood-drinking began among them, that Amphibians
began seducing Humans to come live with them by their tales of easy
immortality, and that they started the system of leaving savage little
carnivores in the Human nurseries.

When the Land-dwellers protested, the Amphibs replied that these
things were carried out by unnaturals or outlaws, and that the
Sea-King could not be held responsible. Permission was given to
Chalice those caught in such behavior.

Nevertheless, the suspicion remained that the Amphib monarch had, in
accordance with age-old procedure, given his unofficial official
blessing and that he was preparing even more disgusting and outrageous
and unnatural moves. Through his control of the populace by the Master
Skin, he would be able to do as he pleased with their minds.

It was the Skins that had made the universal peace possible on the
planet of New Gaul. And it would be the custom of the Skins that would
make possible the change from peace to conflict among the populace.

Through the artificial Skins that were put on all babies at birth--and
which grew with them, attached to their body, feeding from their
bloodstreams, their nervous systems--the Skins, controlled by a huge
Master Skin that floated in a chemical vat in the palace of the
rulers, fed, indoctrinated and attended day and night by a crew of the
most brilliant scientists of the planet, gave the Kings complete
control of the minds and emotions of the inhabitants of the planet.

Originally the rulers of New Gaul had desired only that the populace
live in peace and enjoy the good things of their planet equally. But
the change that had been coming gradually--the growth of conflict
between the Kings of the different species for control of the whole
populace--was beginning to be generally felt. Uneasiness, distrust of
each other was growing among the people. Hence the legalizing of the
Underground, the Philosophy of Violence by the government, an effort
to control the revolt that was brewing.

Yet, the Land-dwellers had managed to take no action at all and to
ignore the growing number of vicious acts.

But not all were content to drowse. One man was aroused. He was
Rastignac.

They were Rastignac's hope, those Six Stars, the gods to which he
prayed. When they passed quickly out of his sight he would continue
his pacing, meditating for the twenty-thousandth time on a means for
reaching one of those ships and using it to visit the stars. The end
of his fantasies was always a curse because of the futility of such
hopes. He was doomed! Mankind was doomed!

       *       *       *       *       *

And it was all the more maddening because Man would not admit that he
was through. Ended, that is, as a human being.

Man was changing into something not quite _homo sapiens_. It might be
a desirable change, but it would mean the finish of his climb upwards.
So it seemed to Rastignac. And he, being the man he was, had decided
to do something about it even if it meant violence.

That was why he was now in the well-dungeon. He was an advocator of
violence against the status quo.


II

There was another cell next to his. It was also at the bottom of a
well and was separated from his by a thin wall of cement. A window had
been set into it so that the prisoners could talk to each other.
Rastignac did not care for the woman who had been let down into the
adjoining cell, but she was somebody to talk to.

"Amphib-changelings" was the name given to those human beings who had
been stolen from their cradles and raised among the non-humanoid
Amphibians as their own. The girl in the adjoining cell, Lusine, was
such a person. It was not her fault that she was a blood-drinking
Amphib. Yet he could not help disliking her for what she had done and
for the things she stood for.

She was in prison because she had been caught in the act of stealing a
Man child from its cradle. This was no crime, but she had left in the
cradle, under the covers, a savage and blood-thirsty little monster
that had leaped up and slashed the throat of the unsuspecting baby's
mother.

Her cell was lit by a cageful of glowworms. Rastignac, peering through
the grille, could see her shadowy shape in the inner cell inside the
wall. She rose langorously and stepped into the circle of dim orange
light cast by the insects.

"_B'zhu, m'fweh_," she greeted him.

It annoyed him that she called him her brother, and it annoyed him
even more to know that she knew it. It was true that she had some
excuse for thus addressing him. She did resemble him. Like him, she
had straight glossy blue-black hair, thick bracket-shaped eyebrows,
brown eyes, a straight nose and a prominent chin. And where his build
was superbly masculine, hers was magnificently feminine.

Nevertheless, this was not her reason for so speaking to him. She knew
the disgust the Land-walker had for the Amphib-changeling, and she
took a perverted delight in baiting him.

He was proud that he seldom allowed her to see that she annoyed him.
"_B'zhu, fam tey zafeep_," he said. "Good evening, woman of the
Amphibians."

Mockingly she said, "Have you been watching the Six Flying Stars,
Jean-Jacques?"

"_Vi._ I do so every time they come over."

"Why do you eat your heart out because you cannot fly up to them and
then voyage among the stars on one of them?"

He refused to give her the satisfaction of knowing his real reason.
He did not want her to realize how little he thought of Mankind and
its chances for surviving--as humanity--upon the face of this planet,
L'Bawpfey.

"I look at them because they remind me that Man was once captain of
his soul."

"Then you admit that the Land-walker is weak?"

"I think he is on the way to becoming non-human, which is to say that
he is weak, yes. But what I say about Landman goes for Seaman, too.
You Changelings are becoming more Amphibian every day and less Human.
Through the Skins the Amphibs are gradually changing you completely.
Soon you will be completely sea-people."

She laughed scornfully, exposing perfect white teeth as she did so.

"The Sea will win out against the Land. It launches itself against the
shore and shakes it with the crash of its body. It eats away the rock
and the dirt and absorbs it into its own self. It can't be worn away
nor caught and held in a net. It is elusive and all-powerful and
never-tiring."

Lusine paused for breath. He said, "That is a very pretty analogy, but
it doesn't apply. You Seafolk are as much flesh and blood as we
Landfolk. What hurts us hurts you."

She put a hand around one bar. The glow-light fell upon it in such a
way that it showed plainly the webbing of skin between her fingers. He
glanced at it with a faint repulsion under which was a counter-current
of attraction. This was the hand that had, indirectly, shed blood.

She glanced at him sidewise, challenged him in trembling tones. "You
are not one to throw stones, Jean-Jacques. I have heard that you eat
meat."

"Fish, not meat. That is part of my Philosophy of Violence," he
retorted. "I maintain that one of the reasons man is losing his power
and strength is that he has so long been upon a vegetable diet. He is
as cowed and submissive as the grass-eating beast of the fields."

Lusine put her face against the bars.

"That is interesting," she said. "But how did you happen to begin
eating fish? I thought we Amphibs alone did that."

What Lusine had just said angered him. He had no reply.

Rastignac knew he should not be talking to a Sea-changeling. They were
glib and seductive and always searching for ways to twist your
thoughts. But being Rastignac, he had to talk. Moreover, it was so
difficult to find anybody who would listen to his ideas that he could
not resist the temptation.

"I was given fish by the Ssassaror, Mapfarity, when I was a child. We
lived along the sea-shore. Mapfarity was a child, too, and we played
together. Don't eat fish!' my parents said. To me that meant 'Eat
it!' So, despite my distaste at the idea, and my squeamish stomach, I
did eat fish. And I liked it. And as I grew to manhood I adopted the
Philosophy of Violence and I continued to eat fish although I am not a
Changeling."

"What did your Skin do when it detected you?" Lusine asked. Her eyes
were wide and luminous with wonder and a sort of glee as if she
relished the confession of his sins. Also, he knew, she was taunting
him about the futility of his ideas of violence so long as he was a
prisoner of the Skin.

He frowned in annoyance at the reminder of the Skin. Much thought had
he given, in a weak way, to the possibility of life without the Skin.

Ashamed now of his weak resistance to the Skin, he blustered a bit in
front of the teasing Amphib girl.

"Mapfarity and I discovered something that most people don't know," he
answered boastfully. "We found that if you can stand the shocks your
Skin gives you when you do something wrong, the Skin gets tired and
quits after a while. Of course your Skin recharges itself and the next
time you eat fish it shocks you again. But after very many shocks it
becomes accustomed, forgets its conditioning, and leaves you alone."

Lusine laughed and said in a low conspirational tone, "So your
Ssassaror pal and you adopted the Philosophy of Violence because you
remained fish and meat eaters?"

"Yes, we did. When Mapfarity reached puberty he became a Giant and
went off to live in a castle in the forest. But we have remained
friends through our connection in the underground."

"Your parents must have suspected that you were a fish eater when you
first proposed your Philosophy of Violence?" she said.

"Suspicion isn't proof," he answered. "But I shouldn't be telling you
all this, Lusine. I feel it is safe for me to do so only because you
will never have a chance to tell on me. You will soon be taken to
Chalice and there you will stay until you have been cured."

She shivered and said, "This Chalice? What is it?"

"It is a place far to the north where both Terrans and Ssassarors send
their incorrigibles. It is an extinct volcano whose steep-sided
interior makes an inescapable prison. There those who have persisted
in unnatural behavior are given special treatment."

"They are bled?" she asked, her eyes widening as her tongue flicked
over her lips again hungrily.

"No. A special breed of Skin is given them to wear. These Skins shock
them more powerfully than the ordinary ones, and the shocks are
associated with the habit they are trying to cure. The shocks effect
a cure. Also, these special Skins are used to detect hidden unnatural
emotions. They re-condition the deviate. The result is that when the
Chaliced Man is judged able to go out and take his place in society
again, he is thoroughly re-conditioned. Then his regular Skin is given
back to him and it has no trouble keeping him in line from then on.
The Chaliced Man is a very good citizen."

"And what if a revolter doesn't become Chaliced?"

"Then he stays in Chalice until he decides to become so."

Her voice rose sharply as she said, "But if I go there, and I am not
fed the diet of the Amphibs, I will grow old and die!"

"No. The government will feed you the diet you need until you are
re-conditioned. Except...." He paused.

"Except I won't get blood," she wailed. Then, realizing she was acting
undignified before a Landman, she firmed her voice.

"The King of the Amphibians will not allow them to do this to me," she
said. "When he hears of it he will demand my return. And if the King
of Men refuses, my King will use violence to get me back."

Rastignac smiled and said, "I hope he does. Then perhaps my people
will wake up and get rid of their Skins and make war upon your
people."

"So that is what you Philosophers of Violence want, is it? Well, you
