
Then the person--it sounded like a man--said, 'He is in, then?'

But Alice only kept on saying, 'Will you walk in, please?' so at last
the man did, rubbing his boots very loudly on the mat.

Then Alice shut the front door, and we saw that it was the butcher, with
an envelope in his hand. He was not dressed in blue, like when he is
cutting up the sheep and things in the shop, and he wore knickerbockers.
Alice says he came on a bicycle. She led the way into the dining-room,
where the Castilian Amoroso bottle and the medicine glass were standing
on the table all ready.

The others stayed on the stairs, but Oswald crept down and looked
through the door-crack.

'Please sit down,' said Alice quite calmly, though she told me
afterwards I had no idea how silly she felt. And the butcher sat down.
Then Alice stood quite still and said nothing, but she fiddled with
the medicine glass and put the screw of brown paper straight in the
Castilian bottle.

'Will you tell your Pa I'd like a word with him?' the butcher said, when
he got tired of saying nothing.

'He'll be in very soon, I think,' Alice said.

And then she stood still again and said nothing. It was beginning to
look very idiotic of her, and H. O. laughed. I went back and cuffed him
for it quite quietly, and I don't think the butcher heard.

But Alice did, and it roused her from her stupor. She spoke suddenly,
very fast indeed--so fast that I knew she had made up what she was going
to say before. She had got most of it out of the circular.

She said, 'I want to call your attention to a sample of sherry wine I
have here. It is called Castilian something or other, and at the price
it is unequalled for flavour and bouquet.'

The butcher said, 'Well--I never!'

And Alice went on, 'Would you like to taste it?'

'Thank you very much, I'm sure, miss,' said the butcher.

Alice poured some out.

The butcher tasted a very little. He licked his lips, and we thought
he was going to say how good it was. But he did not. He put down the
medicine glass with nearly all the stuff left in it (we put it back in
the bottle afterwards to save waste) and said, 'Excuse me, miss, but
isn't it a little sweet?--for sherry I mean?'

'The _Real_ isn't,' said Alice. 'If you order a dozen it will come quite
different to that--we like it best with sugar. I wish you _would_ order
some.' The butcher asked why.

Alice did not speak for a minute, and then she said--

'I don't mind telling _you_: you are in business yourself, aren't
you? We are trying to get people to buy it, because we shall have two
shillings for every dozen we can make any one buy. It's called a purr
something.'

'A percentage. Yes, I see,' said the butcher, looking at the hole in the
carpet.

'You see there are reasons,' Alice went on, 'why we want to make our
fortunes as quickly as we can.'

'Quite so,' said the butcher, and he looked at the place where the paper
is coming off the wall.

'And this seems a good way,' Alice went on. 'We paid two shillings for
the sample and instructions, and it says you can make two pounds a week
easily in your leisure time.'

'I'm sure I hope you may, miss,' said the butcher. And Alice said again
would he buy some?

'Sherry is my favourite wine,' he said. Alice asked him to have some
more to drink.

'No, thank you, miss,' he said; 'it's my favourite wine, but it doesn't
agree with me; not the least bit. But I've an uncle drinks it. Suppose I
ordered him half a dozen for a Christmas present? Well, miss, here's the
shilling commission, anyway,' and he pulled out a handful of money and
gave her the shilling.

'But I thought the wine people paid that,' Alice said.

But the butcher said not on half-dozens they didn't. Then he said he
didn't think he'd wait any longer for Father--but would Alice ask Father
to write him?

Alice offered him the sherry again, but he said something about 'Not
for worlds!'--and then she let him out and came back to us with the
shilling, and said, 'How's that?'

And we said 'A1.'

And all the evening we talked of our fortune that we had begun to make.

Nobody came next day, but the day after a lady came to ask for money to
build an orphanage for the children of dead sailors. And we saw her. I
went in with Alice. And when we had explained to her that we had only
a shilling and we wanted it for something else, Alice suddenly said,
'Would you like some wine?'

And the lady said, 'Thank you very much,' but she looked surprised.

She was not a young lady, and she had a mantle with beads, and the beads
had come off in places--leaving a browny braid showing, and she had
printed papers about the dead sailors in a sealskin bag, and the
seal had come off in places, leaving the skin bare. We gave her a
tablespoonful of the wine in a proper wine-glass out of the sideboard,
because she was a lady. And when she had tasted it she got up in a very
great hurry, and shook out her dress and snapped her bag shut, and said,
'You naughty, wicked children! What do you mean by playing a trick like
this? You ought to be ashamed of yourselves! I shall write to your Mamma
about it. You dreadful little girl!--you might have poisoned me. But
your Mamma...'

Then Alice said, 'I'm very sorry; the butcher liked it, only he said it
was sweet. And please don't write to Mother. It makes Father so unhappy
when letters come for her!'--and Alice was very near crying.

'What do you mean, you silly child?' said the lady, looking quite
bright and interested. 'Why doesn't your Father like your Mother to have
letters--eh?'

And Alice said, 'OH, you...!' and began to cry, and bolted out of the
room.

Then I said, 'Our Mother is dead, and will you please go away now?'

The lady looked at me a minute, and then she looked quite different, and
she said, 'I'm very sorry. I didn't know. Never mind about the wine. I
daresay your little sister meant it kindly.' And she looked round the
room just like the butcher had done. Then she said again, 'I didn't
know--I'm very sorry...'

So I said, 'Don't mention it,' and shook hands with her, and let her
out. Of course we couldn't have asked her to buy the wine after what
she'd said. But I think she was not a bad sort of person. I do like
a person to say they're sorry when they ought to be--especially a
grown-up. They do it so seldom. I suppose that's why we think so much of
it.

But Alice and I didn't feel jolly for ever so long afterwards. And when
I went back into the dining-room I saw how different it was from when
Mother was here, and we are different, and Father is different, and
nothing is like it was. I am glad I am not made to think about it every
day.

I went and found Alice, and told her what the lady had said, and when
she had finished crying we put away the bottle and said we would not try
to sell any more to people who came. And we did not tell the others--we
only said the lady did not buy any--but we went up on the Heath, and
some soldiers went by and there was a Punch-and-judy show, and when we
came back we were better.

The bottle got quite dusty where we had put it, and perhaps the dust of
ages would have laid thick and heavy on it, only a clergyman called when
we were all out. He was not our own clergyman--Mr Bristow is our own
clergyman, and we all love him, and we would not try to sell sherry
to people we like, and make two pounds a week out of them in our spare
time. It was another clergyman, just a stray one; and he asked Eliza if
the dear children would not like to come to his little Sunday school. We
always spend Sunday afternoons with Father. But as he had left the name
of his vicarage with Eliza, and asked her to tell us to come, we thought
we would go and call on him, just to explain about Sunday afternoons,
and we thought we might as well take the sherry with us.

'I won't go unless you all go too,' Alice said, 'and I won't do the
talking.'

Dora said she thought we had much better not go; but we said 'Rot!' and
it ended in her coming with us, and I am glad she did.

Oswald said he would do the talking if the others liked, and he learned
up what to say from the printed papers.

We went to the Vicarage early on Saturday afternoon, and rang at the
bell. It is a new red house with no trees in the garden, only very
yellow mould and gravel. It was all very neat and dry. Just before we
rang the bell we heard some one inside call 'Jane! Jane!' and we thought
we would not be Jane for anything. It was the sound of the voice that
called that made us sorry for her.

The door was opened by a very neat servant in black, with a white apron;
we saw her tying the strings as she came along the hall, through the
different-coloured glass in the door. Her face was red, and I think she
was Jane.

We asked if we could see Mr Mallow.

The servant said Mr Mallow was very busy with his sermon just then, but
she would see.

But Oswald said, 'It's all right. He asked us to come.'

So she let us all in and shut the front door, and showed us into a very
tidy room with a bookcase full of a lot of books covered in black cotton
with white labels, and some dull pictures, and a harmonium. And Mr
Mallow was writing at a desk with drawers, copying something out of a
book. He was stout and short, and wore spectacles.

He covered his writing up when we went in--I didn't know why. He looked
rather cross, and we heard Jane or somebody being scolded outside by the
voice. I hope it wasn't for letting us in, but I have had doubts.

'Well,' said the clergyman, 'what is all this about?'

'You asked us to call,' Dora said, 'about your little Sunday school. We
are the Bastables of Lewisham Road.'

'Oh--ah, yes,' he said; 'and shall I expect you all to-morrow?'

He took up his pen and fiddled with it, and he did not ask us to sit
down. But some of us did.

'We always spend Sunday afternoon with Father,' said Dora; 'but we
wished to thank you for being so kind as to ask us.'

'And we wished to ask you something else!' said Oswald; and he made
a sign to Alice to get the sherry ready in the glass. She did--behind
Oswald's back while he was speaking.

'My time is limited,' said Mr Mallow, looking at his watch; 'but
still--' Then he muttered something about the fold, and went on: 'Tell
me what is troubling you, my little man, and I will try to give you any
help in my power. What is it you want?'

Then Oswald quickly took the glass from Alice, and held it out to him,
and said, 'I want your opinion on that.'

'On _that_,' he said. 'What is it?'

'It is a shipment,' Oswald said; 'but it's quite enough for you to
taste.' Alice had filled the glass half-full; I suppose she was too
excited to measure properly.

'A shipment?' said the clergyman, taking the glass in his hand.

'Yes,' Oswald went On; 'an exceptional opportunity. Full-bodied and
nutty.'

'It really does taste rather like one kind of Brazil-nut.' Alice put her
oar in as usual.

The Vicar looked from Alice to Oswald, and back again, and Oswald went
on with what he had learned from the printing. The clergyman held the
glass at half-arm's-length, stiffly, as if he had caught cold.

'It is of a quality never before offered at the price. Old Delicate
Amoro--what's its name--'

'Amorolio,' said H. O.

'Amoroso,' said Oswald. 'H. O., you just shut up--Castilian
Amoroso--it's a true after-dinner wine, stimulating and yet...'

'_Wine_?' said Mr Mallow, holding the glass further off. 'Do you
_know_,' he went on, making his voice very thick and strong (I expect he
does it like that in church), 'have you never been _taught_ that it is
the drinking of _wine_ and _spirits_--yes, and _beer_, which makes half
the homes in England full of _wretched_ little children, and _degraded_,
_miserable_ parents?'

'Not if you put sugar in it,' said Alice firmly; 'eight lumps and shake
the bottle. We have each had more than a teaspoonful of it, and we were
not ill at all. It was something else that upset H. O. Most likely all
those acorns he got out of the Park.'

The clergyman seemed to be speechless with conflicting emotions, and
just then the door opened and a lady came in. She had a white cap with
lace, and an ugly violet flower in it, and she was tall, and looked
very strong, though thin. And I do believe she had been listening at the
door.

'But why,' the Vicar was saying, 'why did you bring this dreadful fluid,
this curse of our country, to _me_ to taste?'

'Because we thought you might buy some,' said Dora, who never sees when
a game is up. 'In books the parson loves his bottle of old port; and new
sherry is just as good--with sugar--for people who like sherry. And if
you would order a dozen of the wine, then we should get two shillings.'

The lady said (and it _was_ the voice), 'Good gracious! Nasty, sordid
little things! Haven't they any one to teach them better?'

And Dora got up and said, 'No, we are not those things you say; but we
are sorry we came here to be called names. We want to make our fortune
just as much as Mr Mallow does--only no one would listen to us if we
preached, so it's no use our copying out sermons like him.'

And I think that was smart of Dora, even if it was rather rude.

Then I said perhaps we had better go, and the lady said, 'I should think
so!'

But when we were going to wrap up the bottle and glass the clergyman
said, 'No; you can leave that,' and we were so upset we did, though it
wasn't his after all.

We walked home very fast and not saying much, and the girls went up to
their rooms. When I went to tell them tea was ready, and there was
a teacake, Dora was crying like anything and Alice hugging her. I am
afraid there is a great deal of crying in this chapter, but I can't help
