of the hamlet, farther to the south.  The mind of May entered through
its closed door,--for mind, like electricity, laughs at bolts and bars.

There was a buzz of subdued sound from more than twelve hundred
telegraphists, male and female, in that mighty telegraph-hall of Saint
Martin's-le-Grand, but May heard it not.  Dozens upon dozens of tables,
each with its busy occupants--tables to right of her, tables to left of
her, tables in rear of her, tables in front of her,--swept away from her
in bewildering perspective, but May saw them not.  The clicking of six
or seven hundred instruments broke upon her ear as they flashed the news
of the world over the length and breadth of the land, pulsating joy and
sorrow, surprise, fear, hope, despair, and gladness to thousands of
anxious hearts, but May regarded it not.  She heard only the booming of
the great sea, and saw her mother seated by the fire darning socks, with
Madge engaged in household work, and Phil tumbling with baby-brother on
the floor, making new holes and rents for fresh darns and patches.

Mrs Maylands was a student and lover of the Bible.  Her children,
though a good deal wilder, were sweet-tempered like herself.  It is
needless to add that in spite of adverse circumstances they were all
moderately happy.  The fair telegraphist smiled, almost laughed, as her
mind hovered over the home circle.

From the contemplation of this pleasant and romantic picture she was
roused by a familiar rustle at her elbow.  Recalling her mind from the
west of Ireland, she fixed it on a mass of telegrams which had just
arrived from various parts of the city.

They had been sucked through several pneumatic tubes--varying from a few
yards to two miles in length--had been checked, assorted, registered,
and distributed by boys to the various telegraphists to whose lot they
fell.  May Maylands chanced, by a strange coincidence, to command the
instrument in direct connection with Cork.  The telegrams just laid
beside her were those destined for that city, and the regions to which
it was a centre of redistribution.  Among others her own village was in
connection with it, and many a time had she yearned to touch her keys
with a message of love to her mother, but the rules of the office
sternly forbade this.  The communicative touch which she dispensed so
freely to others was forbidden to herself.  If she, or any other
telegraphist in St. Martin's-le-Grand, wished to send a private message,
it became necessary to step out of the office, go to the appointed
place, pay her shilling, and become one of the public for the occasion.
Every one can see the necessity for such a rule in the circumstances.

May's three-keyed machine, by the way, did not actually send forth the
electricity.  It only punched holes in a long tape of white paper, which
holes, according to their relative arrangement, represented the
alphabet.  Having punched a message by playing on the keys, she
transferred her tape to the electric machine at her elbow and passed it
through.  This transmitting machine was automatic or self acting.  It
required only to be fed with perforated tapes.  In Ireland the
receiving-machine presented its messages in the form of dots and dashes,
which, according to arrangement, became alphabetic.  You don't
understand this, reader, eh?  It would be surprising if you did!  A
treatise on electric telegraphy would be required to make it clear--
supposing you to have a mechanical turn of mind.  Suffice it to say that
the Wheatstone telegraph instrument tapes off its messages at the rate
of 100 words a minute.

But to return--

With a sigh May Maylands cast her eyes on the uppermost telegram.  It
ran thus:--

"Buy the horse at any price.  He's a spanker.  Let the pigs go for what
they'll fetch."

This was enough.  Romance, domesticity, and home disappeared, probably
with the message along the wire, and the spirit of business descended on
the little woman as she applied herself once more to the matter-of-fact
manipulation of the keys.

That evening as May left the Post-Office and turned sharply into the
dark street she came into collision with a letter-carrier.

"Oh!  Miss," he exclaimed with polite anxiety, "I beg your pardon.  The
sleet drivin' in my face prevented my seeing you.  You're not hurt I
hope."

"No, Mr Flint, you haven't hurt me," said May, laughing, as she
recognised the voice of her own landlord.

"Why, it's you, Miss May!  Now isn't that good luck, my turnin' up just
in the nick o' time to see you home?  Here, catch hold of my arm.  The
wind's fit to tear the lamp-posts up by the roots."

"But this is not the way home," objected the girl.

"That's true, Miss May, it ain't, but I'm only goin' round a bit by St.
Paul's Churchyard.  There's a shop there where they sell the sausages my
old 'ooman's so fond of.  It don't add more than a few yards to the road
home."

The old 'ooman to whom Solomon Flint referred was his grandmother.
Flint himself had spent the greater part of his life in the service of
the Post-Office, and was now a widower, well stricken in years.  His
grandmother was one of those almost indestructible specimens of humanity
who live on until the visage becomes deeply corrugated, contemporaries
have become extinct, and age has become a matter of uncertainty.  Flint
had always been a good grandson, but when his wife died the love he had
borne to her seemed to have been transferred with additional vehemence
to the "old 'ooman."

"There's a present for you, old 'ooman," said Flint, placing the paper
of sausages on the table on entering his humble abode, and proceeding to
divest himself of his waterproof cape; "just let me catch hold of a
fryin'-pan and I'll give you to understand what a blow-out means."

"You're a good laddie, Sol," said the old woman, rousing herself and
speaking in a voice that sounded as if it had begun its career far back
in the previous century.

Mrs Flint was Scotch, and, although she had lived from early womanhood
in London, had retained something of the tone and much of the
pronunciation of the land o' cakes.

"Ye'll be wat, lassie," she said to May, who was putting off her bonnet
and shawl in a corner.  "No, Grannie," returned the girl, using a term
which the old woman had begged her to adopt, "I'm not wet, only a little
damp."

"Change your feet, lassie, direc'ly, or you'll tak' cauld," said Mrs
Flint in a peremptory tone.

May laughed gently and retired to her private boudoir to change her
shoes.  The boudoir was not more than eight feet by ten in size, and
very poorly furnished, but its neat, methodical arrangements betokened
in its owner a refined and orderly mind.  There were a few books in a
stand on the table, and a flower-pot on the window-sill.  Among the pegs
and garments on the walls was a square piece of cardboard, on which was
emblazoned in scarlet silk, the text, "God is love."  This hung at the
foot of the bed, so as to be the first object to greet the girl's eyes
on awaking each morning.  Below it hung a row of photographs, embracing
the late Reverend James Maylands, his widow, his son Philip, his distant
relative Madge, and the baby.  These were so arranged as to catch the
faint gleam of light that penetrated the window; but as there was a
twenty-foot brick wall in front of the window at a distance of two
yards, the gleam, even on a summer noon, was not intense.  In winter it
was barely sufficient to render darkness visible.

Poor May Maylands!  It was a tremendous change to her from the free air
and green fields of Ireland to a small back street in the heart of
London; but necessity had required the change.  Her mother's income
could not comfortably support the family.  Her own salary, besides
supporting herself, was devoted to the enlargement of that income, and
as it amounted to only 50 pounds a year, there was not much left to pay
for lodgings, etcetera.  It is true Miss Lillycrop would have gladly
furnished May with board and lodging free, but her house was in the
neighbourhood of Pimlico, and May's duties made it necessary that she
should live within a short distance of the General Post-Office.  Miss
Lillycrop had heard of the Flints as being good-hearted and trusty
people, and advised her cousin to board with them, at least until some
better arrangement could be made for her.  Meanwhile May was to go and
spend part of every Sunday with Miss Lillycrop at Number 9 Purr Street.

"Well, Grannie," said May, returning to the front room, where the
sausages were already hissing deliciously, "what news have you for me
to-night?"

She sat down beside the old woman, took her hand and spoke in that
cheery, cosy, confidential way which renders some women so attractive.

"Deed, May, there's little but the auld story--Mercies, mornin', noon,
and night.  But, oo ay, I was maist forgettin'; Miss Lillycrap was here,
an left ye a message o' some sort."

"And what was the message, Grannie?"

"She's gone and forgot it," said Solomon Flint, putting the sausages on
the table, which had already been spread for supper by a stout little
girl who was the sole domestic of the house and attendant on Mrs Flint.
"You've no chance of getting it now, Miss May, for I've noticed that
when the old 'ooman once forgets a thing it don't come back to her--
except, p'r'aps, a week or two afterwards.  Come now, draw in and go to
work.  But, p'r'aps, Dollops may have heard the message.  Hallo!
Dollops! come here, and bring the kettle with you."

Dollops--the little girl above referred to--was particularly small and
shy, ineffably stupid, and remarkably fat.  It was the last quality
which induced Solomon to call her Dollops.  Her hair and garments stuck
out from her in wild dishevelment, but she was not dirty.  Nothing
belonging to Mrs Flint was allowed to become dirty.

"Did you see Miss Lillycrop, Dollops?" asked Solomon, as the child
emerged from some sort of back kitchen.

"Yes, sir, I did; I saw'd 'er a-goin' hout."

"Did you hear her leave a message?"

"Yes, sir, I did.  I 'eard 'er say to missis, `Be sure that you give May
Maylands my love, an tell 'er wotever she do to keep 'er feet dry, an'
don't forgit the message, an' say I'm so glad about it, though it's not
much to speak of arter all!'"

"What was she so glad about?" demanded Solomon.

"I dun know, sir.  She said no more in my 'earin' than that.  I only
comed in w'en she was a-goin' hout.  P'r'aps it was about the findin' of
'er gloves in 'er pocket w'en she was a talkin' to missis, which she
thought she'd lost, though they wasn't wuth pickin' up out of the--"

"Pooh! be off to your pots an' pans, child," said Flint, turning to his
grandmother, who sat staring at the sausages with a blank expression.
"You can't remember it, I s'pose, eh?"

Mrs Flint shook her head and began to eat.

"That's right, old 'ooman," said her grandson, patting her shoulder;
"heap up the coals, mayhap it'll revive the memory."

But Mrs Flint's memory was not so easily revived.  She became more
abstracted than usual in her efforts to recover it.  Supper passed and
was cleared away.  The old woman was placed in her easy chair in front
of the fire with the cat--her chief evening amusement--on her knee; the
letter-carrier went out for his evening walk; Dollops proceeded
miscellaneously to clean up and smash the crockery, and May sat down to
indite an epistle to the inmates of Rocky Cottage.

Suddenly Mrs Flint uttered an exclamation.

"May!" she cried, and hit the cat an involuntary slap on the face which
sent it with a caterwaul of indignant surprise from her knee, "it wasn't
a message, it was a letter!"

Having thus unburdened her mind the old woman relapsed into the previous
century, from which she could not be recalled.  May, therefore, made a
diligent search for the letter, and found it at last under a cracked
teapot on the mantelpiece, where Mrs Flint had told Miss Lillycrop to
place it for safety.

It was short but satisfactory, and ran thus:--

"DEAREST MAY,--I've been to see my friend `in power,' and he says it's
`all right,' that you've only to get your brother over as soon as
possible, and he'll see to getting him a situation.  The enclosed paper
is for his and your guidance.  Excuse haste.--Your affectionate coz,
SARAH LILLYCROP."

It need hardly be said that May Maylands finished her letter with
increased satisfaction, and posted it that night.

Next morning she wrote out a telegram as follows:--"Let Phil come here
_at once_.  The application has been successful.  Never mind clothes.
Everything arranged.  Best love to all."

The last clause was added in order to get the full value for her money.
She naturally underscored the words "at once," forgetting for the moment
that, in telegraphy, a word underlined counts as two words.  She was
therefore compelled to forego the emphasis.

This message she did not transmit through her own professional
instrument, but gave it in at the nearest district office.  It was at
once shot bodily, with a bundle of other telegrams, through a pneumatic
tube, and thus reached St. Martin's-le-Grand in one minute thirty-five
seconds, or about twenty minutes before herself.  Chancing to be the
uppermost message, it was flashed off without delay, crossed the Irish
Channel, and entered the office at Cork in about six minutes.  Here
there was a short delay of half-an-hour, owing to other telegrams which
had prior claim to attention.  Then it was flashed to the west coast,
which it reached long before the letter posted on the previous night,
and not long after May had seated herself at her own three-keyed
instrument.  But there, telegraphic speed was thwarted by unavoidable
circumstances, the post-runner having already started on his morning
rounds, and it was afternoon before the telegram was delivered at Rocky
Cottage.

This was the telegram which had caused Philip Maylands so much anxiety.
He read it at last with great relief, and at the same time with some
degree of sadness, when he thought of leaving his mother "unprotected"
in her lonely cottage by the sea.



CHAPTER THREE.

BRILLIANT PROSPECTS.

Madge--whose proper name was Marjory Stevens--was absent when May's
letter arrived the following day.  On her return to the cottage she was
taken into the committee which sat upon the subject of Phil's
appointment.

"It's not a very grand appointment," said Mrs Maylands, with a sigh.

"Sure it's not an appointment at all yet, mother," returned Phil, who
held in his hand the paper of instructions enclosed in May's letter.
"Beggars, you know, mustn't be choosers; an' if I'm not a beggar,
it's next thing to it I am.  Besides, if the position of a
boy-telegraph-messenger isn't very exalted in itself, it's the first
step to better things.  Isn't the first round of a ladder connected with
the top round?"

"That's true, Phil," said Madge; "there's nothing to prevent your
becoming Postmaster-General in course of time."

"Nothing whatever, that I know of," returned Phil.

"Perhaps somebody else knows of something that may prevent it," said his
mother with an amused smile.

"Perhaps!" exclaimed the boy, with a twinkle in his eye; "don't talk to
me of perhapses, I'm not to be damped by such things.  Now, just
consider this," he continued, looking over the paper in his hand, "here
we have it all in print.  I must apply for the situation in writin' no
less.  Well, I can do it in copperplate, if they please.  Then my age
must be not less than fourteen, and not more than fifteen."

"That suits to a T," said Madge.

"Yes; and, but hallo! what have we here?" said Phil, with a look of
dismay.

"What is it?" asked his mother and Madge in the same breath, with looks
of real anxiety.

"Well, well, it's too bad," said Phil slowly, "it says here that I'm to
have `no claim on the superannuation fund.'  Isn't that hard?"

A smile from Mrs Maylands, and a laugh from Madge, greeted this.  It
was also received with an appalling yell from the baby, which caused
mother and nurse to leap to the rescue.  That sprout of mischief, in the
course of an experimental tour of the premises, had climbed upon a
side-table, had twisted his right foot into the loop of the
window-curtains, had fallen back, and hung, head downwards, howling.

Having been comforted with bread and treacle, and put to bed, the
committee meeting was resumed.

"Well, then," said Phil, consulting his paper again, "I give up the
superannuation advantages.  Then, as to wages, seven shillings a week,
rising to eight shillings after one year's service.  Why, it's a
fortune!  Any man at my age can live on sixpence a day easy--that's
three-and-six, leaving three-and-six a week clear for you, mother.  Then
there's a uniform; just think o' that!"

"I wonder what sort of uniform it is," said Madge.

"A red coat, Madge, and blue trousers with silver lace and a brass
helmet, for certain--"

"Don't talk nonsense, boy," interrupted Mrs Maylands, "but go on with
the paper."

"Oh! there's nothing more worth mentioning," said Phil, folding the
paper, "except that boy-messengers, if they behave themselves, have a
chance of promotion to boy-sorterships, indoor-telegraph-messengerships,
junior sorterships, and letter-carrierships, on their reaching
the age of seventeen, and, I suppose, secretaryships, and
postmaster-generalships, with a baronetcy, on their attaining the age of
Methuselah.  It's the very thing for me, mother, so I'll be off
to-morrow if--"

Phil was cut short by the bursting open of the door and the sudden
entrance of his friend George Aspel.

"Come, Phil," he cried, blazing with excitement, "there's a wreck in the
bay.  Quick! there's no time to lose."
