The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Fantasy Fan September 1933, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Fantasy Fan September 1933
       The Fan's Own Magazine

Author: Various

Editor: Charles D. Hornig

Release Date: July 8, 2014 [EBook #46222]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE FANTASY FAN SEPTEMBER 1933 ***




Produced by Greg Weeks and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net






Transcriber's Note: Minor typographical errors have been corrected
without note. Irregularities and inconsistencies in the text have
been retained as printed.

Words printed in bold are marked with tildes: ~bold~.

The cover of this ebook was created by the transcriber and is hereby
placed in the public domain.




THE FANTASY FAN

THE FANS' OWN MAGAZINE

~Editor~: Charles D. Hornig

Published                     10 cents a copy
Monthly                       $1.00 per year

137 West Grand Street, Elizabeth, New Jersey

Volume 1      September, 1933      Number 1




100 PER CENT YOURS


Every fantasy fiction magazine says: "This is YOUR magazine." Most
fans like this phrase, for it provides a very welcome personal feeling
on the part of the readers toward these magazines. The business of
these publishers is to produce a high-class brand of fantasy,
according to the wishes of the fans, many of whom claim that the
readers' letters in each issue are well worth the price of the book.
THE FANTASY FAN is for such people--those who feel a sense of
participation when they read the opinions of others on science and
weird fiction, and have their own letters published. The sole purpose
of THE FANTASY FAN is to strengthen the bond between the fans, and
advance the popularity of fantasy fiction in every way possible. We
will do our part by publishing interesting and absorbing articles by
the leading fan writers and authors of the day--many dozens of which
we now have on hand; occasionally an exceptionally good short story;
poetry; and all sorts of regular monthly departments. We will also
feature a cash prize contest every month as an incentive to you, the
fans, to show your enthusiasm. Remember one thing, YOU control THE
FANTASY FAN. You will get everything that you want within our power,
and what you do not like will be kept out of our pages. There are
several advantages you have in reading THE FANTASY FAN. Besides
choosing your articles, you can submit your own. We will gladly
consider any of your original material for publication, and if it is
accepted, you will be paid for it. Participate in our cash contests,
which, you will note, are simplicity itself. You can ask us questions
about fantasy fiction, and we will answer them free of charge in our
'Information' department. You can have your letters printed,
criticizing THE FANTASY FAN. If you want to make pen pals, let us
know, and we will list your name in our 'Penpals Wanted' column. Watch
our department, 'The Boiling Point,' in which the most radical
arguments will be carried on. Come to 'The Boiling Point' and present
your side of the controversy. Your suggestions are welcome. You are an
associate editor--flood us with letters. We have told you our part. We
can accomplish these things and make THE FANTASY FAN bigger and better
each month ONLY WITH YOUR HELP! If you have not yet subscribed, do so
now, and insure yourself of a monthly copy. There are only a limited
number printed. If you do not intend to subscribe, send us your dime
for the next issue within a week. Well, here's hoping THE FANTASY FAN
grows and grows, and someday you will be proud to say: "I was one of
the earliest readers!" Stick with us. Look for more pages, a colored
cover and illustrations in the near future.




WELL WISHES


We wish to give our sincere thanks to all those who have so kindly
written in and expressed their hope that THE FANTASY FAN will prosper.

From that supreme master of the weird and occult, Clark Ashton Smith,
we hear: "I am vastly interested to learn of your plans for THE
FANTASY FAN. I enclose dollar bill, for which please enroll me on your
roster at once. The magazine should fill a definite need.... Of
course, I shall be glad to give you any help that lies in my power.
Imaginative fiction, particularly the weird and occult, is my chief
interest. I hope that the public for it, and the publications devoted
to it, will increase in number with the lightening of the present
depression."

Allen Glasser writes: "The name you have chosen, THE FANTASY FAN,
seems far better to me than anything previously used in this line,
