and that they should miss the getting good places at the show. Margaret
had stood all this time leaning against her pillar, with hands clenched
together and teeth firm set, trying to control the shuddering of
horror and indignation that went through her whole frame. She started
convulsively when Linette moved after the burgher, but put a force upon
herself when she perceived that it was in order to inquire how best to
reach the Hotel de Terreforte.

He pointed to the opposite door of the church, and Linette,
reconnoitring and finding that it led into a street entirely quiet and
deserted, went back to the Dauphiness, whom she found sunk on her knees,
stiff and dazed.

'Come, Madame,' she entreated, trying to raise her, 'the Hotel de
Terreforte is near, these houses shelter us, and the rain is nearly
over.'

Margaret did not move at first; then she looked up and said, 'What was
it that they said, Linette?'

'Oh! no matter what they said, Madame; they were ignorant creatures,
who knew not what they were talking about. Come, you are wet, you are
exhausted. This good lady will know how to help you.'

'There is no help in man,' said Margaret, wildly stretching out her
arms. 'Oh, God! help me--a desolate woman--and my sisters! Betrayed!
betrayed!'

Very much alarmed, Linette at last succeeded in raising her to her feet,
and guiding her, half-blinded as she seemed, to the portal of the Hotel
de Terreforte--an archway leading into a courtyard. It was by great good
fortune that the very first person who stood within it was old Andrew
of the Cleugh, who despised all French sports in comparison with the
completeness of his master's equipment, and was standing at the gate,
about to issue forth in quest of leather to mend a defective strap. His
eyes fell on the forlorn wanderer, who had no longer energy to keep her
hood forward. 'My certie! he exclaimed, in utter amaze.

The Scottish words and voice seemed to revive Margaret, and she tottered
forward, exclaiming, 'Oh! good man, help me! take me to the Lady.'

Fortunately the Lady of Glenuskie, being much busied in preparations for
her journey, had sent Annis to the sports with the Lady of Terreforte,
and was ready to receive the poor, drenched, exhausted being, who almost
stumbled into her motherly arms, weeping bitterly, and incoherently
moaning something about her sisters, and her husband, and 'betrayed.'

Old Christie was happily also at home, and dry clothing, a warm posset,
and the Lady's own bed, perhaps still more her soothing caresses,
brought Margaret back to the power of explaining her distress
intelligibly--at least as regarded her sisters. She had discovered that
their escort had been that bitter foe of their house, Robert Hall, and
she verily believed that he had betrayed her sisters into the hands of
some of the routiers who infested the roads.

Dame Lilias could not but think it only too likely; but she said 'the
worst that could well befall the poor lassies in that case would be
their detention until a ransom was paid, and if their situation was
known, the King, the Dauphin, and the Duke of Brittany would be certain
one or other to rescue them by force of arms, if not to raise the
money.' She saw how Margaret shuddered at the name of the Dauphin.

'Oh! I have jewels--pearls--gold,' cried Margaret. 'I could pay the sum
without asking any one! Only, where are they, where are they? What are
they not enduring--the dear maidens! Would that I had never let them out
of my sight!'

'Would that I had not!' echoed Dame Lilias. 'But cheer up, dear Lady,
Madame de Ste. Petronelle is with them and will watch over them; and
she knows the ways of the country, and how to deal with these robbers,
whoever they may be. She will have a care of them.'

But though the Lady of Glenuskie tried to cheer the unhappy princess,
she was full of consternation and misgivings as to the fate of her
young cousins, whom she loved heartily, and she was relieved when, in
accordance with the summons that she had sent, her husband's spurs were
heard ringing on the stair.

He heard the story with alarm. He knew that Sir Andrew Gordon had been
told off to lead the convoy, and had even conversed with him on the
subject.

'Who exchanged him for Hall?' he inquired.

'Oh, do not ask,' cried the unhappy Margaret, covering her face with
her hands, and the shrewder Scots folk began to understand, as glances
passed between them, though they spared her.

She had intended throwing herself at the feet of the King, who had never
been unkind to her, and imploring his succour; but Sir Patrick brought
word that the King and Dauphin were going forth together to visit the
Abbot of a shrine at no great distance, and as soon as she heard that
the Dauphin was with his father, she shrank together, and gave up her
purpose for the present. Indeed, Sir Patrick thought it advisable for
him to endeavour to discover what had really become of the princesses
before applying to the King, or making their loss public. Nor was the
Dauphiness in a condition to repair to Court. Dame Lilias longed to
keep her and nurse and comfort her that evening; but while the spiteful
whispers of De Tillay were abroad, it was needful to be doubly prudent,
and the morning's escapade must if possible be compensated by a public
return to Chateau le Surry. So Margaret was placed on Lady Drummond's
palfrey, and accompanied home by all the attendants who could be got
together. She could hardly sit upright by the time the short ride was
over, for pain in the side and stitch in her breath. Again Lady Drummond
would have stayed with her, but the Countess de Craylierre, who had been
extremely offended and scandalised by the expedition of the Dauphiness,
made her understand that no one could remain there except by the
invitation of the Dauphin, and showed great displeasure at any one but
herself attempting the care of Madame la Dauphine, who, as all knew, was
subject to megrims.

Margaret entreated her belle cousine to return in the morning and tell
her what had been done, and Dame Lilias accordingly set forth with Annis
immediately after mass and breakfast with the news that Sir Patrick
had taken counsel with the Sieur de erreforte, and that they had got
together such armed attendants as they could, and started with their
sons for Nanci, where they hoped to discover some traces of the lost
ladies.

Indeed, he had brought his wife on his way, and was waiting in the court
in case the Princess should wish to see him before he went; but Lilias
found poor Margaret far too ill for this to be of any avail. She had
tossed about all night, and now was lying partly raised on a pile of
embroidered, gold-edged pillows, under an enormous, stiff, heavy quilt,
gorgeous with heraldic colours and devices, her pale cheeks flushed with
fever, her breath catching painfully, and with a terrible short cough,
murmuring strange words about her sisters, and about cruel tongues. A
crowd of both sexes and all ranks filled the room, gazing and listening.

She knew her cousin at her entrance, clasped her hand tight, and seemed
to welcome her native tongue, and understand her assurance that Sir
Patrick was gone to seek her sisters; but she wandered off into, 'Don't
let him ask Jamet. Ah, Katie Douglas, keep the door! They are coming.'

Her husband, returning from the morning mass, had way made for him as he
advanced to the bed, and again her understanding partly returned, as he
said in his low, dry voice, 'How now, Madame?'

She looked up at him, held out her hot hand, and gasped, 'Oh, sir, sir,
where are they?'

'Be more explicit, ma mie,' he said, with an inscrutable face.

'You know, you know. Oh, husband, my Lord, you do not believe it. Say
you do not believe it. Send the whispering fiend away. He has hidden my
sisters.'

'She raves,' said Louis. 'Has the chirurgeon been with her?'

'He is even now about to bleed her, my Lord,' said Madame de Craylierre,
'and so I have sent for the King's own physician.'

Louis's barber-surgeon (not yet Olivier le Dain) was a little, crooked
old Jew, at sight of whom Margaret screamed as if she took him for the
whispering fiend. He would fain have cleared the room and relieved the
air, but this was quite beyond his power; the ladies, knights, pages and
all chose to remain and look on at the struggles of the poor patient,
while Madame de Craylierre and Lady Drummond held her fast and forced
her to submit. Her husband, who alone could have prevailed, did not or
would not speak the word, but shrugged his shoulders and left the room,
carrying off with him at least his own attendants.

When she saw her blood flow, Margaret exclaimed, 'Ah, traitors, take me
instead of my father--only--a priest.'

Presently she fainted, and after partly reviving, seemed to doze, and
this, being less interesting, caused many of the spectators to depart.

When she awoke she was quite herself, and this was well, for the King
came to visit her. Margaret was fond of her father-in-law, who had
always been kind to her; but she was too ill, and speech hurt her too
much, to allow her to utter clearly all that oppressed her.

'My sisters! my poor sisters!' she moaned.

'Ah! ma belle fille, fear not. All will be well with them. No doubt, my
good brother Rene has detained them, that Madame Eleanore may study a
little more of his music and painting. We will send a courier to Nanci,
who will bring good news of them,' said the King, in a caressing voice
which soothed, if it did not satisfy, the sufferer.

She spoke out some thanks, and he added, 'They may come any moment,
daughter, and that will cheer your little heart, and make you well. Only
take courage, child, and here is my good physician, Maitre Bertrand,
come to heal you.'

Margaret still held the King's hand, and sought to detain him. 'Beau
pere, beau pere,' she said, 'you will not believe them! You will silence
them.'

'Whom, what, ma mie?'

'The evil-speakers. Ah! Jamet.'

'I believe nothing my fair daughter tells me not to believe.'

'Ah! sire, he speaks against me. He says--'

'Hush! hush, child. Whoever vexes my daughter shall have his tongue slit
for him. But here we must give place to Maitre Bertrand.'

Maitre Bertrand was a fat and stolid personage, who, nevertheless, had
a true doctor's squabble with the Jew Samiel and drove him out. His
treatment was to exclude all the air possible, make the patient breathe
all sorts of essences, and apply freshly-killed pigeons to the painful
side.

Margaret did not mend under this method. She begged for Samiel, who had
several times before relieved her in slight illnesses; but she was given
to understand that the Dauphin would not permit him to interfere with
Maitre Bertrand.

'Ah!' she said to Dame Lilias, in their own language, 'my husband calls
Bertrand an old fool! He does not wish me to recover! A childless wife
is of no value. He would have me dead! And so would I--if my fame were
cleared. If my sisters were found! Oh! my Lord, my Lord, I loved him
so!'

Poor Margaret! Such was her cry, whether sane or delirious, hour after
hour, day after day. Only when delirious she rambled into Scotch and
talked of Perth; went over again her father's murder, or fancied her
sisters in the hands of some of the ferocious chieftains of the North,
and screamed to Sir Patrick or to Geordie Douglas to deliver them. Where
was all the chivalry of the Bleeding Heart?

Or, again, she would piteously plead her own cause with her husband--not
that he was present, a morning glance into her room sufficed him; but
she would excuse her own eager folly--telling him not to be angered with
her, who loved him wholly and entirely, and begging him to silence the
wicked tongues that defamed her.

When sensible she was very weak, and capable of saying very little; but
she clung fast to Lady Drummond, and, Dauphin or no Dauphin, Dame Lilias
was resolved on remaining and watching her day and night, Madame de
Craylierre becoming ready to leave the nursing to her when it became
severe.

The King came to see his daughter-in-law almost every day, and always
spoke to her in the same kindly but unmeaning vein, assuring her that
her sisters must be safe, and promising to believe nothing against
herself; but, as the Lady of Glenuskie knew from Olivier de Terreforte,
taking no measures either to discover the fate of the princesses or to
banish and silence Jamet de Tillay, though it was all over the Court
that the Dauphiness was dying for love of Alain Chartier. Was it that
his son prevented him from acting, or was it the strange indifference
and indolence that always made Charles the Well-Served bestir himself
far too late?

Any way, Margaret of Scotland was brokenhearted, utterly weary of life,
and with no heart or spirit to rally from the illness caused by the
chill of her hasty walk. She only wished to live long enough to know
that her sisters were safe, see them again, and send them under safe
care to Brittany. She exacted a promise from Dame Lilias never to leave
them again till they were in safe hands, with good husbands, or back
in Scotland with their brother and good Archbishop Kennedy. 'Bid Jeanie
never despise a true heart; better, far better, than a crown,' she
sighed.

Louis concerned himself much that all the offices of religion should be
provided. He attended the mass daily celebrated in her room, and caused
priests to pray in the farther end continually. Lady Drummond, who had
not given up hope, and believed that good tidings of her sisters might
almost be a cure, thought that he really hurried on the last offices, at
which he devoutly assisted. However, the confession seemed to have given
Margaret much comfort. She told Dame Lilias that the priest had shown
her how to make an offering to God of her sore suffering from slander
and evil report, and reminded her that to endure it patiently was
treading in the steps of her Master. She was resolved, therefore, to
make no further struggle nor complaint, but to trust that her silence
and endurance would be accepted. She could pray for her sisters and
their safety, and she would endeavour to yield up even that last earthly
desire to be certified of their safety, and to see their bonnie faces
once more. So there she lay, a being formed by nature and intellect to
have been the inspiring helpmeet of some noble-hearted man, the stay of
a kingdom, the education of all around her in all that was beautiful and
refined, but cast away upon one of the most mean and selfish-hearted of
mankind, who only perceived her great qualities to hate and dread their
manifestation in a woman, to crush them by his contempt; and finally,
though he did not originate the cruel slander that broke her heart,
he envenomed it by his sneers, so as to deprive her of all power of
resistance.

The lot of Margaret of Scotland was as piteous as that of any of the
doomed house of Stewart. And there the Lady of Glenuskie and Annis
de Terreforte watched her sinking day by day, and still there were no
tidings of Jean and Eleanor from Nanci, no messenger from Sir Patrick to
tell where the search was directed.




CHAPTER 9. BALCHENBURG


     'In these wylde deserts where she now abode
        There dwelt a salvage nation, which did live
      On stealth and spoil, and making nightly rade
        Into their neighbours' borders.'--SPENSER.


A terrible legacy of the Hundred Years' War, which, indeed, was not yet
entirely ended by the Peace of Tours, was the existence of bands of men
trained to nothing but war and rapine, and devoid of any other means of
subsistence than freebooting on the peasantry or travellers, whence they
were known as routiers--highwaymen, and ecorcheurs--flayers. They were
a fearful scourge to France in the early part of the reign of Charles
VII., as, indeed, they had been at every interval of peace ever since
the battle of Creci, and they really made a state of warfare preferable
to the unhappy provinces, or at least to those where it was not actually
raging. In a few years more the Dauphin contrived to delude many of
them into an expedition, where he abandoned them and left them to be
massacred, after which he formed the rest into the nucleus of a standing
army; but at this time they were the terror of travellers, who only
durst go about any of the French provinces in well-armed and large
parties.

The domains of King Rene, whether in Lorraine or Provence, were,
however, reckoned as fairly secure, but from the time the little troop,
with the princesses among them, had started from Nanci, Madame de Ste.
Petronelle became uneasy. She looked up at the sun, which was shining
in her face, more than once, and presently drew the portly mule she was
riding towards George Douglas.

'Sir,' she said, 'you are the ladies' squire?'

'I have that honour, Madame.'

'And a Scot?'

'Even so.'

'I ask you, which way you deem that we are riding?'

'Eastward, Madame, if the sun is to be trusted. Mayhap somewhat to the
south.'

'Yea; and which side lies Chalons?'

This was beyond George's geography. He looked up with open mouth and
shook his head.

'Westward!' said the lady impressively. 'And what's yon in the
distance?'

'Save that this land is as flat as a bannock, I'd have said 'twas
mountains.'

'Mountains they are, young man!' said Madame de Ste. Petronelle
emphatically--'the hills between Lorraine and Alsace, which we should be
leaving behind us.'

'Is there treachery?' asked George, reining up his horse. 'Ken ye who is
the captain of this escort?'

'His name is Hall; he is thick with the Dauphin. Ha! Madame, is he sib
to him that aided in the slaughter of Eastern's Eve night?'

'Just, laddie. 'Tis own son to him that Queen Jean made dae sic a
fearful penance. What are ye doing?'

'I'll run the villain through, and turn back to Nanci while yet there is
time,' said George, his hand on his sword.

'Hold, ye daft bodie! That would but bring all the lave on ye. There's
nothing for it but to go on warily, and maybe at the next halt we might
escape from them.'

But almost while Madame de Ste. Petronelle spoke there was a cry, and
from a thicket there burst out a band of men in steel headpieces and
buff jerkins, led by two or three horsemen. There was a confused outcry
of 'St. Denys! St. Andrew!' on one side, 'Yield!' on the other. Madame's
rein was seized, and though she drew her dagger, her hand was caught
before she could strike, by a fellow who cried, 'None of that, you old
hag, or it shall be the worse for thee!'

'St. Andrew! St. Andrew!' screamed Eleanor. 'Scots, to the rescue of
your King's sisters!'

'Douglas--Douglas, help!' cried Jean. But each was surrounded by a swarm
of the ruffians; and as George Douglas hastily pushed down some with
his horse, and struck down one or two with his sword, he was felled by a
mighty blow on the head, and the ecorcheurs thronged over him, dragging
him off his horse, any resistance on the part of the Scottish archers,
their escort, they could not tell; they only heard a tumult of shouts
and cries, and found rude hands holding them on their horses and
dragging them among the trees. Their screams for help were answered by
a gruff voice from a horseman, evidently the leader of the troop. 'Hold
that noise, Lady! No ill is meant to you, but you must come with us. No;
screams are useless! There's none to come to you. Stop them, or I must!'

'There is none!' said Madame de Ste. Petronelle's voice in her own
tongue; 'best cease to cry, and not fash the loons more.'

