midst, to make her voice heard on either side, both to the huts of Aias,
son of Telamon, and to the huts of Achilles, for these twain, trusting
in their valour and the might of their hands, had drawn up their trim
ships at the two ends of the line. There stood the goddess and cried
shrilly in a great voice and terrible, and mighty strength she set in
the heart of each of the Achaians, to war and fight unceasingly. And
straightway to them war grew sweeter than to depart in the hollow ships
to their dear native land.

Then each man gave in charge his horses to his charioteer, to hold them
in by the foss, well and orderly, and themselves as heavy men at arms
were hasting about, being harnessed in their gear, and unquenchable the
cry arose into the Dawn. And long before the charioteers were they
arrayed at the foss, but after them a little way came up the drivers.
And among them the son of Kronos aroused an evil din, and from above
rained down dew danked with blood out of the upper air, for that he was
about to send many strong men down to Hades.

But the Trojans on the other side, on the high ground of the plain,
gathered them around great Hector, and noble Polydamus, and Aineias that
as a god was honoured by the people of the Trojans, and the three sons
of Antenor, Polybos, and noble Agenor, and young Akamas like unto the
immortals. And Hector in the foremost rank bare the circle of his
shield. And as from amid the clouds appeareth glittering a baneful star,
and then again sinketh within the shadowy clouds, even so Hector would
now appear among the foremost ranks, and again would be giving command
in the rear, and all in bronze he shone, like the lightning of
aegis-bearing father Zeus.

And even as when reapers over against each other drive their swaths
through a rich man's field of wheat or barley, and thick fall the
handfuls, even so the Trojans and Achaians leaped upon each other,
destroying, and neither side took thought of ruinous flight; and equal
heads had the battle, and they rushed on like wolves. And woful Discord
was glad at the sight, for she alone of the gods was with them in the
war; for the other gods were not beside them, but in peace they sat
within their halls, where the goodly mansion of each was builded in the
folds of Olympus. And they all were blaming the son of Kronos, lord of
the storm-cloud, for that he willed to give glory to the Trojans. But of
them took the father no heed, but aloof from the others he sat apart,
glad in his glory, looking toward the city of the Trojans, and the ships
of the Achaians, and the glitter of bronze, and the slayers and the
slain.

So long as morning was, and the sacred day still waxed, so long did the
shafts of both hosts strike, and the folk fell, but about the hour when
a woodman maketh ready his meal, in the dells of a mountain, when he
hath tired his hands with felling tall trees, and weariness cometh on
his soul, and desire of sweet food taketh his heart, even then the
Danaans by their valour brake the battalions, and called on their
comrades through the lines. And in rushed Agamemnon first of all, where
thickest clashed the battalions, there he set on, and with him all the
well-greaved Achaians. Footmen kept slaying footmen as they were driven
in flight, and horsemen slaying horsemen with the sword, and from
beneath them rose up the dust from the plain, stirred by the thundering
hooves of horses. And the lord Agamemnon, ever slaying, followed after,
calling on the Argives. And as when ruinous fire falleth on dense
woodland, and the whirling wind beareth it everywhere, and the thickets
fall utterly before it, being smitten by the onset of the fire, even so
beneath Agamemnon son of Atreus fell the heads of the Trojans as they
fled; and many strong-necked horses rattled empty cars along the
highways of the battle, lacking their noble charioteers; but they on the
earth were lying, far more dear to the vultures than to their wives. But
Hector did Zeus draw forth from the darts and the dust, from the
man-slaying, and the blood, and the din, and the son of Atreus followed
on, crying eagerly to the Danaans. And past the tomb of ancient Ilos,
son of Dardanos, across the mid plain, past the place of the wild
fig-tree they sped, making for the city, and ever the son of Atreus
followed shouting, and his invincible hands were defiled with gore. But
when they were come to the Skaian gates, and the oak-tree, there then
they halted, and awaited each other. But some were still in full flight
through the mid plain, like kine that a lion hath scattered, coming on
them in the dead of night; all hath he scattered, but to one sheer death
appeareth instantly, and he breaketh her neck first, seizing her with
strong teeth, and thereafter swalloweth greedily the blood and all the
guts; even so lord Agamemnon son of Atreus followed hard on the Trojans,
ever slaying the hindmost man, and they were scattered in flight, and on
face or back many of them fell from their chariots beneath the hands of
Agamemnon, for mightily he raged with the spear. But when he was
nowabout coming below the city, and the steep wall, then did the father
of men and gods sit him down on the crests of many-fountained Ida, from
heaven descending, with the thunderbolt in his hands.

Then sent he forth Iris of the golden wings, to bear his word: "Up and
go, swift Iris, and tell this word unto Hector: So long as he sees
Agamemnon, shepherd of the host, raging among the foremost fighters, and
ruining the ranks of men, so long let him hold back, but bid the rest of
the host war with the foe in strong battle. But when, or smitten with
the spear or wounded with arrow shot, Agamemnon leapeth into his
chariot, then will I give Hector strength to slay till he come even to
the well-timbered ships, and the sun go down, and sacred darkness draw
on."

So swift-footed Iris spake to Hector the words of Zeus and departed, but
Hector with his harness leaped from the chariot to the ground, and,
shaking his sharp spears went through all the host, stirring up his men
to fight, and he roused the dread din of battle. And they wheeled round,
and stood and faced the Achaians, while the Argives on the other side
strengthened their battalions. And battle was made ready, and they stood
over against each other, and Agamemnon first rushed in, being eager to
fight far in front of all.

Tell me now, ye Muses that inhabit mansions in Olympus, who was he that
first encountered Agamemnon, whether of the Trojans themselves, or of
their allies renowned? It was Iphidamas, son of Antenor, great and
mighty, who was nurtured in Thrace rich of soil, the mother of sheep; he
it was that then encountered Agamemnon son of Atreus. And when they were
come near in onset against each other, Atreus' son missed, and his spear
was turned aside, but Iphidamas smote him on the girdle, below the
corslet, and himself pressed on, trusting to his heavy hand, but pierced
not the gleaming girdle, for long ere that the point struck on the
silver, and was bent like lead. Then wide-ruling Agamemnon caught the
spear with his hand and drew it toward him furiously, like a lion, and
snatched it out of the hand of Iphidamas, and smote his neck with the
sword, and unstrung his limbs. So even there he fell, and slept a sleep
of bronze most piteously. Then did Agamemnon son of Atreus strip him,
and went bearing his goodly harness into the throng of the Achaians.

Now when Koon beheld him, Koon Antenor's eldest son, illustrious among
men, strong sorrow came on him, covering his eyes, for his brother's
fall: and he stood on one side with his spear, and unmarked of noble
Agamemnon smote him on the mid-arm, beneath the elbow, and clean through
went the point of the shining spear. Then Agamemnon king of men
shuddered, yet not even so did he cease from battle and war, but rushed
against Koon, grasping his wind-nurtured spear. Verily then Koon seized
right lustily by the foot Iphidamas, his brother, and his father's son,
and called to all the best of his men; but him, as he dragged the dead
through the press, beneath his bossy shield Agamemnon wounded with a
bronze-shod spear, and unstrung his limbs, and drew near and cut off his
head over Iphidamas. There the sons of Antenor, at the hands of
Agamemnon the king, filled up the measure of their fate, and went down
within the house of Hades.

But Agamemnon ranged among the ranks of men, with spear, and sword, and
great stones for throwing, while yet the blood welled warm from his
wound. But when the wound waxed dry, and the blood ceased to flow, then
keen pangs came on the might of the son of Atreus. Then leaped he into
his chariot, and bade his charioteer drive to the hollow ships, for he
was sore vexed at heart. And he called in a piercing voice, and shouted
to the Danaans: "O friends, leaders and counsellors of the Argives, do
ye now ward from the seafaring ships the harsh din of battle, for Zeus
the counsellor suffers me not all day to war with the Trojans."

So spake he, and his charioteer lashed the fair-maned steeds toward the
hollow ships, and they flew onward nothing loth, and their breasts were
covered with foam, and their bellies were stained with dust, as they
bore the wounded king away from the war.

But Hector, when he beheld Agamemnon departed, cried to the Trojans and
Lykians with a loud shout: "Ye Trojans and Lykians, and Dardanians that
war in close fight, be men, my friends, and be mindful of your impetuous
valour. The best man of them hath departed and to me hath Zeus, the son
of Kronos, given great renown. But straightway drive ye the whole-hooved
horses against the mighty Danaans, that ye may be the masters and bear
away the higher glory."

So spake he, and aroused the might and spirit of every man. Himself with
high thoughts he fared among the foremost, and fell upon the fight; like
a roaring blast, that leapeth down and stirreth the violet-coloured
deep. There whom first, whom last did he slay, even Hector, son of
Priam, when Zeus vouchsafed him renown?

Asaios first, and Autonoos, and Opites, and Dolops, son of Klytios, and
Opheltios, and Agelaos, and Aisymnos, and Oros, and Hipponoos steadfast
in the fight; these leaders of the Danaans he slew, and thereafter smote
the multitude, even as when the West Wind driveth the clouds of the
white South Wind, smiting with deep storm, and the wave swelleth huge,
rolling onward, and the spray is scattered on high beneath the rush of
the wandering wind; even so many heads of the host were smitten by
Hector.

There had ruin begun, and deeds remedeless been wrought, and now would
all the Achaians have fled and fallen among the ships, if Odysseus had
not called to Diomedes, son of Tydeus: "Tydeus' son, what ails us that
we forget our impetuous valour? Nay, come hither, friend, and take thy
stand by me, for verily it will be shame if Hector of the glancing helm
take the ships."

And to him strong Diomedes spake in answer: "Verily will I abide and
endure, but short will be all our profit, for Zeus, the cloud-gatherer,
clearly desireth to give victory to the Trojans rather than to us."

He spake, and drave Thymbraios from his chariot to the ground, smiting
him with the spear in the left breast, and Odysseus smote Molion the
godlike squire of that prince. These then they let be, when they had
made them cease from war, and then the twain fared through the crowd
with a din, as when two boars full of valour fall on the hunting hounds;
so rushed they on again, and slew the Trojans, while gladly the Achaians
took breath again in their flight from noble Hector.

But Hector quickly spied them among the ranks, and rushed upon them
shouting, and with him followed the battalions of the Trojans. And
beholding him, Diomedes of the loud war-cry shuddered, and straightway
spake to Odysseus that was hard by: "Lo, on us this ruin, even mighty
Hector, is rolling: let us stand, and await him, and ward off his
onset."

So spake he, and swayed and sent forth his far-shadowing spear, and
smote him nor missed, for he aimed at the head, on the summit of the
crest, and bronze by bronze was turned, nor reached his fair flesh, for
it was stopped by the threefold helm with its socket, that Phoebus
Apollo to Hector gave. But Hector sprang back a wondrous way, and
mingled with the throng, and he rested, fallen on his knee, and leaned
on the ground with his stout hand, and dark night veiled his eyes.

But while Tydeus' son was following after his spear-cast, far through
the foremost fighters, where he saw it sink into the earth, Hector gat
breath again, and leaping back into his chariot drave out into the
throng, and avoided black Fate. Then rushing on with his spear mighty
Diomedes spake to him: "Dog, thou art now again escaped from death; yet
came ill very nigh thee: but now hath Phoebus Apollo saved thee, to whom
thou must surely pray when thou goest amid the clash of spears. Verily I
will slay thee yet when I meet thee hereafter, if any god is helper of
me too. Now will I make after the rest, whomsoever I may seize."

So spake he, and stripped the son of Paeon, spearman renowned. But
Alexandros, the lord of fair-tressed Helen, aimed with his arrows at
Tydeides, shepherd of the host; leaning as he aimed against a pillar on
the barrow, by men fashioned, of Ilos, son of Dardanos, an elder of the
people in time gone by. Now Diomedes was stripping the shining corslet
of strong Agastrophos from about his breast, and the shield from his
shoulders, and his strong helmet, when Paris drew the centre of his bow;
nor vainly did the shaft fly from his hand, for he smote the flat of the
right foot of Diomedes, and the arrow went clean through, and stood
fixed in the earth; and right sweetly laughing Paris leaped up from his
lair, and boasted, and said: "Thou art smitten, nor vainly hath the dart
flown forth; would that I had smitten thee in the nether belly, and
taken thy life away. So should the Trojans have breathed again from
their trouble, they that shudder at thee, as bleating goats at a lion."

But him answered strong Diomedes, no wise dismayed: "Bowman, reviler,
proud in thy bow of horn, thou gaper after girls, verily if thou madest
trial in full harness, man to man, thy bow and showers of shafts would
nothing avail thee, but now thou boastest vainly, for that thou hast
grazed the sole of my foot. I care not, more than if a woman had struck
me or a senseless boy, for feeble is the dart of a craven man and a
worthless. In other wise from my hand, yea, if it do but touch, the
sharp shaft flieth, and straightway layeth low its man, and torn are the
cheeks of his wife, and fatherless his children, and he, reddening the
earth with his blood, doth rot away, more birds than women round him."

So spake he, and Odysseus, spearman renowned, drew near, and stood in
front of him, and Diomedes sat down behind him, and drew the sharp arrow
from his foot, and a sore pang passed through his flesh. Then sprang he
into his car, and bade his charioteer drive back to the hollow ships,
for he was hurt at heart. Then Odysseus, spearman renowned, was left
alone, nor did one of the Argives abide by him, for fear had fallen on
them all. Then in heaviness he spoke to his own great-hearted spirit:
"Ah me, what thing shall befall me! A great evil it is if I flee, in
dread of the throng; yet worse is this, if I be taken all alone, for the
other Danaans bath Kronion scattered in flight. But wherefore doth my
heart thus converse with herself? for I know that they are cowards, who
flee the fight, but whosoever is a hero in war, him it mainly behoves to
stand stubbornly, whether he be smitten, or whether he smite another."

While he pondered thus in heart and spirit, the ranks came on of the
Trojans under shield, and hemmed him in the midst, setting among them
their own bane. And even as when hounds and young men in their bloom
press round a boar, and he cometh forth from his deep lair, whetting his
white tusk between crooked jaws, and round him they rush, and the sound
of the gnashing of tusks ariseth, and straightway they await his
assault, so dread as he is, even so then round Odysseus, dear to Zeus,
rushed the Trojans. And first he wounded noble Deiopites, from above, in
the shoulder, leaping on him with sharp spear, and next he slew Thoon
and Ennomos, and next Chersidamas, being leapt down from his chariot, he
smote with the spear on the navel beneath the bossy shield, and he fell
in the dust and clutched the ground with the hollow of his hand. These
left he, and wounded Charops, son of Hippasos, with the spear, the
brother of high-born Sokos. And to help him came Sokos, a godlike man,
and stood hard by him, and spake saying: "O renowned Odysseus,
insatiable of craft and toil, to-day shalt thou either boast over two
sons of Hippasos, as having slain two such men of might, and stripped
their harness, or smitten by my spear shaft lose thy life."

So spake he, and smote him on the circle of his shield; through the
shining shield passed the strong spear, and through the fair-dight
corslet it was thrust, and tore clean off the flesh of the flanks, but
Pallas Athens did not suffer it to mingle with the bowels of the hero,
and Odysseus knew that the dart had in nowise lighted on a deadly spot,
and drawing backward, he spake unto Sokos "Ah, wretched one, verily
sheer destruction is come upon thee. Surely thou hast made me to cease
from warring among the Trojans, but here to thee I declare that slaying
and black Fate will be upon thee this day, and beneath my spear
overthrown shalt thou give glory to me, and thy soul to Hades of the
noble steeds."

He spake, and the other turned, and started to flee, and in his back as
he turned he fixed the spear, between the shoulders, and drave it
through the breast. Then he fell with a crash, and noble Odysseus
boasted over him: "Ah, Sokos, son of wise-hearted Hippasos the tamer of
horses, the end of death hath come upon and caught thee, nor hast thou
avoided. Ah, wretch, thy father and lady mother shall not close thine
eyes in death, but birds that eat flesh raw shall tear thee, shrouding
thee in the multitude of their wings. But to me, if I die, the noble
Achaians will yet give due burial."

So spake he, and drew the mighty spear of wise-hearted Sokos forth from
his flesh, and from his bossy shield, and his blood flowed forth when
the spear was drawn away, and afflicted his spirit. And the
great-hearted Trojans when they beheld the blood of Odysseus, with
clamour through the throng came all together against him. But he gave
ground, and shouted unto his comrades: thrice he shouted then, as loud
as man's mouth might cry, and thrice did Menelaos dear to Zeus hear his
call, and quickly he spake to Aias that was hard by him: "Aias, of the
seed of Zeus, child of Telamon, lord of the hosts, the shout of Odysseus
of the hardy heart rings round me, like as though the Trojans were
oppressing him alone among them, and had cut him off in the strong
battle. Nay, let us speed into the throng, for better it is to rescue
him. I fear lest he suffer some evil, being alone among the Trojans, so
brave as he is, and lest great sorrow for his loss come upon the
Danaans."

So spake he, and led the way, and the other followed him, a godlike man.
Then found they Odysseus dear to Zeus, and the Trojans beset him like
tawny jackals from the hills round a wounded horned stag, that a man
hath smitten with an arrow from the bow-string, and the stag hath fled
from him by speed of foot, as long as the blood is warm and his limbs
are strong, but when the swift arrow hath overcome him, then do the
ravening jackals rend him in the hills, in a dark wood, and then god
leadeth a murderous lion thither, and the jackals flee before him, but
he rendeth them, so then, round wise-hearted Odysseus of the crafty
counsels, did the Trojans gather, many and mighty, but that hero
thrusting on with the spear held off the pitiless day. Then Aias drew
near, bearing his shield like a tower, and stood thereby, and the
Trojans fled from him, where each man might. Then warlike Menelaos led
Odysseus out of the press, holding him by the hand, till the squire
drave up the horses.

Then Aias leaped on the Trojans, and slew Doyrklos, bastard son of
Priam, and thereafter wounded he Pandokos, and he wounded Lysandros, and
Pyrasos, and Pylartes. And as when a brimming river cometh down upon the
plain, in winter flood from the hills, swollen by the rain of Zeus, and
many dry oaks and many pines it sucketh in, and much soil it casteth
into the sea, even so renowned Aias charged them, pursuing through the
plain, slaying horses and men. Nor wist Hector thereof at all, for he
was fighting on the left of all the battle, by the banks of the river
Skamandros, whereby chiefly fell the heads of men, and an unquenchable
cry arose, around great Nestor and warlike Idomeneus. And Hector with
them was warring, and terrible things did he, with the spear and in
horsemanship, and he ravaged the battalions of the young men. Nor would
the noble Achaians have yet given ground from the path, if Alexandros,
the lord of fair-tressed Helen, had not stayed Machaon shepherd of the
host in his valorous deeds, and smitten him on the right shoulder with a
three-barbed arrow. Therefore were the Achaians, breathing valour, in
great fear, lest men should seize Machaon in the turning of the fight.

Then Idomeneus spake to noble Nestor: "O Nestor, son of Neleus, great
glory of the Achaians, arise, get thee up into thy chariot, and with
thee let Machaon go, and swiftly drive to the ships the whole-hooved
horses. For a leech is worth many other men, to cut out arrows, and
spread soothing medicaments."

So spake he, nor did knightly Nestor of Gerenia disobey him, but
straightway gat up into his chariot, and with him went Machaon, son of
Asklepios the good leech, and he lashed the horses, and willingly flew
they forward to the hollow ships, where they desired to be.

But Kebriones, the charioteer of Hector, beheld the Trojans driven in
flight, and spake to him, and said: "Hector, here do we contend with the
Danaans, at the limit of the wailful war, but, lo, the other Trojans are
driven in flight confusedly, men and horses. And Aias son of Telamon is
driving them; well I know him, for wide is the shield round his
shoulders. Nay, let us too urge thither the horses and chariot, there
where horsemen and footmen thickest in the forefront of evil strife are
slaying each other, and the cry goes up unquenchable."

So spake he, and smote the fair-maned horses with the shrill-sounding
whip, and they felt the lash, and fleetly bore the swift chariot among
the Trojans and Achaians, treading on the dead, and the shields, and
with blood was sprinkled all the axle-tree beneath, and the rims round
the car with the drops from the hooves of the horses, and with drops
from the tires about the wheels. And Hector was eager to enter the press
of men, and to leap in and break through, and evil din of battle he
brought among the Danaans, and brief space rested he from smiting with
the spear. Nay, but he ranged among the ranks of other men, with spear,
and sword, and with great stones, but he avoided the battle of Aias son
of Telamon.

Now father Zeus, throned in the highest, roused dread in Aias, and he
stood in amaze, and cast behind him his sevenfold shield of bull's hide,
and gazed round in fear upon the throng, like a wild beast, turning this
way and that, and slowly retreating step by step. And as when hounds and
country folk drive a tawny lion from the mid-fold of the kine, and
suffer him not to carry away the fattest of the herd; all night they
watch, and he in great desire for the flesh maketh his onset, but takes
nothing thereby, for thick the darts fly from strong hands against him,
and the burning brands, and these he dreads for all his fury, and in the
dawn he departeth with vexed heart; even so at that time departed Aias,
vexed at heart, from among the Trojans, right unwillingly, for he feared
sore for the ships of the Achaians. And as when a lazy ass going past a
field hath the better of the boys with him, an ass that hath had many a
cudgel broken about his sides, and he fareth into the deep crop, and
wasteth it, while the boys smite him with cudgels, and feeble is the
force of them, but yet with might and main they drive him forth, when he
hath had his fill of fodder, even so did the high-hearted Trojans and
allies, called from many lands, smite great Aias, son of Telamon, with
darts on the centre of his shield, and ever followed after him. And Aias
would now be mindful of his impetuous valour, and turn again, and hold
at bay the battalions of the horse-taming Trojans, and once more he
would turn him again to flee. Yet he hindered them all from making their
way to the fleet ships, and himself stood and smote between the Trojans
and the Achaians, and the spears from strong hands stuck some of them in
his great shield, fain to win further, and many or ever they reached his
white body stood fast halfway in the earth, right eager to sate
themselves with his flesh.

So they fought like unto burning fire.

But the mares of Neleus all sweating bare Nestor out of the battle, and
also carried they Machaon, shepherd of the host. Then the noble
Achilles, swift of foot, beheld and was ware of him, for Achilles was
standing by the stern of his great ship, watching the dire toil, and the
woful rout of battle. And straightway he spake to his own comrade,
Patroklos, calling to him from beside the ship, and he heard, and from
the hut he came, like unto Ares; and this to him was the beginning of
evil. Then the strong son of Menoitios spake first to Achilles: "Why
