"We are not on the high seas, and the Teaser has not yet gone into
commission. It was only this afternoon in Pensacola that Captain Folkner
told his ship's company that he was going to burrow through the sand in
Santa Rosa Sound. We all said we would not go with him; but a dozen of
us came down with him when he told us that he had a way to float the
steamer through, and he was sure it would work. We did not understand
that we were to become mud-diggers. When we got here, we were satisfied
that his plan amounted to nothing, and would not work."

"I am satisfied that it will work," interposed Captain Folkner.

"The agreement in the articles was to run the blockade. If we got
through the sound, it would take a week of constant drudgery, which
we did not ship to do."

"Are you ready to do duty on board of the Teaser when she is in deep
water, Lonley?" asked Christy.

"Every one of us; and every one of the party on shore!" protested the
leader.

"Will that satisfy you, Captain Folkner?" continued Christy, appealing
to him.

"It would if I had the steamer in deep water," replied the captain. "But
how am I to get her into deep water if my crew will not work?"

"Run the blockade, according to the articles!" exclaimed Lonley.

"When are the rest of the ship's company to join you?" asked Christy of
the leader of the mutineers.

"They are coming down in boats at midnight or later; and we shall join
them then and wait till the ship is ready to take us on board. They will
come across from Pensacola to Navy Cove, and then walk till they come to
the Teaser."

"All right," said the lieutenant. "I will land you at Navy Cove, and you
can wait there till the rest of the crew come."

"I am perfectly satisfied with that arrangement," replied Lonley.

"But I am not," interposed the captain, angrily. "What can I do without
any crew to help get the steamer through the sound?"

"I have men enough to take care of you and the Teaser, Captain Folkner;
and the men in the boat will do everything that is required to be done
on board of the Teaser."

"That's another thing," replied the captain, appeased by the implied
promise.

"I can hardly blame your men because they are not willing to go through
the sound with a steamer drawing ten feet of water when there is not
more than six feet of water to float her," said Christy. "Besides, if
you do not get to the other end of the sound before morning, you will
be seen by some of the blockaders, and they could blow this steamer to
pieces, and kill half your people in a few minutes."

"It may be dangerous, but so is running the blockade," added the
captain.

"Going out in a dark night and spending a week in sight of the
blockaders are two different things. But we need not discuss the matter
any more. I will put your men on the point yonder, and then I will
return and help you out of your present difficulty. Am I to take off the
men in the engine department?" asked Christy, as he went to the side
where the boat was.

"No; the engineers and firemen are all right, for they were not called
upon to do any work out of the vessel."

Christy and Flint stepped into the boat, and the crew followed them.
There were twelve of them, and the lieutenant thought they were all good
seamen. He did not like to have them reserved for use in the Confederate
Navy; but he could not help himself then, and he soon landed the party
on the point. The situation had been explained to the crew of the boat,
and they had avoided saying anything to commit themselves.

Though it involved a risk to do it, Christy had dressed in an ordinary
suit of clothes for the occasion, and the party wore nothing by which
they could be identified as sailors of the navy. As soon as the boat had
landed its passengers, it returned to the Teaser at the best speed the
crew could produce.

"I had no idea that you had a plan like this in your head, Mr.
Passford," said Flint, as soon as the boat was clear of Town Point.

"I did not know it myself, Flint. It has all grown out of the
circumstances as we found them," replied Christy. "But I did intend, if
I found the Teaser without a fighting crew on board of her, to capture
her if the situation warranted such a step."

"But you came prepared for just this thing," suggested Flint.

"I came prepared for anything. I hoped we might be able to capture the
Teaser, but I did not expect it."

"I suppose you expect to do it now."

"Yes, I do; and I ought to be broken if I don't do it. I am sorry to let
all those men enter the rebel navy; and that is all that vexes me at the
present moment."

"Perhaps they can be picked up to-morrow, or later to-night," suggested
Flint. "From what I heard, I think she was to have a fighting crew of
about forty men. Of course they will try to join the steamer to-night
or to-morrow; and why not let them do it?" chuckled Flint.

"We will attend to this affair first, but I like the idea."

They reached the Teaser in due time, and all hands went on board of her.
Captain Folkner, with a couple of men he had contrived to retain, with
two firemen, was at work on his apparatus to float a vessel drawing ten
feet in six feet of water or less. Alongside he had a hundred or more of
empty barrels which he was sinking under the sides by hauling them down
with a line under the bottom of the vessel. He did the work partly with
his windlass worked by steam, and he had lifted the bow of the Teaser at
least three feet out of water.

Captain Folkner expatiated with enthusiasm on his plan, and explained
the details to the lieutenant. Christy saw that he had considerable
mechanical genius, but he certainly lacked a balance-wheel. The officer
had set him down as a timid man, but this conversation assured him that
the captain was a brave man. He was carried away with his idea, though
it was plain that he had not examined the question in all its bearings.

"When I have lifted the steamer four feet, she can go through the sound,
for I have taken a boat through that drew six feet. With your men to
help me, I shall get the casks down by midnight, and then all we have
to do is to go ahead," continued the enthusiast.

"Precisely so; and the Teaser is a screw steamer," added Christy.

"Of course she is; you have known her for two months, Gilder."

"When she has been lifted up four feet, she is to go ahead," repeated
Christy, in the tone of a musing man.

"That is what I said; she is to go ahead."

"But what is to drive her ahead? Is she expected to go of herself?"

"Go of herself? Of course not. She is to be driven ahead by her engine
as she always is," replied Captain Folkner, suspending the work upon
which he was engaged, and trying to see the face of the pilot through
the darkness. "How do steamers generally go ahead?"

"If they are screw steamers, they are propelled by the pressure of the
blades of the screw," answered Christy.

"And that is just the way the Teaser will be propelled through the
sound," replied Captain Folkner. "This steamer is to be a privateer, and
I own her. She has cost me about all the money I have in the world, and
I don't want to lose her before I get to sea. If I can get into blue
water with her, I am not at all concerned but that she will run away
from anything afloat."

"How many knots can she do in a smooth sea?"

"Eighteen, and perhaps more."

"Then she is not fast enough for that blockader outside. I saw her
at Mobile when she was a big steam-yacht, and they said she had done
twenty-two knots more than once."

"I don't believe a word of it; and I am willing to take my chances to
run away from her in the Teaser, if I can get out."

"If she is good for eighteen knots, it will not take her more than about
two hours to run through the sound," added Christy, very much amused at
the talk of the captain and owner.

"I don't expect her to go at full speed in that shallow water," said the
enthusiast.

"Do you expect her to go at all when she is hoisted four feet out of
water?" asked Christy, hardly able to keep from laughing.

Captain Folkner was silent for a moment, during which Christy thought
he must have obtained a new idea, for it looked as though he had not
thought of the working of the screw after all his flotation schemes had
been successful.

"I reckon the propeller will have hold enough on the water to make her
go right along, Gilder. I don't reckon you need make any trouble about
that," added the man of mechanical ability, rather sheepishly.

Christy had brought his boat's crew on deck, and directed Flint how to
post them. He thought he had paid proper respect to the talent of the
enthusiast in listening to his theory, and that it was about time to
bring the adventure to an issue.

"I shall not make any trouble about the screw, Captain Folkner, for I
don't think we shall have any difficulty about it. But I believe we had
better not hoist it any higher out of water," added Christy. "I mean
that I think we had better go out of the bay by the main channel."

  [Illustration:
  "He placed one of his men on each side of the Captain."--Page 233.]

"That means to run the blockade?" said the captain.

"That's the idea."

"Gilder, I want you to understand that I command this steamer,"
continued Captain Folkner, angrily.

"Right, with a little correction: You did command her, and I command her
now," replied Christy, as he placed one of his men on each side of the
captain.




CHAPTER XXI

ON A DARK AND FOGGY NIGHT


"I reckon I don't quite understand you, Gilder," said Captain Folkner,
very nervously. "I thought I was still in command of the Teaser."

"I shall not blame you for thinking so; but you are utterly mistaken all
the same," added Christy.

"Did you come here to take the command out of my hands? Is that the
reason why you sent all my men to Town Point?" demanded the captain,
getting an idea of the situation.

"If you had been a magician, you could not have come any nearer to the
truth."

"Who are you? I thought you were Gilder."

"I am not Gilder, though I found it convenient to answer to that name.
It is reported that the Teaser is a very fast steamer, and I wanted
her."

"Do you mean to say that you are a pirate?" asked Captain Folkner,
stepping back as if to emphasize his disgust at such a person. "I have
told you that the Teaser is a privateer, and it seems that you want her
more than I do; but I don't believe it."

"Privateers and pirates are about the same in this age of the world.
I am neither a pirate nor a privateer. Permit me to introduce myself
more precisely than I have thought it wise to do before. I am Lieutenant
Passford, of the United States steamer Bellevite; and I take possession
of the Teaser as a lawful prize. I think we need not discuss the matter
any longer, especially as the tide is high enough by this time to run
out of the bay. Disarm him."

"Say, what sort of a joke is this?" demanded the captain.

"If you are good-natured enough to regard it as a joke, I have not the
least objection," replied Christy. "But I shall be under the painful
necessity of confining you in your stateroom for the present, and I hope
you will make yourself as happy as possible, Captain Folkner."

The lieutenant directed Flint to have the prisoner conveyed to his
stateroom, and to have a man stationed at the door to see that he did
not escape, or do any mischief. The sentinel was to keep his eye on him
all the time, and not allow the room to be closed for a moment. The most
reliable man of the party was selected for this duty, for the captain,
in a fit of desperation over the loss of his vessel, which was his
fortune, might attempt some reckless act.

Accompanied by six men, Christy visited the engine-room, where nearly
all the hands remaining on board were employed. If there was to be
any trouble at all in completing the capture, it would be in this
department. Everything was in working order, and an engineer was on
duty, for the engine had been used in dragging the casks under the
bottom of the vessel.

Beeks was directed to arrest the men on duty, and the engine was handed
over to Sampson, who had been brought for such a position if the
expedition needed him in that capacity. But there was only an assistant
engineer and several firemen on duty, and these were disposed of without
any delay. They were all conducted to the wardroom, where they were
disarmed and a guard placed over them. A couple of sailors were detailed
to serve as firemen, and the work of taking possession was completed.

For the first time the lieutenant had an opportunity to examine the
prize, as she would be if he succeeded in getting her out of the bay.
She was certainly a fine little steamer, and, with the heavy gun mounted
on a pivot, she would have been capable of doing a great deal of
mischief among the unprotected merchant ships of the nation.

When he visited the cabin, he found two colored men there, one of whom
appeared to be a very intelligent fellow. He was very polite to the
lieutenant, and it was evident that he had no personal interest in the
success of the Teaser in the business for which she had been fitted out.
He was the cabin steward, and he had heard everything that had been said
in regard to the vessel since he came on board of her.

"What is your name, my man?" asked Christy, addressing the steward.

"My name is Davis Talbot; but no one ever calls me anything but Dave,"
replied the man, with a cheerful smile, as though he was not at all
disconcerted by the change which had come about in the ownership of the
Teaser.

"How long have you been on board of this steamer, Dave?" asked the
officer, much pleased with the intelligent face of the steward.

"About two months, sir."

"Where did this steamer come from?"

"Captain Folkner bought her somewhere in the West Indies, and brought
her here before the blockade was fairly established."

"Then she is an English-built steamer?"

"I suppose she is, sir; but I don't know anything about it."

"Then she has been here a long while. What has Captain Folkner been
doing all this time?" asked Christy curiously.

"Inventing, sir," replied Dave, chuckling.

"I see; he has that on the brain."

"The government threatened to take his vessel if he did not fit her out
and take her to sea. Then he hurried up, and got a crew ready; but they
had a quarrel last night, and most of the men would not come on board."

"Yes; I know all about that," added Christy, as he looked at his watch
by the light of the shaded lamp in the cabin. "I suppose you insist upon
serving the Confederacy, Dave?"

"I don't insist on anything, sir; I go where the ship takes me, and I
don't mean to quarrel with anybody."

"In other words, will it be necessary to put you under guard?" asked
Christy.

"I don't think it would do me any good, sir," replied Dave, laughing.

"Which side do you belong on?" demanded the officer, rather impatiently.

"I belong on Dave's side, sir."

"Which is Dave's side?"

"The side of freedom," replied the steward, with some embarrassment.
"I don't know you, sir; you don't wear the uniform of a Yankee or a
rebel, and the darkey gets crushed between the upper and the nether
millstone."

"Then to make the matter plainer to you, I am the third lieutenant of
the United States steamer Bellevite, and I have captured this vessel as
an officer of the United States Navy," replied Christy.

"That's all I want to know: the darkey knows where to go, when it is
safe to go there," replied Dave.

"Then if it is safe for you to go to the pilot-house, you may come with
me," added the lieutenant, as he led the way to the deck.

Beeks, with the men who had not been assigned to other duty, was cutting
away the ropes that held the casks in place, and had already turned
adrift all the raft of them alongside. All the rubbish the nautical
inventor had collected to carry out his famous scheme of floating the
vessel through the sound was cleared from the deck, and cut loose from
the side.

"I think everything is clear, sir," reported Beeks, as Christy appeared
on deck with Dave.

"Stand by to get up the anchor, then," added the lieutenant.

"No anchor down, sir," interposed Dave. "She is made fast to the buoy."

"So much the better. I suppose Captain Folkner did not trouble himself
about the forts, Dave, did he?" Christy inquired.

"Yes, sir, he did; Captain Folkner never slept a wink when he did not
have Fort Pickens on his stomach for a nightmare," replied Dave, with
a chuckle.

"But Fort Pickens is all of four miles from the entrance to the channel
of the sound."

"He was in mortal terror of the guns, all the same."

"How was it in regard to Fort Barrancas and Fort McRae?"

"Of course they would not fire on his vessel; if he went out in a fog
or dark night, he was to burn a blue light; and I reckon you can do the
same thing, though I don't believe it could be seen to-night from the
forts," replied Dave, who appeared to be willing to make a good use of
his knowledge.

"Then I don't think we shall have much trouble in getting out of the
bay," added Christy, as he went to the pilot-house, attended by Dave.

Since the lieutenant had declared as unequivocally as he desired who and
what he was, the steward did all he could to assist his new master. He
had served Captain Folkner for two months, for he said the commander had
lived on board all this time, and he had heard everything that passed
between him and his officers and others with whom he had relations.
He was about as well informed as though he had been an officer of the
vessel in whom the captain confided all his affairs. He did not wait to
