the Ghoorkhas, and a company of the 2nd Punjab Infantry and some
Ghoorkhas, found himself in a most serious position. The guns had
limbered up and pushed on, and the rear guard remained, surrounded
by the enemy, hampered with its wounded, and stranded with doolies.
As the native bearers had fled these doolies were, in many cases,
being carried by the native officers.

The enemy grew more and more daring, and a few yards, only, divided
the combatants. Captain Uniacke, retiring with a few of the
Gordons, saw that there was only one course left: they must
entrench for the night. He was in advance of the actual rear guard,
attempting to hold a house against the fire of quite a hundred
tribesmen.

Collecting four men of his regiment, and shouting wildly, he rushed
at the doorway. In the dusk the enemy were uncertain of the number
of their assailants and, in their horror of the bayonet, they fired
one wild volley and fled. To continue the ruse, Captain Uniacke
climbed to the roof, shouting words of command, as if he had a
company behind him. Then he blew his whistle, to attract the rear
guard as it passed, in the dark.

The whistle was heard and, in little groups, they fell back with
the wounded to the house. It was a poor place, but capable of
defence; and the Pathans drew off, knowing that there was loot in
abundance to be gained down by the river.

As night wore on the greatest anxiety prevailed, when transport
officers and small parties straggled in, and reported that
tribesmen were looting and cutting up followers, within a mile of
camp; and that they had no news to give of the men who composed the
rear guard. So anxious were the headquarter staff that a company of
the Borderers were sent out, to do what they could.

Lieutenant Macalister took them out and, going a mile up the river,
was able to collect many followers and baggage animals, but could
find no signs of the rear guard. Early in the morning a company of
the 2nd Punjab Infantry went out, as a search party, and got into
communication with the rear guard. They were safe in the house; but
could not move, as they were hampered with the wounded, and were
surrounded by the enemy. Two regiments and a mountain battery
therefore went out and rescued them from their awkward predicament,
bringing them into camp, with as much baggage as could be found.

The casualties of the day amounted to a hundred and fifty animals,
and a hundred followers killed. Of the combatants two officers were
wounded, and fourteen Gordons were wounded, and four killed.

Owing to the necessity of sending out part of the 4th Brigade, to
support the cut-off rear of the 3rd Brigade, it was impossible to
continue the march that day. Next morning, the order of the brigade
was changed. The 23rd was to lead, handing over a battery of
artillery to the 4th, for service in the rear guard. It was also
ordered that flanking parties were to remain in position, until the
baggage had passed. The advance guard consisted of the 2nd Punjab
Infantry, and the 1st and 2nd Ghoorkhas. The others were told off
to burn and destroy all villages on either side of the nullah. The
baggage of the whole division followed the main guard.

Directly the camp was left, the sides of the nullah enlarged and,
for half a mile, the road lay through a narrow ravine. The drop was
rapid; for the river, swollen by the fallen snow, had become
literally a torrent; and the scene with the baggage was one of
extreme confusion. The recent disaster had given a frenzied impulse
to the generally calm followers, and all felt anxiety to press
forward, with an impetus almost impossible to control. The mass of
baggage became mixed in the ravine, but at last was cleared off
and, when the valley opened, they moved forward at their greatest
speed, but now under perfect control.

After this the opposition became less, and the village of Gulikhel
was reached by the 3rd Brigade. The village stands on the left bank
of the Bara. Immediately below it a nullah becomes a narrow gorge,
almost impassable in the present state of the river. It is several
miles long. There was, however, a road over a neighbouring saddle.
The path up from the river was narrow, but sufficient to allow two
loaded mules to pass abreast. It wound for some seven miles, over a
low hill, until the river bed was again reached.

The next ford was Barkhe. The advance guard was well up in the
hills by midday, when it met the Oxfordshire Regiment, which had
come out seven miles to meet the force; but the baggage of a
division, filing out of the river bed in pairs, is a serious
matter, and there was necessarily a block in the rear.

General Westmacott moved as soon as the baggage was off but, long
before it was through the first defile, his pickets were engaged,
and a general action followed. The enemy, fighting with
extraordinary boldness, kept within a few yards of the pickets.
Followers with baggage animals were constantly hit, as they came up
but, at half-past ten, the rear guard regiments marched out of
camp, under cover of artillery fire.

The fighting was so severe that, within an hour, the ammunition of
the 3rd Ghoorkhas was expended and, shortly afterwards, the two
regiments of the rear guard were forced to call up their first
reserve ammunition mules. The march was continued at a rapid pace,
until they reached the block caused by the narrowness of the path.
Here the whole river reach became choked with animals and doolies.
The wounded were coming in fast, when the Pathans, taking advantage
of the block, attacked in great force, hoping to compel the
retreating force to make their way down the long river defile.

General Westmacott, however, defended his right with energy; the
rear-guard regiments supporting each other, while the batteries
were in continual action. The Borderers, Sikhs, and Ghoorkhas stood
well to their task, till the last of the baggage animals were got
out of the river bed.

The country now had become a rolling plateau, intersected by
ravines and thickly covered with low jungle, in which the enemy
could creep up to within three or four yards of the fighting line.
Progress was, consequently, very slow. To be benighted in such a
country would have meant disaster, so General Westmacott selected a
ridge, which he determined to hold for the night. The wearied men
were just filing up, when a tremendous rush was made by the
Afridis. For a moment, it seemed as if they would all be enveloped
and swept away; but the officers threw themselves into the ranks,
magazines were worked freely, and the very bushes seemed to melt
away before the hail of shot. The tribesmen were swept back in the
darkness, and they never tried a second rush. Their firing also
slackened very much, and this permitted the men to form a camp, and
see to the wounded.

That day the rear guard lost one officer killed and three wounded,
eighteen men killed, eighty-three wounded, and six missing. The
night in camp was a terrible experience. The troops had been
fighting since early morning, the frost was bitter, and they had
neither water, food, nor blankets. General Westmacott passed the
night with the sentry line.

Early in the morning the action recommenced and, stubbornly
contesting each foot, at times almost in hand-to-hand conflict with
tribesmen in the bushes, the rear guard fell back. The summit of
the Kotal was passed; but the enemy continued to harass their
retirement down to the river, where the picket post of the 9th
Ghoorkhas was reached. The retirement from the Tirah had cost a
hundred and sixty-four killed and wounded. As a military
achievement, this march of Lockhart's 2nd Division should have a
prominent place in the history of the British army.

After a quiet day, the force marched into Swaikot. Next morning the
troops in camp there gathered on each side of the road, cheering
their battle-grimed comrades, and bringing down hot cakes to them.
It was a depressing sight. The men were all pinched and
dishevelled, and bore on their faces marks of the terrible ordeal
through which they had just passed.

The advance guard were followed by the wounded. The 4th Brigade
followed. They were even more marked by hardship and strife than
those who had preceded them. Then the rear guard marched in, and
the first phase of the Tirah expedition was at an end.

The expedition had carried out its object successfully. The Afridis
had been severely punished, and had been taught what they had
hitherto believed impossible, that their defiles were not
impregnable, and that the long arm of the British Government could
reach them in their recesses. The lesson had been a very severe
one, but it had been attained at a terrible cost. It is to be hoped
that it will never have to be repeated.

But while the regiment were resting quietly in their cantonment,
there had been serious fighting on the road to Chitral. After some
hesitation, the government had decided that this post should remain
in our hands, and a strong force was therefore stationed at the
Malakand. This, after clearing the country, remained quietly at the
station; until news was received of the attack on our fort at
Shabkadr, near Peshawar, by the Mohmunds and, two days later, news
came that a large council had been held by the fanatics of various
tribes, at which they decided to join the tribes in the Upper
Valley of Swat.

On the 14th of August the force set out from Thana, under Sir
Bindon Blood, on their march for the Upper Swat. The 11th Bengal
Lancers were sent forward in order to reconnoitre the country. The
enemy were found in force near Jelala, at the entrance to the Upper
Swat river, their advance post being established in some Buddhist
ruins on a ridge. The Royal West Kent, however, advanced and drove
them off.

Then news came that several thousand of the enemy occupied a front,
of some two miles, along the height; their right flank resting on
the steep cliffs, and their left reaching to the top of the higher
hills. The battery opened fire upon them; and the infantry, coming
into action at nine o'clock in the morning, did much execution
among the crowded Ghazis.

The 31st and 24th Punjab Infantry, under General Meiklejohn, had a
long and arduous march on the enemy's left. The movement was
successfully carried out; and the enemy, knowing that their line of
retreat towards the Morah Pass was threatened, broke up, a large
portion streaming away to their left. The remainder soon lost heart
and, although a desperate charge by a handful of Ghazis took place,
these only sacrificed their lives, without altering the course of
events.

The enemy gathered on a ridge in the rear but, by eleven, the
heights commanding the road were in the hands of our troops, and
the Guides cavalry began to file past. When they got into the pass
behind the ridge, the enemy were more than a mile away; and could
be seen in great numbers, separated by several ravines.

Captain Palmer, who had pushed forward in pursuit, soon found
himself ahead of his men. Near him were Lieutenant Greaves and,
thirty yards behind, Colonel Adams and Lieutenant Norman. Seeing
that the enemy were in considerable force, Colonel Adams directed
the troop of cavalry who were coming up to hold a graveyard,
through which they had passed, until the infantry could arrive.
Owing, however, to the noise of the firing, Palmer and Greaves did
not hear him; and charged up to the foot of the hill, hoping to cut
off the tribesmen who were hurrying towards them. Palmer's horse
was at once killed, and Greaves fell among the Pathans.

Adams and Fincastle, and two soldiers, galloped forward to their
assistance, and were able to help Palmer back to the shelter of the
graveyard. Meanwhile Fincastle, who had had his horse killed, tried
to help Greaves on to Adams' horse. While doing so, Greaves was
again shot through the body, and Adams' horse wounded. The two
troopers came to their assistance; and Maclean, having first
dismounted his squadron in the graveyard, pluckily rode out with
four of his men. In this way the wounded were successfully brought
in; but Maclean was shot through both thighs, and died almost
instantly. The loss of the two officers, who were both extremely
popular, was greatly felt by the force.

The infantry and guns now having arrived, the enemy retired to a
village, two miles in the rear. Here they were attacked by a
squadron of the Guides, who dispersed them and drove them up into
the hills. In the meantime our camp had been attacked, but the
guard repulsed the assailants, with some loss.

The enemy had lost so heavily that they scattered to the villages,
and sent in to make their submission. This fight effectually cooled
the courage of the natives, and the column marched through their
country unopposed, and the tribesmen remained comparatively quiet
during the after events.



Chapter 12: A Tribal Fight.


Two days after Lisle's return he was sent for by General Lockhart,
who requested him to give him a full account of his capture and
escape.

"This is the second time, Mr. Bullen, that your conduct has been
brought before me. Your defence of that hut, when you were unable
to make your retirement to the camp, with a handful of men, was a
singularly gallant affair. I lost one of my aides-de-camp in the
last fight, and I am pleased to offer you the vacancy. You may take
possession of his horse until we return; when it will, of course,
be sold. I shall be glad to have a young officer of so much courage
and resource on my staff."

"Thank you, sir! I am extremely obliged to you for the offer, which
I gladly accept; and feel it a very high honour, indeed, to be
attached to your staff."

"Very well, Mr. Bullen, I will put you in orders, tomorrow
morning."

On his return to the regiment, Lisle was warmly congratulated when
they heard the honour that had been bestowed on him; but there were
many expressions of regret at his leaving them.

"It will not be for long," he said, "for I suppose that, in another
fortnight, we shall be across the frontier. If it had been at the
beginning of the campaign, I should certainly have refused to
accept the general's offer; for I should much rather have remained
with the regiment. As it was, however, I could hardly refuse."

"Certainly not," said one. "It is always a pull having been on the
staff, even for a short time. The staff always get their names in
orders, and that gives a fellow much better chances in the future.
Besides, in a campaign like this, where the division gets often
broken up, there is plenty of work to do.

"Well, I hope you will soon be back with us again."

Next morning Lisle took up his new duties, and was soon fully
occupied in carrying messages from and to headquarters. One day he
received orders to accompany one of the senior members of the
staff, to reconnoitre a pass two miles from camp. It was a level
ride to the mouth of the gorge. They had scarcely entered it when,
from behind a rock a hundred yards away, a heavy volley was fired.
The colonel's horse was shot dead and he, himself, was shot through
the leg. Lisle was unwounded, and leapt from his horse.

"Ride for your life, Bullen!" the colonel said. "I am shot through
the leg."

Illustration: 'My horse must carry two, sir,' Lisle replied.

"My horse must carry two, sir," Lisle replied, lifting the officer,
who was not wholly disabled, and placing him in the saddle.

"Jump up!" the officer said.

But the tribesmen were now within twenty yards, and Lisle drew his
sword and gave the animal a sharp prick. It was already frightened
with the shouting of the tribesmen, and went off like an arrow.
Lisle, seeing that resistance was absolutely useless, threw down
his sword; and stood with his arms folded, facing the natives. An
order was shouted by a man who was evidently their leader and,
pausing, those who were armed with breech loaders fired after the
flying horseman; totally disregarding Lisle, who had the
satisfaction of finding that his sacrifice had been effectual, for
the horse pursued its way without faltering.

When it was out of range, the chief turned to Lisle. The Afridis
value courage above all things, and were filled with admiration at
the manner in which this young officer sacrificed himself for his
superior. He signalled to Lisle to accompany him and, surrounded by
the tribesmen, he was taken back to the rock from which they had
first fired. Then, guarded by four armed men, he was conducted to a
little village standing high among the hills.

"This is just my luck," he said to himself, when he was taken to a
room in the principal house. "Here I am a prisoner again, just as
the troops are going to march away. It is awfully bad luck. Still,
if I ever do get back, I suppose the fact that I have saved Colonel
Houghton's life will count for something in my favour. It was
unlucky that there was not time for me to jump up behind him, but
my horse was in bad condition, and we should have been a good deal
longer under fire.

"However, I ought not to grumble at my luck. I believe I am the
only officer who has been taken prisoner and, as it looks as if I
am to be kept as a hostage, my life would seem to be safe. I
certainly expected nothing but instant death when they rushed down
upon me. I have no doubt that, by this time, a messenger has
reached camp saying that they have got me; and that, if there is
any farther advance, they will put me to death. As I know that the
general did not intend to go any farther, and that every day is of
importance in getting the troops down before winter sets in in
earnest, I have no doubt that he will send back a message saying
that, if any harm comes to me, they will, in the spring, return and
destroy every house belonging to the tribe.

"I think I may consider myself safe, and shall find plenty of
employment in learning their language, which may be useful to me at
some time or other. I expect that, as soon as we leave, the people
here will go down into one of their valleys. The cold up here must
be getting frightful and, as there is not a tree anywhere near,
they would not be able even to keep up fires.

"As to escape, I fear that will be impossible. The passes will all
be closed by snow, and I have no doubt that, until they are sure of
that, they will keep a sharp lookout after me."

Later in the day the tribesmen returned. The chief came into the
room and, by means of signs and the few words that Lisle had picked
up, when he was before a prisoner, he signified to him that if he
attempted to make his escape he would at once be killed; but
otherwise he would be well treated. For four or five days a
vigilant watch was kept over him. Then it was relaxed, and he felt
sure that the army had marched away.

Then preparations for a move began. Lisle volunteered to assist,
and aided to pack up the scanty belongings, and filled bags with
corn. The chief was evidently pleased with his willingness and,
several times, gave him a friendly nod. At last all was in
readiness; and the occupants of the village, together with their
animals--all heavily laden, even the women carrying heavy
burdens--started on their way. It was five days' journey, and they
halted at last at a small village--which was evidently private
property--down in the plains at the foot of the mountains and, as
Lisle judged, at no very great distance from the frontier line.

Lisle now mixed a good deal with the natives, and thus he began to
pick up a good many words of their language. Now that they were
down on the plains, two men with rifles were always on guard over
him, but he was allowed to move freely about, as he liked.

A fortnight after they were established in their new quarters
another party of natives arrived, and there was a long and angry
talk. As far as Lisle could understand, these were the permanent
occupants of that portion of the plain, and had been accustomed to
receive a small tribute from the hill people who came down to them.
It seemed that, on the present occasion, they demanded a largely
increased sum in cattle and sheep; on the ground that so many of
the hill tribesmen had come down that their land was eaten up by
them. The amount now demanded was larger than the hill people could
pay. They, therefore, flatly rejected the terms offered them; and
the newcomers retired, with threats of exterminating them.

For the next few days, the tribesmen were busy in putting the
village in a state of defence. A deep ditch was dug round it, and
this was surmounted by an abattis of bushes. Fresh loopholes were
pierced in the tower, and stones were gathered in the upper story,
in readiness to throw down on any assailants.

As soon as the work was begun, Lisle signified to the chief that he
was ready to take part in it, and to aid in the defence. The chief
was pleased with his offer, and gladly accepted it. Lisle worked
hard among them. He needed to give them no advice. Accustomed to
tribal war, the men were perfectly competent to carry out the work.
There were but three towers capable of defence, and in these the
whole of the villagers were now gathered. Men and women alike
worked at the defences. Their sheep and cattle were driven into the
exterior line, and were only allowed to go out to graze under a
strong guard.

A fortnight passed before there were any signs of the enemy, and
then a dark mass was seen approaching. The cattle were hastily
driven in, and the men gathered behind the hedge. Lisle asked the
chief for a rifle, but the latter shook his head.

"We have not enough for ourselves," he said. "Here is a pistol we
took from you, and a sword. You must do the best you can with them.
It is probable that, before the fight goes on long, there will be
rifles without masters, and you will be able to find one. Are you a
good shot?"

"Yes, a very good one."

"Very well, the first that becomes free you shall have."

The assailants halted five hundred yards from the village. Then one
rode forward. When he came within a hundred yards he halted, and
shouted:

"Are you ready to pay the tribute fixed upon?"

"We are not," the chief said. "If you took all we have it would not
be sufficient and, without our animals, we should starve when we
got back to the hills; but I will pay twice the amount previously
demanded."

"Then we will come and take them all," the messenger said.

"Come and take them," the chief shouted, and the messenger retired
to the main body; who at once broke up, when they learned the
answer, and proceeded to surround the village.

"Do you think," the chief said to Lisle, "that you could hit that
man who is directing them?"

"I don't know the exact distance," Lisle said, "but I think that,
if I had two or three shots, I could certainly knock him over."

"Give me your rifle," the chief said, to one of the tribesmen
standing near him.

"Now, sahib, let us see what you can do."

Lisle took the rifle, and examined it to see that it was all right;
and then, leaning down on a small rise of ground that permitted him
to see over the hedge, he took steady aim and fired. The man he
aimed at fell, at once.

"Well done, indeed!" the chief exclaimed, "you are a good shot. I
will lend you my rifle. It is one of the best; but I only got it a
