lungs, which smarted painfully at the touch of the undiluted gas, and he
felt that he could not long retain consciousness under such conditions.
Nevertheless, he summoned all his strength and advanced the lever one
more notch. He stared at the clock-face above his head, knowing that if
DuQuesne could advance his lever again he would lose consciousness and
be beaten. Minute after minute went by, however, and the acceleration of
the ship remained constant. Seaton, knowing that he was in sole control
of the power-plant, fought to retain possession of his faculties, while
the hands of the clock told off the interminable minutes.

After an eternity of time an hour had passed, and Seaton attempted to
cut down his power, only to find with horror that the long strain had so
weakened him that he could not reverse the ratchet. He was still able,
however, to give the lever the backward jerk which disconnected the
wires completely--and the safety straps creaked with the sudden stress
as, half the power instantly shut off, the suddenly released springs
tried to hurl five bodies against the ceiling. After a few minutes
DuQuesne revived and slowly cut off his power. To the dismay of both men
they were again falling!

DuQuesne hurried to the lower window to make the observation, remarking:

"You're a better man than I am, Gunga Din."

"Only because you're so badly bunged up. One more notch would've got my
goat," replied Seaton frankly as he made his way to Dorothy's side. He
noticed as he reached her, that Crane had removed his helmet and was
approaching the other girl. By the time DuQuesne had finished the
observation, the other passengers had completely recovered, apparently
none the worse for their experience.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Did we gain anything?" asked Seaton eagerly.

"I make it two, four, thirteen. We've lost about two minutes of arc. How
much power did we have on?"

"A little over half--thirty-two points out of sixty possible."

"We were still falling pretty fast. We'll have to put on everything
we've got. Since neither of us can put it on we'll have to rig up an
automatic feed. It'll take time, but it's the only way."

"The automatic control is already there," put in Crane, forestalling
Seaton's explanation. "The only question is whether we will live through
it--and that is not really a question, since certain death is the only
alternative. We must do it."

"We sure must," answered Seaton soberly.

Dorothy gravely nodded assent.

"What do you fellows think of a little plus pressure on the oxygen?"
asked Seaton. "I think it would help a lot."

"I think it's a good idea," said DuQuesne, and Crane added:

"Four or five inches of water will be about all the pressure we can
stand. Any more might burn our lungs too badly."

The pressure apparatus was quickly arranged and the motors filled to
capacity with reserve bars--enough to last seventy-two hours--the
scientists having decided that they must risk everything on one trial
and put in enough, if possible, to pull them clear out of the influence
of this center of attraction, as the time lost in slowing up to change
bars might well mean the difference between success and failure. Where
they might lie at the end of the wild dash for safety, how they were to
retrace their way with their depleted supply of copper, what other
dangers of dead star, planet, or sun lay in their path--all these were
terrifying questions that had to be ignored.

       *       *       *       *       *

DuQuesne was the only member of the party who actually felt any
calmness, the quiet of the others expressing their courage in facing
fear. Life seemed very sweet and desirable to them, the distant earth a
very Paradise! Through Dorothy's mind flashed the visions she had built
up during long sweet hours, visions of a long life with Seaton. As she
breathed an inaudible prayer, she glanced up and saw Seaton standing
beside her, gazing down upon her with his very soul in his eyes. Never
would she forget the expression upon his face. Even in that crucial
hour, his great love for her overshadowed every other feeling, and no
thought of self was in his mind--his care was all for her. There was a
long farewell caress. Both knew that it might be goodbye, but both were
silent as the violet eyes and the gray looked into each other's depths
and conveyed messages far beyond the power of words. Once more he
adjusted her helmet and strapped her into place.

As Crane had in the meantime cared for the other girl, the men again
took their places and Seaton started the motor which would automatically
advance the speed levers, one notch every five seconds, until the full
power of both motors was exerted. As the power was increased, he turned
the valve as before, until the helmets were filled with pure oxygen
under a pressure of five inches of water.

Margaret Spencer, weakened by her imprisonment, was the first to lose
consciousness, and soon afterward Dorothy felt her senses leave her. A
half-minute, in the course of which six mighty surges were felt, as more
of the power of the doubled motor was released, and Crane had gone,
calmly analyzing his sensations to the last. After a time DuQuesne also
lapsed into unconsciousness, making no particular effort to avoid it, as
he knew that the involuntary muscles would function quite as well
without the direction of the will. Seaton, although he knew it was
useless, fought to keep his senses as long as possible, counting the
impulses he felt as the levers were advanced.

"Thirty-two." He felt exactly as he had before, when he had advanced the
lever for the last time.

"Thirty-three." A giant hand shut off his breath completely, though he
was fighting to his utmost for air. An intolerable weight rested upon
his eyeballs, forcing them backward into his head. The universe whirled
about him in dizzy circles--orange and black and green stars flashed
before his bursting eyes.

"Thirty-four." The stars became more brilliant and of more variegated
colors, and a giant pen dipped in fire was writing equations and
mathematico-chemical symbols upon his quivering brain. He joined the
circling universe, which he had hitherto kept away from him by main
strength, and whirled about his own body, tracing a logarithmic spiral
with infinite velocity--leaving his body an infinite distance behind.

"Thirty-five." The stars and the fiery pen exploded in a wild
coruscation of searing, blinding light and he plunged from his spiral
into a black abyss.

       *       *       *       *       *

In spite of the terrific stress put upon the machine, every part
functioned perfectly, and soon after Seaton had lost consciousness the
vessel began to draw away from the sinister globe; slowly at first,
faster and faster as more and more of the almost unlimited power of the
mighty motor was released. Soon the levers were out to the last notch
and the machine was exerting its maximum effort. One hour and an
observer upon the Skylark would have seen that the apparent size of the
massive unknown world was rapidly decreasing; twenty hours and it was so
far away as to be invisible, though its effect was still great; forty
hours and the effect was slight; sixty hours and the Skylark was out of
range of the slightest measurable force of the monster it had left.

Hurtled onward by the inconceivable power of the unleashed copper demon
in its center, the Skylark flew through the infinite reaches of
interstellar space with an unthinkable, almost incalculable
velocity--beside which the velocity of light was as that of a snail to
that of a rifle bullet; a velocity augmented every second by a quantity
almost double that of light itself.




CHAPTER XI

Through Space Into the Carboniferous


Seaton opened his eyes and gazed about him wonderingly. Only half
conscious, bruised and sore in every part of his body, he could not at
first realize what had happened. Instinctively drawing a deep breath, he
coughed and choked as the undiluted oxygen filled his lungs, bringing
with it a complete understanding of the situation. Knowing from the lack
of any apparent motion that the power had been sufficient to pull the
car away from that fatal globe, his first thought was for Dorothy, and
he tore off his helmet and turned toward her. The force of even that
slight movement, wafted him gently into the air where he hung suspended
several minutes before his struggles enabled him to clutch a post and
draw himself down to the floor. A quick glance around informed him that
Dorothy, as well as the others, was still unconscious. Making his way
rapidly to her, he placed her face downward upon the floor and began
artificial respiration. Very soon he was rewarded by the coughing he had
longed to hear. He tore off her helmet and clasped her to his breast in
an agony of relief, while she sobbed convulsively upon his shoulder. The
first ecstasy of their greeting over, Dorothy started guiltily.

"Oh, Dick!" she exclaimed. "How about Peggy? You must see how she is!"

"Never mind," answered Crane's voice cheerily. "She is coming to
nicely."

Glancing around quickly, they saw that Crane had already revived the
stranger, and that DuQuesne was not in sight. Dorothy blushed, the vivid
wave of color rising to her glorious hair, and hastily disengaged her
arms from around her lover's neck, drawing away from him. Seaton, also
blushing, dropped his arms, and Dorothy floated away from him,
frantically clutching at a brace just beyond reach.

"Pull me down, Dick!" she called, laughing gaily.

Seaton, seizing her instinctively, neglected his own anchorage and they
hung in the air together, while Crane and Margaret, each holding a
strap, laughed with unrestrained merriment.

"Tweet, tweet--I'm a canary!" chuckled Seaton. "Throw us a rope!"

"A Dicky-bird, you mean," interposed Dorothy.

"I knew that you were a sleight-of-hand expert, Dick, but I did not know
that levitation was one of your specialties," remarked Crane with mock
gravity. "That is a peculiar pose you are holding now. What are you
doing--sitting on an imaginary pedestal?"

"I'll be sitting on your neck if you don't get a wiggle on with that
rope!" retorted Seaton, but before Crane had time to obey the command
the floating couple had approached close enough to the ceiling so that
Seaton, with a slight pressure of his hand against the leather, sent
them floating back to the floor, within reach of one of the handrails.

Seaton made his way to the power-plant, lifted in one of the remaining
bars, and applied a little power. The Skylark seemed to jump under them,
then it seemed as though they were back on Earth--everything had its
normal weight once more, as the amount of power applied was just enough
to equal the acceleration of gravity. After this fact had been
explained, Dorothy turned to Margaret.

"Now that we are able to act intelligently, the party should be
introduced to each other. Peggy, this is Dr. Dick Seaton, and this is
Mr. Martin Crane. Boys, this is Miss Margaret Spencer, a dear friend of
mine. These are the boys I have told you so much about, Peggy. Dick
knows all about atoms and things; he found out how to make the Skylark
go. Martin, who is quite a wonderful inventor, made the engines and
things for it."

"I may have heard of Mr. Crane," replied Margaret eagerly. "My father
was an inventor, and I have heard him speak of a man named Crane who
invented a lot of instruments for airplanes. He used to say that the
Crane instruments revolutionized flying. I wonder if you are that Mr.
Crane?"

"That is rather unjustifiably high praise, Miss Spencer," replied Crane,
"but as I have been guilty of one or two things along that line, I may
be the man he meant."

"Pardon me if I seem to change the subject," put in Seaton, "but where's
DuQuesne?"

"We came to at the same time, and he went into the galley to fix up
something to eat."

"Good for him!" exclaimed Dorothy. "I'm simply starved to death. I would
have been demanding food long ago, but I have so many aches and pains
that I didn't realize how hungry I was until you mentioned it. Come on,
Peggy, I know where our room is. Let's go powder our noses while these
bewhiskered gentlemen reap their beards. Did you bring along any of my
clothes, Dick, or did you forget them in the excitement?"

"I didn't think anything about clothes, but Martin did. You'll find your
whole wardrobe in your room. I'm with you, Dot, on that eating
proposition--I'm hungry enough to eat the jamb off the door!"

       *       *       *       *       *

After the girls had gone, Seaton and Crane went to their rooms, where
they exercised vigorously to restore the circulation to their numbed
bodies, shaved, bathed, and returned to the saloon feeling like new men.
They found the girls already there, seated at one of the windows.

"Hail and greeting!" cried Dorothy at sight of them. "I hardly
recognized you without your whiskers. Do hurry over here and look out
this perfectly wonderful window. Did you ever in your born days see
anything like this sight? Now that I'm not scared pea-green, I can enjoy
it thoroughly!"

The two men joined the girls and peered out into space through the
window, which was completely invisible, so clear was the glass. As the
four heads bent, so close together, an awed silence fell upon the little
group. For the blackness of the interstellar void was not the dark of an
earthly night, but the absolute black of the absence of all light,
beside which the black of platinum dust is pale and gray; and laid upon
this velvet were the jewel stars. They were not the twinkling,
scintillating beauties of the earthly sky, but minute points, so small
as to seem dimensionless, yet of dazzling brilliance. Without the
interference of the air, their rays met the eye steadily and much of the
effect of comparative distance was lost. All seemed nearer and there was
no hint of familiarity in their arrangement. Like gems thrown upon
darkness they shone in multi-colored beauty upon the daring wanderers,
who stood in their car as easily as though they were upon their parent
Earth, and gazed upon a sight never before seen by eye of man nor
pictured in his imaginings.

Through the daze of their wonder, a thought smote Seaton like a blow
from a fist. His eyes leaped to the instrument board and he exclaimed:

"Look there, Mart! We're heading almost directly away from the Earth,
and we must be making billions of miles per second. After we lost
consciousness, the attraction of that big dud back there would swing us
around, of course, but the bar should have stayed pointed somewhere near
the Earth, as I left it. Do you suppose it could have shifted the
gyroscopes?"

"It not only could have, it did," replied Crane, turning the bar until
it again pointed parallel with the object-compass which bore upon the
Earth. "Look at the board. The angle has been changed through nearly
half a circumference. We couldn't carry gyroscopes heavy enough to
counteract that force."

"But they were heavier there--Oh, sure, you're right. It's mass, not
weight, that counts. But we sure are in one fine, large jam now. Instead
of being half-way back to the Earth we're--where are we, anyway?"

They made a reading on an object-compass focused upon the Earth.
Seaton's face lengthened as seconds passed. When it had come to rest,
both men calculated the distance.

"What d'you make it, Mart? I'm afraid to tell you my result."

"Forty-six point twenty-seven light-centuries," replied Crane, calmly.
"Right?"

"Right, and the time was 11:32 P. M. of Thursday, by the chronometer
there. We'll time it again after a while and see how fast we're
traveling. It's a good thing you built the ship's chronometers to stand
any kind of stress. My watch is a total loss. Yours is, too?"

"All of our watches must be broken. We will have to repair them as soon
as we get time."

"Well, let's eat next! No human being can stand my aching void much
longer. How about you, Dot?"

"Yes, for Cat's sake, let's get busy!" she mimicked him gaily. "Doctor
DuQuesne's had dinner ready for ages, and we're all dying by inches of
hunger."

       *       *       *       *       *

The wanderers, battered, bruised, and sore, seated themselves at a
folding table, Seaton keeping a watchful eye upon the bar and upon the
course, while enjoying Dorothy's presence to the full. Crane and
Margaret talked easily, but at intervals. Save when directly addressed.
DuQuesne maintained silence--not the silence of one who knows himself to
be an intruder, but the silence of perfect self-sufficiency. The meal
over, the girls washed the dishes and busied themselves in the galley.
Seaton and Crane made another observation upon the Earth, requesting
DuQuesne to stay out of the "engine room" as they called the
partially-enclosed space surrounding the main instrument board, where
were located the object-compasses and the mechanism controlling the
attractor, about which DuQuesne knew nothing. As they rejoined DuQuesne
in the main compartment, Seaton said:

"DuQuesne, we're nearly five thousand light-years away from the Earth,
and are getting farther at the rate of about one light-year per minute."

"I suppose that it would be poor technique to ask how you know?"

"It would--very poor. Our figures are right. The difficulty is that we
