far off.

His pistol held ready, he moved quietly on down the ravine until the old
water course made an abrupt hairpin turn.

Instead of following around the sharp bend, Jon Karyl moved straight
ahead through the overhanging bushes until he came to a dense thicket.
Dropping to his hands and knees he worked his way under the edge of the
thicket into a hollowed-out space in the center.

       *       *       *       *       *

There, just ahead of him, was the lock leading into the service station.
Slipping a key out of a leg pouch on the space suit, he jabbed it into
the center of the lock, opening the lever housing.

He pulled strongly on the lever. With a hiss of escaping air, the lock
swung open. Jon Karyl darted inside, the door closing softly behind.

At the end of the long tunnel he stepped to the televisor which was
fixed on the area surrounding the station.

Jon Karyl saw none of the steel-blue creatures. But he saw their ship.
It squatted like a smashed-down kid's top, its lock shut tight.

He tuned the televisor to its widest range and finally spotted one of
the Steel-Blues. He was looking into the stationary rocket engine.

As Karyl watched, a second Steel-Blue came crawling out of the ship.

The two Steel-Blues moved toward the center of the televisor range.
They're coming toward the station, Karyl thought grimly.

Karyl examined the two creatures. They were of the steel-blue color from
the crown of their egg-shaped heads to the tips of their walking
appendages.

They were about the height of Karyl--six feet. But where he tapered from
broad shoulders to flat hips, they were straight up and down. They had
no legs, just appendages, many-jointed that stretched and shrank
independent of the other, but keeping the cylindrical body with its four
pairs of tentacles on a level balance.

Where their eyes would have been was an elliptical-shaped lens, covering
half the egg-head, with its converging ends curving around the sides of
the head.

Robots! Jon gauged immediately. But where were their masters?

The Steel-Blues moved out of the range of the televisor. A minute later
Jon heard a pounding from the station upstairs.

He chuckled. They were like the wolf of pre-atomic days who huffed and
puffed to blow the house down.

The outer shell of the station was formed from stelrylite, the toughest
metal in the solar system. With the self-sealing lock of the same
resistant material, a mere pounding was nothing.

Jon thought he'd have a look-see anyway. He went up the steel ladder
leading to the station's power plant and the televisor that could look
into every room within the station.

He heaved a slight sigh when he reached the power room, for right at his
hand were weapons to blast the ship from the asteroid.

Jon adjusted one televisor to take in the lock to the station. His
teeth suddenly clamped down on his lower lip.

Those Steel-Blues were pounding holes into the stelrylite with
round-headed metal clubs. But it was impossible. Stelrylite didn't break
up that easily.

Jon leaped to a row of studs, lining up the revolving turret which
capped the station so that its thin fin pointed at the squat ship of the
invaders.

Then he went to the atomic cannon's firing buttons.

He pressed first the yellow, then the blue button. Finally the red one.

The thin fin--the cannon's sight--split in half as the turret opened and
the coiled nose of the cannon protruded. There was a soundless flash.
Then a sharp crack.

Jon was dumbfounded when he saw the bolt ricochet off the ship. This was
no ship of the solar system. There was nothing that could withstand even
the slight jolt of power given by the station cannon on any of the Sun's
worlds. But what was this? A piece of the ship had changed. A bubble of
metal, like a huge drop of blue wax, dripped off the vessel and struck
the rocket of the asteroid. It steamed and ran in rivulets.

He pressed the red button again.

Then abruptly he was on the floor of the power room, his legs strangely
cut out from under him. He tried to move them. They lay flaccid. His
arms seemed all right and tried to lever himself to an upright position.

Damn it, he seemed as if he were paralyzed from the waist down. But it
couldn't happen that suddenly.

He turned his head.

A Steel-Blue stood facing him. A forked tentacle held a square black
box.

Jon could read nothing in that metallic face. He said, voice muffled by
the confines of the plastic helmet, "Who are you?"

"I am"--there was a rising inflection in the answer--"a Steel-Blue."

There were no lips on the Steel-Blue's face to move. "That is what I
have named you," Jon Karyl said. "But what are you?"
