wouldn't know her father was the President of the Council.

It was all a very tight and careful circle, chosen on Earth with a great
deal of "common sense."

There were the ordinary settlers, of course. They had daughters. Some of
them were very pretty and long-limbed. And George had thought about
that.

Certainly there wasn't a decent-looking girl in the whole Governing
circle, and the sight of a girl with flashing eyes and a nice red mouth,
who was shaped a little like something besides a tree stump, was indeed
an exciting sight.

But there were limitations to the settler girls.

They had no background to speak of, and though that didn't make any
difference, George assured himself, they knew nothing about art, music,
poetry, or anything really worth while. And, too, while George's father
had said, "Now, George, we're all one here. Each of us is as good as
another. Joe Finch, who cares for the flowers outside, is every bit as
good a man as I am"--still George knew, if he told his parents he was
going to marry Joe Finch's daughter someday, there would be hell to pay.

So as long as the restrictions had been bound around him, there was no
reason to go just half-way. George was not an ordinary boy. He did
things in extreme. He was now in love with a Venusian girl, and his
family was already starting to make him pay.

       *       *       *       *       *

George turned off the path, just beyond an arch of thick purple-green
vines that always reminded him of a gate to a garden. There was a quiet
simplicity to this small clearing where he and Gistla met. There was an
aloneness to it, and only the sound of the flat shiny leaves sliding
together and the high, trilling sound of the small Venusian birds broke
the peaceful silence. They had always met here, nowhere else.

Now, as George found himself in the clearing, he began to wonder what
Gistla would say or do when he told her he was taking her home to meet
his family. It had been a sudden decision, brought out of anger and
indignation.

George sat down upon the flat hollow of a large vine. The sky was murky
as usual, but the soft warm feel and smell of the growth around him,
with its color and brightness, made up for a sunless sky.

As he waited, he remembered what his mother had said:

"Oh, George, you're really not serious about bringing a _Venusian_ into
our home!"

And his sister, Mari, had said, "My God!" Mari, who was eighteen, said
this to most anything.

But his father, eyes bright and alert, had said, "No, now if George
wants to bring one of these, ah, Venusians home with him, that's his
privilege. I think it would be very interesting."

George knew what his father meant by interesting.

Exposing Gistla to his family would result in deliberate sarcasm and
eye-squinting and barely hidden smiles. There would be pointed remarks
and direct insults. And when it was over, George knew, he would be
expected to see the error of his ways. He would then be expected to
forget about this odd creature and find himself a nice ignorant little
Colony girl, whose father was a member of the Governing circle.

"And to hell with that, too," George said.

"What?" George heard Gistla say. He turned quickly. She was standing at
the edge of the clearing, her round green eyes looking soft and serious.
She wore the usual gray cape that reached her ankles. Her voice was a
deep round sound, and there was hardly any accent in the words she had
learned so quickly since the Colony had begun.

"Talking to myself," George grinned. The old excitement was inside of
him. There was a kind of exotic quality in meeting Gistla that never
disappeared.

She crossed the clearing, not too gracefully, and touched her fingers
against his hand. This had been the extent of their physical expression
of love.

"It is nice to see you, George."

He noticed his feeling of pleasure when he heard her speak his name.
There was something about his own name being spoken by Gistla that had
always seemed even more strange than anything else.

She sat down beside him, and they looked at each other while the leaves
whispered around them and the birds fluttered and chirped. He discovered
again the feeling of rightness, sitting beside Gistla. There was a
solidity about her, a quiet maturity that he seemed able to feel in
himself only when he was with her. And that too was strange, because in
American terms of age, she was much younger than he.

Sitting, as they were doing, silent, watching each other, had been most
of their activity. You did not need to entertain Gistla with foolish
small-talk or exaggerated praising.

But right now he wanted to tell her quickly, to make sure that she would
feel the enthusiasm he had felt.

"Listen, Gistla," he said, while she watched him with her soft-looking
round eyes. "I want you to come with me today to meet my family."

His words seemed to have an odd ring to them, and George waited tensely
