Then they threw themselves down on their faces to pray, and when they
had made an end of praying, they assembled in the kiosk of Erivan in the
inner garden where the Grand Vizier already awaited them. Not long
afterwards arrived the Kiaja and the Kapudan Pasha also, last of all
came the sick Damadzadi and the Cadi of Medina, Mustafa Effendi, and
Segban Pasha.

"Ye see a dead man before you," said the Grand Vizier, Damad Ibrahim, to
the freshly arrived dignitaries. "I am lost. We are the four victims.
The Chief Mufti perhaps may save his life, but we three others shall not
see the dawn of another day. It cannot be otherwise. The Sultan must be
saved, and saved he only can be at the price of our lives."

"I said that long ago," observed the Kapudan Pasha. "Our corpses ought
to have been delivered up to the rebels yesterday, I fear it is already
too late, I fear me that the Sultan is lost anyhow. The Banner of
Affliction ought never to have been exposed at all, we should have been
slain there and then."

"You three withdraw into the Chamber of the Executioners," said the
Grand Vizier to his colleagues, "but wait for me till the Kizlar-Aga
arrives to demand from me the seals of office, till then I must perform
my official duties."

The three ministers then took leave of Damad Ibrahim, embraced each
other, and were removed in the custody of the bostanjis.

It was now the duty of the Grand Vizier to elect a new Chief Mufti from
among the Ulemas. The Ulemas, first of all, chose Damadzadi, but he
declining the dignity on the plea of illness, they chose in his stead
the Cadi of Medina, and for want of a white mantle invested him with a
green one.

After that they elected from amongst themselves Seid Mohammed and
Damadzadi, to receive the secret message of the Sultan from the
Kizlar-Aga and deliver it to Halil Patrona.

Damad Ibrahim was well aware of the nature of this secret message, and
thanked Allah for setting a term to the life of man.

       *       *       *       *       *

Meanwhile Sultan Achmed was sitting in the Hall of Delectation with the
beautiful Adsalis by his side, and in front of him were the four tulips
which Abdi Pasha had presented to him the day before.

The four tulips were now in full bloom.

Adsalis had thrown her arms round the Sultan's neck, and was kissing his
forehead as if she would charm away from his soul the thoughts which
suffered him not to rest, or rejoice, or to love.

He had an eye for nothing but the tulips before him, which he could not
protect or cherish sufficiently. He scarce noticed that Elhaj Beshir,
the Kizlar-Aga, was standing before him with a long MS. parchment
stretched out in his hand.

"Master," cried the Kizlar-Aga, "deign to read the answer which the
Ulemas are sending to Halil Patrona, and if it be according to thy will
give it the confirmation of thy signature."

"What do they require?" asked the Sultan softly, withdrawing, as he
spoke, a tiny knife from his girdle, with the point of which he began
picking away at the earth all round the tulips in order to make it
looser and softer.

"The rebels demand a full assurance that they will not be persecuted in
the future for what they have done in the past."

"Be it so!"

"Next they demand that the Kiaja Aga be handed over to them."

The Sultan cut off one of the tulips with his knife and handed it to the
Kizlar-Aga.

"There, take it!" said he.

The Aga was astonished, but presently he understood and took the tulip.

"Then they want the Kapudan Pasha."

The Sultan cut off the handsomest of the tulips.

"There you have it," said he.

"They further demand the banishment of the Chief Mufti."

The Sultan tore up the third tulip by the roots and cast it from him.

"There it is."

"And the Grand Vizier they want also."

The last tulip Achmed threw violently to the ground, pot and all, and
then he covered his face.

"Ask no more, thou seest I have surrendered everything."

Then he gave him his signet-ring in which his name was engraved, and the
Kizlar-Aga stamped the document therewith, and then handed back the
signet-ring to the Sultan.

The Grand Vizier, meanwhile, was walking backwards and forwards in the
garden of the Seraglio. The Kizlar-Aga came there in search of him, and
with him were the envoys of Halil Patrona, Suleiman, whom he had made
Reis-Effendi, Orli, and Sulali. Elhaj Beshir approached him in their
presence, and kissing the document signed by the Sultan, handed it to
him.

Damad Ibrahim pressed the writing to his forehead and his lips, and,
after carefully reading it through, handed it back again, and taking
from his finger the great seal of the Empire gave it to the Kizlar-Aga.

"May he who comes after me be wiser and happier than I have been," said
he. "Greet the Sultan from me once more. And as for you, tell Halil
Patrona that you have seen the door of the Hall of the Executioners
close behind the back of Damad Ibrahim."

With that the Grand Vizier looked about him in search of someone to
escort him thither, when suddenly a kajkji leaped to his side and begged
that he might be allowed to lead the Grand Vizier to the Hall of
Execution.

This sailor-man had just such a long grey beard as the Grand Vizier
himself.

"How dost thou come to know me?" inquired Damad Ibrahim of the old man.

"Why we fought together, sir, beneath Belgrade, when both of us were
young fellows together."

"What is thy name?

"Manoli."

"I remember thee not."

"But I remember thee, for thou didst release me from captivity, and
didst cherish me when I was wounded."

"And therefore thou wouldst lead me to the executioner? I thank thee,
Manoli!"

All this was spoken while they were passing through the garden on their
way to the fatal chamber into which Manoli disappeared with the Grand
Vizier.

The Kizlar-Aga and the messengers of the insurgents waited till Manoli
came forth again. He came out, covering his face with his hands, no
doubt he was weeping. The Grand Vizier remained inside.

"To-morrow you shall see his dead body," said the Kizlar-Aga to the new
Reis-Effendi, and with that he sent him and his comrade back to Halil.

"We would rather have had them alive," said the ex-ciaus, so suddenly
become one of the chief dignitaries of the state.

That same evening Halil sent back Sulali with the message that the Chief
Mufti might go free.

The old man quitted his comrades about midnight, and day had scarce
dawned when he was summoned once more to the presence of the Grand
Seignior.

All night long the Kizlar-Aga tormented Achmed with the saying of the
Reis-Effendi: "We would rather have them alive!"

"No, no," said the Sultan, "we will not have them delivered up alive. It
shall not be in the power of the people to torture and tear them to
pieces. Rather let them die in my palace, an easy, instantaneous death,
without fear and scarce a pang of pain, wept and mourned for by their
friends."

"Then hasten on their deaths, dread sir, lest the morning come and they
be demanded while still alive."

"Tarry a while, I say, wait but for the morning. You would not surely
kill them at night! At night the gates of Heaven are shut. At night the
phantoms of darkness are let loose. You would not slay any living
creature at night! Wait till the day dawns."

The first ray of light had scarce appeared on the horizon when the
Kizlar-Aga once more stood before the Sultan.

"Master, the day is breaking."

"Call hither the mufti and Sulali!"

Both of them speedily appeared.

"Convey death to those who are already doomed."

Sulali and the mufti fell down on their knees.

"Wherefore this haste, O my master?" cried the aged mufti, bitterly
weeping as he kissed the Sultan's feet.

"Because the rebels wish them to be surrendered alive."

"So it is," observed the Kizlar-Aga by way of corroboration, "the whole
space in front of the kiosk is filled with the insurgents."

The Sultan almost collapsed with horror.

"Hasten, hasten! lest they fall into their hands alive."

"Oh, sir," implored Sulali, "let me first go down with the Imam of the
Aja Sophia to see whether the street really is filled with rebels or
not!"

The Sultan signified that they might go.

Sulali, Hassan, and Ispirizade thereupon hastened through the gate of
the Seraglio down to the open space before the kiosk, but not a living
soul did they find there. Not satisfied with merely looking about them,
they wished to persuade themselves that the insurgents were approaching
the Seraglio from some other direction by a circuitous way.

Meanwhile the Sultan was counting the moments and growing impatient at
the prolonged absence of his messengers.

"They have had time enough to cover the distance to the kiosk and back
twice over," remarked the Kizlar-Aga. "No doubt they have fallen into
the hands of the rebels who are holding them fast so that they may not
be able to bring any tidings back."

The Sultan was in despair.

"Hasten, hasten then!" said he to the Kizlar-Aga, and with that he fled
away into his inner apartments.

Ten minutes later Sulali and the Iman returned, and announced that there
was not a soul to be seen anywhere and no sign of anyone threatening the
Seraglio.

Then the Kizlar-Aga led them down to the gate. A cart drawn by two oxen
was standing there, and the top of it was covered with a mat of rushes.
He drew aside a corner of this mat, and by the uncertain light of dawn
they saw before them three corpses, the Kiaja's, the Kapudan's, and the
Grand Vizier's.

       *       *       *       *       *

Happy Guel-Bejaze sits in Halil's lap and dreamily allows herself to be
cradled in his arms. Through the windows of the splendid palace
penetrate the shouts of triumph which hail Halil as Lord, for the
moment, of the city of Stambul and the whole Ottoman Empire.

Guel-Bejaze tremulously whispers in Halil's ear how much she would prefer
to dwell in a simple, lonely little hut in Anatolia instead of there in
that splendid palace.

Halil smooths away the luxuriant locks from his wife's forehead, and
makes her tell him once more the full tale of all those revolting
incidents which befell her in the Seraglio, in the captivity of the
Kapudan's house, and in the dungeon for dishonourable women. Why should
he keep on arousing hatred and vengeance?

The woman told him everything with a shudder. At her husband's feet,
right in front of them, stood three baskets full of flowers. Halil had
given them to her as a present.

But at the bottom of the baskets were still more precious gifts.

He draws forward the first basket and sweeps away the flowers. A bloody
head is at the bottom of the basket.

"Whose is that?"

Guel-Bejaze, all shuddering, lisped the name of Abdi Pasha.

He cast away the flowers from the second basket, there also was a bloody
head.

"And whose is that?"

"That is the Kiaja Beg's," sobbed the terrified girl.

And now Halil brought forward the third basket, and dashing aside from
it the fresh flowers, revealed to the eyes of Guel-Bejaze a grey head
with a white beard, which lay with closed eyes at the bottom of the
basket.

"Whose is that?" inquired Halil.

Guel-Bejaze's tender frame shivered in the arms of the strong man who
held her, as he compelled her to gaze at the bloody heads. And when she
regarded the third head she shook her own in amazement.

"I do not know that one."

"Not know it! Look again and more carefully. Perchance Death has changed
the expression of the features. That is Damad Ibrahim the Grand Vizier."

Guel-Bejaze regarded her husband with eyes wide-open with astonishment,
and then hastened to reply:

"Truly it _is_ Damad Ibrahim. Of course, of course. Death hath
disfigured his face so that I scarce knew it."

"Did I not tell thee that thou shouldst make sport with the heads of
those who made sport with thy heart? Dost thou want yet more?"

"Oh, no, no, Halil. I am afraid of these also. I am afraid to look upon
these dumb heads."

"Then cover them over with flowers, and thou wilt believe thou dost see
flower-baskets before thee."

"Let me have them buried, Halil. Do not make me fear thee also. Thou
wouldst have me go on loving thee, wouldst thou not? If only thou
wouldst come with me to Anatolia, where nobody would know anything about
us!"

"What dost thou say? Go away now when the very sun cannot set because of
me, and men cannot sleep because of the sound of my name? Dost not thou
also feel a desire to bathe in all this glory?"

"Oh, Halil! the rose and the palm grow up together out of the same
earth, and yet the palm grows into greatness while the rose remains
quite tiny. Suffer me but gently to crouch beside thee, dispense but thy
love to me, and keep thy glory to thyself."

Halil tenderly embraced and kissed the woman, and buried the three
baskets as she desired in the palace garden beneath three wide-spreading
rosemary bushes.

Then he took leave of Guel-Bejaze, for deputies from the people now
waited upon their leader, and begged him to accompany them to the mosque
of Zuleima, where the Sultan's envoys were already waiting for an
answer.

In order to get to the mosque more easily and avoid the labour of
forcing his way through the crowd that thronged the streets, Halil
hastened to the water side, got into the first skiff he met with, and
bade the sailor row him across to the Zuleima Mosque on the other side.

On the way his gaze fell upon the face of the sailor who was sitting
opposite to him. It was a grey-bearded old man.

"What is thy name, worthy old man?" inquired Halil.

"My name is Manoli, your Excellency."

"Call me not Excellency! Dost thou not perceive from my raiment that I
am nothing but a common Janissary?"

"Oh! I know thee better than that. Thou art Halil Patrona, whom may
Allah long preserve!"

"Thou also dost seem very familiar to me. Thou hast just such a white
beard as had Damad Ibrahim who was once Grand Vizier."

"I have often heard people say so, my master."

On arriving opposite the Zuleima Mosque, the boatman brought the skiff
ashore. Halil pressed a golden denarius into the old man's palm, the old
man kissed his hand for it.

Then for a long time Halil gazed into the old man's face.

"Manoli!"

"At thy command, my master."

"Thou seest the sun rising up yonder behind the hills?"

"Yes, my master."

"Before the shadows return to the side of yon hills take care to be well
behind them, and let not another dawn find thee in this city!"

The boatman bent low with his arms folded across his breast, then he
disappeared in his skiff.

But Halil Patrona hastened into the mosque.

The Sultan's ambassadors were awaiting him. Sheik Suleiman came forward.

"Halil!" said he, "the bodies of the three dead men I have given to the
people and their heads I have sent to thee."

"Who were they?" asked Halil darkly.

"The first was the corpse of the Kiaja Beg, his body was cast upon the
cross-ways through the Etmeidan Gate."

"And the second?"

"The Kapudan Pasha, his body was flung down in front of the fountains of
Khir-Kheri."
