bay, sir, and I think you would not understand what more is to be done
until you have heard it," replied Christy.

"Then I will hear you before you anchor the Teaser," said the captain,
leading the way to his cabin.

The lieutenant narrated the events of his trip across Santa Rosa Island.
Captain Breaker was not a little amused at his scheme to get rid of the
portion of the crew of the privateer before he captured her.

"I never suspected that you were the possessor of so much audacity,
Christy," said he, when the lieutenant had put him in possession of all
the facts.

"I did not know that I had more than my fair share, sir, and I don't
know what I have done that is at all audacious," replied Christy, very
meekly.

"It is a very dark and foggy night, but I don't believe that I have
another officer who would have cheek enough to pretend to be a pilot
in Pensacola Bay, and to be in possession of the guard-boat at the same
time."

"Captain Folkner put the idea into my head, and I think I should have
been an idiot not to make use of it, considering the nature of my
mission on board of the Teaser."

"It is a wonder that no one knew you were not Gilder."

"The men in the guard-boat did not expose me, and admitted by their
silence that I was the person I claimed to be," replied Christy, with
a twinkle of the eyes.

"Your scheme would have failed ninety-nine times out of a hundred."

"If it had failed, I had force enough to clean out the enemy on board,
so that I ran no risk; but I was ordered to avoid a fight, and I did
so," argued Christy.

"You were exceedingly fortunate; and the next time you try such a trick,
it may lead you into a rebel prison."

"It was not my fault that the ship's company of the Teaser were at issue
among themselves, and I should have been an imbecile to fail to profit
by it."

"I approve all you have done, Mr. Passford."

"Thank you, sir. Though I was of Captain Folkner's opinion that the
sound was the best way out of the bay in the first place, I abandoned
that view before I started on the expedition. I was sorry that I could
not indorse Captain Folkner's opinion, and that I was obliged to take
sides with his men," said Christy, chuckling.

"I understand your position perfectly. Now, what do you mean by
finishing your work, Mr. Passford?" asked Captain Breaker, curiously.
"We have the Teaser, and we ought to be satisfied with your brilliant
success."

"I am not quite satisfied, sir."

"You ought to be."

"We put twelve men ashore at Town Point rather than have a fight with
them; and I have the feeling that we have a mortgage on those men,
to say nothing of thirty more at Pensacola who were to join the Teaser.
I told them they could get on board of their steamer from the island.
I shall be sorry to disappoint them, for I suppose the whole forty or
more are counting on a handsome allowance of prize money to be made for
them by the Teaser. I should be sorry to disappoint them," continued
Christy, chuckling all the time.

"Precisely so! I suppose you would be greatly grieved to blast their
hopes, and you propose to take them on board of the steamer."

"That is the idea, sir. Taking a more patriotic view of the question,
it would be a great pity to allow forty good sailors to waste their
energies in the service of the Confederacy."

"Undoubtedly it would," said Captain Breaker, his brow knitting under
his earnest thought. "What do you propose to do? Explain your plan
fully, Mr. Passford."

"The principal of the malcontents on board of the Teaser was a man by
the name of Lonley," Christy explained. "We left them at the point where
the rest of the Teaser's crew were to join them. They are all anxious
to get to sea in the Teaser, and I have no doubt they will come down
to-night."

"I should think they would," the captain assented. "But they will expect
to find the steamer in the sound, and not outside of the island. If the
Teaser could get through the sound at all, she would not be where you
intend to put her."

"I told Lonley to get upon the island, and be on the lookout for the
Teaser; and as they have to come from Pensacola in a boat, it will be as
easy for them to go to the island as to land at the point. Very likely
they will get the Times to bring them off, or some other steamer,"
Christy argued.

"It is certainly very desirable to capture these men, for it will do so
much to weaken the enemy; but I am afraid you are a little too audacious
in some of your movements, Mr. Passford," replied Captain Breaker, with
a softening smile.

"I beg you will not consider that I am asking for the command of the
Teaser, Captain Breaker, if she is sent upon this duty," returned the
lieutenant, somewhat set back at the prudence of the commander.

"I think I had better send Mr. Blowitt in command of the Teaser, and you
shall go as his first officer," added the captain.

"I have no objection, even in my heart, to this arrangement," replied
Christy.

"But I shall have to send the prize to New York, and I will appoint you
prize-master," continued the captain, afraid that he was disappointing
the ambitious young officer. "You have done exceedingly well, Christy,
and I shall not fail to mention you favorably in my report; and you will
write out yours as soon as possible."

Christy would not allow himself to think that he was unappreciated
because an older officer was appointed to conduct the enterprise he
suggested. He was ready to do his whole duty either as principal or
subordinate. Mr. Blowitt was summoned from his stateroom, and forty
men, including all who had taken part in the capture of the prize,
were detailed to man the Teaser. The second lieutenant was one of the
jolliest men on board, but he weighed nearly two hundred pounds, and he
was not as active on this account in boat service as some others. He was
an excellent officer, and had been in command of a steamer, though he
had never before been in the navy.

At three o'clock in the morning the fasts of the Teaser were cast off,
and she backed away from the Bellevite. She was to proceed to a point
about six miles to the eastward, which was beyond the camp of the "Pet
Lambs." Here she was to look out for the Teaser's crew.

She had not made half this distance when all hands heard rapid and
continued firing on Santa Rosa Island.




CHAPTER XXIV

LIEUTENANT PASSFORD ON A MISSION


The officers on board of the Teaser could not explain the occasion of
the firing on the island, though it sounded as though an engagement of
some sort was in progress. It had been foggy during the preceding day,
and if any movement on the part of the enemy had been indicated it could
not have been seen on board of the ships off the entrance to the bay.

"I hope this business we are to do this morning will not take us long,"
said Mr. Blowitt. "We may be wanted on board, and I should not like to
be absent from the Bellevite if she is to take part in an engagement of
any kind."

"And I am sure I should not," added Christy. "I should not be surprised
if the enemy made an attempt to capture Pickens; but even if they storm
it in the darkness, I do not see that the ships can do anything until
they are able to see what they are to do."

"But this affair may keep us away from the ship for a day or two,"
suggested the second lieutenant.

"I don't think so, sir; I believe you will be on board again before
seven bells in the morning watch," replied Christy. "The ship's company
of the Teaser were to be somewhere on the shores of the sound where they
could be taken on board."

"But the men you landed at the point believed that the Teaser was to
get out through the sound," replied Mr. Blowitt. "They took you for the
pilot Gilder, and you did not tell them that you intended to run the
blockade."

"Of course I did not; if I had, they would have remained on board. But
the guard-boat attempted to stop us, and the artillery on the island
fired into it, though it is probable that they did not hit it in the
dense fog," Christy explained. "Our men may have learned from the
guard-boat that we took the steamer out through the main channel."

"If they did they probably learned that the Teaser went out with the
assistance of the garrison at the fort," suggested Mr. Blowitt.

"I am confident that the officer of the guard-boat would have no means
of knowing that fact," argued Christy. "Of course, he heard the firing
in the neighborhood of the fort, and he would naturally conclude that
they were firing upon the steamer to prevent her from running out."

"That may be; but, to tell you the truth, Mr. Passford, I am afraid we
shall not find these men," added the second lieutenant. "From the firing
we hear, I should judge that a movement of some kind is in progress, and
our men may be better informed than you expect."

"Of course, they may be; but I expect to find these men at some point
along the shore," replied Christy, who thought the second lieutenant was
just a little obstinate in not accepting his theory in full.

The steamer continued on her course to the eastward, and nothing more
passed between the two principal officers in regard to the crew from
Pensacola. But Flint was quite as confident as the third lieutenant that
the forty men, more or less, would be captured. The noise of the firing
could no longer be heard, and then Christy suggested that the whistle be
sounded as a signal to the men if they were in the vicinity.

The depth of water was three or four fathoms close up to this part
of the island. The soundings indicated that the steamer was as near
as it was prudent to go in the dense fog. Christy was sure that the
privateer's crew could not have gone any farther to the eastward by this
time, and the screw was stopped, while all hands made an anxious use of
their ears to detect any sounds that came from the shore. But nothing
could be heard at first, and Mr. Blowitt again intimated that they were
engaged in a "wild-goose chase." But he had hardly uttered this cooling
reflection before Beeks came aft to report that a number of pistol
shots, as he thought they were, had been heard in the distance.

"Nobody can tell what they mean," said the sceptical Mr. Blowitt. "They
may be a part of the affair we heard going on soon after we left the
ship."

"In what direction were the shots, Beeks?" asked Christy.

"They sounded as though they were about half a mile or less to the
westward of us," replied the quartermaster.

"Blow the whistle in short blasts, Beeks," added Mr. Blowitt, who seemed
to have gathered a little faith from the report of the quartermaster.

The order was obeyed, and Beeks again reported that pistol shots had
been heard from the westward. The third lieutenant was in a hurry to
have the business finished, for he felt confident that the Bellevite
would soon be engaged in an affair of more importance than picking up
a couple of score of prisoners. He ordered the steamer to come about,
and move to the westward; but after she had been under way about five
minutes, he rang to stop her, and then sounded the whistles again.
Several pistol shots responded to this signal. Again he started the
screw, and pointed the bow of the Teaser squarely to the north.

The steamer moved very slowly, and two men sounded all the time till
they reported "by the mark two," when there could not have been more
than three feet of water under the keel of the vessel. The screw was
stopped and backed so that she might not run upon any shoal place ahead
of her, and the officers waited with interest and anxiety for further
action on the part of the party on shore. By this time no one doubted
that there were men on this part of the island; but whether they were
the crew of the privateer or not was yet to be proved.

"Steamer, ahoy!" shouted some one on the shore.

"On the island!" replied Christy, as he was instructed to do by his
superior.

"What steamer is that?" demanded the speaker on the island.

Whoever he was, he could not help knowing that a steamer was there, for
the engineer had begun to blow off steam as soon as the screw stopped,
though neither party could see the other in the fog and darkness.

"The Teaser," replied Christy. "Who are you?"

"We are the ship's company of the Teaser, and we want to get on board,"
replied the speaker. "Is Captain Folkner on board?"

"He is on board--of the Bellevite," the third lieutenant would have
finished the sentence if he had told the whole truth, for he uttered
only the first part of the sentence.

"All right. The first and second lieutenants are with us. Is Gilder on
board?"

"He is; and he wants to get back to the other side of the inland,"
answered Christy, who considered it his duty to make his replies as
suitable to the occasion as possible. "Who is speaking?"

"Lieutenant Lonley," replied the man; and Christy knew him, though he
did not know his rank before. "He wants to see Gilder before he goes on
board. Tell him to come on shore in his canoe."

"What is that for?" demanded Christy, rather surprised at the unexpected
request.

"I want to see him on particular business; I have a message for him,
which I cannot deliver in presence of any other person," replied Lonley.

"All right; you shall see him soon," answered Christy.

"Get out the boats to take us on board," continued Lonley. "Send them
about a mile to the eastward, where we have left our bags."

"All right," repeated Christy.

But he said what he did not believe, for everything did not look right
to him. He could not understand why the bags of the men should be a mile
to the eastward. He could not imagine what business Lonley could have
with Gilder or his representative; and if he had any, why it should be
necessary to meet him on the island.

"Of course you don't expect me to carry on the programme that fellow has
marked out," said Mr. Blowitt. "I don't quite like the looks of the
things that we can't see, Mr. Passford."

"Neither do I, Mr. Blowitt," replied the third lieutenant frankly.

"I shall not send a boat from the steamer till I understand this matter
a great deal better than I do now, and especially I shall not send the
boats a mile to the eastward," added the second lieutenant.

"Of course it is possible that my plan has miscarried already," added
Christy.

"I shall do everything I can to carry out your plan, as I am instructed
to do by the captain; but I have the feeling, in spite of myself, that
we are crawling into a hornet's nest," added Mr. Blowitt, with some
anxiety in his tones. "You will call all hands quietly, and be ready to
repel boarders. It is well to be prepared for whatever may come. The
firing at the west end of the island indicated that something was going
on, and perhaps these men on the shore know about it."

Christy obeyed the order promptly, and the next minute, every seaman on
board was ready with his cutlass and revolver to meet an attack. But no
sound came from the shore just then, and the officers were in a state of
uncertainty in regard to the situation which allowed them to do nothing.
They waited for half an hour, when the leadsman reported that the water
was shoaling, which indicated that the Teaser was drifting towards the
island.

"On board the Teaser!" shouted Lonley, so distinctly that he could
hardly have been more than three hundred feet from the steamer.

"On shore," replied Christy, prompted by Mr. Blowitt.

"I am waiting for Gilder! Why don't he come on shore?" shouted Lonley,
his impatience apparent in his tones.

"Where are all the men?" demanded Christy, as requested by the second
lieutenant.

"They have gone a mile to the eastward where they left their bags."

"We will run down in the steamer for them," added Mr. Blowitt, talking
through Christy.

"Don't do that!" protested the speaker on shore. "There is a Yankee
steamer off in that direction. We heard her steam an hour ago."

"All right!" replied Christy.

"That settles the matter in my mind," said Mr. Blowitt. "They are trying
to play what they call a Yankee trick upon us. When we send our boats to
the eastward, we shall send them into a trap. If the boats are to bring
off forty men, they will expect them to go with only men enough to pull
the oars; and when they get possession of them, they expect to retake
the Teaser."

"I think you are right, Mr. Blowitt," replied Christy, who began to
believe that his scheme was rapidly approaching a failure, though he did
not give it up just yet.

"This Lonley is still on the shore near us," said Mr. Blowitt. "I should
very much like to know what has been going on to-night on the island,
and it may be that he knows all about it. As you are the representative
of Gilder, Mr. Passford, you may take the canoe that is astern, and have
a talk with Lonley at close quarters, if you don't object."

"I should have proposed it myself if I had not feared that the idea
would be charged to my audacity," replied Christy. "I will take only
Flint with me, as he was with me before."

The canoe was brought up to the gangway, and Flint took his place at the
oars. Mr. Blowitt charged the young officer in the most serious manner
not to run any risks, and the boat was shoved off. It required but a few
strokes of the oars to bring it into shoal water by the beach. Only a
single man could be seen on the shore, and this one must be Lonley.
There seemed to be no risk, and Christy landed.




CHAPTER XXV

CHRISTY BECOMES A VICTIM


Everything was perfectly still on the island, and only a single man
was in sight; but Christy put his hand upon his revolver as he went
on shore. Though he had never been a fighting young man, he had the
impression that he should not tamely submit to the assault of an enemy,
or run away from any single man that stood up in front of him. He had
always been prudent, even while he had been daring, and he hardly needed
the solemn admonition of the second lieutenant to be extremely cautious.

"Is that you, Captain Gilder?" asked the man on the shore, who stood a
little way from the waterside.

"Yes; and I take it for granted that you are Lonley," replied Christy,
advancing towards the other. "You have done all the talking this night,
and I ought to know you."

"All the talking except what you have done, and I ought to know you,"
replied Lonley. "I am Lieutenant Lonley, of the Teaser, and our men are
all ready to go on board."

