strange star.

It was Navigator Norris who told us the names of these planets and
traced their positions on a chart for us. He alone of our group was
familiar with astrogation and cosmography. He alone had sailed the
spaceways in the days before the automatic pilots were installed and
locked and sealed on every ship.

A handsome man in his fortieth year, he stood six feet three with broad
shoulders and a powerful frame. His eyes were the eyes of a scholar,
dreamy yet alive with depth and penetration. I had never seen him lose
his temper, and he governed our company with an iron hand.

He was not perfect, of course. Like all Earthmen, he had his faults.
Months before he had joined with that famed Martian scientist,
Ganeth-Klae, to invent that all-use material, _Indurate_, the formula
for which had been stolen and which therefore had never appeared on the
commercial market. Norris would talk about that for hours. If you
inadvertently started him on the subject a queer glint would enter his
eyes, and he would dig around in his pocket for a chunk of the black
substance.

"Did I ever show you a piece of this?" he would say. "Look at it
carefully. Notice the smooth grainless texture--hard and yet not
brittle. You wouldn't think that it was formed in a gaseous state, then
changed to a liquid and finally to a clay-like material that could be
worked with ease. A thousand years after your body has returned to dust,
that piece of _Indurate_ will still exist, unchanged, unworn. Erosion
will have little effect upon it. Beside it granite, steel are nothing.
If only I had the formula ..."

But he had only half the formula, the half he himself had developed. The
other part was locked in the brain of Ganeth-Klae, and Ganeth-Klae had
disappeared. What had become of him was a mystery. Norris perhaps had
felt the loss more than any one, and he had offered the major part of
his savings as a reward for information leading to the scientist's
whereabouts.

Our party--eighteen couples and Navigator Norris--had gathered together
and subsequently left Earth in answer to a curious advertisement that
had appeared in the Sunday edition of the London _Times_.

    WANTED: _A group of married men and women, young, courageous,
    educated, tired of political and social restrictions, interested
    in extra-terrestrial colonization. Financial resources no
    qualification._

After we had been weeded out, interviewed and rigorously questioned,
Norris had taken us into the hangar, waved a hand toward the _Marie
Galante_ and explained the details.

The _Marie Galante_ was a cruiser-type ship, stripped down to essentials
to maintain speed, but equipped with the latest of everything. For a
short run to Venus, for which it was originally built, it would
accommodate a passenger list of ninety.

But Norris wasn't interested in that kind of run. He had knocked out
bulkheads, reconverted music room and ballroom into living quarters. He
had closed and sealed all observation ports, so that only in the bridge
cuddy could one see into space.

"We shall travel beyond the orbit of the sun," he said. "There will be
no turning back; for the search for a new world, a new life, is not a
task for cowards."

Aside to me, he said: "You're to be the physician of this party, Bagley.
So I'm going to tell you what to expect when we take off. We're going to
have some mighty sick passengers aboard then."

"What do you mean, sir?" I said.

He pointed with his pipe toward the stern of the vessel. "See that ...
well, call it a booster. Ganeth-Klae designed it just before he
disappeared, using the last lot of _Indurate_ in existence. It will
increase our take-off speed by five times, and it will probably have a
bad effect on the passengers."

So we had left Earth, at night from a field out in Essex. Without
orders, without clearance papers, without an automatic pilot check.
Eighteen couples and one navigator--destination unknown. If the
Interstellar Council had known what Norris was up to, it would have been
a case for the Space-Time Commission.

Of that long initial lap of our voyage, perhaps the less said the
better. As always is the case when monotony begins to wear away the
veneer of civilization, character quirks came to the surface, cliques
formed among the passengers, and gossip and personalities became matters
of pre-eminent importance.

Rising to the foreground out of our thirty-six, came Fielding Mason,
tall, taciturn, and handsome, with a keen intellect and a sense of
values remarkable in so young a man. Mason was a graduate of Montape,
the French outgrowth of St. Cyr. But he had majored in military tactics,
psychology and sociology and knew nothing at all about astrogation or
even elemental astronomy. He too was a man of good breeding and
refinement. Nevertheless conflict began to develop between him and
Navigator Norris. That conflict began the day we landed on Coulora.

Norris stepped out of the air lock into the cold thin air, glanced
briefly about him and faced the eighteen men assembled.

"We'll divide into three groups," he said. "Each group to carry an
organic surveyor and take a different direction. Each group will so
regulate its marching as to be back here without fail an hour before
darkness sets in. If you find no sign of animal life, then we will take
off again immediately on your return."

Mason paused halfway in the act of strapping on his packsack.

"What's that got to do with it?" he demanded. "There's vegetation here.
That's all that seems to be necessary."

Norris lit his pipe. "If you find no sign of animal life we will take
