_______________________

FOURTH ARTICLE [III, Q. 44, Art. 4]

Whether Christ Worked Miracles Fittingly on Irrational Creatures?

Objection 1: It would seem that Christ worked miracles unfittingly on
irrational creatures. For brute animals are more noble than plants.
But Christ worked a miracle on plants as when the fig-tree withered
away at His command (Matt. 21:19). Therefore Christ should have
worked miracles also on brute animals.

Obj. 2: Further, punishment is not justly inflicted save for fault.
But it was not the fault of the fig-tree that Christ found no fruit
on it, when fruit was not in season (Mk. 11:13). Therefore it seems
unfitting that He withered it up.

Obj. 3: Further, air and water are between heaven and earth. But
Christ worked some miracles in the heavens, as stated above (A. 2),
and likewise in the earth, when it quaked at the time of His Passion
(Matt. 27:51). Therefore it seems that He should also have worked
miracles in the air and water, such as to divide the sea, as did
Moses (Ex. 14:21); or a river, as did Josue (Josh. 3:16) and Elias (4
Kings 2:8); and to cause thunder to be heard in the air, as occurred
on Mount Sinai when the Law was given (Ex. 19:16), and like to what
Elias did (3 Kings 18:45).

Obj. 4: Further, miraculous works pertain to the work of Divine
providence in governing the world. But this work presupposes
creation. It seems, therefore, unfitting that in His miracles Christ
made use of creation: when, to wit, He multiplied the loaves.
Therefore His miracles in regard to irrational creatures seem to have
been unfitting.

_On the contrary,_ Christ is "the wisdom of God" (1 Cor. 1:24), of
whom it is said (Wis. 8:1) that "she ordereth all things sweetly."

_I answer that,_ As stated above, Christ's miracles were ordained to
the end that He should be recognized as having Divine power, unto the
salvation of mankind. Now it belongs to the Divine power that every
creature be subject thereto. Consequently it behooved Him to work
miracles on every kind of creature, not only on man, but also on
irrational creatures.

Reply Obj. 1: Brute animals are akin generically to man, wherefore
they were created on the same day as man. And since He had worked
many miracles on the bodies of men, there was no need for Him to work
miracles on the bodies of brute animals. And so much the less that,
as to their sensible and corporeal nature, the same reason applies to
both men and animals, especially terrestrial. But fish, from living
in water, are more alien from human nature; wherefore they were made
on another day. On them Christ worked a miracle in the plentiful
draught of fishes, related Luke 5 and John 21; and, again, in the
fish caught by Peter, who found a stater in it (Matt. 17:26). As to
the swine who were cast headlong into the sea, this was not the
effect of a Divine miracle, but of the action of the demons, God
permitting.

Reply Obj. 2: As Chrysostom says on Matt. 21:19: "When our Lord does
any such like thing" on plants or brute animals, "ask not how it was
just to wither up the fig-tree, since it was not the fruit season; to
ask such a question is foolish in the extreme," because such things
cannot commit a fault or be punished: "but look at the miracle, and
wonder at the worker." Nor does the Creator "inflict" any hurt on the
owner, if He choose to make use of His own creature for the salvation
of others; rather, as Hilary says on Matt. 21:19, "we should see in
this a proof of God's goodness, for when He wished to afford an
example of salvation as being procured by Him, He exercised His
mighty power on the human body: but when He wished to picture to them
His severity towards those who wilfully disobey Him, He foreshadows
their doom by His sentence on the tree." This is the more noteworthy
in a fig-tree which, as Chrysostom observes (on Matt. 21:19), "being
full of moisture, makes the miracle all the more remarkable."

Reply Obj. 3: Christ also worked miracles befitting to Himself in the
air and water: when, to wit, as related Matt. 8:26, "He commanded the
winds, and the sea, and there came a great calm." But it was not
befitting that He who came to restore all things to a state of peace
and calm should cause either a disturbance in the atmosphere or a
division of waters. Hence the Apostle says (Heb. 12:18): "You are not
come to a fire that may be touched and approached [Vulg.: 'a mountain
that might be touched, and a burning fire'], and a whirlwind, and
darkness, and storm."

At the time of His Passion, however, the "veil was rent," to signify
the unfolding of the mysteries of the Law; "the graves were opened,"
to signify that His death gave life to the dead; "the earth quaked
and the rocks were rent," to signify that man's stony heart would be
softened, and the whole world changed for the better by the virtue of
His Passion.

Reply Obj. 4: The multiplication of the loaves was not effected by
way of creation, but by an addition of extraneous matter transformed
into loaves; hence Augustine says on John 6:1-14: "Whence He
multiplieth a few grains into harvests, thence in His hands He
multiplied the five loaves": and it is clearly by a process of
transformation that grains are multiplied into harvests.
_______________________

QUESTION 45

OF CHRIST'S TRANSFIGURATION
(In Four Articles)

We now consider Christ's transfiguration; and here there are four
points of inquiry:

(1) Whether it was fitting that Christ should be transfigured?

(2) Whether the clarity of the transfiguration was the clarity of
glory?

(3) Of the witnesses of the transfiguration;

(4) Of the testimony of the Father's voice.
_______________________

FIRST ARTICLE [III, Q. 45, Art. 1]

Whether It Was Fitting That Christ Should Be Transfigured?

Objection 1: It would seem that it was not fitting that Christ should
be transfigured. For it is not fitting for a true body to be changed
into various shapes (_figuras_), but only for an imaginary body. Now
Christ's body was not imaginary, but real, as stated above (Q. 5, A.
1). Therefore it seems that it should not have been transfigured.

Obj. 2: Further, figure is in the fourth species of quality, whereas
clarity is in the third, since it is a sensible quality. Therefore
Christ's assuming clarity should not be called a transfiguration.

Obj. 3: Further, a glorified body has four gifts, as we shall state
farther on (Suppl., Q. 82), viz. impassibility, agility, subtlety,
and clarity. Therefore His transfiguration should not have consisted
in an assumption of clarity rather than of the other gifts.

_On the contrary,_ It is written (Matt. 17:2) that Jesus "was
transfigured" in the presence of three of His disciples.

_I answer that,_ Our Lord, after foretelling His Passion to His
disciples, had exhorted them to follow the path of His sufferings
(Matt. 16:21, 24). Now in order that anyone go straight along a road,
he must have some knowledge of the end: thus an archer will not shoot
the arrow straight unless he first see the target. Hence Thomas said
(John 14:5): "Lord, we know not whither Thou goest; and how can we
know the way?" Above all is this necessary when hard and rough is the
road, heavy the going, but delightful the end. Now by His Passion
Christ achieved glory, not only of His soul, not only of His soul,
which He had from the first moment of His conception, but also of His
body; according to Luke (24:26): "Christ ought [Vulg.: 'ought not
Christ'] to have suffered these things, and so to enter into His
glory (?)." To which glory He brings those who follow the footsteps
of His Passion, according to Acts 14:21: "Through many tribulations
we must enter into the kingdom of God." Therefore it was fitting that
He should show His disciples the glory of His clarity (which is to be
transfigured), to which He will configure those who are His;
according to Phil. 3:21: "(Who) will reform the body of our lowness
configured [Douay: 'made like'] to the body of His glory." Hence Bede
says on Mk. 8:39: "By His loving foresight He allowed them to taste
for a short time the contemplation of eternal joy, so that they might
bear persecution bravely."

Reply Obj. 1: As Jerome says on Matt. 17:2: "Let no one suppose that
Christ," through being said to be transfigured, "laid aside His
natural shape and countenance, or substituted an imaginary or aerial
body for His real body. The Evangelist describes the manner of His
transfiguration when he says: 'His face did shine as the sun, and His
garments became white as snow.' Brightness of face and whiteness of
garments argue not a change of substance, but a putting on of glory."

Reply Obj. 2: Figure is seen in the outline of a body, for it is
"that which is enclosed by one or more boundaries" [*Euclid, bk i,
def. xiv]. Therefore whatever has to do with the outline of a body
seems to pertain to the figure. Now the clarity, just as the color,
of a non-transparent body is seen on its surface, and consequently
the assumption of clarity is called transfiguration.

Reply Obj. 3: Of those four gifts, clarity alone is a quality
of the very person in himself; whereas the other three are not
perceptible, save in some action or movement, or in some passion.
Christ, then, did show in Himself certain indications of those three
gifts--of agility, for instance, when He walked on the waves of the
sea; of subtlety, when He came forth from the closed womb of the
Virgin; of impassibility, when He escaped unhurt from the hands of the
Jews who wished to hurl Him down or to stone Him. And yet He is not
said, on account of this, to be transfigured, but only on account of
clarity, which pertains to the aspect of His Person.
_______________________

SECOND ARTICLE [III, Q. 45, Art. 2]

Whether This Clarity Was the Clarity of Glory?

Objection 1: It would seem that this clarity was not the clarity of
glory. For a gloss of Bede on Matt. 17:2, "He was transfigured before
them," says: "In His mortal body He shows forth, not the state of
immortality, but clarity like to that of future immortality." But the
clarity of glory is the clarity of immortality. Therefore the clarity
which Christ showed to His disciples was not the clarity of glory.

Obj. 2: Further, on Luke 9:27 "(That) shall not taste death unless
[Vulg.: 'till'] they see the kingdom of God," Bede's gloss says:
"That is, the glorification of the body in an imaginary vision of
future beatitude." But the image of a thing is not the thing itself.
Therefore this was not the clarity of beatitude.

Obj. 3: Further, the clarity of glory is only in a human body. But
this clarity of the transfiguration was seen not only in Christ's
body, but also in His garments, and in "the bright cloud" which
"overshaded" the disciples. Therefore it seems that this was not the
clarity of glory.

_On the contrary,_ Jerome says on the words "He was transfigured
before them" (Matt. 17:2): "He appeared to the Apostles such as He
will appear on the day of judgment." And on Matt. 16:28, "Till they
see the Son of Man coming in His kingdom," Chrysostom says: "Wishing
to show with what kind of glory He is afterwards to come, so far as
it was possible for them to learn it, He showed it to them in their
present life, that they might not grieve even over the death of their
Lord."

_I answer that,_ The clarity which Christ assumed in His
transfiguration was the clarity of glory as to its essence, but not
as to its mode of being. For the clarity of the glorified body is
derived from that of the soul, as Augustine says (Ep. ad Diosc.
cxviii). And in like manner the clarity of Christ's body in His
transfiguration was derived from His Godhead, as Damascene says
(Orat. de Transfig.) and from the glory of His soul. That the glory
of His soul did not overflow into His body from the first moment of
Christ's conception was due to a certain Divine dispensation, that,
as stated above (Q. 14, A. 1, ad 2), He might fulfil the mysteries of
our redemption in a passible body. This did not, however, deprive
Christ of His power of outpouring the glory of His soul into His
body. And this He did, as to clarity, in His transfiguration, but
otherwise than in a glorified body. For the clarity of the soul
overflows into a glorified body, by way of a permanent quality
affecting the body. Hence bodily refulgence is not miraculous in a
glorified body. But in Christ's transfiguration clarity overflowed
from His Godhead and from His soul into His body, not as an immanent
quality affecting His very body, but rather after the manner of a
transient passion, as when the air is lit up by the sun. Consequently
the refulgence, which appeared in Christ's body then, was miraculous:
just as was the fact of His walking on the waves of the sea. Hence
Dionysius says (Ep. ad Cai. iv): "Christ excelled man in doing that
which is proper to man: this is shown in His supernatural conception
of a virgin and in the unstable waters bearing the weight of material
and earthly feet."

Wherefore we must not say, as Hugh of St. Victor [*Innocent III, De
Myst. Miss. iv] said, that Christ assumed the gift of clarity in the
transfiguration, of agility in walking on the sea, and of subtlety in
coming forth from the Virgin's closed womb: because the gifts are
immanent qualities of a glorified body. _On the contrary,_ whatever
pertained to the gifts, that He had miraculously. The same is to be
said, as to the soul, of the vision in which Paul saw God in a
rapture, as we have stated in the Second Part (II-II, Q. 175, A. 3,
ad 2).

Reply Obj. 1: The words quoted prove, not that the clarity of Christ
was not that of glory, but that it was not the clarity of a glorified
body, since Christ's body was not as yet immortal. And just as it was
by dispensation that in Christ the glory of the soul should not
overflow into the body so was it possible that by dispensation it
might overflow as to the gift of clarity and not as to that of
impassibility.

Reply Obj. 2: This clarity is said to have been imaginary, not as
though it were not really the clarity of glory, but because it was a
kind of image representing that perfection of glory, in virtue of
which the body will be glorious.

Reply Obj. 3: Just as the clarity which was in Christ's body was a
representation of His body's future clarity, so the clarity which was
in His garments signified the future clarity of the saints, which
will be surpassed by that of Christ, just as the brightness of the
snow is surpassed by that of the sun. Hence Gregory says (Moral.
xxxii) that Christ's garments became resplendent, "because in the
height of heavenly clarity all the saints will cling to Him in the
refulgence of righteousness. For His garments signify the righteous,
because He will unite them to Himself," according to Isa. 49:18:
"Thou shalt be clothed with all these as with an ornament."

The bright cloud signifies the glory of the Holy Ghost or the "power
of the Father," as Origen says (Tract. iii in Matth.), by which in
the glory to come the saints will be covered. Or, again, it may be
said fittingly that it signifies the clarity of the world redeemed,
which clarity will cover the saints as a tent. Hence when Peter
proposed to make tents, "a bright cloud overshaded" the disciples.
_______________________

THIRD ARTICLE [III, Q. 45, Art. 3]

Whether the Witnesses of the Transfiguration Were Fittingly Chosen?

Objection 1: It would seem that the witnesses of the transfiguration
were unfittingly chosen. For everyone is a better witness of things
that he knows. But at the time of Christ's transfiguration no one but
the angels had as yet any knowledge from experience of the glory to
come. Therefore the witnesses of the transfiguration should have been
angels rather than men.

Obj. 2: Further, truth, not fiction, is becoming in a witness of the
truth. Now, Moses and Elias were there, not really, but only in
appearance; for a gloss on Luke 9:30, "They were Moses and Elias,"
says: "It must be observed that Moses and Elias were there neither in
body nor in soul"; but that those bodies were formed "of some
available matter. It is also credible that this was the result of the
angelic ministries, through the angels impersonating them." Therefore
it seems that they were unsuitable witnesses.

Obj. 3: Further, it is said (Acts 10:43) that "all the prophets give
testimony" to Christ. Therefore not only Moses and Elias, but also
all the prophets, should have been present as witnesses.

Obj. 4: Further, Christ's glory is promised as a reward to all the
faithful (2 Cor. 3:18; Phil. 3:21), in whom He wished by His
transfiguration to enkindle a desire of that glory. Therefore He
should have taken not only Peter, James, and John, but all His
disciples, to be witnesses of His transfiguration.

On the contrary is the authority of the Gospel.

_I answer that,_ Christ wished to be transfigured in order to show
men His glory, and to arouse men to a desire of it, as stated above
(A. 1). Now men are brought to the glory of eternal beatitude by
Christ--not only those who lived after Him, but also those who
preceded Him; therefore, when He was approaching His Passion, both
"the multitude that followed" and that "which went before, cried
saying: 'Hosanna,'" as related Matt. 21:9, beseeching Him, as it
were, to save them. Consequently it was fitting that witnesses should
be present from among those who preceded Him--namely, Moses and
Elias--and from those who followed after Him--namely, Peter, James,
and John--that "in the mouth of two or three witnesses" this word
might stand.

Reply Obj. 1: By His transfiguration Christ manifested to His
disciples the glory of His body, which belongs to men only. It was
therefore fitting that He should choose men and not angels as
witnesses.

Reply Obj. 2: This gloss is said to be taken from a book entitled _On
the Marvels of Holy Scripture._ It is not an authentic work, but is
wrongly ascribed to St. Augustine; consequently we need not stand by
it. For Jerome says on Matt. 17:3: "Observe that when the Scribes and
Pharisees asked for a sign from heaven, He refused to give one;
whereas here in order to increase the apostles' faith, He gives a
sign from heaven, Elias coming down thence, whither he had ascended,
and Moses arising from the nether world." This is not to be
understood as though the soul of Moses was reunited to his body, but
that his soul appeared through some assumed body, just as the angels
do. But Elias appeared in his own body, not that he was brought down
from the empyrean heaven, but from some place on high whither he was
taken up in the fiery chariot.

Reply Obj. 3: As Chrysostom says on Matt. 17:3: "Moses and Elias are
brought forward for many reasons." And, first of all, "because the
multitude said He was Elias or Jeremias or one of the prophets, He
brings the leaders of the prophets with Him; that hereby at least
they might see the difference between the servants and their Lord."
Another reason was " . . . that Moses gave the Law . . . while Elias
. . . was jealous for the glory of God." Therefore by appearing
together with Christ, they show how falsely the Jews "accused Him of
transgressing the Law, and of blasphemously appropriating to Himself
the glory of God." A third reason was "to show that He has power of
death and life, and that He is the judge of the dead and the living;
by bringing with Him Moses who had died, and Elias who still lived."
A fourth reason was because, as Luke says (9:31), "they spoke" with
Him "of His decease that He should accomplish in Jerusalem," i.e. of
His Passion and death. Therefore, "in order to strengthen the hearts
of His disciples with a view to this," He sets before them those who
had exposed themselves to death for God's sake: since Moses braved
death in opposing Pharaoh, and Elias in opposing Achab. A fifth
reason was that "He wished His disciples to imitate the meekness of
Moses and the zeal of Elias." Hilary adds a sixth reason--namely, in
order to signify that He had been foretold by the Law, which Moses
gave them, and by the prophets, of whom Elias was the principal.

Reply Obj. 4: Lofty mysteries should not be immediately explained to
everyone, but should be handed down through superiors to others in
their proper turn. Consequently, as Chrysostom says (on Matt. 17:3),
"He took these three as being superior to the rest." For "Peter
excelled in the love" he bore to Christ and in the power bestowed on
him; John in the privilege of Christ's love for him on account of his
virginity, and, again, on account of his being privileged to be an
Evangelist; James on account of the privilege of martyrdom.
Nevertheless He did not wish them to tell others what they had seen
before His Resurrection; "lest," as Jerome says on Matt. 17:19, "such
a wonderful thing should seem incredible to them; and lest, after
hearing of so great glory, they should be scandalized at the Cross"
that followed; or, again, "lest [the Cross] should be entirely
hindered by the people" [*Bede, Hom. xviii; cf. Catena Aurea]; and
"in order that they might then be witnesses of spiritual things when
they should be filled with the Holy Ghost" [*Hilary, in Matth. xvii].
_______________________

FOURTH ARTICLE [III, Q. 45, Art. 4]

Whether the Testimony of the Father's Voice, Saying, "This Is My
Beloved Son," Was Fittingly Added?

Objection 1: It would seem that the testimony of the Father's voice,
saying, "This is My beloved Son," was not fittingly added; for, as it
is written (Job 33:14), "God speaketh once, and repeateth not the
selfsame thing the second time." But the Father's voice had testified
to this at the time of (Christ's) baptism. Therefore it was not
fitting that He should bear witness to it a second time.

Obj. 2: Further, at the baptism the Holy Ghost appeared under the
form of a dove at the same time as the Father's voice was heard. But
this did not happen at the transfiguration. Therefore it seems that
the testimony of the Father was made in an unfitting manner.

Obj. 3: Further, Christ began to teach after His baptism.
Nevertheless, the Father's voice did not then command men to hear
him. Therefore neither should it have so commanded at the
transfiguration.

Obj. 4: Further, things should not be said to those who cannot bear
them, according to John 16:12: "I have yet many things to say to you,
but you cannot bear them now." But the disciples could not bear the
Father's voice; for it is written (Matt. 17:6) that "the disciples
hearing, fell upon their face, and were very much afraid." Therefore
the Father's voice should not have been addressed to them.

On the contrary is the authority of the Gospel.

_I answer that,_ The adoption of the sons of God is through a certain
conformity of image to the natural Son of God. Now this takes place
in two ways: first, by the grace of the wayfarer, which is imperfect
conformity; secondly, by glory, which is perfect conformity,
according to 1 John 3:2: "We are now the sons of God, and it hath not
yet appeared what we shall be: we know that, when He shall appear, we
shall be like to Him, because we shall see Him as He is." Since,
therefore, it is in baptism that we acquire grace, while the clarity
of the glory to come was foreshadowed in the transfiguration,
therefore both in His baptism and in His transfiguration the natural
sonship of Christ was fittingly made known by the testimony of the
Father: because He alone with the Son and Holy Ghost is perfectly
conscious of that perfect generation.

Reply Obj. 1: The words quoted are to be understood of God's eternal
speaking, by which God the Father uttered the only-begotten and
co-eternal Word. Nevertheless, it can be said that God uttered the
same thing twice in a bodily voice, yet not for the same purpose, but
in order to show the divers modes in which men can be partakers of
the likeness of the eternal Sonship.

Reply Obj. 2: Just as in the Baptism, where the mystery of the first
regeneration was proclaimed, the operation of the whole Trinity was
made manifest, because the Son Incarnate was there, the Holy Ghost
appeared under the form of a dove, and the Father made Himself known
in the voice; so also in the transfiguration, which is the mystery of
the second regeneration, the whole Trinity appears--the Father in the
voice, the Son in the man, the Holy Ghost in the bright cloud; for
just as in baptism He confers innocence, signified by the simplicity
of the dove, so in the resurrection will He give His elect the
clarity of glory and refreshment from all sorts of evil, which are
signified by the bright cloud.

Reply Obj. 3: Christ came to give grace actually, and to promise
glory by His words. Therefore it was fitting at the time of His
transfiguration, and not at the time of His baptism, that men should
be commanded to hear Him.

Reply Obj. 4: It was fitting that the disciples should be afraid and
fall down on hearing the voice of the Father, to show that the glory
which was then being revealed surpasses in excellence the sense and
faculty of all mortal beings; according to Ex. 33:20: "Man shall not
see Me and live." This is what Jerome says on Matt. 17:6: "Such is
human frailty that it cannot bear to gaze on such great glory." But
men are healed of this frailty by Christ when He brings them into
glory. And this is signified by what He says to them: "Arise, and
fear not."
_______________________

QUESTION 46

THE PASSION OF CHRIST
(In Twelve Articles)

In proper sequence we have now to consider all that relates to
Christ's leaving the world. In the first place, His Passion;
secondly, His death; thirdly, His burial; and, fourthly, His descent
into hell.

With regard to the Passion, there arises a threefold consideration:
(1) The Passion itself; (2) the efficient cause of the Passion;
(3) the fruits of the Passion.

Under the first heading there are twelve points of inquiry:

(1) Whether it was necessary for Christ to suffer for men's
deliverance?

(2) Whether there was any other possible means of delivering men?

(3) Whether this was the more suitable means?

(4) Whether it was fitting for Christ to suffer on the cross?

(5) The extent of His sufferings;

(6) Whether the pain which He endured was the greatest?

(7) Whether His entire soul suffered?

(8) Whether His Passion hindered the joy of fruition?

(9) The time of the Passion;

(10) The place;

(11) Whether it was fitting for Him to be crucified with robbers?

(12) Whether Christ's Passion is to be attributed to the Godhead?
_______________________

FIRST ARTICLE [III, Q. 46, Art. 1]

Whether It Was Necessary for Christ to Suffer for the Deliverance of
the Human Race?

Objection 1: It would seem that it was not necessary for Christ to
suffer for the deliverance of the human race. For the human race
could not be delivered except by God, according to Isa. 45:21: "Am
not I the Lord, and there is no God else besides Me? A just God and a
Saviour, there is none besides Me." But no necessity can compel God,
for this would be repugnant to His omnipotence. Therefore it was not
necessary for Christ to suffer.

Obj. 2: Further, what is necessary is opposed to what is voluntary.
But Christ suffered of His own will; for it is written (Isa. 53:7):
"He was offered because it was His own will." Therefore it was not
necessary for Him to suffer.

Obj. 3: Further, as is written (Ps. 24:10): "All the ways of the Lord
are mercy and truth." But it does not seem necessary that He should
suffer on the part of the Divine mercy, which, as it bestows gifts
freely, so it appears to condone debts without satisfaction: nor,
again, on the part of Divine justice, according to which man had
deserved everlasting condemnation. Therefore it does not seem
necessary that Christ should have suffered for man's deliverance.

Obj. 4: Further, the angelic nature is more excellent than the human,
as appears from Dionysius (Div. Nom. iv). But Christ did not suffer
to repair the angelic nature which had sinned. Therefore, apparently,
neither was it necessary for Him to suffer for the salvation of the
human race.

_On the contrary,_ It is written (John 3:14): "As Moses lifted up the
serpent in the desert, so must the Son of man be lifted up, that
whosoever believeth in Him may not perish, but may have life
everlasting."

_I answer that,_ As the Philosopher teaches (Metaph. v), there are
several acceptations of the word "necessary." In one way it means
anything which of its nature cannot be otherwise; and in this way it
is evident that it was not necessary either on the part of God or on
the part of man for Christ to suffer. In another sense a thing may be
necessary from some cause quite apart from itself; and should this be
either an efficient or a moving cause then it brings about the
necessity of compulsion; as, for instance, when a man cannot get away
owing to the violence of someone else holding him. But if the
external factor which induces necessity be an end, then it will be
said to be necessary from presupposing such end--namely, when some
particular end cannot exist at all, or not conveniently, except such
end be presupposed. It was not necessary, then, for Christ to suffer
from necessity of compulsion, either on God's part, who ruled that
Christ should suffer, or on Christ's own part, who suffered
voluntarily. Yet it was necessary from necessity of the end proposed;
and this can be accepted in three ways. First of all, on our part,
who have been delivered by His Passion, according to John (3:14):
"The Son of man must be lifted up, that whosoever believeth in Him
may not perish, but may have life everlasting." Secondly, on Christ's
part, who merited the glory of being exalted, through the lowliness
of His Passion: and to this must be referred Luke 24:26: "Ought not
Christ to have suffered these things, and so to enter into His
glory?" Thirdly, on God's part, whose determination regarding the
Passion of Christ, foretold in the Scriptures and prefigured in the
observances of the Old Testament, had to be fulfilled. And this is
what St. Luke says (22:22): "The Son of man indeed goeth, according
to that which is determined"; and (Luke 24:44, 46): "These are the
words which I spoke to you while I was yet with you, that all things
must needs be fulfilled which are written in the law of Moses, and in
the prophets, and in the psalms concerning Me: for it is thus
written, and thus it behooved Christ to suffer, and to rise again
from the dead."

Reply Obj. 1: This argument is based on the necessity of compulsion
on God's part.

Reply Obj. 2: This argument rests on the necessity of compulsion on
the part of the man Christ.

Reply Obj. 3: That man should be delivered by Christ's Passion was in
keeping with both His mercy and His justice. With His justice,
because by His Passion Christ made satisfaction for the sin of the
human race; and so man was set free by Christ's justice: and with His
mercy, for since man of himself could not satisfy for the sin of all
human nature, as was said above (Q. 1, A. 2), God gave him His Son to
satisfy for him, according to Rom. 3:24, 25: "Being justified freely
by His grace, through the redemption that is in Christ Jesus, whom
God hath proposed to be a propitiation, through faith in His blood."
And this came of more copious mercy than if He had forgiven sins
without satisfaction. Hence it is said (Eph. 2:4): "God, who is rich
in mercy, for His exceeding charity wherewith He loved us, even when
we were dead in sins, hath quickened us together in Christ."

Reply Obj. 4: The sin of the angels was irreparable; not so the sin
of the first man (I, Q. 64, A. 2).
_______________________

SECOND ARTICLE [III, Q. 46, Art. 2]

Whether There Was Any Other Possible Way of Human Deliverance Besides
the Passion of Christ?

Objection 1: It would seem that there was no other possible way of
human deliverance besides Christ's Passion. For our Lord says (John
12:24): "Amen, amen I say to you, unless the grain of wheat falling
into the ground dieth, itself remaineth alone; but if it die, it
bringeth forth much fruit." Upon this St. Augustine (Tract. li)
observes that "Christ called Himself the seed." Consequently, unless
He suffered death, He would not otherwise have produced the fruit of
our redemption.

Obj. 2: Further, our Lord addresses the Father (Matt. 26:42): "My
Father, if this chalice may not pass away but I must drink it, Thy
will be done." But He spoke there of the chalice of the Passion.
Therefore Christ's Passion could not pass away; hence Hilary says
(Comm. 31 in Matth.): "Therefore the chalice cannot pass except He
drink of it, because we cannot be restored except through His
Passion."

Obj. 3: Further, God's justice required that Christ should satisfy by
the Passion in order that man might be delivered from sin. But Christ
cannot let His justice pass; for it is written (2 Tim. 2:13): "If we
believe not, He continueth faithful, He cannot deny Himself." But He
would deny Himself were He to deny His justice, since He is justice
itself. It seems impossible, then, for man to be delivered otherwise
than by Christ's Passion.

Obj. 4: Further, there can be no falsehood underlying faith. But the
Fathers of old believed that Christ would suffer. Consequently, it
seems that it had to be that Christ should suffer.

_On the contrary,_ Augustine says (De Trin. xiii): "We assert that
the way whereby God deigned to deliver us by the man Jesus Christ,
who is mediator between God and man, is both good and befitting the
Divine dignity; but let us also show that other possible means were
not lacking on God's part, to whose power all things are equally
subordinate."

_I answer that,_ A thing may be said to be possible or impossible in
two ways: first of all, simply and absolutely; or secondly, from
supposition. Therefore, speaking simply and absolutely, it was
possible for God to deliver mankind otherwise than by the Passion of
Christ, because "no word shall be impossible with God" (Luke 1:37).
Yet it was impossible if some supposition be made. For since it is
impossible for God's foreknowledge to be deceived and His will or
ordinance to be frustrated, then, supposing God's foreknowledge and
ordinance regarding Christ's Passion, it was not possible at the same
time for Christ not to suffer, and for mankind to be delivered
otherwise than by Christ's Passion. And the same holds good of all
things foreknown and preordained by God, as was laid down in the
First Part (Q. 14, A. 13).

Reply Obj. 1: Our Lord is speaking there presupposing God's
foreknowledge and predetermination, according to which it was
resolved that the fruit of man's salvation should not follow unless
Christ suffered.

Reply Obj. 2: In the same way we must understand what is here
objected to in the second instance: "If this chalice may not pass
away but I must drink of it"--that is to say, because Thou hast so
ordained it--hence He adds: "Thy will be done."

Reply Obj. 3: Even this justice depends on the Divine will, requiring
satisfaction for sin from the human race. But if He had willed to
free man from sin without any satisfaction, He would not have acted
against justice. For a judge, while preserving justice, cannot pardon
fault without penalty, if he must visit fault committed against
another--for instance, against another man, or against the State, or
any Prince in higher authority. But God has no one higher than
Himself, for He is the sovereign and common good of the whole
universe. Consequently, if He forgive sin, which has the formality of
fault in that it is committed against Himself, He wrongs no one: just
as anyone else, overlooking a personal trespass, without
satisfaction, acts mercifully and not unjustly. And so David
exclaimed when he sought mercy: "To Thee only have I sinned" (Ps.
50:6), as if to say: "Thou canst pardon me without injustice."

Reply Obj. 4: Human faith, and even the Divine Scriptures upon which
faith is based, are both based on the Divine foreknowledge and
ordinance. And the same reason holds good of that necessity which
comes of supposition, and of the necessity which arises of the Divine
foreknowledge and will.
_______________________

THIRD ARTICLE [III, Q. 46, Art. 3]

Whether There Was Any More Suitable Way of Delivering the Human Race
Than by Christ's Passion?

Objection 1: It would seem that there was some other more suitable
way of delivering the human race besides Christ's Passion. For nature
in its operation imitates the Divine work, since it is moved and
regulated by God. But nature never employs two agents where one will
suffice. Therefore, since God could have liberated mankind solely by
His Divine will, it does not seem fitting that Christ's Passion
should have been added for the deliverance of the human race.

Obj. 2: Further, natural actions are more suitably performed than
deeds of violence, because violence is "a severance or lapse from
what is according to nature," as is said in _De Coelo_ ii. But
Christ's Passion brought about His death by violence. Therefore it
would have been more appropriate had Christ died a natural death
rather than suffer for man's deliverance.

Obj. 3: Further, it seems most fitting that whatsoever keeps
something unjustly and by violence, should be deprived of it by some
superior power; hence Isaias says (52:3): "You were sold gratis, and
you shall be redeemed without money." But the devil possessed no
right over man, whom he had deceived by guile, and whom he held
subject in servitude by a sort of violence. Therefore it seems most
suitable that Christ should have despoiled the devil solely by His
power and without the Passion.

_On the contrary,_ St. Augustine says (De Trin. xiii): "There was no
other more suitable way of healing our misery" than by the Passion of
Christ.

_I answer that,_ Among means to an end that one is the more suitable
whereby the various concurring means employed are themselves helpful
to such end. But in this that man was delivered by Christ's Passion,
many other things besides deliverance from sin concurred for man's
salvation. In the first place, man knows thereby how much God loves
him, and is thereby stirred to love Him in return, and herein lies
the perfection of human salvation; hence the Apostle says (Rom. 5:8):
"God commendeth His charity towards us; for when as yet we were
sinners . . . Christ died for us." Secondly, because thereby He set
us an example of obedience, humility, constancy, justice, and the
other virtues displayed in the Passion, which are requisite for man's
salvation. Hence it is written (1 Pet. 2:21): "Christ also suffered
for us, leaving you an example that you should follow in His steps."
Thirdly, because Christ by His Passion not only delivered man from
sin, but also merited justifying grace for him and the glory of
bliss, as shall be shown later (Q. 48, A. 1; Q. 49, AA. 1, 5).
Fourthly, because by this man is all the more bound to refrain from
sin, according to 1 Cor. 6:20: "You are bought with a great price:
glorify and bear God in your body." Fifthly, because it redounded to
man's greater dignity, that as man was overcome and deceived by the
devil, so also it should be a man that should overthrow the devil;
and as man deserved death, so a man by dying should vanquish death.
Hence it is written (1 Cor. 15:57): "Thanks be to God who hath given
us the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ." It was accordingly
more fitting that we should be delivered by Christ's Passion than
simply by God's good-will.

Reply Obj. 1: Even nature uses several means to one intent, in order
to do something more fittingly: as two eyes for seeing; and the same
can be observed in other matters.

Reply Obj. 2: As Chrysostom [*Athanasius, Orat. De Incarn. Verb.]
says: "Christ had come in order to destroy death, not His own, (for
since He is life itself, death could not be His), but men's death.
Hence it was not by reason of His being bound to die that He laid His
body aside, but because the death He endured was inflicted on Him by
men. But even if His body had sickened and dissolved in the sight of
all men, it was not befitting Him who healed the infirmities of
others to have his own body afflicted with the same. And even had He
laid His body aside without any sickness, and had then appeared, men
would not have believed Him when He spoke of His resurrection. For
how could Christ's victory over death appear, unless He endured it in
the sight of all men, and so proved that death was vanquished by the
incorruption of His body?"

Reply Obj. 3: Although the devil assailed man unjustly, nevertheless,
on account of sin, man was justly left by God under the devil's
bondage. And therefore it was fitting that through justice man should
be delivered from the devil's bondage by Christ making satisfaction
on his behalf in the Passion. This was also a fitting means of
overthrowing the pride of the devil, "who is a deserter from justice,
and covetous of sway"; in that Christ "should vanquish him and
deliver man, not merely by the power of His Godhead, but likewise by
the justice and lowliness of the Passion," as Augustine says (De
Trin. xiii).
_______________________

FOURTH ARTICLE [III, Q. 46, Art. 4]

Whether Christ Ought to Have Suffered on the Cross?

Objection 1: It would seem that Christ ought not to have suffered on
the cross. For the truth ought to conform to the figure. But in all
the sacrifices of the Old Testament which prefigured Christ the
beasts were slain with a sword and afterwards consumed by fire.
Therefore it seems that Christ ought not to have suffered on a cross,
but rather by the sword or by fire.

Obj. 2: Further, Damascene says (De Fide Orth. iii) that Christ ought
not to assume "dishonoring afflictions." But death on a cross was
most dishonoring and ignominious; hence it is written (Wis. 2:20):
"Let us condemn Him to a most shameful death." Therefore it seems
that Christ ought not to have undergone the death of the cross.

Obj. 3: Further, it was said of Christ (Matt. 21:9): "Blessed is He
that cometh in the name of the Lord." But death upon the cross was a
death of malediction, as we read Deut. 21:23: "He is accursed of God
that hangeth on a tree." Therefore it does not seem fitting for
Christ to be crucified.

_On the contrary,_ It is written (Phil. 2:8): "He became obedient
unto death, even the death of the cross."

_I answer that,_ It was most fitting that Christ should suffer the
death of the cross.

First of all, as an example of virtue. For Augustine thus writes (QQ.
lxxxiii, qu. 25): "God's Wisdom became man to give us an example in
righteousness of living. But it is part of righteous living not to
stand in fear of things which ought not to be feared. Now there are
some men who, although they do not fear death in itself, are yet
troubled over the manner of their death. In order, then, that no kind
of death should trouble an upright man, the cross of this Man had to
be set before him, because, among all kinds of death, none was more
execrable, more fear-inspiring, than this."

Secondly, because this kind of death was especially suitable in order
to atone for the sin of our first parent, which was the plucking of
the apple from the forbidden tree against God's command. And so, to
atone for that sin, it was fitting that Christ should suffer by being
fastened to a tree, as if restoring what Adam had purloined;
according to Ps. 68:5: "Then did I pay that which I took not away."
Hence Augustine says in a sermon on the Passion [*Cf. Serm. ci De
Tempore]: "Adam despised the command, plucking the apple from the
tree: but all that Adam lost, Christ found upon the cross."

The third reason is because, as Chrysostom says in a sermon on the
Passion (De Cruce et Latrone i, ii): "He suffered upon a high rood
and not under a roof, in order that the nature of the air might be
purified: and the earth felt a like benefit, for it was cleansed by
the flowing of the blood from His side." And on John 3:14: "The Son
of man must be lifted up," Theophylact says: "When you hear that He
was lifted up, understand His hanging on high, that He might sanctify
the air who had sanctified the earth by walking upon it."

The fourth reason is, because, by dying on it, He prepares for us an
ascent into heaven, as Chrysostom [*Athanasius, vide A, III, ad 2]
says. Hence it is that He says (John 12:32): "If I be lifted up from
the earth, I will draw all things to Myself."

The fifth reason is because it is befitting the universal salvation
of the entire world. Hence Gregory of Nyssa observes (In Christ.
Resurr., Orat. i) that "the shape of the cross extending out into
four extremes from their central point of contact denotes the power
and the providence diffused everywhere of Him who hung upon it."
Chrysostom [*Athanasius, vide A. III, ad 2] also says that upon the
cross "He dies with outstretched hands in order to draw with one hand
the people of old, and with the other those who spring from the
Gentiles."

The sixth reason is because of the various virtues denoted by this
class of death. Hence Augustine in his book on the grace of the Old
and New Testament (Ep. cxl) says: "Not without purpose did He choose
this class of death, that He might be a teacher of that breadth, and
height, and length, and depth," of which the Apostle speaks (Eph.
3:18): "For breadth is in the beam, which is fixed transversely
above; this appertains to good works, since the hands are stretched
out upon it. Length is the tree's extent from the beam to the ground;
and there it is planted--that is, it stands and abides--which is the
note of longanimity. Height is in that portion of the tree which
remains over from the transverse beam upwards to the top, and this is
at the head of the Crucified, because He is the supreme desire of
souls of good hope. But that part of the tree which is hidden from
view to hold it fixed, and from which the entire rood springs,
denotes the depth of gratuitous grace." And, as Augustine says
(Tract. cxix in Joan.): "The tree upon which were fixed the members
of Him dying was even the chair of the Master teaching."

The seventh reason is because this kind of death responds to very
many figures. For, as Augustine says in a sermon on the Passion
(Serm. ci De Tempore), an ark of wood preserved the human race from
the waters of the Deluge; at the exodus of God's people from Egypt,
Moses with a rod divided the sea, overthrew Pharaoh and saved the
people of God. the same Moses dipped his rod into the water, changing
it from bitter to sweet; at the touch of a wooden rod a salutary
spring gushed forth from a spiritual rock; likewise, in order to
overcome Amalec, Moses stretched forth his arms with rod in hand;
lastly, God's law is entrusted to the wooden Ark of the Covenant; all
of which are like steps by which we mount to the wood of the cross.

Reply Obj. 1: The altar of holocausts, upon which the sacrifices of
animals were immolated, was constructed of timbers, as is set forth
Ex. 27; and in this respect the truth answers to the figure; but "it
is not necessary for it to be likened in every respect, otherwise it
would not be a likeness," but the reality, as Damascene says (De Fide
Orth. iii). But, in particular, as Chrysostom [*Athanasius, vide A,
III, ad 2] says: "His head is not cut off, as was done to John; nor
was He sawn in twain, like Isaias, in order that His entire and
indivisible body might obey death, and that there might be no excuse
for them who want to divide the Church." While, instead of material
fire, there was the spiritual fire of charity in Christ's holocaust.

Reply Obj. 2: Christ refused to undergo dishonorable sufferings which
are allied with defects of knowledge, or of grace, or even of virtue,
but not those injuries inflicted from without--nay, more, as is
written Heb. 12:2: "He endured the cross, despising the shame."

Reply Obj. 3: As Augustine says (Contra Faust. xiv), sin is accursed,
and, consequently, so is death, and mortality, which comes of sin.
"But Christ's flesh was mortal, 'having the resemblance of the flesh
of sin'"; and hence Moses calls it "accursed," just as the Apostle
calls it "sin," saying (2 Cor. 5:21): "Him that knew no sin, for us
He hath made sin"--namely, because of the penalty of sin. "Nor is
there greater ignominy on that account, because he said: 'He is
accursed of God.'" For, "unless God had hated sin, He would never
have sent His Son to take upon Himself our death, and to destroy it.
Acknowledge, then, that it was for us He took the curse upon Himself,
whom you confess to have died for us." Hence it is written (Gal.
3:13): "Christ hath redeemed us from the curse of the law, being made
a curse for us."
_______________________

FIFTH ARTICLE [III, Q. 46, Art. 5]

Whether Christ Endured All Suffering?

Objection 1: It would seem that Christ did endure all sufferings,
because Hilary (De Trin. x) says: "God's only-begotten Son testifies
that He endured every kind of human sufferings in order to accomplish
the sacrament of His death, when with bowed head He gave up the
ghost." It seems, therefore, that He did endure all human sufferings.

Obj. 2: Further, it is written (Isa. 52:13): "Behold My servant shall
understand, He shall be exalted and extolled, and shall be exceeding
high; as many as have been astonished at Him [Vulg.: 'thee'], so shall
His visage be inglorious among men, and His form among the sons of
men." But Christ was exalted in that He had all grace and all
knowledge, at which many were astonished in admiration thereof.
Therefore it seems that He was "inglorious," by enduring every human
suffering.

Obj. 3: Further, Christ's Passion was ordained for man's deliverance
from sin, as stated above (A. 3). But Christ came to deliver men from
every kind of sin. Therefore He ought to have endured every kind of
suffering.

_On the contrary,_ It is written (John 19:32): "The soldiers
therefore came: and they broke the legs of the first, and of the
other who was crucified with Him; but after they were come to Jesus,
when they saw that He was already dead, they did not break His legs."
Consequently, He did not endure every human suffering.

_I answer that,_ Human sufferings may be considered under two
aspects. First of all, specifically, and in this way it was not
necessary for Christ to endure them all, since many are mutually
exclusive, as burning and drowning; for we are dealing now with
sufferings inflicted from without, since it was not beseeming for Him
to endure those arising from within, such as bodily ailments, as
already stated (Q. 14, A. 4). But, speaking generically, He did
endure every human suffering. This admits of a threefold acceptance.
First of all, on the part of men: for He endured something from
Gentiles and from Jews; from men and from women, as is clear from the
women servants who accused Peter. He suffered from the rulers, from
their servants and from the mob, according to Ps. 2:1, 2: "Why have
the Gentiles raged, and the people devised vain things? The kings of
the earth stood up, and the princes met together, against the Lord
and against His Christ." He suffered from friends and acquaintances,
as is manifest from Judas betraying and Peter denying Him.

Secondly, the same is evident on the part of the sufferings which a
man can endure. For Christ suffered from friends abandoning Him; in
His reputation, from the blasphemies hurled at Him; in His honor and
glory, from the mockeries and the insults heaped upon Him; in things,
for He was despoiled of His garments; in His soul, from sadness,
weariness, and fear; in His body, from wounds and scourgings.

Thirdly, it may be considered with regard to His bodily members. In
His head He suffered from the crown of piercing thorns; in His hands
and feet, from the fastening of the nails; on His face from the blows
and spittle; and from the lashes over His entire body. Moreover, He
suffered in all His bodily senses: in touch, by being scourged and
nailed; in taste, by being given vinegar and gall to drink; in smell,
by being fastened to the gibbet in a place reeking with the stench of
corpses, "which is called Calvary"; in hearing, by being tormented
with the cries of blasphemers and scorners; in sight, by beholding
the tears of His Mother and of the disciple whom He loved.

Reply Obj. 1: Hilary's words are to be understood as to all classes
of sufferings, but not as to their kinds.

Reply Obj. 2: The likeness is sustained, not as to the number of the
sufferings and graces, but as to their greatness; for, as He was
uplifted above others in gifts of graces, so was He lowered beneath
others by the ignominy of His sufferings.

Reply Obj. 3: The very least one of Christ's sufferings was
sufficient of itself to redeem the human race from all sins; but as
to fittingness, it sufficed that He should endure all classes of
sufferings, as stated above.
_______________________

SIXTH ARTICLE [III, Q. 46, Art. 6]

Whether the Pain of Christ's Passion Was Greater Than All Other Pains?

Objection 1: It would seem that the pain of Christ's Passion was not
greater than all other pains. For the sufferer's pain is increased by
the sharpness and the duration of the suffering. But some of the
martyrs endured sharper and more prolonged pains than Christ, as is
seen in St. Lawrence, who was roasted upon a gridiron; and in St.
Vincent, whose flesh was torn with iron pincers. Therefore it seems
that the pain of the suffering Christ was not the greatest.

Obj. 2: Further, strength of soul mitigates pain, so much so that the
Stoics held there was no sadness in the soul of a wise man; and
Aristotle (Ethic. ii) holds that moral virtue fixes the mean in the
passions. But Christ had most perfect strength of soul. Therefore it
seems that the greatest pain did not exist in Christ.

Obj. 3: Further, the more sensitive the sufferer is, the more acute
will the pain be. But the soul is more sensitive than the body, since
the body feels in virtue of the soul; also, Adam in the state of
innocence seems to have had a body more sensitive than Christ had,
who assumed a human body with its natural defects. Consequently, it
seems that the pain of a sufferer in purgatory, or in hell, or even
Adam's pain, if he suffered at all, was greater than Christ's in the
Passion.

Obj. 4: Further, the greater the good lost, the greater the pain. But
by sinning the sinner loses a greater good than Christ did when
suffering; since the life of grace is greater than the life of
nature: also, Christ, who lost His life, but was to rise again after
three days, seems to have lost less than those who lose their lives
and abide in death. Therefore it seems that Christ's pain was not the
greatest of all.

Obj. 5: Further, the victim's innocence lessens the sting of his
sufferings. But Christ died innocent, according to Jer. 9:19: "I was
as a meek lamb, that is carried to be a victim." Therefore it seems
that the pain of Christ's Passion was not the greatest.

Obj. 6: Further, there was nothing superfluous in Christ's conduct.
But the slightest pain would have sufficed to secure man's salvation,
because from His Divine Person it would have had infinite virtue.
Therefore it would have been superfluous to choose the greatest of
all pains.

_On the contrary,_ It is written (Lam. 1:12) on behalf of Christ's
Person: "O all ye that pass by the way attend, and see if there be
any sorrow like unto My sorrow."

_I answer that,_ As we have stated, when treating of the defects
assumed by Christ (Q. 15, AA. 5, 6), there was true and sensible pain
in the suffering Christ, which is caused by something hurtful to the
body: also, there was internal pain, which is caused from the
apprehension of something hurtful, and this is termed "sadness." And
in Christ each of these was the greatest in this present life. This
arose from four causes. First of all, from the sources of His pain.
For the cause of the sensitive pain was the wounding of His body; and
this wounding had its bitterness, both from the extent of the
suffering already mentioned (A. 5) and from the kind of suffering,
since the death of the crucified is most bitter, because they are
pierced in nervous and highly sensitive parts--to wit, the hands and
feet; moreover, the weight of the suspended body intensifies the
agony, and besides this there is the duration of the suffering
because they do not die at once like those slain by the sword. The
cause of the interior pain was, first of all, all the sins of the
human race, for which He made satisfaction by suffering; hence He
ascribes them, so to speak, to Himself, saying (Ps. 21:2): "The words
of my sins." Secondly, especially the fall of the Jews and of the
others who sinned in His death chiefly of the apostles, who were
scandalized at His Passion. Thirdly, the loss of His bodily life,
which is naturally horrible to human nature.

The magnitude of His suffering may be considered, secondly, from the
susceptibility of the sufferer as to both soul and body. For His body
was endowed with a most perfect constitution, since it was fashioned
miraculously by the operation of the Holy Ghost; just as some other
things made by miracles are better than others, as Chrysostom says
(Hom. xxii in Joan.) respecting the wine into which Christ changed
the water at the wedding-feast. And, consequently, Christ's sense of
touch, the sensitiveness of which is the reason for our feeling pain,
was most acute. His soul likewise, from its interior powers,
apprehended most vehemently all the causes of sadness.

Thirdly, the magnitude of Christ's suffering can be estimated from
the singleness of His pain and sadness. In other sufferers the
interior sadness is mitigated, and even the exterior suffering, from
some consideration of reason, by some derivation or redundance from
the higher powers into the lower; but it was not so with the
suffering Christ, because "He permitted each one of His powers to
exercise its proper function," as Damascene says (De Fide Orth. iii).

Fourthly, the magnitude of the pain of Christ's suffering can be
reckoned by this, that the pain and sorrow were accepted voluntarily,
to the end of men's deliverance from sin; and consequently He
embraced the amount of pain proportionate to the magnitude of the
fruit which resulted therefrom.

From all these causes weighed together, it follows that Christ's pain
was the very greatest.

Reply Obj. 1: This argument follows from only one of the
considerations adduced--namely, from the bodily injury, which is the
cause of sensitive pain; but the torment of the suffering Christ is
much more intensified from other causes, as above stated.

Reply Obj. 2: Moral virtue lessens interior sadness in one way, and
outward sensitive pain in quite another; for it lessens interior
sadness directly by fixing the mean, as being its proper matter,
within limits. But, as was laid down in the Second Part (I-II, Q. 64,
A. 2), moral virtue fixes the mean in the passions, not according to
mathematical quantity, but according to quantity of proportion, so
that the passion shall not go beyond the rule of reason. And since
the Stoics held all sadness to be unprofitable, they accordingly
believed it to be altogether discordant with reason, and consequently
to be shunned altogether by a wise man. But in very truth some
sadness is praiseworthy, as Augustine proves (De Civ. Dei
xiv)--namely, when it flows from holy love, as, for instance, when a
man is saddened over his own or others' sins. Furthermore, it is
employed as a useful means of satisfying for sins, according to the
saying of the Apostle (2 Cor. 7:10): "The sorrow that is according to
God worketh penance, steadfast unto salvation." And so to atone for
the sins of all men, Christ accepted sadness, the greatest in
absolute quantity, yet not exceeding the rule of reason. But moral
virtue does not lessen outward sensitive pain, because such pain is
not subject to reason, but follows the nature of the body; yet it
lessens it indirectly by redundance of the higher powers into the
lower. But this did not happen in Christ's case, as stated above (cf.
Q. 14, A. 1, ad 2; Q. 45, A. 2).

Reply Obj. 3: The pain of a suffering, separated soul belongs to the
state of future condemnation, which exceeds every evil of this life,
just as the glory of the saints surpasses every good of the present
life. Accordingly, when we say that Christ's pain was the greatest,
we make no comparison between His and the pain of a separated soul.
But Adam's body could not suffer, except he sinned; so that he would
become mortal, and passible. And, though actually suffering, it would
have felt less pain than Christ's body, for the reasons already
stated. From all this it is clear that even if Adam had suffered in
the state of innocence, [though this was impossible] his pain would
have been less than Christ's.

Reply Obj. 4: Christ grieved not only over the loss of His own bodily
life, but also over the sins of all others. And this grief in Christ
surpassed all grief of every contrite heart, both because it flowed
from a greater wisdom and charity, by which the pang of contrition is
intensified, and because He grieved at the one time for all sins,
according to Isa. 53:4: "Surely He hath carried our sorrows." But
such was the dignity of Christ's life in the body, especially on
account of the Godhead united with it, that its loss, even for one
hour, would be a matter of greater grief than the loss of another
man's life for howsoever long a time. Hence the Philosopher says
(Ethic. iii) that the man of virtue loves his life all the more in
proportion as he knows it to be better; and yet he exposes it for
virtue's sake. And in like fashion Christ laid down His most beloved
life for the good of charity, according to Jer. 12:7: "I have given
My dear soul into the hands of her enemies."

Reply Obj. 5: The sufferer's innocence does lessen numerically the
pain of the suffering, since, when a guilty man suffers, he grieves
not merely on account of the penalty, but also because of the crime,
whereas the innocent man grieves only for the penalty: yet this pain
is more intensified by reason of his innocence, in so far as he deems
the hurt inflicted to be the more undeserved. Hence it is that even
others are more deserving of blame if they do not compassionate him,
according to Isa. 57:1: "The just perisheth, and no man layeth it to
heart."

Reply Obj. 6: Christ willed to deliver the human race from sins not
merely by His power, but also according to justice. And therefore He
did not simply weigh what great virtue His suffering would have from
union with the Godhead, but also how much, according to His human
nature, His pain would avail for so great a satisfaction.
_______________________

SEVENTH ARTICLE [III, Q. 46, Art. 7]

Whether Christ Suffered in His Whole Soul?

Objection 1: It would seem that Christ did not suffer in His whole
soul. For the soul suffers indirectly when the body suffers, inasmuch
as it is the "act of the body." But the soul is not, as to its every
part, the "act of the body"; because the intellect is the act of no
body, as is said _De Anima_ iii. Therefore it seems that Christ did
not suffer in His whole soul.

Obj. 2: Further, every power of the soul is passive in regard to its
proper object. But the higher part of reason has for its object the
eternal types, "to the consideration and consultation of which it
directs itself," as Augustine says (De Trin. xii). But Christ could
suffer no hurt from the eternal types, since they are nowise opposed
to Him. Therefore it seems that He did not suffer in His whole soul.

Obj. 3: Further, a sensitive passion is said to be complete when it
comes into contact with the reason. But there was none such in
Christ, but only "pro-passions"; as Jerome remarks on Matt. 26:37.
Hence Dionysius says in a letter to John the Evangelist that "He
endured only mentally the sufferings inflicted upon Him."
Consequently it does not seem that Christ suffered in His whole soul.

Obj. 4: Further, suffering causes pain: but there is no pain in the
speculative intellect, because, as the Philosopher says (Topic. i),
"there is no sadness in opposition to the pleasure which comes of
consideration." Therefore it seems that Christ did not suffer in His
whole soul.

_On the contrary,_ It is written (Ps. 87:4) on behalf of Christ: "My
soul is filled with evils": upon which the gloss adds: "Not with
vices, but with woes, whereby the soul suffers with the flesh; or
with evils, viz. of a perishing people, by compassionating them." But
His soul would not have been filled with these evils except He had
suffered in His whole soul. Therefore Christ suffered in His entire
soul.

_I answer that,_ A whole is so termed with respect to its parts. But
the parts of a soul are its faculties. So, then, the whole soul is
said to suffer in so far as it is afflicted as to its essence, or as
to all its faculties. But it must be borne in mind that a faculty of
the soul can suffer in two ways: first of all, by its own passion;
and this comes of its being afflicted by its proper object; thus,
sight may suffer from superabundance of the visible object. In
another way a faculty suffers by a passion in the subject on which it
is based; as sight suffers when the sense of touch in the eye is
affected, upon which the sense of sight rests, as, for instance, when
the eye is pricked, or is disaffected by heat.

So, then, we say that if the soul be considered with respect to its
essence, it is evident that Christ's whole soul suffered. For the
soul's whole essence is allied with the body, so that it is entire in
the whole body and in its every part. Consequently, when the body
suffered and was disposed to separate from the soul, the entire soul
suffered. But if we consider the whole soul according to its
faculties, speaking thus of the proper passions of the faculties, He
suffered indeed as to all His lower powers; because in all the soul's
lower powers, whose operations are but temporal, there was something
to be found which was a source of woe to Christ, as is evident from
what was said above (A. 6). But Christ's higher reason did not suffer
thereby on the part of its object, which is God, who was the cause,
not of grief, but rather of delight and joy, to the soul of Christ.
Nevertheless, all the powers of Christ's soul did suffer according as
any faculty is said to be affected as regards its subject, because
all the faculties of Christ's soul were rooted in its essence, to
which suffering extended when the body, whose act it is, suffered.

Reply Obj. 1: Although the intellect as a faculty is not the act of
the body, still the soul's essence is the act of the body, and in it
the intellective faculty is rooted, as was shown in the First Part,
Q. 77, AA. 6, 8.

Reply Obj. 2: This argument proceeds from passion on the part of the
proper object, according to which Christ's higher reason did not
suffer.

Reply Obj. 3: Grief is then said to be a true passion, by which the
soul is troubled, when the passion in the sensitive part causes
reason to deflect from the rectitude of its act, so that it then
follows the passion, and has no longer free-will with regard to it.
In this way passion of the sensitive part did not extend to reason in
Christ, but merely subjectively, as was stated above.

Reply Obj. 4: The speculative intellect can have no pain or sadness
on the part of its object, which is truth considered absolutely, and
which is its perfection: nevertheless, both grief and its cause can
reach it in the way mentioned above.
_______________________

EIGHTH ARTICLE [III, Q. 46, Art. 8]

Whether Christ's Entire Soul Enjoyed Blessed Fruition During the
Passion?

Objection 1: It would seem that Christ's entire soul did not enjoy
blessed fruition during the Passion. For it is not possible to be sad
and glad at the one time, since sadness and gladness are contraries.
But Christ's whole soul suffered grief during the Passion, as was
stated above (A. 7). Therefore His whole soul could not enjoy
fruition.

Obj. 2: Further, the Philosopher says (Ethic. vii) that, if sadness
be vehement, it not only checks the contrary delight, but every
delight; and conversely. But the grief of Christ's Passion was the
greatest, as shown above (A. 6); and likewise the enjoyment of
fruition is also the greatest, as was laid down in the first volume
of the Second Part (I-II, Q. 34, A. 3). Consequently, it was not
possible for Christ's whole soul to be suffering and rejoicing at the
one time.

Obj. 3: Further, beatific "fruition" comes of the knowledge and love
of Divine things, as Augustine says (Doctr. Christ. i). But all the
soul's powers do not extend to the knowledge and love of God.
Therefore Christ's whole soul did not enjoy fruition.

_On the contrary,_ Damascene says (De Fide Orth. iii): Christ's
Godhead "permitted His flesh to do and to suffer what was proper to
it." In like fashion, since it belonged to Christ's soul, inasmuch as
it was blessed, to enjoy fruition, His Passion did not impede
fruition.

_I answer that,_ As stated above (A. 7), the whole soul can be
understood both according to its essence and according to all its
faculties. If it be understood according to its essence, then His
whole soul did enjoy fruition, inasmuch as it is the subject of the
higher part of the soul, to which it belongs, to enjoy the Godhead:
so that as passion, by reason of the essence, is attributed to the
higher part of the soul, so, on the other hand, by reason of the
superior part of the soul, fruition is attributed to the essence. But
if we take the whole soul as comprising all its faculties, thus His
entire soul did not enjoy fruition: not directly, indeed, because
fruition is not the act of any one part of the soul; nor by any
overflow of glory, because, since Christ was still upon earth, there
was no overflowing of glory from the higher part into the lower, nor
from the soul into the body. But since, on the contrary, the soul's
higher part was not hindered in its proper acts by the lower, it
follows that the higher part of His soul enjoyed fruition perfectly
while Christ was suffering.

Reply Obj. 1: The joy of fruition is not opposed directly to the
grief of the Passion, because they have not the same object. Now
nothing prevents contraries from being in the same subject, but not
according to the same. And so the joy of fruition can appertain to
the higher part of reason by its proper act; but grief of the Passion
according to the subject. Grief of the Passion belongs to the essence
of the soul by reason of the body, whose form the soul is; whereas
the joy of fruition (belongs to the soul) by reason of the faculty in
which it is subjected.

Reply Obj. 2: The Philosopher's contention is true because of the
overflow which takes place naturally of one faculty of the soul into
another; but it was not so with Christ, as was said above.

Reply Obj. 3: Such argument holds good of the totality of the soul
with regard to its faculties.
_______________________

NINTH ARTICLE [III, Q. 46, Art. 9]

Whether Christ Suffered at a Suitable Time?

Objection 1: It would seem that Christ did not suffer at a suitable
time. For Christ's Passion was prefigured by the sacrifice of the
Paschal lamb: hence the Apostle says (1 Cor. 5:7): "Christ our Pasch
is sacrificed." But the paschal lamb was slain "on the fourteenth day
at eventide," as is stated in Ex. 12:6. Therefore it seems that
Christ ought to have suffered then; which is manifestly false: for He
was then celebrating the Pasch with His disciples, according to
Mark's account (14:12): "On the first day of the unleavened bread,
when they sacrificed the Pasch"; whereas it was on the following day
that He suffered.

Obj. 2: Further, Christ's Passion is called His uplifting, according
to John 3:14: "So must the Son of man be lifted up." And Christ is
Himself called the Sun of Justice, as we read Mal. 4:2. Therefore it
seems that He ought to have suffered at the sixth hour, when the sun
is at its highest point, and yet the contrary appears from Mk. 15:25:
"It was the third hour, and they crucified Him."

Obj. 3: Further, as the sun is at its highest point in each day at
the sixth hour, so also it reaches its highest point in every year at
the summer solstice. Therefore Christ ought to have suffered about
the time of the summer solstice rather than about the vernal equinox.

Obj. 4: Further, the world was enlightened by Christ's presence in
it, according to John 9:5: "As long as I am in the world I am the
light of the world." Consequently it was fitting for man's salvation
that Christ should have lived longer in the world, so that He should
have suffered, not in young, but in old, age.

_On the contrary,_ It is written (John 13:1): "Jesus, knowing that
His hour was come for Him to pass out of this world to the Father";
and (John 2:4): "My hour is not yet come." Upon which texts Augustine
observes: "When He had done as much as He deemed sufficient, then
came His hour, not of necessity, but of will, not of condition, but
of power." Therefore Christ died at an opportune time.

_I answer that,_ As was observed above (A. 1), Christ's Passion was
subject to His will. But His will was ruled by the Divine wisdom
which "ordereth all things" conveniently and "sweetly" (Wis. 8:1).
Consequently it must be said that Christ's Passion was enacted at an
opportune time. Hence it is written in De Qq. Vet. et Nov. Test., qu.
lv: "The Saviour did everything in its proper place and season."

Reply Obj. 1: Some hold that Christ did die on the fourteenth day of
the moon, when the Jews sacrificed the Pasch: hence it is stated
(John 18:28) that the Jews "went not into Pilate's hall" on the day
of the Passion, "that they might not be defiled, but that they might
eat the Pasch." Upon this Chrysostom observes (Hom. lxxxii in Joan.):
"The Jews celebrated the Pasch then; but He celebrated the Pasch on
the previous day, reserving His own slaying until the Friday, when
the old Pasch was kept." And this appears to tally with the statement
(John 13:1-5) that "before the festival day of the Pasch . . . when
supper was done" . . . Christ washed "the feet of the disciples."

But Matthew's account (26:17) seems opposed to this; that "on the
first day of the Azymes the disciples came to Jesus, saying: Where
wilt Thou that we prepare for Thee to eat the Pasch?" From which, as
Jerome says, "since the fourteenth day of the first month is called
the day of the Azymes, when the lamb was slain, and when it was full
moon," it is quite clear that Christ kept the supper on the
fourteenth and died on the fifteenth. And this comes out more clearly
from Mk. 14:12: "On the first day of the unleavened bread, when they
sacrificed the Pasch," etc.; and from Luke 22:7: "The day of the
unleavened bread came, on which it was necessary that the Pasch
should be killed."

Consequently, then, others say that Christ ate the Pasch with His
disciples on the proper day--that is, on the fourteenth day of the
moon--"showing thereby that up to the last day He was not opposed to
the law," as Chrysostom says (Hom. lxxxi in Matth.): but that the
Jews, being busied in compassing Christ's death against the law, put
off celebrating the Pasch until the following day. And on this
account it is said of them that on the day of Christ's Passion they
were unwilling to enter Pilate's hall, "that they might not be
defiled, but that they might eat the Pasch."

But even this solution does not tally with Mark, who says: "On the
first day of the unleavened bread, when they sacrificed the Pasch."
Consequently Christ and the Jews celebrated the ancient Pasch at the
one time. And as Bede says on Luke 22:7, 8: "Although Christ who is
our Pasch was slain on the following day--that is, on the fifteenth
day of the moon--nevertheless, on the night when the Lamb was
sacrificed, delivering to the disciples to be celebrated, the
mysteries of His body and blood, and being held and bound by the
Jews, He hallowed the opening of His own immolation--that is, of His
Passion."

But the words (John 13:1) "Before the festival day of the Pasch" are
to be understood to refer to the fourteenth day of the moon, which
then fell upon the Thursday: for the fifteenth day of the moon was
the most solemn day of the Pasch with the Jews: and so the same day
which John calls "before the festival day of the Pasch," on account
of the natural distinction of days, Matthew calls the first day of
the unleavened bread, because, according to the rite of the Jewish
festivity, the solemnity began from the evening of the preceding day.
When it is said, then, that they were going to eat the Pasch on the
fifteenth day of the month, it is to be understood that the Pasch
there is not called the Paschal lamb, which was sacrificed on the
fourteenth day, but the Paschal food--that is, the unleavened
bread--which had to be eaten by the clean. Hence Chrysostom in the
same passage gives another explanation, that the Pasch can be taken
as meaning the whole feast of the Jews, which lasted seven days.

Reply Obj. 2: As Augustine says (De Consensu Evang. iii): "'It was
about the sixth hour' when the Lord was delivered up by Pilate to be
crucified," as John relates. For it "was not quite the sixth hour,
but about the sixth--that is, it was after the fifth, and when part
of the sixth had been entered upon until the sixth hour was
ended--that the darkness began, when Christ hung upon the cross. It
is understood to have been the third hour when the Jews clamored for
the Lord to be crucified: and it is most clearly shown that they
crucified Him when they clamored out. Therefore, lest anyone might
divert the thought of so great a crime from the Jews to the soldiers,
he says: 'It was the third hour, and they crucified Him,' that they
before all may be found to have crucified Him, who at the third hour
clamored for His crucifixion. Although there are not wanting some
persons who wish the Parasceve to be understood as the third hour,
which John recalls, saying: 'It was the Parasceve, about the sixth
hour.' For 'Parasceve' is interpreted 'preparation.' But the true
Pasch, which was celebrated in the Lord's Passion, began to be
prepared from the ninth hour of the night--namely, when the chief
priests said: 'He is deserving of death.'" According to John, then,
"the sixth hour of the Parasceve" lasts from that hour of the night
down to Christ's crucifixion; while, according to Mark, it is the
third hour of the day.

Still, there are some who contend that this discrepancy is due to the
error of a Greek transcriber: since the characters employed by them
to represent 3 and 6 are somewhat alike.

Reply Obj. 3: According to the author of De Qq. Vet. et Nov. Test.,
qu. lv, "our Lord willed to redeem and reform the world by His
Passion, at the time of year at which He had created it--that is, at
the equinox. It is then that day grows upon night; because by our
Saviour's Passion we are brought from darkness to light." And since
the perfect enlightening will come about at Christ's second coming,
therefore the season of His second coming is compared (Matt. 24:32,
33) to the summer in these words: "When the branch thereof is now
tender, and the leaves come forth, you know that summer is nigh: so
you also, when you shall see all these things, know ye that it is
nigh even at the doors." And then also shall be Christ's greatest
exaltation.

Reply Obj. 4: Christ willed to suffer while yet young, for three
reasons. First of all, to commend the more His love by giving up His
life for us when He was in His most perfect state of life. Secondly,
because it was not becoming for Him to show any decay of nature nor
to be subject to disease, as stated above (Q. 14, A. 4). Thirdly,
that by dying and rising at an early age Christ might exhibit
beforehand in His own person the future condition of those who rise
again. Hence it is written (Eph. 4:13): "Until we all meet into the
unity of faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a
perfect man, unto the measure of the age of the fulness of Christ."
_______________________

TENTH ARTICLE [III, Q. 46, Art. 10]

Whether Christ Suffered in a Suitable Place?

Objection 1: It would seem that Christ did not suffer in a suitable
place. For Christ suffered according to His human nature, which was
conceived in Nazareth and born in Bethlehem. Consequently it seems
that He ought not to have suffered in Jerusalem, but in Nazareth or
Bethlehem.

Obj. 2: Further, the reality ought to correspond with the figure. But
Christ's Passion was prefigured by the sacrifices of the Old Law, and
these were offered up in the Temple. Therefore it seems that Christ
ought to have suffered in the Temple, and not outside the city gate.

Obj. 3: Further, the medicine should correspond with the disease. But
Christ's Passion was the medicine against Adam's sin: and Adam was
not buried in Jerusalem, but in Hebron; for it is written (Josh.
14:15): "The name of Hebron before was called Cariath-Arbe: Adam the
greatest in the land of [Vulg.: 'among'] the Enacims was laid there."

_On the contrary,_ It is written (Luke 13:33): "It cannot be that a
prophet perish out of Jerusalem." Therefore it was fitting that He
should die in Jerusalem.

_I answer that,_ According to the author of _De Qq. Vet. et Nov.
Test.,_ qu. lv, "the Saviour did everything in its proper place and
season," because, as all things are in His hands, so are all places:
and consequently, since Christ suffered at a suitable time, so did He
in a suitable place.

Reply Obj. 1: Christ died most appropriately in Jerusalem. First of
all, because Jerusalem was God's chosen place for the offering of
sacrifices to Himself: and these figurative sacrifices foreshadowed
Christ's Passion, which is a true sacrifice, according to Eph. 5:2:
"He hath delivered Himself for us, an oblation and a sacrifice to God
for an odor of sweetness." Hence Bede says in a Homily (xxiii): "When
the Passion drew nigh, our Lord willed to draw nigh to the place of
the Passion"--that is to say, to Jerusalem--whither He came five days
before the Pasch; just as, according to the legal precept, the
Paschal lamb was led to the place of immolation five days before the
Pasch, which is the tenth day of the moon.

Secondly, because the virtue of His Passion was to be spread over the
whole world, He wished to suffer in the center of the habitable
world--that is, in Jerusalem. Accordingly it is written (Ps. 73:12):
"But God is our King before ages: He hath wrought salvation in the
midst of the earth"--that is, in Jerusalem, which is called "the
navel of the earth" [*Cf. Jerome's comment on Ezech. 5:5].

Thirdly, because it was specially in keeping with His humility: that,
as He chose the most shameful manner of death, so likewise it was
part of His humility that He did not refuse to suffer in so
celebrated a place. Hence Pope Leo says (Serm. I in Epiph.): "He who
had taken upon Himself the form of a servant chose Bethlehem for His
nativity and Jerusalem for His Passion."

Fourthly, He willed to suffer in Jerusalem, where the chief priests
dwelt, to show that the wickedness of His slayers arose from the
chiefs of the Jewish people. Hence it is written (Acts 4:27): "There
assembled together in this city against Thy holy child Jesus whom
Thou hast anointed, Herod, and Pontius Pilate, with the Gentiles and
the people of Israel."

Reply Obj. 2: For three reasons Christ suffered outside the gate, and
not in the Temple nor in the city. First of all, that the truth might
correspond with the figure. For the calf and the goat which were
offered in most solemn sacrifice for expiation on behalf of the
entire multitude were burnt outside the camp, as commanded in Lev.
16:27. Hence it is written (Heb. 13:27): "For the bodies of those
beasts, whose blood is brought into the holies by the high-priest for
sin, are burned without the camp. Wherefore Jesus also, that He might
sanctify the people by His own blood, suffered without the gate."

Secondly, to set us the example of shunning worldly conversation.
Accordingly the passage continues: "Let us go forth therefore to Him
without the camp, bearing His reproach."

Thirdly, as Chrysostom says in a sermon on the Passion (Hom. i De
Cruce et Latrone): "The Lord was not willing to suffer under a roof,
nor in the Jewish Temple, lest the Jews might take away the saving
sacrifice, and lest you might think He was offered for that people
only. Consequently, it was beyond the city and outside the walls,
that you may learn it was a universal sacrifice, an oblation for the
whole world, a cleansing for all."

Reply Obj. 3: According to Jerome, in his commentary on Matt. 27:33,
"someone explained 'the place of Calvary' as being the place where
Adam was buried; and that it was so called because the skull of the
first man was buried there. A pleasing interpretation indeed, and one
suited to catch the ear of the people, but, still, not the true one.
For the spots where the condemned are beheaded are outside the city
and beyond the gates, deriving thence the name of Calvary--that is,
of the beheaded. Jesus, accordingly, was crucified there, that the
standards of martyrdom might be uplifted over what was formerly the
place of the condemned. But Adam was buried close by Hebron and Arbe,
as we read in the book of Jesus Ben Nave." But Jesus was to be
crucified in the common spot of the condemned rather than beside
Adam's sepulchre, to make it manifest that Christ's cross was the
remedy, not only for Adam's personal sin, but also for the sin of the
entire world.
_______________________

ELEVENTH ARTICLE [III, Q. 46, Art. 11]

Whether It Was Fitting for Christ to Be Crucified with Thieves?

Objection 1: It would seem unfitting for Christ to have been
crucified with thieves, because it is written (2 Cor. 6:14): "What
participation hath justice with injustice?" But for our sakes Christ
"of God is made unto us justice" (1 Cor. 1:30); whereas iniquity
applies to thieves. Therefore it was not fitting for Christ to be
crucified with thieves.

Obj. 2: Further, on Matt. 26:35, "Though I should die with Thee, I
will not deny Thee," Origen (Tract. xxxv in Matth.) observes: "It was
not men's lot to die with Jesus, since He died for all." Again, on
Luke 22:33, "I am ready to go with Thee, both into prison and death,"
Ambrose says: "Our Lord's Passion has followers, but not equals." It
seems, then, much less fitting for Christ to suffer with thieves.

Obj. 3: Further, it is written (Matt. 27:44) that "the thieves who
were crucified with Him reproached Him." But in Luke 22:42 it is
stated that one of them who were crucified with Christ cried out to
Him: "Lord, remember me when Thou shalt come into Thy kingdom." It
seems, then, that besides the blasphemous thieves there was another
man who did not blaspheme Him: and so the Evangelist's account does
not seem to be accurate when it says that Christ was crucified with
thieves.

_On the contrary,_ It was foretold by Isaias (53:12): "And He was
reputed with the wicked."

_I answer that,_ Christ was crucified between thieves from one
intention on the part of the Jews, and from quite another on the part
of God's ordaining. As to the intention of the Jews, Chrysostom
remarks (Hom. lxxxvii in Matth.) that they crucified the two thieves,
one on either side, "that He might be made to share their guilt. But
it did not happen so; because mention is never made of them; whereas
His cross is honored everywhere. Kings lay aside their crowns to take
up the cross: on their purple robes, on their diadems, on their
weapons, on the consecrated table, everywhere the cross shines forth."

As to God's ordinance, Christ was crucified with thieves, because, as
Jerome says on Matt. 27:33: "As Christ became accursed of the cross
for us, so for our salvation He was crucified as a guilty one among
the guilty." Secondly, as Pope Leo observes (Serm. iv de Passione):
"Two thieves were crucified, one on His right hand and one on His
left, to set forth by the very appearance of the gibbet that
separation of all men which shall be made in His hour of judgment."
And Augustine on John 7:36: "The very cross, if thou mark it well,
was a judgment-seat: for the judge being set in the midst, the one
who believed was delivered, the other who mocked Him was condemned.
Already He has signified what He shall do to the quick and the dead;
some He will set on His right, others on His left hand." Thirdly,
according to Hilary (Comm. xxxiii in Matth.): "Two thieves are set,
one upon His right and one upon His left, to show that all mankind is
called to the sacrament of His Passion. But because of the cleavage
between believers and unbelievers, the multitude is divided into
right and left, those on the right being saved by the justification
of faith." Fourthly, because, as Bede says on Mk. 15:27: "The thieves
crucified with our Lord denote those who, believing in and confessing
Christ, either endure the conflict of martyrdom or keep the
institutes of stricter observance. But those who do the like for the
sake of everlasting glory are denoted by the faith of the thief on
the right; while others who do so for the sake of human applause copy
the mind and behavior of the one on the left."

Reply Obj. 1: Just as Christ was not obliged to die, but willingly
submitted to death so as to vanquish death by His power: so neither
deserved He to be classed with thieves; but willed to be reputed with
the ungodly that He might destroy ungodliness by His power.
Accordingly, Chrysostom says (Hom. lxxxiv in Joan.) that "to convert
the thief upon the cross, and lead him into paradise, was no less a
wonder than to shake the rocks."

Reply Obj. 2: It was not fitting that anyone else should die with
Christ from the same cause as Christ: hence Origen continues thus in
the same passage: "All had been under sin, and all required that
another should die for them, not they for others."

Reply Obj. 3: As Augustine says (De Consensu Evang. iii): We can
understand Matthew "as putting the plural for the singular" when he
said "the thieves reproached Him." Or it may be said, with Jerome,
that "at first both blasphemed Him, but afterwards one believed in
Him on witnessing the wonders."
_______________________

TWELFTH ARTICLE [III, Q. 46, Art. 12]

Whether Christ's Passion Is to Be Attributed to His Godhead?

Objection 1: It would seem that Christ's Passion is to be attributed
to His Godhead; for it is written (1 Cor. 2:8): "If they had known
it, they would never have crucified the Lord of glory." But Christ is
the Lord of glory in respect of His Godhead. Therefore Christ's
Passion is attributed to Him in respect of His Godhead.

Obj. 2: Further, the principle of men's salvation is the Godhead
Itself, according to Ps. 36:39: "But the salvation of the just is
from the Lord." Consequently, if Christ's Passion did not appertain
to His Godhead, it would seem that it could not produce fruit in us.

Obj. 3: Further, the Jews were punished for slaying Christ as for
murdering God Himself; as is proved by the gravity of the punishment.
Now this would not be so if the Passion were not attributed to the
Godhead. Therefore Christ's Passion should be so attributed.

_On the contrary,_ Athanasius says (Ep. ad Epict.): "The Word is
impassible whose Nature is Divine." But what is impassible cannot
suffer. Consequently, Christ's Passion did not concern His Godhead.

_I answer that,_ As stated above (Q. 2, AA. 1, 2, 3, 6), the union of
the human nature with the Divine was effected in the Person, in the
hypostasis, in the suppositum, yet observing the distinction of
natures; so that it is the same Person and hypostasis of the Divine
and human natures, while each nature retains that which is proper to
it. And therefore, as stated above (Q. 16, A. 4), the Passion is to
be attributed to the suppositum of the Divine Nature, not because of
