  Sampson shaft of the Oberhartz silver mine,
          near St. Andreasberg, Hanover.             2,437

  The hoisting shaft of the Rosebridge Colliery,
          near Wigan, Lancashire, England.           2,458

  Shaft of the coal mines of St. Luke, near
          St. Chaumont, France.                      2,253

  Amelia shaft, Shemnitz, Hungary.                   1,782

  The No. 1 Camphausen shaft, near Fishbach,
          in the department of the Saarbruck
          Collieries, Prussia.                       1,650


Now, taking the mines of the Comstock for a distance of over a
mile--from the Utah on the north to the Alto on the south--there is
hardly a mine that is not down over 2,500 feet, and most of the shafts
are deeper than those mentioned above; while the Union Consolidated
shaft has a vertical depth of 2,900 feet, and the Yellow Jacket a
depth of 3,030 feet. In his closing argument before the Congressional
Committee on Mines and Mining in 1872, Adolph Sutro of the Sutro
tunnel said: "The deepest hole dug by man since the world has existed
is only 2,700 feet deep, and it remains for the youngest nation on
earth to contribute more to science and geology by giving
opportunities of studying the formation of mineral veins at a greater
depth than has ever been accomplished by any other nation in the
world." Mr. Sutro was of the opinion that the completion of his tunnel
would enable our leading mining companies to reach a vertical depth of
5,000 feet.

This great depth has never yet been attained except in a bore hole or
artesian well. The deepest points to which the crust of the earth has
ever been penetrated have been by means of such borings in quest of
salt, coal, or water. A bore hole for salt at Probst Jesar, near
Lubtheen, for the Government of Mecklenberg-Schwerin, is down 3,315
feet, the size of which bore is twelve inches at the top and three
inches at the bottom. A bore hole was put down for the Prussian
Government to the depth of 4,183 feet. But in these bore holes the
United States leads the world, as there is one near St. Louis, Mo.,
that is 5,500 feet in depth. Here on the Comstock, in the Union
Consolidated mine, a depth of 3,300 feet has been attained, but not by
means of a single vertical shaft. The vertical depth of the shaft is
2,900 feet; the remainder of the depth has been attained by means of
winzes sunk from drifts. Several long drifts were run at this great
depth without difficulty as regards ventilation or heat.

The combination shaft is situated much further east (in which
direction the lode dips) than any other on the Comstock. It is 3,000
feet east of the point where the great vein crops out on the side of
Mount Davidson; 2,200 feet east of the old Chollar-Potosi shaft, 1,800
ft. east of the old Hale & Norcross (or Fair) shaft, and 2,000 ft.
east of the Savage shaft. Thus, it will be seen it is far out to the
front in the country toward which the vein is going. The shaft is sunk
in a very hard rock (andesite), every foot of which requires to be
blasted. The opening is about thirty feet in length by ten feet in
width. In timbering up this is divided into four different
compartments, some for the hoisting and some for the pumping
machinery, thus presenting the appearance at the top of four small
shafts set in a row. Over the shaft stand several large buildings, all
filled with ponderous machinery.

The Sutro drain tunnel (nearly four miles in length) connects with the
shaft at a depth of 1,600 ft., up to which point all the water
encountered below is pumped. The shaft was sunk to the depth of 2,200
ft. before more water was encountered than could be hoisted out in the
"skips" with the dirt. At the 2,200 level two Cornish pumps, each with
columns fifteen inches in diameter, were put in. At the 2,400 level
the same pumps were used. On this level a drift was run that connected
with the old Hale & Norcross and Savage shafts, producing a good
circulation of air both in the shaft and in the mines mentioned. At
this point, on account of the inflow from the mines consequent upon
connecting with them by means of the drift, they had more water than
the Cornish pumps could handle, and introduced the hydraulic pumps,
which pumps are run by the pressure of water from the surface through
a pipe running down from the top of the shaft, whereas the Cornish
pumps are run by huge steam engines.

By means of the hydraulic pumps they were enabled to sink the shaft to
the 2,600 level, and extended the Cornish pumps to that point, where
another set of hydraulic pumps was put in. They then sunk the shaft to
the 2,800 level, when they ran another drift westward, and tapped the
vein. The prospects at this depth in the Hale & Norcross and Chollar
mines were so encouraging that the management decided to sink the
shaft to the depth of 3,000 ft. On reaching the 3,000 level, they ran
a third drift through to the vein. The distance from the shaft to the
east wall of the vein was found to be only 250 ft. At the depth of
3,000 ft. they put in one of the pair of hydraulic pumps that is to be
set up there. The second pump is now arriving from San Francisco, and
as soon as the several parts are on the ground, it will be at once put
in place alongside its fellow on the 3,000 level. This additional pump
will increase the capacity from 600,000 to 700,000 gallons in
twenty-four hours, or about forty-five miners' inches.

Owing to the excellent showing of ore obtained on the 3,000 level by
the Hale & Norcross Company, and to the continuation of the ore below
that level (as shown by a winze sunk in the vein), the management
determined to sink the shaft to the vertical depth of 3,200 ft. It is
now 3,120 ft. deep, and it is safe to say that it will reach the depth
of 3,200 ft. early in September, when it will lack but eighty feet of
being as deep as the shaft at Przibram was at the time of the great
festival. Although the shaft is of great size--about thirty feet by
ten feet before the timbers are put in--the workmen lower it at the
rate of about three feet a day, in rock as hard as flint.

The hydraulic pump now working at the 3,000 foot level of the shaft is
the deepest in the world. In Europe the deepest is in a mine in the
Hartz Mountains, Germany, which is working at the depth of 2,700 feet.
It is, however, a small pump not half the size of the one in the
Combination shaft. Although these pumps were first used in Europe,
those in operation here are far superior in size, and in every other
respect, to those of the Old World, several valuable improvements
having been made in them by the machinists of the Pacific coast.

The capacity of the two Cornish pumps, which lift the water from the
2,900 foot level to the Sutro drain tunnel (at the 1,600 level), is
about 1,000,000 gallons in twenty-four hours, and the capacity of the
present hydraulic pumps is 3,500,000 gallons in the same time. They
are now daily pumping, with both hydraulic and Cornish pumps, about
4,000,000 gallons, but could pump at least 500,000 gallons more in
twenty-four hours than they are now doing. The daily capacity with the
hydraulic pump now coming, and which will be set up as mate to that
now in operation at the 3,000 foot level, will be 5,200,000 gallons.

The water which feeds the pressure pipe of the three sets of hydraulic
pumps is brought from near Lake Tahoe, in the Sierra Nevada Mountains.
The distance is about thirty miles, and the greater part of the way
the water flows through iron pipes, which at one point cross a
depression 1,720 feet in depth. The pressure pipe takes this water
from a tank situated on the eastern slope of Mount Davidson, 3,500
feet west of the shaft. At the tank this pipe is twelve inches in
diameter, but is only eight inches where it enters the top of the
shaft. The tank whence the water is taken is 426 feet higher than the
top of the shaft, therefore the vertical pressure upon the hydraulic
pump at the 3,000 foot level is 3,426 feet. The pressure pipe is of
ordinary galvanized iron where it receives the water at the tank, but
gradually grows thicker and stronger, and at the 3,000 level it is
constructed of cast iron, and is 21/2 inches in thickness. The pressure
at this point is 1,500 pounds to the square inch.

In the early days of hydraulic mining in California the miners thought
that with a vertical pressure of 300 feet they could almost tear the
world to pieces, and not a man among them could have been made to
believe that any pipe could be constructed that would withstand a
vertical pressure of 1,000 feet; but we now see that a thickness of
two and a half inches of cast iron will sustain a vertical pressure of
over 3,400 feet.

There is only one pressure pipe for all the hydraulic pumps. This
extends from the tank on the side of the mountain to the 3,000 foot
level. It is tapped at the points where are situated the several sets
of hydraulic pumps. The water from the pressure pipe enters one part
of the pump, where it moves a piston-back and forth, just as the
piston of a steam engine is moved by steam. This water engine moves a
pump which not only raises to the surface the water which has been
used as driving power, but also a vast quantity of water from the
shaft, all of which is forced up to the Sutro drain tunnel through
what is called a return pipe. Each set of hydraulic pumps has its
return pipe; therefore there are three return pipes--one from the
2,400, one from the 2,600, and another from the 3,000 level.

Some idea may be formed of the great size of these hydraulic engines
when it is known that the stations excavated for them at the several
levels where they are placed are 85 feet long, 28 feet wide, and 12
feet high. All this space is so filled with machinery that only
sufficient room is left to allow of the workmen moving about it. One
of these stations would, on the surface, form a hall large enough for
a ball room, and to those who are unacquainted with the skill of our
miners it must seem wonderful that such great openings can be made and
securely supported far down in the bowels of the earth; yet it is very
effectually done. These great subterranean halls are supported by
timbers 14x16 inches square set along the walls three feet apart, from
center to center, and the caps or joists passing overhead are timbers
of the same size. The timber used is mountain spruce. Not one of these
huge stations has thus far cost one dollar for repairs. The station at
the 2,400 level has been in use five years, that at the 2,600 three
years, and the one at the 3,000 level eight months. Room for
ventilation is left behind the timbers, and all are still sound.
Timbers of the same kind are used in the shaft, and all are sound. The
shaft has cost nothing for repairs. Being in hard andesite rock from
top to bottom, the ground does not swell and crowd upon the timbers.

If it shall be thought advisable to go to a greater depth than 3,200
feet, a station of large size will be made on the east side of the
present shaft, and in this station will be sunk a shaft of smaller
size. The reason why the work will be continued in this way is that in
a single hoist of 3,200 feet the weight of a steel wire cable of that
length is very great--so great that the loaded cage it brings up is a
mere trifle in comparison. In this secondary shaft the hoisting
apparatus and pumps will be run by means of compressed air. As it is
very expensive to make compressed air by steam power, the pressure
pipe will be tapped at the level of the Sutro tunnel, and a stream of
water taken out that will be used in running a turbine wheel of
sufficient capacity to drive three air compressors. As there will be a
vertical pressure upon the turbine at this depth of over 2,000 feet, a
large stream of water will not be required. The water used in driving
the wheel will flow out through the Sutro tunnel, and give no trouble
in the shaft.

By means of this great shaft and its powerful hydraulic and Cornish
pumps the crust of the earth will probably yet be penetrated to far
greater depth than in any other place in the world. It has been only a
little over ten years since the work of sinking it was begun, whereas
in the mines of the Old World they have been delving since "time
whereof the memory of man runneth not to the contrary." The work on
the Combination shaft has been by no means continuous. There have been
long stoppages aside from those required at such times as they were
engaged in running long drifts to the westward to tap the vein, and at
times for many months, when the several companies interested in the
shaft were engaged in prospecting the various levels it had opened up.

       *       *       *       *       *




REMARKABLE WELLS AND CAVERNS.


Yucatan is one of the most interesting States of Mexico, owing to the
splendid ancient palaces and temples of once grand cities, now hidden
in the forests. That country also presents great attractions for
geologists and botanists, as well as naturalists, who there find rare
and beautiful birds, insects, and reptiles.

There are no rivers on the surface of the land, but in many parts it
is entirely undermined by extensive caverns, in which are basins of
water fed by subterranean currents. The caverns are delightfully cool
even at midday, and the fantastic forms of some of the stalactites and
stalagmites are a never-ending source of interest. There are long
winding passages and roomy chambers following one after another for
great distances, with here and there some chink in the stony vault
above, through which a sunbeam penetrates, enabling us to see to the
right and left openings leading to untrodden places in the bowels of
the earth. As few of these caves have been explored, the wildest
accounts are given by the natives concerning the dark recesses where
only wild beasts seek shelter. Before venturing far in, it is
advisable to secure one end of a ball of twine at the entrance, and
keep the ball in hand; nor is it safe to go without lanterns or
torches, lest we step into some yawning chasm or deep water. The
leader of one party suddenly saw a very dark spot just before him; he
jumped over, instead of stepping on it, and told the others to halt.
Examination proved the dark patch to be a pit that seemed bottomless.

Awe-inspiring as are the interiors of some of these caves, they are
frequently most beautiful. The natural pillars are often grand in
dimensions and sparkling with various hues, while stalactites and
stalagmites sometimes resemble familiar objects with astonishing
perfection. It is, however, not advisable to place implicit confidence
in accounts of the natives, for the reality, no matter how beautiful,
can hardly be equal to what the vivid imagination of the Indian has
pictured. Anything bearing the least resemblance to a woman is called
"a most beautiful Virgin Mary." Fantastic flutings become "an organ,"
and a level rock "an altar." Only once we were not disappointed, when,
having been told to look for a pulpit, we found one that appeared as
if man must have fashioned it, supported on a slender pyramidal base,
the upper part very symmetrical, and ornamented with a perfect
imitation of bunches of grapes and other fruit.

As I have already said, in these caves are sheets of water, some very
large, others only a few feet in circumference, fed by subterranean
currents. When the water is clear and sweet, it is peopled by a kind
of bagre, a blind fish called by the natives _tzau_, also a species of
_Silurus_. But there are likewise medicinal and thermal waters, by
bathing in which many people claim to have been cured of most painful
and obstinate diseases.

Strange stories are told of some of these waters. Of one it is said
that those who approach it without holding their breath fall dead.
People who live near the place swear it is so, and say the water
appears to boil on such occasions. From the thermal waters, in some
cases 100 feet below the soil, and without means of access except by
buckets let down through an opening in the rock, warm vapors issue at
early morn, but when the sun is high the water is cool and pleasant to
drink.

The name _senote_ is given to all these deposits of water, also to
some immense natural circular wells from 50 to 300 feet in diameter.
The walls are more or less perpendicular, generally covered with
tropical vegetation. The current in some is swift, but no inlets or
outlets are visible. The water is deliciously pure and sweet, much
better than that of wells opened by man in the same country. These
enormous deposits generally have a rugged path, sometimes very steep,
leading to the water's edge, but daring natives throw themselves from
the brink, afterward ascending by stout roots that hang like ropes
down the walls, the trees above sucking through these roots the
life-sustaining fluid more than a hundred feet below.

In the west part of Yucatan is a village called _Bolonchen_ (nine
wells), because in the public square there are nine circular openings
cut through a stratum of rock. They are mouths of one immense cistern,
if natural or made by hand the natives do not know, but in times of
drought it is empty, which shows that it is not supplied by any
subterranean spring. Then the people depend entirely on water found in
a cave a mile and a half from the village; it is perhaps the most
remarkable cavern in the whole country. The entrance is magnificently
wild and picturesque. It is necessary to carry torches, for the way is
dark and dangerous. After advancing sixty or seventy feet we descend a
strong but rough ladder twenty feet long, placed against a very
precipitous rock. Not the faintest glimmer of daylight reaches that
spot; but after a while we stand on the brink of a perpendicular
precipice, the bottom of which is strongly illuminated through a hole
in the surface rock more than 200 feet above. Standing on the verge of
this awful pit in the dim light, the rocks and crags seem to take on
most weird shapes. We go down into the great hole by a ladder eighty
feet high and twelve wide, and, reaching the bottom, are as yet but at
the mouth of the cave, which, by the bye, is called _Xtacunbi Xunan_
(the hidden lady), because, say the Indians, a lady was stolen from
her mother and hidden there by her lover. Now, to our right, we find a
narrow passage, and soon another ladder; the darkness is intense and
the descent continuous, though irregular, like a series of hills and
dales, ladders being placed against the steepest places.

After an exhausting journey we reach a vast chamber, from which
crooked passages lead in various directions to wells, seven in all,
each named according to the peculiar kind of water. One, always warm,
is called _Chocoha_ (hot water); another, _O[c]iha_* (milky water), and
_Akabha_ (dark water). About 400 paces away from the chamber, passing
through a very narrow, close passage, there is a basin of red water
that ebbs and flows like the sea, receding with the south wind,
increasing with the northwest.

   *Transcriber's note: [c] denotes upside-down 'c' in original.

To reach the most distant well, we go down yet one more ladder, the
seventh. On one side of it there is a perpendicular wall, on the other
a yawning gulf, so when one of the steps, merely round sticks tied
with withes, gave way beneath our feet, we tightly grasped the stick
above. Having reached the bottom of the ladder, we crawl on our hands
and feet through a broken, winding passage about 800 feet long, then
see before us a basin of crystalline water, and how thirsty we are!
This basin is 1,400 feet from the mouth of the cave, and about 450
feet below the earth's surface. Several hundred people during five
months in every year depend entirely on that source for all the water
they use. With their frail pitchers and flaring torches they wend
their way, gasping for breath, through the intricate passages, and
reaching the water, are so profusely perspiring that they must wait
before quenching their thirst. The way back is even harder, and they
are tired and loaded; yet these people are such lovers of cleanliness
that on their arrival at their poor huts, before tasting food, they
will use some of the water that has cost them so much, to bathe their
smoke-begrimed skin. As several women once fainted in the cave, men
generally fetch the water now.

Yucatan is, and has been for ages past, quite free from earthquakes,
while all surrounding countries are from time to time convulsed. This
immunity may be due to the vast caverns and numerous great wells
existing throughout the land. Pliny the Elder was of opinion that if
numerous deep wells were made in the earth to serve as outlets for the
gases that disturb its upper strata, the strength of the earthquakes
would be diminished, and if we may judge by Yucatan, Pliny was right
in his conjectures. After him, other scientists who have carefully
studied the subject have expressed the same opinion with regard to the
efficacy of large wells.

ALICE D. LE PLONGEON.

Brooklyn, July 15, 1885.

       *       *       *       *       *


Cholera failed to strike a single one of the 4,000 women employed in
the national tobacco factory at Valencia, Spain, though the disease
raged violently in that city, and the _Medical World_ recalls that
tobacco workers were also noticed to enjoy exemption from attack
during an epidemic at Amsterdam.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE CABBAGE BUTTERFLY.


A patch of eggs and the minute caterpillars or larvae nearly emerged
from them are seen on the leaf. These tiny eggs are at first quite
white or pale yellow, and form an object for the microscope of
remarkable beauty, which is worthy of the examination of all who take
an interest in the garden and its insect life. An egg magnified is
drawn at the bottom left-hand corner of the woodcut. When the eggs are
near the hatching point they darken in color, and a magnifying glass
reveals through the delicate transparent shell a sight which fills the
observer with amazement; the embryo caterpillar is seen in gradual
course of formation, and if patience and warmth have permitted it, the
observer will witness slight movements within the life-case, and
presently the shell will break and a black head with moving jaws will
be thrust out; the little caterpillar unfolds and slowly crawls away
from the egg-shell, and inserts its jaws into the green leaf. It is
curious to witness how judiciously the little creatures avoid crowding
together, but strike out in different directions, and thus they make
sure of a plentiful supply of food, and distribute the effects of
their depredations. These caterpillars eat continually, and hence
rapidly increase in size, until they present the appearance shown in
our drawing at the bottom of the illustration, which is a full grown
caterpillar.

[Illustration: THE CABBAGE AND PEACOCK BUTTERFLIES.]

It will be observed that this insect is composed of thirteen segments
from head to tail, which is a distinctive characteristic of all
insects both in the larval and perfect states; but in the case of this
and most other caterpillars these segments are sharply defined and
readily recognized. It will also be noticed that the three segments or
"joints" nearest the head bear a pair of legs each; these are the real
feet, or claspers, as they are sometimes termed, which develop into
the feet of the future butterfly. There are four pairs of false feet
or suckers, which adhere to the ground by suction, and which disappear
in the butterfly. On the last or tail end is a fifth pair of suckers
also, which can attach themselves to a surface with considerable
force, as any one can attest who has noticed the wrigglings of one of
these caterpillars when feeling for new feeding ground.

The caterpillar now ceases to eat, and quietly betakes itself to a
secluded corner, where in peace it spins a web around its body, and
wrapt therein remains quiescent, awaiting its change into the
butterfly. Although so dormant outwardly, activity reigns inside;
processes are going on within that chrysalis-case which are the
amazement and the puzzle of all naturalists. In course of time the
worm is changed into the beautiful winged butterfly, which breaks its
case and emerges soft and wet; but it quickly dries and spreads its
wings to commence its life in the air and sunshine. The chrysalis is
represented in the figure on the left. The butterfly, it will be
recognized, is one of the common insects so familiar to all, with
strongly veined white wings, bearing three black spots, two on the
upper and one on the lower wing, and dark coloring on the corner of
the upper wings. The antennae, as with all butterflies, are clubbed at
the extremity--unlike moths', which are tapering--and the large black
staring eyes are the optical apparatus, containing, we are told,
thousands of lenses, each a perfect, simple eye.

The wings derive their chief coloring from the covering of scales,
which lie on like slates on a roof, and are attached in a similar
manner. A small portion of the wing magnified is represented at the
bottom right hand corner, and detached scales more highly magnified
next to it, exhibiting somewhat the form of battledoors.


THE PEACOCK BUTTERFLY.

Another well known insect is illustrated in the figure in the upper
portion--the peacock butterfly (Vanessa Io). The curious spiked and
spotted caterpillar feeds upon the common nettle. This beautiful
butterfly--common in most districts--is brilliantly colored and
figured on the upper side of the wings, but only of a mottled brown on
the under surface, somewhat resembling a dried and brown leaf, so that
it is no easy matter to detect the conspicuous, brightly-decked insect
when it alights from flight upon foliage, and brings its wings
