Project Gutenberg's The Coming of the Ice, by G. Peyton Wertenbaker

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Coming of the Ice

Author: G. Peyton Wertenbaker

Illustrator: Frank Rudolph Paul

Release Date: October 19, 2008 [EBook #26967]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE COMING OF THE ICE ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









_The COMING of the ICE_

_By G. Peyton Wertenbaker_


[Illustration: Strange men these creatures of the hundredth century ...]

_Copyright, 1926, by E. P. Co., Inc._


Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from _Amazing Stories_ July 1961 and was
    first published in _Amazing Stories_ June 1926. Extensive research
    did not uncover any evidence that the U.S. copyright on this
    publication was renewed. Minor spelling and typographical errors
    have been corrected without note.




A Classic Reprint from AMAZING STORIES, June, 1926

Introduction by Sam Moskowitz


_One of the gravest editorial problems faced by the editors of AMAZING
STORIES when they launched its first issue, dated April, 1926, was the
problem of finding or developing authors who could write the type of
story they needed. As a stop-gap, the first two issues of AMAZING
STORIES were devoted entirely to reprints. But reprints were to
constitute a declining portion of the publication's contents for the
following four years. The first new story the magazine bought was
_Coming of the Ice_, by G. Peyton Wertenbaker, which appeared in its
third issue. Wertenbaker was not technically a newcomer to science
fiction, since he had sold his first story to Gernsback's SCIENCE AND
INVENTION, _The Man From the Atom_, in 1923 when he was only 16! Now, at
the ripe old age of 19, he was appearing in the world's first truly
complete science fiction magazine._

_The scope of his imagination was truly impressive and, despite the
author's youth, _Coming of the Ice_ builds to a climax of considerable
power._

_Wertenbaker, under the name of Green Peyton, went on to sell his first
novel, _Black Cabin_, in 1933. He eventually became an authority on the
Southwest with many regional volumes to his credit: _For God and Texas_,
_America's Heartland_, _The Southwest_, and _San Antonio, City of the
Sun_. But he never lost his interest in space travel, assisting Hubertus
Strughold on the writing of _The Green and Red Planet_, a scientific
appraisal of the possibilities of life on the planet Mars published in
1953. He also served for a time as London correspondent for FORTUNE
MAGAZINE._




It is strange to be alone, and so cold. To be the last man on earth....

The snow drives silently about me, ceaselessly, drearily. And I am
isolated in this tiny white, indistinguishable corner of a blurred
world, surely the loneliest creature in the universe. How many thousands
of years is it since I last knew the true companionship? For a long time
I have been lonely, but there were people, creatures of flesh and blood.
Now they are gone. Now I have not even the stars to keep me company, for
they are all lost in an infinity of snow and twilight here below.

If only I could know how long it has been since first I was imprisoned
upon the earth. It cannot matter now. And yet some vague
dissatisfaction, some faint instinct, asks over and over in my throbbing
