and Edward Young sat together one evening in the cave at the top of the
mountain, where poor Fletcher Christian had been wont to hold his lonely
vigils.

"I've bin thinkin' of late," said Young, "that it is very foolish of us
to content ourselves with merely fishing from the rocks, when there are
better fish to be had in deep water, and plenty of material at hand for
making canoes."

"You're right, sir; we ought to try our hands at a canoe.  Pity we
didn't do so before the native men was all killed.  They knew what sort
o' trees to use, and how to split 'em up into planks, an' all that sort
o' thing."

"But McCoy used to study that subject, and talk much about it, when we
were in Otaheite," returned Young.  "I've no doubt that with his aid we
could build a good enough canoe, and the women would be as able as the
men, no doubt, to direct us what to do if we were in a difficulty.
McCoy is a handy fellow, you know, with tools, as he has proved more
than once since the death of poor Williams."

Adams shook his head.

"No doubt, Mr Young, he's handy enough with the tools; but ever since
he discovered how to make spirits, neither he nor Quintal, as you know,
sir, are fit for anything."

"True," said Young, with a perplexed look; "it never occurred to me
before that strong drink was such a curse.  I begin now to understand
why some men that I have known have been so enthusiastic in their outcry
against it.  Perhaps it would be right for you and me to refuse to drink
with Quintal and McCoy, seeing that they are evidently killing
themselves with it."

"I don't quite see that, sir," objected Adams.  "A glass of grog don't
do me no harm that I knows of, an' it wouldn't do them no good if we was
to stop our allowance."

"It might; who can tell?" said Young.  "I've not thought much about the
matter, however, so we won't discuss it.  But what would you say if we
were to hide the kettle that McCoy makes it in, and refuse to give it up
till the canoe is finished?"

Again Adams shook his head.

"They'd both go mad with DT," said he, by which letters he referred to
the drunkard's awful disease, _delirium tremens_.

"Well, at all events, we will try to persuade him to go to work, and the
sooner the better," said Young, rising and leaving the cave.

In pursuance of this plan, Young spoke to McCoy in one of his few sober
moments, and got him persuaded to begin the work, and to drink less
while engaged in it.

Under the impulse of this novelty in his occupation, the unhappy man did
make an attempt to curb himself, and succeeded so far that he worked
pretty steadily for several days, and made considerable progress with
the canoe.

The wood was chosen, the tree felled, the trunk cut to the proper length
and split up into very fair planks, which were further smoothed by means
of a stone adze, brought by the natives from Otaheite, and it seemed as
if the job would be quickly finished, when the terrible demon by whom
McCoy had been enslaved suddenly asserted his tyrannical power.
Quintal, who rendered no assistance in canoe-building, had employed
himself in making a "new brew," as he expressed it, and McCoy went up to
his hut in the mountain one evening to taste.

The result, of course, was that he was absolutely incapable of work next
day; and then, giving way to the maddening desire, he and his
comrade-in-debauchery went in, as they said, for a regular spree.  It
lasted for more than a week, and when it came to an end, the two men,
with cracked lips, bloodshot eyes, and haggard faces, looked as if they
had just escaped from a madhouse.

Edward Young now positively refused to drink any more of the spirits,
and Adams, although he would not go quite to that length, restricted
himself to one glass in the day.

This at first enraged both Quintal and McCoy.  The former cursed his
comrades in unmeasured terms, and drank more deeply just to spite them.
The latter refused to work at the canoe, and both men became so
uproarious, that Young and Adams were obliged to turn them out of the
house where they were wont occasionally to meet for a social evening.

Thus things went on for many a day from bad to worse.  Bad as things had
been in former years, it seemed as if the profoundest depth of sin and
misery had not yet been fathomed by these unhappy mutineers.

In all these doings, it would have gone hard with the poor women and
children if Adams and Young had not increased in their kindness and
consideration for them, as the other two men became more savage and
tyrannical.

At last matters came to such a crisis that it became once more a matter
of discussion with Young and Adams whether they should not destroy the
machinery by which the spirits were made, and it is probable that they
might have done this, if events had not occurred which rendered the act
unnecessary.

One day William McCoy was proceeding with a very uncertain step along
the winding footpath that led to his house up in the mountain.  The
man's face worked convulsively, and it seemed as if terrible thoughts
filled his brain.  Muttering to himself as he staggered along, he
suddenly met his own son, who had grown apace by that time, being nearly
seven years of age.  Both father and son stopped abruptly, and looked
intently at each other.

"What brings you here?" demanded the father, with a look of as much
dignity as it was in his power to assume.

The poor boy hesitated, and looked frightened.  His natural spirit of
fun and frolic seemed of late to have forsaken him.

"What are 'ee afraid of?" roared McCoy, who had not quite recovered from
his last fit of _delirium tremens_.  "Why don't 'ee speak?"

"Mother's not well," said Daniel, softly; "she bid me come and tell
you."

"What's that to me?" cried McCoy, savagely.  "Come here, Dan."  He
lowered his tone, and held out his hand, but the poor boy was afraid to
approach.

Uttering a low growl, the father made a rush at him, stumbled over a
tree-root, and fell heavily to the earth.  Little Dan darted into the
bush, and fled home.

Rising slowly, McCoy looked half-stunned at first, but speedily
recovering himself, staggered on till he reached the hut, when he wildly
seized the bottle from its shelf, and put it to his lips, which were
bleeding from the fall, and covered with dust.

"Ha ha!" he shouted, while the light of delirium rekindled in his eyes,
"this is the grand cure for everything.  My own son's afraid o' me now,
but who cares?  What's that to Bill McCoy! an' his mother's ill too--
ha!--"

He checked himself in the middle of a fierce laugh, and stared before
him as if horror-stricken.

"No, no!" he gasped.  "I--I didn't.  Oh!  God be merciful to me!"

Again he stopped, raised both hands high above his head, uttered a wild
laugh which terminated in a prolonged yell, as he dashed the bottle on
the floor, and darted from the hut.

All the strength and vigour which the wretched man had squandered seemed
to come back to him in that hour.  The swiftness of youth returned to
his limbs.  He ran down the path by which he had just come, and passed
Quintal on the way.

"Hallo, Bill! you're pretty bad to-night," said his comrade, looking
after him.  He then followed at a smart run, as if some new idea had
suddenly occurred to him.  Two of the women met McCoy further down, but
as if to evade them, he darted away to the right along the track leading
to the eastward cliffs.  The women joined Quintal in pursuit, but before
they came near him, they saw him rush to the highest part of the cliffs
and leap up into the air, turning completely over as he vanished from
their sight.

At that spot the cliff appeared to overhang its base, and was several
hundred feet high.  Far down there was a projecting rock, where
sea-gulls clustered in great numbers.  McCoy, like the lightning-flash,
came in contact with the rock, and was dashed violently out into space,
while the affrighted sea-birds fled shrieking from the spot.  Next
moment the man's mangled body cleft the dark water like an arrow,
leaving only a little spot of foam behind to mark for a few seconds his
watery grave.

It might have been thought that this terrible event would have had a
sobering effect upon Matthew Quintal, but instead of that it made him
worse.  The death of his wife, too, by a fall from the cliffs about the
same time, seemed only to have the effect of rendering him more savage;
insomuch that he became a terror to the whole community, and frequently
threatened to take the lives of his remaining comrades.  In short, the
man seemed to have gone mad, and Young and Adams resolved, in
self-defence, to put him to death.

We spare the reader the sickening details.  They accomplished the
terrible deed with an axe, and thus the number of the male refugees on
Pitcairn was reduced to two.  The darkest hour of the lonely island had
been reached--the hour before the dawn.



CHAPTER TWENTY.

THE DAWN OF A BETTER DAY.

The eighteenth century passed away, and as the nineteenth began its
course, a great and marvellous change came over the dwellers on the
lonely island in that almost unknown region of the Southern Seas.  It
was a change both spiritual and physical, the latter resulting from the
former, and both having their roots, as all things good must have, in
the blessed laws of God.

The change did not come instantaneously.  It rose upon Pitcairn with the
sure but gradual influence of the morning dawn, and its progress, like
its advent, was unique in the history of the Church of God.

No preacher went forth to the ignorant people, armed with the powers of
a more or less correct theology.  No prejudices had to be overcome, or
pre-existing forms of idolatry uprooted, and the people who had to be
changed were what might have been deemed most unlikely soil--mutineers,
murderers, and their descendants.  The one hopeful characteristic among
them was the natural amiability of the women, for Young and Adams did
not display more than the average good-humour of men, yet these amiable
women, as we have seen, twice plotted and attempted the destruction of
the men, and two of them murdered in cold blood two of their own
kinsmen.

It may, perhaps, have already been seen that Young and Adams were of a
grave and earnest turn of mind.  The terrible scenes which they had
passed through naturally deepened this characteristic, especially when
they thought of the dreadful necessity which had been forced on them--
the deliberate slaying of Matthew Quintal, an act which caused them to
_feel_ like murderers, however justifiable it may have seemed to them.

Like most men who are under deep and serious impressions, they kept
their thoughts to themselves.  Indeed, John Adams, with his grave
matter-of-fact tendencies and undemonstrative disposition, would
probably never have opened his lips on spiritual things to his companion
if Young had not broken the ice; and even when the latter did venture to
do so, Adams resisted at first with the dogged resolution of an
unbelieving man.

"We've been awful sinners, John Adams," said Young one afternoon as they
were sauntering home from their plantations to dinner.

"Well, sir, no doubt there's some truth in what you say," replied Adams,
slowly, "but then, d'ye see, we've bin placed in what you may call awful
circumstances."

"That's true, that's true," returned Young, with a perplexed look, "and
I've said the same thing, or something like it, to myself many a time;
but, man, the Bible doesn't seem to harmonise with that idea somehow.
It seems to make no difference between big and little sinners, so to
speak, at least as far as the matter of salvation is concerned; and yet
I can't help feeling somehow that men who have sinned much ought to
repent much."

"Just so, sir," said John Adams, with a self-satisfied air, "you're
right, sir.  We have been awful sinners, as you say, an' now we've got
to repent as hard as we can and lead better lives, though, of course, we
can't make much difference in our style o' livin', seein' that our
circumstances don't allow o' much change, an' neither of us has bin much
given to drink or swearin'."

"Strange!" rejoined Young.  "You almost echo what I've been saying to
myself over and over again, yet I can't feel quite easy, for if we have
only got to repent and try to lead better lives, what's the use of our
talking about `Our Saviour?' and what does the Bible mean in such words
as these: `Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ and thou shalt be saved.'
`Only believe.'  `By grace are ye saved, through faith, and that not of
yourselves, it is the gift of God.'  `By the works of the law shall no
flesh living be justified.'"

"Do you mean to say, sir, that them words are all out of the Bible?"
asked Adams.

"Yes, I know they are, for I read them all this morning.  I had a long
hunt after the Bible before I found it, for poor Christian never told me
where he kept it.  I turned it up at last under a bit of tarpaulin in
the cave, and I've been reading it a good deal since, and I confess that
I've been much puzzled.  Hold on a bit here," he added, stopping and
seating himself on a flowering bank beside the path; "that old complaint
of mine has been troubling me a good deal of late.  Let's rest a bit."

Young referred here to an asthmatic affection to which he was subject,
and which had begun to give him more annoyance since the catching of a
severe cold while out shooting among the hills a year before.

"From what you say, sir," said Adams, thoughtfully, after they had sat
down, "it seems to me that if we can do _nothing_ in the matter o'
workin' out our salvation, and have nothin' to do but sit still an'
receive it, we can't be to blame if we don't get it."

"But we may be to blame for refusing it when it's offered," returned
Young.  "Besides, the Bible says, `Ask and ye shall receive,' so that
knocks away the ground from under your notion of sitting still."

"P'r'aps you're right, sir," continued Adams, after a few minutes'
thought, during which he shook his head slowly as if not convinced; "but
I can't help thinkin' that if a man only does his best to do his dooty,
it'll be all right with him.  That's all that's required in His
Majesty's service, you know, of any man."

"True, but if a man _doesn't_ do his best, what then?  Or if he is so
careless about learning his duty that he scarce knows what it is, and in
consequence falls into sundry gross mistakes, what then?  Moreover,
suppose that you and I, having both done our duty perfectly up to the
time of the mutiny, were now to go back to England and say, like the bad
boys, `We will never do it again,' what would come of it, think you?"

"We'd both be hanged for certain," answered Adams, with emphasis.

"Well, then, the matter isn't as simple an you thought it, at least
according to _your_ view."

"It is more puzzlin' than I thought it," returned Adams; "but then
that's no great wonder, for if it puzzles you it's no wonder that it
should puzzle me, who has had no edication whatever 'xcep what I've
picked up in the streets.  But it surprises me--you'll excuse me, Mr
Young--that you who's bin at school shouldn't have your mind more clear
about religion.  Don't they teach it at school?"

"They used to read a few verses of the Bible where I was at school,"
said Young, "and the master, who didn't seem to have any religion in
himself, read over a formal prayer; but I fear that that didn't do us
much good, for we never listened to it.  Anyhow, it could not be called
religious teaching.  But were you never at school, Adams?"

"No, sir, not I," answered the seaman, with a quiet laugh; "leastwise
not at a reg'lar true-blue school.  I was brought up chiefly in the
streets of London, though that's a pretty good school too of its kind.
It teaches lads to be uncommon smart, I tell you, and up to a thing or
two, but it don't do much for us in the book-larnin' way.  I can
scarcely read even now, an' what I have of it was got through spellin'
out the playbills in the public-house windows.  But what d'ye say, sir,
now that we both seem inclined to turn over a new leaf, if you was to
turn schoolmaster an' teach me to read and write a bit better than I can
do at present?  I'd promise to be a willin' scholar an' a good boy."

"Not a bad idea," said Young, with a laugh, as he rose and continued the
descent of the track leading to the settlement.

The village had by this time improved very much in appearance, good
substantial cottages, made of the tafano or flower wood, and the aruni,
having taken the place of the original huts run up at the period of
landing.  Some of the cottages were from forty to fifty feet long, by
fifteen wide and thirteen high.  It was evident that ships were, partly
at least, the model on which they had been constructed; for the
sleeping-places were a row of berths opposite the door, each with its
separate little window or porthole.  There were no fireplaces, the range
of the thermometer on the island being from 55 degrees to 85 degrees,
and all cooking operations were performed in detached outhouses and
ovens.

In the chief of these cottages might have been found, among the many
miscellaneous objects of use and ornament, two articles which lay apart
on a shelf, and were guarded by Young and Adams with almost reverential
care.  These were the chronometer and the azimuth compass of the
_Bounty_.

The cottages, some of which had two stories, were arranged so as to
enclose a large grassy square, which was guarded by a strong palisade
from the encroachments of errant hogs, goats, and fowls.  This spot,
among other uses, served as a convenient day-nursery for the babies, and
also a place of occasional frolic and recreation to the elder children.

