    with the work undertaken and desires to join, signifying his wish by
    desiring to smoke with the braves.]

  [Illustration]
  He/-wa-h[-o]/-a hai/-a-n[-e]/
  I even use a wooden image.
    [Effigies made to represent one who is to be destroyed. The heart is
    punctured, vermilion or other magic powder is applied, and the death
    of the victim is encompassed.]

  [Illustration]
  Pa-kwa/ ma-ko-n[-e]/ [-a]/, [-o]/, h[-e]/,
  [-o]sh-ke/-na-ko-n[-e]/-a.
  The bear goes round angry.
    [The Bear Man/id[-o] is angry because the braves are dilatory in
    going to war. The sooner they decide upon this course, the better it
    will be for the Mid[-e]/ as to his fee, and the chances of success
    are greater while the braves are infused with enthusiasm, than if
    they should become sluggish and their ardor become subdued.]


THIRD DEGREE.

  [Illustration: Fig. 25.--Diagram of Mid[-e]/wig[^a]n of the third
  degree.]

The structure in which the third degree of the Mid[-e]/wiwin is
conferred resembles that of the two preceding, and an outline is
presented in Fig. 25. In this degree three posts are erected, the first
one resembling that of the first degree, being painted red with a band
of green around the top. (Pl. XV, No. 1.) This is planted a short
distance to the east of the middle of the floor. The second post is also
painted red, but has scattered over its entire surface spots of white
clay, each of about the size of a silver quarter of a dollar, symbolical
of the m[-i]/gis shell. Upon the top of this post is placed the stuffed
body of an owl--K[)o]-k['o]-k[)o]-[-o]/. (Pl. XV, No. 2.) This post is
planted a short distance west of the first one and about midway between
it and the third, which last is erected within about 6 or 8 feet from
the western door, and is painted black. (Pl. XV, No. 3.) The sacred
stone against which patients are placed, and which has the alleged
virtue of removing or expelling the demons that cause disease, is placed
upon the ground at the usual spot near the eastern entrance (Fig. 25,
No. 1). The Makw['a] Man/id[-o]--bear spirit--is the tutelary guardian
of this degree. Cedar trees are planted at each of the outer angles of
the structure (Fig. 25, Nos. 6, 7, 8, 9). The sudatory is erected about
100 yards due east of the main entrance of the Mid[-e]/wig[^a]n, and is
of the same size and for the same purpose as that for the second degree.

  [Illustration: Plate XV.
  Sacred Posts of Mid[-e]/wig[^a]n.]

PREPARATION OF CANDIDATE.

It is customary for the period of one year to elapse before a
second-degree Mid[-e]/ can be promoted, even if he be provided with
enough presents for such advancement. As the exacted fee consists of
goods and tobacco thrice the value of the fee for the first degree, few
present themselves. This degree is not held in as high estimation,
relatively, as the preceding one; but it is alleged that a Mid[-e]/'s
powers are intensified by again subjecting himself to the ceremony of
being "shot with the sacred m[-i]/gis," and he is also elevated to that
rank by means of which he may be enabled the better to invoke the
assistance of the tutelary guardian of this degree.

A Mid[-e]/ who has in all respects complied with the preliminaries of
announcing to the chief Mid[-e]/ his purpose, gaining satisfactory
evidence of his resources and ability to present the necessary presents,
and of his proficiency in the practice of medical magic, etc., selects a
preceptor of at least the third degree and one who is held in high
repute and influence in the Mid[-e]/wiwin. After procuring the services
of such a person and making a satisfactory agreement with him, he may be
enabled to purchase from him some special formulae for which he is
distinguished. The instruction embraces a r['e]sum['e] of the traditions
previously given, the various uses and properties of magic plants and
compounds with which the preceptor is familiar, and conversations
relative to exploits performed in medication, incantation, and exorcism.
Sometimes the candidate is enabled to acquire new "medicines" to add to
his list, and the following is a translation of the tradition relating
to the origin of ginseng (Aralia quinquefolia, Gr.), the so-called "man
root," held in high estimation as of divine origin. In Fig. 3 is
presented a pictorial representation of the story, made by Ojibwa, a
Mid[-e]/ priest of White Earth, Minnesota. The tradition purports to be
an account of a visit of the spirit of a boy to the abode of
Dzhibai/Man/id[-o], "the chief spirit of the place of souls," called
Ne/-ba-gi/-zis, "the land of the sleeping sun."

There appears to be some similarity between this tradition and that
given in connection with Pl. V, in which the Sun Spirit restored to
life a boy, by which act he exemplified a portion of the ritual of the
Mid[-e]/wiwin. It is probable therefore that the following tradition is
a corruption of the former and made to account for the origin of "man
root," as ginseng is designated, this root, or certain portions of it,
being so extensively employed in various painful complaints.

  Once an old Mid[-e]/, with his wife and son, started out on a hunting
  trip, and, as the autumn was changing into winter, the three erected a
  substantial wig/iwam. The snow began to fall and the cold increased,
  so they decided to remain and eat of their stores, game having been
  abundant and a good supply having been procured. The son died;
  whereupon his mother immediately set out for the village to obtain
  help to restore him to life, as she believed her father, the chief
  priest of the Mid[-e]/-wiwin, able to accomplish this.

  When the woman informed her father of the death of her son, her
  brother, who was present, immediately set out in advance to render
  assistance. The chief priest then summoned three assistant Mid[-e]/,
  and they accompanied his daughter to the place where the body of his
  dead grandson lay upon the floor of the wig/iwam, covered with robes.

  The chief Mid[-e]/ placed himself at the left shoulder of the dead
  boy, the next in rank at the right, while the two other assistants
  stationed themselves at the feet. Then the youngest Mid[-e]/--he at
  the right foot of the deceased--began to chant a mid[-e]/ song, which
  he repeated a second, a third, and a fourth time.

  When he had finished, the Mid[-e]/ at the left foot sang a mid[-e]/
  song four times; then the Mid[-e]/ at the right shoulder of the body
  did the same, after which the chief Mid[-e]/ priest sang his song four
  times, whereupon there was a perceptible movement under the blanket,
  and as the limbs began to move the blanket was taken off, when the boy
  sat up. Being unable to speak, he made signs that he desired water,
  which was given to him.

  The four Mid[-e]/ priests then chanted medicine songs, each preparing
  charmed remedies which were given to the boy to complete his recovery.
  The youngest Mid[-e]/, standing at the foot of the patient, gave him
  four pinches of powder, which he was made to swallow; the Mid[-e]/ at
  the left foot did the same; then the Mid[-e]/ at the right shoulder
  did likewise, and he, in turn, was followed by the chief priest
  standing at the left shoulder of the boy; whereupon the convalescent
  immediately recovered his speech and said that during the time that
  his body had been in a trance his spirit had been in the "spirit
  land," and had learned of the "grand medicine."

  The boy then narrated what his spirit had experienced during the
  trance, as follows: "Gi/-gi-min/-[)e]-go/-min mi-d[-e]/-wi-w[)i]n
  mi-d[-e]/ man/-i-d[-o]/ 'n-gi-g[)i]n/-o-a-m[^a]k
  ban-dzhi/-ge/-o-we/-[^a]n ta/-zi-ne/-zho-wak/ ni-zha/-n[)e]-zak,
  k[)i]-wi/-de-g[)e]t/ mi/-o-pi/-ke/-ne-b[)u]i/-yan ka-ki/-n[)e]
  ka-we/-d[)e]-ge/ mi/-o-w[)o]k-pi/ i-kan/-o-a-mag/-[)i]-na mi-d[-e]/
  man/i-d[-o] wi-we/-ni-tshi mi-d[-e]/-wi-w[)i]n,
  ki/-mi-m[^a]/-d[)i]-si-win/-in-[^a]n/ ki-mi/-n[)i]-go-nan/
  ge-on/-d[)e]-na-m[)o]ngk ki/-mi-m[^a]/-di-si/-wa-in-an/;
  ki/-ki-no/-a-mag/-wi-nan/ mash/-k[)i]-ki o-gi/-mi-ni/-go-wan/
  o-dzhi-bi/-g[^a]n gi-me/-ni-na-g[)u]k/ mash/-k[)i]-ki-wa/-bo[n]
  sht[)i]k-wan/-a-ko-se/-an o-ma/-m[^a]sh/-k[)i]-ki ma/-gi-ga/-to
  ki/-ka-ya-t[-o]n."

The following is a translation:

  "He, the chief spirit of the Mid[-e]/ Society, gave us the "grand
  medicine," and he has taught us how to use it. I have come back from
  the spirit land. There will be twelve, all of whom will take wives;
  when the last of these is no longer without a wife, then will I die.
  That is the time. The Mid[-e]/ spirit taught us to do right. He gave
  us life and told us how to prolong it. These things he taught us, and
  gave us roots for medicine. I give to you medicine; if your head is
  sick, this medicine put upon it, you will put it on."

The revelation received by the boy was in the above manner imparted
to the Indians. The reference to twelve--three times the sacred number
four--signifies that twelve chief priests shall succeed each other
before death will come to the narrator. It is observed, also, that a
number of the words are archaic, which fact appears to be an indication
of some antiquity, at least, of the tradition.

The following are the principal forms in which a Mid[-e]/ will utilize
Aralia quinquefolia, Gr., ginseng--Sht[)e]/-na-bi-o/-dzhi-bik:

  1. Small quantities of powdered root are swallowed to relieve
    stomachic pains.

  2. A person complaining with acute pains in any specific part of
    the body is given that part of the root corresponding to the part
    affected; e.g., for pleurisy, the side of the root is cut out, and
    an infusion given to relieve such pains; if one has pains in the
    lower extremities, the bifurcations of the root are employed;
    should the pains be in the thorax, the upper part of the root--
    corresponding to the chest--is used in a similar manner.

INITIATION OF CANDIDATE.

As the candidate for promotion has acquired from his Mid[-e]/ friends
such new information as they choose to impart, and from his instructor
all that was practicable, he has only to await the day of ceremony to be
publicly acknowledged as a third-degree Mid[-e]/. As this time
approaches the invitation sticks are sent to the various members and to
such non-resident Mid[-e]/ as the officiating priests may wish to honor.
On or before the fifth day previous to the meeting the candidate moves
to the vicinity of the Mid[-e]/wig[^a]n. On that day the first sweat
bath is taken, and one also upon each succeeding day until four baths,
as a ceremony of purification, have been indulged in. On the evening of
the day before the meeting his preceptor visits him at his own wig/iwam
when, with the assistance of friends, the presents are collected and
carried to the Mid[-e]/-wig[^a]n and suspended from the transverse poles
near the roof. The officiating priests may subsequently join him, when
smoking and singing form the chief entertainment of the evening.

By this time numerous visitors have gathered together and are encamped
throughout the adjacent timber, and the sound of the drum, where dancing
is going on, may be heard far into the night.

Early on the morning of the day of the ceremonies the candidate goes
to the sudatory where he first awaits the coming of his preceptor and
later the arrival of the Mid[-e]/ priests by whom he is escorted to the
Mid[-e]/wig[^a]n. With the assistance of the preceptor he arranges his
gift of tobacco which he takes with him to the sacred inclosure, after
which a smoke offering is made, and later Mid[-e]/ songs are chanted.
These may be of his own composition as he has been a professor of magic
a sufficient lapse of time to have composed them, but to give evidence
of superior powers the chief, or some other of the officiating priests,
will perhaps be sufficiently inspired to sing. The following was
prepared and chanted by one of the Mid[-e]/ priests at the third-degree
meeting at White Earth, Minnesota, and the illustration in Pl. XIV, A,
is a reproduction of the original. The words, with translation, are as
follows:

  [Illustration]

  Ni-ka/-ni-na man/-do-na-m[-o]/-a.
  My friend I am shooting into you in trying to hit the mark.
    [The two arms are grasping the m[-i]/gis, which he the Mid[-e]/ is
    going to shoot into the body of the candidate. The last word means,
    literally, trying to hit the mark at random.]

  [Illustration]
  Me-kwa/-me-sha-kwak/, mi-t[-e]/-wi-da/.
  While it is clear let us have it, the "grand medicine."
    [The Mid[-e]/ arm, signified by the magic zigzag lines at the lower
    end of the picture, reaches up into the sky to keep it clear; the
    rain is descending elsewhere as indicated by the lines descending
    from the sky at the right and left.]

  [Illustration]
  Rest.
  During this interval a smoke offering is made.

  [Illustration]
  Mi-sha/-kwi-t[-o]-n[)i] m[-i]/-g[)i]s-s[)i]m/.
  As clear as the sky [is] my m[-i]/gis.
    [The figure represents the sacred m[-i]/gis, as indicated by the
    short lines radiating from the periphery. The m[-i]/gis is white and
    the clear sky is compared to it.]

  [Illustration]
  S[-o]n/-gi-mi-d[-e]/ wi-ka/-ne, h[-e]/,
  Wi-n[-o]/-a man/-i-d[-o]/-wi-dzh[-i]/-id-e/-zhi-w[^a]t.
  Take the "grand medicine" strong, as they, together
  with the "Great Spirit," tell me.
    [The candidate is enjoined to persevere in his purpose. The
    associate Mid[-e]/ are alluded to, as also Ki/tshi Man/id[-o], who
    urge his continuance and advancement in the sacred society. The arm
    reaches down to search for the sacred m[-i]/gis of the fourth
    degree-- designated by four vertical lines--which is, as yet,
    hidden from the person addressed.]

  [Illustration]
  Hwa/-ba-mi-d[-e]/, hwa/-ba-mi-d[-e]/,
  Na/-wa-kin-t[-e]/.
  He who sees me, he who sees me, stands on the middle of the earth.
    [The human figure symbolizes Ki/tshi Man/id[-o]; the magic lines
    cross his body, while his legs rest upon the outline of the
    Mid[-e]/wig[^a]n. His realm, the sky, reaches from the zenith to the
    earth, and he beholds the Mid[-e]/ while chanting and conducting the
    Mid[-e]/wiwin.]

  [Illustration]
  Man/-i-d[-o]/ wi/-ka-ni/ ni-mi-d[-e]/.
  To the spirit be a friend, my Mid[-e]/.
    [The speaker enjoins the candidate to be faithful to his charge, and
    thus a friend to Ki/tshi Man/id[-o], who in return will always
    assist him. The figure holds a m[-i]/gis in its right hand, and the
    Mid[-e]/ drum in its left.]

The greater number of words in the preceding text are of an archaic
form, and are presented as they were chanted. The several lines may be
repeated ad libitum to accord with the feeling of inspiration which the
singer experiences, or the amount of interest manifested by his hearers.

  [Illustration: Plate XVI.
  Mnemonic Songs.]

All the members of the society not officially inducting the candidate
have ere this entered the Mid[-e]/wig[^a]n and deposited their
invitation sticks near the sacred stone, or, in the event of their
inability to attend, have sent them with an explanation. The candidate,
at the suggestion of the Mid[-e]/ priest, then prepares to leave the
sudatory, gathers up the tobacco, and as he slowly advances toward the
Mid[-e]/ inclosure his attendants fall into the procession according to
their office. The priests sing as they go forward, until they reach the
entrance of the Mid[-e]/wig[^a]n, where the candidate and his preceptor
halt, while the remainder enter and take their stations just within the
door, facing the west.

The drummers, who are seated in the southwestern angle of the inclosure,
begin to drum and sing, while the candidate is led slowly around the
exterior, going by the south, thus following the course of the sun. Upon
the completion of the fourth circuit he is halted directly opposite the
main entrance, to which his attention is then directed. The drumming and
singing cease; the candidate beholds two Mid[-e]/ near the outer
entrance and either side of it. These Mid[-e]/ represent two malevolent
man/id[-o] and guard the door against the entrance of those not duly
prepared. The one upon the northern side of the entrance then addresses
his companion in the following words: I/-ku-tan ka/-wi-nad/-g[)i]
wa/-na-m[^a]/-s[)i] [-e]/-zh[)i]-g[)i]/-n[)i]-g[)e]d--"Do you not see
how he is formed?" To which the other responds: O-da/-p[)i]-n[)o]/
ke/-no-w[)i]n-d[)u]ng shkwan/-d[)i]m--"Take care of it, the door;"
[i.e., guard the entrance.] The former then again speaks
to his companion, and says: Ka-w[-i]n/-n[)i]-na-ga/
w[^a]/-ba-ma/-si-ba/-sh[)i]-gi/-ne-g[-e]t/--"Do you not see how he
carries the goods?" The Mid[-e]/ spoken to assents to this, when the
preceptor takes several pieces of tobacco which he presents to the two
guards, whereupon they permit the candidate to advance to the inner
entrance, where he is again stopped by two other guardian man/id[-o],
who turn upon him as if to inquire the reason of his intrusion. The
candidate then holds out two parcels of tobacco and says to them:
O-da/-pin a-s[-e]/-ma--"Take it, the tobacco," whereupon they receive
the gift and stand aside, saying: Kun/-da-dan--"Go down;" [i.e., enter
and follow the path.] As the candidate is taken a few steps forward and
toward the sacred stone, four of the eight officiating priests receive
him, one replacing the preceptor who goes to the extreme western end
there to stand and face the east, where another joins him, while the
remaining two place themselves side by side so as to face the west.

It is believed that there are five powerful man/id[-o]s who abide within
the third-degree Mid[-e]/wig[^a]n, one of whom is the Mid[-e]/
man/id[-o]--Ki/tshi Man/id[-o]--one being present at the sacred stone,
the second at that part of the ground between the sacred stone and the
first part where the gifts are deposited, the remaining three at the
three degree posts.

As the candidate starts and continues upon his walk around the interior
of the inclosure the musicians begin to sing and drum, while all those
remaining are led toward the left, and when opposite the sacred stone
he faces it and is turned round so that his back is not toward it in
passing; the same is done at the second place where one of the spirits
is supposed to abide; again at first, second, and third posts. By this
time the candidate is at the western extremity of the structure, and as
the second Mid[-e]/ receives him in charge, the other taking his station
beside the preceptor, he continues his course toward the north and east
to the point of departure, going through similar evolutions as before,
as he passes the three posts, the place of gifts and the sacred stone.
This is done as an act of reverence to the man/id[-o]s and to
acknowledge his gratitude for their presence and encouragement. When he
again arrives at the eastern extremity of the inclosure he is placed
between the two officiating Mid[-e]/, who have been awaiting his return,
while his companion goes farther back, even to the door, from which
point he addresses the other officiating Mid[-e]/ as follows:

  M[)i]s-sa/-a-shi/-gwa  wi-kan/-da/-we-an/,
  Now is the time        [I am] telling [--advising,]

  m[)i]s-sa/-a-shi/-gwa  w[-i]/-di-wa/-m[)o]k
  now is the time        to be observed

  wi-un/-o-b[-e]-[)o]g.
  [I am] ready to make him sit down.

Then one of the Mid[-e]/ priests standing beside the candidate leads him
to the spot between the sacred stone and the first-degree post where the
blankets and other goods have been deposited, and here he is seated.
This priest then walks slowly around him singing in a tremulous manner
wa/, h[)e]/, h[)e]/, h[)e]/, h[)e]/, h[)e]/, h[)e]/, h[)e]/, returning
to a position so as to face him, when he addresses him as follows:
M[)i]s-sa/-a-shi/-gwa p[)o]/-g[)u]-s[)e]-ni/mi-nan/ au/-u-sa/
za-a/-da-win/ man/-i-d[-o] m[-i]/-gis. Na/-pish-gatsh
di-m[^a]/-g[)i]-s[)i] [)e]-n[)e]/-n[)i]-mi-an pi/-sha-g[^a]-an-da-i/
na/-pish-gatsh tshi-skwa/-di-na-w[^a]d/ dzhi-ma/-dzhi-a-ka/-ma-da-m[^a]n
bi-m[^a]/-d[)i]s-si/-an.

The following is a free translation:

  The time has arrived for you to ask of the Great Spirit this
  "reverence" i.e., the sanctity of this degree. I am interceding in
  your behalf, but you think my powers are feeble; I am asking him to
  confer upon you the sacred powers. He may cause many to die, but I
  shall henceforth watch your course of success in life, and learn if he
  will heed your prayers and recognize your magic power.

At the conclusion of these remarks three others of the officiating
Mid[-e]/ advance and seat themselves, with their chief, before the
candidate. The Mid[-e]/ drum is handed to the chief priest, and after a
short prelude of drumming he becomes more and more inspired, and sings
the following Mid[-e]/ song, represented pictorially, also on Pl. XIV,
B.

  [Illustration]
  Man/-i-d[-o]/ we-da/, man/-i-d[-o]/ gi-d[-o]/ we-do/-n[)i]ng.
  Let us be a spirit, let the spirit come from the mouth.
    [The head is said to signify that of a Mid[-e]/, who is about to
    sing.]

  [Illustration]
  Nin/-de-wen/-don zha/-bon-d[)e]sh/-k[^a][n]-m[^a]n/.
  I own this lodge, through which I pass.
    [The speaker claims that he has been received into the degree of the
    Mid[-e]/wiwin to which he refers. The objects on the outer side of
    the oblong square character represent spirits, those of the bear.]

  [Illustration]
  [^A]n/-dzhe-ho [)i]/-a-ni/ o-g[-e]n/, hwe/-[-o]-ke/, hwe/-[-o]-ke/.
  Mother is having it over again.
    [The reference is to the earth, as having the ceremony of the "grand
    medicine" again.]

  [Illustration]
  Ni/-ka-nan ni/-go-s[^a]n, ni/-go-s[^a]n/
  ni-ka/-ni-san/, man/-i-d[-o]/ wi-dzhig/
  nin-go-s[^a]n/ an-i-wa/-bi-dzhig ni-ka/.
  Friends I am afraid, I am afraid, friends, of the spirits sitting
    around me.
    [The speaker reaches his hand toward the sky, i.e., places his faith
    in Ki/tshi Man/id[-o] who abides above.]

  [Illustration]
  Ya/-ki-no/-sha-me/-wa, ya/-ki-no/-sha-me/-wa,
  ya-ki-no-si-ka-ne, ya-ki-no-si-ka-ne,
  h[-e]/, ki/-no-sha/-we-wa/.
  I am going, with medicine bag, to the lodge.
    [The object represents an otter skin Mid[-e]/ sack, the property of
    the speaker.]

  [Illustration]
  Ya/-be-kai/-a-bi, ya/-be-kai/-a-bi, h[-e]/-[-a]/, h[-e]/-[-a]/,
  ya/-be-kai/-a-bi, ya/-be-kai/-a-bi, h[-e]/-[-a]/, h[-e]/[-a]/,
  wa/-na-he/-ni/-o-ni/, ya/-be-kai/-o-bik/.
