believe. The Eye of Allah--the maniac--was real; and his power for
evil! There was work to be done, and the point of beginning was not
plain.

How far did the invisible arm reach? How far could the Eye of Allah
see? Where was the generator--the origin of this wireless power; along
what channel did it flow? A ray of lightless light--an unseen ethereal
vibration.... Delamater could only guess at the answers.

The current to kill a man or to flash a spark into silken powder bags
need not be heavy, he knew. Five hundred--a thousand volts--if the
mysterious conductor carried it without resistance and without loss.
People had been killed by house-lighting currents--a mere 110
volts--when conditions were right. There would be no peculiar or
unusual demand upon the power company to point him toward the hidden
maniac.

He tossed restlessly throughout the night, and morning brought no
answer to his repeated questions. But it brought a hurry call from his
Chief.

"Right away," was the instruction; "don't lose a minute. Come to the
office."

He found the big man at his desk. He was quiet, unhurried, but the
operative knew at a glance the tense repression that was being
exercised--the iron control of nerves that demanded action and found
incompetence and helplessness instead.

"I don't believe your fantastic theories," he told Delamater.
"Impractical--impossible! But--" He handed the waiting man a paper.
"We must not leave a stone unturned."

Delamater said nothing; he looked at the paper in his hand. "To the
President of the United States," he read. "Prepare to meet your God.
Friday. The eighth. Twelve o'clock."

The signature he hardly saw; the staring, open eye was all too
familiar.

"That is to-morrow," said Delamater softly. "The President dies
to-morrow."

       *       *       *       *       *

"No!" exploded the Chief. "Do you realize what that means? The
President murdered--more killings to follow--and the killer unknown!
Why the country will be in a panic: the whole structure of the
Government is threatened!"

He paused, then added as he struck his open hand upon the desk: "I
will have every available man at the White House."

"For witnesses?" asked Delamater coldly.

The big man stared at his operative; the lines of his face were
sagging.

"Do you believe--really--he can strike him down--at his desk--from a
distance?"

"I know it." Delamater's fingers played for a moment with three bits
of metal in his pocket. Unconsciously he voiced his thoughts: "Does
the President have nails in his shoes, I wonder?"

"What--what's that?" the Chief demanded.

But Delamater made no reply. He was picturing the President. He would
be seated at his desk, waiting, waiting ... and the bells would be
ringing and whistles blowing from distant shops when the bolt would
strike.... It would flash from his feet ... through the thick rug ...
through the rug.... It would have to ground.

He paid no heed to his Chief's repeated question. He was seeing, not
the rug in the Presidential office, but below it--underneath it--a
heavy pad of rubber.

"If he can be insulated--" he said aloud, and stared unseeingly at his
eagerly listening superiors--"even the telephone cut--no possible
connection with the ground--"

"For God's sake, Del, if you've got an idea--any hope at all! I'm--I'm
up against it, Del."

The operative brought his distant gaze back to the room and the man
across from him. "Yes," he said slowly, thoughtfully, "I've got the
beginning of an idea; I don't see the end of it yet.

"We can cut him off from the ground--the President, I mean--make an
insulated island where he sits. But this devil will get him the
instant he leaves ... unless ... unless...."

"Yes--yes?" The Chief's voice was high-pitched with anxious
impatience; for the first time he was admitting to himself his
complete helplessness in this emergency.

"Unless," said Delamater, as the idea grew and took shape, "unless
that wireless channel works both ways. If it does ... if it does...."

The big man made a gesture of complete incomprehension.

"Wait!" said Robert Delamater, sharply. If ever his sleepy indolence
had misled his Chief, there was none to do so now in the voice that
rang like cold steel. His eyes were slits under the deep-drawn brows,
and his mouth was one straight line.

       *       *       *       *       *

To the hunter there is no greater game than man. And Robert Delamater,
man-hunter, had his treacherous quarry in sight. He fired staccato
questions at his Chief.

"Is the President at his desk at twelve?"

"Yes."

"Does he know--about this?"

"Yes."

"Does he know it means death?"

The Chief nodded.

"I see a way--a chance," said the operative. "Do I get a free hand?"

"Yes--Good Lord, yes! If there's any chance of--"

Delamater silenced him. "I'll be the one to take the chance," he said
grimly. "Chief, I intend to impersonate the President."

"Now listen-- The President and I are about the same build. I know a
man who can take care of the make-up; he will get me by anything but a
close inspection. This Eye of Allah, up to now, has worked only in the
light. We'll have to gamble on that and work our change in the dark.

"The President must go to bed as usual--impress upon him that he may
be under constant surveillance. Then, in the night, he leaves--

"Oh, I know he won't want to hide himself, but he must. That's up to
you.

"Arrange for me to go to his room before daylight. From that minute on
I am the President. Get me his routine for that morning; I must follow
it so as to arouse no least suspicion."

       *       *       *       *       *

"But I don't see--" began the Chief. "You will impersonate
him--yes--but what then? You will be killed if this maniac makes good.
Is the President of the United States to be a fugitive? Is--"

"Hold on, hold on!" said Delamater. He leaned back in his chair; his
face relaxed to a smile, then a laugh.

"I've got it all now. Perhaps it will work. If not--" A shrug of the
shoulders completed the thought. "And I have been shooting it to you
pretty fast haven't I! Now here is the idea--

"I must be in the President's chair at noon. This Allah person will be
watching in, so I must be acting the part all morning. I will have the
heaviest insulation I can get under the rug, and I'll have something
to take the shot instead of myself. And perhaps, perhaps I will send a
message back to the Eye of Allah that will be a surprise.

"Is it a bet?" he asked. "Remember, I'm taking the chance--unless you
know some better way--"

The Chief's chair came down with a bang. "We'll gamble on it, Del," he
said; "we've got to--there is no other way.... And now what do you
want?"

"A note to the White House electrician," said Robert Delamater, "and
full authority to ask for anything I may need, from the U. S. Treasury
down to a pair of wire-cutters."

His smile had become contagious; the Chief's anxious look relaxed. "If
you pull this off, Del, they may give you the Treasury or the Mint at
that. But remember, republics are notoriously ungenerous."

"We'll have to gamble on that, too," said Robert Delamater.

       *       *       *       *       *

The heart of the Nation is Washington. Some, there are, who would have
us feel that New York rules our lives. Chicago--San Francisco--these
and other great cities sometimes forget that they are mere ganglia on
the financial and commercial nervous system. The heart is Washington,
and, Congress to the contrary notwithstanding, the heart of that heart
is not the domed building at the head of Pennsylvania Avenue, but an
American home. A simple, gracious mansion, standing in quiet dignity
and whiteness above its velvet lawns.

It is the White House that draws most strongly at the interest and
curiosity of the homely, common throng that visits the capital.

But there were no casual visitors at the White House on the seventh of
September. Certain Senators, even, were denied admittance. The
President was seeing only the members of the Cabinet and some few
others.

It is given to a Secret Service operative, in his time, to play many
parts. But even a versatile actor might pause at impersonating a
President. Robert Delamater was acting the role with never a fumble.
He sat, this new Robert Delamater, so startlingly like the Chief
Executive, in the chair by a flat top desk. And he worked diligently
at a mass of correspondence.

Secretaries came and went; files were brought. Occasionally he replied
to a telephone call--or perhaps called someone. It would be hard to
say which happened, for no telephone bells rang.

On the desk was a schedule that Delamater consulted. So much time for
correspondence--so many minutes for a conference with this or that
official, men who were warned to play up to this new Chief Executive
as if the life of their real President were at stake.

       *       *       *       *       *

To any observer the busy routine of the morning must have passed with
never a break. And there was an observer, as Delamater knew. He had
wondered if the mystic ray might carry electrons that would prove its
presence. And now he knew.

The Chief of the U. S. Secret Service had come for a consultation with
the President. And whatever lingering doubts may have stifled his
reluctant imagination were dispelled when the figure at the desk
opened a drawer.

"Notice this," he told the Chief as he appeared to search for a paper
in the desk. "An electroscope; I put it in here last night. It is
discharging. The ray has been on since nine-thirty. No current to
electrocute me--just a penetrating ray."

He returned the paper to the drawer and closed it.

"So that is that," he said, and picked up a document to which he
called the visitor's attention.

"Just acting," he explained. "The audience may be critical; we must
try to give them a good show! And now give me a report. What are you
doing? Has anything else turned up? I am counting on you to stand by
and see that that electrician is on his toes at twelve o'clock."

"Stand by is right," the Chief agreed; "that's about all we can do. I
have twenty men in and about the grounds--there will be as many more
later on. And I know now just how little use we are to you, Del."

"Your expression!" warned Delamater. "Remember you are talking to the
President. Very official and all that."

"Right! But now tell me what is the game, Del. If that devil fails to
knock you out here where you are safe, he will get you when you leave
the room."

"Perhaps," agreed the pseudo-executive, "and again, perhaps not. He
won't get me here; I am sure of that. They have this part of the room
insulated. The phone wire is cut--my conversations there are all
faked.

"There is only one spot in this room where that current can pass. A
heavy cable is grounded outside in wet earth. It comes to a copper
plate on this desk; you can't see it--it is under those papers."

       *       *       *       *       *

"And if the current comes--" began the visitor.

"When it comes," the other corrected, "it will jump to that plate and
go off harmlessly--I hope."

"And then what? How does that let you out?"

"Then we will see," said the presidential figure. "And you've been
here long enough, Chief. Send in the President's secretary as you go
out."

"He arose to place a friendly, patronizing hand on the other's
shoulder.

"Good-by," he said, "and watch that electrician at twelve. He is to
throw the big switch when I call."

"Good luck," said the big man huskily. "We've got to hand it to you,
Del; you're--"

"Good-by!" The figure of the Chief Executive turned abruptly to his
desk.

There was more careful acting--another conference--some dictating. The
clock on the desk gave the time as eleven fifty-five. The man before
the flat topped desk verified it by a surreptitious glance at his
watch. He dismissed the secretary and busied himself with some
personal writing.

Eleven fifty-nine--and he pushed paper and pen aside. The movement
disturbed some other papers, neatly stacked. They were dislodged, and
where they had lain was a disk of dull copper.

"Ready," the man called softly. "Don't stand too near that line." The
first boom of noonday bells came faintly to the room.

The President--to all but the other actors in the morning's
drama--leaned far back in his chair. The room was suddenly deathly
still. The faint ticking of the desk clock was loud and rasping. There
was heavy breathing audible in the room beyond. The last noonday chime
had died away....

The man at the desk was waiting--waiting. And he thought he was
prepared, nerves steeled, for the expected. But he jerked back, to
fall with the overturned chair upon the soft, thick-padded rug, at the
ripping, crackling hiss that tore through the silent room.

       *       *       *       *       *

From a point above the desk a blue arc flamed and wavered. Its unseen
terminal moved erratically in the air, but the other end of the deadly
flame held steady upon a glowing, copper disc.

Delamater, prone on the floor, saw the wavering point that marked the
end of the invisible carrier of the current--saw it drift aside till
the blue arc was broken. It returned, and the arc crashed again into
blinding flame. Then, as abruptly, the blue menace vanished.

The man on the floor waited, waited, and tried to hold fast to some
sense of time.

Then: "Contact!" he shouted. "The switch! Close the switch!"

"Closed!" came the answer from a distant room. There was a shouted
warning to unseen men: "Stand back there--back--there's twenty
thousand volts on that line--"

Again the silence....

"Would it work? Would it?" Delamater's mind was full of delirious,
half-thought hopes. That fiend in some far-off room had cut the
current meant as a death-bolt to the Nation's' head. He would leave
the ray on--look along it to gloat over his easy victory. His
generator must be insulated: would he touch it with his hand, now that
his own current was off?--make of himself a conductor?

In the air overhead formed a terrible arc.

From the floor, Delamater saw it rip crashingly into life as twenty
thousand volts bridged the gap of a foot or less to the invisible ray.
It hissed tremendously in the stillness....

And Delamater suddenly buried his face in his hands. For in his mind
he was seeing a rigid, searing body, and in his nostrils, acrid,
distinct, was the smell of burning flesh.

"Don't be a fool," he told himself fiercely. "Don't be a fool!
Imagination!"

The light was out.

"Switch off!" a voice was calling. There was a rush of swift feet from
the distant doors; friendly hands were under him--lifting him--as the
