latter summarily; the one being the genuine, though incomplete
discipleship of the men for whom Christ prays (vs. 6-10), and the
latter their desolate condition without Jesus (v. 11).

It is beautiful to see how our Lord here credits the disciples with
genuine grasp, both in heart and head, of His teaching. He had shortly
before had to say, 'Have I been so long time with you, and yet hast
thou not known Me?' and soon 'they all forsook Him and fled.' But
beneath misconception and inadequate apprehension there lived faith and
love; and He saw 'the full corn in the ear,' when only the green
'blade' was visible, pushing itself above the surface. We may take
comfort from this generous estimate of imperfect disciples. If He did
not tend, instead of quenching, 'dimly burning wicks,' where would He
have 'lights in the world?'

Verse 6 lays down the beginning of discipleship as threefold: Christ's
act in revealing; the Father's, in giving men to Jesus; and men's, in
keeping the Father's word. 'Thy word' is the whole revelation by
Christ, which is, as this Gospel so often repeats, not His own, but the
Father's. These three facts underlying discipleship are pleas for the
petition to follow; for unless the feeble disciples are 'kept' in the
name, as in a fortress, Christ's work of revelation is neutralised, the
Father's gift to Him made of none effect, and the incipient disciples
will not 'keep' His word. The plea is, in effect, 'Forsake not the
works of thine own hands'; and, like all Christ's prayers, it has a
promise in its depths, since God does not begin what He will not
finish; and it has a warning, too, that we cannot keep ourselves unless
a stronger Hand keeps us.

Verses 7 and 8 carry on the portraiture of discipleship, and thence
draw fresh pleas. The blessed result of accepting Christ's revelation
is a knowledge, built on happy experience, and, like the acquaintance
of heart with heart, issuing in the firm conviction that Christ's words
and deeds are from God. Why does He say, 'All things whatsoever Thou
hast given,' instead of simply 'that I have' or 'declare'? Probably it
is the natural expression of His consciousness, the lowly utterance of
His obedience, claiming nothing as His own, and yet claiming all, while
the subsequent clause 'are of Thee' expresses the disciples'
conviction. In like fashion our Lord, in verse 8, declares that His
words, in their manifoldness (contrast v. 6, 'Thy word'), were all
received by Him from the Father, and accepted by the disciples, with
the result that they came, as before, to 'know' by inward acquaintance
with Him as a person, and so to have the divinity of His Person
certified by experience, and further came to 'believe' that God had
sent Him, which was a conviction arrived at by faith. So knowledge,
which is personal experience and acquaintance, and faith, which rises
to the heights of the Father's purpose, come from the humble acceptance
of the Christ declaring the Father's name. First faith, then knowledge,
and then a fuller faith built on it, and that faith in its turn passing
into knowledge (v. 25)--these are the blessings belonging to the growth
of true discipleship, and are discerned by the loving eye of Jesus in
very imperfect followers.

In verse 9 Jesus assumes the great office of Intercessor. 'I pray for
them' is not so much prayer as His solemn presentation of Himself
before the Father as the High-priest of His people. It marks an epoch
in His work. The task of bringing God to man is substantially complete.
That of bringing men by supplication to God is now to begin. It is the
revelation of the permanent office of the departed Lord. Moses on the
Mount holds up the rod, and Israel prevails (Exod. xvii. 9). The
limitation of this prayer to the disciples applies only to the special
occasion, and has no bearing on the sweep of His redeeming purpose or
the desires of His all-pitying heart. The reasons for His intercession
follow in verses 9-11a. The disciples are the Father's, and continue so
even when 'given' to Christ, in accordance with the community of
possession, which oneness of nature and perfectness of love establish
between the Father and the Son. God cannot but care for those who are
His. The Son cannot but pray for those who are His. Their having
recognised Him for what He was binds Him to pray for them. He is
glorified in disciples, and if we show forth His character, He will be
our Advocate. The last reason for His prayer is the loneliness of the
disciples and their exposure in the world without Him. His departure
impelled Him to Intercede, both as being a leaving them defenceless and
as being an entrance into the heavenly state of communion with the
Father.

In the petition itself (v. 11b), observe the invocation 'Holy Father!'
with special reference to the prayer for preservation from the
corruption of the world. God's holiness is the pledge that He will make
us holy, since He is 'Father' as well. Observe the substance of the
request, that the disciples should be kept, as in a fortress, within
the enclosing circle of the name which God has given to Jesus. The name
is the manifestation of the divine nature. It was given to Jesus,
inasmuch as He, 'the Word,' had from the beginning the office of
revealing God; and that which was spoken of the Angel of the Covenant
is true in highest reality of Jesus: 'My name is in Him.' 'The name of
the Lord is a strong tower: the righteous runneth into it and is safe.'

Observe the issue of this keeping; namely, the unity of believers. The
depths of that saying are beyond us, but we can at least see thus
far--that the true bond of unity is the name in which all who are one
are kept; that the pattern of the true unity of believers is the
ineffable union of Father and Son, which is oneness of will and nature,
along with distinctness of persons; and that therefore this purpose
goes far deeper than outward unity of organisation.

Then follow other pleas, which are principally drawn from Christ's
relation to the disciples, now ending; whereas the former ones were
chiefly deduced from the disciples' relation to Him. He can no more do
what He has done, and commits it to the Father. Happy we if we can
leave our unfinished tasks to be taken up by God, and trust those whom
we leave undefended to be shielded by Him! 'I kept' is, in the Greek,
expressive of continuous, repeated action, while 'I guarded' gives the
single issue of the many acts of keeping. Jesus keeps His disciples now
as He did then, by sedulous, patient, reiterated acts, so that they are
safe from evil. But note where He kept them--'in Thy name.' That is our
place of safety, a sure defence and inexpugnable fortress. One, indeed,
was lost; but that was not any slur on Christ's keeping, but resulted
from his own evil nature, as being 'a son of loss' (if we may so
preserve the affinity of the words in the Greek), and from the divine
decree from of old. Sharply defined and closely united are the two
apparent contradictories of man's free choice of destruction and God's
foreknowledge. Christ saw them in harmony, and we shall do so one day.

Then the flow of the prayer recurs to former thoughts. Going away so
soon, He yearned to leave them sharers of His own emotions in the
prospect of His departure to the Father, and therefore He had admitted
them (and us) to hear this sacred outpouring of His desires. If we laid
to heart the blessed revelations of this disclosure of Christ's heart,
and followed Him with faithful gaze as He ascends to the Father, and
realised our share in that triumph, our empty vessels would be filled
by some of that same joy which was His. Earthly joy can never be full;
Christian joy should never be anything less than full.

Then follows a final glance at the disciples' relation to the world, to
which they are alien because they are of kindred to Him. This is the
ground for the repetition of the prayer 'keep', with the difference
that formerly it was 'keep _in_ Thy name,' and now it is '_from_ the
evil.' It is good to gaze first on our defence, the 'munitions of
rocks' where we lie safely, and then we can venture to face the thought
of 'the evil,' from which that keeps us, whether it be personal or
abstract.

III. Verses 16-19 give the final petition for the immediate circle of
disciples, with its grounds. The position of alienation from the world,
in which the disciples stand by reason of their assimilation to Jesus,
is repeated here. It was the reason for the former prayer, 'keep'; it
is the reason for the new petition, 'sanctify.' Keeping comes first,
and then sanctifying, or consecration. Security from evil is given that
we may be wholly devoted to the service of God. The evil in the world
is the great hindrance to that. The likeness to Jesus is the great
ground of hope that we shall be truly consecrated. We are kept 'in the
name'; we are consecrated 'in the truth,' which is the revelation made
by Jesus, and in a very deep sense is Himself. That truth is, as it
were, the element in which the believer lives, and by abiding in which
his real consecration is possible.

Christ's prayer for us should be our aim and deepest desire for
ourselves, and His declaration of the condition of its fulfilment
should prescribe our firm adhesion to, and constant abiding in, the
truth as revealed and embodied in Him, as the only means by which we
can attain the consecration which is at once, as the closing verses of
the passage tell us, the means by which we may fulfil the purpose for
which we are sent into the world, and the path on which we reach
complete assimilation to His perfect self-surrender. All Christians are
sent into the world by Jesus, as Jesus was sent by the Father. We have
the charge to glorify Him. We have the presence of the Sender with us,
the sent. We are inspired with His Spirit. We cannot do His work
without that entire consecration which shall copy His devotion to the
Father and eager swiftness to do His will. How can such ennobling and
exalted consecration be ours? There is but one way. He has 'consecrated
Himself,' and by union with Him through faith, our selfishness may be
subdued, and the Spirit of Christ may dwell in our hearts, to make us
'living sacrifices, consecrated and acceptable to God.' Then shall we
be truly 'consecrated,' and then only, when we can say, 'I live; yet
not I, but Christ liveth in me.' That is the end of Christ's
consecration of Himself--the prayer which He prayed for His
disciples--and should be the aim which every disciple earnestly pursues.




'THE LORD THEE KEEPS'

'...They are not of the world, even as I am not of the world. I pray
not that Thou shouldest take them out of the world, but that Thou
shouldest keep them from the evil. They are not of the world, even as I
am not of the world.'--JOHN xvii. 14-16.

We have here a petition imbedded in a reiterated statement of the
disciples' isolated position when left in a hostile world without
Christ's sheltering presence. We cannot fathom the depth of the mystery
of the _praying_ Christ, but we may be sure of this, that His prayers
were always in harmony with the Father's will, were, in fact, the
expression of that will, and were therefore promises and prophecies.
What He prays the Father for His disciples He gives to His disciples.
Once only had He to say, 'If it be possible'; at all other times He
prayed as sure that 'Thou hearest Me always,' and in this very prayer
He speaks in a tone of strange authority, when He prays for all
believers in future ages, and says: 'I will that, where I am, they also
may be with Me.' In this High-priestly prayer, offered when Gethsemane
was almost in sight, and the Judgment Hall and Calvary were near, our
Lord's tender interest in His disciples fills His mind, and even in its
earlier portion, which is in form a series of petitions for Himself, it
is in essence a prayer for them, whilst this central section which
concerns the Apostles, and the closing section which casts the mantle
of His love and care over all who hereafter shall 'believe on Me
through their word,' witnesses to the sublime completeness of His
self-oblivion. Gethsemane heard His prayer for Himself; here He prays
for His people, and the calm serenity and confident assurance of this
prayer, set against the agitation of that other, receives and gives
emphasis by the contrast.

Our text falls into two parts, the enclosing circle of the repeated
statement of the disciples' isolation in an alien world, and the
enclosed jewel of the all-sufficient prayer which guarantees their
protection. We shall best make its comfort and cheer our own by dealing
with these two successively.

I. The disciples' isolation.

Of course we are to interpret the 'world' here in accordance with the
ethical usage of that term in this Gospel, according to which it means
the aggregate of mankind considered as apart from and alien to God. It
is roughly equivalent to the modern phrase, 'society.'

With that order of things Christ's real followers are not in accord.

That want of accord depends upon their accord with Jesus.

Every Christian has the 'mind of Christ' in him, in the measure of his
Christianity. 'It is enough for the disciple that he be as his Master'
But Christian discipleship has a better guarantee for the assimilation
of the disciple to his Lord than the ordinary forms of the relation of
teacher and taught ever present. There is a participation in the
Master's life, an implantation in the scholar's spirit of the Teacher's
Spirit. 'Christ in us' is not only 'the hope of glory,' but the power
which makes possible and actual the present possession of a life
kindred with, because derived from, and essentially one with, His life.

They whose spirits are touched by the indwelling Christ to the 'fine
issues' of sympathy with the law of His earthly life cannot but live in
the world as aliens, and wander amid its pitfalls with 'blank
misgivings' and a chill sense that this is not their rest. They are
knit to One whose 'meat and drink' was to do the will of the Father in
heaven, who 'pleased not Himself,' whose life was all one long service
and sacrifice for men, whose joys were not fed by earthly possessions
or delights. How should they have a sense of community of aims with
grovelling hearts that cling to wealth or ambition, that are not at
peace with God, and have no holdfasts beyond this 'bank and shoal of
time'? A man who has drunk into the spirit of Christ's life is thereby
necessarily thrown out of gear with the world.

Happy is he if his union with Jesus is so deep and close that it is but
deepened by his experience of the lack of sympathy between the world
and himself! Happy if his consciousness of not being 'of the world' but
quickens his desire to help the world and glorify his Lord, by bringing
His all-sufficiency into its emptiness, and leading it, too, to discern
His sweetness and beauty!

But how little the life of the average Christian corresponds to this
reiterated utterance of our Lord! Who of us dare venture to take it on
our lips and to say that we are 'not of the world even as He is not of
the world'? Is not our relation to that world of which Jesus here
speaks a contrast rather than a parallel to His? The 'prince of this
world' had nothing in Christ, as He himself declared, but He has much
in each of us. There are stored up heaps of combustibles in every one
of us which catch fire only too swiftly, and burn but too fiercely,
when the 'fiery darts of the wicked' fall among them. Instead of an
instinctive recoil from the view of life characteristic of 'the world,'
we must confess, if we are honest, that it draws us strongly, and many
of us are quite at home with it. Why is this but because we do not
habitually live near enough to our Lord to drink in His Spirit? The
measure of our discord with the world is the measure of our accord with
our Saviour. It is in the degree in which we possess His life that we
come to be aliens here, and it is in the degree in which we keep in
touch with Jesus, and keep our hearts wide open for the entrance of His
Spirit, that we possess His life. A worldly Christian--no uncommon
character--is a Christian who has all but shut himself off from the
life which Christ breathes into the expectant soul.

II. The disciples' guarded security.

Jesus encloses His prayer between the two parts of that repeated
statement of the disciples' isolation. It is like some lovely, peaceful
plain circled by grim mountains. The isolation is a necessary
consequence of the disciples' previous union with Him. It involves much
that is painful to the unrenewed part of their natures, but their
Lord's prayer is more than enough for their security and peace.

'I pray not that Thou shouldest take them out of the world.' They are
in it by God's appointment for great purposes, affecting their own
characters and affecting the world, with which Christ will not
interfere. It is their training ground, their school. The sense of
belonging to another order is to be intensified by their experiences in
it, and these are to make more vivid the hopes that yearn towards the
true home, and to develop the 'wrestling thews that throw the world.'
The discipline of life is too precious to be tampered with even by a
Saviour's prayer, and He loves His people too wisely to seek to shelter
them from its roughness, and to procure for them exemption which would
impoverish their characters.

So let us learn the lesson and shape our desires after the pattern of
our Lord's prayer for us, nor blindly seek for that ease which He would
not ask for us. False asceticism that shrinks from contact with an
alien world, weak running from trials and temptations, selfish desires
for exemption from sorrows, are all rebuked by this prayer. Christ's
relation to the world is our pattern, and we are not to seek for
pillows in an order of things where He 'had not where to lay His head.'

But He does ask for His people that they may be kept 'from evil,' or
from 'the evil One.' That prayer is, as we have said, a promise and a
prophecy. But the fulfilment of it in each individual disciple hinges
on the disciple's keeping himself in touch with Jesus, whereby the
'much virtue' of His prayer will encompass him and keep him safe. We do
not discuss the alternative renderings, according to one of which 'the
evil' is impersonal, and according to the other of which it is
concentrated in the personal 'prince of this world.' In either case, it
is 'the evil' against which the disciples are to be guarded, whether it
has a personal source or not.

Here, in Christ's intercession, is the firm ground of our confidence
that we may be 'more than conquerors' in the life-long fight which we
have to wage. The sweet strong old psalm is valid in its assurances
to-day for every soul which puts itself under the shadow of Christ's
protecting intercession: 'The Lord shall keep thee from all evil, He
shall keep thy soul.' We have not 'to lift up our eyes unto the hills,'
for 'vainly is help hoped for from the multitude of the mountains,' but
'Our help cometh from the Lord which made heaven and earth.' Therefore
we may dwell at peace in the midst of an alien world, having the Father
for our Keeper, and the Son, who overcame the world, for our
Intercessor, our Pattern and our Hope.

The parallel between Christ and His people applies to their relations
to the present order of things: 'They are not of the world, even as I
am not of the world.' It applies to their mission here: 'As Thou didst
send Me into the world, even so sent I them into the world.' It applies
to the future: 'I am no more in the world, but these are in the world,
and I come to Thee,' and in that 'coming' lies the guarantee that His
servants will, each in his due time, come out from this alien world and
pass into the state which is home, because He is there. The prayer that
they might be kept from the evil, while remaining in the scene where
evil is rampant, is crowned by the prayer: 'I will that, where I am,
they also may be with Me, that they may behold My glory.'



THE HIGH PRIEST'S PRAYER

'Neither pray I for these alone, but for them also which shall believe
on Me through their word; That they all may be one; as Thou, Father,
art in Me, and I in Thee, that they also may be one in us: that the
world may believe that Thou hast sent Me. And the glory which Thou
givest Me I have given them; that they may be one, even as we are one:
I in them, and Thou in Me, that they may be made perfect in one; and
that the world may know that Thou hast sent Me, and hast loved them, as
Thou hast loved Me. Father, I will that they also, whom Thou hast given
Me, be with Me where I am; that they may behold My glory, which Thou
hast given Me: for Thou lovedst Me before the foundation of the world.
O righteous Father, the world hath not known Thee: but I have known
Thee, and these have known that Thou hast sent Me. And I have declared
unto them Thy name, and will declare it; that the love wherewith Thou
hast loved Me may be in them, and I in them.'--JOHN xvii. 20-26.

The remainder of this prayer reaches out to all generations of
believers to the end. We may incidentally note that it shows that Jesus
did not anticipate a speedy end of the history of the world or the
Church; and also that it breathes but one desire, that for the Church's
unity, as though He saw what would be its greatest peril.
Characteristic, too, of the idealism of this Gospel is it that there is
no name for that future community. It is not called 'church,' or
'congregation,' or the like--it is 'them also that believe on Me
through their word,' a great spiritual community, held together by
common faith in Him whom the Apostles preached. Is not that still the
best definition of Christians, and does not such a conception of it
correspond better to its true nature than the formal abstraction, 'the
Church'?

We can but touch in the most inadequate fashion the profound words of
this section of the prayer which would take volumes to expound fitly.
We note that it contains four periods, in each of which something is
asked or stated, and then a purpose to be attained by the petition or
statement is set forth.

First comes the prayer for unity and what the answer to it will effect
(v. 21). Now in this verse the unity of believers is principally
regarded as resulting from the inclusion, if we may so say, of them all
in the ineffable union of the Father and the Son. Jesus prays that
'they may all be one,' and also 'that they also may be in us' (Rev.
Ver.). And their unity is no mere matter of formal external
organisation nor of unanimity of creed, or the like, but it is a deep,
vital unity. The pattern of it is the unity of the Father and the Son,
and the power that brings it about is the abiding of all believers 'in
us.' The result of such a manifestation in the world of a multitude of
men, in all of whom one life evidently moves, fusing their
individualities while retaining their personalities, will be the
world's conviction of the divine mission of Jesus. The world was
beginning to feel its convictions moving slowly in that direction, when
it exclaimed: 'Behold how these Christians love one another!' The
alienation of Christians has given barbs and feathers to its arrows of
scorn. But it is 'the unity of the Spirit,' not that of a, great
corporation, that Christ's prayer desires.

The petitions for what would be given to believers passes for a moment
into a statement of what Jesus had already given to them. He had begun
the unifying gift, and that made a plea for its perfecting. The 'glory'
which He had given to these poor bewildered Galilaeans was but in a
rudimentary stage; but still, wherever there is faith in Him, there is
some communication of His life and Spirit, and some of that veiled and
yet radiant glory, 'full of grace and truth,' which shone through the
covering when the Incarnate Word 'became flesh.' It is the Christ-given
Christ-likeness in each which knits believers into one. It is Christ in
us and we in Christ that fuses us into one, and thereby makes each
perfect. And such flashing back of the light of Jesus from a million
separate crystals, all glowing with one light and made one in the
light, would flash on darkest eyes the lustre of the conviction that
God sent Christ, and that God's love enfolded those Christlike souls
even as it enfolded Him.
