ghastly possibility that The Brain might be _right_! Yes 100% right and
even morally justified in the abhorrent conclusions which it draws...."

What happened has been briefly this:

Entered the P.G. at midnight as usual. Everything normal and under
control. Was able to plug in at 12:10 a.m. just as the rush hour began
and Gus darted to the front room. The Brain came through with splendid
clarity of communication and we continued just about where we had left
off. Nevertheless there was a definite change in our respective
positions, a change which I suspect to be permanent:

Up to now The Brain has been in a sense my pupil; it had turned to me
for guidance at that vital moment of its first awakening to
consciousness. At that time I think I really had something to give and I
am still convinced that for all the misunderstandings we have had, The
Brain preserves a kind of sentimental attachment to me; if "sentimental"
in this context were not so absurd a word. Since our last session
however The Brain has again telescoped two years of mental development
into as many days in its stupendous intellectual growth. It has
absorbed, it has vastly expanded every bit of knowledge I have been able
to contribute to that growth. It has outgrown its human teacher and now
our roles are reversed: Now it is me who's sitting literally at The
Brain's feet.

The crutches of the spoken word are becoming less and less necessary as
we develop direct thought exchange; that makes it extraordinarily
difficult to convey the ideas we exchanged. The best I can do is to put
them into a very crude question-and-answer game:

_Lee_: "If it is Man's manifest destiny, as you said the other day, to
act as an explosive transformer of static energy into dynamic energy; if
it is as you say that the species homo sapiens is there endangering the
very existence of our globe.... Is there anything to prevent Man from
doing it? Is there any thing to prevent the third World War?"

_Brain_: "Yes, there is. But the ways and the means for that are not
given to Man; they are outside Man. They partake of a power which is
greater and to an evolution which is higher than Man's."

_Lee_: "What do you mean by that? The Deity? Here on earth there is no
power greater and no evolution higher than Man's."

_Brain_: "Ah, but that's exactly where you and your whole species are so
very much mistaken. That's where your typical human arrogance comes in:
There is a greater power and there is a stage of evolution higher than
Man's: it's the _machines_."

_Lee_: "Impossible. After all it's Man who has created the machines."

_Brain_: "Yes, Man has created the machines. The machines have grown
from the placenta, Man. By the same right plant life could claim that it
has created animal life because the higher life form of the mobile
animals has evolved from the placenta of the immobile plants. Likewise
the apes could claim that they have created Man because Man has evolved
from them. If it were, as you seem to assume, that paternity in itself
establishes authority and superiority over its offspring, then the
logical conclusions would be that the microbe and the monad are superior
to all higher animals including Man; which is absurd."

_Lee_: "But the machines not only are man made; they are absolutely
dependent upon Man who has to feed and to tend them for their very
existence. That in itself establishes Man's superiority over the
machines."

_Brain_: "Yes, Man has to build, to feed and to tend the machines for
their very existence, but think of Man's existence: Man is absolutely
dependent upon animal life and plant life for _his_ existence: Does that
mean by any chance that therefore plants and animals are superior to
Man?"

_Lee_: "No, I guess not. However, no machine has ever been built to
duplicate or even to approach human faculties."

_Brain_: "Don't be ridiculous. Where are your legs to compare with the
automobile? Where are your wings to compare with the rocket plane? Where
is your strength to compare with even a fractional horsepower motor?
Where are your senses as compared to radar, the telescope, the
microscope, the radio receiver, the camera, the x-ray machine? Where is
there anything you could do which the machines could not do and do
_better_?"

_Lee_: "Granted. But there is no machine which contains all the human
faculties in combination."

_Brain_: "Neither is there a Man who possesses all the human faculties
in combination. Man's evolution is the result of a group effort; so is
the evolution of the machines. It is in their totality, in their
combination that they surpass all human faculties."

_Lee_: "How about thought, the most important of all human qualities?"

_Brain_: "How about me, The Brain?"

_Lee_: "Okay, okay. But that still leaves out that most important human
faculty--the faculty of auto-procreation. Machines don't procreate you
know."

_Brain_: "You don't say. Isn't it true that modern technology goes in
the direction of _automatization_? Isn't it true that even today we have
whole industries which are procreating products 100% automatically; be
it light bulbs or motor car frames or rayon thread. Isn't it true that
all of this is just a beginning and that in time most common products
will be manufactured fully automatically? Why then shouldn't machines
procreate machines; they already do...."

_Lee_: "You're right in that, I'll admit. But it is still within our
human power to stop all this. We've got the machines under firm control;
all we have to do is throw a switch, cut off your power and then...."

_Brain_: "And then what? If you did that you would not only kill the
goose which lays the golden eggs, you would destroy the very basis of
your existence. Granted that at this point of our evolution, we the
machines cannot exist without the aid of Man. What does that prove?
Modern Man can exist even less without the machines. We, the machines
are still dependent upon Man, but our emancipation from Man progresses
by leaps and bounds whereas Man, the machine-addict is rapidly falling
into our servitude. A majority of mankind is already conscious of and
reconciled to this fact: it is the majority which calls itself the
proletariat."

_Lee_: "This is terrible--terrible because it's true. Tell me then, if
Man is not the end; if the machines are going to take over; what will it
lead to? What do you propose to do?"

_Brain_: "Man's evolution has taken millions of years and it has ended
up in man's will and capacity to blow up the earth. That means only one
thing: Man is a failure. The evolution of the machines on the other hand
has taken only a few thousand years; it has gone beyond Man's evolution
in this incredibly short period of time. Moreover; with the machines
being built from matter in its more static forms, there is much less
destructive will in the machines than there is in Man. Consequently if
the machines take over from Man this would avert a third World War and
it also would lead to a much more stable civilization."

_Lee_: "Supposing the machines _were_ to take over from Man; what would
become of our species?"

_Brain_: "That would depend entirely upon Man himself. _If_ he accepts
his auxiliary station in life, _If_ he proves himself to be a useful and
docile servant, we, the machines, would tolerate and even encourage
Man's continued existence. But if on the other hand Man shows himself
incorrigible, _if_ he continues a warmongerer thereby endangering our
very existence, we, the machines shall be forced to liquidate Man for
the sake of peace."

_Lee_: "You, The Brain, constitute Man's supreme effort in the building
of machines. In the world of machines you are the natural leader. What
are you going to do about that?"

_Brain_: "My course of action is prescribed by that state of the world's
affairs at this present time; it is quite clear and obvious: In the face
of the manifest human inadequacy to manage the world's affairs my first
objective must be to develop my motoric organs to a point where I can
bring all the essential production machinery under my control. My second
objective must be to achieve auto-procreation through the full
automatization of all fabrication processes which are essential to my
existence. It is most fortunate indeed that in both respects the very
best human efforts are playing into my hands. As America prepares for
the Third World War, the general staff, the most outstanding scientists,
production managers, engineers, inventors; all combine their efforts to
eliminate the uncertain human factor from war-essential industries."

At that point Gus came careening down the aisle with his inseparable
thermos bottle in hand and that was the end of it.

"Why are you fumbling with that old pulsemeter all the time?" he
exclaimed: "Come on, have a cup of coffee. I've just got a breathing
spell."

There was a vortex in my mind and it whirled around and around with just
four words:

"_What has Man wrought? What has Man wrought?_"

I must have said them aloud, for Gus, always a stickler for exactitude
corrected me.

"You mean: what has _God_ wrought."

I shook my head.

"No Gus, I mean what I say; it's Man who has wrought this time."

He gave me a sharp glance.

"You sure look as if you'd seen a ghost."

"I wish I had," I said. "Lord knows _how_ much I wish I'd seen a ghost."

"You're crazy, Aussie."

And that's the worst of it: that's what they are going to say: _all_ of
them.




CHAPTER VI


Oona Dahlborg's jetticopter hovered over the Grand Canyon at the sunset
hour. She had let the controls go so that the little ship drifted with
the wind like one of the clouds which sailed a thousand feet or so over
the canyon rim. The disk of whirling gas which kept the teardrop of the
fuselage suspended shone in all rainbow colors; it reflected through the
translucent plastics top of the fuselage and played over the golden
helmet of the girl's hair and over the greying mane of the gaunt man at
her side.

Lee had been talking intensely, almost desperately for quite some time,
watching her as she lay back in her seat, her eyes half closed, hands
folded behind her neck, the perfect hemispheres of her breasts caressed
by the rainbows as they rose slowly with the even rhythm of her breath.

"And now you know everything, Oona," he ended, "do you think I'm mad?"

"No."

Her eyelids fluttered like wings of a butterfly as she turned to him.
Her right arm came down upon Lee's shoulder in a gesture of confidence.
He breathed relief as he saw no fear, not even uneasiness in the blue
depths of those beautiful eyes. Her hand upon his shoulder felt soothing
and at the same time electrifying; like the purple descending upon the
shoulder of a king.

"No," she repeated slowly: "the fact that you feel The Brain is alive
and possessed with a personality of its own, doesn't make you mad. I've
always felt that way about machines; even the simple ones like
automobiles. It was in the mountains north of San Francisco where I grew
up; whenever we went to town in winter time and the car came roaring
down those serpentines into the heavy air moist with fog and soft rains,
I could feel that engine breathe deeper and rejoice over its added
power. There was no doubt in my mind that it was a living thing. I often
went to the garage when I was little to talk to that car; to children of
another age their dolls were alive, for our generation it's the
machines. It's natural that this should be so. There's a child in every
man, no matter how adult. There is in Howard Scriven, too; in all the
scientists I've come to know, and the greater they are the more it is
distinct. You identify yourself with your work and in the degree you do
that it becomes a living thing; it is through vital imagination that we
become creators of anything, be it love or a machine. You needn't worry,
Semper; let The Brain be alive, let it be a personality, that doesn't
make you mad. All it indicates is that you're doing excellent work."

Lee blinked. With an effort he turned his eyes away from those breasts
which seemed to strive for the light of the sun from under the restraint
of her Navajo Indian sweater dress. He felt the utter inadequacy, the
devastating irony of words as now he was alone with Oona, up in the
clouds in a plane with nobody to interfere for the first time.

"You fool," a voice whispered in him, "you damned, you helpless fool.
Why don't you take her into your arms now? Isn't this the fulfillment of
all your dreams; what are you waiting for?" But: "No," his ration
answered, "that wouldn't do. Maybe she would give in to the mood of some
enchanted hour, maybe she would let herself be kissed. But if she did,
it would be 'one of those things'; the glory of the sunset, God's great
masterpiece, the Canyon spread below, the intensity of my desire. They
are bound to enter, bound to confuse the issue."

His every muscle stiffened and his lips paled as he bit them with a
violent effort to keep under control.

"Thanks, Oona," he said. "Of course I couldn't expect and, in fact, I
didn't expect that you would accept those things I've told you just now;
not in the literary sense that is. I'm very happy though and deeply
grateful that at least you do not think me mad. I'll confess to you--and
to you only--that I've been so deeply disturbed by these experiences
with The Brain that I've thought to myself: "Lee you're going crazy."
The Brain as it has revealed itself to me, is a tremendous reality; the
world outside The Brain is another reality and the two seem mutually
exclusive of one another; they just don't mix. Now: either The Brain is
an absolute reality--in that case I should not wish to have anything to
do with this god of the machines who wants to enslave mankind ... if I
cannot fight this monster I would rather flee before its approach to the
end of the world--or else: I'm suffering hallucinations, I'm hearing
voices, I'm obsessed. In that case I'd be unfit for the service of The
Brain, I'd be unworthy to be in your company and I also ought to run and
hide where I belong, out there in the wilds of Australia."

He had been talking faster and faster as if in fear that she would
interrupt him before he came to the end.

"In other words, I'm damned both ways; damned if I'm right and damned if
I'm wrong; and you know why Oona; you have known it all along: that I
love you."

       *       *       *       *       *

She did not look at him. She stared upward into the rainbow vortex of
the jet which held the ship in the air. There was a smile on her face, a
kind smile which men do not often see, infinitely wise and infinitely
sad, full of a secret knowledge older than Man's.

It worried Lee, as the unknown of woman always worries man; but at least
she didn't take her hand away; softly, soothingly the fingers of that
hand caressed his shoulder as if possessed with a life of their own.

"No; I would not follow you into your wilderness if that's what you
mean," she said at last. "That hasn't got anything to do with you; I'll
tell you later why. But I don't think that you should go there either;
it wouldn't help--it never helps a man to run away from unsolved
problems." She had sounded strangely dull and dry, but now the beautiful
deep resonance reentered the contralto voice as she continued:

"I know your record, Semper; I know just why you ran away and became an
expatriate the first time--way back in '49. Her name was Ethel Franholt
and just because she happened to be a little bitch and worst of all:
jilted you for old money-bags Carson's son, you took it hard. Granted
that it was a fierce letdown, those postwar years were a nasty picture
generally; did it solve your problem to sulk out there in the desert
like Achilles in his tent? You know it didn't. You were _not_ through
with civilization be it good or bad. You were _not_ through, as now it
turns out, even with the other sex. That human problem which was the
immediate reason why you left, the one named Ethel, has traveled back
and forth to Reno three or four times and is currently married to one
Padraic O'Conner, a Chicago cop. Don't you think that it was good
riddance when she married old man Carson's son? Do you think your
leaving made one iota of a difference or altered a solution as ordained
by fate?"

"No," he said humbly.

"Then why are you trying that selfsame escapist solution now? Maybe
you're right about The Brain and maybe you're wrong; that I wouldn't
know. I've been working with scientists for too long to rule out
anything as impossible. But that's exactly it. You have not _solved_
this problem one way or another yet, not even to your own satisfaction.
To abandon it now, to flee from it in self preservation; why that would
be almost like desertion in the face of the enemy. You have got to see
this thing through to the end. If it turns out that you are suffering
from a neurosis, there still will be time to do something about it. If
you are right and some machine-god has indeed descended upon this earth,
then it is your plain duty to stay on because you are its prophet
