The Project Gutenberg eBook, The Lost Princess of Oz, by L. Frank Baum,
Illustrated by John R. Neill


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: The Lost Princess of Oz


Author: L. Frank Baum



Release Date: January 30, 2008  [eBook #24459]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE LOST PRINCESS OF OZ***


E-text prepared by Chris Curnow, Joseph Cooper, Chuck Greif, and the
Project Gutenberg Online Distributed Proofreading Team
(http://www.pgdp.net)



Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original illustrations.
      See 24459-h.htm or 24459-h.zip:
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/2/4/4/5/24459/24459-h/24459-h.htm)
      or
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/2/4/4/5/24459/24459-h.zip)





[Illustration: This book belongs to]

[Illustration]

[Illustration]

[Illustration: THERE STOOD THEIR LOVELY GIRL RULER OZMA, OF OZ--]



THE LOST PRINCESS OF OZ

by

L. FRANK BAUM

Author of
  The Road to Oz, Dorothy and the Wizard in Oz, The
  Emerald City of Oz, The Land of Oz, Ozma of Oz,
  The Patchwork Girl of Oz, Tik-Tok of
  Oz, The Scarecrow of Oz,
  Rinkitink in Oz

[Illustration]

Illustrated by John R. Neill







The Reilly & Lee Co.
Chicago

[Illustration: Copyright 1917 by L. Frank Baum
All Rights Reserved]

[Illustration:

  This Book is Dedicated
  To My Granddaughter
  OZMA BAUM]

[Illustration]

[Illustration]

TO MY READERS


Some of my youthful readers are developing wonderful imaginations. This
pleases me. Imagination has brought mankind through the Dark Ages to its
present state of civilization. Imagination led Columbus to discover
America. Imagination led Franklin to discover electricity. Imagination
has given us the steam engine, the telephone, the talking-machine and
the automobile, for these things had to be dreamed of before they became
realities. So I believe that dreams--day dreams, you know, with your
eyes wide open and your brain-machinery whizzing--are likely to lead to
the betterment of the world. The imaginative child will become the
imaginative man or woman most apt to create, to invent, and therefore to
foster civilization. A prominent educator tells me that fairy tales are
of untold value in developing imagination in the young. I believe it.

Among the letters I receive from children are many containing
suggestions of "what to write about in the next Oz Book." Some of the
ideas advanced are mighty interesting, while others are too extravagant
to be seriously considered--even in a fairy tale. Yet I like them all,
and I must admit that the main idea in "The Lost Princess of Oz" was
suggested to me by a sweet little girl of eleven who called to see me
and to talk about the Land of Oz. Said she: "I s'pose if Ozma ever got
lost, or stolen, ev'rybody in Oz would be dreadful sorry."

That was all, but quite enough foundation to build this present story
on. If you happen to like the story, give credit to my little friend's
clever hint. And, by the way, don't hesitate to write me your own hints
and suggestions, such as result from your own day dreams. They will be
sure to interest me, even if I cannot use them in a story, and the very
fact that you have dreamed at all will give me pleasure and do you good.
For, after all, dear reader, these stories of Oz are just yours and
mine, and we are partners. As long as you care to read them I shall try
to write them, and I've an idea that the next one will relate some
startling adventures of the "Tin Woodman of Oz" and his comrades.

  L. FRANK BAUM,
  Royal Historian of Oz.

  "OZCOT"
  at HOLLYWOOD
  in CALIFORNIA
  1917.

[Illustration: List of Chapters]


1 A Terrible Loss                                                     17

2 The Troubles of Glinda the Good                                     30

3 The Robbery of Cayke the Cookie Cook                                38

4 Among the Winkies                                                   57

5 Ozma's Friends are Perplexed                                        64

6 The Search Party                                                    73

7 The Merry-Go-Round Mountains                                        89

8 The Mysterious City                                                104

9 The High Coco-Lorum of Thi                                         120

10 Toto Loses Something                                              137

11 Button-Bright Loses Himself                                       146

12 The Czarover of Herku                                             157

13 The Truth Pond                                                    173

14 The Unhappy Ferryman                                              184

15 The Big Lavender Bear                                             194

16 The Little Pink Bear                                              202

17 The Meeting                                                       216

18 The Conference                                                    230

19 Ugu the Shoemaker                                                 237

20 Surprises                                                         245

21 Magic Against Magic                                               256

22 In the Wicker Castle                                              265

23 The Defiance of Ugu the Shoemaker                                 280

24 The Little Pink Bear Speaks Truly                                 289

25 Ozma of Oz                                                        295

26 Dorothy Forgives                                                  303

[Illustration]




A Terrible Loss

[Illustration]

CHAPTER 1


There could be no doubt of the fact: Princess Ozma, the lovely girl
ruler of the Fairyland of Oz, was lost. She had completely disappeared.
Not one of her subjects--not even her closest friends--knew what had
become of her.

It was Dorothy who first discovered it. Dorothy was a little Kansas girl
who had come to the Land of Oz to live and had been given a delightful
suite of rooms in Ozma's royal palace, just because Ozma loved Dorothy
and wanted her to live as near her as possible, so the two girls might
be much together.

Dorothy was not the only girl from the outside world who had been
welcomed to Oz and lived in the royal palace. There was another named
Betsy Bobbin, whose adventures had led her to seek refuge with Ozma, and
still another named Trot, who had been invited, together with her
faithful companion, Cap'n Bill, to make her home in this wonderful
fairyland. The three girls all had rooms in the palace and were great
chums; but Dorothy was the dearest friend of their gracious Ruler and
only she at any hour dared to seek Ozma in her royal apartments. For
Dorothy had lived in Oz much longer than the other girls and had been
made a Princess of the realm.

Betsy was a year older than Dorothy and Trot was a year younger, yet the
three were near enough of an age to become great playmates and to have
nice times together. It was while the three were talking together one
morning in Dorothy's room that Betsy proposed they make a journey into
the Munchkin Country, which was one of the four great countries of the
Land of Oz ruled by Ozma.

[Illustration]

"I've never been there yet," said Betsy Bobbin, "but the Scarecrow
once told me it is the prettiest country in all Oz."

"I'd like to go, too," added Trot.

"All right," said Dorothy, "I'll go and ask Ozma. Perhaps she will let
us take the Sawhorse and the Red Wagon, which would be much nicer for us
than having to walk all the way. This Land of Oz is a pretty big place,
when you get to all the edges of it."

So she jumped up and went along the halls of the splendid palace until
she came to the royal suite, which filled all the front of the second
floor. In a little waiting room sat Ozma's maid, Jellia Jamb, who was
busily sewing.

"Is Ozma up yet?" inquired Dorothy.

"I don't know, my dear," replied Jellia. "I haven't heard a word from
her this morning. She hasn't even called for her bath or her breakfast,
and it is far past her usual time for them."

"That's strange!" exclaimed the little girl.

"Yes," agreed the maid; "but of course no harm could have happened to
her. No one can die or be killed in the Land of Oz and Ozma is herself a
powerful fairy, and she has no enemies, so far as we know. Therefore I
am not at all worried about her, though I must admit her silence is
unusual."

"Perhaps," said Dorothy, thoughtfully, "she has overslept. Or she may be
reading, or working out some new sort of magic to do good to her
people."

"Any of these things may be true," replied Jellia Jamb, "so I haven't
dared disturb our royal mistress. You, however, are a privileged
character, Princess, and I am sure that Ozma wouldn't mind at all if you
went in to see her."

"Of course not," said Dorothy, and opening the door of the outer chamber
she went in. All was still here. She walked into another room, which was
Ozma's boudoir, and then, pushing back a heavy drapery richly broidered
with threads of pure gold, the girl entered the sleeping-room of the
fairy Ruler of Oz. The bed of ivory and gold was vacant; the room was
vacant; not a trace of Ozma was to be found.

Very much surprised, yet still with no fear that anything had happened
to her friend, Dorothy returned through the boudoir to the other rooms
of the suite. She went into the music room, the library, the laboratory,
the bath, the wardrobe and even into the great throne room, which
adjoined the royal suite, but in none of these places could she find
Ozma.

So she returned to the anteroom where she had left the maid, Jellia
Jamb, and said:

"She isn't in her rooms now, so she must have gone out."

"I don't understand how she could do that without my seeing her,"
replied Jellia, "unless she made herself invisible."

"She isn't there, anyhow," declared Dorothy.

"Then let us go find her," suggested the maid, who appeared to be a
little uneasy.

So they went into the corridors and there Dorothy almost stumbled over a
queer girl who was dancing lightly along the passage.

"Stop a minute, Scraps!" she called. "Have you seen Ozma this morning?"

"Not I!" replied the queer girl, dancing nearer. "I lost both my eyes in
a tussle with the Woozy, last night, for the creature scraped 'em both
off my face with his square paws. So I put the eyes in my pocket and
this morning Button-Bright led me to Aunt Em, who sewed 'em on again. So
I've seen nothing at all to-day, except during the last five minutes. So
of course I haven't seen Ozma."

"Very well, Scraps," said Dorothy, looking curiously at the eyes, which
were merely two round black buttons sewed upon the girl's face.

[Illustration]

There were other things about Scraps that would have seemed curious to
one seeing her for the first time. She was commonly called "The
