
Gillam's journal records that the _Nonsuch_ left Gravesend the 3d of
June, 1668, reached Resolution Island on August 4, and came to anchor
at the south of James Bay on September 29.[6]  It was here that
Radisson had come overland five years before, when he thought that he
discovered a river flowing from the direction of the St. Lawrence.  The
river was Nemisco.  Groseillers called it Rupert in honor of his
patron.  A palisaded fort was at once built, and named King Charles
after the English monarch.  By December, the bay was locked in the
deathly silence of northern frost.  Snow fell till the air became
darkened day after day, a ceaseless fall of muffling snow; the
earth--as Gillam's journal says--"seemed frozen to death."  Gillam
attended to the fort, Groseillers to the trade.  Dual command was bound
to cause a clash.  By April, 1669, the terrible cold had relaxed.  The
ice swept out of the river with a roar.  Wild fowl came winging north
in myriad flocks.  By June the fort was sweltering in almost tropical
heat.  The _Nonsuch_ hoisted anchor and sailed for England, loaded to
the water-line with a cargo of furs.  Honors awaited Groseillers in
London.  King Charles created him a _Knight de la Jarretiere_, an order
for princes of the royal blood.[7]  In addition, he was granted a sum
of money.  Prince Rupert and Radisson had, meanwhile, been busy
organizing a fur company.  The success of Groseillers' voyage now
assured this company a royal charter, which was granted in May, 1670.
Such was the origin of the Hudson's Bay Company.  Prince Rupert was its
first governor; Charles Bayly was appointed resident governor on the
bay.  Among the first shareholders were Prince Rupert, the Duke of
York, Sir George Cartwright, the Duke of Albermarle, Shaftesbury, Sir
Peter Colleton, who had advanced Radisson a loan during the long period
of waiting, and Sir John Kirke, whose daughter had married Radisson.

That spring, Radisson and Groseillers again sailed for the bay.  In
1671, three ships were sent out from England, and Radisson established
a second post westward at Moose.  With Governor Bayly, he sailed up and
met the Indians at what was to become the great fur capital of the
north, Port Nelson, or York.  The third year of the company's
existence, Radisson and Groseillers perceived a change.  Not so many
Indians came down to the English forts to trade.  Those who came brought
fewer pelts and demanded higher prices.  Rivals had been at work.  The
English learned that the French had come overland and were paying high
prices to draw the Indians from the bay.  In the spring a council was
held.[8]  Should they continue on the east side of the bay, or move
west, where there would be no rivalry?  Groseillers boldly counselled
moving inland and driving off French competition.  Bayly was for moving
west.  He even hinted that Groseillers' advice sprang from disloyalty
to the English.  The clash that was inevitable from divided command was
this time avoided by compromise.  They would all sail west, and all
come back to Rupert's River.  When they returned, they found that the
English ensign had been torn down and the French flag raised.[9]  A
veteran Jesuit missionary of the Saguenay, Charles Albanel, two French
companions, and some Indian guides had ensconced themselves in the
empty houses.[10]  The priest now presented Governor Bayly with letters
from Count Frontenac commending the French to the good offices of
Governor Bayly.[11]

France had not been idle.

When it was too late, the country awakened to the injustice done
Radisson and Groseillers.  While Radisson was still in Boston, all
restrictions were taken from the beaver trade, except the tax of
one-fourth to the revenue.  The Jesuit Dablon, who was near the western
end of Lake Superior, gathered all the information he could from the
Indians of the way to the Sea of the North.  Father Marquette learned
of the Mississippi from the Indians.  The Western tribes had been
summoned to the Sault, where Sieur de Saint-Lusson met them in treaty
for the French; and the French flag was raised in the presence of Pere
Claude Allouez, who blessed the ceremony.  M. Colbert sent instructions
to M. Talon, the intendant of New France, to grant titles of nobility
to Groseillers' nephew in order to keep him in the country.[12]  On the
Saguenay was a Jesuit, Charles Albanel, loyal to the French and of
English birth, whose devotion to the Indians during the small-pox
scourge of 1670 had given him unbounded influence.  Talon, the
intendant of New France, was keen to retrieve in the North what
D'Argenson's injustice had lost.  Who could be better qualified to go
overland to Hudson Bay than the old missionary, loyal to France, of
English birth, and beloved by the Indians?  Albanel was summoned to
Quebec and gladly accepted the commission.  He chose for companions
Saint-Simon and young Couture, the son of the famous guide to the
Jesuits.  The company left Quebec on August 6, 1671, and secured a
guide at Tadoussac.  Embarking in canoes, they ascended the shadowy
canon of the Saguenay to Lake St. John.  On the 7th of September they
left the forest of Lake St. John and mounted the current of a winding
river, full of cataracts and rapids, toward Mistassini.  On this stream
they met Indians who told them that two European vessels were on Hudson
Bay.  The Indians showed Albanel tobacco which they had received from
the English.

It seemed futile to go on a voyage of discovery where English were
already in possession.  The priest sent one of the Frenchmen and two
Indians back to Quebec for passports and instructions.  What the
instructions were can only be guessed by subsequent developments.  The
messengers left the depth of the forest on the 19th of September, and
had returned from Quebec by the 10th of October.  Snow was falling.
The streams had frozen, and the Indians had gone into camp for the
winter.  Going from wigwam to wigwam through the drifted forest. Father
Albanel passed the winter preaching to the savages.  Skins of the chase
were laid on the wigwams.  Against the pelts, snow was banked to close
up every chink.  Inside, the air was blue with smoke and the steam of
the simmering kettle.  Indian hunters lay on the moss floor round the
central fires.  Children and dogs crouched heterogeneously against the
sloping tent walls.  Squaws plodded through the forest, setting traps
and baiting the fish-lines that hung through airholes of the thick ice.
In these lodges Albanel wintered.  He was among strange Indians and
suffered incredible hardships.  Where there was room, he, too, sat
crouched under the crowded tent walls, scoffed at by the braves, teased
by the unrebuked children, eating when the squaws threw waste food to
him, going hungry when his French companions failed to bring in game.
Sometimes night overtook him on the trail.  Shovelling a bed through
the snow to the moss with his snow-shoes, piling shrubs as a
wind-break, and kindling a roaring fire, the priest passed the night
under the stars.

When spring came, the Indians opposed his passage down the river.  A
council was called.  Albanel explained that his message was to bring
the Indians down to Quebec and keep them from going to the English for
trade.  The Indians, who had acted as middlemen between Quebec traders
and the Northern tribes, saw the advantage of undermining the English
trade.  Gifts were presented by the Frenchmen, and the friendship of
the Indians was secured.  On June 1, 1672, sixteen savages embarked
with the three Frenchmen.  For the next ten days, the difficulties were
almost insurmountable.  The river tore through a deep gorge of sheer
precipices which the _voyageurs_ could pass only by clinging to the
rock walls with hands and feet.  One _portage_ was twelve miles long
over a muskeg of quaking moss that floated on water.  At every step the
travellers plunged through to their waists.  Over this the long canoes
and baggage had to be carried.  On the 10th of June they reached the
height of land that divides the waters of Hudson Bay from the St.
Lawrence.  The watershed was a small plateau with two lakes, one of
which emptied north, the other, south.  As they approached Lake
Mistassini, the Lake Indians again opposed their free passage down the
rivers.

"You must wait," they said, "till we notify the elders of your coming."
Shortly afterwards, the French met a score of canoes with the Indians
all painted for war.  The idea of turning back never occurred to the
priest.  By way of demonstrating his joy at meeting the warriors, he
had ten volleys of musketry fired off, which converted the war into a
council of peace.  At the assemblage, Albanel distributed gifts to the
savages.

"Stop trading with the English at the sea," he cried; "they do not pray
to God; come to Lake St. John with your furs; there you will always
find a _robe noire_ to instruct you and baptize you."

The treaty was celebrated by a festival and a dance.  In the morning,
after solemn religious services, the French embarked.  On the 18th of
June they came to Lake Mistassini, an enormous body of water similar to
the Great Lakes.[13]  From Mistassini, the course was down-stream and
easier.  High water enabled them to run many of the rapids; and on the
28th of June, after a voyage of eight hundred leagues, four hundred
rapids, and two hundred waterfalls, they came to the deserted houses of
the English.  The very next day they found the Indians and held
religious services, making solemn treaty, presenting presents, and
hoisting the French flag.  For the first three weeks of July they
coasted along the shores of James Bay, taking possession of the country
in the name of the French king.  Then they cruised back to King Charles
Fort on Rupert's River.[14]  They were just in time to meet the
returned Englishmen.

Governor Bayly of the Hudson's Bay Company was astounded to find the
French at Rupert's River.  Now he knew what had allured the Indians
from the bay, but he hardly relished finding foreigners in possession
of his own fort.  The situation required delicate tact.  Governor Bayly
was a bluff tradesman with an insular dislike of Frenchmen and
Catholics common in England at a time when bigoted fanaticism ran riot.
King Charles was on friendly terms with France.  Therefore, the
Jesuit's passport must be respected; so Albanel was received with at
least a show of courtesy.  But Bayly was the governor of a fur company;
and the rights of the company must be respected.  To make matters
worse, the French voyageurs brought letters to Groseillers and Radisson
from their relatives in Quebec.  Bayly, no doubt, wished the Jesuit
guest far enough.  Albanel left in a few weeks.  Then Bayly's
suspicions blazed out in open accusations that the two French explorers
had been playing a double game and acting against English interests.
In September came the company ship to the fort with Captain Gillam, who
had never agreed with Radisson from the time that they had quarrelled
about going from Port Royal to the straits of Hudson Bay.  It has been
said that, at this stage, Radisson and Groseillers, feeling the
prejudice too strong against them, deserted and passed overland through
the forests to Quebec.  The records of the Hudson's Bay Company do not
corroborate this report.  Bayly in the heat of his wrath sent home
accusations with the returning ship.  The ship that came out in 1674
requested Radisson to go to England and report.  This he did, and so
completely refuted the charges of disloyalty that in 1675 the company
voted him 100 pounds a year; but Radisson would not sit quietly in
England on a pension.  Owing to hostility toward him among the English
employees of the company, he could not go back to the bay.  Meantime he
had wife and family and servants to maintain on 100 pounds a year.  If
England had no more need of him, France realized the fact that she had.
Debts were accumulating.  Restless as a caged tiger, Radisson found
himself baffled until a message came from the great Colbert of France,
offering to pay all his debts and give him a position in the French
navy.  His pardon was signed and proclaimed.  In 1676, France granted
him fishing privileges on the island of Anticosti; but the lodestar of
the fur trade still drew him, for that year he was called to Quebec to
meet a company of traders conferring on the price of beaver.[15]  In
that meeting assembled, among others, Jolliet, La Salle, Groseillers,
and Radisson--men whose names were to become immortal.

It was plain that the two adventurers could not long rest.[16]


[1] Chailly-Bert.

[2] The Jesuit expeditions of Dablon and Dreuillettes in 1661 had
failed to reach the bay overland.  Cabot had coasted Labrador in 1497;
Captain Davis had gone north of Hudson Bay in 1585-1587; Hudson had
lost his life there in 1610.  Sir Thomas Button had explored Baffin's
Land, Nelson River, and the Button Islands in 1612; Munck, the Dane,
had found the mouth of the Churchill River in 1619, James and Fox had
explored the inland sea in 1631; Shapley had brought a ship up from
Boston in 1640; and Bourdon, the Frenchman, had gone up to the straits
in 1656-1657.

[3] George Carr, writing to Lord Arlington on December 14, 1665, says:
"Hearing some Frenchmen discourse in New England . . . of a great trade
of beaver, and afterward making proof of what they had said, he thought
them the best present he could possibly make his Majesty and persuaded
them to come to England."

[4] Colonel Richard Nicolls, writing on July 31, 1665, says he
"supposes Col. Geo. Cartwright is now at sea."

[5] It plainly could not have been written while _en route_ across the
Atlantic with Sir George Cartwright, for it records events after that
time.

[6] Robson's _Hudson Bay_.

[7] See Dr. N. E. Dionne, also Marie de l'Incarnation, but Sulte
discredits this granting of a title.

[8] See Robson's _Hudson Bay_, containing reference to the journal kept
by Gorst, Bayly's secretary, at Rupert Fort.

[9] See State Papers, Canadian Archives, 1676, January 26, Whitehall:
Memorial of the Hudson Bay Company complaining of Albanel, a Jesuit,
attempting to seduce Radisson and Groseillers from the company's
services; in absence of ships pulling down the British ensign and
tampering with the Indians.

[10] I am inclined to think that Albanel may not have been aware of the
documents which he carried from Quebec to the traders being practically
an offer to bribe Radisson and Groseillers to desert England.  Some
accounts say that Albanel was accompanied by Groseillers' son, but I
find no authority for this.  On the other hand, Albanel does not
mention the Englishmen being present.  Just as Radisson and
Groseillers, ten years before, had taken possession of the old house
battered with bullets, so Albanel took possession of the deserted huts.
Here is what his account says (Cramoisy edition of the _Relations_):
"Le 28 June a peine avions nous avance un quart de lieue, que nous
rencontrasmes a main gauche dans un petit ruisseau un heu avec ses
agrez de dix ou dou tonneaux, qui portoit le Pavilion Anglois et la
voile latine; dela a la portee du fusil, nous entrasmes dans deux
maisons desertes . . . nous rencontrasmes deux ou trois cabanes et un
chien abandonne. . . ."  His tampering with the Indians was simply the
presentation of gifts to attract them to Quebec.

[11] See State Papers, Canadian Archives: M. Frontenac, the commander
of French (?) king's troops at Hudson Bay, introduces and recommends
Father Albanel.

[12] State Papers, Canadian Archives.

[13] For some years there were sensational reports that Mistassini was
larger than Lake Superior.  Mr. Low, of the Canadian Geological Survey,
in a very exhaustive report, shows this is not so.  Still, the lake
ranks with the large lakes of America.  Mr. Low gives its dimensions as
one hundred miles long and twelve miles wide.

[14] There is a discrepancy in dates here which I leave savants to
worry out.  _Albanel's Relation_ (Cramoisy) is of 1672.  Thomas Gorst,
secretary to Governor Bayly, says that the quarrel took place in 1674.
Oldmixon, who wrote from hearsay, says in 1673.  Robson, who had access
to Hudson's Bay records, says 1676; and I am inclined to think they all
agree.  In a word, Radisson and Groseillers were on bad terms with the
local Hudson's Bay Company governor from the first, and the open
quarrel took place only in 1675.  Considering the bigotry of the times,
the quarrel was only natural.  Bayly was governor, but he could not
take precedence over Radisson and Groseillers.  He was Protestant and
English.  They were Catholics and French.  Besides, they were really at
the English governor's mercy; for they could not go back to Canada
until publicly pardoned by the French king.

[15] State Papers, Canadian Archives, October 20, 1676, Quebec: Report
of proceedings regarding the price of beaver . . . by an ordinance,
October 19, 1676, M. Jacques Duchesneau, Intendant, had called a
meeting of the leading fur traders to consult about fixing the price of
beaver.  There were present, among others, Robert, Cavelier de la
Salle, . . . Charles le Moyne, . . . two Godefroys of Three
Rivers, . . . Groseillers, . . . Jolliet, . . . Pierre Radisson.

[16] Mr. Low's geological report on Labrador contains interesting
particulars of the route followed by Father Albanel.  He speaks of the
gorge and swamps and difficult _portages_ in precisely the same way as
the priest, though Albanel must have encountered the worst possible
difficulties on the route, for he went down so early in the spring.




CHAPTER VI

1682-1684

RADISSON GIVES UP A CAREER IN THE NAVY FOR THE FUR TRADE

Though opposed by the Monopolists of Quebec, he secures Ships for a
Voyage to Hudson Bay--Here he encounters a Pirate Ship from Boston and
an English Ship of the Hudson's Bay Company--How he plays his Cards to
win against Both Rivals


A clever man may be a dangerous rival.  Both France and England
recognized this in Radisson.  The Hudson's Bay Company distrusted him
because he was a foreigner.  The fur traders of Quebec were jealous.
The Hudson's Bay Company had offered him a pension of 100 pounds a year
to do nothing.  France had pardoned his secession to England, paid his
debts, and given him a position in the navy, and when the fleet was
wrecked returning from the campaign against Dutch possessions in the
West Indies, the French king advanced money for Radisson to refit
himself; but France distrusted the explorer because he had an English
wife.  All that France and England wanted Radisson to do was to keep
quiet.  What the haughty spirit of Radisson would _not_ do for all the
fortunes which two nations could offer to bribe him--was to keep quiet.
He cared more for the game than the winnings; and the game of sitting
still and drawing a pension for doing nothing was altogether too tame
for Radisson.  Groseillers gave up the struggle and retired for the
time to his family at Three Rivers.  At Quebec, in 1676, Radisson heard
of others everywhere reaping where he had sown.  Jolliet and La Salle
were preparing to push the fur trade of New France westward of the
Great Lakes, where Radisson had penetrated twenty years previously.
Fur traders of Quebec, who organized under the name of the Company of
the North, yearly sent their canoes up the Ottawa, St. Maurice, and
Saguenay to the forests south of Hudson Bay, which Radisson had
traversed.  On the bay itself the English company were entrenched.
North, northwest, and west, Radisson had been the explorer; but the
reward of his labor had been snatched by other hands.

[Illustration: "Skin for Skin," Coat of Arms and Motto, Hudson's Bay
Company.]

Radisson must have served meritoriously on the fleet, for after the
wreck he was offered the command of a man-of-war; but he asked for a
commission to New France.  From this request there arose complications.
His wife's family, the Kirkes, had held claims against New France from
the days when the Kirkes of Boston had captured Quebec.  These claims
now amounted to 40,000 pounds.  M. Colbert, the great French statesman,
