The Project Gutenberg EBook of Modus Vivendi, by Gordon Randall Garrett

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Modus Vivendi

Author: Gordon Randall Garrett

Illustrator: Schoenherr

Release Date: October 22, 2009 [EBook #30311]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MODUS VIVENDI ***




Produced by Sankar Viswanathan, Greg Weeks, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net







                         Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from Analog Science Fact & Fiction September
    1961. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
    copyright on this publication was renewed.


                            MODUS VIVENDI


                            By WALTER BUPP


     _It's undoubtedly difficult to live with someone who is
      Different. He must, because he is Different, live by other
      ways. But what makes it so difficult is that, for some
      reason he thinks you are Different!_


                     _Illustrated by Schoenherr_

       *       *       *       *       *




By the time I got to the office, I was jittery as a new bride. The day
started out all wrong. I woke up weak and washed out. I was pathetic
when I worked out with the weights--they felt as heavy as the
Pyramids. And when I walked from the subway to the building where Mike
Renner and I have our offices, an obvious telepath tailed me all the
way.

I was ready for a scrap. St. Francis himself would have irritated the
hell out of me, and I'd have gone speechless with rage at the mere
sight of sweet Alice Ben Bolt. The guy sitting with Mike in our law
library didn't have a chance.

"What's this?" I growled, seeing Mike seated silent and staring at our
caller across the big table. There wasn't a book or sheet of foolscap
resting on the walnut. Work hadn't started. They were lying in wait
for me. Well, I was lying in wait for the first guy who opened his
mouth.

"The Grievance Committee!" Mike said in a tone of stifled fury. "This
is Horace Dunn."

"_Carpe Diem_," I snarled at Horace, a hammered-down heavyweight.
"What's Renner done now?"

"Me?" Renner demanded, letting his fat jowls quivver. He's one of
those burly types who looks like he should be playing pro ball and
instead thrives on showing clients how to keep two sets of books while
staying out of jail.

"Not Renner," Horace said. "You, Maragon. The Bar Association gets
upset when reputable attorneys successfully defend one of these Stigma
cases."

"Forgive me my hobbies," I sneered, sitting down beside my partner.
"But I try to win them all. You know I didn't seek that
business--Judge Passarelli appointed me Public Defender when that Psi,
Crescas, bleated that he was destitute."

Mike Renner apparently decided one of us had to be reasonable.
"Coincidence, Dunn," he said. "Pure coincidence. You can't hold it
against--"

"No coincidence," I snapped. It wasn't my day to agree with anybody.
Renner's fat little eyes opened wide.

"Judge Passarelli _knew_ I'd be in his courtroom," I said. "His Honor
wanted to get my views on a point I'd made in that pleading the
previous week."

"Passarelli _again!_" Horace breathed. "Well, well. What do you know?
And two weeks ago he found a Stigma case named Mary Hall 'Not Guilty'
of bunco game against the 99th National Bank. You know the case?"

Renner was too upset for speech. He shook his head, looking over at
me. I didn't give him the satisfaction. Mike hasn't any patience with
my interest in keeping abreast of Psi developments anyway.

"This Mary Hall is a hallucinator," Horace said. He leaned forward and
gave it to us in not much more than a whisper. "This witch used her HC
to pass five dollar bills off as hundreds, getting change. But they
caught her at it." He laughed harshly. "And tried her for it," he
added. "Get the picture on that 'Not Guilty' verdict?"

"No," Renner admitted. I slouched down, scowling.

"She used HC on Judge Passarelli, too. Foozled his vision, whatever
you want to call it. When the 'cutor handed him the evidence, the five
dollar bill she had tried to pass for a hundred, all sealed up in
plastic, Passarelli _saw_ a _hundred_, thanks to her Psi powers."

"Get out of here," I told Horace, getting to my feet.

"Pete! For heaven's sake!" Mike protested. You didn't talk like that
to the Grievance Committee. Did you ever see a guy wring his hands?
Renner was pathetic.

"Can't you quit pussy-footing around, Renner?" I growled. "This comic
isn't from the Grievance Committee!"

Horace Dunn paled on that one. "How do you know that?" he said. He
sounded a lot more dangerous.

"Too polite," I sneered. "And it ill becomes you. What's going on?"

"So I level," Horace conceded. "So I'm _not_ from the Grievance
Committee, and I'm not all hot that Maragon defended Keys Crescas."

"Much better," I said, sitting down again.

"This guy Passarelli is coming up for re-election shortly," our caller
said. A light began to dawn. "We're making sure he doesn't make
it--and that _our_ man does."

My laugh was more a bark. "He can't find Mary Hall," I told Renner.

Horace's lower jaw shot out at me. "I don't like guys who know what
I'm thinking!" he snapped.

I had to laugh in his face. "Who needs TP? You want to tar Passarelli
with the brush of Psi--and this hallucinator would be Exhibit 'A'."

He subsided. "So I can't find her. What then?"

I shook my head. "You say it," I suggested. "Too early to have to wash
my mouth with soap."

Dunn made his big pitch to Renner. "Maragon has a connection with
these Psis--it's all over town that he got Keys Crescas off. This
Crescas can find Mary Hall--you know how Psis stick together." Renner
nodded rapt agreement. "And," Dunn added, finally sticking it in us,
"it would be good politics for Maragon to do it--would kind of sweeten
up the stench of his getting Crescas off, eh?"

Renner thought he had to sell me: "Pete," he insisted, "You've _got_
to! Defending Crescas was sure to hurt our reputation. That girl has
it coming for--"

I waved a hand in his face, shutting him up. "Why should I care what
happens to the girl?" I said, getting up. "Just make sure Horace pays
us a fat fee. After all, it's tax exempt."

"Tax exempt?" he asked, frowning.

