  watches over us all.  Some of your old friends here have begun to
  collect money for your ransom, and I work hard to increase the sum--
  but oh! how slowly it grows!  Even darling grandmamma has got some
  light sewing work which brings in a little.  But our hearts mourn
  because of you.  We earnestly hope that the pirates treat you well,
  ("Thank God they do not know anything about _that_," muttered
  Francisco), and we feel almost sure that they do, because we have been
  told that they are careful of the slaves who, they hope, will be
  ransomed.  I have therefore written to the Dey--how I hated him while
  I wrote the humble letter!--telling him that we hoped to raise the sum
  in a short time.  Every one here is very kind and sympathises with us,
  besides giving a contribution to the fund.

  "`This letter goes by a French vessel which is to touch at Algiers,
  and which conveys a priest who has a large sum of money with him to
  ransom Sicilian and other slaves.  I entreated him to ransom you with
  part of it, but he smiled pitifully, and said the money had been
  raised by the friends of particular slaves, some of whom had been many
  years in captivity, and that it could not be diverted from its proper
  objects.  How my heart sank when he spoke of some being in slavery for
  many years!  But it was cheered again when I reflected how hard we are
  all working to raise the money for you and Lucien and Mariano.  We
  send you all our dear love.--Your affectionate daughter.

"Shall I have an opportunity of answering this?" asked Francisco,
eagerly.

"Yes; I am about to conduct you to the palace, where your son Lucien--
who, I may mention, is a favourite--awaits you."

"You mustn't let them know the truth, father," said Mariano earnestly.

"Would you have him tell them what is false?" asked the Padre gravely.

"No, no," replied the youth, with a laugh, "but there is no occasion to
mention all that we have suffered, you know; and there is a good deal--I
mean a little--that is agreeable to communicate.  For instance, this
very summons to the palace, and Lucien's good luck."

"Trust me, lad," said Francisco; "I won't fail to cheer them if I can,
and you may be sure I won't exaggerate our misfortunes.--But lead on,
old man; I am anxious to get out of this foul den as quickly as--"

"Forgive me, comrades," he added, checking himself, and turning to the
slaves near him; "I am grieved more than I can tell to leave you behind.
If by remaining I could lighten your sorrows, I would gladly do so.  It
may seem presumptuous in one who is himself a slave to say so, yet I
can't help assuring you that if the Almighty is pleased to give me any
power in this city, I won't forget you."

This speech was received with a kindly nod by some, and a laugh of scorn
by others.

Probably the latter had heard similar sentiments before from somewhat
kindred and hearty spirits, and had learned from sad experience that
nothing ever came of their good-will.

Following the old man, the father and son were soon in the presence of
Lucien, who received them, as may well be believed, with a full heart.

"God bless you, my son," said Francisco, "for well assured am I that it
is through your influence that we are here."

"It is through the influence of the British consul," replied Lucien.

"Well, I pray for a blessing on you both, for it is useless to tell me
that _you_ have had no hand in it."

"I do not say that I had no hand in it.  On the contrary, I wrote out
the order for your acquittal; and," added Lucien, with a peculiar smile,
"I also had previously written out your and Mariano's death-warrant!"

"You are jesting, lad," said Francisco.

"Indeed, I am not," returned Lucien, relating the circumstances of the
whole matter to his astonished and somewhat horrified auditors.

"And now," he continued, "I must let you know your destination.  Don't
be disappointed.  You must remember that we are slaves, and have just
been delivered from the Bagnio.  The Dey seems to have taken a fancy for
me--"

"I don't wonder," interrupted Mariano enthusiastically, seizing and
squeezing his brother's hand.

"And," continued Lucien, "he has permitted me to select situations for
you.  I have arranged that you, father, shall be my assistant in the
secretary's office, and that you, Mariano, shall be shopman to Bacri the
Jew."

Lucien looked awkwardly at his father and brother as he spoke, feeling
uncertain, no doubt, as to the manner in which they would receive this
information.  He was therefore rather relieved than otherwise by a smile
on the face of Mariano.

"Why, Lucien," he said, "I always thought you a great original, and this
last display of your powers confirms me in my opinion.  Not that I deem
it strange your having appointed father your clerk--for, in the
circumstances, it would have been charity to have appointed him even to
the office of shoe-black--anything being better than the Bagnio,--but
what wild fancy induced you to make _me_ shop-boy to a Jew?"

"That," replied Lucien, "you shall find out in good time--only, pray,
remember that I am not the Dey's Grand Vizier, and have not many places
to offer."

"Well, well, be it so," returned the other; "I am well content with what
your wisdom provides."

"And so am I," said Francisco, cheerfully.  "I suppose you will feed us
better than we have been fed of late?"

"That will I, father, but there is no pay attached to your offices, for
slaves, you know, get no wages."

"They get splendid habiliments, it would seem," observed Francisco,
regarding his son with twinkling eyes.  "But come, Lucien, I am all
impatience to begin the work of under-secretary of state!  You bear in
remembrance, I trust, that I can read and write nothing save my mother
tongue?"

"Yes; Italian will suffice, father; such of the duties as you fail to
perform I can easily fulfil.--Now, Mariano," he said, taking his brother
aside, and speaking in a low earnest tone, "see that you act wisely in
the situation I have selected for you.  The Jew is a kind, good man,
despite what is said about his worship of Mammon.  I would that all in
this city were like him, for in that case we should have no slavery.
During the short period I have held my office, my eyes have been opened
to much that I may not mention.  There, the very walls of this palace
have ears!  I have said enough.  You remember Angela?"

"Remember her!" exclaimed Mariano, with a deep flush and a look of
intense surprise, "how can you ask me, Lucien?"

"Well, you will hear of her from Bacri.  Good bye--go!"

He rang a bell as he spoke, and ordered the slave who answered the
summons to lead Mariano to the abode of Bacri; at the same time he took
his father's hand and conducted him to his office or bureau.

Amazed at all that had happened, particularly at his summary dismissal
by his brother, the youth followed his conductor in silence, and in a
short time reached the iron-bolted door of the chief of the Jews.

"This is Bacri's house," said his guide in Italian, and, having
discharged this duty, he turned on his heel, and abruptly left him.

Pausing a moment to think, and finding that the more he thought the less
he seemed to be capable of thinking to any purpose, Mariano applied his
knuckles to the door.

For a youth of his character it was a timid knock, and produced no
result.

Mariano was one who--in peculiar circumstances, like those in which at
that time he found himself--might once in a way act with timidity, but
he was not the man to act so twice.  Finding that the first knock was
useless, he hit the door a blow that caused the old house to resound.
In a few seconds it was opened slightly, and the face of a beautiful
girl in Jewish costume appeared.

If Mariano had been suddenly petrified he could not have stood more
rigidly motionless; amazement sat enthroned on his countenance.

"Angela!"

"Signor Mariano!"

The words in each case were followed by a deep flush, and Angela
retreated.

Of course Mariano advanced.

"Excuse--forgive me, signorina," he exclaimed, taking her hand
respectfully.  "I did not know--of course I could not--how was it
possible that--the fact is, I came to see a Jew, and--and--"

"I've found a jewel," he _might_ have said, but that didn't seem to
occur to him!

"Bacri--that's his name!" continued Mariano.  "Is Bacri within?  I came
to see him, but--"

"Yes--Signor Bacri is at home," said Angela, much confused by the
youth's confusion, as well as by the sudden and unexpected nature of the
meeting.  "But your father--and brother Lucien--Oh, I hope they are
well; that they have not been treated cruelly; that they are not in that
dreadful Bagnio, of which I have heard so much," said Angela, at last
finding the use of her tongue.

They were interrupted at this point by the appearance of Bacri himself,
who welcomed the youth to his house, said that he had been told by
Lucien to expect him, and introduced him to his wife and the other
members of his family.

Thereafter the Jew took his new shopman into his private apartment, and
made many strange revelations to him in regard to the affairs of the
piratical city, as well as about the details of his new appointment, in
regard to which we shall say nothing here; but it may be well to add
that Mariano finally retired for the night well satisfied with the
wisdom of his elder brother.

For some time after this, things went well with those actors in our tale
in whose welfare we are chiefly interested.

Francisco proved himself to be an able clerk--when assisted by his
superior!--and Mariano became a most willing and useful shopman--with
the prospect before him of returning each night to bask in the sunshine
of Angela's countenance!

At the consul's residence Paulina was as happy as was possible in her
sad circumstances, for she became very fond of Mrs Langley, and was a
perfect treasure in the house,--not only taking a large part of the
management thereof, but keeping watchful guard over the dangerous Zubby,
so that that Zaharan specimen of humanity inflicted a perceptibly
smaller percentage of bumps on the head of Master Jim than in former
times.  Paulina's baby, too, began to indicate signs of intelligence by
crowing, knocking over whatever it came within reach of, and
endeavouring to dig the eyes out of every one who permitted
familiarities, especially the eyes of Master Jim, who, it is but fair to
add, soon displayed superior capacity in the same line, so that the
parents agreed mutually that they would soon be sweet playmates to each
other, and that they were the most delicious babes that ever were or
could be born.  Ted Flaggan also remained a happy inmate of the consul's
abode, awaiting the arrival of a British vessel which might enable him
to depart, but not at all anxious for that consummation, and, in the
meantime, making himself generally useful.

Down at the Marina, too, the state of things was a little, though not
much, improved.  Another guardian of the slaves had been appointed,--the
former one having been strangled on account of some wickedness reported
by enemies to have been done by him, and of which he was afterwards
found to be entirely innocent.

His successor was a man of better nature, who, although he kept the
slaves hard at their toil, and did not abate the lash or bastinado,
nevertheless supplied them with occasional comforts, such as an extra
roll of bread when extra work had to be done, or even a glass of spirits
when, as was often the case, they were called up at nights, in drenching
rain and cold, to protect the shipping in the harbour, and prevent
wreck, when sudden gales arose.

Thus the aspect of things in the pirate city, bad though it was, became
a little brighter, and continued so for some time, until an event
occurred which flung a darker cloud than usual over the ever changing
scene.



CHAPTER FOURTEEN.

THE PLOT THICKENS, AND MARIANO'S FORBEARANCE AND COURAGE ARE TESTED.

When the commander-in-chief of cavalry condescended to pay a visit to a
Jew, it was a sign that events of considerable importance were hovering
in the air.  The approach, therefore, of Sidi Hamet to the residence of
Bacri one night, under cover of the darkness, was regarded by the Jew
with feelings of misgiving, which caused his face to become suddenly
very grave, as he looked through the little iron-bound hole, or window,
which commanded a view of his court.

The Aga carried no light, although the laws ordained that all who moved
about after night-fall should do so; but Bacri knew him as well by his
outline and gait as if he had seen his face in the sunshine.

Descending the stair at once, the Jew opened the door and let him in.

"Thou art surprised, Bacri?" said Hamet, swaggering into the skiffa,
where Angela chanced to be at work at the time.--"Ha! thou hast a pretty
daughter," he added, with a gaze of insolent admiration.

"The girl is passing fair," replied the Jew, opening the door of his
study, and purposely avoiding the correction of the Aga's mistake.
"Please to enter here."

Hamet obeyed; remarking as he passed that the girl were worthy of being
the wife of a Dey, if she had not been a Jewess.

"Bacri," he said, sitting down, while the master of the house stood
respectfully before him, "thou knowest the object of my visit--eh?
Come, it is not the first time thou hast had to do with such as I.  The
plot thickens, Bacri, and thou must play thy part, willing or not
willing.  Say, how much is it to be?"

"How much do you demand?" asked the Jew.

The Aga rose and whispered in his ear.

"Impossible!" said Bacri, shaking his head decidedly.

"How, dog! impossible?" exclaimed the Turk sternly.  "Dost know that I
can let the whole Turkish army loose on thee and thy false-hearted
race?"

"My race is maligned alike by Mohammedan and Christian," returned the
Jew, with dignity.  "You know full well, Sidi Hamet, that the sum you
have named would ruin all the Jews in the town.  If the security of my
people is not to be purchased for a smaller sum, we must perish.  My
utmost efforts would not avail to raise more than the half thereof
within the specified time.  You may indeed ruin us, if you will, but it
were wise to remember that if you kill the goose that lays the golden
eggs, there will be no more golden eggs to lay."

"True, O Bacri," returned Hamet, laughing; "thou art wise, and I shall
act on thy wisdom--having first, however, acted on mine own when I
demanded double the sum I expected to receive, knowing thine inveterate
tendency to drive a hard bargain!  Now, good-night," he said, rising and
leaving the room.--"Ha! thy pretty daughter has fled.  Well, we shall
hope to see her again.  Mean while, have a care; our plot is in your
hands, but thine every movement shall be watched from this hour, and if
a note of warning escapes thee, thou art but a dead man!"

Saying this, the Aga departed, and Bacri, returning to the skiffa,
summoned Mariano, who had been engaged in another part of the house when
Hamet entered.

"Come hither, lad," said the Jew, while a careworn expression seemed to
settle on his handsome features; "I have work for you to do which
requires courage and speed.  Hamet the Aga--I may say, the black-hearted
Aga--has been here on an errand which I have been looking forward to for
some months.  You may be aware, perhaps, that in this barbarous city
there is no hereditary succession of Deys.  Each Dey is elected by the
Turkish janissaries from among the men of their own ranks; one result of
which is that various factions are kept up in the army, and the most
vigorous man among them, the one who can command the greatest number of
admirers and followers, generally wins the unenviable but much-coveted
post.  When the reigning Dey becomes unpopular, the factions begin to
ferment; and, instead of waiting for him to die, they invariably
strangle, poison, or behead him.  The factions generally have some
disturbance among themselves, but in any case, the consequence of a
revolution of this kind is, that complete anarchy prevails in the city,
and, until a new Dey is elected by the janissaries, the Moors and Jews
are at the mercy of the rude soldiery.  Of course, all who have enemies
among them hide themselves and their pelf, if possible, until the
anarchy ceases, which it does the moment the green standard of the
Prophet is hoisted on the terrace of the palace, announcing that a new
Dey is seated on the warm throne of his not quite cold predecessor.

"I tell you all this," continued the Jew impressively, "that ye may
understand what is about to happen and know how to act.  It is a sharp
