Edmund was completely baffled.

"It appears to me," said the king, "that he fears the discovery of his
villainy, and has taken himself off. I will offer a fitting reward to
the man who shall produce him; meanwhile, it is useless to continue
this scene."

"Wait at least a few minutes," said Edmund, and went forth himself.

Vainly he sought through all the courts of the palace--once he thought
Alfgar, whose fidelity he never suffered himself to doubt, might be in
the chapel, and went there in vain.

At last he found a servitor who had seen him go with some men into the
city, and hurried forth in search of him. He passed through all the
streets inflaming the curiosity of the watchmen; the darkness (for
there were very few lamps or lights of any kind, in those days, for
public use) was intense, a drizzling rain was falling, and at length,
weary, wet, and dispirited, he returned to the palace, and found that
the council, tired of waiting, had at length broken up.

The bishop offered him hospitality, evidently sympathising with his
distress, and once suggested a doubt of the fidelity of his page, but
Edmund repelled it instantly.

"He is true as life," he said.

"But the king himself is witness that Edric has not left his
presence."

"If not, he has plenty of villains about him to anticipate his orders,
vile as Godwin, port-hund of Shrewsbury. Depend upon it they have
murdered him, but if so, I will have vengeance, such vengeance--I will
challenge the villain Edric to single combat."

"The Church would forbid it."

"Do you then sympathise with the hypocrite?"

"Alas, my son! who can read the heart of man? I know not what to
think."

"But you could read the history of the last campaign. A fool might--I
beg pardon--were not all our plans known beforehand? Did not all our
enterprises fail? Were not all our ambushes anticipated? Did we not
fall into all theirs? If they had had a prophet like Elisha, who told
the king of Israel all Benhadad said in his council chamber, they
couldn't have managed better. Can you explain this?"

"No, my son."

"Then I can, for I heard Sweyn say that they had a friend in the
English camp."

"Then you actually put your head in the lion's mouth, prince?" and the
good bishop, purposely to relieve the prince's mind, drew out from him
all the story of his late adventures.

Deep was the distrust which Ednoth himself entertained of the
fair-speaking Edric, yet he would not encourage the Etheling in
further ill-timed opposition to his father.

So at last Edmund slept, and trusted that with the morn he should find
Alfgar; but the morn came, and all his inquiries were vain.

The chamber in which Alfgar was confined contained a box-like recess
for the straw bed, a chair, and a rough table, and these were all the
comforts at his disposal, but they were enough for one in that hardy
age. It was very strongly built, not a loose plank about it, although
the wind found its way through numerous crevices, to the slight
discomfort of the inmate.

But not one hour of sleep could Alfgar take all that night. What would
the Etheling think of him? was his constant thought, he who had saved
his life at the risk of his (the Etheling's) own. Must he not think
that the lad whose life he had saved had been false to him? and this
thought was agony to the faithful and true heart of the prisoner.

He scarcely doubted for one moment into whose hands he had
fallen--that he was in Edric Streorn's power. The only thing he could
not quite comprehend was, why they had thought it worth while to
imprison him, when murder would seem the more convenient mode of
removing an unpleasant witness.

Early on the following day he heard some people approach the door of
the house, and heard them admitted. Shortly afterwards a firm step
ascended the stair, and the door opened.

Edric Streorn stood before him.

The captor eyed his captive with a look of conscious pride, and said
with some complacence, "You see, and perhaps repent, your rashness in
the accusation you made."

"It was true."

"I do not think it worth my while to deny it here; but what of
that?--I am an Englishman by birth, but (let us say) a Dane by choice.
You are a Dane by the fortune of birth, but an Englishman by choice;
the worse choice, you will find, of the two."

Alfgar felt confused.

"But I did not come here to exchange compliments with you, nor to
prove, as to the fools you have chosen to serve, that I was on
pilgrimage at the time you name. I have a direct purpose in detaining
you here, for I have lately seen Sweyn."

"Traitor!"

"I thought we had agreed that we could not throw stones at each other
on that account. Well, the gentle Sweyn has taken your evasion very
much to heart, and earnestly desires to repossess himself of your
person; but for this, my easiest plan would have been to rid myself of
so troublesome a witness in a more speedy manner, and you might ere
this have fed the fishes of the Thames.

"Therefore," he continued, "unless you can satisfy me of two or three
points, I shall deliver you to Sweyn."

Alfgar thought at first that this was simply an idle threat, since it
would be almost impossible to convey him secretly through the country
to the Isle of Wight. Edric understood his thoughts.

"You forget," he said, "that Sweyn will shortly be here; your friend,
the Etheling, may have told you that, if you did not know it before;
he is telling it to everybody, but no one believes him. Only think, no
one will believe that Sweyn could be so audacious, and they think
that, listening behind walls and in cupboards, the Etheling, perhaps,
drank too much of what he found there--and that was all. Well, when
Sweyn comes, he may, if he will, make a public example to all
apostates in your honoured person; meanwhile Edmund thinks you have
deserted him."

No torturer ever seemed to take a keener pleasure in the throes of his
victim, than Edric in the mental agony he kindled in the breast of his
unhappy prisoner.

"But I said I might release you, or at least mitigate your fate, on
one condition, that you answer me a plain question directly and
plainly. Under what name does Edmund travel, and what disguise, and
does he purpose to trust himself in the Danish camp again? Where is he
at present residing? he has disappeared from the palace."

"Monster!" said Alfgar, "you tempt like Satan. Away, and leave me to
my fate."

"You will think better of it by and by when confinement upon bread and
water has tamed you. I will come once more, but it will be the last
time; and, mark you, should your people be defeated--the Danes I
mean--still your escape would not necessarily follow; the house might
take fire, it is of timber, and would soon burn down; a sad misfortune
it would be.

"Good morning. I am going to mass with the king; shall I say a Pater
and an Ave for you, since you are prevented from being there. The
saints have you in their holy keeping!"

His manner throughout had been like that of a cat playing with a
mouse, and there was quite a gratified smile upon his lips as he went.

Strange to say, Alfgar felt less miserable after he was gone. The
wickedness of Edric seemed so great, his hypocrisy so unblushing, that
in his simple faith Alfgar could not believe that he would be allowed
to succeed. Many a holy text in the Psalms came to his mind, and
seemed to assure him of Divine protection.

"I myself have seen the ungodly in great power; and flourishing like a
green bay tree.

"I went by, and, lo! he was gone; I sought him, but his place could
nowhere be found.

"Seek innocency, and take heed to the thing that is right: for that
shall bring a man peace at the last."

"So, come what will," said he, "I will trust in Him and never will I
save my life by uttering one word which might betray the innocent."

In this manner days lengthened into weeks. He tried in vain to open
any intercourse with his ferocious jailor, whose ward was sometimes
shared by a comrade, when there was much ungodly revelry below, and
snatches of Danish war songs mingled with profane oaths. The deep,
deep bay of the mastiff sometimes gave warning of the advent of a
stranger, or of the step heard from the distance, in the still deep
night; but this was all that Alfgar could learn of the outer world,
from which he was banished at so critical a moment.



CHAPTER XV. FATHER CUTHBERT'S DIARY AT CLIFFTON.


SUNDAY BEFORE ADVENT.--

The evening, after the Vesper service in the church was over, and
darkness had closed in, we all sat down to our evening meal. The doors
were shut to keep out the storm, and I had already said grace, when
the Etheling suddenly appeared.

His manner struck us all. He looked wild and agitated, and his first
words cast a chill over us.

"Where is Alfgar?"

"Is he not with you, what has happened?" said I and Herstan, speaking
in the same breath.

"No, I have lost him. I had hoped to find him here; they must have
murdered him," he cried.

"Murdered him?"

"Yes, he was too dangerous to Edric to be suffered to live. I might
have foreseen it; and they have put him out of the way by cowardly
assassination," insisted the Etheling.

There was too much reason in his words.

"Besides," said he, "if he were well and uninjured, would he not have
come here, where he was sure of a welcome?"

"I will go to Dorchester at once," said Herstan.

"It is useless," said Edmund; but my brother, having learnt all that
the prince could tell him, mounted and rode into the town.

Meanwhile Edmund evidently needed our care; we found he had not eaten
all day.

"I have risked my life for my country," he said, "and now that I bring
tidings which ought to circulate through the land like the wind, and
rouse every man to action, I am disbelieved. Nay, it is hinted that I
drank too much Danish wine and mead, and misunderstood what I heard. I
could brain the man who dared say so to my face. I could--and would.
Meanwhile no steps are taken, no levies called out; but I will myself
alarm the country. The innocent blood shall not be on my head."

"Surely they must heed your warning," said we all together.

"Not they. The fox, Edric, pretended that it was all moonshine."

"But did you not expose his treachery?" asked I.

"I tried to do so; but he pulled out a bit of some hedge, which he
said was a holy thorn from St. Joseph's tree at Glastonbury, and that
he was there on pilgrimage when Alfgar saw him--saw him, mark you--at
the Danish camp on the borders of Sussex; and I saw men, I won't
mention names, who had more than once taken reward to slay the
innocent, look as if they would go down on their knees to this holy
thorn, which wasn't a holy thorn at all, but plucked from some hedge
hard at hand. Did not Edric mock them in his heart! I should like to
strangle him."

How I thought of those who tithed mint and rue, and all manner of
herbs, and passed over justice, mercy, and the love of God.

So, in unavailing complaints, midnight drew on, and we heard the sound
of my brother's horse.

He soon entered the room. We saw at a glance that he had laboured in
vain, and spent his strength for nought.

"No one has seen him," he said.

"Have you asked many people?" we inquired.

"Yes, scores. The sheriff, the bishop, the watchmen, the
tradesfolk--no one has seen or heard aught. I will go again tomorrow."

"Meanwhile, do the people know what passed at the banquet last night?"

"No; it has all been kept quiet," was the reply.

We could do no more, and all retired to rest. I have sat up to say my
mattins and finish this diary. It is now nearly the third hour of the
morn, and--

Monday Night, 23d Nov. 1006.--

I had written as far as the word "and," when I was alarmed by a loud
cry from the chamber next my own, which was occupied by the Etheling.
I rose, and knocked at the door, but, receiving no answer, opened it
and went in.

I saw at once that the prince was delirious; the fever, which I had
marked in his eyes and manner, but which he struggled against, had at
length overcome his brave spirit.

Just as I entered the room, bearing my torch, he sprang out of bed.

"There is a snake under my pillow."

I tried to soothe him.

"It is Edric; he is turned into a snake, and is trying to sting me.
Kill him! kill him!"

I got him into bed with some difficulty, and sat by him, after giving
him a composing draught--for I never travel without a few simples at
hand, in case of sickness amongst those to whom I minister.

He slept at last, but it was evident to me that exposure and
excitement had grievously injured his health, and that he was in
danger of prolonged sickness. Ever and anon he raved in his sleep
about Sweyn, Edric, his father, and Alfgar, mixing them up in his mind
most strangely: but the object of his abhorrence was ever Edric, while
he spoke of Alfgar, "poor Alfgar!" as a father might speak of a son.

I watched by him all through the night, and in the morning he was
evidently too ill to rise. His mind became clear for a short time, and
yet his memory was so confused that he scarcely comprehended where he
was, or how he got here.

So my return to Abingdon is indefinitely delayed, for Herstan and my
sister both insist on my staying till he is out of danger, if God
will; and indeed I know no one else to whose care I could willingly
commit him.

We think it best not to let his father or Edric know where he is, for
we know how his death would rejoice the latter, and the wish is often
father to the action. A little would turn the scale now.

Herstan has gone into Dorchester again to inquire about Alfgar, and to
ascertain whether any action has been taken consequent upon Edmund's
intelligence from Carisbrooke.

Saturday.--Vigil of St. Andrew, and Eve of Advent Sunday.--

All this week I have been watching by the sickbed of the Etheling.
