better than introductions, put on the headsets, everybody, and get
acquainted right."

Acquaintance made and the apparatus put away, Seaton went to one of the
store-rooms and brought out a lump of "X," weighing about a hundred
pounds.

"There's enough to build power-plants from now on. It would save time if
you were to dismiss your submarine. With you to pilot us, we can take
you back to the First City a lot faster than your vessel can travel."

Carfon took a miniature transmitter from a pouch under his arm and spoke
briefly, then gave Seaton the course. In a few minutes, the First City
was reached, and the _Skylark_ descended rapidly to the surface of a
lagoon at one end of the city. Short as had been the time consumed by
their journey from the Sixth City, they found a curious and excited
crowd awaiting them. The central portion of the lagoon was almost
covered by the small surface craft, while the sides, separated from the
sidewalks by the curbs, were full of swimmers. The peculiar Dasorian
equivalents of whistles, bells, and gongs were making a deafening
uproar, and the crowd was yelling and cheering in much the same fashion
as do earthly crowds upon similar occasions. Seaton stopped the
_Skylark_ and took his wife by the shoulder, swinging her around in
front of the visiplate.

"Look at that, Dot. Talk about rapid transit! They could give the New
York subway a flying start and beat them hands down!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Dorothy looked into the visiplate and gasped. Six metal pipes, one above
the other, ran above and parallel to each sidewalk-lane of water. The
pipes were full of ocean water, water racing along at fully fifty miles
an hour and discharging, each stream a small waterfall, into the lagoon.
Each pipe was lighted in the interior, and each was full of people,
heads almost touching feet, unconcernedly being borne along, completely
immersed in that mad current. As the passenger saw daylight and felt the
stream begin to drop, he righted himself, apparently selecting an
objective point, and rode the current down into the ocean. A few quick
strokes, and he was either at the surface or upon one of the flights of
stairs leading up to the platform. Many of the travelers did not even
move as they left the orifice. If they happened to be on their backs,
they entered the ocean backward and did not bother about righting
themselves or about selecting a destination until they were many feet
below the surface.

"Good heavens, Dick! They'll kill themselves or drown!"

"Not these birds. Notice their skins? They've got a hide like a walrus,
and a terrific layer of subcutaneous fat. Even their heads are protected
that way--you could hardly hit one of them enough with a baseball bat to
hurt him. And as for drowning--they can out-swim a fish, and can stay
under water almost an hour without coming up for air. Even one of those
youngsters can swim the full length of the city without taking a
breath."

"How do you get that velocity of flow, Carfon?" asked Crane.

"By means of pumps. These channels run all over the city, and the amount
of water running in each tube and the number of tubes in use are
regulated automatically by the amount of traffic. When any section of
tube is empty of people, no water flows through it. This was necessary
in order to save power. At each intersection there are four stand pipes
and automatic swim-counters that regulate the volume of water and the
number of tubes in use. This is ordinarily a quiet pool, as it is in a
residence section, and this channel--our channels correspond to your
streets, you know--has only six tubes each way. If you will look on the
other side of the channel, you will see the intake end of the tubes
going down-town."

Seaton swung the visiplate around and they saw six rapidly-moving
stairways, each crowded with people, leading from the ocean level up to
the top of a tall metal tower. As the passengers reached the top of the
flight they were catapulted head-first into the chamber leading to the
tube below.

"Well, that is some system for handling people!" exclaimed Seaton.
"What's the capacity of the system?"

"When running full pressure, six tubes will handle five thousand people
a minute. It is only very rarely, on such occasions as this, that they
are ever loaded to capacity. Some of the channels in the middle of the
city have as many as twenty tubes, so that it is always possible to go
from one end of the city to the other in less than ten minutes."

"Don't they ever jam?" asked Dorothy curiously. "I've been lost more
than once in the New York subway, and been in some perfectly frightful
jams, too--and they weren't moving ten thousand people a minute either."

"No jams ever have occurred. The tubes are perfectly smooth and
well-lighted, and all turns and intersections are rounded. The
controlling machines allow only so many persons to enter any tube--if
more should try to enter than can be carried comfortably, the surplus
passengers are slid off down a chute to the swim-ways, or sidewalks, and
may either wait a while or swim to the next intersection."

"That looks like quite a jam down there now." Seaton pointed to the
receiving pool, which was now one solid mass except for the space kept
clear by the six mighty streams of humanity-laden water.

"If the newcomers can't find room to come to the surface they'll swim
over to some other pool." Carfon shrugged indifferently. "My residence
is the fifth cubicle on the right side of this channel. Our custom
demands that you accept the hospitality of my home, if only for a moment
and only for a beaker of distilled water. Any ordinary visitor could be
received in my office, but you must enter my home."

Seaton steered the _Skylark_ carefully, surrounded as she was by a
tightly packed crowd of swimmers, to the indicated dwelling, and
anchored her so that one of the doors was close to a flight of steps
leading from the corner of the building down into the water. Carfon
stepped out, opened the door of his house, and preceded his guests
within. The room was large and square, and built of a synthetic,
non-corroding metal, as was the entire city. The walls were tastefully
decorated with striking geometrical designs in many-colored metal, and
upon the floor was a softly woven rug. Three doors leading into other
rooms could be seen, and strange pieces of furniture stood here and
there. In the center of the floor-space was a circular opening some four
feet in diameter, and there, only a few inches below the level of the
floor, was the surface of the ocean.

Carfon introduced his guests to his wife--a feminine replica of himself,
although she was not of quite such heroic proportions.

"I don't suppose that Seven is far away, is he?" Carfon asked of the
woman.

"Probably he is outside, near the flying ball. If he has not been
touching it ever since it came down, it is only because someone
stronger than he pushed him aside. You know how boys are," turning to
Dorothy with a smile as she spoke, "boy nature is probably universal."

"Pardon my curiosity, but why 'Seven'?" asked Dorothy, as she returned
the smile.

"He is the two thousand three hundred and forty-seventh Sacner Carfon in
direct male line of descent," she explained. "But perhaps Six has not
explained these things to you. Our population must not be allowed to
increase, therefore each couple can have only two children. It is
customary for the boy to be born first, and is given the name of his
father. The girl is younger, and is given her mother's name."

"That will now be changed," said Carfon feelingly. "These visitors have
given us the secret of power, and we shall be able to build new cities
and populate Dasor as she should he populated."

"Really?----" She checked herself, but a flame leaped to her eyes, and
her voice was none too steady as she addressed the visitors. "For that
we Dasorians thank you more than words can express. Perhaps you
strangers do not know what it means to want a dozen children with every
fiber of your being and to be allowed to have only two--we do, all too
well--I will call Seven."

She pressed a button, and up out of the opening in the middle of the
floor there shot a half-grown boy, swimming so rapidly that he scarcely
touched the coaming as he came to his feet. He glanced at the four
visitors, then ran up to Seaton and Crane.

"Please, sirs, may I ride, just a little short ride, in your vessel
before you go away?" This was said in their language.

"Seven!" boomed Carfon sternly, and the exuberant youth subsided.

"Pardon me, sirs, but I was so excited----"

"All right, son, no harm done at all. You bet you'll have a ride in the
_Skylark_ if your parents will let you." He turned to Carfon. "I'm not
so far beyond that stage myself that I'm not in sympathy with him.
Neither are you, unless I'm badly mistaken."

"I am very glad that you feel as you do. He would be delighted to
accompany us down to the office, and it will be something to remember
all the rest of his life."

"You have a little girl, too?" Dorothy asked the woman.

"Yes--would you like to see her? She is asleep now," and without waiting
for an answer, the proud Dasorian mother led the way into a bedroom--a
bedroom without beds, for Dasorians sleep floating in thermostatically
controlled tanks, buoyed up in water of the temperature they like best,
in a fashion that no Earthly springs and mattresses can approach. In a
small tank in a corner reposed a baby, apparently about a year old, over
whom Dorothy and Margaret made the usual feminine ceremony of delight
and approbation.

       *       *       *       *       *

Back in the living room, after an animated conversation in which much
information was exchanged concerning the two planets and their races of
peoples, Carfon drew six metal goblets of distilled water and passed
them around. Standing in a circle, the six touched goblets and drank.

They then embarked, and while Crane steered the _Skylark_ slowly along
the channel toward the offices of the Council, and while Dorothy and
Margaret showed the eager Seven all over the vessel, Seaton explained to
Carfon the danger that threatened the Universe, what he had done, and
what he was attempting to do.

"Doctor Seaton, I wish to apologize to you," the Dasorian said when
Seaton had done. "Since you are evidently still land animals, I had
supposed you of inferior intelligence. It is true that your younger
civilization is deficient in certain respects, but you have shown a
depth of vision, a sheer power of imagination and grasp, that no member
of our older civilization could approach. I believe that you are right
in your conclusions. We have no such rays nor forces upon this planet,
and never have had; but the sixth planet of our own sun has. Less than
fifty of your years ago, when I was but a small boy, such a projection
visited my father. It offered to 'rescue' us from our watery planet, and
to show us how to build rocket-ships to move us to Three, which is half
land, inhabited by lower animals."

"And he didn't accept?"

"Certainly not. Then as now our sole lack was power, and the strangers
did not show us how to increase our supply. Perhaps they had more power
than we, perhaps, because of the difficulty of communication, our want
was not made clear to them. But, of course, we did not want to move to
Three, and we had already had rocket-ships for hundreds of generations.
We have never been able to reach Six with them, but we visited Three
long ago; and every one who went there came back as soon as he could. We
detest land. It is hard, barren, unfriendly. We have everything, here
upon Dasor. Food is plentiful, synthetic or natural, as we prefer. Our
watery planet supplies our every need and wish, with one exception; and
now that we are assured of power, even that one exception vanishes, and
Dasor becomes a very Paradise. We can now lead our natural lives, work
and play to our fullest capacity--we would not trade our world for all
the rest of the Universe."

"I never thought of it in that way, but you're right, at that," Seaton
conceded. "You are ideally suited to your environment. But how do I get
to planet Six? Its distance is terrific, even as cosmic distances go.
You won't have any night until Dasor swings outside the orbit of your
sun, and until then Six will be invisible, even to our most powerful
telescope."

"I do not know, myself," answered Carfon, "but I will send out a call
for the chief astronomer. He will meet us, and give you a chart and the
exact course."

At the office, the earthly visitors were welcomed formally by the
Council--the nine men in control of the entire planet. The ceremony over
and their course carefully plotted, Carfon stood at the door of the
_Skylark_ a moment before it closed.

"We thank you with all force, Earthmen, for what you have done for us
this day. Please remember, and believe that this is no idle word--if we
can assist you in any way in this conflict which is to come, the
resources of this planet are at your disposal. We join Osnome and the
other planets of this system in declaring you, Doctor Seaton, our
Overlord."




CHAPTER IX

The Welcome to Norlamin


The _Skylark_ was now days upon her way toward the sixth planet, Seaton
gave the visiplates and the instrument board his customary careful
scrutiny and rejoined the others.

"Still talking about the human fish, Dottie Dimple?" he asked, as he
stoked his villainous pipe. "Peculiar tribe of porpoises, but I'm strong
for 'em. They're the most like our own kind of folks, as far as ideas
go, of anybody we've seen yet--in fact, they're more like us than a lot
of human beings we all know."

"I like them immensely----"

"You couldn't like 'em any other way, their size----"

"Terrible, Dick, terrible! Easy as I am, I can't stand for any such joke
as that was going to be. But really, I think they're just perfectly
fine, in spite of their being so funny-looking. Mrs. Carfon is just
simply sweet, even if she does look like a walrus, and that cute little
seal of a baby was just too perfectly cunning for words. That boy Seven
is keen as mustard, too."

"He should be," put in Crane, dryly. "He probably has as much
intelligence now as any one of us."

"Do you think so?" asked Margaret. "He acted like any other boy, but he
did seem to understand things remarkably well."

"He would--they're 'way ahead of us in most things." Seaton glanced at
the two women quizzically and turned to Crane. "And as for their being
bald, this was one time, Mart, when those two phenomenal heads of hair
our two little girl-friends are so proud of didn't make any kind of hit
at all. They probably regard that black thatch of Peg's and Dot's auburn
mop as relics of a barbarous and prehistoric age--about as we would
regard the hirsute hide of a Neanderthal man."

"That may be so, too," Dorothy replied, unconcernedly, "but we aren't
planning on living there, so why worry about it? I like them, anyway,
and I believe that they like us."

"They acted that way. But say, Mart, if that planet is so old that all
their land area has been eroded away, how come they've got so much water
left? And they've got quite an atmosphere, too."

"The air-pressure," said Crane, "while greater than that now obtaining
upon Earth, was probably of the order of magnitude of three meters of
mercury, originally. As to the erosion, they might have had more water
to begin with than our Earth had."

"Yeah, that'd account for it, all right," said Dorothy.

"There's one thing I want to ask you two scientists," Margaret said.
"Everywhere we've gone, except on that one world that Dick thinks is a
wandering planet, we've found the intelligent life quite remarkably like
human beings. How do you account for that?"

"There, Mart, is one for the massive old bean to concentrate on,"
challenged Seaton: then, as Crane considered the question in silence for
some time he went on: "I'll answer it myself, then, by asking another.
Why not? Why shouldn't they be? Remember, man is the highest form of
earthly life--at least, in our own opinion and as far as we know. In our
wanderings, we have picked out planets quite similar to our own in point
of atmosphere and temperature and, within narrow limits, of mass as
well. It stands to reason that under such similarity of conditions,
there would be a certain similarity of results. How about it, Mart?
Reasonable?"

"It seems plausible, in a way," conceded Crane, "but it probably is not
universally true."

"Sure not--couldn't be, hardly. No doubt we could find a lot of worlds
inhabited by all kinds of intelligent things--freaks that we can't even
