moment covered his face with his hands.  Slagg looked at him with a
bewildered rather than a despairing expression.

"So, we'll have to sink together since we can't swim together," he said
at last, with a touch of reckless vexation, as he gazed at the naturally
stupid and by that time imbecile face of his friend Stumps.

"Come, only cowards give way to despair," cried Sam, starting up.  "We
have one chance yet, God be praised, but let's work with a will, boys,
for the time is short."



CHAPTER FOURTEEN.

THE RAFT.

Sam Shipton's one chance did not seem a bright one, but, with
characteristic energy, he proceeded to avail himself of it at once.

When the raft was launched over the side, as described, the carpenters
had embarked upon it with the rest of the ship's crew, dropping their
tools on the deck beside the mass of unused material of ropes, spars,
planks, etcetera, as they left.  Four of the spars were pretty equal in
length.  Sam selected them hastily and laid them on the deck in the form
of a square, or oblong frame.  Then he seized an axe.

"Unravel some of the ropes, Robin," he cried.  "You two select some
planks as near ten feet long as possible.  Quick--ask no questions, but
do what I tell you."

Sam Shipton was one of those who hold the opinion that every man born
into the world, whether gentle or simple, should learn a trade.  He had
acted on his belief and taught himself that of a carpenter, so that he
wielded the axe with skill, and gave his orders with the precision of
one who knows what he is about.  His comrades, although not trained to
any special trade, were active handy fellows, with the exception,
indeed, of John Shanks, whose fingers were usually described as
"thumbs," and whose general movements were clumsy; but Stumps had a
redeeming quality to set against defects--he was willing.

With a few powerful well-directed blows, Sam cut four deep notches into
the two longest of the selected spars, near their ends, at equal
distances from each other.  Into these he laid the ends of the two
shorter spars, thus forming a frame-work.

"Twelve feet by ten, not a bad raft," he muttered, as if to himself,
while he snatched a rope from the bundle of those disentangled by Robin.
"Take a rope of same size, you two, and lash the opposite corners as
you see me doing.  Stumps will go on selecting the planks."

Sam jerked out his words with as much rapidity and force as he applied
to the labour of his hands.  There was something quite tremendous in his
energy, and little wonder--for, as he glanced now and then along the
deck he saw that the ship was rapidly settling down to her final dive,
and that the closing scene would be sudden.

Powerfully impressed by his example, the others worked in total silence
and with all their might, for Sam's conduct, far more than the
appearance of things, convinced them of their danger.

"The planks now, Stumps!  Drive in as many of these clamps as you can
find, Slagg--so," (he set the example)--"we've no time to bore holes for
bolts.  A plank now; that's it!  Hand some nails--no, the biggest nails
and the big hammer.  Mind your fingers!"

Down came the heavy hammer on a four-inch nail, which went half through
the thick plank.  Two more such blows and the iron head was buried in
the wood.  Six planks sufficed to cover the frame.  They were laid
lengthwise with nails just sufficient to hold them.  A piece of thick
rope passed four times round the entire fabric still further secured
them in position.

"Tie a lot of these nails in a bit of sail-cloth, Slagg, and fix 'em to
the raft--to one of the spars, not the planks.  Do the same with a saw,
hammer, axe, and cask of biscuit,--water, too; don't forget water.  Make
a belt of a bit of rope, Robin, and stick that small axe in it.  Have it
handy."

While he spoke Sam did not look up, but gave all his attention to the
tightening, with a hand-spike, of the knot on the thick rope that bound
the raft together; for we may as well inform those who don't know it,
that the tying of a knot on a cable is not managed in the same way or
with the same ease that a similar operation is performed on a piece of
twine.

"But how shall we lift it over the side?" asked Stumps, becoming
suddenly alive to a difficulty.

"Help me to haul on this rope and you shall see," said Sam.

He ran to the side, lifted a coil of rope off its belaying-pin, threw it
on the deck, cut the rope clear, and hauled it to the raft, to one end
of which he made it fast.

It was the strong rope, by means of which one of the mizzen yards was
braced, and was rove through a block attached to the outward end of the
yard.

"Hoist away now--with a will!"

"Hold on," cried Slagg, stuffing a mass of sail-cloth violently, by
means of a hand-spike, underneath the binding rope of the raft.

"There now--yo ho! heave ho-o!"

Up went the end of the little ark of safety, and when one end was raised
very little force was required to push it over.

"Hold on! hold on! hold o-o-on!" yelled Stumps, straining to prevent the
raft from leaving the ship.

"No, no.--Let go! let go! let go-o-o!" roared Sam.

Stumps did let go and almost fell from the combined effect of his
efforts and despair, as the raft swung off, splashed into the sea far
out of reach, and hung half suspended from the yard-arm.

"It's all up with us," gasped Stumps.

"Not yet, but it will be all up with us in two minutes," returned Sam,
unable to repress a smile even at that moment.

"What d'ye mean?" said Stumps in amazement.  "How can we ever git at it
_now_?"

"Why, stoopid," said Slagg, "don't you see that we've only to go up the
mast, out on the yard-arm, and slip down the rope."

While he was speaking, Robin, by Sam's orders, was performing the feat
referred to.

"Look sharp!" he cried, turning to the others.

A heavy lurch of the ship caused their breasts to leap almost as fast as
their bodies, for they were all more or less aware of the danger of the
ship sinking before they could get clear of her.  The darkness, too,
was, as we have said, increasing by that time, though it was still light
enough to enable them to see what they were about.

In a few minutes they all had gained the end of the yard-arm, slipped
down the rope, and got upon the raft, but it was difficult to hold on,
because at each heave of the ship, the fore-end of the raft was raised
quite out of the sea, and then let fall with considerable violence.  As
soon as Sam reached it, he bade Robin cut adrift with his axe, so great
was the heave; but at the moment the raft hung almost perpendicularly in
the air, and Robin could do nothing but cling to the rope that bound it.
Next instant it again fell flat on the sea.

"Now--cut!" cried Sam.

The rope was severed with one blow; almost at the same instant the stern
of the Triton flew up with a degree of violence that no wave could
account for.  It was her last fling.  Instantly after she went down head
foremost.  The masts, by good fortune, leaned away from the raft at the
time, else they would have been struck by the yards, or involved in the
rigging.  As it was they did not escape.  The vast whirlpool caused by
the sinking ship drew them in with irresistible power.  For one moment
the horrified youths saw a dark green vortex towards which they rushed.
Another moment, and they beheld a green funnel whirling round them as
they sank into midnight darkness, while an ocean of roaring water filled
their ears.

Who shall attempt to describe, the feelings or sensations of that
moment!  The one absorbing idea of self-preservation was of course
dominant, coupled with an intolerable feeling that the upper air could
never be regained.

It was reached, however, by all of them.  First by Sam Shipton, who shot
waist-high above the sea with a loud gasp, and struck out wildly.  Then,
recovering presence of mind, he swam more gently, and looked eagerly
round.  He was immediately followed by Robin and Slagg.  Last of all by
Stumps, who came up legs foremost, and, on turning other end up, saluted
them with a roar that would not have shamed a monster of the deep.  But
the roar was cut short by a gurgle, as, in his frantic struggles, he
sank himself again.

Observing this, and seeing that the others were comparatively
self-possessed, Sam made towards his drowning comrade.  The poor fellow,
catching sight of him as he came near, made a clutch at him, but Sam was
well aware of the danger of being grasped by a drowning man.  He swerved
aside, and Stumps sank with a gurgle of despair.  Twice again did he
rise and sink.  Once more he rose.  With a rapid stroke Sam swam behind
him and caught him under the armpits.  Violently did the poor fellow
strive to turn round and clasp his preserver, but Sam, treading water,
held him easily at arm's-length with his head just above the surface.
As long as he struggled nothing more could be done for him; Sam
therefore put his mouth as near to his ear as possible and shouted:--

"Stop struggling!--else I'll let you go!"

It was probably as much the tone of Sam's voice as the sense of these
words that calmed Stumps.  At all events he instantly lay, or rather
hung, perfectly limp and still.

"Now," continued Sam, "you are quite safe if you do what I tell you.  If
you don't you're a dead man!  D'you understand?"

"Yes," gasped Stumps.

"Let your hands and arms lie flat on the water!  Don't try to raise your
head farther than I let you!  Keep your feet _still_!  Let yourself hang
helpless while I hold you and look round for the raft."

It was obvious that Stumps had regained self-command, for as each of
these orders was shouted in his ear, in the tones of a sergeant-major,
he obeyed with eager, almost ludicrous, promptitude.

"The raft is here, close at hand," said a voice close to Sam's ear.

It was Robin who had discovered him at that moment.

"Is Slagg safe?" asked Sam.

"Here he is, all right," said the worthy referred to, puffing and
choking as he swam up.

"Keep off--don't get in front of him," said Sam, in a warning voice.
"He mayn't have recovered self-restraint enough yet to refrain from
grasping you.  Guide me to the raft, Robin, while I swim on my back, and
see that you don't let it hit me on the head when I come close.  You and
Slagg help each other on, and then help me with Stumps."

Nothing could have calmed Stumps more than the cool, firm way in which
these orders were given, so that he allowed himself to lie like a log
while his deliverer drew him gently backwards until the back of his head
rested on his bosom.  Sam then struck out gently with his legs; Robin
turned him with a push in the right direction, and thus, swimming on his
back, he reached the raft.  Slagg and Robin having already helped each
other upon it, grasped his hair.  At once he freed one hand and caught
the rope that bound the raft.  Stumps naturally slewed round, so that
his mouth and nose went for a moment under water.  Fancying that he was
forsaken, he caught Sam round the neck, drew himself up, and gave a
terrific yell.

"Ha! you may choke me now, if you can," muttered Sam, as he grasped the
rope with both hands, "only, the longer you hold on to me the longer you
will be of getting out of the water."

The terrified lad still retained sufficient sense to appreciate the
force of the remark.  Looking up as well as he could through his
dishevelled hair, he held out one hand to Slagg, who grasped it firmly.
Releasing Sam, with some hesitation he made a convulsive grasp at Robin
with the other hand.  Robin met him half-way.  A loud "heave ho!" and a
mighty pull brought him out of the sea, and sent him with a squash on
the boards of the raft, where he lay gripping the ropes with his hands
as with a vice.

Before his rescuers could turn to aid Sam, he stood panting beside them.

"Thank God," said Sam, "for this deliverance!"

"Amen!" was the earnest and prompt response from the others.

Yet it seemed but a temporary deliverance, for when these castaways
looked around them, they saw nothing but a heaving ocean and a darkening
sky, with the tiny raft as the only visible solid speck in all the
watery waste.  Compared, however, with the extremity of danger though
which they had just passed, the little platform on which they stood
seemed to them an ample refuge--so greatly do circumstances alter our
estimate of facts!

But they had not time to think much, as may be easily understood, for a
great deal still remained to be done.  Their little ark was by no means
secure.  We have said that only enough of nails had been driven into it
to hold the planks to the frame-work, but not to withstand rough
treatment.  Indeed, during the plunge two of the planks had been torn
off, but the binding rope held them to their places, as Sam had
foreseen.

Very little daylight now remained, so that not a moment was to be lost.

"No sign of the big raft," said Sam, stooping to unfasten the hammer and
packet of nails, after taking one quick, anxious glance round the
horizon.

"But it may be not far-off after all," said Slagg, kneeling down to aid
his comrade, while Stumps, by that time recovered, assisted Robin to
tighten the ropes that held the pork-barrel.  "With such poor light it
'ud be hard to make out a flat thing like that a-kickin' in the hollows
of the seas."

"But you forget," returned Sam, "that it must be a-kickin' on the top o'
the sea as well as in the hollows.  Another nail--thanks.  However, I
don't expect to see it again."

"Well, now, I expects to see it in the mornin' not far-off," said Slagg.
"Is the water-cask fast, Robin?"

"All right--and the pork too."

"And the sail.  Just give it an extra shove under the ropes, Robin.
We'd be badly off if we lost it."

"I don't see what good a sail can do us," said Stumps, who had now quite
recovered.

"Not _as_ a sail, Stumpy," replied Slagg, whose spirit soon recovered
elasticity, "though even in that way it may help us, but as a blanket we
shall appreciate it before long."

Slagg was right.  After the planking had been secured and the rope
refastened, those unfortunates found themselves in an unenviable
position.  The gale had indeed abated somewhat, though the heaving of
the great waves was little less tremendous, but the night had settled
down into a state of pitchy darkness, so that they could barely see each
other's faces, while the seas continually washed over them, obliging
them to hold on to the ropes for fear of being washed away.

In such circumstances sleep was out of the question, yet they stood
sorely in need of rest.

"Now we'll see what's to be done wi' the sail," said Slagg, after they
had been seated some time doing nothing.  "Sleep I want, an' sleep I'll
have, so lend a hand, boys."

He drew out the sail with some trouble, so well had it been stuffed in,
and bade the others hold and prevent it from flapping while he fastened
the corners down.  He did not arrange it like a tent, but spread it as
flat as possible, doubling the superfluous edges inward, so that it
presented little or no obstruction to the free passage of wind or water
over them.

This done, they all crept underneath, and found it to be a much snugger
den than they had expected, for the two casks prevented their heads from
being pressed down when a few tons of water rolled over them--as
occasionally happened.

Still they did not dare to sleep until each had fastened a rope round
his waist and bound himself to the flooring.  Having done so, each laid
himself alongside of a turn of the binding-cable, and, embracing that
affectionately with both arms, laid his head on the planks and shut his
eyes.

Many and varied are the conditions under which healthy members of the
human family seek and find repose, but we venture to think that few
conditions have ever been found which were more unfavourable to sleep
than that which has just been described.

Nevertheless, they were met promptly by slumber most profound, as they
lay wet and weary on the little raft that disastrous night, on the dark
and surging breast of the Southern Sea.



CHAPTER FIFTEEN.

LIFE ON THE RAFT.

To awake "all at sea"--in other words, ignorant of one's locality--is a
rather common experience, but to awaken both at and in the sea, in a
similar state of oblivion, is not so common.

It was the fortune of Robin Wright to do so on the first morning after
the day of the wreck.

