Project Gutenberg's The Paradise of Children, by Nathaniel Hawthorne

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Paradise of Children

Author: Nathaniel Hawthorne

Posting Date: December 21, 2010 [EBook #9256]
Release Date: November, 2005
First Posted: September 25, 2003
Last Updated: February 6, 2007

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE PARADISE OF CHILDREN ***




Produced by David Widger.  HTML version by Al Haines










                 A WONDER-BOOK FOR GIRLS AND BOYS

                     By Nathaniel Hawthorne


                    THE PARADISE OF CHILDREN



CONTENTS:

  TANGLEWOOD PLAY-ROOM--Introductory to "The Paradise of Children"
  THE PARADISE OF CHILDREN
  TANGLEWOOD PLAY-ROOM--After the Story




TANGLEWOOD PLAY-ROOM.

The golden days of October passed away, as so many other Octobers have,
and brown November likewise, and the greater part of chill December,
too.  At last came merry Christmas, and Eustace Bright along with it,
making it all the merrier by his presence.  And, the day after his
arrival from college, there came a mighty snow-storm.  Up to this time,
the winter had held back, and had given us a good many mild days, which
were like smiles upon its wrinkled visage.  The grass had kept itself
green, in sheltered places, such as the nooks of southern hill-slopes,
and along the lee of the stone fences.  It was but a week or two ago,
and since the beginning of the month, that the children had found a
dandelion in bloom, on the margin of Shadow Brook, where it glides out
of the dell.

But no more green grass and dandelions now.  This was such a snow-storm!
Twenty miles of it might have been visible at once, between the windows
of Tanglewood and the dome of Taconic, had it been possible to see so
far, among the eddying drifts that whitened all the atmosphere.  It
seemed as if the hills were giants, and were flinging monstrous handfuls
of snow at one another, in their enormous sport.  So thick were the
fluttering snow-flakes, that even the trees, midway down the valley,
were hidden by them the greater part of the time.  Sometimes, it is
true, the little prisoners of Tanglewood could discern a dim outline of
Monument Mountain, and the smooth whiteness of the frozen lake at its
base, and the black or gray tracts of woodland in the nearer landscape.
But these were merely peeps through the tempest.

Nevertheless, the children rejoiced greatly in the snowstorm.  They had
already made acquaintance with it, by tumbling heels over head into its
highest drifts, and flinging snow at one another, as we have just
fancied the Berkshire mountains to be doing.  And now they had come back
to their spacious play-room, which was as big as the great drawing-room,
and was lumbered with all sorts of playthings, large and small.  The
biggest was a rocking-horse, that looked like a real pony; and there was
a whole family of wooden, waxen, plaster, and china dolls, besides
rag-babies; and blocks enough to build Bunker Hill Monument, and nine-pins,
and balls, and humming-tops, and battledores, and grace-sticks, and
skipping-ropes, and more of such valuable property than I could tell of
in a printed page.  But the children liked the snow-storm better than
them all.  It suggested so many brisk enjoyments for to-morrow, and all
the remainder of the winter.  The sleigh-ride; the slides down hill into
the valley; the snow-images that were to be shaped out; the snow-fortresses
that were to be built; and the snow-balling to be carried on!

So the little folks blessed the snow-storm, and were glad to see it come
thicker and thicker, and watched hopefully the long drift that was
piling itself up in the avenue, and was already higher than any of their
heads.

"Why, we shall be blocked up till spring!" cried they, with the hugest
delight.  "What a pity that the house is too high to be quite covered
up!  The little red house, down yonder, will be buried up to its eaves."

"You silly children, what do you want of more snow?" asked Eustace, who,
tired of some novel that he was skimming through, had strolled into the
play-room.  "It has done mischief enough already, by spoiling the only
skating that I could hope for through the winter.  We shall see nothing
