The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Forest Runners, by Joseph A. Altsheler

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Forest Runners
       A Story of the Great War Trail in Early Kentucky

Author: Joseph A. Altsheler

Release Date: February 2, 2005 [EBook #14876]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE FOREST RUNNERS ***




Produced by Kentuckiana Digital Library, David Garcia, Emmy and the
PG Online Distributed Proofreading Team.










_The_ FOREST RUNNERS

[Illustration: "A massive black form shot down into the center of the
room." [Page 277.]]



_The_ FOREST RUNNERS

A STORY OF THE GREAT WAR
TRAIL IN EARLY KENTUCKY

BY
JOSEPH A. ALTSHELER
AUTHOR OF "THE YOUNG TRAILERS"


D. APPLETON-CENTURY COMPANY
INCORPORATED

NEW YORK LONDON
1936


1908, BY
D. APPLETON AND COMPANY




1935, BY EQUITABLE TRUST CO
Printed in the United States of America


BOOKS BY JOSEPH A. ALTSHELER

    THE FRENCH AND INDIAN WAR SERIES

    The Hunters of the Hills
    The Rulers of the Lakes
    The Lords of the Wild
    The Shadow of the North
    The Masters of the Peaks
    The Sun of Quebec

    THE YOUNG TRAILERS SERIES

    The Young Trailers
    The Forest Runners
    The Keepers of the Trail
    The Eyes of the Woods
    The Free Rangers
    The Riflemen of the Ohio
    The Scouts of the Valley
    The Border Watch

    THE TEXAN SERIES

    The Texan Star
    The Texan Scouts
    The Texan Triumph

    THE CIVIL WAR SERIES

    The Guns of Bull Run
    The Guns of Shiloh
    The Scouts of Stonewall
    The Sword of Antietam
    The Star of Gettysburg
    The Rock of Chickamauga
    The Shades of the Wilderness
    The Tree of Appomattox

    THE GREAT WEST SERIES

    The Lost Hunters
    The Great Sioux Trail

    THE WORLD WAR SERIES

    The Guns of Europe
    The Forest of Swords
    The Hosts of the Air

    BOOKS NOT IN SERIES

    Apache Gold
    The Quest of the Four
    The Last of the Chiefs
    In Circling Camps
    The Last Rebel
    A Soldier of Manhattan
    The Sun of Saratoga
    A Herald of the West
    The Wilderness Road
    My Captive
    The Candidate

D. APPLETON AND COMPANY New York London



    This story, while independent in itself, continues the
    fortunes of the two boys who were the central characters
    of "The Young Trailers."




CONTENTS


    I.  PAUL                          1

   II.  IN THE RIVER                 17

  III.  THE LONE CABIN               36

   IV.  THE SIEGE                    59

    V.  THE FLIGHT                   72

   VI.  THE BATTLE ON THE HILL       91

  VII.  WHAT HAPPENED IN THE DARK   108

 VIII.  AT THE RIVER BANK           125

   IX.  A CHANGE OF PLACES          142

    X.  THE ISLAND IN THE LAKE      157

   XI.  A SUDDEN MEETING            176

  XII.  THE BELT BEARERS            192

 XIII.  BRAXTON WYATT'S ORDEAL      217

  XIV.  IN WINTER QUARTERS          239

   XV.  WORK AND PLAY               254

  XVI.  NOEL                        273

 XVII.  FOOTPRINTS IN THE SNOW      283

XVIII.  WHAT THE WARRIOR SAW        295

  XIX.  THE WARNING                 310

   XX.  THE TERRIBLE FORD           328

  XXI.  THE FLIGHT OF LONG JIM      340

 XXII.  THE LAST STAND              355





THE FOREST RUNNERS





CHAPTER I

PAUL


Paul stopped in a little open space, and looked around all the circle of
the forest. Everywhere it was the same--just the curving wall of red and
brown, and beyond, the blue sky, flecked with tiny clouds of white. The
wilderness was full of beauty, charged with the glory of peace and
silence, and there was naught to indicate that man had ever come. The
leaves rippled a little in the gentle west wind, and the crisping grass
bowed before it; but Paul saw no living being, save himself, in the vast,
empty world.

The boy was troubled and, despite his life in the woods, he had full right
to be. This was the great haunted forest of _Kain-tuck-ee_, where the red
man made his most desperate stand, and none ever knew when or whence
danger would come. Moreover, he was lost, and the forest told him nothing;
he was not like his friend, Henry Ware, born to the forest, the heir to
all the primeval instincts, alive to every sight and sound, and able to
read the slightest warning the wilderness might give. Paul Cotter was a
student, a lover of books, and a coming statesman. Fate, it seemed, had
chosen that he and Henry Ware should go hand in hand, but for different
tasks.

Paul gazed once more around the circle of the glowing forest, and the
shadow in his eyes deepened. Henry and the horses, loaded with powder for
the needy settlement, must be somewhere near, but whether to right or left
he could not tell. He had gone to look for water, and when he undertook to
return he merely went deeper and deeper into the forest. Now the boughs,
as they nodded before the gentle breeze, seemed to nod to him in derision.
He felt shame as well as alarm. Henry would not laugh at him, but the born
scholar would be worth, for the time, at least, far less than the born
trailer.

Yet no observer, had there been any, would have condemned Paul as he
condemned himself. He stood there, a tall, slender boy, with a broad, high
brow, white like a girl's above the line of his cap, blue eyes, dark and
full, with the width between that indicates the mind behind, and the firm,
pointed chin that belongs so often to people of intellect.

Paul and Henry were on their way from Wareville, their home, with horses
hearing powder for Marlowe, the nearest settlement, nearly a hundred miles
away. The secret of making powder from the nitre dust on the floors of the
great caves of Kentucky had been discovered by the people of Wareville,
and now they wished to share their unfailing supply with others, in order
that the infant colony might be able to withstand Indian attacks. Henry
Ware, once a captive in a far Northwestern tribe, and noted for his great
strength and skill, had been chosen, with Paul Cotter, his comrade, to
carry it. Both rejoiced in the great task, which to them meant the saving
of Kentucky.

Paul's eyes were apt at times to have a dreamy look, as if he were
thinking of things far away, whether of time or place; but now they were
alive to the present, and to the forest about him. He listened intently.
At last he lay down and put his ear to the earth, as he had seen Henry do;
but he heard nothing save a soft, sighing sound, which he knew to be only
the note of the wilderness. He might have fired his rifle. The sharp,
lashing report would go far, carried farther by its own echoes; but it was
more likely to bring foe than friend, and he refrained.

But he must try, if not one thing, then another. He looked up at the
heavens and studied the great, red globe of the sun, now going slowly
down the western arch in circles of crimson and orange light, and then he
looked hack at the earth. If he had not judged the position of the sun
wrong, their little camp lay to the right, and he would choose that
course. He turned at once and walked swiftly among the trees.

Paul stopped now and then to listen. He would have uttered the long forest
shout, as a signal to his comrade, but even that was forbidden. Henry had
seen signs in the forest that indicated more than once to his infallible
eye the presence of roving warriors from the north, and no risk must be
taken. But, as usual, it was only the note of the wilderness that came to
his ears. He stopped also once or twice, not to listen, but to look at the
splendid country, and to think what a great land it would surely be.

He walked steadily on for miles, but the region about him remained
unfamiliar. No smoke from the little camp-fire rose among the trees, and
no welcome sight of Henry or the horses came to his eyes. For all he knew,
he might be going farther from the camp at every step. Putting aside
caution, he made a trumpet of his two hands, and uttered the long,
quavering cry that serves as a signal in the forest. It came back in a
somber echo from the darkening wilderness, and Paul saw, with a little
shiver, that the sun was now going down behind the trees. The breeze rose,
and the leaves rustled together with a soft hiss, like a warning. Chill
came into the air. The sensitive mind of the boy, so much alive to
abstract impressions, felt the omens of coming danger, and he stopped
again, not knowing what to do. He called himself afraid, but he was not.
It was the greater tribute to his courage that he remained resolute where
another might well have been in despair.

The sun went down behind the black forest like a cannon shot into the sea,
and darkness swept over the wilderness. Paul uttered the long cry again
and again, but, as before, no answer came back; once he fired his rifle,
and the sharp note seemed to run for miles, but still no answer.

Then he decided to take counsel of prudence, and sleep where he was. If he
walked on, he might go farther and farther away from the camp, but if he
stopped now, while he might not find Henry, Henry would certainly find
him. Any wilderness trail was an open road to his comrade.

He hunted a soft place under one of the trees, and, despising the dew,
stretched himself between two giant roots, his rifle by his side. He was
