of an exterior and bearing so much more polished and graceful than the
sons of the soil or their more northern visitors, that he was instantly
recognized as coming from Gaul, then as now the most polished kingdom of
the south. Delighted with his bravery, his modesty, and most chivalric
bearing, the king treated him with most distinguished honor, invited him
to his palace, spoke with him as friend with friend on the kingdoms of
Normandy and France, to the former of which he was subject. There was a
mystery, too, about the young knight, which heightened the interest he
excited; he bore no device on his shield, no cognizance whatever to mark
his name and birth and his countenance, beautiful as it was, often when
in repose expressed sadness and care unusual to his years, for he was
still very young, though in reply to the king's solicitations that he
would choose one of Scotland's fairest maidens (her dower should be
princely), and make the Scottish court his home, he had smilingly avowed
that he was already a husband and father.

"The notice of the king, of course, inspired the nobles with similar
feelings of hospitality. Attention and kindness were lavished on the
stranger from all, and nothing was talked of but the nameless knight.
The Lord of Brus, who had been absent on a mission to a distant court
during the continuance of the martial games, was on his return presented
by the king himself to the young warrior. It is said that both were so
much moved by this meeting, that all present were mystified still more.
The baron, with that deep subtlety for which he was remarkable,
recovered himself the first, and accounted for his emotion to the
satisfaction of his hearers, though not apparently to that of the
stranger, who, though his cheek was blanched, still kept his bright
searching eyes upon him, till the baron's quailed 'neath his gaze. The
hundred tongues of rumor chose to speak of relationship, that there was
a likeness between them, yet I know not how that could be. There is no
impress of the fiendish passion at work in the baron's soul on those
bright, beautiful features."

"Ha! Is it of him you speak?" involuntarily escaped from Nigel, as the
old man for a moment paused; "of him? Methought yon portrait was of an
ancestor of Bruce, or wherefore is it here?"

"Be patient, good my son. My narrative wanders, for my lips shrink from
its tale. That the baron and the knight met, not in warlike joust but in
peaceful converse, and at the request of the latter, is known, but on
what passed in that interview even tradition is silent, it can only be
imagined by the sequel; they appeared, however, less reserved than at
first. The baron treated him with the same distinction as his
fellow-nobles, and the stranger's manner towards him was even more
respectful than the mere difference of age appeared to demand. Important
business with the Lord of Brus was alleged as the cause of his accepting
that nobleman's invitation to the tower of Kildrummie, in preference to
others earlier given and more eagerly enforced. They departed together,
the knight accompanied but by two of his followers, and the baron
leaving the greater number of his in attendance on his wife and child,
who, for some frivolous reason, he left with the court. It was a strange
thing for him to do, men said, as he had never before been known to lose
sight of his boy even for a day. For some days all seemed peace and
hospitality within the tower. The stranger was too noble himself, and
too kindly disposed towards all his fellow-creatures, to suspect aught
of treachery, or he might have remarked the retainers of the baron were
changed; that ruder forms and darker visages than at first were
gathering around him. How the baron might have intended to make use of
them--almost all robbers and murderers by trade--cannot be known, though
it may be suspected. In this room the last interview between them took
place, and here, on this silent witness of the deed, the hand of the
father was bathed in the blood of the son!"

"God in heaven!" burst from Nigel's parched lips, as he sprang up. "The
son--how could that be? how known?"

"Fearfully, most fearfully!" shudderingly answered the old man; "through
the dying ravings of the maniac Lord of Brus himself. Had not heaven, in
its all-seeing justice, thus revealed it, the crime would ever have
remained concealed. His bandit hirelings were at hand to remove and
bury, many fathoms deep in moat and earth, all traces of the deed. One
of the unfortunate knight's followers was supposed to have shared the
fate of his master, and to the other, who escaped almost miraculously,
you owe the preservation of your royal line.

"But there was one witness of the deed neither time nor the most cunning
art could efface. The blood lay in a pool on the oaken floor, and the
voice of tradition whispers that day after day it was supernaturally
renewed; that vain were the efforts to absorb it, it ever seemed moist
and red; and that to remove the plank and re-floor the apartment was
attempted again and again in vain. However this may be, it is evident
that _erasing it_ was attended with extreme difficulty; that the blood
had penetrated well-nigh through the immense thickness of the wood."

Nigel stooped down over the crumbling fragment; years, aye, centuries
had rolled away, yet there it still stood, arrested it seemed even in
its decay, not permitted to crumble into dust, but to remain an
everlasting monument of crime and its retribution. After a brief pause
Nigel resumed his seat, and pushing the hair from his brow, which was
damp with some untold emotion, signed to the old man to proceed.

"That the stranger warrior returned not to Malcolm's court, and had
failed in his promises to various friends, was a matter of
disappointment, and for a time, of conjecture to the king and his court.
That his followers, in obedience, it was said, to their master's signet,
set off instantly to join him either in England or Normandy, for both of
which places they had received directions, satisfied the greater number.
If others suspected foul play, it was speedily hushed up; for the baron
was too powerful, too closely related to the throne, and justice then
too weak in Scotland to permit accusation or hope for conviction. Time
passed, and the only change observable in the baron was, that he became
more gloomy, more abstracted, wrapt up, as it were, in one dark
remembrance, one all-engrossing thought. Towards his wife he was
changed--harsh, cold, bitterly sarcastic; as if her caresses had turned
to gall. Her gentle spirit sunk beneath the withering blight, and he was
heard to laugh, the mocking laugh of a fiend, as he followed her to the
grave; her child, indeed, he still idolized, but it was a fearful
affection, and a just heaven permitted not its continuance. The child,
to whom many had looked as likely to ascend the Scottish throne, from
the failure of all direct heirs, the beautiful and innocent child of a
most guilty father, faded like a lovely flower before him, so softly, so
gradually, that there came no suspicion of death till the cold hand was
on his heart, and he lay lifeless before him who had plunged his soul in
deadliest crime through that child to aggrandize himself. Then was it
that remorse, torturing before, took the form of partial madness, and
there was not one who had power to restrain, or guide, or soothe.

"Then it was the fearful tale was told, freezing the blood, not so much
with the wild madness of the tone, but that the words were too
collected, too stamped with truth, to admit of aught like doubt. The
couch of the baron was, at his own command, placed here, where we now
stand, covering the spot where his first-born fell, and that portrait,
obtained from Normandy, hung where it now is, ever in his sight. The
dark tale which those wild ravings revealed was simply this:

"He had married, as was suspected, during his wanderings, but soon tired
of the yoke, more particularly as his wife possessed a spirit proud and
haughty as his own, and all efforts to mould her to his will were
useless, he plunged anew into his reckless career. He had never loved
his wife, marrying her simply because it suited his convenience, and
brought him increase of wealth and station; and her ill-disguised
abhorrence of many of his actions, her beautiful adherence to virtue,
however tempted, occasioned all former feelings to concentrate in hatred
the most deadly. More than one attempt to rid himself of her by poison
she had discovered and frustrated, and at last removed herself and her
child, under a feigned name, to Normandy, and ably eluded all pursuit
and inquiry.

"The baron's search continued some time, in the hope of silencing her
forever, as he feared she might prove a dangerous enemy, but failing in
his wishes, he travelled some time over different countries, returned at
length to Scotland, and acted as we have seen. The young knight had been
informed of his birthright by his mother, at her death, which took place
two years before he made his appearance in Scotland; that she had
concealed from him the fearful character of his father, being unable so
completely to divest herself of all feeling towards the father of her
child, as to make him an object of aversion to his son. She had long
told him his real name, and urged him to demand from his father an
acknowledgment of his being heir to the proud barony of the Bruce. His
likeness to herself was so strong, that she knew it must carry
conviction to his father; but to make his identity still more certain,
she furnished him with certain jewels and papers, none but herself could
produce. She had done this in the presence of two faithful witnesses,
the father and brother of her son's betrothed bride, high lords of
Normandy, the former of which made it a condition annexed to his consent
to the marriage, that as soon as possible afterwards he should urge and
claim his rights. Sir Walter, of course, willingly complied; they were
married by the name of Brus, and their child so baptized. A war, which
retained Sir Walter in arms with his sovereign, prevented his seeking
Scotland till his boy was a year old, and then for his sake, far more
than for his own, the young father determined on asserting his
birthright, his child should not be nameless, as he had been; but to
spare his unknown parent all public mortification, he joined the martial
games without any cognizance or bearing on his shield.

"Terrible were the ravings in which the baron alluded to the interview
he had had with his murdered child; the angelic mildness and generosity
of the youthful warrior; that, amid all his firmness never to depart
from his claim--as it was not alone himself but his child he would
irreparably injure--he never wavered in his respectful deference to his
parent. He quitted the court in the belief that the baron sought
Kildrummie to collect the necessary papers for substantiating his claim;
but ere he died, it appeared his eyes were opened. The fierce passions
of the baron had been too long restrained in the last interview; they
burst even his politic control, and he had flung the papers received
from, the hand of his too-confiding son on the blazing hearth, and with
dreadful oaths swore that if he would not instantly retract his claim,
and bind himself by the most sacred promise never to breathe the foul
tale again, death should be its silent keeper. He would not bring his
own head low, and avow that he had dishonored a scion of the
blood-royal.

"Appalled far more at the dark, fiendish passions he beheld than the
threat held out to himself, Sir Walter stood silent a while, and then
mildly demanded to be heard; that if so much public mortification to his
parent would attend the pursuance of his claims at the present time, he
would consent to forego them, on condition of his father's solemnly
promising on his deathbed to reveal the truth, and do him tardy justice
then, but forego them altogether he would not, were his life the
forfeit. The calm firmness of his tone, it is supposed, lashed his
father into greater madness, and thus the dark deed was done.

"That the baron several times endeavored to possess himself of the
infant child of Sir Walter, also came to light in his dying moments;
that he had determined to exterminate root and branch, fearful he should
still possess some clue to his birth; he had frantically avowed, but in
his last hour, he would have given all his amassed treasure, his
greatness, his power, but for one little moment of assurance that his
grandson lived. He left him all his possessions, his lordship, his name,
but as there were none came forth to claim, they of necessity passed to
the crown."

"But the child, the son of Sir Walter--if from him our line descends, he
must have lived to manhood--why did not he demand his rights?"

"He lived, aye, and had a goodly progeny; but the fearful tale of his
father's fate related to him again and again by the faithful Edric, who
had fled from his master's murdered corse to watch over the safety of
that master's child, and warn all who had the charge of him of the fiend
in human shape who would probably seek the boy's life as he had his
father's, caused him to shun the idea of his Scottish possessions with a
loathing horror which he could not conquer; they were associated with
the loss of both his parents, for his father's murder killed his devoted
mother. He was contented to feel himself Norman in possessions as well
as in name. He received lands and honors from the Dukes of Normandy, and
at the advanced age of seventy and five, accompanied Duke William to
England. The third generation from him obtained anew Scottish
possessions, and gradually Kildrummie and its feudal tenures returned to
its original lords; but the tower had been altered and enlarged, and
except the tradition of these chambers, the fearful fate of the second
of the line has faded from the minds of his descendants, unless casually
or supernaturally recalled."

"Ha! supernaturally, sayest thou?" interrupted Nigel, in a tone so
peculiar it almost startled his companion. "Are there those who assert
they have seen his semblance--good, gifted, beautiful as thou hast
described him? why not at once deem him the guardian spirit of our
house?"

"And there are those who deem him so, young lord," answered the seer.
"It is said that until the Lords of Bruce again obtained possession of
these lands, in the visions of the night the form of the murdered
warrior, clad as in yon portrait, save with the addition of a scarf
across his breast bearing the crest and cognizance of the Bruce,
appeared once in his lifetime to each lineal descendant. Such
visitations are said to have ceased, and he is now only seen by those
destined like himself to an early and bloody death, cut off in the prime
of manhood, nobleness, and joy."

"And where--sleeping or waking?" demanded the young nobleman, in a low,
deep tone, laying his hand on the minstrel's arm, and looking fixedly on
his now strangely agitated face.

"Sleeping or waking? it hath been both," he answered, and his voice
faltered. "If it be in the front of the war, amid the press, the crush,
the glory of the battle, he hath come, circled with bright forms and
brighter dreams, to the sleeping warrior on the eve of his last fight;
if"--and his voice grew lower and huskier yet--"if by the red hand of
the foe, by the captive's chain and headsman's axe, as the noble
Wallace, there have been those who say--I vouch not for its truth--he
hath been seen in the vigils of the night on the eve of knighthood, when
the young, aspiring warrior hath watched and prayed beside his arms.
Boy! boy! why dost thou look upon me thus?"

"Because thine eye hath read my doom," he said, in a firm, sweet tone;
"and if there be aught of truth in thy tale, thou knowest, feelest I
have seen him. God of mercy, the captive's chain, the headsman's axe!
Yet 'tis Thy will, and for my country--let it come."




CHAPTER XVII.


"Thou art idle, maiden; wherefore not gather thy robes and other gear
together, as thy companions? Knowest thou not in twenty-four hours we
shall be, heaven willing, safely sheltered under the holy wing of St.
Duthac?" was Queen Margaret's address to Agnes, about a week after the
conversation we have recorded. There were many signs of confusion and
tokens of removal in her scanty train, but the maiden of Buchan stood
apart, offering assistance when needed, but making no arrangements for
herself.

"I seek not such holy keeping, may it please you, madam," she replied.
"I do not quit this castle."

"How!" exclaimed Margaret. "Art thou mad?"

"In what, royal madam?"

"Or hath love blinded thee, girl? Knowest thou not Hereford and
Lancaster are advancing as rapidly as their iron-clad force permits, and
in less than seven days the castle must be besieged in form?"

"I know it, madam."

"And thou wilt brave it, maiden?--dare a danger that may be avoided? Is
thy life of so little worth, or if not thy life, thy liberty?"

"When a life is wrapt up in one--when there is none on earth save that
one to whom that life is of any worth, wherefore should I seek safety
save by his side? Royal madam, I am not mad nor blind; but desolate as
I am,--nay, were I not 'twould be the same--I covet to share Sir Nigel's
fate; the blow that strikes him shall lay me at his side, be it in
prison or in death. My safety is with him; and were the danger ten times
as great as that which threatens now, I'd share it with him still."

"Nay, thou art but a loving fool, Agnes. Be advised, seek safety in the
sanctuary; peril cannot reach us there."

"Save by the treachery of the dark-browed earl who grants that shelter.
Nay, pardon me, madam; thou lovest not to list that theme, believing him
as honorable and faithful as thyself. God grant he prove so! If," she
added, with a faint smile, "if it be such mad folly to cling to a
beloved one in danger as in joy, in adversity as in triumph, forgive me,
royal lady, but thy maidens have learned that tale of thee."

"And would to God I could teach them thus again!" exclaimed the queen,
tears coursing down her cheeks. "Oh, Agnes, Agnes, were Robert here, not
death itself should part us. For my child's sake, for his, I go hence
for safety. Could my resting, nay, my death benefit him, Agnes, I would
meet it, weak as thou deemest me."

"Nay, nay, I doubt it not, my queen," answered Agnes, soothingly, "It is
best thou shouldst find some place of repose till this struggle be past.
If it end in victory, it will be joy to hail thee once again within its
walls; if otherwise, better thy safety should be cared for."

"But for thee, my child, is it not unmaidenly for thee to linger here?"

"It would be, royal madam," and a bright vivid flush glowed on her pale
cheeks, "but for the protection of the Lady Seaton, who will not leave
her husband."

"I may not blame her, after mine own words," said the queen,
sorrowfully; "yet she is one I could have wished beside me. Ha! that
trumpet. Merciful heaven! is it the foe?" and trembling with alarm, she
dispatched attendant after attendant to know the cause.

The English force was known to be so near that many a warrior-heart beat
quicker at any unusual blast, and it was not marvel the queen's terrors
should very often affect her attendants. Agnes alone, amid the maiden
train, ever retained a calm self-possession; strange in one who, till
the last eventful year, had seemed such a very child. Her mother
trembled lest the turmoils and confusion of her country should ever
approach her or those she loved; how might she, timid, nay; often
fearful, weak, and yielding, as the flower on the heath, how might she
encounter storm, and grief, and care? Had her mother's eye been on her
now, and could have followed her in yet deeper trials, that mother
scarce had known her child.

She it was whose coolness enabled her easily to recognize and explain
the trumpet's blast. It was an officer with an escort from the Lord of
Ross, informing the queen that, from late intelligence respecting the
movements of the English, he deemed it better they should not defer
their departure from the castle another night.

On the receipt of this message all was increased hurry and confusion in
the apartments of the queen. The advice was to be followed on the
instant, and ere sunset the litters and mules, and other accommodation
for the travellers, waited their pleasure in the outer court.

It was with a mien of princely dignity, a countenance grave and
thoughtful, with which the youthful seneschal attended the travellers to
the great gate of the castle. In after years the expression of his
features flashed again and again upon those who looked upon him them.
Calmly he bade his sister-in-law farewell, and bade her, should she be
the first to see his brother, tell him that it was at her own free will
and pleasure she thus departed; that neither advice nor persuasion on
his part had been used; she had of her own will released him from his
sacred charge; and if ill came of it, to free his memory from blame.

"Trust me, Nigel; oh, surely you may trust me! You will not part from me
in anger at my wilfulness?" entreated Margaret, as clinging to his arm,
she retained him a few minutes ere he placed her in the litter.

"In anger, my sweet sister, nay, thou wrongest me!" he said, a bright
smile dispersing a moment the pensive cast of his features. "In sorrow,
perchance, for I love not him to whose care thou hast committed thyself;
yet if ill await this castle, and thou wert with me, 'twould enhance its
bitterness. No, tis better thou shouldst go; though I would it were not
to the Lord of Ross."

"And wherefore?" demanded the deep stern voice of the officer beside
him.

"Because I doubt him, Archibald Macfarlane," sternly replied the young
nobleman, fixing his flashing eyes upon him; "and thou mayst so inform
him an thou wilt. An I do him wrong, let him deliver the Queen of
Scotland and her attendants in safety to King Robert, in the forthcoming
spring, and Nigel Bruce will crave forgiveness for the wrong that he
hath done him; nay, let his conduct give my doubts the lie, and I will
even thank him, sir."

Turning on his heel, he conducted the queen to her litter, and bade a
graceful farewell to all her fair companions, bidding good angels speed
them on their way. The heavy gates were thrown back, the portcullis
raised and the drawbridge lowered, and amid a parting cheer from the
men-at-arms drawn up in the court in military homage to their queen, the
cavalcade departed, attended only by the men of Ross, for the number of
the garrison was too limited to admit of their attendance anywhere, save
within and on the walls.

With folded arms and an anxious brow, Sir Nigel stood beside the gate,
marking the progress of the train; a gentle voice aroused him. It
playfully said, "Come to the highest turret, Nigel, there thou wilt
trace their path as long as light remains." He started, for Agnes was at
his side. He drew her arm within his own, briefly gave the command to
close the gate and make all secure, and turned with her in the direction
of the keep.

"Have I done right," he said, as, when they had reached a more retired
path, he folded his arm caressingly around her, and drew her closer to
him, "to list thy pleadings, dearest, to grant thy boon? oh, if _they_
go to safety, why did I listen to thee and permit thee to remain?"

"Nay, there is equal safety within these walls, Nigel. Be assured, thine
Agnes hath neither regret nor doubt when thou art by her side," she
answered, still playfully. "I love not the sanctuaries they go to seek;
the stout hearts and trusty blades of warriors like thee and thine, my
Nigel, are better and truer safeguards."

"Alas! Agnes, I fear me not in cases such as these. I am not wont to be
desponding, but from the small number of true men which garrison this
castle, I care not to acknowledge I had loved better to meet my foe on
open ground. Here I can scarce know friend from foe; traitors may be
around me, nay, in my very confidence, and I know it not."

"Art thou not infected with Queen Margaret's suspicions, Nigel? Why
ponder on such uneasy dreams?"

"Because, my best love, I am a better adept in the perusal of men's
countenances and manners than many, and there are signs of lowering
discontent and gloomy cowardice, arguing ill for unity of measures, on
which our safety greatly rests. Yet my fancies may be wrong, and at all
hazards my duty shall be done. The issue is in the hands of a higher
power; we cannot do wrong in committing ourselves to Him, for thou
knowest He giveth not the battle to the strong, and right and justice we
have on Scotland's side."

Agnes looked on his face, and she saw, though he spoke cheerfully, his
thoughts echoed not his words. She would not express her own anxiety,
but led him gently to explain to her his plan of defence, and prepare
her for all she might have to encounter.

Five days passed, and all within and without the walls remained the
same; the sixth was the Sabbath, and the greater part of the officers
and garrison were assembled in the chapel, where divine service was
regularly read by the Abbot of Scone, whom we should perhaps before have
mentioned as having, at the king's especial request, accompanied the
queen and her attendants to Kildrummie. It was a solemn yet stirring
sight, that little edifice, filled as it was with steel-clad warriors
and rude and dusky forms, now bending in one prayer before their God.
The proud, the lowly, the faithless, and the true, the honorable and the
base, the warrior, whose whole soul burned and throbbed but for his
country and his king, the coward, whose only thought was how he could
obtain life for himself and save the dread of war by the surrender of
the castle--one and all knelt there, the workings of those diverse
hearts known but to Him before whom they bent. Strangely and mournfully
did that little group of delicate females gleam forth amidst the darker
and harsher forms around, as a knot of fragile flowers blooming alone,
and unsheltered amidst some rude old forest trees, safe in their own
lowliness from the approaching tempest, but liable to be overwhelmed in
the fall of their companions, whom yet they would not leave. As calmly
as in his own abbey the venerable abbot read the holy service, and
administered the rites of religion to all who sought. It was in the deep
silence of individual prayer which preceded the chanting of the
conclusion of the service that a shrill, peculiar blast of a trumpet was
heard. On the instant it was recognized as the bugle of the warder
stationed on the centre turret of the keep, as the blast which told the
foe was at length in sight. Once, twice, thrice it sounded, at irregular
intervals, even as Nigel had commanded; the notes were caught up by the
warders on the walls, and repeated again and again. A sudden cry of "The
foe!" broke from the soldiers scattered round, and again all was
silence. There had been a movement, almost a confusion in some parts of
the church, but the officers and those who had followed them from the
mountains neither looted up nor stirred. The imperative gesture of the
abbot commanded and retained order and silence, the service proceeded;
there might have been some faltering in the tones of the choir, but the
swelling notes of the organ concealed the deficiency.

The eye of Agnes voluntarily sought her betrothed. His head was still
bent down in earnest prayer, but she had not looked long before she saw
him raise it, and lift up his clasped hands in the evident passionate
fervor of his prayer. So beautiful, so gloriously beautiful was that
countenance thus breathing prayer, so little seemed that soul of earth,
that tears started to the eyes of Agnes, and the paleness of strong
emotion over-spread the cheek, aye, and the quivering lip, which the war
and death-speaking trumpet had had no power to disturb.

"Let me abide by him, merciful Father, in weal or in woe; oh, part us
not!" she prayed again and yet again, and the bright smile which now
encircled his lips--for he had caught her glance--seemed an answer to
her prayer.

