The Project Gutenberg eBook, Fighting the Whales, by R. M. Ballantyne


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: Fighting the Whales


Author: R. M. Ballantyne



Release Date: April 22, 2007  [eBook #21202]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FIGHTING THE WHALES***


E-text prepared by Al Haines



Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original illustrations.
      See 21202-h.htm or 21202-h.zip:
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/2/1/2/0/21202/21202-h/21202-h.htm)
      or
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/2/1/2/0/21202/21202-h.zip)





FIGHTING THE WHALES

by

R. M. BALLANTYNE







[Illustration: Cover Art]




Blackie & Son Ltd.
London ---- Glasgow ---- Bombay
1915




CONTENTS


CHAP.

    I. IN TROUBLE, TO BEGIN WITH
   II. AT SEA
  III. OUR FIRST BATTLE
   IV. "CUTTING IN" THE BLUBBER AND "TRYING OUT" THE OIL
    V. A STORM, A MAN OVERBOARD, AND A RESCUE
   VI. THE WHALE--FIGHTING BULLS, ETC.
  VII. TOM'S WISDOM--ANOTHER GREAT BATTLE
 VIII. DEATH ON THE SEA
   IX. NEWS FROM HOME--A GAM
    X. RETURN HOME




ILLUSTRATIONS


   Fighting the Whales . . . . . . _Cover Art_

   "Tom Lokins raised the harpoon"

   "Hurled it blazing into the sea"

   "In a moment I was overboard"




FIGHTING THE WHALES


CHAPTER I

IN TROUBLE, TO BEGIN WITH

There are few things in this world that have filled me with so much
astonishment as the fact that man can kill a whale!  That a fish, more
than sixty feet long, and thirty feet round the body; with the bulk of
three hundred fat oxen rolled into one; with the strength of many
hundreds of horses; able to swim at a rate that would carry it right
round the world in twenty-three days; that can smash a boat to atoms
with one slap of its tail, and stave in the planks of a ship with one
blow of its thick skull;--that such a monster can be caught and killed
by man, is most wonderful to hear of, but I can tell from experience
that it is much more wonderful to see.

There is a wise saying which I have often thought much upon.  It is
this: "Knowledge is power".  Man is but a feeble creature, and if he
had to depend on his own bodily strength alone he could make no head
against even the ordinary brutes in this world.  But the knowledge
which has been given to him by his Maker has clothed man with great
power, so that he is more than a match for the fiercest beast in the
forest, or the largest fish in the sea. Yet, with all his knowledge,
with all his experience, and all his power, the killing of a great old
sperm whale costs man a long, tough battle, sometimes it even costs him
his life.

It is a long time now since I took to fighting the whales.  I have been
at it, man and boy, for nigh forty years, and many a wonderful sight
have I seen; many a desperate battle have I fought in the fisheries of
the North and South Seas.

Sometimes, when I sit in the chimney-corner of a winter evening,
smoking my pipe with my old messmate Tom Lokins, I stare into the fire
and think of the days gone by till I forget where I am, and go on
thinking so hard that the flames seem to turn into melting fires, and
the bars of the grate into dead fish, and the smoke into sails and
rigging, and I go to work cutting up the blubber and stirring the
oil-pots, or pulling the bow-oar and driving the harpoon at such a
rate that I can't help giving a shout, which causes Tom to start and
cry:

"Hallo!  Bob" (my name is Bob Ledbury, you see).  "Hallo!  Bob, wot's
the matter?"

To which I reply, "Tom, can it all be true?"

"Can _wot_ be true?" says he, with a stare of surprise--for Tom is
getting into his dotage now.

And then I chuckle and tell him I was only thinking of old times, and
so he falls to smoking again, and I to staring at the fire, and
thinking as hard as ever.

The way in which I was first led to go after the whales was curious.
This is how it happened.

About forty years ago, when I was a boy of nearly fifteen years of age,
I lived with my mother in one of the seaport towns of England. There
was great distress in the town at that time, and many of the hands were
out of work. My employer, a blacksmith, had just died, and for more
than six weeks I had not been able to get employment or to earn a
farthing.  This caused me great distress, for my father had died
without leaving a penny in the world, and my mother depended on me
entirely.  The money I had saved out of my wages was soon spent, and
one morning when I sat down to breakfast, my mother looked across the
table and said, in a thoughtful voice:

"Robert, dear, this meal has cost us our last halfpenny."

My mother was old and frail, and her voice very gentle; she was the
most trustful, uncomplaining woman I ever knew.

I looked up quickly into her face as she spoke.  "All the money gone,
Mother?"

"Aye, all.  It will be hard for you to go without your dinner, Robert,
dear."

"It will be harder for _you_, Mother," I cried, striking the table with
my fist; then a lump rose in my throat and almost choked me.  I could
not utter another word.

It was with difficulty I managed to eat the little food that was before
me.  After breakfast I rose hastily and rushed out of the house,
determined that I would get my mother her dinner, even if I should have
to beg for it.  But I must confess that a sick feeling came over me
when I thought of begging.

Hurrying along the crowded streets without knowing very well what I
meant to do, I at last came to an abrupt halt at the end of the pier.
Here I went up to several people and offered my services in a wild sort
of way.  They must have thought that I was drunk, for nearly all of
them said gruffly that they did not want me.

Dinner-time drew near, but no one had given me a job, and no wonder,
for the way in which I tried to get one was not likely to be
successful.  At last I resolved to beg.  Observing a fat, red-faced old
gentleman coming along the pier, I made up to him boldly.  He carried a
cane with a large gold knob on the top of it. That gave me hope, "for
of course," thought I, "he must be rich."  His nose, which was exactly
the colour and shape of the gold knob on his cane, was stuck in the
centre of a round, good-natured countenance, the mouth of which was
large and firm; the eyes bright and blue.  He frowned as I went forward
hat in hand; but I was not to be driven back; the thought of my
starving mother gave me power to crush down my rising shame.  Yet I had
no reason to be ashamed.  I was willing to work, if only I could have
got employment.

Stopping in front of the old gentleman, I was about to speak when I
observed him quietly button up his breeches pocket.  The blood rushed
to my face, and, turning quickly on my heel, I walked away without
uttering a word.

"Hallo!" shouted a gruff voice just as I was moving away.

I turned, and observed that the shout was uttered by a broad
rough-looking jack-tar, a man of about two or three and thirty, who had
been sitting all the forenoon on an old cask smoking his pipe and
basking in the sun.

"Hallo!" said he again.

"Well," said I.

"Wot d'ye mean, youngster, by goin' on in that there fashion all the
mornin', a-botherin' everybody, and makin' a fool o' yourself like
that? eh!"

"What's that to you?" said I savagely, for my heart was sore and heavy,
and I could not stand the interference of a stranger.

"Oh! it's nothin' to me of course," said the sailor, picking his pipe
quietly with his clasp-knife; "but come here, boy, I've somethin' to
say to ye."

"Well, what is it?" said I, going up to him somewhat sulkily.

The man looked at me gravely through the smoke of his pipe, and said,
"You're in a passion, my young buck, that's all; and, in case you
didn't know it, I thought I'd tell ye."

I burst into a fit of laughter.  "Well, I believe you're not far wrong;
but I'm better now."

"Ah! that's right," said the sailor, with an approving nod of his head;
"always confess when you're in the wrong.  Now, younker, let me give
you a bit of advice.  Never get into a passion if you can help it, and
if you can't help it get out of it as fast as possible, and if you
can't get out of it, just give a great roar to let off the steam and
turn about and run.  There's nothing like that.  Passion han't got
legs.  It can't hold on to a feller when he's runnin'.  If you keep it
up till you a'most split your timbers, passion has no chance.  It
_must_ go a-starn. Now, lad, I've been watchin' ye all the mornin', and
I see there's a screw loose somewhere.  If you'll tell me wot it is,
see if I don't help you!"

The kind frank way in which this was said quite won my heart, so I sat
down on the old cask, and told the sailor all my sorrows.

"Boy," said he, when I had finished, "I'll put you in the way o'
helpin' your mother.  I can get you a berth in my ship, if you're
willin' to take a trip to the whale fishery of the South Seas."

"And who will look after my mother when I'm away?" said I.

The sailor looked perplexed at the question.

"Ah! that's a puzzler," he replied, knocking the ashes out of his pipe.
"Will you take me to your mother's house, lad?"

"Willingly," said I, and, jumping up, I led the way.  As we turned to
go, I observed that the old gentleman with the gold-headed cane was
leaning over the rail of the pier at a short distance from us.  A
feeling of anger instantly rose within me, and I exclaimed, loud enough
for him to hear:

"I do believe that stingy old chap has been listening to every word
we've been saying!"

I thought I observed a frown on the sailor's brow as I said this, but
he made no remark, and in a few minutes we were walking rapidly through
the streets.  My companion stopped at one of those stores so common in
seaport towns, where one can buy almost anything, from a tallow candle
to a brass cannon.  Here he

[Transcriber's note: two pages missing from book]

