alive and enables me to move; also to think and speak."

"Ah! You are ver-y much like my-self," said Tik-Tok. "The on-ly
dif-fer-ence is that I move by clock-work, while you move by fire."

"I don't see a particle of likeness between us, I must confess,"
retorted Quox, gruffly. "You are not a live thing; you're a dummy."

"But I can do things, you must ad-mit," said Tik-Tok.

"Yes, when you are wound up," sneered the dragon. "But if you run down,
you are helpless."

"What would happen to you, Quox, if you ran out of gasoline?" inquired
Shaggy, who did not like this attack upon his friend.

"I don't use gasoline."

"Well, suppose you ran out of fire."

"What's the use of supposing that?" asked Quox.  "My
great-great-great-grandfather has lived since the world began, and he
has never once run out of fire to keep him going. But I will confide to
you that as he gets older he shows more smoke and less fire. As for
Tik-Tok, he's well enough in his way, but he's merely copper. And the
Metal Monarch knows copper through and through. I wouldn't be surprised
if Ruggedo melted Tik-Tok in one of his furnaces and made copper
pennies of him."

"In that case, I would still keep going," remarked Tik-Tok, calmly.

"Pennies do," said Betsy regretfully.

"This is all nonsense," said the Queen, with irritation. "Tik-Tok is my
great Army--all but the officers--and I believe he will be able to
conquer Ruggedo with ease. What do you think, Polychrome?"

"You might let him try," answered the Rainbow's Daughter, with her
sweet ringing laugh, that sounded like the tinkling of tiny bells. "And
if Tik-Tok fails, you have still the big fire-breathing dragon to fall
back on."

"Ah!" said the dragon, another sheet of flame gushing from his mouth
and nostrils; "it's a wise little girl, this Polychrome. Anyone would
know she is a fairy."




Chapter Fourteen

The Long-Eared Hearer Learns by Listening


During this time Ruggedo, the Metal Monarch and King of the Nomes, was
trying to amuse himself in his splendid jeweled cavern. It was hard
work for Ruggedo to find amusement to-day, for all the nomes were
behaving well and there was no one to scold or to punish. The King had
thrown his sceptre at Kaliko six times, without hitting him once. Not
that Kaliko had done anything wrong. On the contrary, he had obeyed the
King in every way but one: he would not stand still, when commanded to
do so, and let the heavy sceptre strike him.

We can hardly blame Kaliko for this, and even the cruel Ruggedo forgave
him; for he knew very well that if he mashed his Royal Chamberlain he
could never find another so intelligent and obedient. Kaliko could make
the nomes work when their King could not, for the nomes hated Ruggedo
and there were so many thousands of the quaint little underground
people that they could easily have rebelled and defied the King had
they dared to do so. Sometimes, when Ruggedo abused them worse than
usual, they grew sullen and threw down their hammers and picks. Then,
however hard the King scolded or whipped them, they would not work
until Kaliko came and begged them to. For Kaliko was one of themselves
and was as much abused by the King as any nome in the vast series of
caverns.

But to-day all the little people were working industriously at their
tasks and Ruggedo, having nothing to do, was greatly bored. He sent for
the Long-Eared Hearer and asked him to listen carefully and report what
was going on in the big world.

"It seems," said the Hearer, after listening for awhile, "that the
women in America have clubs."

"Are there spikes in them?" asked Ruggedo, yawning.

"I cannot hear any spikes, Your Majesty," was the reply.

"Then their clubs are not as good as my sceptre. What else do you hear?'

"There's a war.

"Bah! there's always a war. What else?"

For a time the Hearer was silent, bending forward and spreading out his
big ears to catch the slightest sound. Then suddenly he said:

"Here is an interesting thing, Your Majesty. These people are arguing
as to who shall conquer the Metal Monarch, seize his treasure and drive
him from his dominions."

"What people?" demanded Ruggedo, sitting up straight in his throne.

"The ones you threw down the Hollow Tube."

"Where are they now?"

"In the same Tube, and coming back this way," said the Hearer.

Ruggedo got out of his throne and began to pace up and down the cavern.

"I wonder what can be done to stop them," he mused.

"Well," said the Hearer, "if you could turn the Tube upside down, they
would be falling the other way, Your Majesty."

Ruggedo glared at him wickedly, for it was impossible to turn the Tube
upside down and he believed the Hearer was slyly poking fun at him.
Presently he asked:

"How far away are those people now?"

"About nine thousand three hundred and six miles, seventeen furlongs,
eight feet and four inches--as nearly as I can judge from the sound of
their voices," replied the Hearer.

"Aha! Then it will be some time before they arrive," said Ruggedo, "and
when they get here I shall be ready to receive them."

He rushed to his gong and pounded upon it so fiercely that Kaliko came
bounding into the cavern with one shoe off and one shoe on, for he was
just dressing himself after a swim in the hot bubbling lake of the
Underground Kingdom.

"Kaliko, those invaders whom we threw down the Tube are coming back
again!" he exclaimed.

"I thought they would," said the Royal Chamberlain, pulling on the
other shoe. "Tititi-Hoochoo would not allow them to remain in his
kingdom, of course, and so I've been expecting them back for some time.
That was a very foolish action of yours, Rug."

"What, to throw them down the Tube?"

"Yes. Tititi-Hoochoo has forbidden us to throw even rubbish into the
Tube."

"Pooh! what do I care for the Jinjin?" asked Ruggedo scornfully. "He
never leaves his own kingdom, which is on the other side of the world."

"True; but he might send some one through the Tube to punish you,"
suggested Kaliko.

"I'd like to see him do it! Who could conquer my thousands of nomes?"

"Why, they've been conquered before, if I remember aright," answered
Kaliko with a grin. "Once I saw you running from a little girl named
Dorothy, and her friends, as if you were really afraid."

"Well, I was afraid, that time," admitted the Nome King, with a deep
sigh, "for Dorothy had a Yellow Hen that laid eggs!"

The King shuddered as he said "eggs," and Kaliko also shuddered, and so
did the Long-Eared Hearer; for eggs are the only things that the nomes
greatly dread. The reason for this is that eggs belong on the earth's
surface, where birds and fowl of all sorts live, and there is something
about a hen's egg, especially, that fills a nome with horror. If by
chance the inside of an egg touches one of these underground people, he
withers up and blows away and that is the end of him--unless he manages
quickly to speak a magical word which only a few of the nomes know.
Therefore Ruggedo and his followers had very good cause to shudder at
the mere mention of eggs.

"But Dorothy," said the King, "is not with this band of invaders; nor
is the Yellow Hen. As for Tititi-Hoochoo, he has no means of knowing
that we are afraid of eggs."

"You mustn't be too sure of that," Kaliko warned him. "Tititi-Hoochoo
knows a great many things, being a fairy, and his powers are far
superior to any we can boast."

Ruggedo shrugged impatiently and turned to the Hearer.

"Listen," said he, "and tell me if you hear any eggs coming through the
Tube."

The Long-Eared one listened and then shook his head. But Kaliko laughed
at the King.

"No one can hear an egg, Your Majesty," said he. "The only way to
discover the truth is to look through the Magic Spyglass."

"That's it!" cried the King. "Why didn't I think of it before? Look at
once, Kaliko!"

So Kaliko went to the Spyglass and by uttering a mumbled charm he
caused the other end of it to twist around, so that it pointed down the
opening of the Tube. Then he put his eye to the glass and was able to
gaze along all the turns and windings of the Magic Spyglass and then
deep into the Tube, to where our friends were at that time falling.

"Dear me!" he exclaimed. "Here comes a dragon."

"A big one?" asked Ruggedo.

"A monster. He has an electric light on the end of his tail, so I can
see him very plainly. And the other people are all riding upon his
back."

"How about the eggs?" inquired the King.

Kaliko looked again.

"I can see no eggs at all," said he; "but I imagine that the dragon is
as dangerous as eggs. Probably Tititi-Hoochoo has sent him here to
punish you for dropping those strangers into the Forbidden Tube. I
warned you not to do it, Your Majesty."

This news made the Nome King anxious. For a few minutes he paced up and
down, stroking his long beard and thinking with all his might. After
this he turned to Kaliko and said:

"All the harm a dragon can do is to scratch with his claws and bite
with his teeth."

"That is not all, but it's quite enough," returned Kaliko earnestly.
"On the other hand, no one can hurt a dragon, because he's the toughest
creature alive. One flop of his huge tail could smash a hundred nomes
to pancakes, and with teeth and claws he could tear even you or me into
small bits, so that it would be almost impossible to put us together
again. Once, a few hundred years ago, while wandering through some
deserted caverns, I came upon a small piece of a nome lying on the
rocky floor. I asked the piece of nome what had happened to it.
Fortunately the mouth was a part of this piece--the mouth and the left
eye--so it was able to tell me that a fierce dragon was the cause. It
had attacked the poor nome and scattered him in every direction, and as
there was no friend near to collect his pieces and put him together,
they had been separated for a great many years. So you see, Your
Majesty, it is not in good taste to sneer at a dragon."

The King had listened attentively to Kaliko. Said he:

"It will only be necessary to chain this dragon which Tititi-Hoochoo
has sent here, in order to prevent his reaching us with his claws and
teeth."

"He also breathes flames," Kaliko reminded him.

"My nomes are not afraid of fire, nor am I," said Ruggedo.

"Well, how about the Army of Oogaboo?"

"Sixteen cowardly officers and Tik-Tok! Why, I could defeat them
single-handed; but I won't try to. I'll summon my army of nomes to
drive the invaders out of my territory, and if we catch any of them I
intend to stick needles into them until they hop with pain."

"I hope you won't hurt any of the girls," said Kaliko.

"I'll hurt 'em all!" roared the angry Metal Monarch. "And that braying
Mule I'll make into hoof-soup, and feed it to my nomes, that it may add
to their strength."

"Why not be good to the strangers and release your prisoner, the Shaggy
Man's brother?" suggested Kaliko.

"Never!"

"It may save you a lot of annoyance. And you don't want the Ugly One."

"I don't want him; that's true. But I won't allow anybody to order me
around. I'm King of the Nomes and I'm the Metal Monarch, and I shall do
as I please and what I please and when I please!"

With this speech Ruggedo threw his sceptre at Kaliko's head, aiming it
so well that the Royal Chamberlain had to fall flat upon the floor in
order to escape it. But the Hearer did not see the sceptre coming and
it swept past his head so closely that it broke off the tip of one of
his long ears. He gave a dreadful yell that quite startled Ruggedo, and
the King was sorry for the accident because those long ears of the
Hearer were really valuable to him.

So the Nome King forgot to be angry with Kaliko and ordered his
Chamberlain to summon General Guph and the army of nomes and have them
properly armed. They were then to march to the mouth of the Tube, where
they could seize the travelers as soon as they appeared.




Chapter Fifteen

The Dragon Defies Danger


Although the journey through the Tube was longer, this time, than
before, it was so much more comfortable that none of our friends minded
it at all. They talked together most of the time and as they found the
dragon good-natured and fond of the sound of his own voice they soon
became well acquainted with him and accepted him as a companion.

"You see," said Shaggy, in his frank way, "Quox is on our side, and
therefore the dragon is a good fellow. If he happened to be an enemy,
instead of a friend, I am sure I should dislike him very much, for his
breath smells of brimstone, he is very conceited and he is so strong
and fierce that he would prove a dangerous foe."

"Yes, indeed," returned Quox, who had listened to this speech with
pleasure; "I suppose I am about as terrible as any living thing. I am
glad you find me conceited, for that proves I know my good qualities.
As for my breath smelling of brimstone, I really can't help it, and I
once met a man whose breath smelled of onions, which I consider far
worse."

"I don't," said Betsy; "I love onions.

"And I love brimstone," declared the dragon, "so don't let us quarrel
over one another's peculiarities."

Saying this, he breathed a long breath and shot a flame fifty feet from
his mouth. The brimstone made Betsy cough, but she remembered about the
onions and said nothing.

They had no idea how far they had gone through the center of the earth,
nor when to expect the trip to end. At one time the little girl
remarked:

"I wonder when we'll reach the bottom of this hole. And isn't it funny,
Shaggy Man, that what is the bottom to us now, was the top when we fell
the other way?"

