
"Run!" yelled Stoddard, slipping a new clip into his pistol.

The professor needed no invitation. Gathering his long legs he sped
after the younger man, and together they burst from the mouth of the
cavern.

       *       *       *       *       *

Outside, in the dazzle of moonlight, they paused for an instant.

"This way!" called Stoddard, racing toward that splintered arena.

They gained it and lunged across it to the shelving slope that reached
upward to the narrow, perilous ridge whence they had come.

As they proceeded, the pigmy horde following with incredible
swiftness, Stoddard wheeled and fired time and again--and now his
shots were answered by the reports of rifles.

"Krassnov and his Cossacks!" he muttered. "Well, we'll give them our
heels, unless they hit us."

"And Russians are notoriously bad shots, I understand," panted the
professor.

At any rate, they reached the slope and struggled upward toward the
ridge, putting themselves presently out of range behind the jagged
rocks that loomed on every side.

But just as they were congratulating themselves on their escape, came
a dull, reverberating explosion--and as they clung to their insecure
footholds, a volcano of snow and ice rose ahead. Thousands of tons of
debris avalanched into the chasm below.

       *       *       *       *       *

Stunned, deafened, they looked around.

Down in that pocket where the Thunderbolt had so recently gleamed was
one vast chaos, and above, where that razor-back ridge had led across
the intervening chasms to safety, was a dazzling void.

To both came the same thought, but Stoddard expressed it first.

"Krassnov--he's dynamited the ridge!" he gasped.

"Then we--we'll never get back now!" echoed Professor Prescott.

"No, but they'll never get us here!"

"Scant comfort, though, when we're pinioned here like a couple of
birds with their wings clipped."

"Right; but let's see. Let's figure. We're better off than we were.
And what was it Napoleon once said: 'When you can't retreat, advance.'
So suppose we--"

"But listen!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Stoddard heard. It was the sound of rifle shots. And looking down, he
saw a feverish activity surrounding the rocket. Myriads of the pigmies
were swarming upon it, while a handful of Cossacks were holding them
off.

"Something doing down there, all right!" he muttered. "Looks to me
like--why, sure I've got it! That madman has overshot himself, for
once! He's buried their precious meteor, in blowing up our ridge, and
they've turned on him!"

"I think you're right," agreed Professor Prescott. "Suppose we advance
as you say. It looks like a chance."

"Right," said Stoddard.

Slowly, cautiously, they returned down the slope.

When within a hundred yards, they knew they had sized up the situation
correctly. With frantic speed, Krassnov was supervising the shoveling
out of his rocket from amid the debris; was directing its loading,
while the free members of his crew held off the enraged natives who
were obstructing them.

Descending even more cautiously now, they neared the scene of
activity.

"My plan is this--to get aboard and find out where they're going!"
said Stoddard, through shut teeth. "What do you say?"

"Lead on!" said the professor.

So they continued down, neared the resting-place of that strange
craft, and, under shelter of the moonlight shadows, stole through the
confused ranks surrounding it and crept aboard.

       *       *       *       *       *

Stowing themselves into the first likely niche that offered--a narrow
cubicle behind a flight of metal stairs--they waited, scarcely daring
to breathe for fear of being discovered.

Fifteen minutes passed, a half-hour, when suddenly sounded a rasping
of doors that told them the rocket was being sealed.

Then came a roar, as of some mighty blast beating down upon the frozen
earth, followed by a lifting, rushing sensation--and they were flung
violently to the flooring.

The pressure ceased in a moment, however, to be supplanted by a
buoyant, exhilarating sense of flight. It increased, and they judged
they must be traveling at great speed.

Glancing at the luminous dial of his watch, Professor Prescott saw
that it was a quarter to ten.

"Well, we're off!" he whispered. "And where, would you guess, are we
headed?"

"I wouldn't guess," Stoddard whispered back. "From the way we're
riding, it might be Mars! We must be making hundreds of miles an
hour."

"Or thousands! Who knows?"

They crouched there in their cramped niche, scarcely even whispering
now, as the tense minutes passed.

       *       *       *       *       *

Suddenly the motion changed. They seemed to be dropping.

Another moment or two, and with a slight jar the rocket came to rest.

"Well, we're here, wherever it is," said Stoddard, stirring.

"Yes, undoubtedly," the professor agreed. "And the next move?"

"I think we'll let them make that."

They were not long in doing so. There came the sound of doors rasping
open, of footsteps echoing on metal stairs and corridors. Once a giant
Cossack passed within four feet of them. But at length, all was silent
within the rocket.

"Now, then, suppose we have a look around," said Stoddard, stepping
out.

"Right," agreed his companion, following. "I'll admit I am mildly
curious to know what corner of the earth we've been transported to."

They proceeded down the dim-lit corridor the way they had come,
descended a flight of stairs and headed along another corridor--to
pause suddenly and gasp with astonishment. For through the door whence
they had entered the rocket poured a flood of sunshine.

       *       *       *       *       *

Stoddard stared at it a moment incredulously, and then glanced at his
watch.

"Ten o'clock, I make it!" he muttered. "Am I crazy, or what?"

"No, I hardly think so," smiled Professor Prescott, recovering from
his own surprise. "It is merely that we are in some part of the world
quite a few thousand miles removed from India. Back on Kinchinjunga,
it is still ten o'clock at night, but here, it is quite obviously
daytime."

"That must be the explanation," Stoddard agreed. "But it certainly
gave me a start at first!"

Approaching the door, followed by the professor, he peered cautiously
out, to confront a desolate stretch of scrubby growth, hemmed in by a
background of rugged mountains.

"Now where the devil would you say we are?" he demanded, gazing around
perplexedly.

"Either in the United States or in Mexico," was the astonishing
reply.

"But how can you say that?"

"Because it must be some place approximately twelve hours distant from
India in time, to judge from the sun, which is not far past the
meridian."

"But why not Australia, for instance?"

"Because Australia is too far. It would be three o'clock tomorrow
morning there, since it is ten o'clock last night now in India."

       *       *       *       *       *

Stoddard pondered this a minute, then admitted its correctness.

"All right, then. Assuming that we are somewhere on the North American
continent, the next thing is to give Krassnov the slip; otherwise it
won't be big enough for all of us!"

And that Professor Prescott conceded readily enough.

But before making any further move, they looked over their
surroundings carefully, to satisfy themselves none of their late
captors were in view.

"They're evidently somewhere on the other side of the rocket,"
Stoddard concluded at length. "So let's make a break for it while
we've got the chance."

"Lead the way!" said the professor.

"O. K., here we go!"

And, stepping through the door, they dropped to the ground and raced
off under the glare of the burning sun toward the rugged mountains
that loomed ahead.

       *       *       *       *       *

For a hundred yards or so they were able to keep the rocket between
themselves and the Russians but soon the ground sloped up to such an
extent that they realized they must be in full view.

Dropping behind the scant shelter of a scraggly tree, they turned and
glanced down--and there, beyond the rocket, they could now see a
group of men standing around outside a small wooden shack, shouting
and gesticulating in their direction.

"Damn it, they've seen us!" muttered Stoddard.

"But why don't they come after us?" queried Professor Prescott.

The answer came even as he spoke, for out of the shack rushed the tall
figure of the prince, in his hand a pair of binoculars which he raised
to his eyes.

Whether or not be spotted them, an instant later he turned and uttered
a command, and two huge Cossacks sprang to the pursuit.

"There's nothing to do now but run for it!" cried Stoddard, leaping to
his feet.

The professor followed and they plunged on up the slope, bullets from
their pursuers' pistols and the rifles of those below kicking up the
dust around them. But either because the aim was bad or the targets
difficult, they escaped unscathed.

As for Stoddard, he wasted no time in firing back.

"Once we get in those mountains, we're safe!" he gasped, as they
struggled on. "How are you, Professor--all right?"

"No holes in my skin so far!" came the panting answer.

Five desperate, dodging minutes passed.

Glancing over their shoulders, they saw that the heavy, stolid
Cossacks were losing ground. And ahead, tauntingly near now, loomed a
thickly-wooded slope that meant the beginning of big timber--and
safety.

Another five minutes--each second an hour--and they had gained it.

       *       *       *       *       *

But there was no pausing yet, they could hear the Cossacks crashing on
like determined blood-hounds behind.

"No need to climb any more!" exclaimed Stoddard, half breathless.
"We'll edge along, keep in the trees, and try to throw them off."

The older man said nothing; merely gritted his teeth. This climb had
told on him more than anything he had experienced on the cruel slopes
of Kinchinjunga.

As they struggled along now, sometimes it seemed that they had thrown
their pursuers off the trail, or completely outdistanced them, but
always a moment later they would hear again the crunch of the
Cossacks' boots on the dry undergrowth.

So the grim flight continued, mile after heart-tearing mile, and
Stoddard was beginning to realize that the professor couldn't keep on
much longer--had just about decided to stop and shoot it out with
their pursuers--when suddenly there came a sound that brought new hope
to him.

"Did you hear that?" he gasped, pausing.

"It--sounded like--a car!" panted his companion.

"Right. And that means there must be a road through here somewhere!
But where?"

"Listen." Professor Prescott pointed to the left. "The sound seems to
be coming from over there."

And sure enough, from the left came a wheezing grind of a car making a
heavy grade.

"Near, too," decided Stoddard. "Come on--let's go! We've got to head
it off. It's our only hope, except--"

With relief, he shoved his automatic back into its holster and led the
way in the direction of the now rapidly nearing car.

       *       *       *       *       *

A hundred yards they had made, up a slight rise, when there spread
before them a rutted mountain road, and on it, in full view, was a
laboring Ford of ancient vintage.

Over the wheel hovered a lanky, leathery native, and beside him sat a
small, plump woman who looked as though she might be his wife.

They were almost to the top of the hill when Stoddard hailed them.

"Say!" he said. "Give us a ride, will you? We're lost."

"Keep on, Henry!" he heard the woman urge. "I don't like the looks of
'em."

Americans! Well, thought Stoddard, they were in the United States,
anyway. That was something. And he didn't exactly blame the good woman
for her suspicions. They must look pretty wild, at that, with their
two-day beards and tattered clothes.

"Sorry," spoke up Henry. "Missus says no. She knows best. 'Sides, it
ain't fur to Martin's Bluff. You kin make it in an hour."

"But say, wait a minute!" They were running along beside the wheezing
car now. "We've got to get there in a hurry. We'll pay you."

Henry pricked up his ears at this, but his wife shook her head.

"Keep on!" she urged. "They may be bandits!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Whereupon Stoddard drew his automatic, for there was no more time to
argue.

"Stop!" he commanded. "You'll take us, understand? I'll pay you well!"

"See, I was right!" screamed the woman. "Bandits! Bandits! Oh,
Henry--save me!"

Wildly she clung to him, as Stoddard mounted the running-board, but
