While thus agreeably engaged, a rustling of the bushes caused him to
bundle the gains hastily up in a handkerchief, which he thrust into his
pocket, while he leaped nimbly to his feet, and seized his crutch.

"Oh, it's only you, Bill! why, I declare I thought it was--well, well,
never mind.  How have ye got on?"

The individual addressed entered the enclosure, and sat down at the foot
of the tree with a sigh, which might, without much exaggeration, have
been termed a growl.  Bill was also, strange to say, a sailor, and a
wounded one, (doubtless a shipwrecked one), because his left arm was in
a sling.

"It's tough work, Jim, an' little pay," said the newcomer.  "Why, I've
walked twenty mile good, an' only realised two pun' ten.  If it don't
improve, I'll take to a better trade."

"You're a discontented dog," replied Jim, spreading out his treasures.
"Here have I limped the same distance, an' bin an' got five pun' two."

"Whew!" whistled the other.  "You don't say that?  Well--we go 'alves,
so I'm better--'ere pass that bottle.  I'll drink to your good 'ealth.
'Ow did you ever come by it, Bill?"

To this Bill replied that he had fallen in with several ladies, whose
hearts were so touched by his pitiful tale that most of them gave him
crown pieces, while two, who actually shed tears while he spoke, gave
him half a sovereign each!

"I drink to them 'ere two ladies," exclaimed Bill, applying the gin
bottle to his mouth, which was already full of bread and beef.

"So does I," said Jim, snatching the bottle from his comrade, "not so
much for the sake of them there ladies, 'owever, as to get my fair share
o' the tipple afore you."

The remainder of the sentence was drowned by gin; and after they had
finished the bottle, which was only a pint one however, these two men
sat down together to count their ill-gotten gains; for both of them were
vile impostors, who had never been on the salt water in the whole course
of their worthless lives.

"Now, madam," said I, pointedly addressing Miss Flouncer, who had
listened with rapt attention, "this circumstance happened _before_ the
existence of the Shipwrecked Mariners' Society, and similar cases
happened frequently.  In fact, the interior of our land was at that time
constantly visited by shipwrecked sailors of this kind."

"Indeed!" said Miss Flouncer, undulating to me, with a benignant smile.

"Yes, madam," said I.  "Now observe another side of this picture."

Hereupon I resumed my address, the substance of which was as follows:

It chanced that when impostor Jim started away over the moor at the
slapping pace I have already referred to, he was observed by two of the
village boys, who were lying in a hollow by the road-side amusing
themselves.  These urchins immediately ran home, and told what they had
seen.  The gossips of the place congregated round the inn door, and
commented on the conduct of the pretended seaman in no measured terms--
at the same time expressing a wish that they only had him there, and
they would let him smell the peculiar odour of their horse-pond.  At
this point the courage and the ire of three stout young ploughmen, who
had been drinking deeply, was stirred up so much that they vowed to be
revenged, and set off in pursuit of the offender.  As they ran nearly
all the way, they soon came to the spot where Jim and Bill had been
enjoying themselves, and met these villains just as they were issuing
from the underwood to continue their journey.

A fight immediately ensued, but Jim made such play with his crutch that
the ploughmen were driven back.  Bill, too, who had been a London
prize-fighter, unslung his left arm, and used it so vigorously that the
rustics, after having had all their eyes blackened and all their noses
bled, were fain to turn round and fly!

This event, as you may suppose, made a considerable sensation in the
neighbourhood; travellers and carriers conveyed the news of it along the
road from village to village; and the thing was thoroughly canvassed,
and the impostors duly condemned.

Well, about three weeks afterwards a great storm arose; a ship was
wrecked on the coast, and all the crew and passengers drowned except one
man--a powerful seaman, who chanced to be a good swimmer, and who nearly
lost his own life in his gallant efforts to save the life of the only
female who was on board.  This man swam to the shore with one arm, while
with the other he supported the woman.

He could barely crawl up the beach through the heavy surf, dragging his
burden after him.  But he succeeded, and then lay for some time
insensible.  When he recovered, he found that the woman appeared to be
dead.  Anxious, however, to do all in his power to restore her, he tried
to chafe her limbs; but seeing that he could make no impression, he
hastened away to search for human dwellings and send help.  Four miles
did he stagger along before he came to a fishing village.

Here he told his tale; the men of the place hurried away to the scene of
the wreck, but arrived too late to be of any use.

The sailor remained some days with the fishermen, who received him
kindly, and gave him a few pence to help him on his way to the nearest
town, where he received a few shillings from some charitable persons,
and then set off to walk on foot to his native place, which happened to
be on the opposite coast of England.

The poor fellow got on very well until he came to the road which led to
the village where Jim had been so successful.  All along this road he
was scouted as an impostor, and, but for his imposing size and physical
strength, would doubtless have received more kicks than halfpence.  As
it was he was well-nigh starved.

Arriving one afternoon, famishing and almost knocked up, at the village,
he went in despair to the inn door, and began to tell his sorrowful
tale.  He told it to unsympathetic ears.  Among his auditors were the
three ploughmen who had been so roughly handled by Jim and Bill.  These
only heard the first two or three sentences when they rushed upon the
sailor, calling on their comrades, who were numerous, to help them to
duck the rascal in the horse-pond.

The stout tar, although taken by surprise and overpowered, was not
disposed to submit without a struggle.  He was a very Samson in
strength.  Rising up by main force with two of his foes on his back, he
threw them off, drove his right fist into the eye of one, his foot into
the stomach of a second, flattened the nose of a third on his face with
a left-hander, and then wheeling round at random, plunged his elbow into
the chest of another who was coming on behind, and caused him to measure
his length on the ground.  Before the rustics recovered from their
surprise at the suddenness of these movements, two more of their number
were sprawling in the dust, and the rest stood off aghast!

"Now, then," shouted the indignant tar, as he clapped his back to the
side of the inn, "come on! the whole of 'ee.  I hope yer wills is made.
What! ye're afeard, are ye?  Well, if ye won't come on I'll bid ye good
afternoon, ye low minded, cowardly land-lubbers!"

And with that he made a rush at them.  They tumbled over each other in
heaps, trying to get out of his way, so that he could only get a passing
dig at one or two of them, and cleared away as fast as he could run.

They did not follow him far, so Jack soon stopped and sat down on the
road-side, in a very savage state of mind, to wipe the blood from his
face and knuckles.

While he was thus engaged, an elderly gentleman in the garb of a
clergyman approached him.

"What has happened to you, my man?" he asked.

"That's none o' your business," answered Jack with angry emphasis.  "Ax
no questions, an' you'll be told no lies!"

"Excuse me, friend," replied the clergyman gently, "I did not mean to
annoy you; but you seem to have been badly wounded, and I would assist
you if you will allow me."

"I ax yer parding, sir," said Jack, a little softened, though by no
means restored to his wonted good-humour; "no offence meant, but I've
been shamefully abused by the scoundrels in yonder village, an' I am
riled a bit.  It's only a scratch, sir, you don't need to consarn
yerself."

"It is more than a scratch, if I may judge from the flow of blood.
Permit me to examine."

"Oh, it'll be all right d'rectly," said Jack; but as he said so he fell
back on the grass, fainting from loss of blood which flowed from a large
wound on his head.

When the sailor's senses were restored, he found himself in a bed in the
clergyman's dwelling, with his head bandaged up, and his body a good
deal weaker than he had ever before felt it.  The clergyman took care of
him until he recovered; and you may be sure that he did not miss the
opportunity to urge the sailor to think of his soul, and to come to
Jesus Christ, the Saviour of the world, whose name is Love, and whose
teaching is all summed up in this, "Do unto others as ye would that they
should do unto you."

When Jack was quite recovered, the clergyman gave him some money to
enable him to reach his home without begging his way.

Now this case also occurred _before_ the Shipwrecked Mariners' Society
was instituted.  I cannot say that such cases of rough handling were
frequent; but cases in which true-blue shipwrecked tars were treated as
impostors were numerous, so that, in those days, knaves and rascals
often throve as wrecked seamen, while the genuine and unfortunate men
were often turned rudely from door to door.  This state of things does
not exist now.  It _cannot_ exist now, for honorary agents of the
society are to be found on every part of our coasts, so that the moment
a wrecked man touches the land, no matter whether he be a Briton or a
foreigner, he is at once taken care of, clothed, housed, fed, supplied
with a little money, and forwarded to his home, or to the nearest consul
of his nation.  The society has therefore accomplished two great and
good objects, for which the entire nation owes it a debt of gratitude;
it has rid the land of begging impostors clad in sailors' clothes, and
it has provided relief and assistance to the shipwrecked among our brave
and hardy seamen who are in every sense the bulwarks of our island, and
without whose labours, in the most perilous of all callings, Great
Britain would be one of the poorest and most uninfluential kingdoms on
the face of the earth.

But the society does a great deal more than that, for it comforts and
assists with money and advice hundreds and thousands of widows and
orphans whose husbands, fathers, or brothers have been drowned; and this
it does from year to year regularly--as regularly as the storms come and
scatter death and destruction on our shores.  It cannot be too earnestly
impressed on the people of England, and especially on those who dwell
inland, that at least a thousand lives are lost, two thousand ships are
wrecked, and two millions sterling are thrown away upon the coasts of
this country _every year_.

It is owing to the untiring energy of the National Lifeboat Institution
that those figures are not much, _very_ much higher; and it is the
Shipwrecked Mariners' Society that alleviates much, _very_ much, of the
woe resulting from storms and wrecks upon our shores.  Sailors and
fishermen know this well, and support both institutions largely.  I
would that ladies and gentlemen knew this better, and felt that they
have a positive duty incumbent on them in regard to these societies, for
they are not local but _national_.

"Now, madam," said I, again addressing myself pointedly to Miss
Flouncer, "would you like to hear a few interesting facts in reference
to the objects of this Society?"

Miss Flouncer smiled and undulated in order to express her readiness to
listen; at the same time she glanced at Sir Richard, who, I observed,
was sound asleep.  I also noticed that Mrs Bingley sniffed impatiently;
but I felt that I had a duty to perform, so with unalterable resolution
I prepared to continue my address, when Miss Peppy, who had been nearly
asleep during the greater part of the time I was speaking, suddenly said
to Miss Flouncer--

"Well, it _is_ a most surprising state of things that people _will_ go
to sea and get wrecked just to let societies like these spring up like
mushrooms all over the land.  For my part, I think I would rather do
without the things that ships bring to us from foreign lands than always
hear of those dreadful wrecks, and--but really one cannot expect the
world to alter just to please one, so I suppose people must go on being
drowned and saved by rocket-boats and lifeboats; so we had better retire
to the drawing-room, my dear."

The last observation was addressed to Mrs Bingley, who responded to it
with a bow of assent as she drew on her gloves.

Immediately after, the ladies rose, and I was thus constrained to
postpone my narration of interesting facts, until another opportunity
should offer.



CHAPTER SEVENTEEN.

MRS. GAFF ENDEAVOURS FRUITLESSLY TO UNDERSTAND THE NATURE OF CASH,
PRINCIPAL, AND INTEREST.

At first, as I have said, poor Mrs Gaff was quite inconsolable at the
bereavements she had sustained in the loss of her husband and son and
brother.  For a long time she refused to be comforted, or to allow her
spirit to be soothed by the visits, (the "angel visits" as she styled
them), of Lizzie Gordon, and the entrance of God's Word into her heart.

Much of the violence of the good woman's character was the result of
training and example on an impulsive and sanguine, yet kindly spirit.
She had loved Stephen and Billy with a true and ardent love, and she
could not forgive herself for what she styled her "cruelty to the dear
boy."  Neither could she prevail on herself to enjoy or touch a single
penny of the money which ought, she said, to have been her husband's.

Night after night would Mrs Gaff sit down by the cottage fireside to
rest after her day of hard toll, and, making Tottie sit down on a stool
at her feet, would take her head into her lap, and stroke the hair and
the soft cheek gently with her big rough hand, while she discoursed of
the good qualities of Stephen, and the bravery of her darling boy, to
whom she had been such a cruel monster in days gone by.

Poor Tottie, being of a sympathetic nature, would pat her mother's knee
and weep.  One evening while they were sitting thus she suddenly seemed
to be struck with a new idea.

"Maybe, mother," said she, "Daddy an' Billy will come back.  We've never
hearn that they's been drownded."

"Tottie," replied Mrs Gaff earnestly, "I've thoughten o' that afore
now."

Little more was said, but from that night Mrs Gaff changed her manner
and her practice.  She set herself earnestly and doggedly to prepare for
the return of her husband and child!

On the day that followed this radical change in her feelings and plans,
Mrs Gaff received a visit from Haco Barepoles.

"How d'ye find yerself to-day, Mrs Gaff?" said the big skipper, seating
himself carefully on a chair, at which he cast an earnest glance before
sitting down.

This little touch of anxiety in reference to the chair was the result of
many years of experience, which told him that his weight was too much
for most ordinary chairs, unless they were in sound condition.

"Well and hearty," replied Mrs Gaff, sitting down and seizing Tottie's
head, which she began to smooth.  She always smoothed Tottie, if she
were at hand, when she had nothing better to do.

"Heh!" exclaimed Haco, with a slight look of surprise.  "Glad to hear
it, lass.  Nothin' turned up, has there?"

"No, nothin'; but I've bin busy preparin' for Stephen and Billy comin'
home, an' that puts one in good spirits, you know."

A shade of anxiety crossed Haco's brow as he looked earnestly into the
woman's face, under the impression that grief had shaken her reason, but
she returned his glance with such a calm self-possessed look that he
felt reassured.

"I hope they'll come, lass," he said sadly; "what makes ye think they
will?"

"I feel _sure_ on it.  I feel it here," replied the woman, placing her
hand on her breast.  "Sweet Miss Lizzie Gordon and me prayed together
that the Lord would send 'em home if it was His will, an' ever since
then the load's bin off my heart."

Haco shook his head for a moment, then nodded it, and said cheerily,
"Well, I hope it may be so for your sake, lass.  An' what sort o'
preparations are ye goin' to make?"

Mrs Gaff smiled as she rose, and silently went to a cupboard, which
stood close to the Dutch clock with the horrified countenance, and took
therefrom a tea-caddy, which she set on the table with peculiar
emphasis.  Tottie watched her with an expression of awe, for she had
seen her mother weeping frequently over that tea-caddy, and believed
that it must certainly contain something very dreadful.

"The preparations," said Mrs Gaff, as she searched her pocket for the
key of the box, "will depend on what I'm able to afford."

"You'll be able to afford a good deal, then, if all that's reported be
true, for I'm told ye've got ten thousand pounds."

"Is that the sum?" asked Mrs Gaff, still searching for the key, which,
like all other keys in like circumstances, seemed to have gone in for a
game of hide-and-seek; "I'm sure I ought to know, for the lawyer took
great pains to teach me that; ay, there ye are," (to the key); "found ye
at last.  Now then, Haco, we'll have a look at the book and see."

To Tottie's surprise and no small disappointment, the only object that
came out of the mysterious tea-caddy was a small book, which Mrs Gaff,
however, seemed to look upon with respect, and to handle as if she
half-expected it would bite.

"There, that's my banker's book.  You read off the figures, Haco, for I
can't.  To be sure if I had wanted to know, Tottie could have told me,
but I haven't had the heart to look at it till to-day."

"Ten thousand, an' no mistake!" said Haco, looking at the figures with
