went through it like a railway train; came out upon the road beyond, and
reached a wooded part of the country where several roads and by-paths
diverged from the highway.  All this time Edwards kept close on our
heels.  He did not gain on us, but we felt that we did not distance him.
"Down here!" cried Jack, doubling suddenly into a lane.

We passed a small bridge that crossed a mill-lake.  Beyond, there was a
farm-yard.  The path-way was high, and we could look down on the tops of
the stacks.  One of these, a haystack, stood about ten feet from the low
wall that skirted the road.  It had been half pulled down, and the hay
was loose.  Without a word or warning Jack sprang completely across this
space, turned right over, and plunged head first into the hay.  I
followed instantly, and disappeared.  We lay for a few seconds perfectly
still, and heard Edwards pass at full speed.  Then we struggled out and
watched him out of sight.

Sliding down, we regained the lane, returned to the high-road, and
continued our flight.

We saw no more of Edwards.

About eight miles from my father's house there was a small seaport town.
We made for this, and reached it just as the sun rose in all his golden
glory on the distant edge of the sleeping sea.



STORY TWO, CHAPTER 3.

On entering the village we found it in a state of unusual bustle.  I had
often been there before, and had thought it rather a quiet place for a
seaport.  But now there was a sort of bustling activity and an air of
mystery about it that I could not understand.  I mentioned my feelings
to Jack, but he did not answer me, which was a piece of rudeness so
unusual, that I could only suppose that his mind was so deeply affected
with the circumstances, in which we had placed ourselves, as to render
him somewhat absent.

On arriving at the chief, indeed the only, inn of the place, we
discovered the reason of all the bustle.  A strange ship had arrived the
night before--a large ship, fitted out for an expedition to some distant
part of the world.  She had come to complete her supply of provisions
and to engage a few extra hands.

Here then was a fortunate opportunity!  We asked at once where we could
find the captain.  He was in the bar-room of the inn.  We entered it and
found him there, standing with his back to the fire and a coat-tail
under each arm.  He was a big fat man, with a savage expression of
countenance, and ragged head and beard, and a red nose.

"Sir," said Jack, "we wish to ship with you."

The captain stared, took a pencil-case out of his pocket, picked his
teeth therewith, and surveyed us from head to foot.

"Oh, you do, do you?  You wish to ship with me?"

"Yes."

"Suppose I don't want you."

"Then we shall have to try elsewhere."

The captain smiled grimly, shut up the pencil-case, and said--

"What can ye do?"

"We can read, and write, and count," said I, taking the words out of
Jack's mouth; for I felt that his brusque manner of replying was not
calculated to commend us to the captain.

"Oh, you can read, and write, and count, can ye?" repeated the captain,
with deep sarcasm.  "If ye had said ye could feed, and fight, and shout,
it would have bin more to the purpose."

"Perhaps we can do a little of that sort of thing, too," suggested Jack,
with a broad grin.

"Hah?" ejaculated the captain.  "Wot else can ye do?"

"Oh, anything," said Jack.

"I gin'rally find," observed the captain, "that w'en a boy says he can
do anything, he very soon proves that he can do nothing."

"Well, I don't mean that exactly," rejoined Jack; "I mean we can _try_
anything."

"Ha! that's more to the pint.  Where did ye come from?"

We looked at each other.  "That," said I, "is a matter of no importance
to any one but ourselves.  We have run away from home, and we want to go
to sea as fast as possible.  If you are willing to take us, we are
willing to go.  What say you?"

"Run away! ho! ho!--run away!" said the captain, chuckling; "you are
just the lads I want.  Nothing like runaway boys for me.  I wouldn't
give a pinch of snuff for your good boys that do wot they're bid.
Commend me to the high-spirited fellers that runs away, and that folk
are so wicked as to call bad boys.  That's the sort o' stuff that suits
_our_ service."

I did not by any means relish the manner and tone, in which all this was
said: so I asked him what particular service he belonged to.

"You'll know that time enough," he replied, laughing; "but after all,
why shouldn't I tell ye? there's nothing to conceal.  We're a
discovery-ship; we're goin' to look for Sir John Franklin's expedition,
and after we've found it we're going to try the North Pole, and then go
right through the Nor'-west passage, down by Behring's Straits, across
the Pacific, touchin' at the Cannibal Islands in passin', and so on to
China.  Havin' revictualled there, we'll bear away for Japan,
Haustralia, Cape o' Good Hope, and the West Indies, and come tearin'
across the Atlantic with the Gulf-stream to England!  Will that suit
ye?"

It may seem strange, and the reader will hardly believe me when I say,
that, transparently absurd though this statement was, nevertheless I
believed every word of it--and so did Jack.  I saw that by his glowing
eye and heightened colour.

"And when do you sail?"  I inquired joyfully.

"In half an hour; so get aboard, boys, and don't give so much tongue.
I've other matters to mind just now.  Come, be off!"

We retreated precipitately to the door.

"What's her name?" inquired Jack, looking back.

"`The Ring-tailed Smasher,'" cried the captain, fiercely.

"The what?"

"`The Ring-tailed Smasher,'" roared the captain, seizing the poker.

We vanished.  In five minutes we were on board the ship.  To this hour I
have no remembrance of how we got on board.  My brain swam with intense
excitement.  I felt as if I were flying, not walking, as I ran about the
deck and clambered up the rigging.

Shortly after, the captain came aboard.  The rope that attached the
vessel to the quay was cast off, the sails flew out as if by magic, and
the shore began to fall rapidly astern.

It was now, for the first time, that a full sense of what I had done
came over me.  I leaned over the stern of the ship, and gazed at my
native shore as it grew fainter in the distance, until the familiar
hills became a mere line of blue on the horizon, and were finally
blotted from my view by the blinding tears that sprang suddenly to my
eyes.  Oh! the agony of that moment I shall never forget.  The words
that Jack had quoted to me the night before--"Honour thy father and thy
mother"--seemed to be stamped in letters of fire within my brain.  I
felt keenly that, in a moment of passionate self-will, I had done that
which would cause me the deepest sorrow all my life.

In that dark hour I forgot all my romantic notions of travel in foreign
lands; I cared not a straw for hunting, or fighting, or wild adventures.
I would have cheerfully given worlds, had I possessed them, to be
permitted to undo the past--to hasten to my dear father's feet, and
implore forgiveness of the evil that I had done.  But regret was now
unavailing.  The land soon sank below the horizon, and, ere many hours
had passed, our ship was scudding before a stiff breeze and leaping
wildly over the waves of the Atlantic Ocean.



STORY TWO, CHAPTER 4.

"Ho! tumble up there, tumble up!  All hands, ahoy! tumble up!  Look
alive, lads; there's work to do, my hearties!"

Such were the words, uttered in the most terrifically violent bass
tones, that awoke me on the first morning after I went to sea.
Instantly all the men around me leaped out of their hammocks.  They were
all half-dressed, and I noticed that the greater part of them completed
their toilet in the short interval between quitting their hammocks and
gaining the deck.  Jack and I had lain down in our clothes, so we were
on deck almost as soon as the others.

Here the most unexpected sights assailed us.  It seemed to me as if a
miraculous change had taken place on everybody and everything during the
night.  The ship when she had set sail was as untidy and lumbered about
the decks as a merchantman usually is on quitting port.  Now everything
was clean, in its place, snugly fastened, and in order.  The sails
appeared to have undergone some modification.  I fancied, too, that the
masts raked aft a good deal more than they had done, and round the foot
of them were ranged muskets, pistols, cutlasses, and boarding-pikes,
where masses of cordage and handspikes had been before.  The hencoops
had vanished, and in their place were rows of brass carronades, while in
the centre of the deck an enormous swivel gun occupied the place, on
which the long-boat had formerly rested.  Even the captain seemed to
have changed.  His costume was somewhat Eastern in its character, and
his whole aspect was much more ferocious than when I first saw him.

Vague and terrible suspicions crossed my mind as I viewed these
wonderful transformations; but I had no time to indulge them, for the
men had hastened with the promptitude of men-of-war's men to their
stations, leaving Jack and me alone in the middle of the deck.

"Hallo, boys!" shouted the captain, "no idlers allowed aboard this ship.
Here, stand by this gun, and lend a hand with the ropes when you're
told to.  Obey orders,--that's the only duty I've got to lay on you."

We hastened to the gun pointed out, and while I was standing there
waiting for orders, I looked over the side, and, for the first time,
became aware of the cause of these proceedings.

About two miles to leeward of us, just off our larboard bow, I saw a
large ship running under a press of canvas.  She was a huge
clumsy-looking merchantman, and I heard our first mate say she was an
East-Indiaman.

"Then why chase her?" thought I, "and why these warlike preparations?"

It struck me at the time, I remember, that the captain must have guessed
my thoughts, for he glanced at me quickly, and then turning to the mate,
with a sarcastic smile, said--

"I thought you had better sight than you seem to have.  In my judgment
that's a Russian merchantman, and as we happen to be at war with Russia
just now I'll take the liberty of overhauling her."

Instead of replying to this, the mate burst into a loud laugh in which,
strangely enough, he was joined by the captain and all the men who were
within hearing.  I felt uneasy at this, and expressed my feelings in a
whisper to Jack, who shook his head and looked at me mysteriously, but
said nothing.

I felt that, even though we were at war with Russia, we, as a
discovery-ship, had no right whatever to interfere in the capacity of a
war-ship, and I was about to remonstrate with the captain at all
hazards, when my thoughts were suddenly changed by the order being given
to fire a shot across the stranger's bows.  The gun at which I was
stationed was run out.

"Stand by!" cried the captain.

"Fire!"

In the excitement of the moment, and without knowing what I had to do,
though deeply impressed with the feeling that something ought to be done
when an order was given, I pulled violently at the rope which I had in
my hand; the effect of which was to move the gun very slightly when it
exploded.  The result was that the ball, instead of passing well ahead
of the strange vessel, passed close to its bow, and carried away half of
the bowsprit.

The captain turned on me a face absolutely blazing with wrath.  He
seized a handspike, and I thought he was about to dash out my brains on
the spot.  He hissed at me between his clinched teeth; then, suddenly
bursting into a shout of fiendish laughter, he cried--

"Well, well, after all there's no harm done.  It'll make them understand
that we don't mean to trifle with 'em.  Clear the boarding-pikes there.
Are the grappling-irons ready?"

"Ay, ay, sir."

By this time the stranger had hove-to, and we were bearing down on her
so rapidly that a few minutes more would bring us alongside.  Our men
stood ready for action.  They were the worst-looking set of scoundrels I
ever beheld.

"Ship ahoy!" shouted our captain as we drew near, "what ship's that?"

A smart young officer leaped on the bulwarks, and cried, "Come alongside
and I'll tell you.  Show your colours."

At the word our colours went up, as colours are usually hoisted, rolled
up like a ball.  I watched with intense interest, for I felt that now at
last I should know our true character.  The ball of what seemed to be
dark-blue bunting reached the masthead and hung for one instant--then
its folds fell heavily, and were swept out by the breeze.  The flag was
black, and in the centre were a white skull and crossbones!

I almost fainted at the sight.  I looked at Jack, who stood beside me.
He was as white as a sheet; but his lips were firmly compressed, and his
brows knitted.

"Do we deserve what we have got?" he muttered in a deep, sad voice.

I did not reply; but my conscience answered, "We do--at least I do."

We were now hove-to about a pistol-shot to leeward of the ship, and our
captain, leaping on the bulwark, cried, with a dreadful oath, "Send your
gig alongside instantly with your captain and papers.  If you don't look
sharp I'll blow you out of the water."

He had scarcely finished speaking, when a loud shout rent the air, and
the bulwarks of the strange vessel swarmed with soldiers.  At the same
moment, twenty concealed ports flew open and twenty heavy guns were run
out.

Our captain gave the word, "Fire!" as he leaped on the deck and rushed
to the wheel.  The word must have been given at the same moment on board
the chase, for both broadsides burst simultaneously from the vessels'
sides with a deafening crash that sounded ten times louder and more
terrible than the loudest thunder I ever heard.  We were so near that
the combined volumes of smoke completely blinded and almost suffocated
me.  I fancied, for a moment, that our powder-magazine had blown up.

The thunder of the broadsides was followed by the most appalling shrieks
I ever heard, and by the ceaseless rattle of musketry as the soldiers
opened on us with deadly precision.  Through the smoke I saw men falling
around me, and the decks were immediately covered with blood, while
bullets and splinters of wood whistled round my head like hail.

I was stunned.  I felt like one in a horrid dream.  Gradually the smoke
cleared away, and then I saw that our captain had put down the helm and
our vessel was sheering off to leeward under full sail.  The rapidity
with which everything was done quite took away my breath.  Before we
were out of gun-shot the decks had been cleared, the dead thrown into
the sea, the wounded carried below, and the decks washed with buckets of
water.

Just then I thought of Jack, and looked round in haste.  He was not
there!  I rushed below! he was not in his hammock.  In an agony of
anxiety I went down into the horrible den of blood where our surgeon was
attending to the wounded.  Here, amid groaning and dying men, I found my
friend stretched in a cot with a blanket over him, his handsome face was
very pale, and his eyes were closed when I approached.  Going down on my
knees beside him, while my heart fluttered with an inexpressible feeling
of dread, I whispered his name.

He opened his large eyes slowly, and a sweet sad smile lit up his face
for one moment, as he took me by the hand.

"O Jack!  Jack, my friend--my brother--are you wounded?"  I asked.

"Yes," he replied, in a faint voice; "I'm badly hurt, I fear."

"Has the doctor dressed your wound?"

"He finished the--the--operation just before you came down."

"Operation!"  I whispered, while a feeling of deadly sickness came over
me.  "Where--what--" I could not go further.

Poor Jack knew what I wished to ask.  He gently lifted part of the
blanket, and I felt as if I had been stunned by an electric shock on
observing that his right leg had been amputated above the knee.  For
some moments I could not speak.  I could not move.  It was with
difficulty that I could draw my labouring breath.  Suddenly I clasped my
hands--

"O Jack! my beloved! my--" I gasped.  My throat was parched.  For one
moment I thought I was dying.  Suddenly I started up, uttered a great
agonising cry, and fell down on the deck.  Then a flood of tears sprang
into my burning eyes, and I sobbed as if my heart would burst asunder.
I did not try to check this.  It was too precious a relief to my
insupportable agony.  I crept close to my friend's cot, took his hand
gently, and, laying my cheek upon it, wept there as I never wept before.
Jack's former advice now came back to me vividly, and his words of
caution, "Honour thy father and thy mother," burned deep into my
throbbing brain, while my accusing conscience whispered unceasingly,
"You brought him to this--you brought him to this!"  My sorrow was
broken in upon rudely by the first mate.

"What are you doin' here, you young blackguard?" he cried, seizing me by
the collar, and dragging me to the foot of the ladder that led out of
this bloody den.  "Skulking, eh!  _I'll_ teach you to skulk; _I'll_ cure
you o' that, my lad!  _I'll_ tan your skin for you," and at each
emphatic word he gave a blow with a rope's end that raised a bar of
livid flesh across my back.  "There," he cried, giving me a final cut,
and hurling me up the first few steps of the ladder, "on deck with you!"

I did not hesitate to comply.  I gained the deck with unusual rapidity,
smarting with pain and burning with indignation.  But what I saw going
on there made me almost forget my pain.  The great swivel gun amidships
was being cleared for action, and our captain was giving orders beside
it as coolly and quietly as if nothing unusual had occurred that day.

I was deeply impressed for a few minutes with this cool, calm
indifference, which characterised the men as well as the captain; but
when I had considered a little, I came to understand that they were used
to battle and bloodshed, and that therefore it was quite natural.  After
that I ceased to wonder at anything.  Indeed, the power to be astonished
seemed to leave my breast altogether, and from that moment I regarded
everything that happened on the pirate vessel as being quite what might
be expected--mere matter of course.

I now observed that we had not yet done with the supposed Russian.  We
had merely run astern out of range of her guns, but not beyond the range
of our large swivel.  In a few minutes it was ready.  The captain
sighted the gun, and gave the word "Fire!"

The ship quivered with the shock, and so large was the ball that I could
distinctly trace its flight.  It fell short a few yards.  "So, so,"
muttered the captain.  "The next will do its work."

He was right.  The next ball struck the rails that ran round the poop,
carried away the binnacle, and raked the upper deck from stern to stem.
I could see it quite plainly with the glass.

"Hurrah!" shouted some of the crew.

"Silence, you babies," growled the captain; "time enough to crow when
our work's done."

The men who had cheered fell back abashed.  I noticed that they were
chiefly the younger men of the crew, whose countenances were not yet
utterly unhumanised by crime.

"Load."

"Ready."

"Fire!"

Again the huge iron mass sprang from the cannon's mouth, and rushed
along its deadly track.  It struck the top of a wave, and bounding up
passed through the sails and cordage of the Russian, cutting one or two
of the lighter spars, and also the main topsail halyards, which caused
the yard to come rattling down, and rendered the sail useless.  Seeing
this, the pirate captain ordered sail to be reduced in order to keep at
a sufficient distance astern to render the guns of the chase useless.
Every shot from our gun now told with terrible effect.  We could see the
splinters fly as every ball entered the ship's stern, or swept her deck,
or crashed through her rigging.  Presently she turned her broadside to
us.

"She don't mean to waste her ammunition, surely," remarked the captain,
with a sneer.

