pupils are a great many for one person to teach. Your mother,
however, has promised that the master from the village shall come up
to instruct you all in arithmetic, and your French master and your
music master will, of course, attend here as usual. I trust,
therefore, that by more attention on the part of my pupils I may be
able to continue the heavy task which I have undertaken. What I want
to impress upon you children"--here she turned abruptly to the little
Delaneys--"is that lessons are lessons, and play is play. During
lesson-time I allow _no_ wandering thoughts, I allow no attempts at
shirking your duties. The tasks I set you will be carefully chosen
according to your different abilities, and I can assure you beforehand
that learned they must be. If I find that they are not carefully
prepared I shall punish you. By being attentive, by making the best of
your time, you can easily get through the lessons appointed you, and
then when they are over I hope you will thoroughly enjoy your time of
play. Now, all of you sit quiet. We will begin with a lesson from
English history."

Miss Ramsay then began to lecture in her usual style. She was really
an excellent teacher, and Iris found what she said very interesting.
She began to tell about the reign of Queen Elizabeth, and she made
that time quite live to the intelligent little girl. But Apollo had
not nearly come to the reign of Elizabeth in his English history. He,
consequently, could not follow the story, and soon began to look out
of the window, and to count the flies which were buzzing in the hot
sunshine on the window-panes. When Miss Ramsay addressed a sudden
question to him he was unable to reply. She passed it on to Ann, who
instantly gave the correct answer. But Apollo felt himself to be in
his governess' black books. As this was the first morning of lessons,
she was not going to be severe, and, telling the little boy to take
his history away to another table, desired him to read it all
carefully through.

"I will question you to-morrow about what I told you to-day," she
said. "Now, remember, you must tell me the whole story of the Spanish
Armada to-morrow."

"But I have not gone farther than the reign of John," said Apollo.

"Don't answer me, Apollo," said Miss Ramsay; "you are to read this
part of your history book. Now, sit with your back to the others and
begin."

Apollo shrugged his shoulders. For a short time he made an effort to
read his dull history, but then once again his eyes sought the
sunshine and the flies on the window panes.

Meanwhile Diana, Orion, and the two little Dolman boys were in a class
by themselves, busily engaged over a geography lesson.

Diana had not the smallest wish to become acquainted with any portion
of the globe where she was not herself residing. Her thoughts were all
full of the bow and arrow which Apollo had carefully hidden in a
little dell at the entrance of the wood, on the previous night. She
was wondering when she could run off to secure the prize, and when she
would have an opportunity of punishing her enemies. She began to think
that it would be really necessary to give Miss Ramsay a prick with the
fatal arrow. Miss Ramsay was turning out to be most disagreeable.

Meanwhile, the heat of the room, and a curious giddy sensation in her
head, caused it to sink lower and lower, until finally it rested on
her book, and little Diana was off in the land of dreams.

A sharp tap on her shoulders roused her with a start. Miss Ramsay was
standing over her, looking very angry.

"Come, Diana! this will never do," she cried. "How dare you go to
sleep! Do you know your geography?"

"P'ease, I doesn't know what jog-aphy is," said Diana.

"What a very naughty little girl you are! Have not I been taking pains
to explain it all to you? You will have to stay in the schoolroom when
lessons are over for quite five minutes. Now, stand up on your chair,
hold your book in your hands, don't look out of the window, keep your
eyes fixed on your book, and then you will soon learn what is required
of you."

Diana obeyed this mandate with a very grave face.

In about ten minutes Miss Ramsay called her to her side.

"Well, do you know your lesson?" she asked.

"Kite perfect," replied Diana.

"Well, let me hear you. What is the capital of England?"

"Dublin Bay," replied Diana, with avidity.

"You are a very naughty child. How can you tell me you know your
lesson? See, I will ask you one more question. What is the capital of
Scotland?"

"Ireland," answered Diana, in an earnest voice.

Miss Ramsay shut the book with a bang. Diana looked calmly at her.

"I thought I knew it," she said. "I's sossy. I don't think I care to
go on learning jog-aphy; it don't suit me." She stretched herself,
gave utterance to a big yawn, and half turned her back on her
teacher. "You is getting in temper," she continued, "and that isn't
wight; I don't care to learn jog-aphy."

What serious consequences might not have arisen at that moment it is
hard to tell, had not Orion caused a sudden diversion. He fell off his
chair in a heap on the floor.

Iris sprang from her seat and ran to the rescue.

"I'm drefful sick," said Orion; "I think it was the lollipops and
ginger-beer. Please let me go to bed."

"Lollipops and ginger-beer!" cried Miss Ramsay in alarm. "What does
the child mean?"




CHAPTER XII.

A BABY'S HONOR.


When Miss Ramsay repeated Orion's words there was a dead silence for a
full half minute in the schoolroom. Had anyone noticed them, they
might have observed Philip and Conrad turn very pale; but all eyes
were directed to little Orion, who was lying on the floor, pressing
his hand to his stomach and moaning bitterly.

"I'm drefful sick," he said; "I wish I had not taken that horrid
ginger-beer."

"But where did you get ginger-beer?" said Miss Ramsay, finding her
voice at last. "Get up this minute, Orion, and come to me.

"Really," continued the good lady to herself, "there must be something
uncanny in those outlandish names; I don't think I can manage these
children. Orion is as bad as Diana, and she is the greatest handful I
ever came across.

"Come here, Orion," continued the governess, "and tell me what is the
matter with your stomach."

"Pain," answered the little boy, "crampy pain. It's the ginger-beer.
I'm drefful sick; I can't do no more lessons."

"Let me put him to bed," said Diana; "let me go nurse him. I'll sit on
his bed and talk to him. He is a very naughty boy, but I know how to
manage him. Come 'long, Orion; come 'long wid sister Di." She grasped
the little boy firmly with one of her own stout little hands, and
pulled him up on to his feet.

"Diana, you are not to interfere," said Miss Ramsay. "Come, Orion;
come and explain what is the matter."

"Lollipops," moaned Orion, "and ginger-beer. Oh, I did like the
lollipops, and I was so thirsty I thought I'd never leave off drinking
ginger-beer."

"But where did you get lollipops and ginger-beer? Mrs. Dolman never
allows the children to take such unwholesome things. What can you
mean? Where did you get them?"

To this question Orion refused to make any reply. Baby as he was, he
had a confused sort of idea of honor. Philip and Conrad had told him
that he was on no account whatever to mention the fact that they had
gone away fishing on the previous afternoon, that they had visited a
little shop and spent some of Orion's own money. Philip and Conrad had
no money of their own, but before he parted with the children, Mr.
Delaney had given the two elder ones five shillings apiece, and the
two younger ones half a crown, and Orion's half-crown had seemed great
wealth to Philip and Conrad, and had accordingly induced them to treat
the little fellow with marked consideration. The whole of the money
was now gone. How, Orion had not the slightest idea. He only knew that
his pockets were empty and that he felt very sick and very miserable.

He shut up his little lips now and raised his eyes, with a sort of
scowl in their expression, to Miss Ramsay's face.

"Where did you get the lollipops and ginger-beer?" repeated the
governess.

"That's my own business," said Orion. "I'm drefful sick; I want to go
to bed."

"You are a very naughty little boy," said Miss Ramsay.

"I think him a brick," whispered Philip to Conrad.

"Hush, for goodness' sake!" whispered back Conrad.

"I want to go to bed," repeated Orion. "I'm drefful sick; I'm quite
tired of telling you. I have got a headache and a pain in my tumtum."
Again he pressed his hand to his stomach and looked imploringly around
him.

"What's all this fuss?" here burst from Diana. "Why can't Orion go to
bed? New teacher, you has a very queer way of managing sildrens. When
we was at home we went to bed when we had pains. I can't underland
you, not one little bit."

"Come with me this moment, Orion," said Miss Ramsay. "Diana, if you
speak a word except in the French tongue, you shall be kept in during
all the afternoon."

Orion and Miss Ramsay left the room, and the other children stared at
one another. The three Dolman girls sat down to their books. Philip
and Conrad thought it best to follow their example. Iris and Apollo
looked wistfully from one to the other, but did not dare to speak; but
Diana, walking boldly over to the nearest window, amused herself by
touching each fly in turn with the tip of her small fat finger.

"They don't like it, poor darlin's," she said to herself, "but I don't
mean to hurt 'em. I wonder now if I could get away to the wood and get
hold of my bow and arrow. Miss Wamsay must be shotted as well as the
others. It's awful what I has got to do."

Apollo sank dejectedly down before the account of the Spanish Armada,
and Iris, with tears slowly rising to her eyes, turned over her lesson
books. At last the impulse to do something was more than she could
stand, and, rising from her seat, she edged her way to the door. Mary
called after her in French to know what she was going to do, but Iris
would make no reply. She reached the door, opened it, and then ran as
fast as she could to the nursery.

There she found Simpson putting Orion to bed. The little boy was
crying bitterly.

"As soon as ever you lie down, master, you have got to drink off this
medicine," said Simpson.

"I won't touch it--horrid stuff!" said Orion.

"But you must, sir. I'll allow no 'won'ts' in my nursery. Little boys
have got to do what they are told. If you make any fuss I'll just hold
your nose and then you'll be obliged to open your mouth, and down the
medicine will go. Come, come, sir, none of those tears. You have been
a very naughty little boy, and the pain is sent you as a punishment."

"Oh, there you are, Iris!" said Orion. "Oh, Iris! I am so glad. Please
be a mother to me--please put your arms round me--please kiss me,
Iris."

Iris flew to the little fellow, clasped him in her arms, and held his
hot little forehead against her cheek.

"Simpson," she said, turning to the nurse, "I know quite well how to
manage him. Won't you let me do it?"

"I am sure, Miss Iris, I'd be only too thankful," said the perplexed
woman. "There's Miss Ramsay and my mistress in no end of a state, and
Master Orion as obstinate as a boy can be. There's something gone
wrong in this house since you four children arrived, and I really
don't know how I am to stand it much longer. Not that I have any
special fault to find with you, Miss Iris, nor, indeed, for that
matter, with Master Apollo; but it's the two younger ones. They are
handfuls, and no mistake."

"I like being a handfu' 'cept when I'm sick," said Orion. "I don't
want to be a handfu' to-day. Please, Iris, don't mek me take that
horrid medicine."

"He must take it, Miss Iris; he won't be better till he do," said the
nurse, lifting up the glass as she spoke and stirring the contents
with a spoon. "Come, now, sir, be a brave boy. Just open your mouth
and get it down. Then you'll drop asleep, and when you wake you will
probably be quite well."

Orion pressed his lips very tightly together.

"You'll take the medicine for me, Orion?" said Iris.

"No, I can't," he moaned.

"Oh, but, darling! just try and think. Remember you are a giant--a
grand, great giant, with your girdle and your sword, and this medicine
is just an enemy that you have got to conquer. Here now; open your
mouth and get it down. Think of mother, Orion. She would like you to
take it."

Orion still kept his mouth very firmly shut, but he opened his sweet,
dark eyes and looked full at his sister.

"Would mother really like it?" he said at last, in a whisper.

"Of course; it would make her ever so happy."

"And will she know about it, Iris?"

"I think she will. Maybe she is in the room with us just now."

"Oh, lor'! what awful talk to say to the child," murmured Simpson to
herself.

"If I really thought mother could see, and if I really thought--"
began the little boy.

"Yes, yes, she can see!" said Iris, going on her knees and clasping
both the little fellow's hands in one of hers. "She can see, she does
know, and she wants her own brave giant to be a giant to the end. Now,
here is the enemy; open your mouth, conquer it at one gulp."

"Well, to be sure," whispered Simpson.

Orion, however, did not glance at Simpson. He gazed solemnly round the
room as if he really saw someone; then he fixed his brown eyes on his
sister's face, then he opened his mouth very wide. She instantly took
the cup and held it to the little lips. Orion drained off the nauseous
draught and lay back, panting, on his pillow.

"It was a big thing to conquer. I am a fine giant," he said, when he
returned the empty cup to Iris.

"Yes, you are a splendid old chap," she replied.

At that moment Mrs. Dolman and Miss Ramsay entered the room.

"Has Orion taken his medicine?" said Mrs. Dolman. "Iris, my dear, what
are you doing here?"
