this eveng which meanders thro a butifull Vallie of great extent, I
call after Sgt Pryor the countrey on the Lard Side a high mountain Saw
Several Small rapids to day the river Keep its width and appear to be
deep, my feet is verry much brused & cut walking over the flint, &
constantly Stuck full Prickley pear thorns, I puled out 17 by the light
of the fire to night We camped on the river Same (Lard) Side Musqutors
verry troublesom.




[Lewis, July 20, 1805]
Saturday 20 h 1805.
Set out early this morning as usual, currant strong, we therefore
employ the toe rope when ever the banks permit the use of it; the water
is reather deep for the seting pole in most places. at 6 A.M. the hills
retreated from the river and the valley became wider than we have seen
it since we entered the mountains. some scattering timber on the river
and in the valley. consisting of the narrowleafed Cottonwood aspin &
pine. vas numbers of the several species of currants goosberries and
service berries; of each of these I preserved some seeds. I found a
black currant which I thought preferable in flavor to the yellow. this
currant is really a charming fruit and I am confident would be prefered
at our markets to any currant now cultivated in the U States. we killed
an Elk this morning which was very acceptable to us. through the valley
which we entered early in the morning a large creek flows from the
mountains and discharges itself into the river behind an island on
Stard. side about 15 yds. wide this we called Potts's Creek after John
Potts one of our party. about 10 A.M. we saw the smoke arrose as if the
country had been set on fire up the valley of this creek about 7 ms.
distant we were at a loss to determine whether it had been set on fire
by the natives as a signall among themselves on discovering us, as is
their custom or whether it had been set on fire by Capt. C. and party
accedentally. the first however proved to be the fact, they had
unperceived by us discovered Capt. Clark's party or mine, and had set
the plain on fire to allarm the more distant natives and fled
themselves further into the interior of the mountains. this evening we
found the skin of an Elk and part of the flesh of the anamal which
Capt. C. had left near the river at the upper side of the valley where
he assended the mountain with a note informing me of his transactions
and that he should pass the mounts which lay just above us and wate our
arrival at some convenient place on the river. the other elk which
Capt. C. had killed we could not find. about 2 in the evening we had
passed through a range of low mountains and the country bacame more
open again, tho still broken and untimbered and the bottoms not very
extensive. we encamped on the Lard. side near a spring on a high bank
the prickly pears are so abundant that we could scarcely find room to
lye. just above our camp the river is again closed in by the Mouts. on
both sides. I saw a black woodpecker today about the size of the lark
woodpecker as black as a crow. I indevoured to get a shoot at it but
could not. it is a distinct species of woodpecker; it has a long tail
and flys a good deel like the jay bird.

This morning Capt. Clark set out early and proceeded on through a
valley leaving the river about six miles to his left; he fell in with
an old Indian road which he pursued untill it struck the river about 18
miles from his camp of the last evening just above the entrance of a
large creek which we call white paint Creek. the party were so much
fortiegued with their march and their feet cut with the flint and
perced with the prickly pears untill they had become so painfull that
he proceeded but little further before he determined to encamp on the
river and wait my arrival.--Capt. C. saw a smoke today up the valley of
Pryor's creek which was no doubt caused by the natives likewise. he
left signals or signs on his rout in order to inform the indians should
they pursue his trale that we were not their enemies, but white men and
their friends.--cloth &c




[Clark, July 20, 1805]
July 20th Satturday 1805
a fine morning we proceded on thro a valley leaveing the river about 6
miles to our left and fell into an Indian roade which took us to the
river above the mo. of a Creek 18 miles The Misquetors verry troublesom
my man York nearly tired out, the bottoms of my feet blistered. I
observe a Smoke rise to our right up the Valley of the last Creek about
12 miles distant, The Cause of this Smoke I can't account for certainly
tho think it probable that the Indians have heard the Shooting of the
Partey below and Set the Praries or Valey on fire to allarm their
Camps; Supposeing our party to be a war party comeing against them, I
left Signs to Shew the Indians if they Should come on our trail that we
were not their enemeys. Camped on the river, the feet of the men with
me So Stuck with Prickley pear & cut with the Stones that they were
Scerseley able to march at a Slow gate this after noon




[Lewis, July 21, 1805]
Sunday July 21st 1805.
Set out early this morning and passed a bad rappid where the river
enters the mountain about 1 m. from our camp of last evening the Clifts
high and covered with fragments of broken rocks. the current strong; we
employed the toe rope principally, and also the pole as the river is
not now so deep but reather wider and much more rapid our progress was
therefore slow and laborious. we saw three swans this morning, which
like the geese have not yet recovered the feathers of the wing and
could not fly we killed two of them the third escaped by diving and
passed down with the current; they had no young ones with them
therefore presume they do not breed in this country these are the first
we have seen on the river for a great distance. we daily see great
numbers of gees with their young which are perfectly feathered except
the wings which are deficient in both young and old. my dog caught
several today, as he frequently dose. the young ones are very fine, but
the old gees are poor and unfit for uce. saw several of the large brown
or sandhill Crain today with their young. the young Crain is as large
as a turkey and cannot fly they are of a bright red bey colour or that
of the common deer at this season. this bird feeds on grass prinsipally
and is found in the river bottoms. the grass near the river is lofty
and green that of the hill sides and high open grounds is perfectly dry
and appears to be scorched by the heat of the sun. the country was
rough mountainous & much as that of yesterday untill towards evening
when the river entered a beautifull and extensive plain country of
about 10 or 12 miles wide which extended upwards further that the eye
could reach this valley is bounded by two nearly parallel ranges of
high mountains which have their summits partially covered with snow.
below the snowey region pine succeeds and reaches down their sides in
some parts to the plain but much the greater portion of their surfaces
is uncovered with timber and expose either a barren sterile soil
covered with dry parched grass or black and rugged rocks. the river
immediately on entering this valley assumes a different aspect and
character, it spreads to a mile and upwards in width crouded with
Islands, some of them large, is shallow enough for the use of the
seting pole in almost every part and still more rappid than before;
it's bottom is smooth stones and some large rocks as it has been since
we have entered the mountains. the grass in these extensive bottoms is
green and fine, about 18 inches or 2 feet high. the land is a black
rich loam and appears very fertile. we encamped in this beatiful valley
on the Lard. side the party complain of being much fatiegued with this
days travel. we killed one deer today.--This morning we passed a bold
creek 28 yds. wide which falls in on Stard. side. it has a handsome and
an extensive valley. this we called Pryor's Creek after Sergt. (John)
Pryor one of our party. I also saw two fesants today of a dark brown
colour much larger than the phesant of the U States.

this morning Capt. Clark having determined to hunt and wait my arrival
somewhere about his preset station was fearfull that some indians might
still be on the river above him sufficiently near to hear the report of
his guns and therefore proceeded up, the river about three miles and
not finding any indians nor discovering any fresh appearance of them
returned about four miles below and fixed his camp near the river;
after refreshing themselves with a few hours rest they set out in
different directions to hunt. Capt C. killed a buck and Fields a buck
and doe. he caught a young curlooe which was nearly feathered. the
musquetoes were equally as troublesome to them as to ourselves this
evening; tho some hours after dark the air becomes so cold that these
insects disappear. the men are all fortunately supplyed with musquetoe
biers otherwise it would be impossible for them to exist under the
fatiegues which they daily encounter without their natural rest which
they could not obtain for those tormenting insects if divested of their
biers. timber still extreemly scant on the river but there is more in
this valley than we have seen since we entered the mountains; the
creeks which fall into the river are better supplyed with this article
than the river itself.-

we saw a number of trout today since the river has become more shallow;
also caught a fish of a white colour on the belly and sides and of a
bluish cast on the back which had been accedentally wounded by a
setting pole. it had a long pointed mouth which opened somewhat like
the shad.




[Clark, July 21, 1805]
July 21st Sunday 1805
a fine morning our feet So brused and Cut that I deturmined to delay
for the Canoes, & if possible kill Some meat by the time they arrived,
all the Creeks which fall into the Missouri on the Std. Side Since
entering the Mountains have extencive Valies of open Plain. the river
bottoms Contain nothing larger than a Srub untill above the last Creek
the Creeks & runs have timber on them generally, the hills or mountains
are in Some places thickly covered with pine & Cedar &c. &c. I
proceeded on about 3 miles this morning finding no fresh Indian Sign
returned down the river four miles and Camped, turned out to hunt for
Some meat, which if we are Suckessfull will be a Seasonable Supply for
the partey assending. emence quantities of Sarvice buries, yellow, red,
Purple & black Currents ripe and Superior to any I ever tasted
particularly the yellow & purple kind. Choke Cheries are Plenty; Some
Goose buries--The wild rose Continue the Willow more abundant no Cotton
wood of the Common kind Small birds are plenty, Some Deer, Elk, Goats,
and Ibex; no buffalow in the Mountains.

Those mountains are high and a great perportion of them rocky Vallies
fertile I observe on the highest pinicals of Some of the mountains to
the West Snow lying in Spots Some Still further North are covered with
Snow and cant be Seen from this point The Winds in those mountains are
not Settled generally with the river, to day the wind blow hard from
the West at the Camp. The Missouri Continus its width the Current
Strong and Crouded with little Islands and Cose graveley bars; but
little fine Sand the Chanel generally a Corse gravel or Soft mud.
Musquetors & Knats verry troublesom. I killed a Buck, and J. Fields
killed a Buck and Doe this evening. Cought a young Curlough.




[Lewis, July 22, 1805]
Monday July 22cd 1805.
We set out early as usual. The river being divided into such a number
of channels by both large and small Island that I found it impossible
to lay it down correctly following one channel only in a canoe and
therefore walked on shore took the general courses of the river and
from the rising grounds took a view of the Islands and it's different
channels which I laid don in conformity thereto on my chart. there
being but little timber to obstruct my view I could see it's various
meanders very satisfactorily. I passed though a large Island which I
found a beautifull level and fertile plain about 10 feet above the
surface of the water and never overflown. on this Island I met with
great quantities of a smal onion about the size of a musquit ball and
some even larger; they were white crisp and well flavored I geathered
about half a bushel of them before the canoes arrived. I halted the
party for breakfast and the men also geathered considerable quantities
of those onions. it's seed had just arrived to maturity and I gathered
a good quantity of it. This appears to be a valuable plant inasmuch as
it produces a large quantity to the squar foot and bears with ease the
rigor of this climate, and withall I think it as pleasantly flavored as
any species of that root I ever tasted. I called this beatifull and
fertile island after this plant Onion Island. here I passed over to the
stard. shore where the country was higher and ascended the river to the
entrance of a large creek which discharges itself into the Missouri on
the Stard. side. it is composed of three pretty considerable creeks
which unite in a beautifull and extensive vally a few miles before it
discharges itself into the river. while wateing for the canoes to
arrive I killed an otter which sunk to the bottom on being shot, a
circumstance unusual with that anamal. the water was about 8 feet deep
yet so clear that I could see it at the bottom; I swam in and obtained
it by diving. I halted the party here for dinner; the canoes had taken
different channels through these islands and it was sometime before
they all came up. I placed my thermometer in a good shade as was my
custom about 4 P.M. and after dinner set out without it and had
proceeded near a mile before I recollected it I sent Sergt. Ordway back
for it, he found it and brought it on. the murcury stood at 80 a. 0
this is the warmest day except one which we have experienced this
summer. The Indian woman recognizes the country and assures us that
this is the river on which her relations live, and that the three forks
are at no great distance. this peice of information has cheered the
sperits of the party who now begin to console themselves with the
anticipation of shortly seeing the head of the missouri yet unknown to
the civilized world. the large creek which we passed on Stard. 15 yds.
we call white Earth Creek from the circumstance of the natives
procuring a white paint on this crek.--Saw many gees, crams, and small
birds common to the plains, also a few phesants and a species of small
curlooe or plover of a brown colour which I first met with near the
entrance of Smith's river but they are so shy and watchfull there is no
possibility of geting a shoot at them it is a different kind from any
heretofore discribed and is about the size of the yellow leged plover
or jack Curlooe. both species of the willow that of the broad leaf and
narrow leaf still continue, the sweet willow is very scarce. the rose
bush, small honesuckle, the pulpy leafed thorn, southernwood, sage Box
alder narrow leafed cottonwood, red wod, a species of sumac are all
found in abundance as well as the red and black goosberries, service
berries, choke cherries and the currants of four distinct colours of
black, yellow, red and perple. the cherries are not yet ripe. the bear
appear to feed much on the currants. late this evening we arrived at
Capt. Carks camp on the stard. side of the river; we took them on board
with the meat they had collected and proceeded a short distance and
encamped on an Island Capt. Clark's party had killed a deer and an Elk
today and ourselves one deer and an Antelope only. altho Capt C. was
much fatiegued his feet yet blistered and soar he insisted on pursuing
his rout in the morning nor weould he consent willingly to my releiving
him at that time by taking a tour of the same kind. finding him anxious
I readily consented to remain with the canoes; he ordered Frazier and
Jo. & Reubin Filds to hold themselves in readiness to accompany him in
the morning. Sharbono was anxious to accompany him and was accordingly
permitted. the musquetoes and knats more than usually troublesome to us
this evening.-




[Clark, July 22, 1805]
July 22d Monday 1805
a fine morning wind from the S. E. the last night verry cold, my
blanket being Small I lay on the grass & Covered with it. I opened the
bruses & blisters of my feet which caused them to be painfull
dispatched all the men to hunt in the bottom for Deer, deturmined my
Self to lay by & nurs my feet. haveing nothing to eat but venison and
Currents, I find my Self much weaker than when I left the Canoes and
more inclined to rest & repose to day. These men were not Suckcessfull
in hunting killed only one Deer Capt Lewis & the Party arvd. at 4
oClock & we all proceeded on a Short distance and Camped on an Island
the Musquitors verry troublesom this evening G Drewyer not knowing the
place we Camped Continued on up the river. I deturmined to proceed on
in pursute of the Snake Indians on tomorrow and directed Jo Rubin
Fields Frasure to get ready to accompany me. Shabono, our interpreter
requested to go, which was granted &c. In my absence the hunters had
killed Some Deer & a Elk, one fusee found &c. &c.




[Lewis, July 23, 1805]
Tuesday July 23rd 1805.
Set out early as usual; Capt. Clark left us with his little party of 4
men and continued his rout on the Stard. side of the river. about 10
OCk. A M. we came up with Drewyer who had seperated from us yesterday
evening and lay out all night not being able to find where we had
encamped. he had killed 5 deer which we took on board and continued our
rout. the river is still divided by a great number of islands, it
channels sometimes seperating to the distance of 3 miles; the current
very rapid with a number of riffles; the bed gravel and smooth stones;
the banks low and of rich loam in the bottoms; some low bluffs of
yellow and red clay with a hard red slate stone intermixed. the bottoms
are wide and but scantily timbered; the underbrush very thick
consisting of the narrow & broad leafed willow rose and Currant bushes
principally. high plains succeeds the river bottoms and extend back on
either side to the base of the mountains which are from 8 to 12 miles
assunder, high, rocky, some small pine and Cedar on them and ly
parallel with the river. passed a large creek on Lard. side 20 yds.
wide which after meandering through a beautifull and extensive bottom
for several miles nearly parallel with the river discharges itself
opposite to a large cluster of islands which from their number I called
the 10 islands and the creek Whitehous's Creek, after Josph. Whitehouse
one of the party. saw a great abundance of the common thistles; also a
number of the wild onions of which we collected a further supply. there
is a species of garlic also which grows on the high lands with a flat
leaf now green and in bloe but is strong tough and disagreeable. found
some seed of the wild flax ripe which I preserved; this plant grows in
great abundance in these bottoms. I halted rearther early for dinner
today than usual in order to dry some articles which had gotten wet in
several of the canoes. I ordered the canoes to hoist their small flags
in order that should the indians see us they might discover that we
were not Indians, nor their enemies. we made great uce of our seting
poles and cords the uce of both which the river and banks favored. most
of our small sockets were lost, and the stones were so smooth that the
points of their poles sliped in such manner that it increased the
labour of navigating the canoes very considerably, I recollected a
parsel of giggs which I had brought on, and made the men each atatch
one of these to the lower ends of their poles with strong wire, which
answered the desired purpose. we saw Antelopes Crain gees ducks beaver
and Otter. we took up four deer which Capt. Clark & party had killed
and left near the river. he pursued his rout untill late in the evening
and encamped on the bank of the river 25 ms. above our encampment of
the last evening; he followed an old indian road which lyes along the
river on the stard side Capt. saw a number of Antelopes, and one herd
of Elk. also much sign of the indians but all of ancient date. I saw
the bull rush and Cattail flag today.

I saw a black snake today about two feet long the Belly of which was as
black as any other part or as jet itself. it had 128 scuta on the
belley 63 on the tail.




[Clark, July 23, 1805]
July 23rd Tuesday 1805
a fair morning wind from the South. I Set out by land at 6 miles
overtook G Drewyer who had killed a Deer. we killed in the Same bottom
4 deer & a antelope & left them on the river bank for the Canoes
proceeded on an Indian roade through a wider Vallie which the Missouri
Passes about 25 miles & Camped on the bank of the river, High mountains
on either Side of the Vallie Containing Scattering Pine & Cedar Some
Small Cotton willow willow &c. on the Islands & bank of the river I Saw
no fresh Sign of Indians to day Great number of antelopes Some Deer & a
large Gangue of Elk




[Lewis, July 24, 1805]
Wednesday July 24th 1805.
Set out at sunrise; the current very strong; passed a remarkable bluff
of a crimson coloured earth on Stard. intermixed with Stratas of black
and brick red slate. the valley through which the river passed today is
much as that of yesterday nor is there any difference in the appearance
of the mountains, they still continue high and seem to rise in some
places like an amphatheater one rang above another as they receede from
the river untill the most distant and lofty have their tops clad with
snow. the adjacent mountains commonly rise so high as to conceal the
more distant and lofty mountains from our view. I fear every day that
we shall meet with some considerable falls or obstruction in the river
notwithstanding the information of the Indian woman to the contrary who
assures us that the river continues much as we see it. I can scarcely
form an idea of a river runing to great extent through such a rough
mountainous country without having it's stream intercepted by some
difficult and gangerous rappids or falls. we daily pass a great number
of small rappids or riffles which decend one to or 3 feet in 150 yards
but they are rarely incommoded with fixed or standing rocks and altho
strong rappid water are nevertheless quite practicable & by no means
dangerous. we saw many beaver and some otter today; the former dam up
the small channels of the river between the islands and compell the
river in these parts to make other channels; which as soon as it has
effected that which was stoped by the beaver becomes dry and is filled
up with mud sand gravel and drift wood. the beaver is then compelled to
seek another spot for his habitation wher he again erects his dam. thus
the river in many places among the clusters of islands is constantly
changing the direction of such sluices as the beaver are capable of
stoping or of 20 yds. in width. this anamal in that way I beleive to be
very instrumental in adding to the number of islands with which we find
the river crouded. we killed one deer today and found a goat or
Antelope which had been left by Capt. Clark. we saw a large bear but
could not get a shoot at him. we also saw a great number of Crams &
Antelopes, some gees and a few red-headed ducks the small bird of the
plains and curloos still abundant. we observed a great number of snakes
about the water of a brown uniform colour, some black, and others
speckled on the abdomen and striped with black and brownish yellow on
the back and sides. the first of these is the largest being about 4
feet long, the second is of that kind mentioned yesterday, and the last
is much like the garter snake of our country and about it's size. none
of these species are poisonous I examined their teeth and fund them
innosent. they all appear to be fond of the water, to which they fly
for shelter immediately on being pursued.--we saw much sign of Elk but
met with none of them. from the appearance of bones and excrement of
old date the buffaloe sometimes straggle into this valley; but there is
no fresh sighn of them and I begin think that our harrvest of white
puddings is at an end, at least untill our return to the buffaloe
country. our trio of pests still invade and obstruct us on all
occasions, these are the Musquetoes eye knats and prickley pears, equal
to any three curses that ever poor Egypt laiboured under, except the
Mahometant yoke. the men complain of being much fortiegued, their
labour is excessively great. I occasionly encourage them by assisting
in the labour of navigating the canoes, and have learned to push a
tolerable good pole in their fraize. This morning Capt. Clark set out
early and pursued the Indian road whih took him up a creek some miles
abot 10 A.M. he discovered a horse about six miles distant on his left,
he changed his rout towards the horse, on approaching him he found the
horse in fine order but so wild he could not get within less than
several hundred paces of him. he still saw much indian sign but none of
recent date. from this horse he directed his course obliquely to the
river where on his arrival he killed a deer and dined. in this wide
valley where he met with the horse he passed five handsome streams, one
of which only had timber another some willows and much stoped by the
beaver. after dinner he continued his rout along the river upwards and
encamped having traveled about 30 mes.




[Clark, July 24, 1805]
July 24th Wednesday 1805
a fine day wind from the N W. I proceeded on up a Creek on the
direction of the Indian road at 10 oClock discovered a horse 6 miles to
my left towards the river as I approached the horse found him fat and
verry wild we could not get near him, we changed our Direction to the
river for water haveing previously Crossed 5 handsom Streams in one
Vallie one only had any timber on it one other Willows only & a number
of beaver Dams. when I Struck the river turned down to kill a Deer
which we dined on & proceeded on up the river a fiew miles an Campd. on
the river. the river much like it was yesterday. the mountains on
either Side appear like the hills had fallen half down & turned Side
upwards the bottoms narrow and no timber a fiew bushes only.




[Lewis, July 25, 1805]
Thursday July 25th 1805.
Set out at an early hour and proceeded on tolerably well the water
still strong and some riffles as yesterday. the country continues much
the same as the two preceeding days. in the forenoon we saw a large
brown bear on an island but he retreated immediately to the main shore
and ran off before we could get in reach of him. they appear to be more
shy here than on the Missouri below the mountains. we saw some
antelopes of which we killed one. these anamals appear now to have
collected again is small herds several females with their young and one
or two males compose the herd usually. some males are yet soletary or
two perhaps together scattered over the plains which they seen
invariably to prefer to the woodlands. if they happen accedentaly in
the woodlands and are allarmed they run immediately to the plains,
seeming to plaise a just confidence in their superior fleetness and
bottom. we killed a couple of young gees which are very abundant and
fine; but as they are but small game to subsist a party on of our
strength I have forbid the men shooting at them as it waists a
considerable quantity of amunition and delays our progress. we passed
Capt. Clark's encampment of the 23rd inst. the face of the country &
anamal and vegatable productions were the same as yesterday, untill
late in the evening, when the valley appeared to termineate and the
river was again hemned in on both sides with high caiggy and rocky
clifts. soon after entering these hills or low mountains we passed a
number of fine bold springs which burst out underneath the Lard. clifts
near the edge of the water; they wer very cold and freestone water. we
passed a large Crk. today in the plain country, 25 yds. wide, which
discharges itself on the Stard. side; it is composed of five streams
which unite in the plain at no great distance from the river and have
their souces in the Mts. this stream we called Gass's Creek. after
Sergt. Patric Gass one of our party.--two rapids near the large spring
we passed this evening were the worst we have seen since that we passed
on entering the rocky Mountain; they were obstructed with sharp pointed
rocks, ranges of which extended quite across the river. the clifts are
formed of a lighter coloured stone than those below I obseve some
limestone also in the bed of the river which seem to have been brought
down by the current as they are generally small and woarn smooth.--This
morning Capt. Clark set out early and at the distance of a few miles
arrived at the three forks of the Missouri, here he found the plains
recently birnt on the stard. side, and the track of a horse which
appeared to have passed only about four or five days. after taking
breakfast of some meat which they had brought with them, examined the
rivers, and written me a note informing me of his intended rout, he
continued on up the North fork, which though not larger than the middle
fork, boar more to the West, and of course more in the direction we
were anxious to pursue. he ascended this stream about 25 miles on
Stard. side, and encamped, much fatiegued, his feet blistered and
wounded with the prickley pear thorns. Charbono gave out, one of his
ankles failed him and he was unable to proceede any further.--I
observed that the rocks which form the clifts on this part of the river
appear as if they had been undermined by the river and by their weight
had seperated from the parent hill and tumbled on their sides, the
stratas of rock of which they are composed lying with their edges up;
others not seperated seem obliquely depressed on the side next the
river as if they had sunk down to fill the cavity which had been formed
by the washing and wearing of the river. I have observed a red as well
as a yellow species of goosberry which grows on the rocky Clifts in
open places of a swetish pine like flavor, first observed in the
neighbourhood of the falls; at least the yellow species was first
observed there. the red differs from it in no particular except it's
colour and size being somewhat larger; it is a very indifferent fruit,
but as they form a variety of the native fruits of this country I
preserved some of their seeds. musquetoes and knats troublesome as
usual.




[Clark, July 25, 1805]
July 25th Thursday 1805
a fine morning we proceeded on a fiew miles to the three forks of the
Missouri those three forks are nearly of a Size, the North fork appears
to have the most water and must be Considered as the one best
calculated for us to assend middle fork is quit as large about 90 yds.
wide. The South fork is about 70 yds wide & falls in about 400 yards
below the midle fork. those forks appear to be verry rapid & Contain
Some timber in their bottoms which is verry extincive,--on the North
Side the Indians have latterly Set the Praries on fire, the Cause I
can't account for. I Saw one horse track going up the river about four
or 5 days past. after Brackfast (which we made on the ribs of a Buck
killed yesterday), I wrote a note informing Capt Lewis the rout I
intended to take, and proeeded on up the main North fork thro a vallie,
the day verry hot about 6 or 8 miles up the North fork a Small rapid
river falls in on the Lard Side which affords a great Deel of water and
appears to head in the Snow mountains to the S W. this little river
falls into the Missouri by three mouthes, haveing Seperated after it
arrives in the river Bottoms, and Contains as also all the water
courses in this quarter emence number of Beaver & orter maney thousand
enhabit the river & Creeks near the 3 forks (Pholosiphie's River)--We
Campd on the Same Side we assended Starboard 20 miles on a direct line
up the N. fork. Shabono our intrepreter nearly tired one of his ankles
falling him--The bottoms are extencive and tolerable land Covered with
tall grass & prickley pears The hills & mountains are high Steep &
rockey. The river verry much divided by Islands Some Elk Bear & Deer
and Some Small timber on the Islands. Great quantities of Currents,
red, black, yellow, Purple, also Mountain Currents which grow on the
Sides of Clifts; inferior in taste to the others haveing Sweet pineish
flaver and are red & yellow, Choke Cheries, Boin roche, and the red
buries also abound--musquitors verry trouble Som untill the mountain
breeze Sprung up which was a little after night.




[Lewis, July 26, 1805]
Friday July 26th 1805.
Set out early this morning as usual current strong with frequent
riffles; employ the cord and seting poles. the oars scarcely ever being
used except to pass the river in order to take advantage of the shore
and cur-rent. at the distance of 33/4 m. passed the entrance of a large
Creek 15 yds. wide which discharges itself on Lard. near the center of
a Lard. bend it is a bold runing stream this we called Howard's Creek
after Thomas P. Howard one of our party. at the distance of one mile
further we passed the entrance of a small run which falls in just above
a rocky clift on Lard. here the hills or reather mountains again recede
from the river and the valley again widens to the extent of several
miles with wide and fertile bottom lands. covered with grass and in
many places a fine terf of greenswoard. the high lands are thin meagre
soil covered with dry low sedge and a species of grass also dry the
seeds of which are armed with a long twisted hard beard at the upper
extremity while the lower point is a sharp subulate firm point beset at
it's base with little stiff bristles standing with their points in a
contrary direction to the subulate point to which they answer as a barb
and serve also to pres it forward when onece entered a small distance.
these barbed seed penetrate our mockersons and leather legings and give
us great pain untill they are removed. my poor dog suffers with them
excessively, he is constantly hinting and scratching himself as if in a
rack of pain. the prickly pear also grow here as abundantly as usual.
there is another species of the prickly pear of a globular form,
composed of an assemblage of little conic leaves springing from a
common root to which their small points are attached as a common center
and the base of the cone forms the apex of the leaf which is garnished
with a circular range of sharp thorns quite as stif and more keen than
the more common species with the flat leaf, like the Cockeneal plant.
on entering this open valley I saw the snowclad tops of distant
mountains before us. the timber and mountains much as heretofore. saw a
number of beaver today and some otter, killed one of the former, also 4
deer; found a deer's skin which had been left by Capt. C. with a note
informing me of his having met with a horse but had seen no fresh
appearance of the Indians. the river in the valley is from 2 to 250
yds. wide and crouded with Islands, in some places it is 3/4 of a mile
wide including islands. were it passed the hills it was from 150 to 200
yds. the banks are still low but never overflow. one of the men brought
me an indian bow which he found, it was made of cedar and about 2 F. 9
Inh. in length. it had nothing remarkable in it's form being much such
as is used by the Mandans Minetares &c. This morning Capt. Clark left
Sharbono and Joseph Fields at the camp of last evening and proceeded up
the river about 12 miles to the top of a mountain from whence he had an
extensive view of the valley of the river upwards and of a large creek
which flowed into it on Std. side. not meeting with any fresh
appearance of Indians he determined to return and examine the middle
fork of the missouri and meet me by the time he expected me to arrive
at the forks. he returned down the mountain by the way of an old Indian
road which led through a deep hollow of the mountain facing the south
the day being warm and the road unshaded by timber he suffered
excessively with heat and the want of water, at length he arrived at a
very cold spring, at which he took the precaution of weting his feet
head and hands before drank but notwithstanding this precaution he soon
felt the effects of the water. he felt himself very unwell shortly
after but continued his march rejoined Sharbono and Fields where the
party eat of a fawn which Jo. Fields had killed in their absence Capt.
C. was so unwell that he had no inclination to eat. after a short
respite he resumed his march pass the North fork at a large island;
here Charbono was very near being swept away by the current and cannot
swim, Capt. C however risqued him and saved his life. Capt. C.
continued his march to a small river which falls into the North fork
some miles above the junction of the 3 forks it being the distance of
about four miles from his camp of last evening here finding himself
still more unwell he determined to encamp. they killed two brown or
Grisley bear this evening on the island where they passed the N. fork
of the Missouri. this stream is much divided by islands and it's
current rapid and much as that of the missouri where we are and is
navigable.-




[Clark, July 26, 1805]
July 26th Friday 1805
I deturmined to leave Shabono & one man who had Sore feet to rest &
proceed on with the other two to the top of a mountain 12 miles distant
west and from thence view the river & vallies a head, we with great
dificuelty & much fatigue reached the top at 11 oClock from the top of
this mountain I could see the Course of the North fork about 10 miles
meandering through a Vallie but Could discover no Indians or Sign which
was fresh. I could also See Some distance up the Small River below, and
also the middle fork after Satisfying my Self returned to the two men
by an old Indian parth, on this parth & in the Mountain we Came to a
Spring of excessive Cold water, which we drank reather freely of as we
were almost famished; not with Standing the precautions of wetting my
face, hands, & feet, I Soon felt the effects of the water. We Contind.
thro a Deep Vallie without a Tree to Shade us Scorching with heat to
the men who had killed a pore Deer, I was fatigued my feet with Several
blisters & Stuck with prickley pears. I eate but verry little
deturmined to Cross to the middle fork and examine that. we Crossed the
Missouri which was divided by a verry large Island, the first Part was
knee deep, the other waste deep & verry rapid--I felt my Self verry
unwell & took up Camp on the little river 3 miles above its mouth &
near the place it falls into the bottom a fiew Drops of rain this
evening

we killed 2 bear which was imediately in our way. both pore emence
number of Beaver and orter in this little river which forks in the
bottom




[Lewis, July 27, 1805]
Saturday July 27th 1805.
We set out at an early hour and proceeded on but slowly the current
still so rapid that the men are in a continual state of their utmost
exertion to get on, and they begin to weaken fast from this continual
state of violent exertion. at the distance of 13/4 miles the river was
again closely hemned in by high Clifts of a solid limestone rock which
appear to have tumbled or sunk in the same manner of those discribed
yesterday. the limestone appears to be of an excellent quality of deep
blue colour when fractured and of a light led colour where exposed to
the weather. it appears to be of a very fine grain the fracture like
that of marble. we saw a great number of the bighorn on those Clifts.
at the distance of 33/4 ms. further we arrived at 9 A.M. at the
junction of the S. E. fork of the Missouri and the country opens
suddonly to extensive and beatifull plains and meadows which appear to
be surrounded in every direction with distant and lofty mountains;
supposing this to be the three forks of the Missouri I halted the party
on the Lard. shore for breakfast and walked up the S. E. fork about 1/2
a mile and ascended the point of a high limestone clift from whence I
commanded a most perfect view of the neighbouring country. From this
point I could see the S. E. fork about 7 miles. it is rapid and about
70 yards wide. throughout the distance I saw it, it passes through a
smoth extensive green meadow of fine grass in it's course meandering in
several streams the largest of which passes near the Lard. hills, of
which, the one I stand on is the extremity in this direction. a high
wide and extensive plain succeeds the meadow and extends back several
miles from the river on the Stard. sade and with the range of mountains
up the Lard. side of the middle fork. a large spring arrises in this
meadow about 1/4 of a mile from the S. E. fork into which it discharges
itself on the Stard. side about 400 paces above me. from E to S.
between the S. E. and middle forks a distant range of lofty mountains
rose their snow-clad tops above the irregular and broken mountains
which lie adjacent to this beautifull spot. the extreme point to which
I could see the S. E. fork boar S. 65 deg. E. distant 7 ms. as before
observed. between the middle and S. E. forks near their junctions with
the S. W. fork there is a handsom site for a fortification it consists
of a limestone rock of an oblong form; it's sides perpendicular and
about 25 ft high except at the extremity towards the middle fork where
it ascends gradually and like the top is covered with a fine terf of
greenswoard. the top is level and contains about 2 Acres. the rock
rises from the level plain as if it had been designed for some such
purpose. the extream point to which I can see the bottom and meandering
of the Middle fork bears S. 15 E distant about 14 miles. here it turns
to the right around a point of a high plain and disappears to my view.
it's bottoms are several miles in width and like that of the S. E. fork
form one smoth and beautifull green meadow. it is also divided into
several streams. betwen this and the S. W. fork there is an extensive
plain which appears to extend up both those rivers many miles and back
to the mountains. the extreme point to which I can see the S. W. fork
bears S. 30 W. distant about 12 miles. this stream passes through a
similar country with the other two and is more divided and serpentine
in it's course than either of the others; it also possesses abundanly
more timber in it's bottoms. the timber here consists of the
narrowleafed cottonwood almost entirely. but little box alder or sweet
willow the underbrush thick and as heretofore discribed in the quarter
of the missouri. a range of high mountains at a considerable distance
appear to reach from South to West and are partially covered with snow
the country to the right of the S. W. fork like that to the left of the
S. E. fork is high broken and mountainous as is that also down the
missouri behind us, through which, these three rivers after assembling
their united force at this point seem to have forced a passage these
bottom lands tho not more than 8 or 9 feet above the water seem never
to overflow. after making a draught of the connection and meanders of
these streams I decended the hill and returned to the party, took
breakfast and ascended the S. W. fork 13/4 miles and encamped at a
Lard. bend in a handsome level smooth plain just below a bayou, having
passed the entrance of the middle fork at 1/2 a mile. here I encamped
to wait the return of Capt. Clark and to give the men a little rest
which seemed absolutely necessary to them. at the junction of the S. W.
and Middle forks I found a note which had been left by Capt. Clark
informing me of his intended rout, and that he would rejoin me at this
place provided he did not fall in with any fresh sighn of Indians, in
which case he intended to pursue untill he over took them calculating
on my taking the S. W. fork, which I most certainly prefer as it's
direction is much more promising than any other. beleiving this to be
an essential point in the geography of this western part of the
Continent I determined to remain at all events untill I obtained the
necessary data for fixing it's latitude Longitude &c. after fixing my
camp I had the canoes all unloaded and the baggage stoed away and
securely covered on shore, and then permitted several men to hunt. I
walked down to the middle fork and examined and compared it with the S.
W. fork but could not satisfy myself which was the largest stream of
the two, in fact they appeared as if they had been cast in the same
mould there being no difference in character or size, therefore to call
either of these streams the Missouri would be giving it a preference
wich it's size dose not warrant as it is not larger then the other.
they are each 90 yds. wide. in these meadows I saw a number of the
duckanmallad with their young which are now nearly grown. Currants of
every species as well as goosberries are found here in great abundance
and perfection. a large black goosberry which grows to the hight of
five or six feet is also found here. this is the growth of the bottom
lands and is found also near the little rivulets which make down from
the hills and mountains it puts up many stems from the same root, some
of which are partialy branched and all reclining. the berry is
attatched seperately by a long peduncle to the stem from which they
hang pendant underneath. the berry is of an ovate form smooth as large
as the common garden goosberry when arrived at maturity and is as black
as jet, tho the pulp is of a cimson colour. this fruit is extreemly
asced. the leaf resembles the common goosberry in form but is reather
larger and somewhat proportioned to the superior size of it's stem when
compared with the common goosberry. the stem is covered with very sharp
thorns or bryers. below the tree forks as we passed this morning I
observed many collections of the mud nests of the small martin
attatched to the smooth face of the limestone rocks sheltered by
projections of the same rock above. Our hunters returned this evening
with 6 deer 3 Otter and a musk rat. they informed me that they had seen
great numbers of Antelopes, and much sign of beaver Otter deer Elk, &c.
at 3 P.M. Capt Clark arrived very sick with a high fever on him and
much fatiegued and exhausted. he informed me that he was very sick all
last night had a high fever and frequent chills & constant aking pains
in all his mustles. this morning notwithstanding his indisposition he
pursued his intended rout to the middle fork about 8 miles and finding
no recent sign of Indians rested about an hour and came down the middle
fork to this place. Capt. C. thought himself somewhat bilious and had
not had a passage for several days; I prevailed on him to take a doze
of Rushes pills, which I have always found sovereign in such cases and
to bath his feet in warm water and rest himself. Capt. C's
indisposition was a further inducement for my remaining here a couple
of days; I therefore informed the men of my intention, and they put
their deer skins in the water in order to prepare them for dressing
tomorrow. we begin to feel considerable anxiety with rispect to the
Snake Indians. if we do not find them or some other nation who have
horses I fear the successfull issue of our voyage will be very
doubtfull or at all events much more difficult in it's accomplishment.
we are now several hundred miles within the bosom of this wild and
mountanous country, where game may rationally be expected shortly to
become scarce and subsistence precarious without any information with
rispect to the country not knowing how far these mountains continue, or
wher to direct our course to pass them to advantage or intersept a
navigable branch of the Columbia, or even were we on such an one the
probability is that we should not find any timber within these
mountains large enough for canoes if we judge from the portion of them
through which we have passed. however I still hope for the best, and
intend taking a tramp myself in a few days to find these yellow
gentlemen if possible. my two principal consolations are that from our
present position it is impossible that the S. W. fork can head with the
waters of any other river but the Columbia, and that if any Indians can
subsist in the form of a nation in these mountains with the means they
have of acquiring food we can also subsist. Capt. C. informed me that
there is a part of this bottom on the West side of the Middle fork near
the plain, which appears to overflow occasionally and is stony.




[Clark, July 27, 1805]
July 27th Saturday 1805
I was verry unwell all last night with a high fever & akeing in all my
bones. my fever &c. continus, deturmind to prosue my intended rout to
the middle fork, accordingly Set out in great pain across a Prarie 8
miles to the Middle this fork is nearly as large as the North fork &
appears to be more rapid, we examined and found no fresh Sign of
Indians, and after resting about an hour, proceeded down to the
junction thro a wide bottom which appears to be overflown every year, &
maney parts Stoney this river has Several Islands and number of beaver
& orter, but little timber. we could See no fresh Sign of Indians just
above the Point I found Capt Lewis encamped haveing arrived about 2
oClock. Several Deer killed this evening. I continue to be verry unwell
fever verry high; take 5 of rushes pills & bathe my feet & legs in hot
water




[Lewis, July 28, 1805]
Sunday July 28th 1805.
My friend Capt. Clark was very sick all last night but feels himself
somwhat better this morning since his medicine has opperated. I
dispatched two men early this morning up the S. E. Fork to examine the
river; and permitted sundry others to hunt in the neighbourhood of this
place. Both Capt. C. and myself corrisponded in opinon with rispect to
the impropriety of calling either of these streams the Missouri and
accordingly agreed to name them after the President of the United
States and the Secretaries of the Treasury and state having previously
named one river in honour of the Secretaries of War and Navy. In
pursuance of this resolution we called the S. W. fork, that which we
meant to ascend, Jefferson's River in honor of Thomas Jefferson. the
Middle fork we called Madison's River in honor of James Madison, and
the S. E. Fork we called Gallitin's River in honor of Albert Gallitin.
the two first are 90 yards wide and the last is 70 yards. all of them
run with great valocity and thow out large bodies of water. Gallitin's
River is reather more rapid than either of the others, is not quite as
deep but from all appearances may be navigated to a considerable
distance. Capt. C. who came down Madison's river yesterday and has also
seen Jefferson's some distance thinks Madison's reather the most rapid,
but it is not as much so by any means as Gallitin's. the beds of all
these streams are formed of smooth pebble and gravel, and their waters
perfectly transparent; in short they are three noble streams. there is
timber enough here to support an establishment, provided it be erected
with brick or stone either of which would be much cheaper than wood as
all the materials for such a work are immediately at the spot. there
are several small sand-bars along the shores at no great distance of
very pure sand and the earth appears as if it would make good brick. I
had all our baggage spread out to dry this morning; and the day proving
warm, I had a small bower or booth erected for the comfort of Capt. C.
our leather lodge when exposed to the sun is excessively hot. I observe
large quantities of the sand rush in these bottoms which grow in many
places as high as a man's breast and stand as thick as the stalks of
wheat usually do. this affords one of the best winter pastures on earth
for horses or cows, and of course will be much in favour of an
establishment should it ever be thought necessary to fix one at this
place. the grass is also luxouriant and would afford a fine swarth of
hay at this time in parsels of many acres together. all those who are
not hunting altho much fatiegued are busily engaged in dressing their
skins, making mockersons leggings &c to make themselves comfortable.
the Musquetoes are more than usually troublesome, the knats are not as
much so. in the evening about 4 O'Ck the wind blew hard from South West
and after some little time brought on a Cloud attended with thunder and
Lightning from which we had a fine refreshing shower which cooled the
air considerably; the showers continued with short intervals untill
after dark. in the evening the hunters all returned they had killed 8
deer and 2 Elk. some of the deer wer in excellent order. those whome I
had sent up Gallitin's river reported that after it passed the point to
which I had seen it yesterday that it turned more to the East to a
considerable distance or as far as they could discover the opening of
the Mountains formed by it's valley which was many miles. the bottoms
were tolerably wide but not as much so as at or near it's mouth. it's
current is rappid and the stream much divided with islands but is
sufficiently deep for canoe navigation. Our present camp is precisely
on the spot that the Snake Indians were encamped at the time the
Minnetares of the Knife R. first came in sight of them five years
since. from hence they retreated about three miles up Jeffersons river
and concealed themselves in the woods, the Minnetares pursued, attacked
them, killed 4 men 4 women a number of boys, and mad prisoners of all
the females and four boys, Sah-cah-gar-we-ah or Indian woman was one of
the female prisoners taken at that time; tho I cannot discover that she
shews any immotion of sorrow in recollecting this event, or of joy in
being again restored to her native country; if she has enough to eat
and a few trinkets to wear I beleive she would be perfectly content
anywhere.




[Clark, July 28, 1805]
July 28th Sunday 1805
I was verry unwell all night, Something better this morning, a very
worm day untill 4 oClock when the wind rose & blew hard from the S W.
and was Cloudy, The Thermometr. Stood at 90 deg. above 0 in the evening a
heavy thunder Shower from the S W. which continud at intervales untill
after dark, Several deer killed to day men all employed dressing Skins
for Clothes & Mockersons, two men went up the East fork & reports that
it is nearly the Size of the N. fork, verry rapid & has maney Islands.
Our present Camp is the prosise Spot the Snake Indians were Camped at
the time the Minetarries came in Sight, attacked & killed 4 men 4 women
& a number of boys, & made prisoners of all. the females & 4 boys.




[Lewis, July 29, 1805]
Monday July 29th 1805.
This morning some of the hunters turned out and returned in a few hours
with four fat bucks, the venison is now very fine we have killed no
mule deer since we lay here, they are all of the longtailed red deer
which appear quite as large as those of the United States. the hunters
brought in a living young sandhill crane it has nearly obtained it's
growth but cannot fly; they had pursued it and caught it in the
meadows. it's colour is precisely that of the red deer. we see a number
of the old or full grown crams of this species feeding in these
meadows. this young animal is very ferce and strikes a severe blow with
his beak; after amusing myself with it I had it set at liberty and it
moved off apparently much pleased with being releived from his
captivity. the men have been busily engaged all day in dising skins and
making them into various garments all are leather dressers and taylors.
we see a great abundance of fish in the stream some of which we take to
be trout but they will not bite at any bate we can offer them. the King
fisher is common on the river since we have left the falls of the
Missouri. we have not seen the summer duck since we left that place,
nor do I beleive that it is an inhabitant of the Rocky mountains. the
Duckanmallard were first seen with their young on the 20th inst. and I
forgot to note it; they are now abundant with their young but do not
breed in the missouri below the mountains. the grasshopers and crickets
are abundant in the plains as are also the small birds frequently
mentioned. there is also in these plains a large ant with a redish
brown body and legs, and a black head and abdomen; they construct
little perimids of small gravel in a conic shape, about 10 or 12 inches
high without a mixture of sticks and with but little earth. Capt. Clark
is much better today, is perfectly clear of fever but still very
languid and complains of a general soarness in all his limbs. I
prevailed on him to take the barks which he has done and eate tolerably
freely of our good venison.




[Clark, July 29, 1805]
July 29 Monday 1805
A fair morning wind from the North I feel my Self something better to
day, made some Celestial observations took two Merdn. altitudes which
gave for Latd. 45 deg. 22' 34" N men all dressing Skins &c.




[Lewis, July 30, 1805]
Tuesday July 30th 1805.
Capt. Clark being much better this morning and having completed my
observations we reloaded our canoes and set out, ascending Jeffersons
river. Sharbono, his woman two invalleds and myself walked through the
bottom on the Lard. side of the river about 41/2 miles when we again
struck it at the place the woman informed us that she was taken
prisoner. here we halted untill Capt. Clark arrived which was not
untill after one P.M. the water being strong and the river extreemly
crooked. we dined and again proceeded on; as the river now passed
through the woods the invalleds got on board together with Sharbono and
the Indian woman; I passed the river and continued my walk on the
Stard. side. saw a vast number of beaver in many large dams which they
had maid in various bayoes of the river which are distributed to the
distance of three or four miles on this side of the river over an
extensive bottom of timbered and meadow lands intermixed. in order to
avoid these bayoes and beaver dams which I found difficult to pass I
directed my course to the high plain to the right which I gained after
some time with much difficulty and waiding many beaver dams to my waist
in mud and water. I would willingly have joined the canoes but the
brush were so thick, the river crooked and bottoms intercepted in such
manner by the beaver dams, that I found it uceless to attempt to find
them, and therefore proceeded on up the river in order to intersept it
where it came near the plain and woult be more collected into one
channel. at length about sunset I arrived at the river only about six
miles from my calculation on a direct line from the place I had left
the canoes but I thought they were still below me. I found the river
was divided where I reached it by an Island and was therefore fearfull
that they might pass without my seeing them, and went down to the lower
point of the large island; here I discovered a small Island, close
under the shore on which I was; I passed the narrow channel to the
small island and examined the gravly bar along the edge of the river
for the tracks of the men, knowing from the appearance of the river at
this place that if they had passed they would have used the cord on the
side where I was. I saw no tracks and was then fully convinced that
they were below me. I fired my gun and hallooed but counld hear nothing
of them. by this time it was getting nearly dark and a duck lit on the
shore in about 40 steps of me and I killed it; having now secured my
supper I looked our for a suitable place to amuse myself in combating
the musquetoes for the ballance of the evening. I found a parsel of
drift wood at the head of the little Island on which I was and
immediately set it on fire and collected some willow brush to lye on. I
cooked my duck which I found very good and after eating it layed down
and should have had a comfortable nights lodge but for the musquetoes
which infested me all night. late at night I was awakened by the nois
of some animal runing over the stoney bar on which I lay but did not
see it; from the weight with which it ran I supposed it to be either an
Elk or a brown bear. the latter are very abundant in this
neighbourhood. the night was cool but I felt very little inconvenience
from it as I had a large fire all night. Capt. Clark had proceeded on
after I seperated from him and encamped on a islad. only about 2 miles
below me but did not hear the report of my gun nor of my hooping.-I saw
some deer and antelopes.




[Clark, July 30, 1805]
July 30th Monday 1805
We Set out 8 oClock and proceeded on 131/2 miles up the N. fork the
river verry rapid & Sholey the Channel entirely Corse gravel many
Islands and a number of Chanels in different directions thro the bottom
&c. passed the place the Squar interpretress was taken, one man with
his Sholder Strained, 2 with Turners, we Camped on the Std. Side the
evening Cool. Capt Lewis who walkd on Shore did not join me this evening




[Lewis, July 31, 1805]
Wednesday July 31st 1805.
This morning I waited at my camp very impatiently for the arrival of
Capt. Clark and party; I observed by my watch that it was 7 A.M. and
they had not come in sight. I now became very uneasy and determined to
wait until 8 and if they did not arrive by that time to proceed on up
the river taking it as a fact that they had passed my camp some miles
last evening. just as I set out to pursue my plan I discovered Charbono
walking up shore some distance below me and waited untill arrived I now
learnt that the canoes were behind, they arrived shortly after. their
detention had been caused by the rapidity of the water and the
circuitous rout of the river. they halted and breakfasted after which
we all set out again and I continued my walk on the Stard. shore the
river now becomes more collected the islands tho numerous ar generally
small. the river continues rapid and is from 90 to 120 yd. wide has a
considerable quantity of timber in it's bottoms. towards evening the
bottoms became much narrower and the timber much more scant. high hills
set in close on the Lard. and the plain high waivy or reather broken on
the Stard. and approach the river closely for a shot distance vally
above 11/2 M wd. About one mile above Capt. Clark's encampment of the
last evening the principall entrance of a considerable river discharges
itself into Jefferson's river. this stream is a little upwards of 30
yd. wide discharges a large quantity of very clear water it's bed like
that of Jefferson's river is pebble and gravel. it takes it's rise in
the snowclad mountains between Jefferson's and Madison's Rivers to the
S. W. and discharges itself into the former by seven mouths it has some
timber in it's bottoms and vas numbers of beaver and Otter. this stream
we call River Philosophy. the rock of the clifts this evening is a hard
black grannite like that of the clifts of most parts of the river below
the limestone clifts at the 3 forks of the Missouri this evening just
before we encamped Drewyer discovered a brown bear enter a small cops
of bushes on the Lard. side; we surrounded the place an surched the
brush but he had escaped in some manner unperceived but how we could
not discover. nothing killed today and our fresh meat is out. when we
have a plenty of fresh meat I find it impossible to make the men take
any care of it, or use it with the least frugallity. tho I expect that
necessity will shortly teach them this art. the mountiains on both
sides of the river at no great distance are very lofty. we have a lame
crew just now, two with turners or bad boils on various parts of them,
one with a bad stone bruise, one with his arm accedently dislocated but
fortunately well replaced, and a fifth has streigned his back by
sliping and falling backwards on the gunwall of the canoe. the latter
is Sergt. Gass. it gives him great pain to work in the canoe in his
present situation, but he thinks he can walk with convenience, I
therefore scelected him as one of the party to accompany me tomorrow,
being determined to go in quest of the Snake Indians. I also directed
Drewyer and Charbono to hold themselves in readiness. Charbono thinks
that his ankle is sufficiently recovered to stand the march but I
entertain my doubts of the fact; he is very anxious to accompany me and
I therefore indulge him. There is some pine on the hills on both sides
of the river opposite to our encampment which is on the Lard. side upon
a small island just above a run. the bull rush & Cat-tail flag grow in
great abundance in the moist parts of the bottoms the dryer situations
are covered with fine grass, tanzy, thistles, onions and flax. the
bottom land fertile and of a black rich loam. the uplands poor sterile
and of a light yellow clay with a mixture of small smooth pebble and
gravel, poducing prickley pears, sedge and the bearded grass in great
abundance; this grass is now so dry that it would birn like tinder.--we
saw one bighorn today a few antelopes and deer.-




[Clark, July 31, 1805]
July 31st Tuesday 1805
a fair Morning Capt Lewis out all night, we arrived at his Camp to
brackfast, he was without a blanket, & he killed a Duck whiche Suped on
&c. the river as yesterday Sholey & rapid, passed the lower mouth of a
Small river on the Lard. in the morning & the upper mouth a ____ Miles
above, this little river is the one I camped on the 26th & heads in the
Snow mountains to the S W. proceeded on verry well and Camped on a
Small Island a little above the place I Camped the 25th instant at the
mouth of a run on the Lard Side, the bottoms from the Mouth of the
river extend to 21/2 Miles & enter a Short & high hill which is about 1
mile thro and, the river then passes thro a 2d value of about 11/2
Miles wide, Some Islands. below this Knobe the river is Crouded with
Islands, we are out of fresh meet, & nothing killed to day The
Mountains on either Side is high & rough we have two men with toumers
and unable to work.

Capt Lewis deturmin to proceed on with three men in Serch of the Snake
Indians, tomorrow




[Lewis, August 1, 1805]
August 1st 1805
At half after 8 A.M. we halted for breakfast and as had been previously
agreed on between Capt. Clark and myself I set out with 3 men in quest
of the Snake Indians. the men I took were the two Interpreters Drewyer
and Sharbono and Sergt. Gass who by an accedental fall had so disabled
himself that it was with much pain he could work in the canoes tho he
could march with convenience. the rout we took lay over a rough high
range of mountains on the North side of the river. the rive entered
these mountains a few miles above where we left it. Capt Clark
recommended this rout to me from a belief that the river as soon as it
past the mountains boar to the N. of W. he having a few days before
ascended these mountains to a position from which he discovered a large
valley passing betwen the mountains and which boar to the N. West. this
however poved to be the inlet of a large creek which discharged itself
into the river just above this range of mountans, the river bearing to
the S. W. we were therefore thrown several miles out of our rout. as
soon as we discovered our mistake we directed our course to the river
which we at length gained about 2 P.M. much exhausted by the heat of
the day the roughnes of the road and the want of water. the mountains
are extreemly bare of timber and our rout lay through the steep valleys
exposed to the heat of the sun without shade and scarcely a breath of
air; and to add to my fatiegue in this walk of about 11 miles I had
taken a doze of glauber salts in the morning in consequence of a slight
desentary with which I had been afflicted for several days; being
weakened by the disorder and the opperation of the medecine I found
myself almost exhausted before we reached the river. I felt my sperits
much revived on our near approach to the river at the sight of a herd
of Elk of which Drewyer and myself killed two. we then hurried to the
river and allayed our thirst. I ordered two of the men to skin the Elk
and bring the meat to the river while myself and the other prepared a
fire and cooked some of the meat for our dinner. we made a comfortable
meal of the Elk and left the ballance of the meat on the bank of the
river the party with Capt. Clark. this supply was no doubt very
acceptable to them as they had had no fresh meat for near two days
except one beaver Game being very scarce and shy. we had seen a few
deer and some goats but had not been fortunate enough to kill any of
them. after dinner we resumed our march and encamped about 6 m. above
on the Stard side of the river.




[Lewis, August 1, 1805]
Thursday August 1st 1805.
This morning we set out early and proceeded on tolerably well untill 8
OCT. by which time we had arrived within a few miles of a mountain
through which the river passes. we halted on the Stard. side and took
breakfast. after which or at 1/2 after 8 A.M. as had been previously
concerted betwen Capt. Clark and myself I set out with three men in
surch of the Snake Indians or Sosonees. our rout lay over a high range
of mountains on the North side of the river. Capt C. recommended this
rout to me no doubt from a beleif that the river as soon as it passed
this chain of mountains boar to the N. of W. he having on the 26th ult.
ascended these mountains to a position from whence he discoved a large
valley passing between the mountains which boar to the N. W. and
presumed that the river passed in that direction; this however proved
to be the passage of a large creek which discharged itself into the
river just above this range of mountains, the river bearing to the S.
W. we were therefore thrown several miles out of our rout. as soon as
we discovered our error we directed our course to the river which we at
length gained about 2 P.M. much exhausted by the heat of the day, the
roughness of the road and the want of water. the mountains are
extreemly bare of timber, and our rout lay through the steep and narrow
hollows of the mountains exposed to the intese heat of the midday sun
without shade or scarcely a breath of air to add to my fatiegue in this
walk of about 11 miles, I had taken a doze of glauber salts in the
morning in consequence of a slight disentary with which I had been
afflicted for several days. being weakened by the disorder and the
operation of the medicine I found myself almost exhausted before we
reached the river. I felt my sperits much revived on our near approach
to the river at the sight of a herd of Elk, of which Drewyer and myself
soon killed a couple. we then hurryed to the river and allayed our
thirst. I ordered two of the men to skin the Elk and bring the meat to
the river, while myself and the other prepared a fire and cooked some
of the meat for our dinner. we made a comfortable meal on the Elk, and
left the ballance of the meat and skins on the bank of the river for
Capt. Clark and party. this supply will no doubt be acceptable to them,
as they had had no fresh meat when I left them for almost 2 days except
one beaver; game being very scarce and shy above the forks. we had seen
a few deer and antelopes but had not been fortunate enough to kill any
of them. as I passed these mountains I saw a flock of the black or dark
brown phesants; the young phesant is almost grown we killed one of
them. this bird is fully a third larger than the common phesant of the
Atlantic states. it's form is much the same. it is booted nearly to the
toes and the male has not the tufts of long black feathers on the sides
of the neck which are so conspicuous in those of the Atlantic. their
colour is a uniform dark brown with a small mixture of yellow or
yelloish brown specks on some of the feathers particularly those of the
tail, tho the extremities of these are perfectly black for about one
inch. the eye is nearly black, the iris has a small dash of yellowish
brown. the feathers of the tail are reather longer than that of our
phesant or pattridge as they are Called in the Eastern States; are the
same in number or eighteen and all nearly of the same length, those in
the intermediate part being somewhat longest. the flesh of this bird is
white and agreeably flavored. I also saw near the top of the mountain
among some scattering pine a blue bird about the size of the common
robbin. it's action and form is somewhat that of the jay bird and never
rests long in any one position but constantly flying or hoping from
sprey to sprey. I shot at one of them but missed it. their note is loud
and frequently repeated both flying and when at rest and is char ah',
char'ah, char ah', as nearly as letters can express it. after dinner we
resumed our march and my pack felt much lighter than it had done about
2 hours before. we traveled about six miles further and encamped on the
stard. bank of the river, making a distance of 17 miles for this day.
the Musquetoes were troublesome but I had taken the precaution of
bringing my bier.

Shortly after I left Capt. Clark this morning he proceed on and passed
through the mountains; they formed tremendious clifts of ragged and
nearly perpendicular rocks; the lower.part of this rock is of the
black grannite before mentioned and the upper part a light coloured
freestone. these clifts continue for 9 miles and approach the river
very closely on either side. he found the current verry strong. Capt.
C. killed a big horn on these clifts which himself and party dined on.
after passing this range of mountains he entered this beautifull valley
in which we also were it is from 6 to 8 miles wide. the river is
crooked and crouded with islands, it's bottoms wide fertile and covered
with fine grass from 9 inches to 2 feet high and possesses but a scant
proportion of timber, which consists almost entirely of a few narrow
leafed cottonwood trees distributed along the verge of the river. in
the evening Capt. C. found the Elk I had left him and ascended a short
distance above to the entrance of a large creek which falls in on
Stard. and encamped opposite to it on the Lard. side. he sent out the
two Fieldses to hunt this evening and they killed 5 deer, which with
the Elk again gave them a plentifull store of fresh provisions. this
large creek we called Field's Creek after Reubin Fields one our party.
on the river about the mountains wich Capt. C. passed today he saw some
large cedar trees and some juniper also just at the upper side of the
mountain there is a bad rappid here the toe line of our canoe broke in
the shoot of the rapids and swung on the rocks and had very nearly
overset. a small distance above this rapid a large bold Creek falls in
on Lard. side which we called Frazier's Creek after Robt. Frazier. They
saw a large brown bear feeding on currants but could not get a shoot at
him.




[Clark, August 1, 1805]
August 1st Wednesday 1805
A fine day Capt. Lewis left me at 8 oClock just below the place I
entered a verrey high mountain which jutted its tremedious Clifts on
either Side for 9 Miles, the rocks ragide Some verry dark & other part
verry light rock the light rocks is Sand Stone. The water Swift & very
Sholey. I killed a Ibix on which the whole party Dined, after passing
through the Mountain we entered a wide extesive vallie of from 4 to 8
Miles wide verry leavell a Creek falls in at the Commencement of this
Vallie on the Lard Side, the river widens & spreds into Small Chanels.
We encamped on the Lard Side opposit a large Creek I sent out Jo. & R
fields to hunt this evening they killed 5 Deer, I saw a large Bear
eateing Currents this evining The river so rapid that the greatest
exertion is required by all to get the boats on wind S W Murckery at
sun rise 50 deg. Ab. 0




[Lewis, August 2, 1805]
August 2nd 1805.
We resumed our march this morning at sunrise the weather was fair and
wind from N. W. finding that the river still boar to the south I
determined to pass it if possible to shorten our rout this we effected
about five miles above our camp of last evening by wading it. found the
current very rappid about 90 yards wide and waist deep this is the
first time that I ever dared to make the attempt to wade the river, tho
there are many places between this and the three forks where I presume
it migh be attempted with equal success. the valley though which our
rout of this day lay and through which the river winds it's meandering
course is a beatifull level plain with but little timber and that on
the verge of the river. the land is tolerably fertile, consisting of a
black or dark yellow loam, and covered with grass from 9 Inches to 2
feet high. the plain ascends gradually on either side of the river to
the bases of two ranges of mountains which ly parrallel to the river
and which terminate the width of the vally. the tops of these mountains
were yet partially covered with snow while we in the valley. were
suffocated nearly with the intense heat of the midday sun. the nights
are so could that two blankets are not more than sufficient covering.
we found a great courants, two kinds of which were red, others yellow
deep purple and black, also black goosburies and service buries now
ripe and in full perfection, we feasted suptuously on our wild fruit
particularly the yellow courant and the deep purple servicebury which I
found to be excellent the courrant grows very much like the red currant
common to the gardens in the atlantic states tho the leaf is somewhat
different and the growth taller. the service burry grows on a smaller
bush and differs from ours only in colour and the superior excellence
of it's flavor and size, it is of a deep purple. this day we saw an
abundance of deer and goats or antelopes and a great number of the
tracks of Elk; of the former we killed two. we continued our rout along
this valley which is from six to eight Miles wide untill sun set when
we encamped for the night on the river bank having traveled about 24
miles. I feel myself perfectly recovered of my indisposition and do not
doubt being able to pursue my march with equal comfort in the morning.




[Lewis, August 2, 1805]
Friday August 2cd 1805.
We resumed our march this morning at sunrise; the day was fair and wind
from N. W. finding that the river still boar to the South I determined
to pass it if possible in order to shorten our rout; this we effected
by wading the river about 5 miles above our encampment of the last
evening. we found the current very rapid waist deep and about 90 yd.
wide bottom smooth pebble with a small mixture of coarse gravel. this
is the first time that I ever dared to wade the river, tho there are
many places between this and the forks where I presume it might be
attempted with equal success. The vally allong which we passed today,
and through which the river winds it's meandering course is from 6 to 8
miles wide and consists of a beatifull level plain with but little
timber and that confined to the verge of the river; the land is
tolerably fertile, and is either black or a dark yellow loam, covered
with grass from 9 inches to 2 feet high. the plain ascends gradually on
either side of the river to the bases of two ranges of high mountains,
which lye parallel to the river and prescribe the limits of the plains.
the tops of these mountains are yet covered partially with snow, while
we in the valley are nearly suffocated with the intense heat of the
midday sun; the nights are so cold that two blankets are not more than
sufficient covering. soon after passing the river this morning Sergt.
Gass lost my tommahawk in the thick brush and we were unable to find
it, I regret the loss of this usefull implement, however accedents will
happen in the best families, and I consoled myself with the
recollection that it was not the only one we had with us. the bones of
the buffaloe and their excrement of an old date are to be met with in
every part of this valley but we have long since lost all hope of
meeting with that animal in these mountains. we met with great
quantities of currants today, two species of which were red, others
yellow, deep perple and black; also black goosberries and
serviceberries now ripe and in great perfection. we feasted sumptuously
on our wild fruits, particularly the yellow currant and the deep perple
serviceberries, which I found to be excellent. the serviceberry grows
on a small bush and differs from ours only in colour size and superior
excellence of it's flavour. it is somewhat larger than ours. on our way
we saw an abundance of deer Antelopes, of the former we killed 2. we
also saw many tracks of the Elk and bear. no recent appearance of
Indians. the Indians in this part of the country appear to construct
their lodges with the willow boughs and brush; they are small of a
conic figure and have a small aperture on one side through which they
enter. we continued our rout up this valley on the Lard. side of the
river untill sunset, at which time we encamped on the Lard. bank of the
river having traveled 24 miles. we had brought with us a good stock of
venison of which we eat a hearty supper. I feel myself perfectly
recovered of my indisposition, and do not doubt being able to pursue my
rout tomorrow with the same comfort I have done today.--we saw some
very large beaver dams today in the bottoms of the river several of
which wer five feet high and overflowed several acres of land; these
dams are formed of willow brush mud and gravel and are so closely
interwoven that they resist the water perfectly. the base of this work
is thick and rises nearly perpendicularly on the lower side while the
upper side or that within the dam is gently sloped. the brush appear to
be laid in no regular order yet acquires a strength by the irregularity
with which they are placed by the beaver that it would puzzle the
engenuity of man to give them.

Capt. Clark continued his rout early this morning. the rapidity of the
current was such that his progress was slow, in short it required the
utmost exertion of the men to get on, nor could they resist this
current by any other means than that of the cord and pole. in the
course of the day they passed some villages of burrowing squirrels, saw
a number of beaver dams and the inhabitants of them, many young ducks
both of the Duckanmallard and the redheaded fishing duck, gees, several
rattle snakes, black woodpeckers, and a large gang of Elk; they found
the river much crouded with island both large and small and passed a
small creek on Stard. side which we called birth Creek. Capt. Clark
discovers a tumor rising on the inner side of his ankle this evening
which was painfull to him. they incamped in a level bottom on the Lard.
side.-




[Clark, August 2, 1805]
August 2nd Friday 1805
a fine day Set out early the river has much the Same kind of banks
Chanel Current &c. as it had in the last vallie, I walked out this
morning on Shore & Saw Several rattle Snakes in the plain, the wind
from the S W we proceeded on with great dificuelty from the rapidity of
the current & rapids, abt. 15 miles and Encamped on the Lard Side, saw
a large Gangue of Elk at Sunset to the S W. passed a Small Creek on the
Stard Side and maney large and Small Islands. Saw a number of young
Ducks as we have also Seen everry Day, Some geese I saw Black
woodpeckers--I have either got my foot bitten by Some poisonous insect
or a turner is riseing on the inner bone of my ankle which is painfull




[Lewis, August 3, 1805]
August the 3rd 1805.
Set out this morning at sunrise and continued our rout through the
valley on the Lard. side of the river. at eleven A.M. Drewyer killed a
doe and we halted and took breakfast. the mountains continue high on
either side of the valley, and are but skantily supplyed with timber;
small pine appears to be the prevalent growth. there is no timber in
the valley except a small quantity of the narrow leafed cottonwood on
the verge of the river. the underwood consists of the narrowleafed or
small willow, honeysuckle rosebushes, courant, goosbury and service
bury bushes allso a small quantity of a species of dwarf burch the leaf
of which, oval, deep green, finely indented and very small. we encamped
this evening after sunset having traveled by estimate 23 miles. from
the width and appearance of the valley at this place I concieved that
the river forked not far above me and therefore resolved the next
morning to examine the adjacent country more minutely.




[Lewis, August 3, 1805]
Saturday August 3rd 1805.
Set out early this morning, or before sunrise; still continued our
march through the level valley on the lard. side of the river. the
valley much as yesterday only reather wider; I think it 12 Miles wide,
tho the plains near the mountains rise higher and are more broken with
some scattering pine near the mountain. in the leaveler parts of the
plain and river bottoms which are very extensive there is no timber
except a scant proportion of cottonwood neat the river. the under wood
consists of the narrow leafed or small willow, the small honeysuckle,
rosebushes, currant, serviceberry, and goosbery bushes; also a small
species of berth in but small quantities the leaf which is oval finely,
indented, small and of a deep green colour. the stem is simple
ascending and branching, and seldom rises higher than 10 or 12 feet.
the Mountains continue high on either side of the valley, and are but
scantily supplyed with timber; small pine apears to be the prevalent
growth; it is of the pith kind, with a short leaf. at 11 A.M. Drewyer
killed a doe and we halted about 2 hours and breakfasted, and then
continued our rout untill night without halting, when we arrived at the
river in a level bottom which appeared to spread to greater extent than
usual. from the appearance of the timber I supposed that the river
forked above us and resolved to examine this part of the river minutely
tomorrow. this evening we passed through a high plain for about 8 miles
covered with prickley pears and bearded grass, tho we found this even
better walking than the wide bottoms of the river, which we passed in
the evening; these altho apparently level, from some cause which I know
not, were formed into meriads of deep holes as if rooted up by hogs
these the grass covered so thick that it was impossible to walk without
the risk of falling down at every step. some parts of these bottoms
also possess excellent terf or peat, I beleive of many feet deep. the
mineral salts also frequently mentioned on the Missouri we saw this
evening in these uneven bottoms. we saw many deer, Antelopes ducks,
gees, some beaver and great appearance of their work. also a small bird
and the Curlooe as usual. we encamped on the river bank on Lard. side
having traveled by estimate 23 Miles. The fish of this part of the
river are trout and a species of scale fish of a white colour and a
remarkable small long mouth which one of our men inform us are the same
with the species called in the Eastern states bottlenose. the snowey
region of the mountains and for some distance below has no timber or
herbage of any kind; the timber is confined to the lower and middle
regions. Capt. Clark set out this morning as usual. he walked on shore
a small distance this morning and killed a deer. in the course of his
walk he saw a track which he supposed to be that of an Indian from the
circumstance of the large toes turning inward. he pursued the track and
found that the person had ascended a point of a hill from which his
camp of the last evening was visible; this circumstance also confirmed
the beleif of it's being an Indian who had thus discovered them and ran
off. they found the river as usual much crouded with islands, the
currant more rapid & much more shallow than usual. in many places they
were obliged to double man the canoes and drag them over the stone and
gravel. this morning they passed a small creek on Stard. at the
entrance of which Reubin Fields killed a large Panther. we called the
creek after that animal Panther Creek. they also passed a handsome
little stream on Lard. which is form of several large springs which
rise in the bottoms and along the base of the mountains with some
little rivulets from the melting snows. the beaver have formed many
large dams on this stream. they saw some deer Antelopes and the common
birds of the country. in the evening they passed a very bad rappid
where the bed of the river is formed entrely of solid rock and encamped
on an island just above. the Panther which Fields killed measured seven
and 1/2 feet from the nose to the extremity of the tail. it is precisely
 the same animal common to the western part of our country. the men wer
compelled to be a great proportion of their time in the water today;
they have had a severe days labour and are much fortiegued.




[Clark, August 3, 1805]
August 3rd Saturday1805
a fine morning wind from the N E I walked on Shore & killed a Deer in
my walk I saw a fresh track which I took to be an Indian from the Shape
of the foot as the toes turned in, I think it probable that this Indian
Spied our fires and Came to a Situation to view us from the top of a
Small knob on the Lard Side. the river more rapid and Sholey than
yesterday one R. F. man killed a large Panthor on the Shore we are
oblige to haul over the Canoes Sholey in maney places where the Islands
are noumerous and bottom Sholey, in the evening the river more rapid
and Sholey we encamped on an Island avove a part of the river which
passed thro a rockey bed enclosed on both sides with thick willow
current & red buries &c &c passed a bold Stream which heads in the
mountains to our right and the drean of the minting Snow in the Montn.
on that side ar in View--at 4 oClock passed a bold Stream which falls
from a mountn in three Channels to our left, the Greater portion of the
Snow on this mountain is melted, but little remaining near us Some Deer
Elk & antelopes & Bear in the bottoms. but fiew trees and they Small
the Mountains on our left Contain pine those on our right but verry
partially Supplied and what pine & cedar it has is on the Lower region,
no wood being near the Snow. great numbers of Beaver Otter &c. Some
fish trout & and bottle nose. Birds as usial. Geese young Ducks &
Curlows




[Lewis, August 4, 1805]
August 4th 1805.
Set out very early this morning and steered S. E. by E. about 4 Miles
when we passed a bould runing creek about 12 yards wide the water could
and remarkably clear, we then changed our course to S. E. passing
obliquely across a valley which boar nearly E leaving the valley which
we had pursued for the 2 precedeing days. at the distance of 3 miles we
passed a handsome little river which passes through this valley; it is
about 30 yards wide affords a considerable quantity of water and I
believe it may be navigated some miles. I then changed my rout to S. W.
passed a high plain which lyes between the vallies and returned to the
S. valley, in passing which I fell in with a river about 45 yards wide
which I waideg and then continued my rout down to it's junction with
the river just mentioned, and from thence to the entrance of the creek
which falls in about 2 miles below; still continuing my rout down this
stream about three miles further and about 2 M. below our encampment of
the last evening this river forms a junction with a river 50 yards wide
which comes from the N. W. and falling into the S. valley runs
parrallel with the middle fork about 12 miles. this is a bould rappid &
clear stream it's bed so broken and obstructed by gravel bars and
Islands that it appeared to me impossible to navigate it with safety.
the middle fork is gentle and possesses about 2/3ds as much water as
this rappid stream, it's cours so far as I can observe it is about S.
W. and it appears to be navigable; its water is much warmer than that
of the rappid fork and somewhat turbid, from which I concluded that it
had it's source at a greater distance in the mountains and passed
through an opener country than the other. under this impression I wrote
a note to Capt. Clark recommending his taking the middle fork provided
he should arrive at this place before my return which I expect will be
the day after tomorrow. the note I left on a pole at the forks of the
river and having refreshed ourselves and eat heartily of some venison
we killed this morning I continued my rout up the Stard side of the N.
W. fork, determining to pursue it untill 12 OC. the next day and then
pass over to the middle fork and return to their junction or untill I
met Capt. Clark. we encamped this evening near the point where the
river leaves the valley and enters the mountains, having traveled about
20 miles.-




[Lewis, August 4, 1805]
Sunday August 4th 1805.
Set out very early this morning and Steered S. E. by E. 4 M. when we
pased a bold runing Creek 12 yds. wide, the water of which was clear
and very cold. it appears to be formed by four dranes from the snowey
mountains to our left. after passing this creek we changed our
direction to S. E. passing obliquely across a valley which boar E
leaving the valley we had pursued for the two peceeding days. at the
distance of 3 Ms. we passed a handsome little river which meanders
through this valley; it is about 30 yds wide, affords a considerable
quantity of water and appears as if it might be navigated some miles.
the currant is not rapid nor the water very clear; the banks are low
and the bed formed of stone and gravel. I now changed my rout to S. W.
passed a high plain which lies betwen the valleies and returned to the
South valley, in passing which I fell in with a river about 45 yds.
wide gravley bottom gentle currant waist deep and water of a whitish
blue tinge. this stream we waded and continued our rout down it to the
entrance of the river just mentioned about 3/4 of a mile. still
continuing down we passed the entrance of the creek about 2 miles lower
down; and at the distance of three miles further arrived at it's
junction with a river 50 yds. wide which Comes from the S. W. and
falling into the South valley runs parallel with the middle fork about
12 miles before it forms a junction. I now found that our encampment of
the last evening was about 11/2 miles above the entrance of this large
river on Stard. this is a bold rappid and Clear Stream, it's bed so
much broken and obstructed by gravley bars and it's waters so much
subdivided by Islands that it appears to me utterly impossible to
navigate it with safety. the middle fork is gentle and possesses about
2/3rds as much water as this stream. it's course so far as I can
observe it is about S. W., and from the opening of the valley I beleive
it still bears more to the West above it may be safely navigated. it's
water is much warmer then the rapid fork and it's water more turbid;
from which I conjecture that it has it's sources at a greater distance
in the mountains and passes through an opener country than the other.
under this impression I wrote a note to Capt Clark, recommending his
taking the middle fork povided he should arrive at this place before my
return, which I expect will be the day after tomorrow. this note I left
on a pole at the forks of the river, and having refreshed ourselves and
eat heartily of some venison which we killed this morning we continued
our rout up the rapid fork on the Stard side, resolving to pursue this
stream untill noon tomorrow and then pass over to the middle fork and
come down it to their junction or untill I meet Capt Clark. I have seen
no recent Indian sign in the course of my rout as yet. Charbono
complains much of his leg, and is the cause of considerable detention
to us. we encamped on the river bank near the place at which it leaves
the valley and enters the mountain having traveled about 23 miles. we
saw some Antelopes deer Grains, gees, and ducks of the two species
common to this country. the summer duck has ceased to appear, nor do I
beleive it is an inhabitant of this part of the country. the timber &c
is as heretofore tho there is more in this valley on the rapid fork
than we have seen in the same extent on the river since we entered this
valley. the Indians appear on some parts of the river to have distroyed
a great proportion of the little timber which there is by seting fire
to the bottoms. This morning Capt. Clark set out at sunrise, and sent
two hunters ahead to kill some meat. at 8 A.M. he arrived at my camp of
the 2ed inst. where he breakfasted; here he found a note which I had
left for him at that place informing him of the occurences of my rout
&c. the river continued to be crouded with Islands, rapid and shoaly.
these shoals or riffles succeeded each other every 3 or four hundred
yards; at those places they are obliged to drag the canoes over the
stone there not being water enough to float them, and betwen the riffles
 the current is so strong that they are compelled to have cecourse to
the cord; and being unable to walk on the shore for the brush wade in
the river along the shore and hawl them by the cord; this has increased
the pain and labour extreemly; their feet soon get tender and soar by
wading and walking over the stones. these are also so slipry that they
frequently get severe falls. being constantly wet soon makes them feble
also. their hunters killed 2 deer today and some gees and ducks wer
killed by those who navigated the canoes. they saw deer antelopes
Grains beaver Otter &c. Capt. Clark's ancle became so painfull to him
that he was unable to walk.--This evening they encamped on the Stard.
side in a bottom of cottonwood timber all much fatiegued.




[Clark, August 4, 1805]
August 4th Sunday 1805
a fine morning cool proceeded on verry early and Brackfast at the Camp
Capt Lewis left yesterday morning, at this Camp he left a note
informing that he discovered no fresh Sign of Indians &c. The river
continued to be crouded with Islands Sholey rapid & clear, I could not
walk on Shore to day as my ankle was Sore from a turner on that part.
the method we are compelled to take to get on is fatigueing & laborious
in the extreen, haul the Canoes over the rapids, which Suckceed each
other every two or three hundred yards and between the water rapid
oblige to towe & walke on Stones the whole day except when we have
poleing men wet all day Sore feet &c. &c Murcury at Sun rise 49 a. 0,




[Lewis, August 5, 1805]
Monday August 5th 1805
As Charbono complained of being unable to march far today I ordered him
and Sergt. Gass to pass the rappid river near our camp and proceed at
their leasure through the level bottom to a point of high timber about
seven miles distant on the middle fork which was in view; I gave them
my pack that of Drewyer and the meat which we had, directing them to
remain at that place untill we joined them. I took Drewyer with me and
continued my rout up the stard. side of the river about 4 miles and
then waded it; found it so rapid and shallow that it was impossible to
navigate it. continued up it on the Lard. side about 11/2 miles further
when the mountains put in close on both sides and arrose to great
hight, partially covered with snow. from hence the course of the river
was to the East of North. I took the advantage of a high projecting
spur of the mountain which with some difficulty we ascended to it's
summit in about half an hour. from this eminance I had a pleasing view
of the valley through which I had passed many miles below and the
continuation of the middle fork through the valley equally wide above
me to the distance of about 20 miles when that also appeared to enter
the mountains and disappeared to my view; however the mountains which
termineate the valley in this direction appeared much lower than those
up either of the other forks. on the rapid fork they appeared still to
rise the one range towering above another as far as I could perceive
them. the middle fork as I suspected dose bear considerably to the West
of South and the gap formed by it in the mountains after the valley
terminates is in the same direction. under these circumstances I did
not hesitate in beleiving the middle fork the most proper for us to
ascend. about South from me, the middle fork approached within about 5
miles. I resolved to pass across the plains to it and return to Gass
and Charbono, accordingly we set out and decended the mountain among
some steep and difficult precipices of rocks. here Drewyer missed his
step and had a very dangerous fall, he sprained one of his fingers and
hirt his leg very much. in fifteen or 20 minutes he was able to proceed
and we continued our rout to the river where we had desighned to
interscept it. I quenched my thirst and rested a few minutes examined
the river and found it still very navi-gable. an old indian road very
large and plain leads up this fork, but I could see no tracks except
those of horses which appeared to have passed early in the spring. as
the river mad a great bend to the South East we again ascended the high
plain and steered our course as streight as we could to the point where
I had directed Gass and Sharbono to remain. we passed the plain
regained the bottom and struck the river about 3 miles above them; by
this time it was perfectly dark & we hooped but could hear no tidings
of them. we had struck the river at the point of timber to which I had
directed them, but having mistaken a point of woods lower down, had
halted short of the place. we continued our rout after dark down the
bottom through thick brush of the pulppy leafed thorn and prickly pears
for about 2 hours when we arrived at their camp. they had a small
quantity of meat left which Drewyer and myself eat it being the first
we had taisted today. we had traveled about 25 miles. I soon laid down
and slept very soundly untill morning. I saw no deer today nor any game
except a few Antelopes which were very shy. the soil of the plains is a
light yellow clay very meager and intermixed with a large proportion of
gravel, producing nothing except the twisted or bearded grass, sedge
and prickly pears. the dryer parts of the bottoms are also much more
indifferent in point of soil to those below and are covered with the
southernwood pulpy leafed thorn and prickley pears with but little
grass. the moist parts are fertile and covered with fine grass and sand
rushes.

This morning Capt. Clark set out at sunrise and dispatched Joseph &
Reubin Fields to hunt. they killed two deer on one of which the party
breakfasted. the river today they found streighter and more rapid even
than yesterday, and the labour and difficulty of the navigation was
proportionably increased, they therefore proceeded but slowly and with
great pain as the men had become very languid from working in the water
and many of their feet swolen and so painfull that they could scarcely
walk. at 4 P.M. they arrived at the confluence of the two rivers where
I had left the note. this note had unfortunately been placed on a green
pole which the beaver had cut and carried off together with the note;
the possibility of such an occurrence never one occurred to me when I
placed it on the green pole. this accedent deprived Capt. Clark of any
information with ripect to the country and supposing that the rapid
fork was most in the direction which it was proper we should pursue, or
West, he took that stream and asscended it with much difficulty about a
mile and encamped on an island that had been lately overflown and was
yet damp; they were therefore compelled to make beds of brush to keep
themselves out of the mud. in ascending this stream for about a quarter
of a mile it scattered in such a maner that they were obliged to cut a
passage through the willow brush which leant over the little channels
and united their tops. Capt. Clarks ankle is extreemly painfull to him
this evening; the tumor has not yet mature, he has a slight fever.--The
men were so much fortiegued today that they wished much that navigation
was at an end that they might go by land.-




[Clark, August 5, 1805]
August 5th Monday 1805
a Cold Clear morning the wind from the S. E. the river Streight & much
more rapid than yesterday, I Sent out Jo. & R. Fields to kill Some meat
they killed 2 Deer & we brackfast on one of them and proceeded on with
great dificuelety from the rapidity of the Current, and numerable
rapids we had to encounter, at 4 oClock P M Murcury 49 ab. 0, passed
the mouth of principal fork which falls in on the Lard. Side, this fork
is about the Size of the Stard. one less water reather not so rapid,
its Course as far as can be Seen is S. E & appear to pass through
between two mountains, the N W. fork being the one most in our course
i. e. S 25 W. as far as I can See, deturmind me to take this fork as
the principal and the one most proper the S E fork is of a Greenish
Colour & contains but little timber. The S W fok contains more timber
than is below for Some distance, we assended this fork about one mile
and Encamped on an Island which had been laterly overflown & was wet we
raised our bead on bushes, we passed a part of the river above the
forks which was divided and Scattered thro the willows in Such a manner
as to render it dificuelt to pass through for a 1/4 of a mile, we wer
oblige to Cut our way thro the willows--Men much fatigued from their
excessive labours in hauling the Canoes over the rapids &c. verry weak
being in the water all day. my foot verry painfull

Assended the N W Fork 9 miles on a Course S. 30 deg. W. to a Bluff on the
Stard. Side passed Several Bayous & Islands




[Lewis, August 6, 1805]
Tuesday August 6th 1805.
We set out this morning very early on our return to the forks. having
nothing to eat I set Drewyer to the woodlands to my left in order to
kill a deer, sent Sergt. Gass to the right with orders to keep
sufficiently near to discover Capt. C. and the party should they be on
their way up that stream, and with Sharbono I directed my course to the
main forks through the bottom directing the others to meet us there.
about five miles above the forks I head the hooping of the party to my
left and changed my rout towards them; on my arrival found that they
had taken the rapid fork and learnt from Capt. Clark that he had not
found the note which I had left for him at that place and the reasons
which had induced him to ascend this stream. it was easeist & more in
our direction, and apd. to contain as much water he had hoever
previously to my comeing up with him, met Drewyer who informed him of
the state of the two rivers and was on his return. one of their canoes
had just overset and all the baggage wet, the medecine box among other
articles and several articles lost a shot pouch and horn with all the
implements for one rifle lost and never recovered. I walked down to the
point where I waited their return. on their arrival found that two
other canoes had filled with water and wet their cargoes completely.
Whitehouse had been thrown out of one of the canoes as she swing in a
rapid current and the canoe had rubed him and pressed him to the bottom
as she passed over him and had the water been 2 inches shallower must
inevitably have crushed him to death. our parched meal, corn, Indian
preasents, and a great part of our most valuable stores were wet and
much damaged on this ocasion. to examine, dry and arrange our stores
was the first object; we therefore passed over to the lard. side
opposite to the entrance of the rapid fork where there was a large
gravly bar that answered our purposes; wood was also convenient and
plenty. here we fixed our camp, and unloaded all our canoes and opened
and exposed to dry such articles as had been wet. a part of the load of
each canoe consisted of the leaden canestirs of powder which were not
in least injured, tho some of them had remained upwards of an hour
under water. about 20 lbs. of powder which we had in a tight Keg or at
least one which we thought sufficiently so got wet and intirely
spoiled. this would have been the case with the other had it not have
been for the expedient which I had fallen on of securing the powder by
means of the lead having the latter formed into canesters which were
filled with the necessary proportion of poder to discharge the lead
when used, and those canesters well secured with corks and wax. in this
country the air is so pure and dry that any vessel however well
seasoned the timber may be will give way or shrink unless it is kept
full of some liquid. we found that three deer skins which we had left
at a considerable hight on a tree were taken off which we supposed had
been done by a panther. we sent out some men to hunt this evening, they
killed 3 deer and four Elk which gave us a plentifull supply of meat
once more. Shannon had been dispatched up the rapid fork this morning
to hunt, by Capt Clark before he met with Drewyer or learnt his mistake
in the rivers. when he returned he sent Drewyer in surch of him, but he
rejoined us this evening and reported that he had been several miles up
the river and could find nothing of him. we had the trumpet sounded and
fired several guns but he did not join us this evening. I am fearful he
is lost again. this is the same man who was seperated from us 15 days
as we came up the Missouri and subsisted 9 days of that time on grapes
only. Whitehouse is in much pain this evening with the injury one of
his legs sustained from the canoe today at the time it upset and swing
over him. Capt Clarks ankle is also very painfull to him.--we should
have given the party a days rest some where near this place had not
this accedent happened, as I had determined to take some observations
to fix the Latitude and longitude of these forks. our merchandize
medecine &c are not sufficiently dry this evening we covered them
securely for the evening. Capt Clark had ascended the river about 9
miles from this place on a course of S 30 deg. W. before he met with Drewyer.

we beleive that the N. W. or rapid fork is the dane of the melting
snows of the mountains, and that it is not as long as the middle fork
and dose not at all seasons of the year supply any thing like as much
water as the other and that about this season it rises to it's greatest
hight. this last appears from the apparent bed of the river which is
now overflown and the water in many plases spreads through old channels
which have their bottoms covered with grass that has grown this season
and is such as appears on the parts of the bottom not innundated. we
therefore determined that the middle fork was that which ought of right
to bear the name we had given to the lower portion or River Jefferson
and called the bold rapid an clear stream Wisdom, and the more mild and
placid one which flows in from the S. E. Philanthrophy, in
commemoration of two of those cardinal virtues, which have so eminently
marked that deservedly selibrated character through life.




[Clark, August 6, 1805]
August 6th Tuesday 1805
a Clear morning Cool wind from the S W we proceeded on with much
dificuelty and fatigue over rapids & Stones; river about 40 or 50 yards
wide much divided by Islands and narrow Bayoos to a low bluff on the
Stard Side & Brackfast, dureing the time of Brackfast Drewyer Came to
me from Capt. Lewis and informed me that they had explored both forks
for 30 or 40 miles & that the one we were assending was impractiabl
much further up & turned imediately to the north, The middle fork he
reported was jintle and after a Short distanc turned to the S. W. and
that all the Indian roades leades up the middle fork. this report
deturmind me to take the middle fork, accordingly Droped down to the
forks where I met with Capt Lewis & party, Capt Lewis had left a Letter
on a pole in the forks informing me what he had discovered & the course
of the rivers &c. this lettr was Cut down by the beaver as it was on a
green pole & Carried off. Three Skins which was left on a tree was
taken off by the Panthers or wolvers. In decending to the Point one
Canoe Struck & turned on a rapid & Sunk, and wet every thing which was
in her, this misfortune obliged us to halt at the forks and dry those
articles, one other Canoe nearly turning over, filled half full of
water & wet our medison & Some Goods Corn &c. Several hunters out to
day & killed a young Elk, Antilope, & 3 Deer, one man Shannon did not
return to night--This evening Cool my anckle much wors than it has
been--this evening a Violent wind from the N. W accompanied with rain
which lasted half an hour wind N. W




[Lewis, August 7, 1805]
Wednesday August 7th 1805.
The morning being fair we spread our stores to dry at an early hour.
Dispatched Reubin Fields in surch of Shannon. our stores were now so
much exhausted that we found we could proceed with one canoe less. we
therefore drew out one of them into a thicket of brush and secured her
in such manner that the water could not take her off should the river
rise to the hight where she is. The creek which falls in above us we
called turf creek from the cercustance of it's bottoms being composed
of excellent turf. my air gun was out of order and her sights had been
removed by some accedent I put her in order and regulated her. she shot
again as well as she ever did. The clouds last night prevented my
taking any lunar observations this day I took Equal Altitudes of the 0
with Sextant.

At one oclock all our baggage was dry we therefore packed it up
reloaded the canoes and the party proceeded with Capt. Clark up
Jefferson's river. I remained with Sergt. Gass to complete the
observation of equal altitudes and joined them in the evening at their
camp on the Lard. side just above the entrance of turf creek. we had a
shower of rain wich continued about 40 minutes attended with thunder
and lightning. this shower wet me perfectly before I reached the camp.
the clouds continued during the night in such manner that I was unable
to obtain any lunar observations. This evening Drewyer brought in a
deer which he had killed. we have not heard any thing from Shannon yet,
we expect that he has pursued Wisdom river upwards for som distance
probably killed some heavy animal and is waiting our arrival. the large
biteing fly or hare fly as they sometimes called are very troublesome
to us. I observe two kinds of them a large black species and a small
brown species with a green head. the musquetoes are not as troublesome
as they were below, but are still in considerable quantities. the eye
knats have disappeared. the green or blowing flies are still in swarms.

r the courses from the entrance of Wisdom river to the forks of
Jefferson's river are taken directly to the objects mentioned and the
distance set down is that by land on a direct line between the points;
the estimated distances by water is also added in the body of the
remarks on each course.




[Clark, August 7, 1805]
August 7th Wednesday 1805
a fine morning put out our Stores &c. to dry & took equal altitudes
with the Sextant,--as our Store were a little exorsted and one Canoe
became unnecessary deturmind to leave one. we Hauled her up in the
bushes on the lower Side of the main fork & fastened her So that the
water could not flote her off. The Countrey in this quarter is as
follows i, e a Vallie of 5 or 6 miles wide Inclosed between two high
Mountains, the bottom rich Some Small timber on the Islands & bushes on
the edges of the river Some Bogs & verry good turf in different places
in the vallie, Some scattering Pine & ceder on the mountains in places,
other Parts nacked except grass and Stone The Lattitude of the Mouth of
Wisdom River is 45 deg. 2' 21.6" North, we proceeded up the Main Middle or S.
E. fork, passed a Camped on the Lard. Side above the mouth of a bold
running Stream 12 yards wide, which we call turf Creek from the number
of bogs & quanty of turf in its waters. this Creek runs thro a open
Plain for Several miles, takeing its rise in a high mountain to the N
E. The river Jefferson above Wisdom is gentle Crooked and about 40
yards wide, Containing but little timber, Some few Cotton willow Willow
& Birch, and the Srubs common to the countrey and before mentioned at 5
oClock a thunder Storm from the N. W. accompanied with rain which
lasted about 40 minits.--despatched R Fields to hunt Shannon, who was
out huntg. on Wisdom river at the time I returned down that Stream, and
has made on up the river expecting us to follow him up that river one
Deer killed this evening. all those Streams Contain emence number of
Beaver orter Muskrats &c.




[Lewis, August 8, 1805]
Thursday August 8th 1805.
We had a heavy dew this morning. as one canoe had been left we had now
more hads to spear for the chase; game being scarce it requires more
hunters to supply us. we therefore dispatched four this morning. we set
out at sunrise and continued our rout up the river which we find much
more gentle and deep than below the entrance of Wisdom river it is from
35 to 45 yards wide very crooked many short bends constituteing large
and general bends; insomuch that altho we travel briskly and a
considerable distance yet it takes us only a few miles on our general
course or rout. there is but very little timber on this fork
principally the under brush frequently mentioned. I observe a
considerable quantity of the buffaloe clover in the bottoms. the
sunflower, flax, green swoard, thistle and several species of the rye
grass some of which rise to the hight of 3 or 4 feet. there is a grass
also with a soft smooth leaf that bears it's seeds very much like the
timothy but it dose not grow very luxouriant or appear as if it would
answer so well as the common timothy for meadows. I preserved some of
it's seeds which are now ripe, thinking perhaps it might answer better
if cultivated, at all events is at least worth the experi-ment. it
rises about 3 feet high. on a direct line about 2 miles above our
encampment of this morning we passed the entrance of Philanthrophy
River which discharges itself by 2 channels a small distance assunder.
this river from it's size and S. Eastwardly course no doubt heads with
Madisons river in the snowey mountains visible in that direction. at
Noon Reubin Fields arrived and reported that he had been up Wisdom
river some miles above where it entered the mountain and could find
nothing of Shannon, he had killed a deer and an Antelope. great
quantity of beaver Otter and musk-rats in these rivers. two of the
hunters we sent out this morning returned at noon had killed each a
deer and an Antelope. we use the seting poles today almost altogether.
we encamped on the Lard sides where there was but little timber were
obliged to use willow brush for fuel; the rosebushes and bryers were
very thick. the hunters brought in another deer this evening. to tumor
on Capt. Clarks ankle has discharged a considerable quantity of matter
but is still much swolen and inflamed and gives him considerable pain.
saw a number of Gees ducks and some Crains today. the former begin to
fly.

the evening again proved cloudy much to my mortification and prevented
my making any lunar observations. the Indian woman recognized the point
of a high plain to our right which she informed us was not very distant
from the summer retreat of her nation on a river beyond the mountains
which runs to the west. this hill she says her nation calls the
beaver's head from a conceived remblance of it's figure to the head of
that animal. she assures us that we shall either find her people on
this river or on the river immediately west of it's source; which from
it's present size cannot be very distant. as it is now all important
with us to meet with those people as soon as possible, I determined to
proceed tomorrow with a small party to the source of the principal
stream of this river and pass the mountains to the Columbia; and down
that river untill I found the Indians; in short it is my resolusion to
find them or some others, who have horses if it should cause me a trip
of one month. for without horses we shall be obliged to leave a great
part of our stores, of which, it appears to me that we have a stock
already sufficiently small for the length of the voyage before us.




[Clark, August 8, 1805]
August 8th Thursday 1805
We proceeded on early wind from the S W. The Thermometer at 52 a 0 at
Sunrise at 5 miles by water & 41/2 on a derect line from the forks we
passed a River on the Lard Side 30 yards wide and navagable for Some
distance takeing its rise in the Mountains Easterly & with the waters
of Madisons River, passes thro an extensive vallie open & furtill &c.
this river we call Philanthophy--above this river (which has but little
timber) Jeffersons R is crooked with Short bends a fiew Islands and
maney gravelly Sholes, no large timber, Small willow Birch & Srubs &c.
Encamped on the Lard Side, R Fields joined us this eveng. & informes
that he could not find Shannon my foot yet verry Swore




[Lewis, August 9, 1805]
Friday August 9th 1805.
The morning was fair and fine; we set out at an early hour and
proceeded on very well. some parts of the river more rapid than
yesterday. I walked on shore across the land to a point which I
presumed they would reach by 8 A.M. our usual time of halting. by this
means I acquired leasure to accomplish some wrightings which I
conceived from the nature of my instructions necessary lest any
accedent should befall me on the long and reather hazardous rout I was
now about to take. the party did not arrive and I returned about a mile
and met them, here they halted and we breakefasted; I had killed two
fine gees on my return. while we halted here Shannon arrived, and
informed us that having missed the party the day on which he set out he
had returned the next morning to the place from whence he had set out
or furst left them and not finding that he had supposed that they wer
above him; that he then set out and marched one day up wisdom river, by
which time he was convinced that they were not above him as the river
could not be navigated; he then returned to the forks and had pursued
us up this river. he brought the skins of three deer which he had
killed which he said were in good order. he had lived very plentifully
this trip but looked a good deel worried with his march. he informed us
that Wisdom river still kept it's course obliquely down the Jefferson's
river as far as he was up it. immediately after breakfast I slung my
pack and set out accompanyed by Drewyer Shields and McNeal who had been
previously directed to hold themselves in readiness for this service. I
directed my course across the bottom to the Stard. plain led left the
beaver's head about 2 miles to my left and interscepted the river about
8 miles from the point at which I had left it; I then waded it and
continued my rout to the point where I could observe that it entered
the mountain, but not being able to reach that place, changed my
direction to the river which I struck some miles below the mountain and
encamped for the evening having traveled 16 M. we passed a handsom
little stream formed by some large spring which rise in this wide
bottom on the Lard. side of the river. we killed two Antelopes on our
way and brought with us as much meat as was necessary for our suppers
and breakfast the next morning. we found this bottom fertile and
covered with taller grass than usual. the river very crooked much
divided by islands, shallow rocky in many plases and very rapid;
insomuch that I have my doubts whether the canoes could get on or not,
or if they do it must be with great labour.--Capt. Clark proceeded
after I left him as usual, found the current of the river increasing in
rapidity towards evening. his hunters killed 2 antelopes only. in the
evening it clouded up and we experienced a slight rain attended with
some thunder and lightning. the musquetoes very troublesome this
evening. there are some soft bogs in these vallies covered with turf.
the earth of which this mud is composed is white or bluish white and
appears to be argillacious.




[Clark, August 9, 1805]
August 9th Friday 1805
a fine morning wind from the N. E we proceeded on verry well rapid
places more noumerous than below, Shannon the man whome we lost on
Wisdom River Joined us, haveing returned to the forks & prosued us up
after prosueing Wisdom River one day

Capt Lewis and 3 men Set out after brackft. to examine the river above,
find a portage if possible, also the Snake Indians. I Should have taken
this trip had I have been able to march, from the rageing fury of a
turner on my anckle musle, in the evening Clouded up and a fiew drops
of rain Encamped on the Lard Side near a low bluff, the river to day as
yesterday. the three hunters Could kill only two antelopes to day, game
of every kind Scerce




[Lewis, August 10, 1805]
Saturday August 10th 1805.
We set out very early this morning and continued our rout through the
wide bottom on the Lard. side of the river after passing a large creek
at about 5 miles we fel in with a plain Indian road which led towards
the point that the river entered the mountain we therefore pursued the
road I sent Drewyer to the wright to kill a deer which we saw feeding
and halted on the river under an immencely high perpendicular clift of
rocks where it entered the mountain here we kindled a fire and waited
for Drewyer. he arrived in about an hour and a half or at noon with
three deer skins and the flesh of one of the best of them, we cooked
and eat a haisty meal and departed, returning a shot distance to the
