through the upheaved and obstructed streets.  It was a scene of absolute
and utter ruin, which Lawrence felt could never be effaced from his
memory, but must remain there burned in deeply, in its minutest details,
to the end of time.

When they had passed the suburbs, however, and reached the country
beyond, the depressing influences passed away, and, a certain degree of
cheerfulness returning with the sun, they began to chat and to explain
to each other their various experiences.

"Of course, when I felt the earthquake," said Pedro to Lawrence, "I knew
that, although little damage was done to the village to which I had gone
in search of my friends, it must have been very severe on the town with
its spires and public buildings; so I saddled up at once, and set off on
my return.  I met Quashy just as I left the village, and we both spurred
back as fast as we could.  When we came in sight of it, we saw at once
that the place was destroyed, but, until we reached it, had no idea of
the completeness of the destruction.  We could not even find the road
that led to the inn where we had left you and Manuela; and it was not
till the following morning that we found the inn itself, and came up, as
you know, just in time to help you, though we had sought diligently all
night."

"Das so, massa," broke in Quashy, who had listened with glittering eyes
to Pedro's narrative, which of course was much more extended and full,
"an' you's got no notion how we's banged about our poor shins among dese
ruins afore we founded you.  S'my b'lief but for de fires we'd nebber
hab founded you at all.  And dem scoundrils--oh! dem scoundrils--"

Quashy's feelings at this point failed to find vent in words
sufficiently expressive, so he relieved them to some extent by shaking
his fist at scoundreldom in general, and grinding his teeth.  No words
could have expressed his feelings half so well.  By way of changing a
subject that appeared to be almost too much for him, he turned abruptly
to the Indian girl; and said, in Spanish quite as bad as that of
Lawrence--

"But where were _you_, senhorina, all the time?"

"Ay, Manuela, let's hear how it was that you escaped," said Pedro
quickly, in Indian.

"I escaped through the mercy of God," replied the girl, in a low voice.

"True, Manuela, true," replied the guide, "you never said a truer word
than that; but by what means was His mercy displayed?"

"I can scarcely tell," returned the girl; "when the earthquake came I
was sitting on my bed.  Then the wall of the room seemed to fall on me,
and my senses were gone.  How long I lay so, I cannot tell.  When I
recovered my mind I felt as if buried alive, but I could breathe, and
although unable to rise, I could move.  Then I heard cries, and I
replied; but my strength was gone, and I think no one heard me.  Then I
prayed, and then, I think, I slept, but am not sure.  At last I heard a
spade striking the earth above me.  Soon an opening was made, and I was
dragged rudely out.  The rest you know."

On this being interpreted to her companions, Quashy gave it as his
decided opinion that a miracle had been performed for her special
deliverance; but Lawrence thought that, without miraculous interference,
God had caused a mass of wall to fall over and protect her in much the
same way that he himself had been protected.

While they were talking thus, and slowly descending one of the numerous
richly-wooded, though rugged, paths which traverse the lower slopes of
the Andes, they encountered a party of horsemen from the Pampas.  They
were well-armed, and from their looks might have been another troop of
banditti, coming like human vultures from afar to swoop down on the
carcass of the unfortunate town.

To have shown the slightest hesitancy or fear--supposing them to have
been what they looked--would have been to invite attack, but, as the
reader knows, our travellers were not the men to betray themselves thus.
Before starting, they had carefully examined their weapons, and had
bestowed them about their persons somewhat ostentatiously.  Pedro had
even caused Manuela to stick a brace of small pistols and a large knife
in her belt; and, as Indian women are sometimes known to be capable of
defending themselves as vigorously as men, she was by no means a cipher
in the effective strength of the party.

With a dignified yet free-and-easy air that would have done credit to a
Spanish Don of the olden time, Pedro saluted the party as he rode past.
His aspect, and the quiet, self-possessed air of the huge Englishman,
with the singularity of his cudgel, coupled with the look of graceful
decision about the Indian maiden, and the blunt bull-doggedness of the
square negro, were sufficient to ensure a polite response, not only from
that party, but from several other bands of the same stamp that were met
with during the day.

Diverging from the main road in order to avoid these bands, they
followed a track well-known to the guide.  Towards the afternoon, from
the top of a rising ground, they descried a solitary foot traveller
wending his way wearily up the hill.

He was a man of middle age, and powerfully-built, but walked with such
evident difficulty that it seemed as if he were either ill or exhausted.
Pedro eyed him with considerable suspicion as he approached.  In
passing, he begged for assistance.  As he spoke in French, Lawrence,
whose sympathies, like those of Quashy, were easily roused, asked in
that tongue what was the matter with him.

He had been robbed, he said, by that villainous bandit, Conrad of the
Mountains, or some one extremely like him, and had been nearly killed by
him.  He was on his way to San Ambrosio, where his wife and family
dwelt, having heard that it had been greatly damaged, if not destroyed,
by an earthquake.

"It has been utterly destroyed, my poor fellow," said Lawrence, in a
tone of pity; "but it may be that your family has escaped.  A good
number of people have escaped.  Here are a few dollars for you.  You
will need them, I fear.  You can owe them to me, and pay them when next
we meet."

The gift was accompanied with a look of pleasantry, for Lawrence well
knew there was little chance of their ever meeting again.

Pedro sat regarding them with a grim smile.  "You are a stout fellow,"
he said, in a tone that was not conciliatory, after the beggar had
accepted the dollars with many expressions of gratitude; "from all I
have heard of Conrad of the Mountains, you are quite a match for him, if
he were alone."

"He was not alone, senhor," replied the beggar, with a look that told of
a temper easily disturbed.

To this Pedro replied contemptuously, "Oh, indeed!" and, turning
abruptly away, rode on.

"You doubt that man?" said Lawrence, following him.

"I do."

"He looked honest."

"Men are not always to be judged by their looks."

"Das a fact!" interposed Quashy; "what would peepil judge ob _me_, now,
if dey hoed by looks?"

"They'd say you were a fine, genial, hearty, good-natured blockhead,"
said Lawrence, laughing.

"True, massa, you's right.  I'm all dat an' wuss, but not _always_ dat.
Sometimes I'm roused; an' I'm _awrful_ w'en I'm roused!  You should see
me w'en my back's riz.  Oh _my_!"

The negro opened his eyes and mouth so awfully at the mere idea of such
a rising that his companions were fain to seek relief in laughter.  Even
the grave Manuela gave way to unrestrained merriment, for if she failed
to thoroughly understand Quashy's meaning, she quite understood his
face.

That night they found welcome shelter in a small farm.

"Did you fall in with the notorious bandit, Conrad of the Mountains?"
asked their host, after the ceremonious reception of his guests was
over.

"No, senhor," answered Pedro.  "Is that fellow in this neighbourhood
just now?"

"So it is said, senhor.  I have not seen him myself, and should not know
him if I saw him, but from descriptions I should think it must be he.  I
have a poor fellow--a peon--lying here just now, who has been robbed and
nearly murdered by him.  Come, he is in the next room; you can speak to
him."

Saying this, the host introduced Pedro and Lawrence into an inner
chamber, where the wounded man lay, groaning horribly.  He was very
ready, indeed eager, to give all the information in his power.  Fear had
evidently given the poor fellow an exaggerated idea of the appearance of
the man who had waylaid him; nevertheless, from his description our
travellers had no difficulty in recognising the poor bereaved beggar
whom they had met and assisted.

"Was he a large man?" asked Pedro.

"Yes, yes, senhor; tremendous!--seven feet or more, and _so_"--
indicating about three feet--"across the shoulders.  Rough black head,
huge black beard and moustache, hawk nose, with such awful eyes, and the
strength of a tiger!  I could never have been so easily overcome by one
man if he had not been a giant."

"You see," said Pedro in English, turning to Lawrence with a smile, "the
description tallies exactly, making due allowance for this poor fellow's
alarm.  He must be a clever fellow this Conrad of the Mountains, for he
has not only frightened a peon out of his wits, but roused the pity of
an Englishman by asserting that he had been robbed by _himself_!  Your
charity, you see, was ill bestowed."

"So, it seems we might have made this noted bandit prisoner if we had
only known!" exclaimed Lawrence, who seemed more distressed at missing
the chance of becoming an amateur thief-catcher than at misdirected
charity.  "But do you really think the fellow was Conrad of the
Mountains?"

"I am certain he was not," said Pedro.

"How do you know?"

"I have several grounds for my belief, but, even if I had not, I might
easily judge from appearances.  Conrad is said to be kind to women and
children.  The scoundrel we met with could not be kind to any one.
Moreover, there is no clear proof that Conrad _is_ a bandit, while this
man certainly is one."

"I'm sorry you seem so sure, because I should like much to be able to
say I had seen this notorious fellow about whom every one appears to
hear so much and to know so little."

Although the bandit of whom we have just made mention was not Conrad of
the Mountains, it may interest the reader to know that he was in truth a
sufficiently notorious villain, named Fan, the captain of a band of
twenty assassins, most of whom were escaped criminals from the prisons
of Chili and Peru.  Among other exploits, Fan once attacked the armed
escort of a troop of mules conveying silver in bars from the mines to
Chili.  Fan and his men attacked them in a ravine so suddenly, and with
such a deadly fire of musketry, that the few who survived laid down
their arms at once, on the promise being made that their lives should be
spared.

Banditti do not usually regard promises as binding.  It would be
surprising if they did.  Fan made the survivors lie down on their faces,
and was about to plunder the mules, when he changed his mind, and shot
all the rest of the convoy in cold blood, except the last, who, seeing
the fate that awaited him, leaped over a precipice, rolled down a steep
slope many hundred feet deep, and, strange to say, escaped with his
life.  He then procured a dozen or two well-armed men, and returned to
the scene of the robbery, but found that the robbers had flown with as
much silver as they could carry, the remainder being scattered about on
the road.

These miscreants were afterwards captured, but, owing to disputes
between the Peruvian and the Chilian Governments, the former of whom had
hold of, while the latter claimed, the robbers, they all escaped their
merited punishment, and were set at large.



CHAPTER TWELVE.

THICK WOODS, HEAT, CHANGE OF SCENE, AND SAVAGES.

We must change the scene now, and transport our reader to one of those
numerous streams which convey the surplus waters of the Andes to the
warmer regions of Bolivia, and thence, through many a wild, luxuriant
wilderness and jungle, to the Parana river, by which they ultimately
find their way to the sea.

It was approaching the afternoon of a very sultry day when Lawrence
awoke from his midday siesta under an algaroba-tree, and slowly opened
his eyes.  The first object they rested upon was the brown little face
of Manuela, reposing on a pillow formed of leopard skin.  In those
regions it was the practice, when convenient, to sling a network hammock
between two trees, and enjoy one's siesta in that.  The Indian girl lay
in her hammock, with her eyes shut, and her little mouth open,--not
undignifiedly open, but just sufficiently so to permit of one seeing
something of the teeth and tongue inside.

Fascinated apparently by the sight, a mite of a blue-bird with a golden
head sat on the edge of the hammock close to the little mouth, and
looked in.  Evidently it was a bird of an inquiring disposition, for,
having gazed for a considerable time with one eye, it turned its head,
and gazed a longer time with the other.  Quashy lay close to Lawrence,
with his back towards him.  The latter, observing that the cheek of the
former was more lumpy and prominent than usual, raised himself on one
elbow to look at him, and found that the lump was the result of an
expansion of the mouth from ear to ear.  He was wide awake, gloating
over the proceedings of that little blue-bird, but he heard Lawrence
move, and turning his head slightly round, whispered--

"Dat am berry funny--i'n't it?"

The whisper slightly roused Manuela.  She drew a long breath, vented a
deep sigh, and effectually blew the blue-bird away.

At the same moment the whole party was roused by a wild and
indescribable scream, followed by a magnificent flash of what seemed to
be coloured fire.

In his half-sleeping condition, Lawrence, believing it to be the
war-whoop of wild Indians, leaped up and grasped his cudgel, but nothing
was to be seen save the grinning face of Quashy and the amused looks of
Manuela and Pedro.

"Purrits," remarked the negro, by way of explanation.

"What do you mean by purrits?" demanded Lawrence, half ashamed of his
alarm.

"I mean what I says, massa,--purrits."

"He means parrots," said Pedro, with a grave smile, as he rose, and
proceeded to fold up the poncho on which he had lain.  "We've had many a
song from these screamers, but I don't remember ever seeing such a big
flock come so near us, or scream so loud, before.  They must have been
attracted by your pretty face, Manuela, and could not help shouting with
surprise at finding you asleep."

Manuela laughed lightly as she stepped out of her hammock.

"They've just roused us in good time," continued Pedro, looking up
between the tree-tops at the sky, "for the hut of the tiger-hunter is a
long way off, and I'm anxious to reach it before dark."

In a few minutes the hammock and other camp equipage was conveyed to one
of the native canoes, which lay close to the river's bank, our
travellers embarked, and ere long were far from the spot where the
siesta had been taken.

In the afternoon they stopped for a little to refresh themselves with
roasted parrot, chocolate, and biscuit.

Parrots are found everywhere and in great numbers in those regions
between the Atlantic and Pacific.  They live and travel in large flocks,
and, as every one knows, they are remarkably fond of using their
discordant voices, much to the annoyance of sensitive travellers.
Fortunately such travellers do not often go to the wild regions of South
America,--when they do, they soon become un-sensitive.  When parrots
assemble in a flock on the trees, they keep fluttering their wings with
a tremulous motion, bending down their heads and chattering, young and
old, without regard to each other or to harmony.  Each seems bent on
giving his own opinion in the loudest key, and pays no regard whatever
to the opinions of others.  There is something almost human in this!

It is a curious fact that, while the plumage of the parrots' breasts is
always gaudy and brilliant in the extreme, that of their backs is
usually the colour of the general tone of the region they inhabit.  In
woods, where the bark of trees is chiefly bright yellow and green, their
backs are of these colours.  In the plains they are a mixture of green
and brown, so that when skimming over a country they are not easily
distinguished, but if they chance to come unexpectedly on travellers,
they sheer off with a shriek, and expose their gaudy breasts to view.

The large flock that had so suddenly come on our friends while taking
their siesta had turned off thus with a horrible scream, and revealed
their gay breasts, on which the sun chanced to shine at the moment with
great power, thus producing, as we have said, a splendid flash of
colour.

"Massa," inquired Quashy, as they sat in the canoe enjoying the cold
meal and floating slowly with the stream, "which you likes best,--ros'
purrit or ros' monkey?"

"Really, I'm not quite sure," replied Lawrence; "it depends very much on
appetite.  If I'm very hungry, I prefer the one that comes first to
hand.  Which do _you_ like best?"

"Well, I's not kite sure needer.  I t'ink sometimes dat monkey is best,
but I can't easy git ober de face."

"How so, Quashy?"

"'Cause it am so like eatin' a bit o' my great-gran'moder."

"Indeed!"

"Yes.  You's no notion how like dey all is to dat ole lady.  You see,
she was uncommon old.  She come ob a long-lib race.  Das whar' it is.
My moder was eighty-two, an' my gran'moder was ninety-siven, an' my
great-gran'moder was a hun'r'd an' sixteen, an' dey was all alive
togidder, an' at fuss you couldn' tell which was de oldest.  Dey run
neck an' neck for a long time, but arter de great-gran' one pass de
hunr' milestone--oh! she hoed ahead like a rattlesnake.  De wrinkles an'
de crows' foots, an' de--de colour--jes' like bu'nt leather!  She lef'
de oders far behind, an' looked like nuffin so much as dat poor little
blear-eyed monkey you shot de oder day, what Senhorina Manuela say was
_so_ nice to eat.  What! you un'erstan' Ingliss?" added the negro,
looking at the Indian girl, who had given vent to a half-suppressed
giggle.

"Yes--leetil," replied Manuela, without attempting further to restrain
her mirth.
