entrance and looked toward the South with a feeling of homesickness too
intense to describe. Away, over leagues of perilous travel, lay
everything that was dear or congenial; and how many dreary months,
perhaps years, must pass before I could obtain release from associations
more dreadful than solitude. It required all the courage I could command
to endure it.

The whale-fishing opens about the first week in August, and continues
throughout September. As it drew near, the settlement prepared to move
farther north, to a locality where they claimed whales could be found
in abundance. I cheerfully assisted in the preparations, for to meet
some whaling vessel was my only hope of rescue from surroundings that
made existence a living death.

The dogs were harnessed to sleds heavily laden with the equipments of an
Esquimaux hut. The woman, as well as the men, were burdened with immense
packs; and our journey begun. We halted only to rest and sleep. A few
hours work furnished us a new house out of the ever present ice. We
feasted on raw meat--sometimes a freshly killed deer; after which our
journey was resumed.

As near as I could determine, it was close to the 85 deg. north latitude,
where we halted on the shore of an open sea. Wild ducks and game were
abundant, also fish of an excellent quality. Here, for the first time in
many months, I felt the kindly greeting of a mild breeze as it hailed me
from the bosom of the water. Vegetation was not profuse nor brilliant,
but to my long famished eyes, its dingy hue was delightfully refreshing.

Across this sea I instantly felt a strong desire to sail. I believed it
must contain an island of richer vegetation than the shore we occupied.
But no one encouraged me or would agree to be my companion. On the
contrary, they intimated that I should never return. I believed that
they were trying to frighten me into remaining with them, and declared
my intention to go alone. Perhaps I might meet in that milder climate
some of my own race. My friend smiled, and pointing to the South, said,
as he designated an imaginary boundary:

"Across _that_ no white man's foot has ever stepped."

So I was alone. My resolution, however, was not shaken. A boat was
constructed, and bidding adieu to my humble companions, I launched into
an unknown sea.




CHAPTER II.


On and on, and on I rowed until the shore and my late companions were
lost in the gloomy distance. On and on, and still on, until fatigued
almost to exhaustion; and still, no land. A feeling of uncontrollable
lonesomeness took possession of me. Silence reigned supreme. No sound
greeted me save the swirl of the gently undulating waters against the
boat, and the melancholy dip of the oars. Overhead, the familiar eyes of
night were all that pierced the gloom that seemed to hedge me in. My
feeling of distress increased when I discovered that my boat had struck
a current and was beyond my control. Visions of a cataract and
inevitable death instantly shot across my mind. Made passive by intense
despair, I laid down in the bottom of the boat, to let myself drift into
whatever fate was awaiting me.

I must have lain there many hours before I realized that I was traveling
in a circle. The velocity of the current had increased, but not
sufficiently to insure immediately destruction. Hope began to revive,
and I sat up and looked about me with renewed courage. Directly before
me rose a column of mist, so thin that I could see through it, and of
the most delicate tint of green. As I gazed, it spread into a curtain
that appeared to be suspended in mid-air, and began to sway gently back
and forth, as if impelled by a slight breeze, while sparks of fire, like
countless swarms of fire-flies, darted through it and blazed out into a
thousand brilliant hues and flakes of color that chased one another
across and danced merrily up and down with bewildering swiftness.
Suddenly it drew together in a single fold, a rope of yellow mist, then
instantly shook itself out again as a curtain of rainbows fringed with
flame. Myriads of tassels, composed of threads of fire, began to dart
hither and thither through it, while the rainbow stripes deepened in hue
until they looked like gorgeous ribbons glowing with intensest radiance,
yet softened by that delicate misty appearance which is a special
quality of all atmospheric color, and which no pencil can paint, nor the
most eloquent tongue adequately describe.

The swaying motion continued. Sometimes the curtain approached near
enough, apparently, to flaunt its fiery fringe almost within my grasp.
It hung one instant in all its marvelous splendor of colors, then
suddenly rushed into a compact mass, and shot across the zenith, an arc
of crimson fire that lit up the gloomy waters with a weird, unearthly
glare. It faded quickly, and appeared to settle upon the water again in
a circular wall of amber mist, round which the current was hurrying me
with rapidly increasing speed. I saw, with alarm, that the circles were
narrowing A whirlpool was my instant conjecture, and I laid myself down
in the boat, again expecting every moment to be swept into a seething
abyss of waters. The spray dashed into my face as the boat plunged
forward with frightful swiftness. A semi-stupor, born of exhaustion and
terror, seized me in its merciful embrace.

It must have been many hours that I lay thus. I have a dim recollection
of my boat going on and on, its speed gradually decreasing, until I was
amazed to perceive that it had ceased its onward motion and was gently
rocking on quiet waters. I opened my eyes. A rosy light, like the first
blush of a new day, permeated the atmosphere. I sat up and looked about
me. A circular wall of pale amber mist rose behind me; the shores of a
new and beautiful country stretched before. Toward them, I guided my
boat with reviving hope and strength.

I entered a broad river, whose current was from the sea, and let myself
drift along its banks in bewildered delight. The sky appeared bluer, and
the air balmier than even that of Italy's favored clime. The turf that
covered the banks was smooth and fine, like a carpet of rich green
velvet. The fragrance of tempting fruit was wafted by the zephyrs from
numerous orchards. Birds of bright plumage flitted among the branches,
anon breaking forth into wild and exultant melody, as if they rejoiced
to be in so favored a clime.

And truly it seemed a land of enchantment. The atmosphere had a peculiar
transparency, seemingly to bring out clearly objects at a great
distance, yet veiling the far horizon in a haze of gold and purple.
Overhead, clouds of the most gorgeous hues, like precious gems converted
into vapor, floated in a sky of the serenest azure. The languorous
atmosphere, the beauty of the heavens, the inviting shores, produced in
me a feeling of contentment not easily described. To add to my senses
another enjoyment, my ears were greeted with sounds of sweet music, in
which I detected the mingling of human voices.

I wondered if I had really drifted into an enchanted country, such as I
had read about in the fairy books of my childhood.

The music grew louder, yet wondrously sweet, and a large pleasure boat,
shaped like a fish, glided into view. Its scales glittered like gems as
it moved gracefully and noiselessly through the water. Its occupants
were all young girls of the highest type of blonde beauty. It was their
soft voices, accompanied by some peculiar stringed instruments they
carried, that had produced the music I had heard. They appeared to
regard me with curiosity, not unmixed with distrust, for their boat
swept aside to give me a wide berth.

I uncovered my head, shook down my long black hair, and falling upon my
knees, lifted my hands in supplication. My plea was apparently
understood, for turning their boat around, they motioned me to follow
them. This I did with difficulty, for I was weak, and their boat moved
with a swiftness and ease that astonished me. What surprised me most was
its lack of noise.

As I watched its beautiful occupants dressed in rich garments, adorned
with rare and costly gems, and noted the noiseless, gliding swiftness of
their boat, an uncomfortable feeling of mystery began to invade my mind,
as though I really had chanced upon enchanted territory.

As we glided along, I began to be impressed by the weird stillness. No
sound greeted me from the ripening orchards, save the carol of birds;
from the fields came no note of harvest labor. No animals were visible,
nor sound of any. No hum of life. All nature lay asleep in voluptuous
beauty, veiled in a glorious atmosphere. Everything wore a dreamy look.
The breeze had a loving, lingering touch, not unlike to the Indian
Summer of North America. But no Indian Summer ever knew that dark green
verdure, like the first robe of spring. Wherever the eye turned it met
something charming in cloud, or sky, or water, or vegetation. Everything
had felt the magical touch of beauty.

On the right, the horizon was bounded by a chain of mountains, that
plainly showed their bases above the glowing orchards and verdant
landscapes. It impressed me as peculiar, that everything appeared to
rise as it gained in distance. At last the pleasure boat halted at a
flight of marble steps that touched the water. Ascending these, I gained
an eminence where a scene of surpassing beauty and grandeur lay spread
before me. Far, far as the eye could follow it, stretched the stately
splendor of a mighty city. But all the buildings were detached and
surrounded by lawns and shade trees, their white marble and gray granite
walls gleaming through the green foliage.

Upon the lawn, directly before us, a number of most beautiful girls had
disposed themselves at various occupations. Some were reading, some
sketching, and some at various kinds of needlework. I noticed that they
were all blondes. I could not determine whether their language possessed
a peculiarly soft accent, or whether it was an unusual melody of voice
that made their conversation as musical to the ear as the love notes of
some amorous wood bird to its mate.

A large building of white marble crowned a slight eminence behind them.
Its porticos were supported upon the hands of colossal statues of women,
carved out of white marble with exquisite art and beauty. Shade trees of
a feathery foliage, like plumes of finest moss, guarded the entrance and
afforded homes for brilliant-plumaged birds that flew about the porticos
and alighted on the hands and shoulders of the ladies without fear. Some
of the trees had a smooth, straight trunk and flat top, bearing a
striking resemblance to a Chinese umbrella. On either side of the
marble-paved entrance were huge fountains that threw upward a column of
water a hundred feet in height, which, dissolving into spray, fell into
immense basins of clearest crystal. Below the rim of these basins, but
covered with the crystal, as with a delicate film of ice, was a wreath
of blood red roses, that looked as though they had just been plucked
from the stems and placed there for a temporary ornament. I afterward
learned that it was the work of an artist, and durable as granite.

I supposed I had arrived at a female seminary, as not a man, or the
suggestion of one, was to be seen. If it were a seminary, it was for the
wealth of the land, as house, grounds, adornments, and the ladies'
attire were rich and elegant.

I stood apart from the groups of beautiful creatures like the genus of
another race, enveloped in garments of fur that had seen much service. I
presented a marked contrast. The evident culture, refinement, and
gentleness of the ladies, banished any fear I might have entertained as
to the treatment I should receive. But a singular silence that pervaded
everything impressed me painfully. I stood upon the uplifted verge of an
immense city, but from its broad streets came no sound of traffic, no
rattle of wheels, no hum of life. Its marble homes of opulence shone
white and grand through mossy foliage; from innumerable parks the
fountains sparkled and statues gleamed like rare gems upon a costly
robe; but over all a silence, as of death, reigned unbroken. The awe and
the mystery of it pressed heavily upon my spirit, but I could not refuse
to obey when a lady stepped out of the group, that had doubtless been
discussing me, and motioned me to follow her.

She led me through the main entrance into a lofty hall that extended
through the entire building, and consisted of a number of grand arches
representing scenes in high relief of the finest sculpture. We entered a
magnificent salon, where a large assembly of ladies regarded me with
unmistakable astonishment. Every one of them was a blonde. I was
presented to one, whom I instantly took to be the Lady Superior of the
College, for I had now settled it in my mind that I was in a female
seminary, albeit one of unheard of luxury in its appointments.

The lady had a remarkable majesty of demeanor, and a noble countenance.
Her hair was white with age, but over her features, the rosy bloom of
youth still lingered, as if loth to depart. She looked at me kindly and
critically, but not with as much surprise as the others had evinced. I
may here remark that I am a brunette. My guide, having apparently
received some instruction in regard to me, led me upstairs into a
private apartment. She placed before me a complete outfit of female
wearing apparel, and informed me by signs that I was to put it on. She
then retired. The apartment was sumptuously furnished in two
colors--amber and lazulite. A bath-room adjoining had a beautiful
porcelain tank with scented water, that produced a delightful feeling of
exhilaration.

Having donned my new attire, I descended the stairs and met my guide,
who conducted me into a spacious dining-room. The walls were adorned
with paintings, principally of fruit and flowers. A large and superb
picture of a sylvan dell in the side of a rock, was one exception. Its
deep, cool shadows, and the pellucid water, which a wandering sunbeam
accidentally revealed, were strikingly realistic. Nearly all of the
pictures were upon panels of crystal that were set in the wall. The
light shining through them gave them an exceedingly natural effect. One
picture that I especially admired, was of a grape vine twining around
the body and trunk of an old tree. It was inside of the crystal panel,
and looked so natural that I imagined I could see its leaves and
tendrils sway in the wind. The occupants of the dining-room were all
ladies, and again I noted the fact that they were all blondes:
beautiful, graceful, courteous, and with voices softer and sweeter than
the strains of an eolian harp.

The table, in its arrangement and decoration, was the most beautiful
one I had ever seen. The white linen cloth resembled brocaded satin. The
knives and forks were gold, with handles of solid amber. The dishes were
of the finest porcelain. Some of them, particularly the fruit stands,
looked as though composed of hoar frost. Many of the fruit stands were
of gold filigree work. They attracted my notice at once, not so much on
account of the exquisite workmanship and unique design of the dishes, as
the wonderful fruit they contained. One stand, that resembled a huge
African lily in design, contained several varieties of plums, as large
as hen's eggs, and transparent. They were yellow, blue and red. The
centre of the table was occupied by a fruit stand of larger size than
the others. It looked like a boat of sea foam fringed with gold moss.
Over its outer edge hung clusters of grapes of a rich wine color, and
clear as amethysts. The second row looked like globes of honey, the next
were of a pale, rose color, and the top of the pyramid was composed of
white ones, the color and transparency of dew.

The fruit looked so beautiful. I thought it would be a sacrilege to
destroy the charm it had for the eye; but when I saw it removed by pink
tipped fingers, whose beauty no art could represent, and saw it
disappear within such tempting lips. I thought the feaster worthy of the
feast. Fruit appeared to be the principal part of their diet, and was
served in its natural state. I was, however, supplied with something
that resembled beefsteak of a very fine quality. I afterward learned
that it was chemically prepared meat. At the close of the meal, a cup
was handed me that looked like the half of a soap bubble with all its
iridescent beauty sparkling and glancing in the light. It contained a
beverage that resembled chocolate, but whose flavor could not have been
surpassed by the fabled nectar of the gods.




CHAPTER III.


I have been thus explicit in detailing the circumstances of my entrance
into the land of Mizora, or, in other words, the interior of the earth,
lest some incredulous person might doubt the veracity of this narrative.

It does seem a little astonishing that a woman should have fallen by
accident, and without intention or desire, upon a discovery that
explorers and scientists had for years searched for in vain. But such
was the fact, and, in generosity, I have endeavored to make my accident
as serviceable to the world in general, and Science in particular, as I
could, by taking observations of the country, its climate and products,
and especially its people.

I met with the greatest difficulty in acquiring their language.
Accustomed to the harsh dialect of the North, my voice was almost
intractable in obtaining their melodious accentuation. It was,
therefore, many months before I mastered the difficulty sufficiently to
converse without embarrassment, or to make myself clearly understood.
The construction of their language was simple and easily understood, and
in a short time I was able to read it with ease, and to listen to it
with enjoyment. Yet, before this was accomplished, I had mingled among
them for months, listening to a musical jargon of conversation, that I
