The Project Gutenberg eBook, The Blue Pavilions, by Sir Arthur Thomas
Quiller-Couch


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: The Blue Pavilions


Author: Sir Arthur Thomas Quiller-Couch



Release Date: November 30, 2006  [eBook #19977]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE BLUE PAVILIONS***


E-text prepared by Lionel Sear



THE BLUE PAVILIONS.

by

Arthur Thomas Quiller Couch (Q).

This e-text was prepared from a reprint of a version published in
1891.







TO A FORMER SCHOOLFELLOW.


MY DEAR ----,

I will not write your name, for we have long been strangers; and I,
at any rate, have no desire to renew our friendship.  It is now ten
years and more from the end of that summer term when we shook hands
at the railway-station and went east and west with swelling hearts;
and since then no report has come of you.  In the meantime you may
have died, or grown rich and esteemed; but that you have remained the
boy I knew is clearly beyond hope.

You were a genius then, and wrote epic poetry.  I assume that you
have found it worth while to discontinue that habit, for I never see
your name among the publishers' announcements.  But your poetry used
to be magnificent when you recited it in the shadow of the deserted
fives-court; and I believe you spoke sincerely when you assured me
that my stories, too, were something above contempt.

To the boy that was you I would dedicate a small tale, crammed with
historical inaccuracy.  To-day, no doubt, you would recognise the
story of Captain Seth Jermy and the _Nightingale_ frigate, and point
out that I have put it seventeen years too early.  But in those days
you would neither have known nor cared.  And the rest of the book is
far belated.

                                                        Q.

Shiplake, 20 _November_, 1891.




CONTENTS.


Chap.

       DEDICATION.

I.     CAPTAIN JOHN AND CAPTAIN JEMMY.

II.    THE DICE-BOX.

III.   THE TWO PAVILIONS.

IV.    THE TWO PAVILIONS (continued).

V.     A SWARM OF BEES.

VI.    THE EARL OF MARLBOROUGH SEEKS RECRUITS.

VII.   THE CAPTAINS MAKE A FALSE START.

VIII.  FATHER AND SON.

IX.    THE FOUR MEN AT THE "WHITE LAMB".

X.     THE TRIBULATIONS OF TRISTRAM.

XI.    THE GALLEY "L'HEUREUSE".

XII.   WILLIAM OF ORANGE.

XIII.  CAPTAIN SALT EFFECTS ONE SURPRISE AND PLANS TWO MORE.

XIV.   THE GALLEYS AND THE FRIGATE.

XV.     BACK AT THE BLUE PAVILIONS.



THE BLUE PAVILIONS.



CHAPTER I.


CAPTAIN JOHN AND CAPTAIN JEMMY.

At noonday, on the 11th of October, 1673, the little seaport of
Harwich, beside the mouth of the River Stour, presented a very lively
appearance.  More than a hundred tall ships, newly returned from the
Dutch War, rode at anchor in the haven, their bright masts swaying in
the sunshine above the thatched and red-tiled roofs of the town.
Tarry sailors in red and grey kersey suits, red caps and flat-heeled
shoes jostled in the narrow streets and hung about St. Nicholas's
Churchyard, in front of the Admiralty House, wherein the pursers sat
before bags and small piles of money, paying off the crews.
Soldiers crowded the tavern doors--men in soiled uniforms of the
Admiral's regiment, the Buffs and the 1st Foot Guards; some with
bandaged heads and arms, and the most still yellow after their
seasickness, but all intrepidly toasting the chances of Peace and the
girls in opposite windows.  Above their laughter, and along every
street or passage opening on the harbour--from Cock and Pye Quay,
from Lambard's stairs, the Castleport, and half a dozen other
landing-stages--came wafted the shouts of captains, pilots,
boatswains, caulkers, longshore men; the noise of artillery and
stores unlading; the tack-tack of mallets in the dockyard, where Sir
Anthony Deane's new ship the _Harwich_ was rising on the billyways,
and whence the blown odours of pitch and hemp and timber, mingling
with the landward breeze, drifted all day long into the townsfolk's
nostrils, and filled their very kitchens with the savour of the sea.

In the thick of these scents and sounds, and within a cool doorway,
before which the shadow of a barber's pole rested on the cobbles,
reclined Captain John Barker--a little wry-necked gentleman, with a
prodigious hump between his shoulders, and legs that dangled two
inches off the floor.  His wig was being curled by an apprentice at
the back of the shop, and his natural scalp shone as bare as a
billiard-ball; but two patches of brindled grey hair stuck out from
his brow above a pair of fierce greenish eyes set about with a
complexity of wrinkles.  Just now, a coating of lather covered his
shrewish underjaw.

The dress of this unlovely old gentleman well became his rank as
captain of his Majesty's frigate the _Wasp_, but went very ill with
his figure--being, indeed, a square-cut coat of scarlet, laced with
gold, a long-flapped blue waistcoat, black breeches and stockings.
Enormous buckles adorned the thick-soled shoes which he drummed
impatiently against the legs of his chair.

The barber--a round, bustling fellow--stropped his razor and prattled
gossip.  On a settle to the right a couple of townsmen smoked,
listened, and waited their turn with an educated patience.

"Changes, indeed, since you left us, Captain John," the barber began,
his razor hovering for the first scrape.

"Wait a moment.  You were about to take hold of me by the nose.
If you do it, I'll run you through.  I thought you'd like to be
warned, that's all.  Go on with your chatter."

"Certainly, Captain John--'tis merely a habit--"

"Break yourself of it."

"I will, sir.  But, as I was saying, the changes will astonish you
that have been at sea so long.  In the first place, a riding-post
started from hence to London and from London hither a-gallop with
brazen trumpet and loaded pistols, to keep his Majesty certified
every day of the Fleet's doings, and the Fleet of his Majesty's
wishes; and all Harwich a-tremble half the night under its
bedclothes, but consoled to find the King taking so much notice of
it.  And the old jail moved from St. Austin's Gate, and a new one
building this side of Church Street, where Calamy's Store used to
stand--with a new town-hall, too--"

Here, as he paused to scrape the captain's cheek, one of the two
townsmen on the settle--a square man in grey, with a red waistcoat--
withdrew the long pipe from his mouth and groaned heavily.

"What's that?" asked the hunchback snappishly.

"That, sir, is Mr. Pomphlett," the barber explained.  "He disapproves
of the amount spent in decorating the new hall with pillars, rails,
balusters, and what not; for the king's arms, to be carved over the
mayor's seat and richly gilt, are to be a private gift of Mr. Isaac
Betts, and the leathern fire-buckets to be hung round the wall--"

Mr. Pomphlett emitted another groan, which the barber good-naturedly
tried to drown in talk.  Captain Barker heard it, however.

"There it is again!"

"Yes, sir.  You see Mr. Pomphlett allows his public spirit to run
high.  He says--"

The little captain jerked round in his chair, escaping a gash by a
hair's-breadth, and addressed the heavy citizen--

"Mr. Pomphlett, sir, it was not for the sake of listening to your
observations upon public affairs that I came straight off my ship to
this shop, but to hear the news."

The barber coughed.  Mr. Pomphlett feebly traced a curve in the air
with his pipe-stem, and answered sulkily--

"I s-said nun-nothing.  I f-felt unwell."

"He suffers," interposed Mr. Pomphlett's neighbour on the settle, a
long-necked man in brown, "from the wind; don't you, Pomphlett?"

Mr. Pomphlett nodded with an aggrieved air, and sucked his pipe.

"Death," continued the man in brown, by way of setting the
conversation on its legs again, "has been busy in Harwich, Barker."

"Ah! now we come to business!  Barber, who's dead?"

"Alderman Croten, sir."

"Tut-tut.  Croten gone?"

"Yes, sir; palsy took him at a ripe age.  And Abel's gone, the Town
Crier; and old Mistress Pinch's bad leg carried her from us last
Christmas Day, of all days in the year; and young Mr. Eastwell was
snatched away by a chain-shot in the affair with the Smyrna fleet;
and Mistress Salt--that was daughter of old Sir Jabez Tellworthy, and
broke her father's heart--she's a widow in straitened circumstances,
and living up at the old house again--"

"_What!_"

Captain Barker bounced off his chair like a dried pea from a shovel.

"There now!  Your honour's chin is wounded."

"P'sh! give me your towel."  He snatched it from the barber's arm and
mopped away the blood and lather from his jaw.  "Mistress Salt a
widow?  When?  How?"

"I thought, maybe, your honour would know about it."

"Don't think.  Roderick Salt dead?  Tell me this instant, or--"

"He was drowned, sir, in a ditch, they tell me, but two months after
he sailed with his company of Foot Guards, in the spring of this
year.  It seems 'twas a ditch that the Marshal Turenne had the
misfortune to forget about--"

"My hat--where is it?  Quick!"

Already Captain Barker had plucked the napkin from his throat, caught
up his sword from a chair, and was buckling on the belt in a
tremendous hurry.

"But your honour forgets the wig, which is but half curled; and your
honour's face shaved on the one side only."

The hunchback's answer was to snatch his wig from between the
apprentice's tongs, clap it on his head, ram his hat on the top of
it, and flounce out at the shop door.

The streets were full of folk, but he passed through them at an
amazing speed.  His natural gait on shipboard was a kind of
anapaestic dance--two short steps and a long--and though the crowd
interrupted its cadence and coerced him to a quick bobbing motion, as
of a bottle in a choppy sea, it hardly affected his pace.  Here and
there he snapped out a greeting to some ship's captain or townsman of
his acquaintance, or growled testily at a row of soldiers bearing
down on him three abreast.  His angry green eyes seemed to clear a
path before him, in spite of the grins which his hump and shambling
legs excited among strangers.  In this way he darted along High
Street, turned up by the markets, crossed Church Street into West
Street, and passed under the great gate by which the London Road left
the town.

Beyond this gate the road ran through a tall ravelin and out upon a
breezy peninsula between the river and the open sea.  And here
Captain Barker halted and, tugging off hat and wig, wiped his crown
