
This, in the first place, intimated to them that they would be sure to
find the charity and kindness of the county, which they had found here
where they were before, hardened and shut up against them; and that, on
the other hand, they would be questioned wherever they came, and would
be in danger of violence from others in like cases with themselves.

Upon all these considerations, John, their captain, in all their names,
went back to their good friend and benefactor who had relieved them
before, and, laying their case truly before him, humbly asked his
advice; and he as kindly advised them to take up their old quarters
again, or, if not, to remove but a little farther out of the road, and
directed them to a proper place for them. And as they really wanted some
house, rather than huts, to shelter them at that time of the year, it
growing on towards Michaelmas, they found an old decayed house, which
had been formerly some cottage or little habitation, but was so out of
repair as[217] scarce habitable; and by consent of a farmer, to whose
farm it belonged, they got leave to make what use of it they could.

The ingenious joiner, and all the rest by his directions, went to work
with it, and in a very few days made it capable to shelter them all in
case of bad weather; and in which there was an old chimney and an old
oven, though both lying in ruins, yet they made them both fit for use;
and, raising additions, sheds, and lean-to's[218] on every side, they
soon made the house capable to hold them all.

They chiefly wanted boards to make window shutters, floors, doors, and
several other things; but as the gentleman above favored them, and the
country was by that means made easy with them, and, above all, that they
were known to be all sound and in good health, everybody helped them
with what they could spare.

Here they encamped for good and all, and resolved to remove no more.
They saw plainly how terribly alarmed that country was everywhere at
anybody that came from London, and that they should have no admittance
anywhere but with the utmost difficulty; at least no friendly reception
and assistance, as they had received here.

Now, although they received great assistance and encouragement from the
country gentlemen, and from the people round about them, yet they were
put to great straits; for the weather grew cold and wet in October and
November, and they had not been used to so much hardship, so that they
got cold in their limbs, and distempers, but never had the infection.
And thus about December they came home to the city again.

I give this story thus at large, principally to give an account[219]
what became of the great numbers of people which immediately appeared in
the city as soon as the sickness abated; for, as I have said, great
numbers of those that were able, and had retreats in the country, fled
to those retreats. So when it[220] was increased to such a frightful
extremity as I have related, the middling people[221] who had not
friends fled to all parts of the country where they could get shelter,
as well those that had money to relieve themselves as those that had
not. Those that had money always fled farthest, because they were able
to subsist themselves; but those who were empty suffered, as I have
said, great hardships, and were often driven by necessity to relieve
their wants at the expense of the country. By that means the country was
made very uneasy at them, and sometimes took them up, though even then
they scarce knew what to do with them, and were always very backward to
punish them; but often, too, they forced them from place to place, till
they were obliged to come back again to London.

I have, since my knowing this story of John and his brother, inquired,
and found that there were a great many of the poor disconsolate people,
as above, fled into the country every way; and some of them got little
sheds and barns and outhouses to live in, where they could obtain so
much kindness of the country, and especially where they had any, the
least satisfactory account to give of themselves, and particularly that
they did not come out of London too late. But others, and that in great
numbers, built themselves little huts and retreats in the fields and
woods, and lived like hermits in holes and caves, or any place they
could find, and where, we may be sure, they suffered great extremities,
such that many of them were obliged to come back again, whatever the
danger was. And so those little huts were often found empty, and the
country people supposed the inhabitants lay dead in them of the plague,
and would not go near them for fear, no, not in a great while; nor is it
unlikely but that some of the unhappy wanderers might die so all alone,
even sometimes for want of help, as particularly in one tent or hut was
found a man dead, and on the gate of a field just by was cut with his
knife, in uneven letters, the following words, by which it may be
supposed the other man escaped, or that, one dying first, the other
buried him as well as he could:--

    O m I s E r Y!
    We Bo T H Sh a L L D y E,
                   W o E, W o E

I have given an account already of what I found to have been the case
down the river among the seafaring men, how the ships lay in the
"offing," as it is called, in rows or lines, astern of one another,
quite down from the Pool as far as I could see. I have been told that
they lay in the same manner quite down the river as low as
Gravesend,[222] and some far beyond, even everywhere, or in every place
where they could ride with safety as to wind and weather. Nor did I ever
hear that the plague reached to any of the people on board those ships,
except such as lay up in the Pool, or as high as Deptford Reach,
although the people went frequently on shore to the country towns and
villages, and farmers' houses, to buy fresh provisions (fowls, pigs,
calves, and the like) for their supply.

Likewise I found that the watermen on the river above the bridge found
means to convey themselves away up the river as far as they could go;
and that they had, many of them, their whole families in their boats,
covered with tilts[223] and bales, as they call them, and furnished with
straw within for their lodging; and that they lay thus all along by the
shore in the marshes, some of them setting up little tents with their
sails, and so lying under them on shore in the day, and going into their
boats at night. And in this manner, as I have heard, the riversides were
lined with boats and people as long as they had anything to subsist on,
or could get anything of the country; and indeed the country people, as
well gentlemen as others, on these and all other occasions, were very
forward to relieve them, but they were by no means willing to receive
them into their towns and houses, and for that we cannot blame them.

There was one unhappy citizen, within my knowledge, who had been visited
in a dreadful manner, so that his wife and all his children were dead,
and himself and two servants only left, with an elderly woman, a near
relation, who had nursed those that were dead as well as she could. This
disconsolate man goes to a village near the town, though not within the
bills of mortality, and, finding an empty house there, inquires out the
owner, and took the house. After a few days he got a cart, and loaded it
with goods, and carries them down to the house. The people of the
village opposed his driving the cart along, but, with some arguings and
some force, the men that drove the cart along got through the street up
to the door of the house. There the constable resisted them again, and
would not let them be brought in. The man caused the goods to be
unloaded and laid at the door, and sent the cart away, upon which they
carried the man before a justice of peace; that is to say, they
commanded him to go, which he did. The justice ordered him to cause the
cart to fetch away the goods again, which he refused to do; upon which
the justice ordered the constable to pursue the carters and fetch them
back, and make them reload the goods and carry them away, or to set
them in the stocks[224] till they[225] came for further orders; and if
they could not find them,[226] and the man would not consent to take
them[227] away, they[225] should cause them[227] to be drawn with hooks
from the house door, and burned in the street. The poor distressed man,
upon this, fetched the goods again, but with grievous cries and
lamentations at the hardship of his case. But there was no remedy:
self-preservation obliged the people to those severities which they
would not otherwise have been concerned in. Whether this poor man lived
or died, I cannot tell, but it was reported that he had the plague upon
him at that time, and perhaps the people might report that to justify
their usage of him; but it was not unlikely that either he or his goods,
or both, were dangerous, when his whole family had been dead of the
distemper so little a while before.

I know that the inhabitants of the towns adjacent to London were much
blamed for cruelty to the poor people that ran from the contagion in
their distress, and many very severe things were done, as may be seen
from what has been said; but I cannot but say also, that where there was
room for charity and assistance to the people, without apparent danger
to themselves, they were willing enough to help and relieve them. But as
every town were indeed judges in their own case, so the poor people who
ran abroad in their extremities were often ill used, and driven back
again into the town; and this caused infinite exclamations and outcries
against the country towns, and made the clamor very popular.

And yet more or less, maugre[228] all the caution, there was not a town
of any note within ten (or, I believe, twenty) miles of the city, but
what was more or less infected, and had some[229] died among them. I
have heard the accounts of several, such as they were reckoned up, as
follows:--

    Enfield                   32
    Hornsey                   58
    Newington                 17
    Tottenham                 42
    Edmonton                  19
    Barnet and Hadley         43
    St. Albans               121
    Watford                   45
    Uxbridge                 117
    Hertford                  90
    Ware                     160
    Hodsdon                   30
    Waltham Abbey             23
    Epping                    26
    Deptford                 623
    Greenwich                631
    Eltham and Lusum          85
    Croydon                   61
    Brentwood                 70
    Rumford                  109
    Barking            about 200
    Brandford                432
    Kingston                 122
    Staines                   82
    Chertsey                  18
    Windsor                  103
                    _cum aliis._[230]

Another thing might render the country more strict with respect to the
citizens, and especially with respect to the poor, and this was what I
hinted at before; namely, that there was a seeming propensity, or a
wicked inclination, in those that were infected, to infect others.

There have been great debates among our physicians as to the reason of
this. Some will have it to be in the nature of the disease, and that it
impresses every one that is seized upon by it with a kind of rage and a
hatred against their own kind, as if there were a malignity, not only in
the distemper to communicate itself, but in the very nature of man,
prompting him with evil will, or an evil eye, that as they say in the
case of a mad dog, who, though the gentlest creature before of any of
his kind, yet then will fly upon and bite any one that comes next him,
and those as soon as any, who have been most observed[231] by him
before.

Others placed it to the account of the corruption of human nature,
who[232] cannot bear to see itself more miserable than others of its own
species, and has a kind of involuntary wish that all men were as unhappy
or in as bad a condition as itself.

Others say it was only a kind of desperation, not knowing or regarding
what they did, and consequently unconcerned at the danger or safety, not
only of anybody near them, but even of themselves also. And indeed, when
men are once come to a condition to abandon themselves, and be
unconcerned for the safety or at the danger of themselves, it cannot be
so much wondered that they should be careless of the safety of other
people.

But I choose to give this grave debate quite a different turn, and
answer it or resolve it all by saying that I do not grant the fact. On
the contrary, I say that the thing is not really so, but that it was a
general complaint raised by the people inhabiting the outlying villages
against the citizens, to justify, or at least excuse, those hardships
and severities so much talked of, and in which complaints both sides may
be said to have injured one another; that is to say, the citizens
pressing to be received and harbored in time of distress, and with the
plague upon them, complain of the cruelty and injustice of the country
people in being refused entrance, and forced back again with their
goods and families; and the inhabitants, finding themselves so imposed
upon, and the citizens breaking in, as it were, upon them, whether they
would or no, complain that when they[233] were infected, they were not
only regardless of others, but even willing to infect them: neither of
which was really true, that is to say, in the colors they[234] were
described in.

It is true there is something to be said for the frequent alarms which
were given to the country, of the resolution of the people of London to
come out by force, not only for relief, but to plunder and rob; that
they ran about the streets with the distemper upon them without any
control; and that no care was taken to shut up houses, and confine the
sick people from infecting others; whereas, to do the Londoners justice,
they never practiced such things, except in such particular cases as I
have mentioned above, and such like. On the other hand, everything was
managed with so much care, and such excellent order was observed in the
whole city and suburbs, by the care of the lord mayor and aldermen, and
by the justices of the peace, churchwardens, etc., in the outparts, that
London may be a pattern to all the cities in the world for the good
government and the excellent order that was everywhere kept, even in the
time of the most violent infection, and when the people were in the
utmost consternation and distress. But of this I shall speak by itself.

One thing, it is to be observed, was owing principally to the prudence
of the magistrates, and ought to be mentioned to their honor; viz., the
moderation which they used in the great and difficult work of shutting
up houses. It is true, as I have mentioned, that the shutting up of
houses was a great subject of discontent, and I may say, indeed, the
only subject of discontent among the people at that time; for the
confining the sound in the same house with the sick was counted very
terrible, and the complaints of people so confined were very grievous:
they were heard in the very streets, and they were sometimes such that
called for resentment, though oftener for compassion. They had no way to
converse with any of their friends but out of their windows, where they
would make such piteous lamentations as often moved the hearts of those
they talked with, and of others who, passing by, heard their story; and
as those complaints oftentimes reproached the severity, and sometimes
the insolence, of the watchmen placed at their doors, those watchmen
would answer saucily enough, and perhaps be apt to affront the people
who were in the street talking to the said families; for which, or for
their ill treatment of the families, I think seven or eight of them in
several places were killed. I know not whether I should say murdered or
not, because I cannot enter into the particular cases. It is true, the
watchmen were on their duty, and acting in the post where they were
placed by a lawful authority; and killing any public legal officer in
the execution of his office is always, in the language of the law,
called "murder." But as they were not authorized by the magistrate's
instructions, or by the power they acted under, to be injurious or
abusive, either to the people who were under their observation or to any
that concerned themselves for them, so that,[235] when they did so, they
might be said to act themselves, not their office; to act as private
persons, not as persons employed; and consequently, if they brought
mischief upon themselves by such an undue behavior, that mischief was
upon their own heads. And indeed they had so much the hearty curses of
the people, whether they deserved it or not, that, whatever befell them,
nobody pitied them; and everybody was apt to say they deserved it,
whatever it was. Nor do I remember that anybody was ever punished, at
least to any considerable degree, for whatever was done to the watchmen
that guarded their houses.

What variety of stratagems were used to escape, and get out of houses
thus shut up, by which the watchmen were deceived or overpowered, and
that[236] the people got away, I have taken notice of already, and shall
say no more to that; but I say the magistrates did moderate and ease
families upon many occasions in this case, and particularly in that of
taking away or suffering to be removed the sick persons out of such
houses, when they were willing to be removed, either to a pesthouse or
other places, and sometimes giving the well persons in the family so
shut up leave to remove, upon information given that they were well, and
that they would confine themselves in such houses where they went, so
long as should be required of them. The concern, also, of the
magistrates for the supplying such poor families as were infected,--I
say, supplying them with necessaries, as well physic as food,--was very
great: and in which they did not content themselves with giving the
necessary orders to the officers appointed; but the aldermen, in person
and on horseback, frequently rode to such houses, and caused the people
to be asked at their windows whether they were duly attended or not,
also whether they wanted anything that was necessary, and if the
officers had constantly carried their messages, and fetched them such
things as they wanted, or not. And if they answered in the affirmative,
all was well; but if they complained that they were ill supplied, and
that the officer did not do his duty, or did not treat them civilly,
they (the officers) were generally removed, and others placed in their
stead.

It is true, such complaint might be unjust; and if the officer had such
arguments to use as would convince the magistrate that he was right, and
that the people had injured him, he was continued, and they reproved.
But this part could not well bear a particular inquiry, for the parties
could very ill be well heard and answered in the street from the
windows, as was the case then. The magistrates, therefore, generally
chose to favor the people, and remove the man, as what seemed to be the
least wrong and of the least ill consequence; seeing, if the watchman
was injured, yet they could easily make him amends by giving him another
post of a like nature; but, if the family was injured, there was no
satisfaction could be made to them, the damage, perhaps, being
