the forest, and for two hours we surveyed it in all directions.

Chance rewarded our search for eatable vegetables, and one of the most
useful products of the tropical zones furnished us with precious food
that we missed on board.  I would speak of the bread-fruit tree, very
abundant in the island of Gilboa; and I remarked chiefly the variety
destitute of seeds, which bears in Malaya the name of "rima."

Ned Land knew these fruits well.  He had already eaten many during his
numerous voyages, and he knew how to prepare the eatable substance.
Moreover, the sight of them excited him, and he could contain himself
no longer.

"Master," he said, "I shall die if I do not taste a little of this
bread-fruit pie."

"Taste it, friend Ned--taste it as you want.  We are here to make
experiments--make them."

"It won't take long," said the Canadian.

And, provided with a lentil, he lighted a fire of dead wood that
crackled joyously.  During this time, Conseil and I chose the best
fruits of the bread-fruit. Some had not then attained a sufficient
degree of maturity; and their thick skin covered a white but rather
fibrous pulp.  Others, the greater number yellow and gelatinous, waited
only to be picked.

These fruits enclosed no kernel.  Conseil brought a dozen to Ned Land,
who placed them on a coal fire, after having cut them in thick slices,
and while doing this repeating:

"You will see, master, how good this bread is.  More so when one has
been deprived of it so long.  It is not even bread," added he, "but a
delicate pastry.  You have eaten none, master?"

"No, Ned."

"Very well, prepare yourself for a juicy thing.  If you do not come for
more, I am no longer the king of harpooners."

After some minutes, the part of the fruits that was exposed to the fire
was completely roasted.  The interior looked like a white pasty, a sort
of soft crumb, the flavour of which was like that of an artichoke.

It must be confessed this bread was excellent, and I ate of it with
great relish.

"What time is it now?" asked the Canadian.

"Two o'clock at least," replied Conseil.

"How time flies on firm ground!" sighed Ned Land.

"Let us be off," replied Conseil.

We returned through the forest, and completed our collection by a raid
upon the cabbage-palms, that we gathered from the tops of the trees,
little beans that I recognised as the "abrou" of the Malays, and yams
of a superior quality.

We were loaded when we reached the boat.  But Ned Land did not find his
provisions sufficient.  Fate, however, favoured us.  Just as we were
pushing off, he perceived several trees, from twenty-five to thirty
feet high, a species of palm-tree.

At last, at five o'clock in the evening, loaded with our riches, we
quitted the shore, and half an hour after we hailed the Nautilus.  No
one appeared on our arrival.  The enormous iron-plated cylinder seemed
deserted.  The provisions embarked, I descended to my chamber, and
after supper slept soundly.

The next day, 6th January, nothing new on board.  Not a sound inside,
not a sign of life.  The boat rested along the edge, in the same place
in which we had left it.  We resolved to return to the island.  Ned
Land hoped to be more fortunate than on the day before with regard to
the hunt, and wished to visit another part of the forest.

At dawn we set off.  The boat, carried on by the waves that flowed to
shore, reached the island in a few minutes.

We landed, and, thinking that it was better to give in to the Canadian,
we followed Ned Land, whose long limbs threatened to distance us.  He
wound up the coast towards the west:  then, fording some torrents, he
gained the high plain that was bordered with admirable forests.  Some
kingfishers were rambling along the water-courses, but they would not
let themselves be approached.  Their circumspection proved to me that
these birds knew what to expect from bipeds of our species, and I
concluded that, if the island was not inhabited, at least human beings
occasionally frequented it.

After crossing a rather large prairie, we arrived at the skirts of a
little wood that was enlivened by the songs and flight of a large
number of birds.

"There are only birds," said Conseil.

"But they are eatable," replied the harpooner.

"I do not agree with you, friend Ned, for I see only parrots there."

"Friend Conseil," said Ned, gravely, "the parrot is like pheasant to
those who have nothing else."

"And," I added, "this bird, suitably prepared, is worth knife and fork."

Indeed, under the thick foliage of this wood, a world of parrots were
flying from branch to branch, only needing a careful education to speak
the human language.  For the moment, they were chattering with parrots
of all colours, and grave cockatoos, who seemed to meditate upon some
philosophical problem, whilst brilliant red lories passed like a piece
of bunting carried away by the breeze, papuans, with the finest azure
colours, and in all a variety of winged things most charming to behold,
but few eatable.

However, a bird peculiar to these lands, and which has never passed the
limits of the Arrow and Papuan islands, was wanting in this collection.
But fortune reserved it for me before long.

After passing through a moderately thick copse, we found a plain
obstructed with bushes.  I saw then those magnificent birds, the
disposition of whose long feathers obliges them to fly against the
wind.  Their undulating flight, graceful aerial curves, and the shading
of their colours, attracted and charmed one's looks.  I had no trouble
in recognising them.

"Birds of paradise!"  I exclaimed.

The Malays, who carry on a great trade in these birds with the Chinese,
have several means that we could not employ for taking them.  Sometimes
they put snares on the top of high trees that the birds of paradise
prefer to frequent.  Sometimes they catch them with a viscous birdlime
that paralyses their movements.  They even go so far as to poison the
fountains that the birds generally drink from.  But we were obliged to
fire at them during flight, which gave us few chances to bring them
down; and, indeed, we vainly exhausted one half our ammunition.

About eleven o'clock in the morning, the first range of mountains that
form the centre of the island was traversed, and we had killed nothing.
Hunger drove us on.  The hunters had relied on the products of the
chase, and they were wrong.  Happily Conseil, to his great surprise,
made a double shot and secured breakfast.  He brought down a white
pigeon and a wood-pigeon, which, cleverly plucked and suspended from a
skewer, was roasted before a red fire of dead wood.  While these
interesting birds were cooking, Ned prepared the fruit of the
bread-tree. Then the wood-pigeons were devoured to the bones, and
declared excellent.  The nutmeg, with which they are in the habit of
stuffing their crops, flavours their flesh and renders it delicious
eating.

"Now, Ned, what do you miss now?"

"Some four-footed game, M. Aronnax.  All these pigeons are only
side-dishes and trifles; and until I have killed an animal with cutlets
I shall not be content."

"Nor I, Ned, if I do not catch a bird of paradise."

"Let us continue hunting," replied Conseil.  "Let us go towards the
sea.  We have arrived at the first declivities of the mountains, and I
think we had better regain the region of forests."

That was sensible advice, and was followed out.  After walking for one
hour we had attained a forest of sago-trees. Some inoffensive serpents
glided away from us.  The birds of paradise fled at our approach, and
truly I despaired of getting near one when Conseil, who was walking in
front, suddenly bent down, uttered a triumphal cry, and came back to me
bringing a magnificent specimen.

"Ah! bravo, Conseil!"

"Master is very good."

"No, my boy; you have made an excellent stroke.  Take one of these
living birds, and carry it in your hand."

"If master will examine it, he will see that I have not deserved great
merit."

"Why, Conseil?"

"Because this bird is as drunk as a quail."

"Drunk!"

"Yes, sir; drunk with the nutmegs that it devoured under the
nutmeg-tree, under which I found it.  See, friend Ned, see the
monstrous effects of intemperance!"

"By Jove!" exclaimed the Canadian, "because I have drunk gin for two
months, you must needs reproach me!"

However, I examined the curious bird.  Conseil was right.  The bird,
drunk with the juice, was quite powerless.  It could not fly; it could
hardly walk.

This bird belonged to the most beautiful of the eight species that are
found in Papua and in the neighbouring islands.  It was the "large
emerald bird, the most rare kind." It measured three feet in length.
Its head was comparatively small, its eyes placed near the opening of
the beak, and also small.  But the shades of colour were beautiful,
having a yellow beak, brown feet and claws, nut-coloured wings with
purple tips, pale yellow at the back of the neck and head, and emerald
colour at the throat, chestnut on the breast and belly.  Two horned,
downy nets rose from below the tail, that prolonged the long light
feathers of admirable fineness, and they completed the whole of this
marvellous bird, that the natives have poetically named the "bird of
the sun."

But if my wishes were satisfied by the possession of the bird of
paradise, the Canadian's were not yet.  Happily, about two o'clock, Ned
Land brought down a magnificent hog; from the brood of those the
natives call "bari-outang." The animal came in time for us to procure
real quadruped meat, and he was well received.  Ned Land was very proud
of his shot.  The hog, hit by the electric ball, fell stone dead.  The
Canadian skinned and cleaned it properly, after having taken half a
dozen cutlets, destined to furnish us with a grilled repast in the
evening.  Then the hunt was resumed, which was still more marked by Ned
and Conseil's exploits.

Indeed, the two friends, beating the bushes, roused a herd of kangaroos
that fled and bounded along on their elastic paws.  But these animals
did not take to flight so rapidly but what the electric capsule could
stop their course.

"Ah, Professor!" cried Ned Land, who was carried away by the delights
of the chase, "what excellent game, and stewed, too!  What a supply for
the Nautilus!  Two! three! five down!  And to think that we shall eat
that flesh, and that the idiots on board shall not have a crumb!"

I think that, in the excess of his joy, the Canadian, if he had not
talked so much, would have killed them all.  But he contented himself
with a single dozen of these interesting marsupians.  These animals
were small.  They were a species of those "kangaroo rabbits" that live
habitually in the hollows of trees, and whose speed is extreme; but
they are moderately fat, and furnish, at least, estimable food.  We
were very satisfied with the results of the hunt.  Happy Ned proposed
to return to this enchanting island the next day, for he wished to
depopulate it of all the eatable quadrupeds.  But he had reckoned
without his host.

At six o'clock in the evening we had regained the shore; our boat was
moored to the usual place.  The Nautilus, like a long rock, emerged
from the waves two miles from the beach.  Ned Land, without waiting,
occupied himself about the important dinner business.  He understood
all about cooking well.  The "bari-outang," grilled on the coals, soon
scented the air with a delicious odour.

Indeed, the dinner was excellent.  Two wood-pigeons completed this
extraordinary menu.  The sago pasty, the artocarpus bread, some
mangoes, half a dozen pineapples, and the liquor fermented from some
coco-nuts, overjoyed us.  I even think that my worthy companions' ideas
had not all the plainness desirable.

"Suppose we do not return to the Nautilus this evening?" said Conseil.

"Suppose we never return?" added Ned Land.

Just then a stone fell at our feet and cut short the harpooner's
proposition.



CHAPTER XXI

CAPTAIN NEMO'S THUNDERBOLT

We looked at the edge of the forest without rising, my hand stopping in
the action of putting it to my mouth, Ned Land's completing its office.

"Stones do not fall from the sky," remarked Conseil, "or they would
merit the name aerolites."

A second stone, carefully aimed, that made a savoury pigeon's leg fall
from Conseil's hand, gave still more weight to his observation.  We all
three arose, shouldered our guns, and were ready to reply to any attack.

"Are they apes?" cried Ned Land.

"Very nearly--they are savages."

"To the boat!"  I said, hurrying to the sea.

It was indeed necessary to beat a retreat, for about twenty natives
armed with bows and slings appeared on the skirts of a copse that
masked the horizon to the right, hardly a hundred steps from us.

Our boat was moored about sixty feet from us.  The savages approached
us, not running, but making hostile demonstrations.  Stones and arrows
fell thickly.

Ned Land had not wished to leave his provisions; and, in spite of his
imminent danger, his pig on one side and kangaroos on the other, he
went tolerably fast.  In two minutes we were on the shore.  To load the
boat with provisions and arms, to push it out to sea, and ship the
oars, was the work of an instant.  We had not gone two cable-lengths,
when a hundred savages, howling and gesticulating, entered the water up
to their waists.  I watched to see if their apparition would attract
some men from the Nautilus on to the platform.  But no.  The enormous
machine, lying off, was absolutely deserted.

Twenty minutes later we were on board.  The panels were open.  After
making the boat fast, we entered into the interior of the Nautilus.

I descended to the drawing-room, from whence I heard some chords.
Captain Nemo was there, bending over his organ, and plunged in a
musical ecstasy.

"Captain!"

He did not hear me.

"Captain!"  I said, touching his hand.

He shuddered, and, turning round, said, "Ah! it is you, Professor?
Well, have you had a good hunt, have you botanised successfully?"

"Yes Captain; but we have unfortunately brought a troop of bipeds,
whose vicinity troubles me."

"What bipeds?"

"Savages."

"Savages!" he echoed, ironically.  "So you are astonished, Professor,
at having set foot on a strange land and finding savages?  Savages!
where are there not any?  Besides, are they worse than others, these
whom you call savages?"

"But Captain----"

"How many have you counted?"

"A hundred at least."

"M. Aronnax," replied Captain Nemo, placing his fingers on the organ
stops, "when all the natives of Papua are assembled on this shore, the
Nautilus will have nothing to fear from their attacks."

The Captain's fingers were then running over the keys of the
instrument, and I remarked that he touched only the black keys, which
gave his melodies an essentially Scotch character.  Soon he had
forgotten my presence, and had plunged into a reverie that I did not
disturb.  I went up again on to the platform: night had already fallen;
for, in this low latitude, the sun sets rapidly and without twilight.
I could only see the island indistinctly; but the numerous fires,
lighted on the beach, showed that the natives did not think of leaving
it.  I was alone for several hours, sometimes thinking of the
natives--but without any dread of them, for the imperturbable
confidence of the Captain was catching--sometimes forgetting them to
admire the splendours of the night in the tropics.  My remembrances
went to France in the train of those zodiacal stars that would shine in
some hours' time.  The moon shone in the midst of the constellations of
the zenith.

The night slipped away without any mischance, the islanders frightened
no doubt at the sight of a monster aground in the bay.  The panels were
open, and would have offered an easy access to the interior of the
Nautilus.

At six o'clock in the morning of the 8th January I went up on to the
platform.  The dawn was breaking.  The island soon showed itself
through the dissipating fogs, first the shore, then the summits.

The natives were there, more numerous than on the day before--five or
six hundred perhaps--some of them, profiting by the low water, had come
on to the coral, at less than two cable-lengths from the Nautilus.  I
distinguished them easily; they were true Papuans, with athletic
figures, men of good race, large high foreheads, large, but not broad
and flat, and white teeth.  Their woolly hair, with a reddish tinge,
showed off on their black shining bodies like those of the Nubians.
From the lobes of their ears, cut and distended, hung chaplets of
bones.  Most of these savages were naked.  Amongst them, I remarked
some women, dressed from the hips to knees in quite a crinoline of
herbs, that sustained a vegetable waistband.  Some chiefs had
ornamented their necks with a crescent and collars of glass beads, red
and white; nearly all were armed with bows, arrows, and shields and
carried on their shoulders a sort of net containing those round stones
which they cast from their slings with great skill.  One of these
chiefs, rather near to the Nautilus, examined it attentively.  He was,
perhaps, a "mado" of high rank, for he was draped in a mat of
banana-leaves, notched round the edges, and set off with brilliant
colours.

I could easily have knocked down this native, who was within a short
length; but I thought that it was better to wait for real hostile
demonstrations.  Between Europeans and savages, it is proper for the
Europeans to parry sharply, not to attack.

During low water the natives roamed about near the Nautilus, but were
not troublesome; I heard them frequently repeat the word "Assai," and
by their gestures I understood that they invited me to go on land, an
invitation that I declined.

So that, on that day, the boat did not push off, to the great
displeasure of Master Land, who could not complete his provisions.

This adroit Canadian employed his time in preparing the viands and meat
that he had brought off the island.  As for the savages, they returned
to the shore about eleven o'clock in the morning, as soon as the coral
tops began to disappear under the rising tide; but I saw their numbers
had increased considerably on the shore.  Probably they came from the
neighbouring islands, or very likely from Papua.  However, I had not
seen a single native canoe.  Having nothing better to do, I thought of
dragging these beautiful limpid waters, under which I saw a profusion
of shells, zoophytes, and marine plants.  Moreover, it was the last day
that the Nautilus would pass in these parts, if it float in open sea
the next day, according to Captain Nemo's promise.

I therefore called Conseil, who brought me a little light drag, very
like those for the oyster fishery.  Now to work!  For two hours we
fished unceasingly, but without bringing up any rarities.  The drag was
filled with midas-ears, harps, melames, and particularly the most
beautiful hammers I have ever seen.  We also brought up some sea-slugs,
pearl-oysters, and a dozen little turtles that were reserved for the
pantry on board.

But just when I expected it least, I put my hand on a wonder, I might
