
Bet walked quickly through the streets. She pushed back her hair under
her plaid shawl: her eyes looked bright, and her step was once more
firm and erect.

"There are all kinds of love," she kept muttering to herself--"all
kinds-there's the love that gives, and the love that gets. Seems to me
that mine must be the love that gives."

A queer little smile came over her face as this thought entered her
brain. She walked still more quickly, and clenched her strong hand,
while resolution and the noble determination of self-sacrifice gave her
a false strength. Bet was not ignorant of certain verses of the Bible.
She had never read the Bible, for her mother's form of religion had
rendered the idea of looking into its pages distasteful to her; but
words from it had been quoted many times in her poor home, and one of
its verses now floated into her memory: _"Greater love hath no man than
this--that a man lay down his life for his friend."_ The words brought
with them a healing sense of comfort. She really did not know from
where they were taken, but she found herself repeating them, and she
knew that if she really agreed to marry Dent, she would give up far
more than her life for Will. No questionings as to the right or the
wrong of this action came to perplex her--she never for an instant
supposed it possible that Will could prefer prison with the thought of
her waiting for him at the end, to liberty with her lost to him
forever. No, no; sailors, of all men, must be free--free as the wind or
the air. Will must once more go where he pleased, and taste the briny
ocean in salt spray on his lips. Confinement would kill a roving spirit
like his. He would be sorry to have lost her--Bet; but by-and-bye he
would find another lass to comfort him.

Just at present Bet had a sense of exaltation that caused her scarcely
to feel any pain. The worst had now come and was over--her heart beat
calmly; she had nothing further to dread; and she ran quickly up the
stairs to Hester's room, and looked in with almost a bright face.

"I ha' come," she said, drawing her breath fast,--"Dent is found,
Hetty, and Will will be free to-morrow night."

"Oh, how glad I am!" said Hester. She had been making up her fire and
tidying the room before going to rest. She went straight up to Bet,
now, and put one arm round her neck, and raised herself a little to
kiss the taller girl.

"You'll be happy, yet, Bet," she said; "and God knows I'm glad of it."
Bet did not respond to Hester's kiss. She held herself very erect, and
looked down calmly into the singer's eager, enthusiastic face.

"It's a good thing Dent is found," she repeated. "I came to you Hetty,
to ask you ef you'd help me to write a letter to Will. You're more of a
scholard than I am, and I thought maybe atween us I might make my mind
known to the lad."

"For sure, Bet, I'll help you to write," said Hester. "But ef Dent is
found, and witnesses for Will, you'll see him in a few hours, honey;
and it don't seem worth while to put into writing what can be told with
the lips."

"I'll see Will to-morrow," repeated Bet, "for I'll be in the
police-court; but, all the same, it's my mind to put a few words in
writing, so that the lad may know clear what my meaning is. You'll help
me, won't you, Hetty, seeing as you're more of a scholard than me?"

"To be sure I will," said Hester. And going to a drawer, she took out a
penny bottle of ink, an old pen, and a sheet or two of very thin, poor
writing paper.

"Shall I write or will you?" she said, looking up at the girl, who
stood still and upright in the middle of the room.

"Set down, Bet, dear, and take the pen in your own fingers--ef the
letter's for Will, he'd like to have the writing yours. Set down, and
I'll help you to spell out the words."

"No," said Bet; "I ain't a scholard, and my hand shakes. I'll say
what's in my heart, and you'll write it for me, Hetty, dear."

She moved over now to the fireplace, and leaned one elbow on the tiny
mantel-shelf; her face was quiet, but Hester could not help remarking
the absence of hope in her eyes.

"Are you sure that Dent will appear in the witness box?" she asked.
"Seems to me as if he'd scarce dare to; for he'll have to say how he
come by the notes. You know, Bet, and so do I, that he's the real
thief; and ef he appears to clear Will, seems to me he must confess his
own share. Are you sure as he'll do it, Bet?"

"He told father so," replied Bet. "He's deep, and he'll find a way. He
said as he'd do it for a price--it were a heavy one--he wouldn't do it
for nought else; he named his price, and he promised that for that he'd
clear Will."

"I don't see how he's to do it," repeated Hester, looking more and more
dissatisfied. "Dent ain't the man to pop himself into the jail. And a
price? You and Granger han't got any money. It's deceived you are, I
fear me, Bet."

"No," said Bet--"the price is _me_--there ain't no deceit, and his
meaning's quite plain. When Dent saves Will, he's to have me. I'm to
wed him--them's the terms--there ain't no use argufying, Hester; but
it's all plain--Dent will clear Will, and keep out of prison hisself,
for he's as clever as he's bad. And I'm to be his wife. Now you write
the letter."

"That I won't," said Hester, flinging down her pen. "Ef you think I'm
going to break Will's heart, and yourn, too, you're fine and mistook.
Dent is playing the fool on you, Bet Granger; and you're no true lass
to give up Will on any terms."

Hester spoke with great vehemence and passion. She was horrified at
what she considered sacrilege. She could not understand Bet. Rising
from her seat, she pushed her writing materials away, and stooped over
the hearth.

"There," she said, as she poked the little fire--"I'm glad as you has
spoke out your mind. You hate Dent, and you'll marry him; and you'll
give Will his liberty, but you'll break his heart. No, no--I won't
write that letter."

"I'll do the best that I can myself," replied Bet. She was not the
least angry or excited. She sat down by Hester's table, and taking up
the pen dipped it in the ink, and with difficulty began to put her
words on paper. Her head was bent low, and her hand labored; but she
did not pause, nor glance again at Hester. Minutes passed into
half-hours: one--two--three of these went by before Bet, with a burning
flush on one cheek, and the other deadly white, finished her letter.

"There," she said. "You don't understand me, Hetty, but I ha' made it
all clear to Will. Here's the letter. Seal it up for nought but him to
see. When he's free to-morrow, give it to him, Hetty, and don't think
harder than you can help of poor Bet Granger."

She laid the letter on the mantel-piece by Hester's side, wrapped her
shawl again about her head, and went out.




CHAPTER XXII.


"You ha' got the promise of the girl?" said Dent.

"Yes, yes--that's sure and certain."

"All right; then I'll go to the police-court. Now look you here,
Granger--you don't s'pose as I'm _really_ going to give that chap his
liberty?"

"You won't wed Bet else," replied Granger.

"So _you_ say. Well, set down, man. We has half-an-hour afore us, and
I've got to think one or two things out. Are you quite aware, or must I
make it plainer to yer, the only way in which I could let Will out?"

"It don't seem over clear, for sartin," replied Granger. "But you're a
clever chap, Dent, and I trusts yer. You'll let the lad out, and you'll
wed my gel, and you'll give me my share of the siller. Come,
now--that's plain enough, ain't it?"

"_This_ is plain," said Dent, knocking the ashes out of his pipe-the
two men were loafing together near one of the quays--"this is plain,
and this only--that when Will comes out of prison I goes in. I can't
prove Will Scarlett innocent without proving myself t'other thing. Is
it likely now--you tell me as it's likely--ef I'll lend myself to that
sort of plan?"

"Only you said it," replied Granger. "And for sartin my gel won't wed
you else."

"And," continued Dent, "when I'm locked up, it won't look too nice for
you. There are a few things as 'ull come out about that money as I
stole. Ef I'm took up, Liverpool 'ull be a sight too hot for you,
Granger. You take my word on that point."

Granger's bloated and red face turned pale. He did not speak at all for
a moment. Then he said, slowly: "You has a plan in your head, Isaac
Dent; and the sooner you outs with it the better it'll be for you and
for me."

"Yes," said Dent, smiling. "You're about right there, mate. I has a
plan, and this is it--I mean to go to the police-court to-day--I means
to witness there; but not for Will Scarlett, but _agin_' him. He'll
swear as I give him the notes; I'll swear tother way. His case looks
black now--I'll make it of a double-dyed darkness. I'll do for him.
That'll be none so difficult."

"But what about Bet?" said Granger. "I don't care about Scarlett. It's
nought to me how long he stays in prison. But how'll you get Bet to wed
you, ef you treats the lad so, is more nor I can make out."

"We'll blind her," said Dent. "Throw dust in her eyes--eh? That's where
you can help me, Granger--and five pound, not in notes, but gold, for
the job."

Granger looked dubious.

"Bet's going to the police-court," he said.

"She mustn't go--no, not on no account. Look here, Granger, you wern't,
so to say, special tender and fatherly to them boys o' yourn, were you?"

"What now?" said Granger.

"Well, just this," replied Dent. "I want you to take them boys, and
manage so as Bet shall have a hint of it, and pretend as you're going
to do bad by them. Take them out of her sight. She'll follow--she'll
spend all the time, while Will's little business is being settled,
looking for the boys. It can be done, and we'll lure her out of
Liverpool, and we'll pretend as Will is free, until such time as I can
wed her. Then I don't care what she knows. Come into the 'Star and
Garter,' mate--we'll have a drink, and soon fix up this yer business."




CHAPTER XXIII.


It sometimes happens that a very valiant and resolute spirit is
contained in a small body. Bet Granger's little brothers, known in the
slums as the captain and the general, were as thin, as lanky, as
under-grown little chaps as could be found in Liverpool. Not a scrap of
superfluous flesh had they, and certainly not an iota of superfluous
growth. They were under-fed, under-sized; but nevertheless brave
spirits shone out of their eyes, and valiant and even martial ideas
animated their small frames. The "Cap'n" and the "Gen'ral" were
considered so plucky by the other boys--and girls of the neighborhood
that as a rule they were asked to take the command in a fight, and to
assume leading and distinguished positions in a general fray. Most
valiantly then would they strike out left or right--regardless of black
eyes, indifferent to bumps or blows. They looked like little furies on
these occasions, and the other children applauded and admired. It was
well known in Sparrow Street, and it was even beginning to be
recognized as a certain fact in Paradise Row, that when both the
captain and the general were engaged together in one encounter there
was not the smallest chance of the opposite side winning.

These untrained and somewhat desperate little bravos had also certain
instincts which taught them to espouse the cause of those weaker than
themselves: and it was often a ludicrous as well as a pathetic sight to
see these small champions leading the van, and eagerly supporting girls
and boys a great deal bigger than themselves. Their mother had
certainly told them that fighting was sinful; but it was the breath of
life to them, and when Thady was once asked what he liked best in the
world, he answered promptly, "Punchin' another feller's head." These
small boys were quite little braves in their way; but, as there is a
weak point in the most invincible armor, so were there conditions under
which the general and his gallant captain would undoubtedly show the
white feather. There was a presence which could effectually quench the
ardor of two pairs of keen eyes, could cause two little faces to blanch
to an unwholesome and sickly hue, could cause two little hearts to beat
anxiously, and could so affect the moral equilibrium of two very
steadfast little souls, that lies would fall glibly from their lips,
and the coward's weapons of deceit and subterfuge would be gladly used
by them in self-defence.

It was a father who had this effect upon his children; and the
torturing and ruining of these young child-lives was being effected in
the civilized England of our nineteeth century. Granger represented a
not too uncommon type of man, and Nat and Thady did not suffer more
than hundreds of other boys when exposed to his influence.

On the morning after Bet had written her letter to Will, she rose
early, and was preparing to go to the police-court, to look her last on
her lover, when the door of their one little room in Sparrow Street was
burst rudely open, and Granger, his face red and bloated, and his whole
manner indicating that he had reached the quarrelsome stage of
insobriety, entered the room with heavy strides. He was a big man,
powerfully made, and when in his present condition even Bet thought it
wisest to let him alone. He entered the room and glared about him
savagely. A great deal of this manner was put on, for he was acting a
part under Dent's instructions; but none of his children knew this, and
when striding across the room, he caught the poor little blue-eyed
captain by his ragged collar, the boy uttered a scream, and the
general, basely deserting his brother, rushed to Bet for protection.

"Give up that lad," shouted Granger, hoarsely. "I want the two of 'em.
They are my lads, and you have played the fool with 'em long enough. I
have got work as 'ull suit them, away in Warrington, and I'm going to
take 'em by an early train. There--hands off, Bet--give me the lads."
"Never," cried Bet. She looked like a wild creature about to be
deprived of her young. Holding one arm firmly round the general, she
gripped the little captain by the other hand.

"Gi' them up to me, father! You shan't have them--you shan't touch
them--there! What do you mean? You take 'em away to work at I knows not
what?--and they no more nor seven years old! Let 'em be--they're my
lads, and you shan't harm a hair of their heads."

The boys clung to her, with white faces. The man, savage and amazed at
this unexpected resistance, stood wavering for an instant. At that
moment it seemed to Bet as if a thousand furies possessed her, and a
thousand strengths were given to her. All the accumulated anguish of
the past week seemed to gather vehemence now, and to lend iron force to
her muscular arms. She wrenched the little captain quite away from the
red-faced, bloated man; and then, both arms freed for a moment, she
actually pushed him before her to the door, and, before he could utter
a word, or collect his scattered forces, she locked him out.

"There! lads," she said, turning round with a triumphant half laugh,
"you see as Bet's as good as her word."

"You're a born fighter," said the captain, in a tone of admiration. He
recovered his spirits and his courage on the spot, and in a few moments
he and the general were amusing themselves in acting the scene which
Bet had just gone through.

"Boys," said their sister's voice, after ten minutes had passed, and no
attack been made on the door, she concluded that Granger had for the
present withdrawn himself--"Boys, I'm a wanting to go out."

"Oh, no, Bet, no--father'll come back."

"But the door's werry strong. I'll lock it from the outside, and make
off with the key. I won't be long, boys; I'm a hungered to see
somebody--my heart draws me, and I'm in pain. You won't be in any
danger, dear lads, and I'll be back werry soon. I jest want to set eyes
on one face that I'll never see no more. You won't be afeard, ef
there's a locked door between you and father."

The rare tears which scarcely ever came to her stood in Bet's eyes.

"No, we won't be afeard," said the captain, running up to his
sister--"there ain't nought to be afeard of. You're wanting to see your
sweetheart--ain't yer, Bet?"

"No," said Bet, with an almost-cry--"I han't got a sweetheart now. All
the same, I hungers for the sight of a face. And I'll be back soon.
Don't you be fretting, lads. There'll be a locked door atween you and
harm."

She wrapped her shawl about her, waited for no further words, locked
