
"I did not know then," she said. "I had never thought of it. You
took me altogether by surprise, and what I said I thought was true.
Afterwards I knew that I had been mistaken. I hoped that you would
ask me again, but you did not, and I soon felt that you never
would. You tried hard to be as you were before, but you were not
the same, and I was not the same. Then I did not seem to care.
There were three men who wanted me. I did not care much which it
was, but I would not have anyone say that I had married for
position--I hated the idea of that--and so I would have taken the
third. He was bright and pleasant, and all that sort of thing, and
I thought that I could be happy with him, until George Lechmere
opened my eyes. Then, of course, that was over; but his story
showed me still more what a fool I had been, what a heart I had
thrown away, and I said, 'I will at least make an effort to undo
the past. I will not let my chance of happiness go away from me
merely from false pride. If he loves me still he will forgive me.
If not, at least I shall not, all through my life, feel that I
might have made it different could I have brought myself to speak a
word.'"

"I love you as much as ever," Frank said, taking her hand. "I love
you more for speaking as you have. I can hardly believe my
happiness. Can it be that you really love me, Bertha?"

"I think I have proved it, Frank. I do love you. I have known it
for some time, but it seemed all too late. It was a grief rather
than a pleasure. Every time you came it was a pain to me, for I
felt that I had lost you; and it was only when I learned, two days
ago, how you could forgive, and that at the same time I could free
myself from the chain I had allowed to be wound round me, and which
I don't think I could otherwise have broken, that I made up my mind
that it should not be my fault if things were not put right between
us.

"Now let us tell mother."

Her hand was still in his, and they went across the deck together.

"Mamma," she said, "please put down that book. I have a piece of
news for you. Frank and I are going to be married."

Lady Greendale sat for a moment, speechless in astonishment. She
knew that Bertha had wished to tell him that she had refused
Carthew's offer, but that this would come of it she had never
dreamt. A year before she had approved of Bertha's rejection of
Frank, but since then much had happened. Bertha had shown that she
would not marry for position only, and that she would be likely to
take her own way entirely in the matter; and, although this was a
downfall to the hopes that she had once entertained, Lady Greendale
was herself very fond of Frank, and it was at any rate better than
having Bertha marry a man of whose real means she was ignorant, and
who, as everyone knew, bet heavily on the turf. These ideas flashed
rapidly through her mind, and holding out one hand to each, she
said:

"There is no one to whom I could more confidently entrust her
happiness, Frank. God bless you both."

Then she betook herself to her pocket handkerchief, for her tears
came easily, and on this occasion she herself could hardly have
said whether they were the result of pleasure in Bertha's
happiness, or regret at the downfall of the air castles she had
once built.

"I think, Bertha, our best plan will be to go below now," Frank
suggested, quietly.

"What for?" Bertha asked, shyly.

The thing had been done. She felt radiantly happy, but more shocked
at her own boldness than she had been when she perpetrated it.

"Well, my dear, I thought that perhaps you would rather not kiss me
in sight of the whole crew, and certainly I shan't be able to
restrain myself much longer."

"Then, in that case," she said, demurely, "perhaps we had better go
below."

It was half an hour before they came on deck again.

"Well, my dears," Lady Greendale said, "the more I think of it the
better I am pleased. As far as I am concerned, nothing could be
nicer. I shall have Bertha within a short drive of me, and it won't
be like losing her.

"Do you know, Bertha, your father said to me once, 'I would give
anything if some day Frank Mallett and our Bertha were to take a
fancy to each other. There is nothing I should like more than to
have her settled near us, and there is no one I know more likely to
make her happy than he would be.' I am sure, dear, that you will be
glad to know that your engagement would have had his approval, as
it has mine."

Bertha bent down and kissed her mother, with tears standing in her
eyes.

"It will be a great pleasure to us both to have you so near us,"
Frank said, earnestly. "You know that, having lost my own mother so
long ago, I have always looked upon you as more of a mother than
anyone else, and have always felt almost as much at home in your
house as in my own.

"Now, let us sit down and talk it over quietly. In the first place,
I propose that on Monday, when you leave Lord Haverley's, you shall
both come here for a time. The Solent will be very pleasant for the
next fortnight, and we can then take a fortnight's cruise west,
and, if you like, land at Plymouth, and go straight home."

"I should be very glad," Lady Greendale said at once, rejoiced at
the thought that she would thus avoid the necessity of answering
any questions about Bertha; "and there will be no occasion at all
to speak of this at my cousin's. There might be all sorts of
questions asked, and expressions of surprise, and so on. It will be
quite time enough to write to our friends after we have been
comfortably settled at home for a time. We can talk over all that
afterwards."

"Yes, and I should think, Lady Greendale, that it would save the
trouble of two letters if, while mentioning that Bertha is engaged
to your neighbour, Major Mallett, you could add that the marriage
will come off in the course of a few weeks.

"Don't you think so, Bertha?"

"Certainly not," she said, saucily. "It will be quite time to talk
about that a long time hence."

"Well, I will put off talking about it for a short time, but, you
see, I have had a year's waiting already."

Very pleasant was the three hours' cruise. No one gave a thought of
the missing topmast and bowsprit. There was a nice sailing breeze,
and, clipped as her wings were, the Osprey was still faster than
the majority of the yachts.

As soon as the two ladies had been put ashore, Frank sailed for
Cowes. It was too late when they got there for anything to be done
that evening, but Frank went ashore with the captain, and found
that the spars were all ready to receive the iron work and sheaves
from the old ones; and as these had been towed up to the yard to be
in readiness, Messieurs White promised that they would arrange for
a few hands to come to work early, and that the spars should be
brought off by half-past eight on Monday morning.

As soon as he had returned in the gig, after putting the ladies
ashore at Ryde, Frank had called George Lechmere to him.

"It is all right, George, thanks to your interview with Miss
Greendale. It was a bold step to take, but it was the best possible
thing, and succeeded splendidly, and everything is to be as I wish
it."

"I am glad, indeed, to hear it, Major, and I hoped that you would
have something of the sort to tell me. There was a look about you
both that I took to mean that things were going on well."

"Yes, George. At first, when she told me that you had told her
about that affair at Delhi, I felt that there was really no
occasion for you to have said anything about it; but it did me a
great deal of good. She made much more of it than there was any
occasion for; but, you know, when women are inclined to take a
pleasant view of a thing, they will magnify molehills into
mountains."

"I thought that it would do good, Major. I don't mean that it would
do you any good, but that it would do good generally. I had to tell
the other story, and that came naturally with it; and, at any rate,
she could not but see that there was a deal of difference between
the nature of the man who had been so good to me, and that of that
scoundrel."

"That is just the effect it did have. Well, don't say anything
about it forward, at present. The men shall be told later on."

By one o'clock on Monday the Osprey was back at Ryde, and at two
o'clock the dinghy went ashore with the mate and two of the hands,
who waited a quarter of an hour till a vehicle brought down the
ladies' luggage. Soon afterwards Frank went ashore in the gig, and
brought Lady Greendale and Bertha off.

As they went down to their cabin, Bertha, looking into the saloon,
saw George Lechmere preparing the tea tray to bring it up on deck.
She at once went to him.

"I did not thank you before," she said, holding out her hand; "but
I thank you now, and shall thank you all my life. You did me the
greatest service."

"I am glad, indeed, Miss Greendale, that it was so; for I know that
the Major would never have been a happy man if this had not come
about."

For the next fortnight the Osprey was cruising along the coast,
getting as far as Torquay, and returning to Cowes. Frank did not
enter her for any of the races. Lady Greendale, although a fair
sailor, grew nervous when the yacht heeled over far, and even
Bertha did not care for racing, the memory of the last race being
too fresh in her mind for her to wish to take part in another for
the present.



Chapter 11.

"That is an uncommonly pretty trading schooner, Bertha," Frank
Mallett said, as he rose from his chair to get a better look at a
craft that was passing along to the eastward. "I suppose she must
be in the fruit trade, and must just have arrived from the Levant.
I should not be surprised if she had been a yacht at one time. She
is not carrying much sail, but she is going along fast. I think
they would have done better if they had rigged her as a
fore-and-aft schooner instead of putting those heavy yards on the
foremast. That broad band of white round her spoils her appearance;
her jib boom is unusually long, and she must carry a tremendous
spread of canvas in light winds. I should think that she must be
full up to the hatches, for she is very low in the water for a
trader."

The Osprey was lying in the outside tier of yachts off Cowes. The
party that had been on board her for the regatta had broken up a
week before, and only Lady Greendale and Bertha remained on board.
The former had not been well for some days, and had had her maid
down from town as soon as the cabins were empty. It had been
proposed, indeed, that she and Bertha should return to town, but,
being unwilling to cut short the girl's pleasure, she said that she
should do better on board than in London; and, moreover, she did
not feel equal to travelling. She was attended by a doctor in
Cowes, and the Osprey only took short sails each day, generally
down to the Needles and back, or out to the Nab.

"Yes, she is a nice-looking boat," Bertha agreed, "and if her sails
were white and her ropes neat and trim, she would look like a
yacht, except for those big yards."

"Her skipper must be a lubber to have the ropes hanging about like
that. Of course, he may have had bad weather in crossing the bay,
but if he had any pride in the craft, he might at least have got
her into a good deal better trim while coming in from the Needles.
Still, all that could be remedied in an hour's work, and certainly
she is as pretty a trader as ever I saw. How did your mother seem
this afternoon, Bertha?"

"About the same, I think. I don't feel at all anxious about her,
because I have often seen her like this before. I think really,
Frank, that she is quite well enough to go up to town; but she
knows that I am enjoying myself so much that she does not like to
take me away. I have no doubt that she will find herself better by
Saturday, when, you know, we arranged some time back that we would
go up. You won't be long before you come, will you?"

"Certainly not. Directly you have landed I shall take the Osprey to
Gosport, and lay her up there. I need not stop to see that done. I
can trust Hawkins to see her stripped and everything taken on
shore; and, of course, the people at the yard are responsible for
hauling her up. I shall probably be in town the same evening; but,
if you like, and think that your mother is only stopping for you,
we will go across to Southampton at once."

"Oh, no, I am sure that she would not like that; and I don't want
to lose my last three days here. Of course, when we get home at the
end of next week, and you are settled down there, too, you will be
a great deal over at Greendale, but it won't be as it is here."

"Not by a long way. However, we shall be able to look forward to
the spring, Bertha, when I shall have you all to myself on board,
and we shall go on a long cruise together; though I do think that
it is ridiculous that I should have to wait until then."

"Not at all ridiculous, sir. You say that you are perfectly
happy--and everyone says that an engagement is the happiest time in
one's life--and besides, it is partly your own fault; you have made
me so fond of the Osprey that I have quite made up my mind that
nothing could possibly be so nice as to spend our honeymoon on
board her, and to go where we like, and to do as we like, without
being bothered by meeting people one does not care for. And,
besides, if you should get tired of my company, we might ask Jack
Harley and Amy to come to us for a month or so."

"I don't think that it will be necessary for us to do that," he
laughed. "Starting as we shall in the middle of March, we shan't
find it too hot in the Mediterranean before we turn our head
homewards; and I think we shall find plenty to amuse us between
Gibraltar and Jaffa."

"No, three months won't be too much, Frank. Tomorrow is the dinner
at the clubhouse, isn't it?"

"Yes. I should be sorry to miss that, for having only been just
elected a member of the Squadron, I should like to put in an
appearance at the first set dinner."

"Of course, Frank. I certainly should not like you to miss it."

The next evening Frank went ashore to dine at the club. An hour and
a half later a yacht's boat came off.

"I have a note for Miss Greendale," the man in the stern said, as
she came alongside; "I am to give it to her myself."

Bertha was summoned, and, much surprised, came on deck.

The man handed up the note to her. She took it into the companion,
where a light was burning; her name and that of the yacht were in
straggling handwriting that she scarcely recognised as Frank's.

She tore it open.

"My Darling: I have had a nasty accident, having been knocked down
just as I landed. I am at present at Dr. Maddison's. I wish you
would come ashore at once. It is nothing very serious, but if you
did not see me you might think that it was. Don't agitate your
mother, but bring Anna with you. The boat that brings this note
will take you ashore."

Bertha gave a little gasp, and then summoning up her courage, ran
down into the cabin.

"Mamma, dear, you must spare me and Anna for half an hour. I have
just had a note from Frank. He has been knocked down and hurt. He
says that it is nothing very serious, and he only writes to me to
come ashore so that I can assure myself. I won't stop more than a
quarter of an hour. If I find that he is worse than I expect, I
will send Anna off to you with a message."

Scarcely listening to what her mother said in reply, she ran into
her cabin, told Anna to put on her hat and shawl to go ashore with
her, and in a minute descended to the boat with her maid. It was a
four-oared gig, and the helmsman had taken his place in the stern
behind them.

Bertha sat cold and still without speaking. She was sure that Frank
must be more seriously hurt than he had said, or he would have had
himself taken off to the yacht instead of to the surgeon's. The
shaky and almost illegible handwriting showed the difficulty he
must have had in holding the pencil.

The boat made its way through the fleet till it reached the shallow
water which they had to cross on their way to the shore. Here, with
the exception of a few small craft, the water was clear of yachts.

Suddenly the long line of lights along the shore disappeared, and
something thick, heavy and soft fell over Bertha's head. An arm was
thrown round her, and Anna pressed tightly against her. In vain she
struggled. There was a faint, strange smell, and she lost
consciousness.

An hour passed without her return to the yacht, and Lady Greendale
began to fear that she had found Frank too ill to leave, and had
forgotten to send Anna back with the message. At last she touched
the bell.

"Will you tell the captain that I want to speak to him?"

"Captain," she said. "I am much alarmed about Major Mallett. That
boat that came off here an hour ago brought a note for my daughter,
saying that he had been hurt, and she went ashore with her maid to
see him. She said that she would be back in a short time, and that
if she found that he was badly hurt she would send her maid back
with a message to me. She has been gone for more than an hour, and
I wish you would take a boat and go ashore, find out how the Major
is, and bring me back word at once. He is at Dr. Maddison's. You
know the house."

The skipper hurried away with a serious face. A little more than a
minute after he had left the cabin Lady Greendale heard the rattle
of the blocks of the falls. The boat was little more than half an
hour away. Lady Greendale, in her anxiety, had told the steward to
let her know when it was coming alongside, and went up on deck to
get the news as quickly as possible.

"It is a rum affair altogether, my lady," Hawkins said, as he
stepped on deck. "I went to the doctor's, and he has seen nothing
whatever of the Major, and Miss Greendale and her maid have not
been to his house at all."

Lady Greendale stood for a moment speechless with surprise and
consternation.

"This is most extraordinary," she said at last. "What can it mean?
You are sure that there is no mistake, captain? It was to Dr.
Maddison's house she went."

"Yes, my lady, there ain't no mistake about that. I have been there
to fetch medicine for you two or three times. Besides, I saw the
doctor myself."

"Major Mallett must have been taken to some other doctor's," she
said, "and must have made a mistake and put in the name of Dr.
Maddison. His house is some little distance from the club. There
may be another doctor's nearer. What is to be done?"

"I am sure I do not know, my lady," the captain said, in
perplexity.

"Where can my daughter and her maid be?" Lady Greendale went on.
"They went ashore to go to Dr. Maddison's."

"Perhaps, my lady, they might have heard as they went ashore that
the Major was somewhere else, or some messenger might have been
waiting at the landing stage to take them there direct."

"That must be it, I suppose; but it is all very strange. I think
the best thing, captain, will be for you to go to the club. They
are sure to know there about the accident, and where he is. You
see, the landing stage is close to the club, and he might have been
just going in when he was knocked down--by a carriage, I suppose."

"Like enough he is at the club still, my lady. At any rate, I will
go there in the first place and find out. There is sure to be a
crowd about the gates listening to the music--they have got a band
over from Newport--so that if they do not know anything at the
club, there are sure to be some people outside who saw the
