"And what were you doing?"

"Oh, I was seconding him, sir."

"Oh, that was right.  You were not both on him at once?"

"Oh no, sir; it was all fair."

"Then Glyn thoroughly whipped him, eh?"

"Yes, sir, thoroughly."

The Colonel turned to his son, and looked him over again; and then,
after another two-handed tug at his moustache, he said slowly:

"I say, Glyn, old chap, you got it rather warmly.  But tut, tut, tut,
tut!  This won't do.  What did that old chap say: `Let dogs delight to
bark and bite'?  Here, I have been talking to the Doctor, and the Doctor
has been talking to me.  Look here, you, Singh, military fighting, after
proper discipline, and done by fighting men, is one thing; schoolboy
fighting is quite another, not for gentlemen.  It's low and
blackguardly.--Do you hear, Glyn?" he cried turning on his son.
"Blackguardly, sir--blackguardly.  Look at your faces, sir, and see how
you have got yourselves marked.  But er--er--"

He picked his pocket-handkerchief up from where he had spread it over
his knees and blew another blast.  "This er--this er--big fellow that
you thrashed--big disagreeable fellow--bit of a bully, eh?"

"Regular tyrant, father.  We hadn't been here a month, before not a day
passed without his insulting Singh or making us uncomfortable."

"Ha! insulted Singh, did he?"

"Yes, sir," cried that individual through his set teeth.  "He was always
calling me nigger, and mocking at me in some way."

"Humph!  Brute!  And so, after putting up with a good deal, and obeying
my orders till he couldn't stand it any longer, Glyn took your part and
thrashed the fellow, eh?"

"Yes, sir, bravely," cried Singh, with his eyes flashing.  "I wish you'd
been there to see."

"I wish--"

The Colonel stopped short.  "No, no.  Tut, tut!  Nonsense!  I did not
want to see.  Here, hold out your hands, Glyn.  No, no, not like that.
Double your fists.  Hold them out straight.  I want to look at your
knuckles.  Dreadful!  Nice state for a gentleman's hands.  Fighting's
bad.--Do you hear, Singh?  Very bad.  But I must confess that I didn't
get through school without a turn-up or two myself.  Glyn took your
part, then, and thrashed the fellow.  Well, he won't bully either of you
again.  Yes, I got into my scrapes when I was a boy; but you know times
were different then.  Everything was rougher.  This sort of thing won't
do.  You must be more of gentlemen now--more polished.  Fighting's bad."

"But you let the sergeant, father, teach us how to use the gloves after
you had got them over from England."

"Eh?  What, sir--what sir?" cried the Colonel sharply.  "Well, yes, I
did.  It was a bit of a lapse, though, and every man makes mistakes.
But that, you see, was part of my old education, and through being in
India so many years and away from modern civilisation, and er--Of
course, I remember; it was after your poor father had been talking to
me, Singh, and telling me that he looked to me to make you a thorough
English gentleman, one fit to occupy his throne some day, and rule well
over his people--firmly, justly, and strongly, as an Englishman would.
And, of course, I thought it would be right for you both to know how to
use your fists if you were unarmed and attacked by ruffians.  And--er,
well, well, you see I was not quite wrong.  Mind, you know, I detest
fighting, and only this morning I have been quite agreeing with the
Doctor--fine old gentlemanly fellow, by the way, and a great scholar--
agreeing with him, I say, that this fighting is rather a disgrace.  At
the same time, my boys, as I was about to say, I was not quite wrong
about those gloves.  You see, it enabled Glyn here to bring skill to
bear against a bigger and a stronger man, and er--um--you see, there are
other kinds of fighting that a man will have to go through in life; and
then when such things do happen, mind this--I mean it metaphorically,
you know--when you do have to fight with your fists, or with your
tongue, thrash your adversary if you can; but if he from superior skill
or strength thrashes you, why then, take it like a man, shake hands, and
bear no malice against the one who wins."

The Colonel blew his nose again.

"That's not quite what I wanted to say, my boys; but I shall think this
affair over a bit, and perhaps I shall have a few more words to say
by-and-by."

"Oh, I say, dad--" cried Glyn.

"What do you mean by that, sir?" said the Colonel sharply.

"Finish it all now, and don't bring it up again."

"Glyn!" cried the Colonel sternly.

"Yes, father."

"Don't you dictate to me, sir.  I promised the Doctor that I would talk
to you both severely about this--this--well, piece of blackguardism,
ungentlemanly conduct, and I must keep my word.  But I will reserve the
rest till after dinner."

"After dinner, father?" cried Glyn eagerly.

"Yes.  I have come down to stay at Plymborough for a few days at the
hotel, and I have told them there that I should have two gentlemen to
dine with me to-night, of course, if the Doctor gives his consent."

"Oh, but look at us, sir!" cried Singh.  "We are in the infirmary, and
not fit to come."

"Infirmary!" said the Colonel scornfully.  "Ha, ha!  You look infirm
both of you!"

"Oh, we don't feel much the matter, father," said Glyn; "but look at
us."

"Look at you, sir?  How can I help looking at you?  Yes, you do look
nice objects."

"But we can't help it now, sir," said Singh, "and we should like to
come."

"Humph!  Yes, of course you'd like to come, my boy, and I want to have
you both to finish my lecture after I have thought it out a little more.
Well, look here, my lads; you are both bruised and--er--a bit
discoloured; but the world isn't obliged to know that it was done with
fists.  You might have been thrown off your horses or been upset in a
carriage accident.  Oh yes, it's no business of anybody else's.  I shall
ask the Doctor to let you come."

"Oh, thank you, father!" cried Glyn eagerly.  "But I say, dad, you
didn't shake hands with Singh when we came in."

"Well, no, boy; but--there, there, that's all right now.  You see I had
to listen to what the Doctor said.  Why, he tells me that you fellows
showed them all down here how to deal with a rowdy elephant."

"Singh did, father."

"Well done, boy!  You see, that's one great advantage in learning.
Nearly everything comes useful some time or other, and--There, let me
see," he continued, referring to his watch.  "I must be off.  Visit too
long as it is.  Ring the bell, one of you.  I want to see the Doctor
again before I go."

"And you will get us leave, sir?" cried Singh, as he returned from
pulling at the bell.

"Oh yes, I'll manage that.  Seven o'clock, boys, military time; and now
you both be off; but mind this, I am going to finish my lecture after
dinner, for I am not satisfied with what I said.  There, right about
face!  March!"

As the boys reached the door the handle was turned and the Doctor
entered the room.



CHAPTER FOURTEEN.

A LITTLE BIT ABOUT THE PAST.

"Well, boys, glad to see you!  Did Dr Justinian say anything to you
about coming away to-night?"

"No, father; but--Dr Justinian--who do you mean?"

"Why, your law-maker and instructor.  He spoke very seriously to me
about breaking his laws and rules.  Well, here you are.  Come along.
The dining-room is this way.--I have been very busy since I saw you,
Singh.  I have seen the cook and given him a good talking to, and he has
promised us a regular Indian dinner, with curry."

The Colonel laid his hand on Singh's shoulder, and they passed out into
the hall of the hotel.

As they were crossing, Morris entered from the other side, nodded and
smiled to the boys, raised his hat to the Colonel, who stared at him,
and then passing on, went up to the office to speak to the manager.

"Friend of yours, boys?" said the Colonel.  "Yes, father; one of our
masters."

"Oh!  What brings him here?"

"I don't know, father.  Perhaps he thought you might ask him to dinner."

"Ho!" said the Colonel, with a snort.  "Then he thought wrong.  Ah--but
one moment!  Would you like me to ask him, my boy?"

"Oh no," cried Glyn, with a look of dismay.  "We want you all to
ourselves, father."

"But you, Singh; would you like him to join us?"

The boy shrugged his shoulders and shook his head.

"No," he said; "I think like Glyn does," and Singh clung in a boyish,
affectionate manner to the stalwart Colonel's arm, greatly to that
gentleman's satisfaction.

"Then we will have our snug little dinner all to ourselves, boys, and a
good long talk about old times and the last news I have had from Dour.--
Yes, all right, waiter; serve the dinner at once, and mind everything is
very hot.--There you are: snug little table for three.  I'll sit this
side with my back to the light, and you two can sit facing it, so that I
can look at you both."

"Oh, but that isn't fair, father," cried Glyn.  "We ought to be with our
backs to the light."

"Not at all, sir," said the Colonel, laughing.  "A soldier should never
be ashamed of his scars."

The seats were taken, the dinner began, and had not proceeded far before
Glyn noticed that the waiter was staring very hard at his bruised face,
getting so fierce a look in return that the man nearly dropped the plate
he was handing, and refrained from looking at him again.

"Better bring candles, waiter," said the Colonel.--"One likes to see
what one is eating, boys;" and as a few minutes later the waiter placed
a tall branch with its four wax candles in the centre of the table, the
Colonel nodded to Singh.  "There," he said, "now we can all play fair,
and you can see my scars."

"Yes," said Singh, looking at the Colonel fixedly.  "There's the big one
quite plain that father used to tell me about."

"Indeed!" said the Colonel sharply.  "Why, what did he tell you about
it, and when?"

"Oh, it was when I was quite a little fellow," replied Singh.  "He said
it was in a great fight when three of the rajahs had joined against him
to attack him and kill him, and take all his land.  He said that there
was a dreadful fight, and there were so many of his enemies that he was
being beaten."

"Oh--ah--yes," said the Colonel.  "Your father and I had a great many
fights with his enemies when the Company sent me to help him with a
battery of horse artillery, and to drill his men."

"Was that, father, when you drilled and formed your regiment of
cavalry?"

"Yes, boy, yes.  But never mind the fighting now.  That was in the old
days.  Go on with your dinner."

But Singh did not seem to heed his words, for he was sitting gazing
straight before him at the scar on his host's forehead; and laying down
his knife and fork he continued, in a rapt, dreamy way, "And he said he
thought his last hour had come, for he and the few men who were
retreating with him had placed their backs against a steep piece of
cliff, and they were fighting for their lives, surrounded by hundreds of
the enemy."

"My dear boy, you are letting your dinner get cold," said the Colonel,
in a petulant way.

"Yes," continued Singh, "and it was all just like a story out of a book.
I used to ask father to tell it to me, and when I did he used to smile
and make me kneel down before him with my hands on his knees."

"But, my dear Singh," interposed the Colonel, who looked so annoyed and
worried that Glyn kicked his schoolfellow softly under the table, and
then coloured up.

"Don't!" cried Singh sharply; and then in his old dreamy tone, "When he
told me I used to seem to see it all, with his fierce enemies in their
steel caps with the turbans round them, and the chain rings hanging
about their necks and their swords flashing in the air as they made cuts
at my father's brave friends; and first one fell bleeding, and then
another, till there were only about a dozen left, and my father the
Maharajah was telling his men that the time had come when they must make
one bold dash at their enemies, and die fighting as brave warriors
should."

"Yes, yes, yes, yes!" cried the Colonel querulously.  "But that curry is
getting cold, my boy, and it won't be worth eating if it isn't hot."

"Yes, I'll go on directly," continued Singh in the same imperturbable
manner, and he leaned his elbows now upon the table, placed his chin
upon his hands, and fixed his eyes upon the Colonel's scar.

"I can see it all now so plainly," he said; and with a quick gesture his
host dropped his knife sharply in his plate and clapped his hand across
his forehead, while Glyn gave his schoolfellow another thrust--a soft
one this time--with his foot.

But Singh paid not the slightest heed to his companion's hint.  He only
leaned a little more forward to look now in the Colonel's eyes; and
laughing softly he continued:

"That doesn't make any difference.  I can see it all just the same, and
I seem to hear the roar like thunder father spoke about.  He said it was
the trampling of horses and the shouting of men, and it was you tearing
over the plain from out of the valley, with all the men that you had
drilled and made into his brave regiment.  They swept over the ground
with a rush, charging into the midst of the enemy and cutting right and
left till they reached my father and his friends, when a terrible
slaughter went on for a few minutes before the enemy turned and fled,
pursued by your brave soldiers, who had left their leader wounded on the
ground.  Father said he had just strength enough to catch you in his
arms as you fell from your horse with that terrible gash across your
forehead.  That was how he said you saved his life and always became his
greatest friend."

The Colonel's lips had parted to check the narration again and again;
but he seemed fascinated by the strange look in the boy's eyes, and for
the time being it was as if the whole scene of many years before was
being enacted once again; while, to Glyn's astonishment, the boy slowly
rose from his seat, went round to the Colonel's side of the table, to
stand behind his chair till the waiter left the room, and then laying
one hand on the old warrior's shoulder, with the other he drew away that
which covered the big scar, and bending over him he said softly:

"Father told me I was to try and grow up like you, who saved his life,
and that I was always to think of you as my second father when he was
gone."

As Singh ended he bent down gently, and softly and reverently kissed the
scar, while the Colonel closed his eyes and Glyn noticed that his lips
were quivering beneath the great moustache, which seemed to move
strangely as if it had been touched.

For a few moments then there was a deep silence, during which Singh
glided back to his seat, took up his knife and fork, and said, in quite
a changed tone of voice:

"It always makes me think of that when I sit and look at you.  And it
comes back, sir, just like a dream.  My father the Maharajah told me I
was never to forget that story; and I never shall."

Just at that moment the door was opened, and the waiter entered bearing
another dish, while through the opening there came a burst of music as
if some band were playing a march.

"Hah!" cried the Colonel, speaking with quite a start, but with his
voice sounding husky and strange, and the words seeming forced as he
gave Singh a long and earnest look.  "Why, surely that is not a military
band?"

"No, sir," said the waiter, as he proceeded to change the plates, two of
them having their contents hardly touched.  "There's a wild-beast show
in the town, sir, in the field at the back," and as he spoke the man
looked sharply at the boys.

"Oh," said the Colonel with a forced laugh.  "Why, boys, is that where
your elephant came from?"

And then the dinner went on, with the Colonel forcing himself into
questioning the boys about their adventure, and from that he brought up
the elephants in Dour, and chatted about tiger-shooting and the dangers
of the man-eaters in the jungle.  But all the time Glyn kept noting that
his father spoke as if he had been strangely moved, and that when he
turned his eyes upon Singh his face softened and his voice sounded more
gentle.

As they sat over the dessert, Singh asked him to tell them about one of
the other old fights that his father and the Colonel had been in.

"Don't ask me, my boy," said the Colonel gently.  "You can't understand
it perhaps.  When you grow as old as I am perhaps you will.  But I don't
know.  You like Glyn after a fashion, I suppose?"

"Like him?" cried Singh half-fiercely.  "Why, of course I do!"
