much more that I did not know before, though I _am_ a chief of the Cree
nation."

Okematan looked pointedly at Rednose as he said this.  After a brief
pause he continued--

"The great white chief," (meaning Lord Selkirk), "is _not_ a fool.  It
is true that he is not a god; he is a man and a Paleface, subject to the
follies and weaknesses of the Palefaces, and not quite so wise as it is
possible to be, but he is a good man, and wishes well to the Indian.  I
have found weaknesses among the Palefaces.  One of them is that their
chiefs plan--sometimes wisely, sometimes foolishly--but they leave the
carrying out of their plans to other men, and sometimes these other men
care for nobody but themselves.  They tell lies, they mislead the great
white chief, and tell him to do what is wrong.

"So it was when our agreement came to be made.  The great white chief
found, when he came to Red River, a few families of Saulteaux whom we
had permitted to hunt on our lands.  He thought the land belonged to the
Saulteaux as well as to the Crees.  He was mistaken, ignorant; he knew
no better, and the Palefaces who did know, did not put light into him;
so the names of Saulteaux chiefs were put in the writing.  Then the
great white chief went away across the great salt lake to the lands of
the rising sun, leaving his small chiefs to carry out his plans.  Some
of these are _very_ small chiefs, unfit to carry out any plans.  Others
are bad small chiefs, that will carry out only such plans as are sure to
benefit themselves.  It is these men with whom we have to deal.  It is
these who deserve to be swept off the face of the earth."

A number of emphatic nods and "waughs" at this point showed that
Okematan had at last touched a key-note with which his braves could
shout in harmony.

"But," resumed the chief impressively, "we cannot sweep them off the
earth; we cannot even sweep them off the banks of Red River.  We might
easily sweep the Saulteaux into Lake Winnipeg if we thought it worth
while to try, but the Palefaces--never!  Okematan has travelled far to
the south and seen the Palefaces there.  They cannot be counted.  They
swarm like our locusts; they darken the earth as our buffaloes darken
the plains.  They live in stone wigwams.  I have seen one of their
wigwams that was big enough to hold all the Crees' wigwams bundled
together.  If we killed or scalped all the Palefaces in Red River the
great white chief would come over the great salt lake with an army that
would swallow us up as the buffalo swallows up a tuft of grass.

"Besides," continued Okematan, with a slight touch of pathos in his
tone, "there are good and bad men among the Palefaces, just as there are
good and bad among ourselves.  I have dwelt for many moons with a tribe
called Scosh-min.  Okematan loves the Scosh-min.  They speak a wonderful
language, and some of them are too fond of fire-water; but their braves
fear nothing, and their squaws are pretty and work hard--almost as hard
as our squaws--though they are not quite as good-looking as ours.  They
are too white--their faces are like buffalo fat!"

A "Waugh," which might be translated "Hear, hear," greeted this
statement of opinion.

"Now," continued our chief, "if we swept away all the people of Red
River, we would sweep away the good Scosh-min, which would be foolish,
and we would gain nothing in the end, but would bring worse trouble on
our heads.  My counsel, therefore, is for peace.  I advise that we
should let the buffalo runners and the people of Red River alone; send a
message with our grievances to the great white chief; ask him to come
back over the great salt lake to put things right, and, in the meantime,
wait with patience; attend to our own business; hunt, fish, eat, drink,
sleep, and be happy."

Having delivered his harangue, Okematan sat down amid murmurs of mingled
applause and disapprobation.  It was evident that he had created a
serious division of opinion in the camp, and it seemed as if on the
impression made by the next speaker would depend the great question of
peace or war.

Presently an old warrior arose, and a profound silence followed, for
they held him in great respect.

"My braves," said the old man sententiously, "I have lived long, and my
fighting days are nearly over.  If wisdom has not accumulated on my head
it must be my own fault, for I have had great experience both of war and
peace--more of war, perhaps, than of peace.  And the opinion that I have
come to after long and very deep consideration is this: if there is
something to fight for, fight--fight well; if there is nothing to fight
for, don't fight--don't fight at all."

The old man paused, and there were some "Waughs" of approval, for the
truth contained in his profound conclusion was obvious even to the
stupidest Red-skin of the band--supposing that a stupid brave among
Crees were possible!

"I have also lived to see," continued the old man, "that revenge is
nothing--nothing at all, and therefore not worth fighting for."

As this was flying straight in the face of the most cherished of
Red-skins' beliefs, it was received in dead though respectful silence.

"My young braves do not believe this.  I know it.  I have been young
myself, and I remember well how pleasant revenge was to me, but I soon
found that the pleasure of revenge did not last.  It soon passed away,
yet the deed of revenge did not pass away, and sometimes the deed became
to my memory very bitter--insomuch that the pleasantness was entirely
swallowed up and forgotten in the bitterness.  My young braves will not
believe this, I know.  They go on feeling; they think on feeling; they
reason on feeling; they trust to feeling.  It is foolish, for the brain
was given to enable man to think and judge and plan.  You are as foolish
as if you were to try to smell with your mouth and eat with your nose.
But it is the way of youth.  When experience teaches, then you will come
to know that revenge is not worth fighting for--its pleasantness will
pass away, but the bitter it leaves behind will never pass away.

"What is the meaning of revenge?" continued this analytical old savage.
"What is the use of it?  Does it not mean that we give up all hope of
getting what we want, and wildly determine to get what pleasure is still
possible to us by killing those who have thwarted us?  And when you have
killed and got all the pleasure there is, what does it come to?  Your
enemy is dead, and scalped.  What then?  He does not know that he is
dead.  He does not care that he is dead and scalped.  You cannot keep
him alive for ever killing and scalping him.  But you have made his wife
and children miserable.  What of that?  It was not his wife and children
who opposed you, therefore you have revenged yourself on the wrong
persons.  He does not know that you have rendered his wife and children
miserable, and does not care; therefore, I ask, why are you pleased?  If
your enemy was a good man, your revenge has only done him a kindness,
for it has sent him to the happy hunting grounds before his time, where
you will probably never meet him to have the pleasure of being revenged
on him there.  If he was a bad man, you have sent him to the world of
Desolation, where he will be waiting to receive you when you get there,
and where revenge will be impossible, for men are not allowed to kill or
scalp there.  At least if they are I never heard of it--and I am an old
man now.

"There is nothing, then, to fight for with the Palefaces of Red River,
and my counsel is, like that of Okematan, that we should decide on
peace--not war."

Whatever may have been the private opinion of the braves as to this new
and very unexpected style of address, the effect of it was pacific; for,
after a little more palaver, the peace-party carried the day--or, rather
the night--and, next morning, the Cree warriors went back to their tents
and hunting avocations, leaving Okematan to return to the camp of his
friends the buffalo runners.



CHAPTER SIXTEEN.

AN EVENING IN THE CAMP.

It was daybreak when Fergus McKay galloped into camp with the startling
news that an attack by hostile Indians might be expected that day or the
following night.  He was, of course, unaware of the fact that the
peace-making Okematan had been unwittingly following his tracks at a
more leisurely pace.

Some readers may think that the Indian, with his traditional power of
following a trail, should have observed and suspected the fresh track of
the hunter, but it must be remembered that some hundreds of buffalo
runners had passed over the same track a day or two previously, and that
Hawkeye, or Pathfinder himself, would have become helpless in the midst
of such trampled confusion.  Besides, Okematan had no reason to suspect
that he had been followed; still less that the camp of the war-party had
been accidentally discovered.

"Now, boys," said Fergus, after detailing his adventures during the
night, "we will hev to give up all notion o' buffalo runnin' this day
an' putt the camp in a state o' defence."

There was a good deal of grumbling at this, especially among some of the
younger men; for they were very keen to commence the sport, and had not
much belief in the power of a small band of savages to do them harm.
Some of them even suggested that half of their number should remain
behind to guard the camp while the other half should go after the
buffalo.  This proposal, however, was not received with favour, as it
would certainly be a matter of disagreement which half was to go out,
and which to remain behind!

"Where is Kateegoose?" asked Dechamp at this crisis.

"Stuffin' 'imself, of course!" said Fred Jenkins, amid a general laugh.
"I've noticed, since we set sail on this trip, that Kateegoose always
turns out at daybreak, lights the galley fire, an' begins the dooties o'
the day by stuffin' 'imself."

"Ay, and I've noticed," observed one of the young hunters, "that it
takes a deal o' stuffin' to fill him out properly, for he keeps on at it
most part o' the day."

"Except," remarked another, "when he stops to smoke what o' the stuffin'
has been already shoved down."

"Moreover," added the seaman, "I've noticed that Francois La Certe
always keeps 'im company.  He's a sympathetic sort o' man is Francois,
fond o' helpin' his mates--specially when they're eatin' an' smokin'."

At this moment Kateegoose, having been called, came forward.  He was an
ill-favoured savage, with various expressions on his ugly visage which
were not so much Nature's gifts as the result of his own evil passions.
Jealousy was one of them, and he had often turned a green eye on
Okematan.  There were indications about his mouth and fingers, as he
came forward, that justified the commentaries on his habits, and
betrayed recent acquaintance with fat pork.

"You hear the reports that have just been brought in?" said Dechamp.

"Kateegoose hears," was the laconic answer.

"Kateegoose is a Cree," continued Dechamp; "he knows the spirit that
dwells in the hearts of his tribe.  What does he think?"

"The thoughts of the Indian are many and deep.  He has for many moons
watched the behaviour of Okematan, and he has long suspected that the
heart of the serpent dwells in the breast of that chief.  Now he is
sure."

"But what about your people?" demanded the camp-chief.  "They are not at
war with us.  Are they all villains because one among them turns out to
be bad?"

Kateegoose drew himself up with a look of dignity, and pouted his greasy
lips as he replied--

"The Crees have always been a brave and true and upright people.  They
never attack friends until, by their conduct, these friends have become
enemies.  But the Crees are human.  They are not perfect--neither are
the Palefaces.  There are bad men among them--a few; not many--as well
as young men and foolish.  Sometimes, when on the war-path, a clever bad
man can reason with them till he blinds them, and they are ready to do
wrong.  It may be so now.  Okematan is clever.  Kateegoose does not know
what to advise."

"Kateegoose was not asked to advise," returned Dechamp sternly.  "He may
return to his tent."

Thus summarily dismissed, this hanger-on or camp-follower returned to
his pork and pipe with a feeling that somehow he had failed to make the
exact impression on the leader that he desired.  La Certe, however,
consoled him, and helped him to continue the duties of the day.

"Come with me, McKay," said Dechamp, after giving all needful directions
regarding the safety of the camp.  "I don't believe that rascal
Kateegoose.  He's a greedy idler, something like La Certe, but by no
means so harmless or good-natured.  Moreover, I find it hard to believe
that Okematan has turned traitor."

"I agree with you," said Fergus.  "It iss ferry hard to believe that a
man who has been so long among us, and got such a good character, should
suddenly turn against us--an' that, too, without provocation.  But what
will you be sayin' to what Taniel and myself has seen with our two
eyes?"

"It looks bad, I confess," answered Dechamp, as they paced to and fro in
a retired part of the camp; "but you must remember that your two eyes
are not your two ears, and that you heard nothing that you could
understand."

"Fery true, Dechamp.  But the language of the eye is sometimes as clear
and understandable as the language of the ear.  No wan could mistake the
meanin' o' some o' the warriors when they scowled an' pointed in the
direction of our camp here, an' gripped the handles o' their scalpin'
knives and tomahawks.  Moreover, Okematan also pointed in the same
direction, though I am bound to say he did not grip his knife.  Whether
he scowled or not I do not know, for he was standin' wi' his back to
us."

"Well, I cannot tell.  I'm not willin' to believe Okematan a traitor;
but what you have seen is enough to make me put the camp in defence
instead of startin' out to hunt--"

At that moment the sharp click of a gun was heard as a neighbouring
sentry put his piece on full cock.

Dechamp and Fergus hastened towards him.

"Have a care, Andre; don't be too quick with your gun," said the former.
"I see only one man coming.  He can do us no harm."

As the approaching figure drew near, it was seen to be that of an Indian
on horseback.  He rode carelessly at a jog-trot.

"It looks like Okematan!" said Dechamp, glancing at his companion in
surprise.

"It iss Okematan," returned Fergus.

Before another word could be spoken, a shot was heard in the camp, and
horse and man were seen to roll upon the ground.  The latter rose
immediately, but the horse lay stiff--evidently shot dead.  For a few
seconds profound silence followed the incident, as if men were too much
taken by surprise to think and act.  Then, when the dismounted Indian
was seen to walk leisurely, as if unhurt, towards them, there was a
hubbub in the camp, while men, women, and boys ran towards the spot
whence the shot seemed to have been fired, but no one was to be found
there.  Only a very faint puff of smoke overhead told where the marksman
had stood.  It had been a well-chosen spot, where a low bush or two
mingled with several carts that had been rather carelessly drawn up, and
several horses had been picketed together.  These had afforded
concealment enough for at least a few moments.

The tent of La Certe was not far from this corner.  At the time the shot
was heard, the self-indulgent half-breed was inside, recumbent on his
back in the enjoyment of a pipe.

"That's odd," he said to Slowfoot, who was seated opposite to her lord
scraping the remnants of something out of a tin kettle with the point of
a scalping-knife.  "Somebody's gun gone off by accident, I suppose.  I
hear some one at our fire.  Look out, Slowfoot, and ask what has
happened."

Slowfoot finished the scraping of the kettle before obeying; then lifted
the curtain that closed the opening of their tent, and peeped out.

"It is Kateegoose--loading his gun, I think."

La Certe got up, with a sigh of regret at the necessity for exertion,
and, lifting the curtain-door, stepped out.

"What are they firing at, Kateegoose?"

The Indian did not know.  Some one, he thought, might have let off his
gun by accident.  He thought it wise, however, to be ready, and had just
sent the ramrod down the barrel of his gun to make sure that it was
loaded with ball.  To make still surer that all was ready, the Indian
shook the priming out of the pan of his gun, wiped it, and re-primed.
Then he laid the weapon down by his side, and resumed the pipe which he
had apparently laid down to enable him to perform these operations more
conveniently, and, at the same time, with more safety.

At that moment Dechamp walked smartly towards the fire in front of La
Certe's tent.

"Does Kateegoose know who fired that shot?" he asked with a keen glance,
for his suspicions had been aroused.

"Some one over there," answered the Indian languidly, as he pointed in
the right direction.

"It does not need a medicine-man to tell me that," said Dechamp,
sternly.  "I heard the shot, and saw the smoke.  Have you any idea who
fired it, La Certe?"

"I have not," replied the half-breed.  "I was lying in my tent when I
heard it.  Kateegoose was smoking beside the fire.  We both thought it
was an accident, or some one trying his gun, till we heard the shouting
and running.  Then I jumped up, seized my gun, and sprang out to see
what it was all about.  I found Kateegoose equally on the _qui vive_.
He was shoving his ramrod down to make sure his gun was loaded when you
came up.  What is it all about?"

"Only that the horse of Okematan has been shot under him by some one,
and that there is a would-be murderer in the camp."

"Okematan!  Has the traitor ventured to return?" exclaimed Kateegoose,
with an expression of surprise that was very unusual in an Indian.

"Ay, he has ventured," responded Dechamp, "and some one has ventured to
fire at him with intent to kill.  By good luck he was a bad shot.  He
missed the man, though he hit and killed the horse.  But I shall find
the rascal out before long--he may depend on that!"

So saying, the commandant left the spot.

"Do you know anything about this?" asked La Certe, turning full on the
Indian.

"Kateegoose is not a medicine-man.  He cannot be in two places at once.
He knows nothing."

For a sly man La Certe was wonderfully credulous.  He believed the
Indian, and, returning to his tent, lay down again to finish the
interrupted pipe.

"Kateegoose was trying his gun to see if it was loaded," he said to his
better half.
