Christ's sense of union with the Father was deep, close, constant, in
manner and measure altogether transcending any experience of ours. But
still He sets before us a pattern of what we should aim at in these
great words. They show the path of comfort for every lonely heart. 'I
am not alone, for the Father is with Me.' If earth be dark, let us look
to Heaven. If the world with its millions seems to have no friend in it
for us, let us turn to Him who never leaves us. If dear ones are torn
from our grasp, let us grasp God. Solitude is bitter; but, like other
bitters, it is a tonic. It is not all loss if the trees which with
their leafy beauty shut out the sky from us are felled, and so we see
the blue.

Christ's company is to us what the Father's fellowship was to Christ.
He has borne solitude that He might be the companion of all the lonely,
and the same voice which said, 'Ye shall leave Me alone,' said also, 'I
am with you always, even to the end of the world.'

But _that_ communion of Christ with the Father was broken, in that
awful hour when He cried: 'My God, why hast Thou forsaken Me?' We tread
there on the verge of mysteries, beyond our comprehension; but this we
know--that it was our sin and the world's, made His by His willing
identifying of Himself with us, which built up that black wall of
separation. That hour of utter desolation, forsaken by God, deserted by
men, was the hour of the world's redemption. And Jesus Christ was
forsaken by God and deserted by men, that you and I might never be
either the one or the other, but might find in His sweet and constant
companionship at once the society of man and the presence of God.



PEACE AND VICTORY

'These things I have spoken unto you, that in Me ye might have peace.
In the world ye shall have tribulation; but be of good cheer; I have
overcome the world.'--JOHN xvi. 33.

So end these wonderful discourses, and so ends our Lord's teaching
before His passion. He gathers up in one mighty word the total
intention of these sweet and deep sayings which we have so long been
pondering together. He sketches in broad outline the continual
characteristics of the disciples' life, and closes all with the
strangest shout of victory, even at the moment when He seems most
utterly defeated.

We shall, I think, best lay on our hearts and minds the spirit and
purpose of these words if we simply follow their course, and look at
the three things which Christ emphasises here: the inward peace which
is His purpose for us; the outward tribulation which is our certain
fate; and the courageous confidence which Christ's victory for us gives.

I. Note, then, first, the inward peace.

'These things have I spoken unto you that in Me ye might have peace.'
Peace is not lethargy; and it is very remarkable to notice how, in
immediate connection with this great promise, there occur words which
suggest its opposite--tribulation and battle. 'In the world ye have
tribulation.' 'I have overcome'--that means a fight. These are to go
side by side with the peace that He promises. The two conditions belong
to two different spheres. The Christian life bifurcates, as it were,
into a double root, and moves in two realms--'in Me' and 'in the world'
And the predicates and characteristics of these two lives are, in a
large measure, diametrically opposite. So here, without any
contradiction, our Lord brackets together these two opposite conditions
as both pertaining to the life of a devout soul. He promises a peace
which co-exists with tribulation and disturbance, a peace which is
realised in and through conflict and struggle. The tree will stand,
with its deep roots and its firm bole, unmoved, though wildest winds
may toss its branches and scatter its leaves. In the fortress,
beleaguered by the sternest foes, there may be, right in the very
centre of the citadel, a quiet oratory through whose thick walls the
noise of battle and the shout of victory or defeat can never penetrate.
So we may live in a centre of rest, however wild may be the uproar in
the circumference. 'In Me... peace,' that is the innermost life. 'In
the world... tribulation,' that is only the surface.

But, then, note that this peace, which exists with, and is realised
through, tribulation and strife, depends upon certain conditions. Our
Lord does not say, 'Ye have peace,' but 'These things I have spoken
that you _may_ have it.' It is a possibility; and He lays down
distinctly and plainly here the twofold set of conditions, in
fulfilment of which a Christian disciple may dwell secure and still, in
the midst of all confusion. Note, then, these two.

It is peace, if we have it at all, _in Him_. Now you remember how
emphatically and loftily, as one of the very key-notes of these
discourses, our Lord has spoken to us, in them, of 'dwelling in Him' as
the prerogative and the duty of every Christian. We are in Him as in an
atmosphere. In Him our true lives are rooted as a tree in the soil. We
are in Him as a branch in the vine, in Him as the members in a body, in
Him as the residents in a house. We are in Him by simple faith, by the
trust that rests all upon Him, by the love that finds all in Him, by
the obedience that does all for Him. And it is only when we are 'in
Christ' that we rest, and realise peace. All else brings distraction.
Even delights trouble. The world may give excitement, the world may
give vulgar and fleeting joys, the world may give stimulus to much that
is good and true in us, but there is only one thing that gives peace,
and that is that our hearts should dwell in the Fortress, and should
ever be surrounded by Jesus Christ. Brother! let nothing tempt us down
from the heights, and out from the citadel where alone we are at rest;
but in the midst of all the pressing duties, the absorbing cares, the
carking anxieties, the seducing temptations of the world, and in the
presence of all the necessity for noble conflict which the world brings
to every man that is not its slave, let us try to keep the roots of our
lives in contact with that soil from which they draw all their
nourishment, and to wrap ourselves round with the life of Jesus Christ,
which shall make an impenetrable shield between us and 'the fiery darts
of the wicked.' Keep on the lee side of the breakwater and your little
cock-boat will ride out the gale. Keep Christ between you and the
hurtling storm, and there will be a quiet place below the wall where
you may rest, hearing not the loud winds when they call. 'These things
have I spoken that in Me ye might have peace.'

But there is another condition. Christ speaks the great words which
have been occupying us so long, that they may bring to us peace. I need
not do more than remind you, in a sentence, of the contents of these
wonderful discourses. Think of how they have spoken to us of our
Brother's ascension to Heaven to prepare a place for us; of His coming
again to receive us to Himself; of His presence with us in His absence;
of His indwelling in us and ours in Him; of His gift to us of a divine
Spirit. If we believed all these things; if we realised them and lived
in the faith of them; if we meditated upon them in the midst of our
daily duties; and if they were real to us, and not mere words written
down in a Book, how should anything be able to disturb us, or to shake
our settled confidence? Cleave to the words of the Master, and let them
pour into your hearts the quietness and confidence which nothing else
can give. And then, whatsoever storms may be around, the heart will be
at rest. We find peace nowhere else but where Mary found her repose,
and could shake off care and 'trouble about many things,' sitting at
the feet of Jesus, wrapt in His love and listening to His word.

II. Then note, secondly, the outward tribulation which is the certain
fate of His followers.

Of course there is a very sad and true sense in which the warning, 'In
the world ye shall have tribulation,' applies to all men. Pain and
sickness, loss and death, the monotony of hard, continuous, unwelcome
toil, hopes blighted or disappointed even in their fruition, and all
the other 'ills that flesh is heir to,' afflict us all. But our Lord is
not speaking here about the troubles that befall men as men, nor about
the chastisement that befalls them as sinners, nor about the evils
which dog them because they are mortal or because they are bad, but of
the yet more mysterious sorrows which fall upon them because they are
good, 'In the world ye have tribulation,' is the proper rendering and
reading. It had already begun, and it was to be the standing condition
and certain fate of all that followed Him.

I have already said that the Christian life moves in two spheres, and
hence there must necessarily be antagonism and conflict. Whoever
realises the inward life in Christ will more or less, and sooner or
later, find himself coming into hostile collision with lives which only
move on the surface and belong to the world. If you and I are
Christians after the pattern of Jesus Christ, then we dwell in the
midst of an order of things which is not constituted on or for the
principles that regulate our lives and the objects at which we aim. And
hence, in that fundamental discordance between the Christian life and
society as it is constituted, there must always be, if there be honesty
and consistency on the side of the Christian man, more or less of
collision between him and it. All that you regard as axiomatic the
world regards as folly, if you take Christ for your Teacher. All that
you labour to secure the world does not care to possess, if you have
Him for your aim. All that you live to seek it has abandoned; all that
you desire to obey it will not even consult, if you are taking Christ
and His law for your rule. And therefore there must come, sooner or
later, and more or less intensely in all Christian lives, opposition
and tribulation. You cannot get away from the necessity, so it is as
well to face it.

No doubt the form of antagonism varies. No doubt the more the world is
penetrated by Christian principles divorced from their root and source,
the less vehement and painful will the collision be. But _there_ is the
gulf, and there it will remain, until the world is a Church. No doubt
some portion of the battlements of organised Christianity has tumbled
into the ditch, and made it a little less deep. Christians have dropped
their standard far too much, and so the antagonism is not so plain as
it ought to be, and as it used to be, and as, some day, it will be. But
there it is, and if you are going to live out and out like a Christian
man, you will get the old sneers flung at you. You will be 'crotchety,'
'impracticable,' 'spoiling sport,' 'not to be dealt with,' 'a wet
blanket,' 'pharisaical,' 'bigoted,' and all the rest of the pretty
words which have been so frequently used about the men that try to live
like Jesus Christ. Never mind! 'In the world ye have tribulation.' 'I
bear in my body the marks of the Lord Jesus,' the branding-iron which
tells to whom the slave belongs. And if it is His initials that I carry
I may be proud of the marks.

But at any rate there will be antagonism. You young men in your
warehouses, you men that go on 'Change', we people that live by our
pens or our tongues, and find ourselves in opposition to much of the
tendencies of the present day--we have all, in our several ways, to
bear the cross. Do not let us be ashamed of it, and, above all, do not
let us, for the sake of easing our shoulders, be unfaithful to our
Master. 'In the world ye have tribulation'; and the Christian man's
peace has to be like the rainbow that lives above the cataract--still
and radiant, whilst it shines above the hell of white waters that are
tortured below.

III. Lastly, notice the courageous confidence which comes from the
Lord's victory.

'Be of good cheer!' It is the old commandment that rang out to Joshua
when, on the departure of Moses, the conduct of the war fell into his
less experienced hands: 'Be strong, and of a good courage; only be thou
strong and very courageous.' So says the Captain of salvation, leaving
His soldiers to face the current of the heady fight in the field. Like
some leader who has climbed the ramparts, or hewed his way through the
broken ranks of the enemies, and rings out the voice of encouragement
and call to his followers, our Captain sets before us His own example:
'I have overcome the world,' He said that the day before Calvary. If
that was victory, what would defeat have been?

Notice, then, how our Lord's life was a true battle. The world tried to
draw Him away from God by appealing to things desirable to sense, as in
the wilderness; or to things dreadful to sense, as on the cross; and
both the one and the other form of temptation He faced and conquered.
It was no shadow fight which evoked this paean of victory from His
lips. The reality of His conflict is somewhat concealed from us by
reason of its calm and the completeness of His conquest. We do not
appreciate the force that drives a planet upon its path because it is
calm and continuous and silent, but the power that kept Jesus Christ
continually faithful to His Father, continually sure of that Father's
presence, continually averse to all self-will and selfish living, was a
power mightier then all others that have been manifested in the history
of humanity. The Captain of our salvation has really fought the fight
before us.

But mark, again, that our Lord's life is the type of all victorious
life. The world conquers me when it draws me away from God, when it
makes me its slave, when it coaxes me to trust it, and urges to despair
if I lose it. The world conquers me when it comes between me and God,
when it fills my desires, when it absorbs my energies, when it blinds
my eyes to the things unseen and eternal. I conquer the world when I
put my foot upon its temptations, when I crush it down, when I shake
off its bonds, and when nothing that time and sense, with their
delights or their dreadfulnesses, can bring, prevents me from cleaving
to my Father with all my heart, and from living as His child here.
Whoso thus coerces Time and Sense to be the servants of his filial love
has conquered them both, and whoso lets them draw him away from God is
beaten, however successful he may dream himself to be and men may call
him.

My friends! there is a lesson for Manchester people. Jesus Christ was
not a very successful man according to the standard of Market Street
and the Exchange. He made but a poor thing of the world, and He was
going to be martyred on the cross the day after He said these words.
And yet that was victory. Ay! Many a man beaten down in the struggle of
daily life, and making very little of it, according to our vulgar
estimate, is the true conqueror. Success means making the world a
stepping-stone to God.

Still further, note our share in the Master's victory--'_I_ have
overcome the world. Be _ye_ of good cheer.' That seems an irrelevant
way of arguing. What does it matter to me though He has overcome? So
much the better for Him; but what good is it to me?

It may aid us somewhat to more strenuous fighting, if we know that a
brother has fought and conquered, and I do not under-estimate the
blessing and the benefit of the life of Jesus Christ, as recorded in
these Scriptures, even from that, as I conceive it, miserably
inadequate and imperfect point of view. But the victory of Jesus Christ
is of extremely little practical use to me, if all the use of it is to
show me how to fight. Ah! you must go a deal deeper than that. 'I have
overcome the world, and I will come and put My overcoming Spirit into
your weakness, and fill you with My own victorious life, and make your
hands strong to war and your fingers to fight; and be in you the
conquering and omnipotent Power.'

My friends! Jesus Christ's victory is ours, and we are victors in it,
because He is more than the pattern of brave warfare, He is even the
Son of God, who gave Himself for us, and gives Himself to us, and
dwells in us our Strength and our Righteousness.

Lastly, remember that the condition of that victory's being ours is the
simple act of reliance upon Him and upon it. The man who goes into the
battle as that little army of the Hebrews did against the
wide-stretching hosts of the enemy, saying, 'O Lord! we know not what
to do, but our eyes are up unto Thee,' will come out 'more than
conqueror through Him that loved him.' For 'this is the victory that
overcometh the world, even our faith.'



THE INTERCESSOR

'These words spake Jesus, and lifted up His eyes to heaven, and said,
Father, the hour is come; glorify Thy Son, that Thy Son also may
glorify Thee: As Thou hast given Him power over all flesh, that He
should give eternal life to as many as Thou hast given Him. And this is
life eternal, that they might know Thee the only true God, and Jesus
Christ, whom Thou hast sent. I have glorified Thee on the earth: I have
finished the work which Thou gavest Me to do. And now, O Father,
glorify Thou Me with Thine own Self with the glory which I had with
Thee before the world was. I have manifested Thy name unto the men
which Thou gavest Me out of the world: Thine they were, and Thou gavest
them Me; and they have kept Thy word. Now they have known that all
things whatsoever Thou hast given Me, are of Thee. For I have given
unto them the words which Thou gavest Me; and they have received them,
and have known surely that I came out from Thee, and they have believed
that Thou didst send Me. I pray for them: I pray not for the world, but
for them which Thou hast given Me; for they are Thine. And all Mine are
Thine, and Thine are Mine; and I am glorified in them. And now I am no
more in the world, but these are in the world, and I come to Thee. Holy
Father, keep through Thine own name those whom Thou hast given Me, that
they may be one, as we are. While I was with them in the world, I kept
them in Thy name: those that Thou gavest Me I have kept, and none of
them is lost, but the son of perdition; that the Scripture might be
fulfilled. And now come I to Thee; and these things I speak in the
world, that they might have My joy fulfilled in themselves. I have
given them Thy word; and the world hath hated them, because they are
not of the world, even as I am not of the world. I pray not that Thou
shouldest take them out of the world, but that Thou shouldest keep them
from the evil. They are not of the world, even as I am not of the
world. Sanctify them through Thy truth: Thy word is truth. As Thou hast
sent Me into the world, even so have I also sent them into the world.
And for their sakes I sanctify Myself, that they also might be
sanctified through the truth.'--JOHN xvii. 1-19.

We may well despair of doing justice to the deep thoughts of this
prayer, which volumes would not exhaust. Who is worthy to speak or to
write about such sacred words? Perhaps we may best gain some glimpses
of their great and holy sublimity by trying to gather their teaching
round the centres of the three petitions, 'glorify' (vs. 1, 5), 'keep'
(v. 11), and 'sanctify' (v. 17).

I. In verses 1-5, Jesus prays for Himself, that He may be restored to
His pre-incarnate glory; but yet the prayer desires not so much that
glory as affecting Himself, as His being fitted thereby for completing
His work of manifesting the Father. There are three main points in
these verses-the petition, its purpose, and its grounds.

As to the first, the repetition of the request in verses 1 and 5 is
significant, especially if we note that in the former the language is
impersonal, 'Thy Son,' and continues so till verse 4, where 'I' and
'Me' appear. In verses 1-3, then, the prayer rests upon the ideal
relations of Father and Son, realised in Jesus, while in verses 4 and 5
the personal element is emphatically presented. The two petitions are
in their scope identical. The 'glorifying' in the former is more fully
explained in the latter as being that which He possessed in that
ineffable fellowship with the Father, not merely before incarnation,
but before creation. In His manhood He possessed and manifested the
'glory as of the Only-Begotten of the Father, full of grace and truth';
but that glory, lustrous though it was, was pale, and humiliation
compared with the light inaccessible, which shone around the Eternal
Word in the bosom of the Father. Yet He who prayed was the same Person
who had walked in that light before time was, and now in human flesh
asked for what no mere manhood could bear. The first form of the
petition implies that such a partaking in the uncreated glory of the
Father is the natural prerogative of One who is 'the Son,' while the
second implies that it is the appropriate recompense of the earthly
life and character of the man Jesus.

The petition not only reveals the conscious divinity of the Son, but
also His willing acceptance of the Cross; for the glorifying sought is
that reached through death, resurrection, and ascension, and that
introductory clause, 'the hour is come,' points to the impending
sufferings as the first step in the answer to the petition. The
Crucifixion is always thus treated in this Gospel, as being both the
lowest humiliation and the 'lifting up' of the Son; and here He is
reaching out His hand, as it were, to draw His sufferings nearer. So
willingly and desiringly did this Isaac climb the mount of sacrifice.
Both elements of the great saying in the Epistle to the Hebrews are
here: 'For the joy that was set before Him, [He] endured the Cross.'

The purpose of the petition is to be noted; namely, the Son's
glorifying of the Father. No taint of selfishness corrupted His prayer.
Not for Himself, but for men, did He desire His glory. He sought return
to that serene and lofty seat, and the elevation of His limited manhood
to the throne, not because He was wearied of earth or impatient of
weakness, sorrows, or limitations, but that He might more fully
manifest by that Glory, the Father's name. To make the Father known is
to make the Father glorious; for He is all fair and lovely. That
revelation of divine perfection, majesty, and sweetness was the end of
Christ's earthly life, and is the end of His heavenly divine activity.
He needs to reassume the prerogatives of which He needed to divest
Himself, and both necessities have one end. He had to lay aside His
garments and assume the form of a servant, that He might make God
known; but, that revelation being complete, He must take His garments
and sit down again, before He can go on to tell all the meaning of what
He has 'done unto us.'

The ground of the petition is twofold. Verses 2 and 3 represent the
glory sought for, as the completion of the Son's mission and task.
Already He had been endowed with 'authority over all flesh,' for the
purpose of bestowing eternal life; and that eternal life stands in the
knowledge of God, which is the same as the knowledge of Christ. The
present gift to the Son and its purpose are thus precisely parallel
with the further gift desired, and that is the necessary carrying out
of this. The authority and office of the incarnate Christ demand the
glory of, and consequent further manifestation by, the glorified
Christ. The life which He comes to give is a life which flows from the
revelation that He makes of the Father, received, not as mere
intellectual knowledge, but as loving acquaintance.

The second ground for the petition is in verse 4, the actual perfect
fulfilment by the Son of that mission. What untroubled consciousness of
sinless obedience and transparent shining through His life of the
Father's likeness and will He must have had, who could thus assert His
complete realisation of that Father's revealing purpose, as the ground
of His deserving and desiring participation in the divine glory! Surely
such words are either the acme of self-righteousness or the
self-revealing speech of the Son of God.

II. With verse 6 we pass to the more immediate reference to the
disciples, and the context from thence to verse 15 may be regarded as
all clustered round the second petition 'keep' (v. 11). That central
request is preceded and followed by considerations of the disciples'
relation to Christ and to the world, which may be regarded as its
grounds. The whole context preceding the petition may be summed up in
two grounds for the prayer--the former set forth at length, and the
