and I just dropped down on a bit of a three-legged stool near him, and
wan't seen at all, at all. Thin I heard them a contriving and making up
their bits of plans, and something was to happen on Thursday as 'ud
take our breath away, and the sailor would have his own way; and
Will-oh, I couldn't catch what was to be done with Will; but for
certain sure he wasn't to be no mate of yourn; and-and-the long and
short of it is, honey, that there's black treachery to the fore."

"Let me go," said Bet.

She had been kneeling by Mother Bunch, and drinking in every word. Now
she stood up, and taking her mother's plaid shawl, wrapped it round her
head and shoulders.

"I'm going out," she said; "see to the boys, Mrs. O'Flaherty. I'll be
back, maybe, by-and-bye. Maybe I won't."

"I thought you'd take things in the right spirit, dear," responded
Mother Bunch, who showed no particular curiosity to learn Bet's present
purpose.

Having delivered her soul, she felt no further anxiety with regard to
the matter. Bet was a strong lass, who, when apprised of her danger,
could fight her own battles. With the remark that "she would see to the
little varmints," and not expect Bet back until she chose to come, she
rolled herself downstairs; and Bet followed her quickly, and soon
reached the street.

She walked fast; her heart was beating, and her head was in a whirl.
All her latent fear and distrust of her father had risen in full force.
As to Dent-for, of course, the sailor was Dent-she regarded him with a
kind of sick horror. Could she outwit these two who were plotting
against her and her lover?-was there time?

She made straight for the place where she thought it most likely she
should find Will. He generally spent his evenings with Hester Wright.
When she reached the lodgings a neighbor told her that Hester was out;
but as she was about to descend the stairs, with a sickening feeling at
her heart, Will's whistle, as he bounded up three steps at a time, fell
like the most joyful music on her ears. She sprang to him and clasped
her arms around his neck.

"Will-dear Will-I ha' come-we must be wed to-night, Will."

She was panting and trembling, and her words were only coherent by
reason of the great stress and force with which she emphasized them.
Will wondered if she had taken leave of her senses.

"Come into Hester's room, Bet," he said, tenderly. "Here, set down,
darling; why, how terrible you do tremble!"

"Oh, Will, I'm mortal frightened. There's more bad than good in this
yer world; and the bad's agin' us-and bad things and bad people have
such a power of strength in them, Will-and they'll part us if we don't
outwit them. Oh, Will, let us be made man and wife this blessed night."

"But we can't, Bet. I'd like to--it could never be a minute too soon
for me--but the license ain't due to me afore to-morrow, and Thursday
is fixed up at St. Giles' Church for the parson to wed us. Thursday is
not so _very_ far off, sweetheart. Why, I expect it seems longer to me
than to you, Bet, for I ha' loved you, as Jacob did Rachel, for many a
long year. What's two days when you ha' waited years?" concluded Will,
and he put his arm round Bet and tried to get her to rest her head on
his shoulder.

She almost pushed his strong arm away.

"You don't understand," she said. "It's to-night or it's never--it's
you and me to go away to-night in the darkness, and hide ourselves for
a bit, and let the wicked do their worst--or it's you and me to be
parted, Will, and me to be hungering for you, and you for me--allays
and allays."

Here Bet related what Mother Bunch had told her--that there was a plot
brewing, and how her father and Isaac Dent meant to ruin her and Will.
She told her story with great excitement and emphasis--her eyes
flashing, and the color coming and going in her cheeks. To her it was a
terrible story, replete with all possibilities of parting and disaster.
The terror of it had taken hold of her, and her teeth almost chattered
as she gave emphasis to her words.

To her dismay, however, she saw that the tale itself made little
impression on Will. He was much distressed at Bet's agitation, and did
all in his power to soothe her; but he could not get himself to believe
that Granger or Dent could possibly injure either of them. He had all
an honest young fellow's sovereign contempt for these worthies, and he
even gently laughed when Bet repeated her assurance that the deep plot
they were hatching between them would succeed, and part her and Will
forever.

"I ain't afeard," said Will, stoutly. "I don't believe in there being
any plot, Bet. Mother Bunch has just had a bit of a dhrame, as she
calls it, and she didn't hear half she thinks she heard. As to Granger
and Dent, I know they don't love me, and they might do me a nasty turn,
if they knew how. But then, they don't know how, Bet, darling; and I
ain't going to hide and creep away in the darkness, not for no man.
You're shook with trouble, poor Bet; but there ain't no fear--not the
least in life; and we'll be wed on Thursday, sweetheart, and have a
good time afterwards."

"Oh, Will, Will!" said Bet. Her lover's want of belief in her story
seemed to her the crowning drop. She clasped her hands, and suddenly
went down on her knees to him.

"Let us be wed to-night, Will!" she asked--"to save me from Isaac Dent,
Will! Make me your true wife to-night, whether you believe the story or
not!"

Here she cried and wept, and wrung her hands.

Will was dreadfully perturbed-he did not believe in any danger for
himself, but he was distressed for Bet. He raised her gently from the
floor.

"You know as I'd take you to my arms this minute, darling, ef it could
be done," he said. "But it seems to me they hedge round a wedding with
a sight of difficulties, and you must either eat your heart out waiting
till the banns is called, or have a license. My license is due
to-morrow, but not afore."

The idea, however, of the license was very dim to Bet.

"I thought the parson would say some words, and we might be man and
wife," she said. "You could send him the license, whatever that means,
by-and-bye, Will-but I'm _sure_ the parson would say the good words
over us to-night, and then we might go away together. There's a deal of
things can be done, if one but tried; and you and me needn't have our
hearts broke because we must wait for daylight to get that bit of
paper. Oh, Will, let's go together and find the parson. Dear Will,
darling, let's go at once!-let's ax him, leastways-and if he says nay,
we'll abide by it. Let's go, Will, now, this very minute. Let's find
the parson, and abide by his nay or his yea!"

Will, bewildered, agitated by Bet's suffering and despair, yielded a
somewhat unwilling assent.

"But I must go to my lodgings first," he said. "For I ha' got some
money to change. Ef the parson can be found, and ef he'll wait for his
license until to-morrow, and say the good words over us to-night, Bet,
why, we can cross to Birkenhead by the last boat this evening. But I'd
a sight rather wait till Thursday," he added under his breath; "for it
seems like running away when there's nought to run from."




CHAPTER XVI.


Will's objection to so sudden a marriage was overruled by Bet's fervor
and impetuosity; she would not listen to his objections, but every time
he opened his lips shut him up with the emphatic remark, "It's now or
never, sweetheart; ef it ain't to-night, something tells me as I'll
never be wed to you."

She accompanied Will to the door of his lodgings, and paced up and down
the narrow little street, chafing and trembling with impatience, while
he ran upstairs to fetch the bank-notes which he had not yet changed.
He came down in a few minutes, having donned his best jack-tar suit,
and holding out a pretty sealskin purse to Bet.

"Just you see here," he said--"I found this in my room; I can't make
out how it came there. Ain't it fine? Look--ain't it wonderful how
anything can be turned out so neat?" and he opened the purse, and
showed the bright red leather lining; then clasped it again, and
stroked the soft seal covering.

"I'd like to give it to you, Bet," he said, "ef I knew how I come by
it. It were lying on the floor, and the clasps shone when I held up the
candle. I must ask Mrs. Jobling, my landlady, if she knows who it
belongs to. It ain't likely as she'd own such a bonny bit o' a thing;"
he fingered the purse admiringly, and then thrust it into one of his
deep pockets.

"I'll give it to you if I can't find the owner, Bet," he said in
conclusion. "I don't suppose you ever had anything so bonny."

Bet, however, was far too impatient and excited to be interested in the
most beautiful purse that was ever made.

"Let it be now, Will," she said. "Most like it belongs to Mrs.
Jobling--don't let's think of it now. Have you got the money in your
pocket, Will, dear? And shall we go at once and find the parson?"

A flush came up into Will's bronzed cheeks.

"None so fast, sweetheart," he said. "What would you say to us going to
be married and having never a ring to put on that finger o' yourn? I
han't bought the ring yet--the wedding-ring, darling; but I ha' got
money to buy it--ten pound; it does seem a sight of riches. Let's go
down to Higgins' and change the notes, Bet. We can get the ring there."
Bet did not object--she turned at once in the right direction, walking
so fast that Will began to chaff her.

"You take my breath away," he said. "You forget that I've got sea-legs,
and ain't a match for the land folks when they go at that pace."

"Oh, Will--if you could be in earnest!" said poor Bet. "I'm hurrying
'cause it's life or death to me. It gets late, and parson may be
out--oh! a hundred things may happen--oh, if my heart didn't beat so
hard!"

"Well, here we are, dear," said Will, and the two turned into the small
close marine store presided over by Higgins.

That worthy came forward himself to meet the handsome couple who now
stood at the other side of his grimy counter.

"Evenin'," he said. "What may I serve you with? Why, if it ain't
Scarlett! I didn't know you at first, lad, and that's a fact. Evening
young woman! Courting, eh?" he whispered in an aside to Scarlett.

"Oh, that's about done," said Will. "It's marrying we're after--could
you fit this here young woman with a ring?" he added, and he took Bet's
hand in his.

A tray of wedding rings was placed on the counter--they were all
second-hand, and some of them much the worse for wear.

Will made his selection, choosing a fairly solid gold band. He slipped
the ring into his pocket, smiled into Bet's anxious eyes, and taking
out his bank-notes, spread them on the counter.

"You'll oblige me with change for these, Mr. Higgins?" he said. "See,
it's a nice tidy little lot of money, ain't it? But it comes in handy;
for a feller ain't wed every day of the week."

"It air a lot of money," said Higgins, in a contemplative tone. He took
up the notes, and fingered them, feeling their texture and looking at
the backs. "It _air_ a tidy lot of money," he repeated, and he looked
keenly into Will's honest face.

For all his bronzing the color would easily mount into this young
sailor's cheeks-it did so now, and he spoke with a little offence.

"You're wondering how so much comes to the like of me," he said. "Well,
it's easily answered. I sold my berth in the 'Good Queen Anne'-about
the neatest boat in the docks, and the jolliest berth a feller ever had
the luck to find-for this yer money. It comes in handy now as I'm about
to be wed. But don't change it if you have no mind to, Mr. Tiggins. I
can pass it in at the bank to-morrow morning."

At these words Bet turned deadly pale and gripped her companion's arm.

"No," she whispered hoarsely: "we must have the change to-night."

Higgins, who had been watching the pair, now spoke in that oily and
seductive tone which had brought many excellent customers to his door.

"What do you take me for, Scarlett?" he said. "Ain't you, so to speak,
an old friend, and one of the best customers as this yer house can wish
to see? Of course I'll change the notes, man, and good luck to you and
your lass there. Yes--of course I'll change the notes; but seeing as
I'm poor, and the times is 'ard, you won't object to the usual
percentage for obleeging a neighbor?"

"And what's that?" said Will. "I'm in a hurry," he added; "so I'll
listen to anything in reason."

"I charge interest a shilling in the pound," said Higgins. "That'll be
ten shillings on the two notes, and the ring
seven-and-six--seventeen-and-six in total; that leaves nine pounds
two-and-six-pence change--and here you air. Only," here Higgins
produced pen and ink, "you'll obleege _me_ by writing your name and
where you lodges on the back of the notes."

"What's that for?" said Will, drawing back a step or two.

"Nothing, ef you don't want to do it," responded Higgins; "only I can't
nohow change the notes without--it's a precaution I allus uses with
regard to bank-notes, which sailors don't have every day in their
pockets. No address, no change--you can please yourself."

"Oh, Will, do write," whispered Bet; and so urged, Will did dip his pen
in the ink, and scrawled his name in a somewhat uncertain calligraphy
on the back of each note. Mrs. Jobling's address was further added. He
then received his change, and he and Bet hurried out of the shop.

"Sold!" whispered Higgins to himself; and an ugly grin appeared upon
his face. "Now to send these notes up to the bank the first thing
to-morrow,--and--and--well, I have no love for Isaac Dent, and
Scarlett's the sort of feller as no one could dislike; but the times is
'ard and the worst of us must live."

Here Higgins rang a little bell. When his attendant answered the
summons he told him that he was going out, but that if a sailor called
Dent looked in, he was to be asked to wait.

Meanwhile Will and Bet were hurrying as fast as they could to that part
of the town where St. Giles' Church was situated. The church was a
landmark, and it was easy to find it; and not very difficult, either,
to ascertain where Mr. Phillips, the hardworked curate, resided. Bet,
who could read well, had decided that they would apply to the curate,
not to the vicar.

"Mother knew a little about Mr. Phillips," she said; "and I see his
name on the notice-board. He'll be maybe more willing to listen, for
mother said he were poor, arter a fashion, himself."

The little house at which the two stopped was certainly humble-looking;
and the parson's study, in which they presently found themselves, was
poorly furnished, with a threadbare carpet, a sad dearth of books, and
a very feeble semblance of a fire. The curate, a thin, gray-haired man,
with a stoop, rose from his chair as the young couple came and stood
before him. Will was feeling intensely sheepish and uncomfortable; but
Bet, with the eagerness born of intense conviction, had no room for
self-consciousness.

"Ef you please, sir," she said, flinging aside her mother's shawl, and
speaking not only with her lips, but with her glowing cheeks and
sparkling, lovely eyes-"ef you please, sir, this is Will Scarlett, and
I'm-I'm Elizabeth Granger. Mother used to mind you when you preached,
sir; and she often comed to your church when she was strong enough. We
was to be wed at St. Giles', Will and me, come Thursday, parson." Here
she paused and gasped; and her eyes grew full of tears.

"Yes," said Mr. Phillips, in a kind tone. "You and this young man-a
sailor, I see-are to be married on Thursday; yes, very good. And you
will make him an honest, faithful wife, I hope. Can I do anything for
you? Anything to help either of you? Marriage is an honorable estate,
none more so."

The tears were still brimming over in Bet's eyes. She had got so far,
but now the words she wanted to say stuck in her throat. She looked
appealingly at Will, who instantly forgot himself, and came to her
rescue. Taking her hand in his, he led her up to the curate's little
study table.

"It's this way," he said-"Bet nor me, we don't know the rights of it;
but we've a mind to be made man and wife to-night, ef you're willing,
parson."

The curate opened his eyes, and was about to speak; but Bet interrupted
