
W.S.W. asks: How is the best rosin, used on violin bows,
prepared?--W.F. asks: What is a simple method for washing clay for
brick and tile making?--E.S.D. asks: What is the best kind of wood to
construct a guitar?

       *       *       *       *       *




COMMUNICATIONS RECEIVED.


The Editor of the SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN acknowledges, with much
pleasure, the receipt of original papers and contributions upon the
following subjects:

  On Rheumatism.   By A.R.E.
  On Postage Stamps.   By E.B.
  On Boiler Explosions.   By G.B.B.
  On Reaching the North Pole.   By J.H.S.
  On Heating Street Cars.   By P.T.
  On a Hybrid Fruit,   By R.S.B.
  On an Air Vessel.   By J.T.R.

Also inquiries and answers from the following:
E.B.M.--F.F.F.--N.B.H.--B.B.--O.F.--R.V.J.--F.M.--N.B.C.--C.F.E.--W.T.
--C.W.C.--T.F.--C.A.S.--S.N.M.--J.R.D.--P.J.D.S.

       *       *       *       *       *


HINTS TO CORRESPONDENTS.

Correspondents whose inquiries fail to appear should repeat them. If
not then published, they may conclude that, for good reasons, the
Editor declines them. The address of the writer should always be
given.

Inquiries relating to patents, or to the patentability of inventions,
assignments, etc., will not be published here. All such questions,
when initials only are given, are thrown into the waste basket, as it
would fill half of our paper to print them all; but we generally take
pleasure in answering briefly by mail, if the writer's address is
given.

Hundreds of inquiries analogous to the following are sent: "Who sells
a tool for truing up a crosshead wrist? Who sells tools for refitting
steam valves without unscrewing them from the pipes? Who sells
spoke-turning lathes? Who makes machinery for freeing wool of burrs
and dirt? Where can tungsten, or tungsten steel, be procured, and at
what price? Who sells silicate of alumina and silicate of potash?" All
such personal inquiries are printed, as will be observed, in the
column of "Business and Personal," which is specially set apart for
that purpose, subject to the charge mentioned at the head of that
column. Almost any desired information can in this way be
expeditiously obtained.

       *       *       *       *       *

OFFICIAL.




INDEX OF INVENTIONS
FOR WHICH
LETTERS PATENT OF THE UNITED STATES WERE GRANTED IN THE WEEK ENDING
January 18, 1877,
AND EACH BEARING THAT DATE.

[Those marked (r) are reissued patents.]

       *       *       *       *       *

A complete copy of any patent in the annexed list, including both the
specifications and drawings, will be furnished from this office for
one dollar. In ordering, please state the number and date of the
patent desired, and remit to Munn & Co., 37 Park Row, New York city.

       *       *       *       *       *

  Abdominal corset, C. Lascell                         186,258
  Acoustic telegraph, T.A. Edison                      186,330
  Advertising card, H. Mahler                          186,209
  Air compressor, J. Clayton                           186,306
  Air compressor, W.F. Garrison                        186,336
  Animal trap, T.N. Hughes                             186,252
  Annealing furnace, H.B. Chess                        186,404
  Atomizer, W. Kennish                                 186,208
  Axle tree, trussed, J.B. Brewster                    186,227
  Barbed fence, C.F. Washburn                          186,389
  Bee hive, G.W. Akins                                 186,223
  Belt shipping attachment, R. Denmark                 186,318
  Blotter and paper clip, C.B. Farrington              186,288
  Bone black, cooling, C. Doscher                      186,327
  Book back, metallic, I. Reynolds                     186,216
  Bottle and basket, E. Cusenier, Sr                   186,311
  Bottle for hair dye, T. Divine                       186,321
  Bottle stopper, E.B. Requa                           186,270
  Bread cutter, G.B. Heath                             186,248
  Brick and tile lifter, Braislin & Wood               186,303
  Broom, W.M. Jackson                                  186,254
  Brush handle, I.L. Landis                            186,399
  Buckle, G.F. Eberhard                                186,329
  Buffing roll, L.S. Graves                            186,205
  Butter press, W.S. Alexander                         186,224
  Button, D. Wilcox                                    186,392
  Call bell, A.C. Gould                                186,338
  Car axle lubricator, R. Macdonald                    186,354
  Car coupling, O. & M. Crum                           186,313
  Car coupling, J.W. Skeele                            186,373
  Car roof, H. Aldridge                                186,188
  Car roof, H. Aldridge                                186,189
  Cards for fibers, making, Yates & Kellett            186,396
  Cartridge, J.P. White                                186,220
  Chamber vessel, J.C. Moore                           186,264
  Clamp for ratchet drills, L. Beland                  186,225
  Cloth, folding and scouring, R.D. Nesmith            186,363
  Clothespin, W.S. Davis                               186,314
  Clutch, A.B. Bean                                    186,296
  Coffee pot, W.W. Stevens                             186,378
  Combination lock, A. Parise                          186,268
  Combination lock, G. Winter                          186,393
  Combination tool, I.U. Malphurs                      186,259
  Combustible, J.B.D. Cassinelli                       186,294
  Corn planter, W. Gilman                              186,203
  Corn planter, J.L.G. Schmidt                         186,275
  Corn planter and cultivator, E.C. Gage               186,244
  Corn popper, G.P. Sisson                             186,279
  Corset, J. Mayer,                                    186,210
  Cotton gin, J.W. Thorn                               186,383
  Cotton holder, dental, T. Cogswell                   186,307
  Curtain fixture, Collins & Saltsgaver                186,198
  Curtain fixture, J.B. Marshall                       186,357
  Dial telegraph, J.H.C. Watts                         186,283
  Door and gate fastener, J. Gibbs                     186,337
  Door hanger, W.E. Warner                             186,388
  Door retainer, R.E. Dietz                            186,319
  Drop light, J.A. Evarts                              186,332
  Egg beater, G.P. Sisson                              186,278
  Egg carrier, L. Inglee                               186,253
  Electric gas lighting, C.H. Hinds                    186,343
  Electro harmonic telegraph, E. Gray                  186,340
  Electric dental plugger, J.E. Dexter                 186,234
  Elevator, safety check, N.H. Fogg                    186,241
  Fabrics, winding up, G.E. Jones                      186,256
  Feed apparatus, punching, J. Morgan                  186,212
  Feed bag for horses, G.C. Booth                      186,301
  Fence post, P.J. Rickard                             186,271
  Fire place, H.F. Watson                              186,390
  Fire place heater, J.K. Dimmick                      186,320
  Fire place, portable, T.C. Nativel                   186,361
  Fish scrap, treating, S.L. Goodale                   186,204
  Fly fan, H.B. Baker                                  186,292
  Fly fan, W.R. Fowler                                 186,243
  Folding chair, B F. Little                           186,353
  Friction wheel, E. Brauer                            186,304
  Fruit or paint can, W.H. Fowler                      186,333
  Furnace, evaporating, J. Kitchen                     186,349
  Furnace, smelting, G.W. Swett (r)                      7,468
  Gang plow, W. Fruhling                               186,335
  Gang plow, E. Peak                                   186,269
  Gas and air carbureter, Boomer & Randall             186,302
  Gas governor, J.R. Blossom                           186,299
  Gas, manufacturing, J G. Hunt                        186,207
  Gas retort cover, A. Schwarz                         186,276
  Gate, D. Scherer                                     186,274
  Gill net, D.W. & S.H. Davis                          186,232
  Grafting machine, E. Walters                         186,219
  Grain binder, J.M. Rosebrooks                        186,272
  Grain separator, O.J. Chubbuck                       186,230
  Grain separator, T.J. Doyle                          186,235
  Grubbing machine, I. Burley                          186,228
  Hand truck, H.R. Ferris                              186,237
  Hat bodies, washing, T.C. Beatty                     186,295
  Hats, wiring and binding. Cuming & Knight            186,312
  Hay tedder and side rake, Huber & Snell              186,346
  High pressure hot air engine, O. Stenberg            186,377
  Hook for drawrods, M.B. Eskine                       186,236
  Hoops, racking, S. Parker                            186,365
  Horse power, traverse pinion, J.A. Field             186,238
  Horseshoe, weighted, E.E. Seixas                     186,277
  Hose nozzle, M.S. Curtis                             186,310
  Hot air furnace, J.C. Sanborn                        186,217
  Hydraulic motor, J.M. Bois                           186,195
  Indexer, J. Suter                                    186,382
  Indicator for liquids, I. Levi                       186,400
  Insects, destroying, J.B. Margarit                   186,260
  Iron fence, Nellis & Guttridge                       186,362
  Key board, musical, B. Bishop                        186,298
  Knob roses to doors, W.A. Barlow                     186,194
  Lamp burner, H.H. Doty                               186,201
  Lamp chimney, S.W. Fowler (r)                          7,463
  Lathe chuck, metal, J.H. Harris                      186,245
  Leather-covered nut, L.T. Smith                      186,375
  Letter scales, J.V.H. Nott                           186,267
  Lifting jack, C.F. Davis                             186,315
  Lifting jack, F.M. Lottridge                         186,402
  Lifting jack, D.M. Ross                              186,368
  Lighting alarm clocks, H.J. & W.D. Davies            186,317
  Limekiln, J.W. Devling                               186,233
  Lock for drawers, etc., G.W. Baker                   186,192
  Locomotive engine, W. Wells                          186,285
  Loom, L.J. Knowles                                   186,350
  Loom, Smith & Skinner                                186,374
  Looms, preparing warps for, W. Heaton                186,249
  Molasses gate, S. Barker                             186,193
  Multifold pipe coupling, E.A. Leland                 186,351
  Muzzle bit for horses, A.J. Short                    186,371
  Newspaper file, P.E. Sloan                           186,280
  Odorless air closet, G.R. Moore                      186,266
  Odorless receptacle, G.R. Moore                      186,265
  Oiler, S.S. Newton                                   186,364
  Ordnance, S. Crispin                                 186,308
  Ore and coal jigger, G. Schmauch                     186,370
  Ores, process of treating, G.D. Wyckoff              186,222
  Paper box, R.H. Foster                               186,242
  Paper, cloth, etc., machine for cutting, E. Allen    186,190
  Paper cutting machine, P. McAleer                    186,262
  Paper dish, S.E. Harlow                              186,247
  Paper folding machine, L.C. Crowell                  186,309
  Paper, folding, S.D. Tucker                 186,384, 186,385
  Pasting machine, T. Goodall                          186,339
  Piano forte attachment, E. Zachariae                 186,397
  Pins, dowels, etc., cutting, F.H. Kane               186,348
  Pipes bursting, preventing, A. Bujac                 186,305
  Plaiting machine, E.S. Harding                       186,246
  Plane irons, adjusting, J.A. Traut                   186,281
  Plate for stoves, N.M. Simonds                       186,372
  Plow attachment, D.W. Hughes                         186,344
  Plow stock, R. Weber                                 186,284
  Powder, compensating, Miltimore & Totten             186,211
  Printing telegraph transmit, G.M. Phelps             186,215
  Pulleys from shafting, drawing, H.F. Casterline      186,229
  Pulverizing machine, A.B. Lipsey                     186,401
  Pump, G.R. McCrum                                    186,358
  Quilting frame, H.T. Davis                           186,316
  Railway brake apparatus, H.F. Knapp                  186,257
  Railway car, S.R. & O.V. Wallace                     186,387
  Rake, self-cleaning, V.W. Blanchard                  186,300
  Refrigerating car, J.M. Ayer (r)                       7,467
  Refrigerator, G.H. Crisfield                         186,200
  Refrigerator, J.W. Stewart                           186,376
  Registering fare box, J.C. Strong                    186,380
  Reversing valve, engine, Bevins, Weis & Phillips     186,297
  Riding saddle, J.C. Miller                           186,359
  Rotary engine, D.R. Harder                           186,342
  Sad iron, Baker & Asbury                             186,291
  Sample garment, L.E. Warner                          186,282
  Saw set, C. Heinen                                   186,250
  Saw table, G.E. Burt                                 186,196
  Screw for piano stools, G.W. Archer                  186,191
  Seat, reversible, J.E. Rugg                          186,273
  Seed planter, D.J. Davis                             186,231
  Seed sower, J. Pearce                                186,214
  Seeder and cultivator, W.A. Van Brunt (r)              7,466
  Separating germs from grain, C.A. Duprez             186,328
  Sheep shears, Porterfield & Malin                    186,366
  Sheet metal can, J.S. Field                          186,239
  Shirt stud, C.H. Field                               186,202
  Shot cartridge, J.P. White                           186,391
  Sock and stocking, J.L. Krauser                      186,398
  Socket for scythe shanks, M. Smith                   186,218
  Sofa bedstead, H. Compes                             186,199
  Spark arrester, W.S. Hudson                          186,345
  Spark arrester and consumer, T.E. Roberts            186,367
  Spinning frame, G. Draper                            186,325
  Spinning frame, ring, G. Draper                      186,324
  Spinning frame, ring, W.F. Draper                    186,322
  Spinning machine, G. Draper                          186,323
  Spring back wagon seat, J.W. Wood                    186,394
  Spring bolt for sliding doors, etc., A. Hance        186,341
  Spring for wagons, auxiliary, A.W. McKown            186,263
  Stalls, cutting, J.M. Goff (r)                         7,469
  Stencil plate, Wright & Bryant                       186,395
  Stove, M.L. Wood                                     186,286
  Stove pipe, A.B. Allen                               186,290
  Straw cutter, D. Maxwell                             186,261
  Tempering steel, etc., G.F. Simonds (r)         7,464, 7,465
  Tension regulator, G. Draper                         186,326
  Ticket case, S. Strandgaard                          186,381
  Time attachment for locks, J. Sargent                186,369
  Time lock, E.J. Woolley                              186,221
  Toothbrush, S. Woolverton                            188,287
  Toy card shooter, C.W. Frost                         186,334
  Tubular gang saw, J.A. Balch                         186,293
  Underground telegraphs, W. Mackintosh       186,355, 186,356
  Valve gear of engines, link for, J.H. Luther         186,403
  Vapor burner, W.C. North                             186,213
  Variable cut-off, J. Fish                            186,240
  Vehicle wheel, H. Mounts                             186,360
  Vehicle wheel, G.F. Almy                             186,289
  Velocipede, Stineman & Halloway                      186,379
  Vent clearer for wash bowls etc., J.S. Hawley        186,206
  Ventilator, J.B. Hill                                186,251
  Vessels, lessening draught of, E. Ellison            186,331
  Wagon end gate, T.L. Black                           186,226
  Water closet trunk, E.A. Leland                      186,352
