Nov. 21st, 1006.--

This evening I heard heavy steps on the stairs, and methought their
tread seemed familiar, as well it might, for no sooner had the door
opened than my son Alfgar, for whom we had mourned as dead, or at
least dead to us, fell upon my neck and wept.

It was a long time before either of us was composed enough to say
much, but when we had a little recovered, the abbot who had brought
them to my rooms introduced a tall young man in gleeman's garb, as
Edmund the Etheling.

At length we all sat down to supper, but talked so much we could eat
little, and I soon learned all the news Alfgar had to tell. His tale
is wonderful; he has been indeed delivered from the mouth of the lion,
nay, from the jaws of the fierce lion; but I must set down all things
in order.

The one thing which delights me most is the way in which his faith has
stood the hard hard test to which it has been put.

But my dear nephew Bertric, Saint Bertric we must assuredly call him,
oh how it will lighten the grief of his parents and sister to know how
gloriously he died for Christ! One could envy him his crown.

And then how delighted Ethelgiva will be to learn not only that Alfgar
is alive, but to hear how true and brave he has been.

But when all these congratulations were over, and we had learned all
that Alfgar had to tell, there was evidently something on the mind of
the prince.

"Alfgar and I have a very important duty to perform," he said.

I waited, and he proceeded.

"There has been grievous treachery in our ranks. Edric Streorn has
sold us to the Danes."

"I feared as much," said I, sadly.

"I learned it at Carisbrooke, and am now on my way to Dorchester,
where my royal father has arrived, or will arrive tomorrow. I should
have gone there at once, but Alfgar learned you were here, and would
come. Besides, we need your help to fit us for appearing at court."

And, in truth, their habiliments were not very royal.

Well, Abingdon is a town of great resources, wherein all things meet
may be found.

"We will to the tradesmen tomorrow," I said, "and fit you for the
presence."

"I have yet heavier news to unfold," Edmund added, very seriously.
"The Danes purpose a winter campaign in the heart of the land, hoping
to take us unawares."

"Now the saints forbid!" said I.

"Even so; but they are not all with us. St. Brice is against us."

I sighed, and so did they. The very remembrance of that day is
sickening.

"We have heard," said the abbot, "that the king will arrive tomorrow
at Dorchester; we will send you thither in the morning. Meanwhile, my
sons, you do not eat and drink as I would have you. Remember you need
to sustain exhausted nature."

That was indeed true. They had travelled fast, and had fasted by the
way, of necessity.

"Well, Alfgar, we will tomorrow to the king," said Edmund, after they
had eaten and drunken; "he must surely listen to us now."

"He appears to love this wicked Edric," said the abbot sorrowfully.

"Far better than his own flesh and blood," replied Edmund.

"My son," said the abbot, "rest here this night in our poor house;
tomorrow we will find you both horses and fitting apparel, and ye
shall go meetly to the king, who is the guest of the bishop."

"I shall not be sorry, father, to see the inside of my chamber," said
the young prince; for he is yet young, although so wise and
valiant--not more than a year or two older than Alfgar.

The compline bell rang.

"I will go with you to thank God first for our deliverance, and to pay
my vows to Him," said Edmund; "then to bed."

After compline, Edmund went from the chapel to bed. Alfgar would not
retire. He came to my cell; there he talked with me for a full hour.
His affection moves me greatly. He has evidently found a real friend
in Prince Edmund, who has delivered him from a cruel death, and who
wants to attach him permanently to his service. Meanwhile Alfgar is
all haste to return to Aescendune and Ethelgiva, before any further
steps are taken.

Saturday, Nov. 22d, 1006.--

After we had arrayed the Etheling and Alfgar this morning, I decided
to accompany them on their road to Dorchester, for it happened that I
had arranged to say mass and preach tomorrow at the little church of
St. Michael at Clifton, the residence of my sister Bertha and her
husband Herstan. It lies on a cliff over the Thames, on the way to the
cathedral city, whence its name, "the town on the cliff."

So we started, the Etheling, Alfgar, and I, after the chapter mass at
nine. We crossed the fine timber bridge over the Isis, then kept the
causeway over the marshes, till, crossing an arm of the main stream,
we ascended a hill and passed through the open country.

On the north the country is richly wooded. There lies the chase of
Neweham, abounding in deer, with a few wolves yet lingering in its
recesses, and forming sport for the ceorls.

In the neighbourhood of a great monastery the roads are always good,
and waggons can travel easily and smoothly from Abingdon to
Dorchester. So, being well mounted, we were only the best part of an
hour in reaching Clifton.

The river here makes a sudden bend to the east, after running for some
time almost due north, and at the bend the steep cliff rises whereon
the little church and my brother Herstan's hall is built, with a few
cottages below and around occupied by his theows.

We went first to the church and offered our devotions. From the
elevated ground whereon it stands, the cathedral of Dorchester and the
Synodune hills formed conspicuous objects.

Then we turned to the hall, and met a reception such as warmed the
heart. When we had refreshed ourselves, I had to tell Bertha all the
strange events which have recently happened at Aescendune; of the
destruction of her old home, but of the well being of all her friends;
yes, of all, for we know that he has won the martyr's crown.

Some natural tears she dropped; but I think she soon came to see all
things in their right light, as we try to do.

Soon after our arrival, Herstan sent a messenger to Dorchester to
learn at what hour the king was expected; and the answer was returned,
that they expected him in time for the banquet at the episcopal palace
this evening. So Edmund and Alfgar consented to pass the day quietly
at Cliffton.



CHAPTER XIII. THE CITY OF DORCHESTER.


Dorchester was at this period the most important city of the Midland
counties, for it was the seat of the great bishopric which extended
its sway over nearly the whole of Mercia.

Here the apostle of Wessex, Birinus, had converted and baptized
Cynegils, king of that country, Oswald, the saintly king of
Northumbria, being present, and receiving him fresh from the
regenerating waters as his adopted son. Here, the next year, Cuichelm,
his brother, was baptized, and from this centre Christianity was
widely diffused. The good bishop died in the year 650, and was buried
amongst the people he loved, but many years later his relics were
translated to Winchester. But the tale went forth that the cunning
canons of Dorchester had given them another body than that of the
saint, and their shrine was the object of veneration equally with the
rival shrine at Winchester.

Dorchester became successively the seat of two great bishoprics--the
one West Saxon, the other Mercian. The first, founded by Birinus, when
Wessex extended far north of the Thames, was divided seventy years
later into two sees--Winchester and Sherburne. For some years the city
was without bishops, owing to its insecure position during the strife
between Wessex and Mercia, but later it appears as the seat of the
great Mercian bishopric, retaining its jurisdiction until after the
Norman conquest, when the see was transferred to Lincoln. Therefore
Dorchester long enjoyed a wide celebrity and greater influence, than
the city, Oxenford, which, lying at a distance of ten miles, was
destined to supersede it eventually.

The day was closing on an evening of November 1006, and the sun was
sinking across the level country beyond the walls, when the people of
Dorchester might have been seen crowding the roads which led from the
eastern gate towards Bensington and Wallingford; the wooden bridge by
which the road crossed the Tame was covered with human beings, and
every eye was eagerly directed along the great high road. The huge
cathedral church towered above the masses, rude in architecture, yet
still impressive in its proportions, while another church, scarcely
smaller in its dimensions, rose from the banks lower down the stream,
below the bridge, and the wooden steeple of a third was visible above
the roofs of the houses in the western part of the city.

But, as in every other city which had once been Roman, the relics of
departed greatness contrasted painfully (at least we should think so)
with the humbler architecture around. The majesty of the churches was
indeed (as a contemporary wrote) great, but thatched roofs consorted
ill with the remains of shattered column and pedestal, and with the
fragmentary ruins of the grand amphitheatre, which were yet partly
visible, although the stones which had been brought from Bath to build
it had been employed largely in church architecture.

The light of day was rapidly fading; a light breeze brought down the
remaining leaves from the trees, or whirled them about in all
directions; winter was plainly about to assume the mastery of the
scene, as was evident from the clothing the people wore, the thick fur
and warm woollen cloaks which covered their light tunics.

At length the sound of approaching cavalry was heard, and the cry "The
King! the King!" was raised, and cheers were given by the multitude.
It was observable, almost at a glance, that they proceeded from the
young and giddy, and that their elders refrained from joining in the
cry.

About a hundred horsemen, gaily caparisoned, appeared, and in the
midst, with equal numbers of his guard preceding and following, rode
Ethelred the king. He was of middle stature and not uncomely, but
there was a look of vacillation about his face, which would have
struck even an indifferent physiognomist, while his thin lips, which
he was constantly biting (when he was not biting his nails), seemed to
indicate a tendency towards cruelty.

But by his side rode one, whose restless eyes seemed to wander to each
individual of the crowd in turn, while power and malice seemed equally
conspicuous in his glance. Little changed since we last beheld him
rode the traitor, for so all but the king accounted him, Edric
Streorn.

Amidst the shouts of the populace, who loved to look on the display,
the Bishop Ednoth {xi} and the chief magistrates of the city
received the monarch and his councillor in front of the church of Sts.
Peter and Paul, and escorted him through the streets to the palace,
which stood in what was then a central position, on the spot now
called Bishop's Court. It was spacious, built around a quadrangular
courtyard, with cloisters surrounding the lowest storey and the smooth
shaven lawn, in the centre of which a granite cross was upraised. A
gateway opened in the southern side and led to the inner court, and
the cloisters opened from either side upon it.

On the opposite side of the quadrangle was the great hall where synods
were held, and where, on state occasions, such as a royal visit, the
banquet was prepared.

Here, after the king had availed himself of the bath, and his
attendants had divested themselves of their travel-stained attire, the
throne of the king was placed at the head of the board, and a seat for
the bishop on his right hand, and for Edric on his left.

Ethelred took his place; upon his head a thin circlet of gold confined
his flowing locks already becoming scant, but, as their natural colour
was light, not otherwise showing signs of age: he was only in his
fortieth year. His tunic was finely embroidered in colours around the
neck, and was below of spotless white, secured by a belt richly
gilded, whereon was a sheath for the dagger or knife, which was used
for all occasions, whether in battle or in meal time, the haft being
inlaid with precious stones. Over the tunic a rich purple mantle was
lightly thrown, and his slippers were of dark cloth, relieved by white
wool; the tunic descended to his heels.

The attire of Edric was similar in shape, but of different colour; his
tunic was of green, edged with brown fur, his mantle of dark cloth,
and his belt of embossed leather. There was a studied humility in it
all, as if he shunned all comparison with the king.

Ednoth said grace, and the chanters responded. The canons of the
cathedral, the priests of the other churches, the sheriff of the
county, the reeve of the borough, the burgesses, all had their places,
and the banquet began; huge joints being carried round to each
individual, from which, with his dagger, he cut what he fancied and
deposited it on his plate; then wine, ale, and mead were poured
foaming into metal tankards, and lighter delicacies followed. There
was no delay; no one cared to talk until he had satisfied his
appetite.

The king, as a matter of course, opened the conversation, when the
edge of desire was gone.

"Have the levies who served in the war all been disbanded, Sheriff?"

"The last returned from the garrisons in Sussex a week ago, and are
all hoping for a quiet winter in the bosom of their families."

"Have they lost many of their number? Did the people of this hundred
suffer greatly in the war which Sweyn forced upon us?"

"Not very many; still there has been a little mourning, and much
anticipation of future evil," replied the bishop.

"That is needless," said Edric; "they may all prepare to keep their
Christmas with good cheer. The Danes are sleeping, hibernating like
bears in their winter caves."

"While they are so near as the Wight, who can rest in peace?" said
Ednoth.

"The Wight! it must be a hundred miles from here; the Danes have never
reached any spot so far from the coast as this."

"Yet there is an uneasy belief that they will attack the inland
districts now that they have exhausted the districts on the coast, and
that we must be prepared to suffer as our brethren have done."

"Before they leave their retreat again we shall be ready to meet them;
our levies will be better trained and more numerous."

"A curse seemed upon all our exertions this last year," said Ednoth,
sorrowfully. "We were defending our hearths and our homes, yet we were
everywhere outmanoeuvred and beaten. It could not have been worse had
we had spies and traitors in command."

The king slightly coloured, for he resented all imputations on his
favourite, and was about to make a sharp reply, when a voice which
made him start, replied:

"Quite right, reverend father! as you say, success was impossible
while spies and traitors commanded our forces."

All looked up in amazement; two guests had entered unbidden, and the
king, the bishop, and Edric recognised Prince Edmund.

"The unseemly interruption is a sufficient introduction to the
company. I need not, my friends, present to you my turbulent son
Edmund, or the attendant he has picked up."

"No need whatsoever, if you will first allow us to explain the reasons
of our presence here. We have somewhat startling news from the enemy."

"The enemy, by my last advices, lies quiet in the Isle of Wight," said
Edric.

