cross, Gloria Patri.... Sicut erat. 14. Kyrie Eleison, Christe Eleison,
Kyrie Eleison, Pater Noster, qui es in coelis... (in silence). Et ne nos
inducas in tentationem. Sed libera nos a malo. 15. Respice in servos
tuos.... Et sit splendor....16. Gloria Patri.... Sicut erat....Oremus,
Dirigere et sanctificare.... l7. Jube, Domine.... Deus et actus
nostros....Amen. 18. Lectio brevis, which in feast offices is the
Capitulum from None. 19. Adjutorium nostrum in nomine Domine (with sign
of cross on forehead, breast and shoulders); Qui fecit....20.
Benedicite, Deus; Domine nos benedicat...in pace, Amen. To the lectio
brevis at Prime, Tu autem Domine, miserere nobis, is added.

_The Athanasian Creed_. In the Roman Breviary prior to the reform of
1911, the title given to the formula of faith was Symbolum S. Athanasi.
In the new Breviaries the title stands Symbolum Athanasianum. Why was
the change made?

During the past two hundred years the authorship of this formula has
led to great discussion and its reading has led to much bitter and
heated controversy in Anglican and Protestant churches. Many contended
for its retention in Protestant services and many rejoiced at its
partial exclusion, its truncated revision and clamoured for its
rejection everywhere from service. Controversy led to the study of its
origin. In 1872 a Protestant author, Ffoulkes, maintained that it was
not composed by St. Athanasius (296-373) but by Paulinus of Aquileia
(A.D. 800). But the literature of the age of Charlemagne proves that
this creed had at the beginning of the ninth century an antiquity of at
least more than a century (Ommaney, _History and Structure of the
Athanasian Creed_, Oxford, 1897). Scholars, basing their opinions on
words found in the _Expositio Fidei Fortunati_, date the origin of
this symbol from the fifth century. It contains certain expressions
which a writer subsequent to the Council of Chalcedon (451) would have
been most unlikely to employ, and omits certain expressions which such a
writer would have been most unlikely to omit. However, it is likely that
the creed dates from the fifth century. Who its author was, is quite
doubtful. It was not St. Athanasius, it may have been St. Hilary of
Aries, or St. Vincent of Lerins, or some local bishop in southern
France, "But let us only suppose that the real author was some local
bishop--or the theologian employed by some local bishop--and that it was
composed in the first instance for purely local use in some district of
southern France--then does not the difficulty disappear, and are not
the facts of its silent and gradual adoption suitably explained? Not
coming from an author of wide reputation, it would not at first have
attracted much attention and would have been used only in the locality
of its origin; from there its use would have spread to neighbouring
districts; as it got more known it would have been more widely adopted,
and the compactness and lucidity of its statements, and the
enthusiasm-inspiring character of its style would have contributed to
make it highly prized wherever it was known. Then would come speculation
as to its authorship, and what wonder if in uncritical times an
Athanasian authorship was first guessed, then confidently affirmed and
believed?" (Father Sydney F. Smith, S.J., _The Month_, October, 1904).

This opinion is only one of several held by Catholic scholars. Dom Morin
holds strongly, and gives very good reasons for his view, that it was
written by Martin of Braga between the years 550 and 580. It was
written, he says, for the people of Galicia in Spain, who had been
recently converted from Arianism (_Journal of Theological Studies_,
April, 1911). It was adopted into Gallican liturgy and office about 980,
and in the Roman office only when the Curial Breviary was adopted.

"The liturgical use of the Athanasian Creed was Frankish in origin
(ninth century) and spread through the influence of the Cluniac reform
(tenth century), but only found its way to Rome in the Supplementary
prayers in the twelfth and thirteenth century" (Burton and Myers, _op.
cit_., p. 51).

_Rubrics_. Athanasian Creed, to be said (1) Trinity Sunday, (2) Sundays
after Epiphany, (3) Sundays after Pentecost unless there be in (2) and
(3) the commemoration of a double, or of an octave.

Why is prayer offered at this first hour of the day?

Writers on liturgy answer, 1st to offer to God the first fruits of our
day, of our work, of our devotion, following in this the example of
Christ, Who from His first entry into the world offered Himself to His
Father for the salvation of mankind. 2d To beg of Him to keep us safe
during the day, 3d To beg of Him to keep us free from sin, "ut in
diurnis actibus nos servet a nocentibus."

     "May God in all our words and deeds
      Keep us from harm this day.
      May He in love retain us still,
      From tones of strife and words of ill,
      And wrap around and close our eyes
      To earth's absorbing vanities.
      May wrath and thoughts that gender shame
      Ne'er in our breasts abide.
      And painful abstinences tame
      Of wanton flesh, the pride" (Hymn at Prime).

_Rubrics_. The Office of Prime begins in choir with the silent
recitation of _Pater Noster, Ave, Credo_. Then, if in choir (aloud) Deus
in adjutorium. ... Domine ad adjirvandum. ... Gloria Patri.... Alleluia,
or Laus tibi.... Then the hymn _fam lucis_ is said. The antiphon for the
day is said as far as the asterisk (*), then the Psalms of the day's
Office as arranged in the new Pian Psaltery, according to the day of the
week, except on some special feasts, when the Psalms at Prime are the
Sunday psalms. When the _ordo recitandi_ marks an Office as _officium
solemne_ (an excepted feast), the psalms at Lauds and Hours are the
Sunday psalms; and at Prime the psalm _Deus in nomine tuo_ (Psalm 53)
takes the place of Psalm _Confitemini_ (Psalm 117). At Prime, and at the
small Hours, Terce, Sext, None, only one antiphon is said. It is said in
full at the end of the last Psalm in each Hour.

The Capitulum, the little Responsory, _Christe_, _Fili Dei vivi_ ... is
then said. In this responsory the versicle _Qui sedes ad dexteram
Patris_ is sometimes changed, e.g., in paschal time it is, _Qui
surrexisti a mortuis_.

The manner of reciting this responsory is sometimes not correctly
understood, owing, perhaps, to its printed form in some Breviaries. The
normal method is to repeat the _whole_ response, then say the versicle,
and then the second portion of the response; then the _Gloria Patri el
Filio et Spiritui Sancto, without the Sicut erat_, is said, and the
response repeated. The versicle _Exsurge_ and the response _Et libera_
are then said. This is the method of recitation in all the small Hours
and at Compline.

After this responsory, if the Office be of double rite or be an Office
within an octave, or on the vigil of Epiphany or on Friday or Saturday
after Ascension, or on a Sunday on which a double is commemorated, or an
octave is celebrated, or on a semi-double feast within an octave,
_Dominus vobiscum, Et cum spiritu tuo_, and the prayer _Dominus Deus
omnipotens_ is said. But if the Office be not any of these mentioned
just now, the responsory is followed by the _Preces_.

_Preces_ (Title XXXIV.) In the Breviary there are two sets of preces,
the Preces Dominicales for Sunday and the Preces Feriales for ferial
Offices. These ferial preces of Prime differ from the ferial preces of
Lauds, and are said in Prime when the ferial preces are said in Lauds,
That is, on the ferias of Advent, Lent, Passiontide, Ember days and
Vigils. The ferial preces of Lauds are found in the Breviary,
immediately after the second set of Psalms for ferial Lauds and after
the short responsory in the psalm arrangements for the days of the week.
(See Lauds, _supra_, p. 188.)

These prayers were introduced at a very early stage of Christian
liturgy. St. Isidore writes that they come from Greek liturgy and the
opening words _Kyrie eleison_ seem to indicate remnants of an old
litany. Formerly they were read oftener during the liturgical year than
we now are called on to repeat them. They are sometimes referred to as
the _preces flebiles_, tearful prayers, because they are said in times
of penance, and are formed to excite tears. In choir recitation they are
said kneeling. When the preces or the preces feriales are said the sign
of the cross is made from the forehead to the breast, at the words
_Adjutorium nostrum in nomine Domini_. Then the Confiteor is said.

The Confiteor was from an early date a prayer said privately as a
preparation for Mass. It is found in several forms; _Confiteor Deo,
beatae Mariae, omnibus sanctis et vobis_ (Sarum Missal), but since the
time of St. Pius V. (1566-1572) our present form alone was followed and
allowed (S. R. C., 13th February, 1666). If the Office be recited
privately or with one or two companions, the _confiteor_ is said once
only and simultaneously in the preces, and the words _vobis fratribus_
and _vos fratres_, which priests say in the opening prayer of Mass are
omitted. It should be remarked, too, that the _Misereatur_ and
_Indulgentiam_ have not in this location _vestri, vestris, vos,_ but
_nostri, nostris, nos_. Sometimes errors in this part of the recitation
of the Office are unnoticed, and this pronoun error makes the formula
meaningless.

After the _Indulgentiam_ come the concluding versicles of the preces,
Dignare ... sine peccato ... miserere ... miserere ... Fiat ...
Quemadmodum ... Domine ... Et ... Dominus vobiscum, Et cum spiritu tuo,
and the prayer _Domine Deus Omnipotens_ ... Amen. ... Dominus vobiscum,
Et cum spiritu tuo. ... Benedicamus Domino, Deo gratias. If the Office
be said in choir, the martyrology is read at this part of Prime. The
reading of the martyrology is not of obligation in private recitation of
the Office; but the reading of it was highly recommended, even in
private recitation, by Pope Gregory XIII. (14th January, 1584; see his
words in the beginning of the Martyrology).

Then are said, Pretiosa ... mors ... sancta Maria ... Deus in
adjutorium... Domine ad adjuvandum (both the latter being repeated
thrice) ... Gloria Patri ... Sicut erat ... Kyrie eleison ... Christe
eleison ... Kyrie eleison ... Pater Noster (silently) until words "Et
ne nos" ... Sed libera ... Respice ... Et sit ... Gloria Patri ... Sicut
erat ... Oremus, Dirigere et ... Amen, Jube Domine ... Dies et
actus ... Amen.

The short lesson which, on all feasts, is the same as the chapter which
is said at None will be found in the proper or common, under that Hour,
The new Psalter and new rubrics made no change in this matter. Hence,
for example, on the feast of SS. Peter and Paul the short lesson at end
of Prime is taken from None of the feast, "Et Petrus ad se reversus";
the short lesson for Prime on the feast of St. Aloysius is "Lex Dei
ejus" and not the short lesson printed in the Psalter under the
day's Office.

On all Sundays and week days it varies according to the season. Thus--

1. From the 14th January until the first Saturday in Lent, from Monday
to Wednesday in Trinity week, from the Friday after the octave of Corpus
Christi until the Saturday before Advent, the short lesson is "Dominus
autem" (II. Thess. iii.),

2. From the first Sunday of Advent until the 23rd December inclusive it
is "Domine miserere" (Isaias xxxiii,).

3. From the first Sunday of Lent until the Saturday before Passion
Sunday inclusive it is "Quaerite Dominum" (Isaias iv.).

4. From Passion Sunday until Wednesday in Holy Week it is "Faciem meam"
(Isaias, 1.),

5. From Easter Sunday to the Vigil of Ascension inclusive, the short
lesson is "Si consurrexists" (Coloss. iii.).

At the end of the short lesson the words "Tu autem Domine, miserere
nobis; Deo gratias" are added, and after these words are said
"Adjutorium nostrum ... Qui fecit ... Benedicite Deus" and the Blessing,
"Dominus nos benedicat ... requiescant in pace, Amen." Then _Pater
Noster_ is said silently, unless another Hour is to follow immediately.




TEXTS AND INTENTIONS FOR PIOUS RECITATION OF PRIME.

1. "Herod and his army set him at nought" (St. Luke, c. 25).

2. "Not this man, but Barrabas. Crucify Him."

3. "I find no cause in Him. I will chastise Him and let Him go" (St.
Luke).

4. "But Jesus he delivered up to their will" (St. Luke, c. 23).

5. "Shall I crucify your King?," (St. John, 19).

_General Intentions_. The Pope and his intentions; the propagation of
the Faith; the priesthood; the Catholic laity; Catholic Missions in the
East; Catholic Europe.

_Personal Intentions_. The spirit of meekness and humility; greater
devotion to the Eucharist; greater love of the Blessed Virgin; the
priestly vows.

_Special Intentions_. For our friends; for the sick and sorrowful; for
the Church in Scotland; for our enemies; for the priesthood of America.




CHAPTER III.

TERCE, SEXT, NONE (TITLE XVI.).

TERCE.

_Etymology._ The word Terce comes from the Latin word _tertia (hora)_,
third. Because this little Hour was said at the third hour of the Roman
day, that is, about 9 o'clock in the forenoon,

_Structure._ It consists of Pater Noster, Ave, Deus in adjutorium,
Gloria Patri ... Sicut erat ... Amen, Alleluia, Hymn, opening words of
the antiphon, the three psalms, antiphon in full, capitulum, response,
Dominus vobiscum, Et cum spiritu tuo, Oremus, collect, Dominus vobiscum,
Et cum spiritu tuo, Benedicamus ... Deo gratias, Fidelium animae....
Amen. And Pater Noster is said silently if another Hour is not begun
immediately.

Terce is called the golden Hour, _hora aurea_, because at this time of
the day, the third Hour, the Holy Ghost, who is typified by gold,
descended on the apostles. It is called sometimes the sacred Hour (_hora
sacra_) because in conventional churches it is recited immediately
before Holy Mass. It is the most solemn of all the small Hours.

_Antiquity._ The custom of praying at these three hours, terce, sext and
none, is very ancient. It was in use amongst the devout Jews, and the
early converts to Christianity retained the practice. The Apostolic
Constitutions contain the words "Preces etiam vestras facite
hora tertia."

Why does the Church wish us to pray at the third hour?

The question is asked by liturgists of olden times. Their replies are:--

1. to remind us of the hour when our Saviour was condemned (St. Mark, c.
15).

2. to remind us of the hour at which the Holy Ghost descended on the
Church.

3. as the Church's hymn tells us that at this hour of the day when men
are engrossed in worldly affairs, they especially need God's help,

     "Come, Holy Ghost, Who ever One,
      Reignest with Father and with Son.
      It is the hour, our souls possess
      With Thy full flood of holiness.
      Let flesh and heart and lips and mind
      Sound forth our witness to mankind.
      And love light up our mortal frame
      Till others catch the living flame,
      Now to the Father, to the Son,
      And to the Spirit, Three in One,
      Be praise and thanks and glory given,
      By men on earth, by saints in heaven. Amen."

      (Translation by Cardinal Newman of St. Ambrose's
        hymn, _Nunc sancte_).




TEXTS AND INTENTIONS FOR PIOUS RECITATION OF TERCE.

1. "Therefore, Pilate took Jesus and scourged Him."

2. "And the soldiers plaiting a crown of thorns put it on His head; and
they put on Him a purple garment."

3. "And they came to Him and said, 'Hail, King of the Jews,' and they
gave Him blows" (St. John).

4. "Jesus, therefore, came forth bearing the crown of thorns and the
purple garment, and he (Pilate) sayeth to them 'Behold the Man!'"

_General Intentions._ The Pope's Intentions; the conversion of heretics;
the conversion of the Jews.

_Personal Intentions._ Devotion to the Holy Ghost; devotion to the
Passion.

_Special Intentions._ Vocations in America and Australia; for the Irish
people throughout the world; for the souls of our deceased penitents.




SEXT.

_Etymology_. The word Sext comes from the Latin word _sexta, (hora)_,
the sixth hour, because the little Hour should be said at what was the
sixth hour of the Roman day, about mid-day with us.

_Structure._ The structure of this hour is similar to that given in
Terce above, the hymn, antiphon, psalms, little chapter and responses
differing, but the order and form being similar in both.

_Antiquity._ The Psalmist wrote, "Vespere et mane et meridie narrabo et
annuntiabo, et exaudiet vocem meam" (Ps. 54). This practice of devout
Jews was maintained by the early Christians and in the Acts of the
Apostles we read, "Ascendit Petrus in superiora ut oraret circam horam
sextam" (Acts x, 9). At this hour, the Christians met for public,
joint prayer.

Why does the Church wish us to pray at the sixth hour of the day?

1. Because at this hour Christ instructed the Samaritan woman, the type
of the Gentiles; and He promised to give the living water, springing up
unto life everlasting, which was His blood, poured out on Calvary at the
sixth hour.

2. Because at this sixth hour Christ was raised on the cross for our
salvation and it is right and just, daily, to remember Him and His great
love for us. Besides, it is to realise His words "And if I be lifted up
from the earth, I will draw all things to myself" (St. John xii. 32).
And the Church, in the opening words of Sext for Sunday, impresses this
idea on us "Deficit in salutare meum anima mea," "My soul hath fainted
after thy salvation" (Ps. 118).

3. To ask God to grant us health and peace of heart, as the hymn for
Sext sings:--

     "O God, Who canst not change nor fail,
      Guiding the hours as they go by,
      Brightening with beam the morning pale,
      And burning in the midnight sky,
      Quench Thou the fires of hate and strife,
      The wasting fever of the heart;
      From perils guard our feeble life,
      And to our souls Thy grace impart.
      Grant this, O Father, only Son,
      And Holy Ghost, God of Grace,
      To whom all glory, Three in One,
      Be given in every time and place--Amen."

      (Translation by Cardinal Newman of St. Ambrose's
       hymn, _Rector potens_).




TEXTS AND INTENTIONS FOR THE PIOUS RECITATION OF SEXT.

1. "And they took Jesus, and after they had mocked Him, they took off
the purple from Him and put His own garments on Him and led Him out to
crucify Him" (St. Mark, c. 15).

2. "Bearing His own cross, Jesus went forth to that place called
Calvary."

3. "Daughters of Jerusalem, weep not for Me, but for yourselves."

_General Intentions._ The wants of the Church; for peace and goodwill
amongst all States and peoples; for the Pope; for Church students.

_Personal Intentions._ For patience; for fraternal charity; for the love
of the practice of mortification.

_Special Intentions._ For Catholic schools; for increase in number of
daily communicants; for the success of catechists and their work.




NONE.

_Etymology._ The word _None_ comes from the Latin word _nona_, ninth
(_hora nona_), because this part of the Office was said at the ninth
hour of the Roman day, that is, about three o'clock in our modern day.

_Antiquity._ This hour was set apart in Apostolic times for joint
prayer, "Now Peter and John went up into the Temple at the ninth hour of
