The Project Gutenberg EBook of A Treatise on Anatomy, Physiology, and
Hygiene (Revised Edition), by Calvin Cutter

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: A Treatise on Anatomy, Physiology, and Hygiene (Revised Edition)

Author: Calvin Cutter

Release Date: November 24, 2009 [EBook #30541]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TREATISE ON ANATOMY (REVISED) ***




Produced by Bryan Ness, Dan Horwood and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)









                    A
                 TREATISE
                    ON
           ANATOMY, PHYSIOLOGY,
               AND HYGIENE

               DESIGNED FOR
    COLLEGES, ACADEMIES, AND FAMILIES.

          BY CALVIN CUTTER, M.D.

                  -----
  WITH ONE HUNDRED AND FIFTY ENGRAVINGS.
                  -----

       REVISED STEREOTYPE EDITION.

                NEW YORK:
         CLARK, AUSTIN AND SMITH.
      CINCINNATI:--W. B. SMITH & CO.
     ST. LOUIS, MO.:--KEITH & WOODS.

                  1858.




  Entered according to Act of Congress, in the year 1852, by

  CALVIN CUTTER, M. D.,

  In the Clerk's Office of the District Court of the District
  of Massachusetts.

  C. A. ALVORD, Printer,
  No. 15 Vandewater Street, N. Y.




PREFACE.


Agesilaus, king of Sparta, when asked what things boys should learn,
replied, "Those which they will _practise_ when they become men." As
health requires the observance of the laws inherent to the different
organs of the human system, so not only boys, but girls, should
acquire a knowledge of the laws of their organization. If sound
morality depends upon the inculcation of correct principles in youth,
equally so does a sound physical system depend on a correct physical
education during the same period of life. If the teacher and parents
who are deficient in moral feelings and sentiments, are unfit to
communicate to children and youth those high moral principles demanded
by the nature of man, so are they equally incompetent directors of the
physical training of the youthful system, if ignorant of the organic
laws and the physiological conditions upon which health and disease
depend.

For these reasons, the study of the structure of the human system, and
the laws of the different organs, are subjects of interest to
all,--the young and the old, the learned and the unlearned, the rich
and the poor. Every scholar, and particularly every young miss, after
acquiring a knowledge of the primary branches,--as spelling, reading,
writing, and arithmetic,--should learn the structure of the human
system, and the conditions upon which health and disease depend, as
this knowledge will be required in _practice_ in after life.

"It is somewhat unaccountable," says Dr. Dick, "and not a little
inconsistent, that while we direct the young to look abroad over the
surface of the earth, and survey its mountains, rivers, seas, and
continents, and guide their views to the regions of the firmament,
where they may contemplate the moons of Jupiter, the rings of Saturn,
and thousands of luminaries placed at immeasurable distances, ... that
we should never teach them _to look into themselves_; to consider
their own corporeal structures, the numerous parts of which they are
composed, the admirable functions they perform, the wisdom and
goodness displayed in their mechanism, and the lessons of practical
instruction which may be derived from such contemplations."

Again he says, "One great practical end which should always be kept in
view in the study of physiology, is the invigoration and improvement
of the corporeal powers and functions, the preservation of health, and
the prevention of disease."

The design of the following pages is, to diffuse in the community,
especially among the youth, a knowledge of Human Anatomy, Physiology,
and Hygiene. To make the work clear and practical, the following
method has been adopted:--

1st. The structure of the different organs of the system has been
described in a clear and concise manner. To render this description
more intelligible, one hundred and fifty engravings have been
introduced, to show the situation of the various organs. Hence the
work may be regarded as an elementary treatise on anatomy.

2d. The functions, or uses of the several parts have been briefly and
plainly detailed; making a primary treatise on human physiology.

3d. To make a knowledge of the structure and functions of the
different organs _practical_, the laws of the several parts, and the
conditions on which health depends, have been clearly and succinctly
explained. Hence it may be called a treatise on the principles of
hygiene, or health.

To render this department more complete, there has been added the
appropriate treatment for burns, wounds, hemorrhage from divided
arteries, the management of persons asphyxiated from drowning,
carbonic acid, or strangling, directions for nurses, watchers, and the
removal of disease, together with an Appendix, containing antidotes
for poisons, so that persons may know what _should be done_, and what
_should not be done_, until a surgeon or physician can be called.

In attempting to effect this in a brief elementary treatise designed
for schools and families, it has not been deemed necessary to use
vulgar phrases for the purpose of being understood. The appropriate
scientific term should be applied to each organ. No more effort is
required to learn the meaning of a _proper_, than an improper term.
For example: a child will pronounce the word as readily, and obtain as
correct an idea, if you say _lungs_, as if you used the word _lights_.
A little effort on the part of teachers and parents, would diminish
the number of vulgar terms and phrases, and, consequently, improve the
language of our country. To obviate all objections to the use of
proper scientific terms, a Glossary has been appended to the work.

The author makes no pretensions to new discoveries in physiological
science. In preparing the anatomical department, the able treatises of
Wilson, Cruveilhier, and others have been freely consulted. In the
physiological part, the splendid works of Carpenter, Dunglison,
Liebig, and others have been perused. In the department of hygiene
many valuable hints have been obtained from the meritorious works of
Combe, Rivers, and others.

We are under obligations to R. D. Mussey, M. D., formerly Professor of
Anatomy and Surgery, Dartmouth College, N. H., now Professor of
Surgery in the Ohio Medical College; to J. E. M'Girr, A. M., M. D.,
Professor of Anatomy, Physiology, and Chemistry, St. Mary's
University, Ill.; to E. Hitchcock, Jr., A. M., M. D., Teacher of
Chemistry and Natural History, Williston Seminary, Mass.; to Rev. E.
Hitchcock, D. D., President of Amherst College, Mass., who examined
the revised edition of this work, and whose valuable suggestions
rendered important aid in preparing the manuscript for the present
stereotype edition.

We return our acknowledgments for the aid afforded by the Principals
of the several Academies and Normal Schools who formed classes in
their institutions, and examined the revised edition as their pupils
progressed, thus giving the work the best possible test trial, namely,
the recitation-room.

To the examination of an intelligent public, the work is respectfully
submitted by

                                                        CALVIN CUTTER.

WARREN, MASS., _Sept. 1, 1852_.




TO TEACHERS AND PARENTS.


As the work is divided into chapters, the subjects of which are
complete in themselves, the pupil may commence the study of the
structure, use, and laws of the several parts of which the human
system is composed, by selecting such chapters as fancy or utility may
dictate, without reference to their present arrangement,--as well
commence with the chapter on the digestive organs as on the bones.

The acquisition of a correct pronunciation of the technical words is
of great importance, both in recitation and in conversation. In this
work, the technical words interspersed with the text, have been
divided into syllables, and the accented syllables designated. An
ample Glossary of technical terms has also been appended to the work,
to which reference should be made.

It is recommended that the subject be examined in the form of
_topics_. The questions in _Italics_ are designed for this method of
recitation. The teacher may call on a pupil of the class to describe
the anatomy of an organ from an anatomical outline plate; afterwards
call upon another to give the physiology of the part, while a third
may state the hygiene, after which, the questions at the bottom of
the page may be asked promiscuously, and thus the detailed knowledge
of the subject possessed by the pupils will be tested.

At the close of the chapters upon the Hygiene of the several portions
of the system, it is advised that the instructor give a lecture
reviewing the anatomy, physiology, and hygiene, of the topic last
considered. This may be followed by a general examination of the class
upon the same subject. By this course a clear and definite knowledge
of the mutual relation of the Anatomy, Physiology, and Hygiene, of
different parts of the human body, will be presented.

We also suggest the utility of the pupils' giving analogous
illustrations, examples, and observations, where these are interspersed
in the different chapters, not only to induce inventive thought, but to
discipline the mind.

To parents and others we beg leave to say, that about two thirds of
the present work is devoted to a concise and practical description of
the uses of the important organs of the human body, and to show how
such information may be usefully applied, both in the preservation of
health, and the improvement of physical education. To this have been
added directions for the treatment of those accidents which are daily
occurring in the community, making it a treatise proper and profitable
for the FAMILY LIBRARY, as well as the school-room.




CONTENTS.


 Chapter.                                                        Page.
       1. General Remarks,                                          13
       2. Structure of Man,                                         17
       3. Chemistry of the Human Body,                              25
       4. Anatomy of the Bones,                                     29
       5. Anatomy of the Bones, continued,                          39
       6. Physiology of the Bones,                                  48
       7. Hygiene of the Bones,                                     53
       8. Anatomy of the Muscles,                                   64
       9. Physiology of the muscles,                                76
      10. Hygiene of the Muscles,                                   85
      11. Hygiene of the Muscles, continued,                        96
      12. Anatomy of the Teeth,                                    105
      12. Physiology of the Teeth,                                 109
      12. Hygiene of the Teeth,                                    110
      13. Anatomy of the Digestive Organs,                         113
      14. Physiology of the Digestive Organs,                      124
      15. Hygiene of the Digestive Organs,                         129
      16. Hygiene of the Digestive Organs, continued,              142
      17. Anatomy of the Circulatory Organs,                       154
      18. Physiology of the Circulatory Organs,                    164
      19. Hygiene of the Circulatory Organs,                       172
      20. Anatomy of the Lymphatic Vessels,                        181
      20. Physiology of the Lymphatic Vessels,                     183
      20. Hygiene of the Lymphatic Vessels,                        188
      21. Anatomy of the Secretory Organs.                         192
      21. Physiology of the Secretory Organs,                      193
      21. Hygiene of the Secretory Organs,                         197
      22. Nutrition,                                               200
      22. Hygiene of Nutrition,                                    205
      23. Anatomy of the Respiratory Organs,                       209
      24. Physiology of the Respiratory Organs,                    217
      25. Hygiene of the Respiratory Organs,                       228
      26. Hygiene of the Respiratory Organs, continued,            239
      27. Animal Heat,                                             252
      28. Hygiene of Animal Heat,                                  261
      29. Anatomy of the Vocal Organs,                             268
      29. Physiology of the Vocal Organs,                          272
      30. Hygiene of the Vocal Organs,                             274
      31. Anatomy of the Skin,                                     282
      32. Physiology of the Skin,                                  293
      33. Hygiene of the Skin,                                     301
      34. Hygiene of the Skin, continued,                          311
      35. Appendages of the Skin,                                  322
      36. Anatomy of the Nervous System,                           327
      37. Anatomy of the Nervous System, continued,                340
      38. Physiology of the Nervous System,                        346
      39. Hygiene of the Nervous System,                           358
      40. Hygiene of the Nervous System, continued,                368
      41. The Sense of Touch,                                      378
      42. Anatomy of the Organs of Taste,                          384
      42. Physiology of the Organs of Taste,                       386
      43. Anatomy of the Organs of Smell,                          389
      43. Physiology of the Organs of Smell,                       391
      44. Anatomy of the Organs of Vision,                         394
      45. Physiology of the Organs of Vision,                      404
      45. Hygiene of the Organs of Vision,                         410
      46. Anatomy of the Organs of Hearing,                        414
      47. Physiology of the Organs of Hearing,                     420
      47. Hygiene of the Organs of Hearing,                        422
      48. Means of preserving the Health,                          425
      49. Directions for Nurses,                                   432
          -   -   -   -   -
          APPENDIX,                                                439
          GLOSSARY,                                                451
          INDEX,                                                   463




ANATOMY, &c.

CHAPTER I.

GENERAL REMARKS.


1. ANATOMY is the science which treats of the structure and relations
of the different parts of animals and plants.

2. It is divided into _Vegetable_ and _Animal_ anatomy. The latter of
these divisions is subdivided into _Human_ anatomy, which considers,
exclusively, human beings; and _Comparative_ anatomy, which treats of
the mechanism of the lower orders of animals.

3. PHYSIOLOGY treats of the functions, or uses of the organs of
animals and plants. Another definition is, "the science of life."

4. This is also divided into _Vegetable_ and _Animal_ physiology, as
it treats of the vegetable or animal kingdom; and into _Human_ and
_Comparative_ physiology, as it describes the vital functions of man
or the inferior animals.

5. HYGIENE is the art or science of maintaining health, or a knowledge
of those laws by which health may be preserved.

6. The kingdom of nature is divided into _organic_ and _inorganic_
bodies. Organic bodies possess organs, on whose action depend their
growth and perfection. This division includes animals and plants.
Inorganic bodies are devoid of organs, or instruments of life. In this
division are classed the earths, metals, and other minerals.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

1. What is anatomy? 2. How is it divided? How is the latter division
subdivided? 3. What is physiology? Give another definition. 4. How is
physiology divided? Give a subdivision. 5. What is hygiene? 6. Define
organic bodies.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

7. In general, organic matter differs so materially from inorganic,
that the one can readily be distinguished from the other. In the
organic world, every individual of necessity springs from some
_parent, or immediate producing agent_; for while inorganic substances
are formed by chemical laws alone, we see no case of an animal or
plant coming into existence by accident or chance, or chemical
operations.

8. Animals and plants _are supported by means of nourishment_, and die
without it. They also increase in size _by the addition of new
particles of matter to all parts of their substances_; while rocks and
minerals grow only by additions to their surfaces.

9. "Organized bodies always present a combination of both solids and
fluids;--of solids, differing in character and properties, arranged
into organs, and these endowed with functional powers, and so
associated as to form of the whole a single system;--and of fluids,
contained in these organs, and holding such relation to the solids
that the existence, nature, and properties of both mutually and
necessarily depend on each other."

10. Another characteristic is, that organic substances have a _certain
order of parts_. For example, plants possess organs to gain
nourishment from the soil and atmosphere, and the power to give
strength and increase to all their parts. And animals need not only a
digesting and circulating apparatus, but organs for breathing, a
nervous system, &c.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

6. Define inorganic bodies. 7. What is said of the difference, in
general, between organic and inorganic bodies? 8. What of the growth
of organic and inorganic bodies? 9. What do organized bodies always
present? 10. Give another characteristic of organized substances.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

11. _Individuality_ is an important characteristic. For instance, a
large rock may be broken into a number of smaller pieces, and yet
every fragment will be rock; but if an organic substance be separated
into two or more divisions, neither of them can be considered an
individual. Closely associated with this is the power of _life_, or
_vitality_, which is the most distinguishing characteristic of organic
structure; since we find nothing similar to this in the inorganic
creation.

12. _The distinction between plants and animals_ is also of much
importance. _Animals grow proportionally in all directions_, while
plants grow upwards and downwards from a collet only. The _food_ of
animals is _organic_, while that of plants is _inorganic_; the latter
feeding entirely upon the elements of the soil and atmosphere, while
the former subsist upon the products of the animal and vegetable
kingdoms. The size of the vegetable is in most cases limited only by
the duration of existence, as a tree continues to put forth new
branches during each period of its life, while the animal, at a
certain time of life, attains the average size of its species.

13. One of the most important distinctions between animals and plants,
is _the different effects of respiration_. Animals consume the oxygen
of the atmosphere, and give off carbonic acid; while plants take up
the carbonic acid, and restore to animals the oxygen, thus affording
an admirable example of the principle of compensation in nature.

14. But the decisive distinctions between animals and plants are
_sensation_ and _voluntary motion_, the power of acquiring a knowledge
of external objects through the senses, and the ability to move from
place to place at will. These are the characteristics which, in their
fullest development in man, show intellect and reasoning powers, and
thereby in a greater degree exhibit to us the wisdom and goodness of
the Creator.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

11. What is said of the individuality of organized and inorganized
bodies? What is closely associated with this? 12. Give a distinction
between animals and plants as regards growth. The food of animals and
plants. What is said in respect to size? 13. What important
distinction in the effects of respiration of animals and plants? 14.
What are the decisive distinctions between animals and plants?

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

15. DISEASE, which consists in an unnatural condition of the bodily
organs, is in most cases under the control of fixed laws, which we are
capable of understanding and obeying. Nor do diseases come by chance;
they are penalties for violating physical laws. If we carelessly cut
or bruise our flesh, pain and soreness follow, to induce us to be more
careful in the future; or, if we take improper food into the stomach,
we are warned, perhaps immediately by a friendly pain, that we have
violated an organic law.

16. Sometimes, however, the penalty does not directly follow the sin,
and it requires great physiological knowledge to be able to trace the
effect to its true cause. If we possess good constitutions, we are
responsible for most of our sickness; and bad constitutions, or
hereditary diseases, are but the results of the same great law,--the
iniquities of the parents being visited on the children. In this view
of the subject, how important is the study of physiology and hygiene!
For how can we expect to obey laws which we do not understand?

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

15. What is said of disease? 16. Why is the study of physiology and
hygiene important?

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=




CHAPTER II.

STRUCTURE OF MAN,


17. In the structure of the human body, there is a union of fluids and
solids. These are essentially the same, for the one is readily changed
into the other. There is no fluid that does not contain solid matter
in solution, and no solid matter that is destitute of fluid.

18. In different individuals, and at different periods of life the
proportion of fluids and solids varies. In youth, the fluids are more
abundant than in advanced life. For this reason, the limbs in
childhood are soft and round, while in old age they assume a hard and
wrinkled appearance.

19. The fluids not only contain the materials from which every part of
the body is formed, but they are the medium for conveying the waste,
decayed particles of matter from the system. They have various names,
according to their nature and function; as, the blood, and the bile.

20. The solids are formed from the fluids, and consequently they are
reduced, by chemical analysis, to the same ultimate elements. The
particles of matter in solids are arranged variously; sometimes in
_fi'bres_, (threads,) sometimes in _lam'i-nae_, (plates,) sometimes
homogeneously, as in basement membranes. (Appendix A.)

21. The parts of the body are arranged into _Fi'bres_, _Fas-cic'u-li_,
_Tis'sues_, _Or'gans_, _Ap-pa-ra'tus-es_, and _Sys'tems_.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

17. What substances enter into the structure of the human body? Are
they essentially the same? 18. What is said of these substances at
different periods of life? 19. What offices do the fluids of the
system perform? 20. What is said of the solids? How are the particles
of matter arranged in solids? 21. Give an arrangement of the parts of
the body.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

22. A FIBRE is a thread of exceeding fineness. It is either
cylindriform or flattened.

23. A FASCICULUS is the term applied to several fibres united. Its
general characteristics are the same as fibres.

24. A TISSUE is a term applied to several different solids of the
body.

25. An ORGAN is composed of tissues so arranged as to form an
instrument designed for action. The action of an organ is called its
_function_, or use.

_Example._ The liver is an organ, and the secretion of the bile from
the blood is one of its functions.[1]

   [1] Where examples and observations are given or experiments
       suggested, let the pupil mention other analogous ones.

26. An APPARATUS is an assemblage of organs designed to produce
certain results.

_Example._ The digestive apparatus consists of the teeth, stomach,
liver, &c., all of which aid in the digestion of food.

[Illustration: Fig. 2. Represents a portion of broken muscular fibre of
animal life, (magnified about seven hundred diameters.)]

27. The term SYSTEM is applied to an assemblage of organs arranged
according to some plan, or method; as the nervous system, the
respiratory system.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

22. Define a fibre. 23. Define a fasciculus. 24. Define a tissue. 25.
Define an organ. What is the action of an organ called? Give examples.
_Mention other examples._ 26. What is an apparatus? Give an example
27. How is the term system applied?

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

28. A TISSUE is a simple form of organized animal substance. It is
flexible, and formed of fibres interwoven in various ways; as, the
cellular tissue.

29. However various all organs may appear in their structure and
composition, it is now supposed that they can be reduced to a few
tissues; as, the _Cel'lu-lar_, _Os'se-ous_, _Mus'cu-lar_, _Mu'cous_,
_Ner'vous_, &c. (Appendix B.)

30. The CELLULAR TISSUE,[2] now called the _areolar tissue_, consists
of small fibres, or bands, interlaced in every direction, so as to
form a net-work, with numerous interstices that communicate freely
with each other. These interstices are filled, during life, with a
fluid resembling the serum of blood. The use of the areolar tissue is
to connect together organs and parts of organs, and to envelop, fix,
and protect the vessels and nerves of organs.

   [2] The _Cellular_, _Serous_, _Dermoid_, _Fibrous_, and _Mucous
       tissues_ are very generally called _membranes_.

[Illustration: Fig. 3. Arrangement of fibres of the cellular tissue
magnified one hundred and thirty diameters.]

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

28. What is a tissue? 29. What is said respecting the structure and
composition of the various organs? Name the primary membranes. 30.
Describe the cellular tissue. How are the cells imbedded in certain
tissues? Give observation 1st, relative to the cellular tissue.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

_Observations._ 1st. When this fluid becomes too great in quantity, in
consequence of disease, the patient labors under general dropsy. The
swelling of the feet when standing, and their return to a proper shape
during the night, so often noticed in feeble persons, furnish a
striking proof both of the existence and peculiarity of this tissue,
which allows the fluid to flow from cell to cell, until it settles in
the lower extremities.

2d. The free communication between the cells is still more remarkable
in regard to air. Sometimes, when an accidental opening has been made
from the air-cells of the lungs into the contiguous cellular tissue,
the air in respiration has penetrated every part until the whole body
is so inflated as to occasion suffocation. Butchers often avail
themselves of the knowledge of this fact, and inflate their meat to
give it a fat appearance.

31. "Although this tissue enters into the composition of all organs,
it never loses its own structure, nor participates in the functions of
the organ of which it forms a part. Though present in the nerves, it
does not share in their sensibility; and though it accompanies every
muscle and every muscular fibre, it does not partake of the
irritability which belongs to these organs."

32. Several varieties of tissue are formed from the cellular; as, the
_Se'rous_, _Der'moid_, _Fi'brous_, and several others.

33. The SEROUS TISSUE lines all the closed, or sac-like cavities of
the body; as, the chest, joints, and abdomen. It not only lines these
cavities, but is reflected, and invests the organs contained in them.
The liver and the lungs are thus invested. This membrane is of a
whitish color, and smooth on its free surfaces. These surfaces are
kept moist, and prevented from adhering by a _se'rous_ fluid, which is
separated from the blood. The use of this membrane is to separate
organs and also to facilitate the movement of one part upon another,
by means of its moist, polished surfaces.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

Give observation 2d. 31. What is said of the identity of this tissue?
32. Name the varieties of tissue formed from the cellular. 33. Where
is the serous tissue found? What two offices does it perform? Give its
structure. What is the use of this membrane?

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

34. The DERMOID TISSUE covers the outside of the body. It is called
the _cu'tis_, (skin.) This membrane is continuous with the mucous at
the various orifices of the body, and in these situations, from the
similarity of their structure, it is difficult to distinguish between
them.

_Observations._ 1st. In consequence of the continuity and similarity
of structure, there is close sympathy between the mucous and dermoid
membranes. If the functions of the skin are disturbed, as by a chill,
it will frequently cause a catarrh, (cold,) or diarrhoea. Again, in
consequence of this intimate sympathy, these complaints can be
relieved by exciting a free action in the vessels of the skin.

2d. It is no uncommon occurrence that diseased or irritated conditions
of the mucous membrane of the stomach or intestines produce diseases
or irritations of the skin, as is seen in the rashes attendant on
dyspepsia, and eating certain species of fish. These eruptions of the
skin can be relieved by removing the diseased condition of the
stomach.

35. The FIBROUS TISSUE consists of longitudinal, parallel fibres,
which are closely united. These fibres, in some situations, form a
thin, dense, strong membrane, like that which lines the internal
surface of the skull, or invests the external surface of the bones.
In other instances, they form strong, inelastic bands, called
_lig'a-ments_, which bind one bone to another. This tissue also
