_Water-Lily_ had been pointed out to me from a distance, and we might go
and see her to-morrow morning if we liked. With the prospect of living
for at least a month on our slender stocking, the idea of immediate
employment was very welcome, to say nothing of the attraction of further
adventures. Alister began to cheer up, and Dennis to sober down. We
wrote home, and posted our letters, after which we secured a decent
sleeping-room and a good meal of broiled salmon, saffron-coloured cakes,
and hot coffee, for a very reasonable sum; but, moderate as it was, it
confirmed us in the conviction that we could not afford to eat the bread
of idleness.

Next day we were early at the wharf. The _Water-Lily_ was by no means so
white as she was named, and the smell of the salt fish was abominable.
But we knew we could not pick and choose when we wanted employment, and
wanted to be together; and to this latter point we had nailed our
colours. With Alister and me the mate came to terms at once, but for a
time he made difficulties about Dennis. We "stowaways" had had so much
dirty work to do in all weathers for the past fortnight, that we looked
sailor-like enough, I dare say; and as it had honestly been our
endeavour to learn all we could, and shirk nothing, and as the captain's
paper spoke well of us, I think the mate got a very good bargain--for we
were green enough to take lower wages than the customary rate on the
strength of a long string of special reasons which he made us swallow.
This probably helped towards his giving in about Dennis. The matter
about Dennis was that he looked too much of the fine gentleman still,
though his homespun suit had seen salt water, and was far from innocent
of tar and grease, for he had turned his hand to plenty of rough work
during the voyage, partly out of good-nature, and partly to learn all he
could get the sailors to teach him. However, his coaxing tongue clinched
the bargain at last; indeed the mate seemed a good deal struck by the
idea that he would find it "mighty convenient" to have a man on board
who was a good scholar and could help him to keep the log. So we signed
articles, and went to our duty.

The _Water-Lily_ was loaded, and we sailed in her, and we got to New
York. But of all the ill-found tubs that ever put to sea, I should think
she might have taken the first prize. We were overhauling her rotten
rigging, taking off, putting on, and mending chafing gear every bit of
our time, Sunday included. The carpenter used horrible language, but for
his vexation I could have forgiven him if he had expressed it more
decently, for he never had a moment's rest by day; and though a ship's
carpenter is exempt from watches and allowed to sleep at night as a
rule, I doubt if he had two nights' rest between Halifax and New York.

As Dennis put it, there was "any amount of chicanery about the whole
affair." Some of our pay was "set against" supplying "duds" for Dennis
to do dirty work in; Alister was employed as sail-maker, and then, like
the carpenter, was cheated of his rest. As to food, we were nearly
starved, and should have fared even worse than we did, but that the
black cook was friendly towards us.

"Dis _Water-Lily_ ob ours a leetle ober-blown, Dennis, I'm tinking,"
said Alfonso, showing all his white teeth. "Hope she not fall to pieces
dis voyage."

"Hope not, Alfonso. She hasn't lost her scent, anyhow!" At which
allusion to our unsavoury cargo Alfonso yelled with laughter.

For our favour with the cook (and it means hot coffee, dry socks, and
other little comforts being in favour with the cook) we had chiefly to
thank Dennis. Our coal-black comrade loved jokes much, but his own
dignity just a little more; and the instinctive courtesy which was as
natural to Dennis as the flow of his fun, made him particularly
acceptable to Alfonso.

And for the rest, we came to feel that if we could keep the _Water-Lily_
afloat to the end of her voyage, most other considerations were minor
ones.




CHAPTER X.

     "May it please GOD not to make our friends so happy as to forget
     us!"--_Old Proverb_.


The _Water-Lily_ was re-christened by Dennis, with many flourishes of
speech and a deck tub of salt water long before we reached our journey's
end. The _Slut_, as we now privately called her, defied all our efforts
to make her look creditable for New York harbour, but we were glad
enough to get her there at all.

We made the lights of Barnegat at about six o'clock one fine morning,
took a pilot on board at Sandy Hook, and the _Slut_ being by this time
as ship-shape as we could get her, we cleaned ourselves to somewhat
better purpose, put on our shore-togs, and were at leisure to enjoy one
of the most charming sensations in the world, that of making one's way
into a beautiful harbour on a beautiful morning. The fresh breeze that
favoured us, the sunshine that--helped by the enchantment of
distance--made warehouses look like public buildings, and stone houses
like marble palaces, a softening hue of morning mist still clinging about
the heights of Brooklyn and over the distant stretch of the Hudson
river islands, the sparkling waves and dancing craft in the bay, and all
the dear familiar maze of spars and rigging in the docks; it is
wonderful how such sights, and the knowledge that you are close to the
haven where you would be, charm away the sore memories of the voyage
past, and incline you to feel that it hasn't been such a bad cruise
after all.

"Poor ole _Water-Lily_!" sighed Alfonso, under the influence of this
feeling, "you and me's called her a heap o' bad names, Dennis; I 'spects
we has to have our grumbles, Dennis. Dat's 'bout whar 'tis."

"She's weathered the storm and got into port, anyhow," said Dennis, "and
I suppose you think the best can do no more. Eh?"

"Jes' so, Dennis."

Alfonso was not far wrong on the subject of grumbling. It is one of a
sailor's few luxuries and privileges, and acts as safety-valve for heats
of just and unjust indignation, which might otherwise come to dangerous
explosion. We three had really learned no mean amount of rough-and-ready
seamanship by this time, and we had certainly practised the art of
grumbling as well. That "of all the dirty ill-found tubs," the _Slut_
was the worst we had ever known, our limited experience had made us safe
in declaring, and we had also been voluble about the undue length of
time during which we had been "humbugging about" between Halifax and New
York. But these by-gones we now willingly allowed to be by-gones,
especially as we had had duff-pudding the day before, though it was not
Sunday--(Oh, Crayshaw's! that I should have lived to find duff-pudding a
treat--but it _is_ a pleasant change from salt meat),--and as the
captain had promised some repairs to the ship before we returned to
Halifax.

We were not long in discovering that the promise was a safe one, for he
did not mean to return to Halifax at all. Gradually it leaked out, that
when the salt fish was disposed of we were not going to take in ballast
and go back, as we had thought, but to stow away a "general cargo" of
cheap manufactured articles (chiefly hardware, toys, trumpery pictures,
and looking-glasses) and proceed with them on a trading voyage "down
south."--"West Indies," said the carpenter. "Bermuda for certain," was
another opinion; but Alfonso smiled and said, "Demerara."

"Cap'n berry poor sailor, but berry good trader," he informed us in
confidence. "Sell 'm stinking fish and buy gimcracks cheap; sell
gimcracks dear to Portugee store in Georgetown, take in sugar--berry
good sugar, Demerara sugar--and come back to New York."

Alfonso had made the voyage before on these principles, and was all the
more willing to believe that this was to be the programme, because he
was--at such uncertain intervals as his fate ordained--courting a young
lady of colour in Georgetown, Demerara. I don't think Dennis O'Moore
could help sympathizing with people, and as a result of this
good-natured weakness, he heard a great deal about that young lady of
colour, and her genteel clothes, and how she played the piano, and
belonged to the Baptist congregation.

"I've a cousin myself in Demerara, Alfonso," said Dennis.

"Hope she'm kind to you, Dennis. Hope you can trust her, 'specially if
the members walks home with her after meeting." And Alfonso sighed.

But jokes were far too precious on board the _Slut_ for Dennis to spoil
this one by explaining that his cousin was a middle-aged gentleman in
partnership with the owner of a sugar estate.

As we had sailed on the understanding that the _Water-Lily_ was bound to
New York and back again to Halifax, of course we made a fuss and
protested at the change. But we had not really much practical choice in
the matter, whatever our strict rights were, and on the whole we found
it would be to our advantage to go through with it, especially as we did
secure a better understanding about our wages, and the captain promised
us more rest on Sundays. On one point we still felt anxious--our home
letters; so Dennis wrote to the post-master at Halifax, and arranged for
them to be forwarded to us at the post-office, Georgetown, Demerara. For
Alfonso was right, we were bound for British Guiana, it being however
understood that we three were not under obligation to make the return
voyage in the _Water-Lily_.

An odd incident occurred during our brief stay in New York. It was after
the interview in which we came to terms with the captain, and he had
given us leave for three hours ashore. You can't see very much of a city
when you have no money to spend in it; but we had walked about till we
were very hungry, and yet more thirsty, for it was hot, when we all
three caught sight of a small shop (or store, as Americans would call
it), and we all spoke at once.

"Cooling drinks!" exclaimed Dennis.

"There's cakes yonder," said Alister.

"Michael Macartney," muttered I, for that was the name over the door.

We went in as a customer came out, followed by Michael Macartney's
parting words in a rich brogue that might have been old Biddy's own. I
took a good look at him, which he returned with a civil comment on the
heat, and an inquiry as to what I would take, which Dennis, in the
thirstiness of his throat, answered for me, leaving me a few moments
more of observation. I made a mental calculation, and decided that the
man's age would fit Micky, and in the indescribableness of the colour of
his clothes and his complexion he was undoubtedly like Biddy, but if
they had been born in different worlds the expression of his eyes could
not have been more different. I had the clearest remembrance of hers.
One does not so often look into the eyes of a stranger and see genuine
feeling that one should forget it. For the rest of him, I was glad that
Biddy had allowed that there was no similarity "betwixt us." He had a
low forehead, a broad nose, a very wide mouth, full of very large teeth,
and the humorous twinkle in his eye did not atone for the complete
absence of that steady light of honest tenderness which shone from
Biddy's as freely and fearlessly as the sun shines. He served Dennis and
Alister and turned to me.

"Have you a mother in Liverpool?" I asked, before he had time to ask me
which "pop" I wanted.

As I have said, his mouth was big, but I was almost aghast at the size
to which it opened, before he was able to say, "Murther and ages! Was ye
there lately? Did ye know her?"

"Yes; I know her."

"And why would ye be standing there with the cold pop, when there's
something better within? Come in, me boy. So you're acquainted with my
mother? And how was she?"

"No, thank you, I don't drink spirits. Yes; your mother was well when I
saw her."

"GOD be praised! It's a mighty long time since I seen the ould
craythur."

"Fifteen years," said I.

I looked at Mr. Macartney as I said it, but he had evasive eyes, and
they wandered to the doorway. No customers appeared, however, and he
looked back to Dennis and Alister, but they had both folded their arms,
and were watching us in silence.

"Murther and ages!" he repeated, "it doesn't feel the half of it."

"I fancy it seems longer, if anything, to her. But she has been on the
look-out for you every day, you see. You've a good business, Mr.
Macartney, so I dare say you're a ready reckoner. Fifteen times three
hundred and sixty-five? Five thousand four hundred and seventy-five,
isn't it?"

"It's a fine scholar for a sailor-boy that ye are!" said Micky; and
there was a touch of mischief in his eye and voice which showed that he
was losing his temper. I suppose Dennis heard it, too, for he took one
bound to my side in a way that almost made me laugh to feel how ready he
was for a row. But I knew that, after all, I had no right over the man's
private affairs, warm as was my zeal for old Biddy.

"And you think I might mind my business and leave you to yours, Mr.
Macartney?" I said. "But you see your mother was very kind to me, very
kind indeed; and when I left Liverpool I promised her if ever I came
across you, you should hear of her, and she should hear of you."

"And why not?" he answered in mollified tones. "It's mighty good-natured
in ye too. But come in, all the three of ye, and have somethin' to eat
and drink for the sake of the old country."

We followed him into a back parlour, where there were several wooden
rocking-chairs, and a strong smell of stale tobacco. Here he busied
himself in producing cold meat, a squash pie, and a bottle of whisky,
and was as voluble as civil about every subject except the one I wished
to talk of. But the memory of his mother was strong upon me, and I had
no intention of letting it slide.

"I'm so glad to have found you," I said. "I am sure you can't have
known what a trouble it has been to your mother never to have heard from
you all these years."

"Arrah! And why should she bother herself over me?" he answered
impatiently. "Sure I never was anything _but_ a trouble to her, worse
luck!" And before I could speak again, he went on. "But make your mind
aisy, I'll be writing to her. Many's the time that I've all but indited
the letter, but I'll do it now. Upon me conscience, ye may dipind upon
me."

Could I depend upon his shambling conscience? Every instinct of an
honest man about me answered, No. As he had done for fifteen years past,
so he would do for fifteen years to come. As long as he was comfortable
himself, his mother would never get a line out of him. Perhaps his voice
recalled hers, but I almost fancied I could hear her as I sat there.--"I
ax your pardon, darlin'. It was my own Micky that was on my mind."

"Look here, Mr. Macartney," said I; "I want you to do me a favour. I owe
your mother a good turn, and it'll ease my mind to repay it. Sit down
whilst we're enjoying your hospitality, and just write her a line, and
let me have the pleasure of finding a stamp and putting it in the post
with my own hands."

We argued the point for some time, but Micky found the writing materials
at last, and sat down to write. As he proceeded he seemed to become
more reconciled to the task; though he was obviously no great scribe,
and followed the sentiments he was expressing with curious contortions
of his countenance which it was most funny to behold. By and by I was
glad to see a tear or two drop on to the paper, though I was sorry that
he wiped them up with his third finger, and wrote over the place before
it had time to dry.

"Murther and ages! But it's mighty pleased that she'll be," said Mr.
Macartney when he had finished. He looked mighty pleased with himself,
and he held the letter out to me.

"Do you mean me to read it?" I asked.

"I did. And ye can let your friends hear too."

I read it aloud, wondering as I read. If pen and ink spoke the truth,
Biddy's own Micky's heart was broke entirely with the parting from his
mother. Sorra a bit of taste had there been in his food, or a drop of
natural rest had he enjoyed for the last fifteen years. "Five thousand
four hundred and seventy-five days--no less." (When I reached this
skilful adoption of my calculations, I involuntarily looked up. There
sat Mr. Macartney in his rocking-chair. He was just lighting a short
pipe, but he paused in the operation to acknowledge what he evidently
believed to be my look of admiration with a nod and a wink. I read on.)
Times were cruel bad out there for a poor boy that lived by his
industry, but thank GOD he'd been spared the worst pangs of starvation
(I glanced round the pop-shop, but, as Micky himself would have said, No
matther!); and didn't it lighten his heart to hear of his dear mother
