
As Zella started to go, Inga's eyes suddenly fell upon her shoes and
instantly he recognized them as his own. For only in Pingaree were shoes
shaped in this manner: high at the heel and pointed at the toes.

"Stop!" he cried in an excited voice, and the girl obeyed, wonderingly.
"Tell me," he continued, more gently, "where did you get those shoes?"

"My father brought them to me from Regos," she answered.

"From Regos!"

"Yes. Are they not pretty?" asked Zella, looking down at her feet to
admire them. "One of them my father found by the palace wall, and the
other on an ash-heap. So he brought them to me and they fit me
perfectly."

By this time Inga was trembling with eager joy, which of course the girl
could not understand.

"What is your name, little maid?" he asked.

"I am called Zella, and my father is Nikobob, the charcoal-burner."

"Zella is a pretty name. I am Inga, Prince of Pingaree," said he, "and
the shoes you are now wearing, Zella, belong to me. They were not cast
away, as your father supposed, but were lost. Will you let me have them
again?"

Zella's eyes filled with tears.

"Must I give up my pretty shoes, then?" she asked. "They are the only
ones I have ever owned."

Inga was sorry for the poor child, but he knew how important it was that
he regain possession of the Magic Pearls. So he said, pleadingly:

"Please let me have them, Zella. See! I will exchange for them the shoes
I now have on, which are newer and prettier than the others."

The girl hesitated. She wanted to please the boy Prince, yet she hated
to exchange the shoes which her father had brought her as a present.

"If you will give me the shoes," continued the boy, anxiously, "I will
promise to make you and your father and mother rich and prosperous.
Indeed, I will promise to grant any favors you may ask of me," and he
sat down upon the floor and drew off the shoes he was wearing and held
them toward the girl.

[Illustration]

"I'll see if they will fit me," said Zella, taking off her left
shoe--the one that contained the Pink Pearl--and beginning to put on one
of Inga's.

Just then Queen Cor, angry at being made to wait for her whip with the
seven lashes, rushed into the room to find Inga. Seeing the boy sitting
upon the floor beside Zella, the woman sprang toward him to beat him
with her clenched fists; but Inga had now slipped on the shoe and the
Queen's blows could not reach his body.

Then Cor espied the whip lying beside Inga and snatching it up she tried
to lash him with it--all to no avail.

While Zella sat horrified by this scene, the Prince, who realized he had
no time to waste, reached out and pulled the right shoe from the girl's
foot, quickly placing it upon his own. Then he stood up and, facing the
furious but astonished Queen, said to her in a quiet voice:

"Madam, please give me that whip."

"I won't!" answered Cor. "I'm going to lash those Pingaree women with
it."

The boy seized hold of the whip and with irresistible strength drew it
from the Queen's hand. But she drew from her bosom a sharp dagger and
with the swiftness of lightning aimed a blow at Inga's heart. He merely
stood still and smiled, for the blade rebounded and fell clattering to
the floor.

Then, at last, Queen Cor understood the magic power that had terrified
her husband but which she had ridiculed in her ignorance, not believing
in it. She did not know that Inga's power had been lost, and found
again, but she realized the boy was no common foe and that unless she
could still manage to outwit him her reign in the Island of Coregos was
ended. To gain time, she went back to the red-domed chamber and seated
herself in her throne, before which were grouped the weeping slaves from
Pingaree.

Inga had taken Zella's hand and assisted her to put on the shoes he had
given her in exchange for his own. She found them quite comfortable and
did not know she had lost anything by the transfer.

"Come with me," then said the boy Prince, and led her into the presence
of Queen Cor, who was giving Rinkitink a scolding. To the overseer Inga
said:

"Give me the keys which unlock these chains, that I may set these poor
women at liberty."

"Don't you do it!" screamed Queen Cor.

"If you interfere, madam," said the boy, "I will put you into a
dungeon."

By this Rinkitink knew that Inga had recovered his Magic Pearls and the
little fat King was so overjoyed that he danced and capered all around
the room. But the Queen was alarmed at the threat and the slave driver,
fearing the conqueror of Regos, tremblingly gave up the keys.

Inga quickly removed all the shackles from the women of his country and
comforted them, telling them they should work no more but would soon be
restored to their homes in Pingaree. Then he commanded the slave driver
to go and get all the children who had been made slaves, and to bring
them to their mothers. The man obeyed and left at once to perform his
errand, while Queen Cor, growing more and more uneasy, suddenly sprang
from her throne and before Inga could stop her had rushed through the
room and out into the courtyard of the palace, meaning to make her
escape. Rinkitink followed her, running as fast as he could go.

It was at this moment that Bilbil, in his mad dash from Regos, turned in
at the gates of the courtyard, and as he was coming one way and Queen
Cor was going the other they bumped into each other with great force.
The woman sailed through the air, over Bilbil's head, and landed on the
ground outside the gates, where her crown rolled into a ditch and she
picked herself up, half dazed, and continued her flight. Bilbil was also
somewhat dazed by the unexpected encounter, but he continued his rush
rather blindly and so struck poor Rinkitink, who was chasing after Queen
Cor. They rolled over one another a few times and then Rinkitink sat up
and Bilbil sat up and they looked at each other in amazement.

"Bilbil," said the King, "I'm astonished at you!"

"Your Majesty," said Bilbil, "I expected kinder treatment at your
hands."

"You interrupted me," said Rinkitink.

"There was plenty of room without your taking my path," declared the
goat.

And then Inga came running out and said: "Where is the Queen?"

"Gone," replied Rinkitink, "but she cannot go far, as this is an island.
However, I have found Bilbil, and our party is again reunited. You have
recovered your magic powers, and again we are masters of the situation.
So let us be thankful."

Saying this, the good little King got upon his feet and limped back into
the throne room to help comfort the women.

Presently the children of Pingaree, who had been gathered together by
the overseer, were brought in and restored to their mothers, and there
was great rejoicing among them, you may be sure.

"But where is Queen Garee, my dear mother?" questioned Inga; but the
women did not know and it was some time before the overseer remembered
that one of the slaves from Pingaree had been placed in the royal dairy.
Perhaps this was the woman the boy was seeking.

Inga at once commanded him to lead the way to the butter house, but when
they arrived there Queen Garee was nowhere in the place, although the
boy found a silk scarf which he recognized as one that his mother used
to wear. Then they began a search throughout the island of Coregos, but
could not find Inga's mother anywhere.

When they returned to the palace of Queen Cor, Rinkitink discovered that
the bridge of boats had again been removed, separating them from Regos,
and from this they suspected that Queen Cor had fled to her husband's
island and had taken Queen Garee with her. Inga was much perplexed what
to do and returned with his friends to the palace to talk the matter
over.

Zella was now crying because she had not sold her honey and was unable
to return to her parents on the island of Regos, but the boy Prince
comforted her and promised she should be protected until she could be
restored to her home. Rinkitink found Queen Cor's purse, which she had
had no time to take with her, and gave Zella several gold pieces for the
honey. Then Inga ordered the palace servants to prepare a feast for all
the women and children of Pingaree and to prepare for them beds in the
great palace, which was large enough to accommodate them all.

Then the boy and the goat and Rinkitink and Zella went into a private
room to consider what should be done next.

[Illustration]




The Escape

[Illustration]

CHAPTER 14


"Our fault," said Rinkitink, "is that we conquer only one of these twin
islands at a time. When we conquered Regos, our foes all came to
Coregos, and now that we have conquered Coregos, the Queen has fled to
Regos. And each time they removed the bridge of boats, so that we could
not follow them."

"What has become of our own boat, in which we came from Pingaree?" asked
Bilbil.

"We left it on the shore of Regos," replied the Prince, "but I wonder
if we could not get it again."

"Why don't you ask the White Pearl?" suggested Rinkitink.

"That is a good idea," returned the boy, and at once he drew the White
Pearl from its silken bag and held it to his ear. Then he asked: "How
may I regain our boat?"

The Voice of the Pearl replied: "Go to the south end of the Island of
Coregos, and clap your hands three times and the boat will come to you."

"Very good!" cried Inga, and then he turned to his companions and said:
"We shall be able to get our boat whenever we please; but what then
shall we do?"

"Take me home in it!" pleaded Zella.

"Come with me to my City of Gilgad," said the King, "where you will be
very welcome to remain forever."

"No," answered Inga, "I must rescue my father and mother, as well as my
people. Already I have the women and children of Pingaree, but the men
are with my father in the mines of Regos, and my dear mother has been
taken away by Queen Cor. Not until all are rescued will I consent to
leave these islands."

"Quite right!" exclaimed Bilbil.

"On second thought," said Rinkitink, "I agree with you. If you are
careful to sleep in your shoes, and never take them off again, I believe
you will be able to perform the task you have undertaken."

They counseled together for a long time as to their mode of action and
it was finally considered best to make the attempt to liberate King
Kitticut first of all, and with him the men from Pingaree. This would
give them an army to assist them and afterward they could march to Regos
and compel Queen Cor to give up the Queen of Pingaree. Zella told them
that they could go in their boat along the shore of Regos to a point
opposite the mines, thus avoiding any conflict with the warriors of King
Gos.

This being considered the best course to pursue, they resolved to start
on the following morning, as night was even now approaching. The
servants being all busy in caring for the women and children, Zella
undertook to get a dinner for Inga and Rinkitink and herself and soon
prepared a fine meal in the palace kitchen, for she was a good little
cook and had often helped her mother. The dinner was served in a small
room overlooking the gardens and Rinkitink thought the best part of it
was the sweet honey, which he spread upon the biscuits that Zella had
made. As for Bilbil, he wandered through the palace grounds and found
some grass that made him a good dinner.

[Illustration]

During the evening Inga talked with the women and cheered them,
promising soon to reunite them with their husbands who were working in
the mines and to send them back to their own island of Pingaree.

Next morning the boy rose bright and early and found that Zella had
already prepared a nice breakfast. And after the meal they went to the
most southern point of the island, which was not very far away,
Rinkitink riding upon Bilbil's back and Inga and Zella following behind
them, hand in hand.

When they reached the water's edge the boy advanced and clapped his
hands together three times, as the White Pearl had told him to do. And
in a few moments they saw in the distance the black boat with the silver
lining, coming swiftly toward them from the sea. Presently it grounded
on the beach and they all got into it.

Zella was delighted with the boat, which was the most beautiful she had
ever seen, and the marvel of its coming to them through the water
without anyone to row it, made her a little afraid of the fairy craft.
But Inga picked up the oars and began to row and at once the boat shot
swiftly in the direction of Regos. They rounded the point of that island
where the city was built and noticed that the shore was lined with
warriors who had discovered their boat but seemed undecided whether to
pursue it or not. This was probably because they had received no
commands what to do, or perhaps they had learned to fear the magic
powers of these adventurers from Pingaree and were unwilling to attack
them unless their King ordered them to.

The coast on the western side of the Island of Regos was very uneven and
Zella, who knew fairly well the location of the mines from the inland
forest path, was puzzled to decide which mountain they now viewed from
the sea was the one where the entrance to the underground caverns was
located. First she thought it was this peak, and then she guessed it was
that; so considerable time was lost through her uncertainty.

They finally decided to land and explore the country, to see where they
were, so Inga ran the boat into a little rocky cove where they all
disembarked. For an hour they searched for the path without finding any
trace of it and now Zella believed they had gone too far to the north
and must return to another mountain that was nearer to the city.

Once again they entered the boat and followed the winding coast south
until they thought they had reached the right place. By this time,
however, it was growing dark, for the entire day had been spent in the
search for the entrance to the mines, and Zella warned them that it
would be safer to spend the night in the boat than on the land, where
wild beasts were sure to disturb them. None of them realized at this
time how fatal this day of search had been to their plans and perhaps if
Inga had realized what was going on he would have landed and fought all
the wild beasts in the forest rather than quietly remain in the boat
until morning.

However, knowing nothing of the cunning plans of Queen Cor and King Gos,
they anchored their boat in a little bay and cheerfully ate their
