The Project Gutenberg EBook of Millennium, by Everett B. Cole

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Millennium

Author: Everett B. Cole

Release Date: March 8, 2008 [EBook #24779]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MILLENNIUM ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Geetu Melwani and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









       *       *       *       *       *

Transcriber note.

This etext was produced from Astounding Science Fiction May 1955.
Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
copyright on this publication was renewed.

       *       *       *       *       *




MILLENNIUM

BY EVERETT B. COLE


     _There are devices a high-level culture could produce that simply
     don't belong in the hands of incompetents of lower cultural
     evolution. The finest, and most civilized of tools can be made a
     menace ..._


[Illustration]


Illustrated by Freas




Liewen Konar smiled wryly as he put a battered object on the bench.
"Well, here's another piece recovered. Not worth much, I'd say, but here
it is."

Obviously, it had once been a precisely fabricated piece of equipment.
But its identity was almost lost. A hole was torn in the side of the
metal box. Knobs were broken away from their shafts. The engraved
legends were scored and worn to illegibility, and the meter was merely a
black void in the panel. Whatever had been mounted at the top had been
broken away, to leave ragged shards. Inside the gaping hole in the case,
tiny, blackened components hung at odd angles.

Klion Meinora looked at the wreckage and shook his head.

"I know it's supposed to be what's left of a medium range communicator,"
he said, "but I'd never believe it." He poked a finger inside the hole
in the case, pushing a few components aside. Beyond them, a corroded
wheel hung loosely in what had once been precision bearings.

"Where's the power unit?"

Konar shook his head. "No trace. Not much left of the viewsphere,
either."

"Well." Meinora shook his head resignedly. "It's salvage. But we got it
back." He stood back to look at the communicator. "Someone's been
keeping the outside clean, I see."

Konar nodded. "It was a religious relic," he said. "Found it in an
abbey." He reached into the bag he had placed on the floor.

"And here's a mental amplifier-communicator, personnel, heavy duty.
Slightly used and somewhat out of adjustment, but complete and
repairable." He withdrew a golden circlet, held it up for a moment, and
carefully laid it on the bench beside the wrecked communicator. Its
metal was dented, but untarnished.

"Don't want to get rough with it," he explained. "Something might be
loose inside."

He reached again into the bag. "And a body shield, protector type, model
GS/NO-10C. Again, somewhat used, but repairable. Even has its
nomenclature label."

"Good enough." Meinora held a hand out and accepted the heavy belt. He
turned it about in his hands, examining the workmanship. Finally, he
looked closely at the long, narrow case mounted on the leather.

"See they counted this unit fairly well. Must have been using it."

"Yes, sir. It's operative. The Earl wore it all the time. Guess he kept
up his reputation as a fighter that way. Be pretty hard to nick anyone
with a sword if he had one of these running. And almost any clumsy
leatherhead could slash the other guy up if he didn't have to worry
about self-protection."

"I know." Meinora nodded quickly. "Seen it done. Anything more turned
up?"

"One more thing. This hand weapon came from the same abbey I got the
communicator from. I'd say it was pretty hopeless, too." Konar picked a
flame-scarred frame from his bag, then reached in again, to scoop up a
few odd bits of metal.

"It was in pieces when we picked it up," he explained. "They kept it
clean, but they couldn't get the flame pits out and reassembly was a
little beyond them."

"Beyond us too, by now." Meinora looked curiously at the object. "Looks
as though a couple of the boys shot it out."

"Guess they did, sir. Not once, but several times." Konar shrugged.
"Malendes tells me he picked up several like this." He cocked his head
to one side.

"Say, chief, how many of these things were kicking around on this
unlucky planet?"

Meinora grimaced. "As far as we can determine, there were ninety-two
operative sets originally issued. Each of the original native operatives
was equipped with a mentacom and a body shield. Each of the eight
operating teams had a communicator and three hand weapons, and the
headquarters group had a flier, three communicators, a field detector
set, and six hand weapons. Makes quite an equipment list."

"Any tools or maintenance equipment?"

Meinora shook his head. "Just operator manuals. And those will have
deteriorated long ago. An inspection team was supposed to visit once a
cycle for about fifty cycles, then once each five cycles after that.
They would have taken care of maintenance. This operation was set up
quite a while ago, you know. Operatives get a lot more training now--and
we don't use so many of them."

"So, something went wrong." Konar looked at the equipment on the bench.
"How?" he asked. "How could it have happened?"

"Oh, we've got the sequence of events pretty well figured out by now."
Meinora got to his feet. "Of course, it's a virtually impossible
situation--something no one would believe could happen. But it did." He
looked thoughtfully at the ruined communicator.

"You know the history of the original operation on this planet?"

"Yes, sir. I looked it over. Planet was checked out by Exploration. They
found a couple of civilizations in stasis and another that was about to
go that way. Left alone, the natives'd have reverted to a primitive
hunter stage--if they didn't go clear back to the caves. And when they
did come up again, they'd have been savage terrors."

"Right. So a corps of native operatives was set up by Philosophical, to
upset the stasis and hold a core of knowledge till the barbaric period
following the collapse of one of the old empires was over. One
civilization on one continent was chosen, because it was felt that its
impact on the rest of the planet would be adequate to insure progress,
and that any more extensive operation would tend to mold the planetary
culture."

Konar nodded. "The old, standard procedure. It usually worked better
than this, though. What happened this time?"

"The Merokian Confederation happened."

"But their penetration was nowhere near here."

"No, it wasn't. But they did attack Sector Nine. And they did destroy
the headquarters. You remember that?"

"Yes, sir. I read about it in school. We lost a lot of people on that
one." Konar frowned. "Long before my time in the Corps, of course, but I
studied up on it. They used some sort of screen that scrambled the
detectors, didn't they?"

"Something like that. Might have been coupled with someone's
inattention, too. But that's unimportant now. The important thing is
that the sector records were destroyed during the attack."

"Sure. But how about the permanent files that were forwarded to
Aldebaran depository?"

Meinora smiled grimly. "Something else that couldn't happen. We're still
looking for traces of that courier ship. I suppose they ran afoul of a
Merokian task force, but there's nothing to go on. They just
disappeared." He picked up the mental communicator, examining the signs
of aging.

"One by one," he continued, "the case files and property records of
Sector Nine are being reconstructed. Every guardsman even remotely
associated with the Sector before the attack is being interviewed, and a
lot of them are working on the reconstruction. It's been a long job, but
we're nearly done now. This is one of the last planets to be located and
rechecked, and it's been over a period since the last visit they've had
from any of our teams. On this planet, that's some fifty-odd
generations. Evidently the original operatives didn't demolish their
equipment, and fifty some generations of descendants have messed things
up pretty thoroughly."

Konar looked at the bench. Besides the equipment he had just brought in,
there were other items, all in varying stages of disrepair and ruin.

"Yes, sir," he agreed. "If this is a sample, and if the social
conditions I've seen since I joined the team are typical, they have. Now
what?"

"We've been picking up equipment. Piece by piece, we've been accounting
for every one of those items issued. Some of 'em were lost. Some of 'em
probably wore out and were discarded, or were burned--like this, only
more so." Meinora pointed at the wrecked communicator.

"Local legends tell us about violent explosions, so we know a few
actually discharged. And we've tracked down the place where the flier
cracked up and bit out a hole the size of a barony. Those items are gone
without trace." He sighed.

"That introduces an uncertainty factor, of course, but the equipment in
the hands of natives, and the stuff just lying around in deserted areas
has to be tracked down. This planet will develop a technology some day,
and we don't want anything about to raise questions and doubts when it
does. The folklore running around now is bad enough. When we get the
equipment back, we've got to clean up the social mess left by the
descendants of those original operatives."

"Nice job."

"Very nice. We'll be busy for a long time." Meinora picked up a small
tape reel. "Just got this," he explained. "That's why I was waiting for
you here. It's an account of a mentacom and shield that got away.
Probably stolen about twenty years ago, planetary. We're assigned to
track it down and pick it up."

He turned to speak to a technician, who was working at another bench.

"You can have this stuff now. Bring in some more pretty soon."

       *       *       *       *       *

Flor, the beater, was bone weary. The shadows were lengthening, hiding
the details in the thickets, and all the hot day, he had been thrusting
his way through thicket after thicket, in obedience to the instructions
of the foresters. He had struck trees with his short club and had
grunted and squealed, to startle the _khada_ into flight. A few of the
ugly beasts had come out, charging into the open, to be run down and
speared by the nobles.

And Flor had tired of this hunt, as he had tired of many other hunts in
the past. Hunting the savage _khada_, he thought resentfully, might be
an amusing sport for the nobles. But to a serf, it was hard,
lung-bursting work at best. At worst, it meant agonizing death beneath
trampling hoofs and rending teeth.

To be sure, there would be meat at the hunting lodge tonight, in plenty,
and after the hunt dinner, he and the other serfs might take bits of the
flesh home to their families. But that would be after the chores in the
scullery were over. It would be many hours before Flor would be able to
