
And there was occasion for haste.  Before the sails were properly
secured, the squall struck them; the foremast was snapped off close to
the deck; for a time the ship became unmanageable and drifted rapidly
towards the land.

"Is that a small island that I see on the weather bow, Olly?" said the
skipper to his son.  "Look, your eyes are better than mine."

"Yes, father.  It looks like a small one."

"Steer for that, Grummidge.  We'll take shelter in its lee."

The sails were braced, and the direction of the vessel was changed,
while the wreck of the foremast was being cleared away; but, just as
they were drawing near to the island, the wind chopped round, and the
hoped-for shelter they were approaching became suddenly a lee shore.

"Nothing can save us now," muttered Grummidge, "the _Water Wagtail_ is
going to her doom."

"You're right, my man.  Before another hour goes by, she will have
wagged her tail for the last time," said Master Trench, somewhat
bitterly.

They were both right.  In less than an hour after that the ship was
hurled upon the outlying rocks of a low island.  Shaken and strained as
she had been during her disastrous voyage, it took but a short time to
break her up, but the bow had been thrust high between two rocks and
remained fast.

Circumstances do not change character, but they often bring it to the
front.  Heroes and poltroons may remain unknown until a sudden incident
or change of condition reveals them.  As the crew of the wrecked ship
clustered on the fragment of the bow, and gazed on the tumultuous flood
of foaming water that seethed between them and the shore, their hearts
failed them for fear.  Some sternly compressed their lips, and looked
like men who had made up their minds to "die game."  A few even looked
defiant, as if daring Fate to do her worst, though the pallor of their
countenances gave the lie to the expression of their features; but many
of them, in the terror of the moment, cried aloud for mercy, and wildly
promised amendment if their lives should be spared.  A few were composed
and grave.  Brave men, though bad.  Possibly some of these prayed.  If
so, they had the sense to do it silently to Him who knows the secrets of
all hearts.

"No man can cross that and live," said the skipper, in a low, sad tone.

"It is my intention to try, Master Trench," said Paul Burns, grasping
the end of a light line and tying it round his waist.

Little Oliver looked quickly and anxiously at his friend.  His heart
sank, for he saw at a glance that it was not possible to follow him.
The deed, if done at all, must be done by his friend alone.  Great,
therefore, was the rebound of joy in the boy's heart when Paul said--

"Now, Olly, attend to me.  My life, under God, may depend on close
attention to my signals and the management of the line.  I can trust
your father and the men to haul me back to the ship if need be, but I
will trust only you to pay out and read my signals.  Observe, now, let
there be no _slack_ to the line; keep it just taut but without any pull
on it, so that you may _feel_ the signals at once.  One pull means _pay
out faster_, two pulls mean _haul me aboard_, three pulls is _all right
and fix the big hawser to the line so that I may haul it ashore_.  Now,
Olly, I trust to you to read my signals and act promptly."

Oliver's heart was too full to speak.  He looked at his friend with
swimming eyes and nodded his head.

"Men," said Paul to the crew, "let me beg you to obey the boy's orders
smartly.  If God wills it so, we shall all be saved."

He leaped over the side as he concluded.  Another moment and he was seen
to rise and buffet the plunging waters manfully.  Great as was the
muscular strength of the young man, it seemed absolute feebleness to
those who looked on; nevertheless he made headway towards the shore,
which was strewn with great boulders with a low cliff behind them.  It
was among these boulders that his chief danger and difficulty lay, for
his strong frame would have been as nothing if dashed against them.

Quickly he was lost to view in the hurly-burly of foam and spray.

With the utmost care did Oliver Trench perform his duty.  It required
both vigour of hand and delicacy of touch to keep the line right, but it
was manipulated by hands whose vigour and touch were intensified by
love.

"Ease off!" he cried, looking back impatiently at the strong fellows who
held the slack of the line.

The men obeyed so readily that the line ran out too fast and the boy had
much ado to check it.  Just as he got it sufficiently taut, he felt what
seemed to him like _two_ pulls--"haul me in!"  Could it be?  He was not
certain.  In an agony of anxiety he held on, and was about to give the
signal to haul in, when his father, who watched his every movement,
instantly said, "Give him another second or two, Olly."

Just then there was a strong single pull at the line.

"Pay out!--faster!" shouted Oliver, and, at the same moment he eased off
his own feelings in a tremendous sigh of relief.

After that the line ran steadily for a few seconds, and no signals came.
Then it ceased to run, and poor Oliver's fears began to rush in upon
him again, but he was speedily relieved by feeling three distinct and
vigorous pulls.

"Thank God, he's safe," cried the boy.  "Now then, pass along the
hawser--quick!"

This was done, the light line was attached to a three-inch rope, and the
party on the wreck waited anxiously.

"Give it a pull, Olly, by way of signal," suggested Master Trench.

"He did not tell me to do that, father," returned the boy, hesitating.

"No doubt he forgot it in the hurry--try it, anyhow."

A hearty pull on the line was accordingly given, and they soon had the
satisfaction of seeing the hawser move over the side and run towards the
shore.  When it ceased to run out they knew that Paul must have got hold
of the end of it, so, making their end fast to the heel of the bowsprit,
they waited, for as yet the rope lay deep in the heaving waters, and
quite useless as a means of escape.

Presently the rope began to jerk, then it tightened, soon the bight of
it rose out of the sea and remained there--rigid.

"Well done, Paul," exclaimed the skipper, when this was accomplished.
"Now, Olly, you go first, you're light."

But the boy hesitated.  "No, father, you first," he said.

"Obey orders, Olly," returned the skipper sternly.

Without another word Oliver got upon the rope and proceeded to clamber
along it.  The operation was by no means easy, but the boy was strong
and active, and the water not very cold.  It leaped up and drenched him,
however, as he passed the lowest point of the bight, and thereafter the
weight of his wet garments delayed him, so that on nearing the shore he
was pretty well exhausted.  There, however, he found Paul up to the
waist in the sea waiting for him, and the last few yards of the journey
were traversed in his friend's arms.

By means of this rope was every man of the _Water Wagtail's_ crew saved
from a watery grave.

They found that the island on which they had been cast was sufficiently
large to afford them shelter, and a brief survey of it proved that there
was both wood and water enough to serve them, but nothing of animal or
vegetable life was to be found.  This was serious, because all their
provisions were lost with the wrecked portion of the ship, so that
starvation stared them in the face.

"If only the rum-kegs had been saved," said one of the men, when they
assembled, after searching the island, to discuss their prospects, "we
might, at least, have led a merry life while it lasted."

"Humph!  Much good that would do you when you came to think over it in
the next world," said Grummidge contemptuously.

"I don't believe in the next world," returned the first speaker gruffly.

"A blind man says he doesn't see the sun, and don't believe in it,"
rejoined Grummidge: "does that prove that there's no sun?"

Here Master Trench interposed.

"My lads," he said, "don't you think that instead of talking rubbish it
would be wise to scatter yourselves along the coast and see what you can
pick up from the wreck?  Depend on't some of the provisions have been
stranded among the rocks, and, as they will be smashed to pieces before
long, the sooner we go about it the better.  The truth is, that while
you have been wastin' your time running about the island, Master Burns
and I have been doin' this, an' we've saved some things already--among
them a barrel of pork.  Come, rouse up and go to work--some to the
shore, others to make a camp in the bush."

This advice seemed so good that the men acted on it at once, with the
result that before dark they had rescued two more barrels of pork and a
barrel of flour from the grasp of the sea, besides some cases of goods
which they had not taken time to examine.

Returning from the shore together, laden with various rescued articles,
Paul and Oliver halted and sat down on a rock to rest for a few minutes.

"Olly," said the former, "what was that I saw you wrapping up in a bit
of tarred canvas, and stuffing so carefully under the breast of your
coat, soon after the ship struck?"

"Mother's last letter to me," said the boy, with a flush of pleasure as
he tapped his breast.  "I have it safe here, and scarcely damaged at
all."

"Strange," remarked Paul, as he pulled a well-covered packet from his
own breast-pocket; "strange that your mind and mine should have been
running on the same subject.  See here, this is _my_ mother's last gift
to me before she died--a letter, too, but it is God's letter to fallen
man."

With great care the young man unrolled the packet and displayed a
well-worn manuscript copy of a portion of the Gospel of John.

"This is copied," he said, "from the translation of God's Word by the
great Wycliffe.  It was given to my mother by an old friend, and was, as
I have said, her parting gift to me."

The friends were interrupted in their examination of this interesting
M.S. by the arrival of one of the sailors, with whom they returned to
the encampment in the bush.



CHAPTER THREE.

FIRST EXPERIENCES ON THE ISLAND.

A wonderfully picturesque appearance did these shipwrecked mariners
present that night when, under the shelter of the shrubbery that crowned
their small island, they kindled several camp-fires, and busied
themselves in preparing supper.

As there was no law in the island--and our skipper, having lost his
ship, forbore to assert any right to command--every one naturally did
what seemed right in his own eyes.

As yet there had arisen no bone of contention among them.  Of food they
had secured enough for at least a few days.  Fire they had procured by
means of flint, steel, and tinder.  A clear spring furnished them with
water, and ships' buckets washed ashore enabled them to convey the same
to their encampment.  Fortunately, no rum-kegs had been found, so that
evil passions were not stirred up, and, on the whole, the first night on
the island was spent in a fair degree of harmony--considering the
character of the men.

Those who had been kindred souls on board ship naturally drew together
on shore, and kindled their several fires apart.  Thus it came to pass
that the skipper and his son, the two mates, and Paul Burns found
themselves assembled round the same fire.

But the two mates, it is right to add, were only sympathetic in a small
degree, because of their former position as officers, and their recent
imprisonment together.  In reality they were men of no principle and of
weak character, whose tendency was always to throw in their lot with the
winning side.  Being a little uncertain as to which was the winning side
that night, they had the wisdom to keep their own counsel.

Oliver presided over the culinary department.

"You see, I'm rather fond of cookin'," he said, apologetically, "that's
why I take it in hand."

"Ah, that comes of his bein' a good boy to his mother," said Master
Trench in explanation, and with a nod of approval.  "Olly was always
ready to lend her a helpin' hand in the house at anything that had to be
done, which has made him a Jack-of-all-trades--cookin' among the rest,
as you see."

"A pity that the means of displaying his powers are so limited," said
Paul, who busied himself in levelling the ground beside the fire for
their beds.

"Limited!" exclaimed Trench, "you are hard to please, Master Paul; I
have lived on worse food than salt pork and pancakes."

"If so, father," said Oliver, as he deftly tossed one of the cakes into
the air and neatly caught it on its other side in the pan, "you must
either have had the pork without the pancakes or the pancakes without
the pork."

"Nay, Master Shallowpate, I had neither."

"What! did you live on nothing?"

"On nothing better than boiled sheepskin--and it was uncommon tough as
well as tasteless; but it is wonderful what men will eat when they're
starving."

"I think, father," returned the boy, as he tossed and deftly caught the
cake again, "that it is more wonderful what men will eat when they're
_not_ starving!  Of all the abominations that mortal man ever put
between his grinders, I think the worst is that vile stuff--"

He was interrupted by a sudden outbreak of wrath at the fire next to
theirs, where Big Swinton, Grummidge, and several others were engaged,
like themselves, in preparing supper.

"There will be trouble in the camp before long, I see plainly enough,"
remarked Paul, looking in the direction of the disputants.  "These two
men, Swinton and Grummidge, are too well-matched in body and mind and
self-will to live at peace, and I foresee that they will dispute your
right to command."

"They won't do that, Paul," returned Trench quietly, "for I have already
given up a right which I no longer possess.  When the _Water Wagtail_
went on the rocks, my reign came to an end.  For the future we have no
need to concern ourselves.  The man with the most powerful will and the
strongest mind will naturally come to the top--and that's how it
_should_ be.  I think that all the troubles of mankind arise from our
interfering with the laws of Nature."

"Agreed, heartily," replied Paul, "only I would prefer to call them the
laws of God.  By the way, Master Trench, I have not yet told you that I
have in my possession some of these same laws in a book."

"Have you, indeed?--in a book!  That's a rare and not altogether a safe
possession now-a-days."

"You speak the sober truth, Master Trench," returned Paul, putting his
hand into a breast-pocket and drawing forth the packet which contained
the fragment of the Gospel of John.  "Persecution because of our beliefs
is waxing hotter and hotter just now in unfortunate England.  However,
we run no risk of being roasted alive in Newfoundland for reading God's
blessed Word--see, there it is.  A portion of the Gospel of John in
manuscript, copied from the English translation of good Master
Wycliffe."

"A good and true man, I've heard say," responded the skipper, as he
turned over the leaves of the precious document with a species of solemn
wonder, for it was the first time he had either seen or handled a
portion of the Bible.  "Pity that such a friend of the people should not
have lived to the age o' that ancient fellow--what's his name--Thoosle,
something or other?"

"Methuselah," said Paul; "you're right there, Master Trench.  What might
not a good man like Wycliffe have accomplished if he had been permitted
to live and teach and fight for the truth for nine hundred and
sixty-nine years?"

"You don't mean to say he lived as long as that?" exclaimed the boy,
looking up from his pots and pans.

"Indeed I do."

"Well, well! he must have been little better than a live mummy by the
end of that time!" replied Oliver, resuming his interest in his pots and
pans.

"But how came you to know about all that Master Paul, if this is all the
Scripture you've had?" asked Trench.

"My mother was deeply learned in the Scriptures," answered Paul, "and
she taught me diligently from my boyhood.  The way she came to be so
learned is curious.  I will tell you how it came about, while we are
