
"I'll give you fifty cents a week," said Mills, "and more if I do well.
You can come to-day, if you like."

"You are very kind, but I am doing better than that," said Frank.

"What are you doing,--selling papers?"

"No; I have given that up. I am a telegraph boy."

"How much do you make?"

"Seven dollars last week."

"Why, you will be rich," said the blind man, enviously. "I don't think I
get as much as that myself, and I have to pay a boy out of it."

His poor guide did not have the appearance of being very liberally paid.

"Then you won't come back?" said Mills, querulously.

"No, I guess not."

"Come along, boy!" said Mills, roughly, to his little guide. "Are you
going to keep me here all day?"

"I thought you wanted to speak to this boy."

"Well, I have got through. He has deserted me. It is the way of the
world. There's nobody to pity the poor, blind man."

"Here's five cents for old acquaintance' sake. Mr. Mills," said Frank,
dropping a nickel into the hand of the boy who was guiding him.

"Thank you! May you never know what it is to be blind!" said Mills, in
his professional tone.

"If I am, I hope I can see as well as you," thought Frank. "What a
precious old humbug he is, and how I pity that poor boy! If I had a
chance I would give him something to save him from starvation."

Frank walked on, quite elated at the change in his circumstances which
allowed him to give money in charity to the person who had once been his
employer. He would have given it more cheerfully if in his estimation
the man had been more worthy.

Frank's errand took him up Broadway. He had two or three stops to make,
which made it inconvenient for him to ride. A little way in front of him
he saw a boy of fourteen, whom he recognized as an errand-boy, and a
former fellow-lodger at the Newsboy's Lodging-House. He was about to
hurry forward and join John Riley,--for this was the boy's name,--when
his attention was attracted, and his suspicions aroused, by a man who
accosted John. He was a man of about thirty, rather showily dressed,
with a gold chain dangling from his vest.

"Johnny," he said, addressing the errand-boy "do you want to earn ten
cents?"

"I should like to," answered the boy, "but I am going on an errand, and
can't spare the time."

"It won't take five minutes," said the young man. "It is only to take
this note up to Mr. Conant's room, on the fourth floor of this
building."

They were standing in front of a high building occupied as offices.

The boy hesitated.

"Is there an answer?" he asked.

"No; you can come right down as soon as the letter is delivered."

"I suppose I could spare the time for that," said John Riley.

"Of course you can. It won't take you two minutes. Here is the ten
cents. I'll hold your bundle for you while you run up."

"All right!" said the errand-boy, and, suspecting nothing, he
surrendered his parcel, and taking the note and the dime, ran upstairs.

No sooner was he out of sight than the young man began to walk off
rapidly with the bundle. It was an old trick, that has been many times
played upon unsuspecting boys, and will continue to be played as long as
there are knavish adventurers who prefer dishonest methods of getting a
living to honest industry.

In this case, however, the rogue was destined to disappointment. It may
be stated that he had been present in the dry-goods store from which the
parcel came, and, knowing that the contents were valuable, had followed
the boy.

No sooner did Frank understand the fellow's purpose than he pursued him,
and seized him by the arm.

"What do you want of me?" demanded the rogue, roughly. "I am in a hurry
and can't be detained."

"I want you to give me that bundle which you are trying to steal from my
friend, John Riley."

The rogue's countenance changed.

"What do you mean?" he demanded, to gain time.

"I mean that I heard your conversation with him, and I know your game.
Come back, or I will call a policeman."

The young man was sharp enough to see that he must give up his purpose.

"There, take the bundle," he said, tossing it into Frank's arms. "I was
only going for a cigar; I should have brought it back."

When John Riley came downstairs, with the letter in his hand,--for he
had been unable to find any man named Conant in the building,--he found
Frank waiting with the parcel.

"Holloa, Frank! Where's that man that sent me upstairs? I can't find Mr.
Conant."

"Of course you can't. There's no such man in the building. That man was
a thief; but for me he would have carried off your bundle."

"What a fool I was!" said the errand-boy. "I won't let myself be fooled
again."

"Don't give up a bundle to a stranger again," said Frank. "I'm only a
country boy, but I don't allow myself to be swindled as easily as you."

"I wish that chap would come here again," said Johnny, indignantly. "But
I've come out best, after all," he added, brightening up. "I've made ten
cents out of him."




CHAPTER XVIII.

A RICH WOMAN'S SORROW.


One day Frank was summoned to a handsome residence on Madison avenue.

"Sit down in the parlor," said the servant "and I will call Mrs.
Graham."

As Frank looked around him, and noted the evidences of wealth in the
elegant furniture and rich ornaments profusely scattered about, he
thought, "How rich Mrs. Graham must be! I suppose she is very happy. I
should be if I could buy everything I wanted."

It was a boy's thought, and betrayed our hero's inexperience. Even
unlimited means are not sure to produce happiness, nor do handsome
surroundings prove wealth.

Five minutes later an elderly lady entered the room. She was richly
dressed, but her face wore a look of care and sorrow.

As she entered, Frank rose with instinctive politeness, and bowed.

"You are the telegraph boy," said the lady, inquiringly.

"Yes, ma'am."

Mrs. Graham looked at him earnestly, as if to read his character.

"I have sent for you," she said, at length, "to help me in a matter of
some delicacy, and shall expect you not to speak of it, even to your
employers."

"They never question me," said Frank, promptly. "You may rely upon my
secrecy."

Frank's statement was correct. The business entrusted to telegraph
messengers is understood to be of a confidential nature, and they are
instructed to guard the secrets of those who make use of their services.

"I find it necessary to raise some money," continued the lady,
apparently satisfied, "and am not at liberty, for special reasons, to
call upon my husband for it. I have a diamond ring of considerable
value, which I should like to have you carry, either to a jeweller or a
pawnbroker, and secure what advance you can upon it."

"And I believed she had plenty of money," thought Frank, wondering.

"I will do the best I can for you, madam," said our hero.

Mrs. Graham drew from her pocket a small box, containing a diamond ring,
which sparkled brilliantly in the sunshine.

"It is beautiful," said Frank, admiringly.

"Yes, it cost originally eight hundred dollars," said the lady.

"Eight hundred dollars!" echoed Frank, in wonder. He had heard of
diamond rings, and knew they were valuable, but had no idea they were so
valuable as that.

"How much do you expect to get on it?" he asked.

"Nothing near its value, of course, nor is that necessary. Two hundred
dollars will be as much as I care to use, and at that rate I shall be
able the sooner to redeem it. I believe I will tell you why I want the
money."

"Not unless you think it best," said Frank.

"It is best, for I shall again require your services in disposing of the
money."

The lady sat down on the sofa beside Frank, and told him the story which
follows:--

"I have two children," she said, "a daughter and a son. The son has
recently graduated from college, and is now travelling in Europe. My
daughter is now twenty-six years of age. She was beautiful, and our
social position was such that my husband, who is a proud man,
confidently anticipated that she would make a brilliant match. But at
the age of nineteen Ellen fell in love with a clerk in my husband's
employ. He was a young man of good appearance and character, and nothing
could be said against him except that he was poor. This, however, was
more than enough in Mr. Graham's eyes. When Lawrence Brent asked for the
hand of our daughter, my husband drove him from the house with insult,
and immediately discharged him from his employ. Ellen was high-spirited,
and resented this treatment of the man she loved. He soon obtained a
place quite as good as the one he had lost, and one day Ellen left the
house and married him. She wrote to us, excusing her action, and I would
gladly have forgiven her; but her father was obdurate. He forbade my
mentioning her name to him, and from that day to this he has never
referred to her.

"I am now coming to the business in which you are to help me. For years
my son-in-law was able to support his wife comfortably, and also the two
children which in time came to them. But, a year since, he became sick,
and his sickness lasted till he had spent all his savings. Now he and
his poor family are living in wretched lodgings, and are in need of the
common necessaries of life. It is for them I intend the money which I
can secure upon this ring."

Frank could not listen without having his sympathies aroused.

"I shall be still more glad to help you," he said, "now that I know how
the money is to be used."

"Thank you," said the lady. "You are a good boy, and I see that I can
trust you implicitly."

She handed Frank the box, enjoining upon him to be careful not to lose
it.

"It is so small that it might easily slip from your pocket," she said.

"I shall take the best care of it," said Frank. "Where would you advise
me to go first?"

"I hardly know. If I wished to sell it I would carry it to Tiffany; but
it was purchased there, and it might in that case come to my husband's
ears. There is a pawnbroker, named Simpson, who, I hear, is one of the
best of his class. You may go there first."

"How much shall I say you want on it?" asked Frank.

"Don't mention my name at all," said the lady, hastily.

"I suppose I shall have to give some name," said Frank, "in order that
the ticket may be made out."

"What is your own name?"

"Frank Kavanagh."

"Have you a mother living?"

"No," said Frank, gravely.

"Then let the ticket be made out in your name."

"If you wish it."

"Shall I bring the money to you, Mrs. Graham?"

"No; my husband might be at home, and it would arouse his suspicions. At
twelve o'clock I will meet you at Madison Park, at the corner opposite
the Union League Club House. You can then report to me your success."

"Very well," said Frank.

He went at once to the pawnbroker mentioned by Mrs. Graham. But for his
uniform he would have been questioned closely as to how he came by the
ring; but telegraph boys are so often employed on similar errands that
the pawnbroker showed no surprise. After a careful examination he agreed
to advance two hundred dollars, and gave Frank the money and the ticket.
When Frank gave his own name, he said, "That is your name, is it not?"

"Yes, sir."

"But the ring does not belong to you?"

"No; it belongs to a lady who does not wish her name known."

"It is all the same to us."

"That was easily done," thought Frank. "Now I must go and meet Mrs.
Graham."

"Have you got the money?" asked Mrs. Graham, anxiously, as Frank made
his appearance.

"Yes," replied Frank.

"How much?"

"The amount you asked for."

"That is well. Now I shall be able to relieve my poor daughter. I cannot
bear to think of her and her poor children suffering for the lack of
bread, while I am living in luxury. I wish Mr. Graham was not so
unforgiving."

"Will you take the money now?" asked Frank.

"I wish you to take fifty dollars to my daughter."

"I will do so with pleasure. What is her address?"

Mrs. Graham drew out a card, on which she had pencilled her daughter's
address. It proved to be a tenement-house on the east side of the city,
not far from Fourteenth street.

"I wish I could go myself," said Mrs. Graham, sadly; "but I do not dare
to do so at present. Give Ellen this money, with my best love; and say
to her that a month hence I will again send her the same sum. Tell her
to keep up good courage. Brighter days may be in store."

"I will be sure to remember," said Frank, in a tone of sympathy.

The errand was to his taste; for he was about to carry help and comfort
to those who needed both.




CHAPTER XIX.

A MESSENGER OF GOOD TIDINGS.


There stands a large tenement-house on East Fourteenth street, five
stories in height, and with several entrances. Scores of barefooted and
scantily attired children play in the halls or on the sidewalk in front,
and the great building is a human hive, holding scores of families. Some
