crackled so kindly that it really seemed to be affectionately inviting
the kettle to come and sit upon its lap. So the kettle was brought and
tea made. But no milk could be found--so every one had six lumps of
sugar to each cup instead. The things to eat, on the other hand, were
nicer than usual. The boys looked about very carefully, and found in
the pantry some cold tongue, bread, butter, cheese, and part of a cold
pudding--very much nicer than cook ever made when they were at home. And
in the kitchen cupboard was half a Christmassy cake, a pot of strawberry
jam, and about a pound of mixed candied fruit, with soft crumbly slabs
of delicious sugar in each cup of lemon, orange, or citron.

It was indeed, as Jane said, 'a banquet fit for an Arabian Knight.'

The Phoenix perched on Robert's chair, and listened kindly and
politely to all they had to tell it about their visit to Lyndhurst,
and underneath the table, by just stretching a toe down rather far, the
faithful carpet could be felt by all--even by Jane, whose legs were very
short.

'Your slaves will not return to-night,' said the Phoenix. 'They sleep
under the roof of the cook's stepmother's aunt, who is, I gather,
hostess to a large party to-night in honour of her husband's cousin's
sister-in-law's mother's ninetieth birthday.'

'I don't think they ought to have gone without leave,' said Anthea,
'however many relations they have, or however old they are; but I
suppose we ought to wash up.'

'It's not our business about the leave,' said Cyril, firmly, 'but I
simply won't wash up for them. We got it, and we'll clear it away; and
then we'll go somewhere on the carpet. It's not often we get a chance
of being out all night. We can go right away to the other side of the
equator, to the tropical climes, and see the sun rise over the great
Pacific Ocean.'

'Right you are,' said Robert. 'I always did want to see the Southern
Cross and the stars as big as gas-lamps.'

'DON'T go,' said Anthea, very earnestly, 'because I COULDN'T. I'm SURE
mother wouldn't like us to leave the house and I should hate to be left
here alone.'

'I'd stay with you,' said Jane loyally.

'I know you would,' said Anthea gratefully, 'but even with you I'd much
rather not.'

'Well,' said Cyril, trying to be kind and amiable, 'I don't want you to
do anything you think's wrong, BUT--'

He was silent; this silence said many things.

'I don't see,' Robert was beginning, when Anthea interrupted--

'I'm quite sure. Sometimes you just think a thing's wrong, and sometimes
you KNOW. And this is a KNOW time.'

The Phoenix turned kind golden eyes on her and opened a friendly beak to
say--

'When it is, as you say, a "know time", there is no more to be said. And
your noble brothers would never leave you.'

'Of course not,' said Cyril rather quickly. And Robert said so too.

'I myself,' the Phoenix went on, 'am willing to help in any way
possible. I will go personally--either by carpet or on the wing--and
fetch you anything you can think of to amuse you during the evening. In
order to waste no time I could go while you wash up.--Why,' it went on
in a musing voice, 'does one wash up teacups and wash down the stairs?'

'You couldn't wash stairs up, you know,' said Anthea, 'unless you began
at the bottom and went up feet first as you washed. I wish cook would
try that way for a change.'

'I don't,' said Cyril, briefly. 'I should hate the look of her
elastic-side boots sticking up.'

'This is mere trifling,' said the Phoenix. 'Come, decide what I shall
fetch for you. I can get you anything you like.'

But of course they couldn't decide. Many things were suggested--a
rocking-horse, jewelled chessmen, an elephant, a bicycle, a motor-car,
books with pictures, musical instruments, and many other things. But
a musical instrument is agreeable only to the player, unless he has
learned to play it really well; books are not sociable, bicycles cannot
be ridden without going out of doors, and the same is true of motor-cars
and elephants. Only two people can play chess at once with one set of
chessmen (and anyway it's very much too much like lessons for a game),
and only one can ride on a rocking-horse. Suddenly, in the midst of the
discussion, the Phoenix spread its wings and fluttered to the floor, and
from there it spoke.

'I gather,' it said, 'from the carpet, that it wants you to let it go
to its old home, where it was born and brought up, and it will return
within the hour laden with a number of the most beautiful and delightful
products of its native land.'

'What IS its native land?'

'I didn't gather. But since you can't agree, and time is passing, and
the tea-things are not washed down--I mean washed up--'

'I votes we do,' said Robert. 'It'll stop all this jaw, anyway. And it's
not bad to have surprises. Perhaps it's a Turkey carpet, and it might
bring us Turkish delight.'

'Or a Turkish patrol,' said Robert.

'Or a Turkish bath,' said Anthea.

'Or a Turkish towel,' said Jane.

'Nonsense,' Robert urged, 'it said beautiful and delightful, and towels
and baths aren't THAT, however good they may be for you. Let it go. I
suppose it won't give us the slip,' he added, pushing back his chair and
standing up.

'Hush!' said the Phoenix; 'how can you? Don't trample on its feelings
just because it's only a carpet.'

'But how can it do it--unless one of us is on it to do the wishing?'
asked Robert. He spoke with a rising hope that it MIGHT be necessary for
one to go and why not Robert? But the Phoenix quickly threw cold water
on his new-born dream.

'Why, you just write your wish on a paper, and pin it on the carpet.'

So a leaf was torn from Anthea's arithmetic book, and on it Cyril wrote
in large round-hand the following:


We wish you to go to your dear native home, and bring back the most
beautiful and delightful productions of it you can--and not to be gone
long, please.

                    (Signed)  CYRIL.
                              ROBERT.
                              ANTHEA.
                              JANE.


Then the paper was laid on the carpet.

'Writing down, please,' said the Phoenix; 'the carpet can't read a paper
whose back is turned to it, any more than you can.'

It was pinned fast, and the table and chairs having been moved, the
carpet simply and suddenly vanished, rather like a patch of water on a
hearth under a fierce fire. The edges got smaller and smaller, and then
it disappeared from sight.

'It may take it some time to collect the beautiful and delightful
things,' said the Phoenix. 'I should wash up--I mean wash down.'

So they did. There was plenty of hot water left in the kettle, and every
one helped--even the Phoenix, who took up cups by their handles with its
clever claws and dipped them in the hot water, and then stood them on
the table ready for Anthea to dry them. But the bird was rather slow,
because, as it said, though it was not above any sort of honest work,
messing about with dish-water was not exactly what it had been brought
up to. Everything was nicely washed up, and dried, and put in its proper
place, and the dish-cloth washed and hung on the edge of the copper
to dry, and the tea-cloth was hung on the line that goes across the
scullery. (If you are a duchess's child, or a king's, or a person of
high social position's child, you will perhaps not know the difference
between a dish-cloth and a tea-cloth; but in that case your nurse has
been better instructed than you, and she will tell you all about it.)
And just as eight hands and one pair of claws were being dried on the
roller-towel behind the scullery door there came a strange sound from
the other side of the kitchen wall--the side where the nursery was. It
was a very strange sound, indeed--most odd, and unlike any other sounds
the children had ever heard. At least, they had heard sounds as much
like it as a toy engine's whistle is like a steam siren's.

'The carpet's come back,' said Robert; and the others felt that he was
right.

'But what has it brought with it?' asked Jane. 'It sounds like
Leviathan, that great beast.'

'It couldn't have been made in India, and have brought elephants? Even
baby ones would be rather awful in that room,' said Cyril. 'I vote we
take it in turns to squint through the keyhole.'

They did--in the order of their ages. The Phoenix, being the eldest by
some thousands of years, was entitled to the first peep. But--

'Excuse me,' it said, ruffling its golden feathers and sneezing softly;
'looking through keyholes always gives me a cold in my golden eyes.'

So Cyril looked.

'I see something grey moving,' said he.

'It's a zoological garden of some sort, I bet,' said Robert, when he had
taken his turn. And the soft rustling, bustling, ruffling, scuffling,
shuffling, fluffling noise went on inside.

'_I_ can't see anything,' said Anthea, 'my eye tickles so.'

Then Jane's turn came, and she put her eye to the keyhole.

'It's a giant kitty-cat,' she said; 'and it's asleep all over the
floor.'

'Giant cats are tigers--father said so.'

'No, he didn't. He said tigers were giant cats. It's not at all the same
thing.'

'It's no use sending the carpet to fetch precious things for you
if you're afraid to look at them when they come,' said the Phoenix,
sensibly. And Cyril, being the eldest, said--

'Come on,' and turned the handle.

The gas had been left full on after tea, and everything in the room
could be plainly seen by the ten eyes at the door. At least, not
everything, for though the carpet was there it was invisible, because it
was completely covered by the hundred and ninety-nine beautiful objects
which it had brought from its birthplace.

'My hat!' Cyril remarked. 'I never thought about its being a PERSIAN
carpet.'

Yet it was now plain that it was so, for the beautiful objects which it
had brought back were cats--Persian cats, grey Persian cats, and there
were, as I have said, 199 of them, and they were sitting on the carpet
as close as they could get to each other. But the moment the children
entered the room the cats rose and stretched, and spread and overflowed
from the carpet to the floor, and in an instant the floor was a sea of
moving, mewing pussishness, and the children with one accord climbed to
the table, and gathered up their legs, and the people next door knocked
on the wall--and, indeed, no wonder, for the mews were Persian and
piercing.

'This is pretty poor sport,' said Cyril. 'What's the matter with the
bounders?'

'I imagine that they are hungry,' said the Phoenix. 'If you were to feed
them--'

'We haven't anything to feed them with,' said Anthea in despair, and she
stroked the nearest Persian back. 'Oh, pussies, do be quiet--we can't
hear ourselves think.'

She had to shout this entreaty, for the mews were growing deafening,
'and it would take pounds' and pounds' worth of cat's-meat.'

'Let's ask the carpet to take them away,' said Robert. But the girls
said 'No.'

'They are so soft and pussy,' said Jane.

'And valuable,' said Anthea, hastily. 'We can sell them for lots and
lots of money.'

'Why not send the carpet to get food for them?' suggested the Phoenix,
and its golden voice came harsh and cracked with the effort it had to be
make to be heard above the increasing fierceness of the Persian mews.

So it was written that the carpet should bring food for 199 Persian
cats, and the paper was pinned to the carpet as before.

The carpet seemed to gather itself together, and the cats dropped off
it, as raindrops do from your mackintosh when you shake it. And the
carpet disappeared.

Unless you have had one-hundred and ninety-nine well-grown Persian cats
in one small room, all hungry, and all saying so in unmistakable mews,
you can form but a poor idea of the noise that now deafened the children
and the Phoenix. The cats did not seem to have been at all properly
brought up. They seemed to have no idea of its being a mistake in
manners to ask for meals in a strange house--let alone to howl for
them--and they mewed, and they mewed, and they mewed, and they mewed,
till the children poked their fingers into their ears and waited in
silent agony, wondering why the whole of Camden Town did not come
knocking at the door to ask what was the matter, and only hoping that
the food for the cats would come before the neighbours did--and before
all the secret of the carpet and the Phoenix had to be given away beyond
recall to an indignant neighbourhood.

The cats mewed and mewed and twisted their Persian forms in and out and
unfolded their Persian tails, and the children and the Phoenix huddled
together on the table.

The Phoenix, Robert noticed suddenly, was trembling.

'So many cats,' it said, 'and they might not know I was the Phoenix.
These accidents happen so quickly. It quite un-mans me.'

This was a danger of which the children had not thought.

'Creep in,' cried Robert, opening his jacket.

And the Phoenix crept in--only just in time, for green eyes had glared,
pink noses had sniffed, white whiskers had twitched, and as Robert
buttoned his coat he disappeared to the waist in a wave of eager grey
Persian fur. And on the instant the good carpet slapped itself down on
the floor. And it was covered with rats--three hundred and ninety-eight
of them, I believe, two for each cat.

'How horrible!' cried Anthea. 'Oh, take them away!'

'Take yourself away,' said the Phoenix, 'and me.'

'I wish we'd never had a carpet,' said Anthea, in tears.

They hustled and crowded out of the door, and shut it, and locked it.
Cyril, with great presence of mind, lit a candle and turned off the gas
at the main.

'The rats'll have a better chance in the dark,' he said.

The mewing had ceased. Every one listened in breathless silence. We all
know that cats eat rats--it is one of the first things we read in our
little brown reading books; but all those cats eating all those rats--it
wouldn't bear thinking of.

Suddenly Robert sniffed, in the silence of the dark kitchen, where the
only candle was burning all on one side, because of the draught.

'What a funny scent!' he said.

And as he spoke, a lantern flashed its light through the window of the
kitchen, a face peered in, and a voice said--

'What's all this row about? You let me in.'

It was the voice of the police!

Robert tip-toed to the window, and spoke through the pane that had
been a little cracked since Cyril accidentally knocked it with a
walking-stick when he was playing at balancing it on his nose. (It was
after they had been to a circus.)

'What do you mean?' he said. 'There's no row. You listen; everything's
as quiet as quiet.' And indeed it was.

The strange sweet scent grew stronger, and the Phoenix put out its beak.

The policeman hesitated.

'They're MUSK-rats,' said the Phoenix. 'I suppose some cats eat
them--but never Persian ones. What a mistake for a well-informed carpet
to make! Oh, what a night we're having!'

'Do go away,' said Robert, nervously. 'We're just going to bed--that's
our bedroom candle; there isn't any row. Everything's as quiet as a
mouse.'

A wild chorus of mews drowned his words, and with the mews were mingled
the shrieks of the musk-rats. What had happened? Had the cats tasted
them before deciding that they disliked the flavour?

'I'm a-coming in,' said the policeman. 'You've got a cat shut up there.'

'A cat,' said Cyril. 'Oh, my only aunt! A cat!'

'Come in, then,' said Robert. 'It's your own look out. I advise you not.
Wait a shake, and I'll undo the side gate.'

He undid the side gate, and the policeman, very cautiously, came in. And
there in the kitchen, by the light of one candle, with the mewing
and the screaming going like a dozen steam sirens, twenty waiting on
motor-cars, and half a hundred squeaking pumps, four agitated voices
shouted to the policeman four mixed and wholly different explanations of
the very mixed events of the evening.

Did you ever try to explain the simplest thing to a policeman?



CHAPTER 8. THE CATS, THE COW, AND THE BURGLAR

The nursery was full of Persian cats and musk-rats that had been brought
there by the wishing carpet. The cats were mewing and the musk-rats were
squeaking so that you could hardly hear yourself speak. In the kitchen
were the four children, one candle, a concealed Phoenix, and a very
visible policeman.

'Now then, look here,' said the Policeman, very loudly, and he pointed
his lantern at each child in turn, 'what's the meaning of this here
yelling and caterwauling. I tell you you've got a cat here, and some
one's a ill-treating of it. What do you mean by it, eh?'

It was five to one, counting the Phoenix; but the policeman, who was
one, was of unusually fine size, and the five, including the Phoenix,
were small. The mews and the squeaks grew softer, and in the comparative
silence, Cyril said--

'It's true. There are a few cats here. But we've not hurt them. It's
quite the opposite. We've just fed them.'

'It don't sound like it,' said the policeman grimly.

'I daresay they're not REAL cats,' said Jane madly, perhaps they're only
dream-cats.'

'I'll dream-cat you, my lady,' was the brief response of the force.

'If you understood anything except people who do murders and stealings
and naughty things like that, I'd tell you all about it,' said Robert;
'but I'm certain you don't. You're not meant to shove your oar into
people's private cat-keepings. You're only supposed to interfere when
people shout "murder" and "stop thief" in the street. So there!'
