
I could feel Anita move to silence her.

Molo was whispering: "They come. But we will be ready for them."

Another image: mid-space. The allied ships gathering, waiting for
others to arrive. A group here of about ten of our ships from the
three worlds: poised, waiting.

I was aware that upon the mound-like protuberance of the room-floor
where we were sitting, a door was opening. It slid, or melted away. At
our feet was an opening downward into the small interior of the mound.

Molo whispered, "The great Master. Sit quiet! He will talk to us."

Over us now a barrage came with a hiss, a circular curtain of
insulation. The huge globular room faded. We were alone on the mound,
Snap, Molo, myself, Anita, Venza and Meka upon the end of our bench.
Behind us stood our single Wandlite guard, with a weapon in his
shoulder hand.

At our feet an opening yawned into the mound-interior. It was a tiny,
lighted room. In a cup-like seat a brain was perched, just below the
level of our feet: the great Master Brain of Wandl. He was alone here.
Not attended by retinue; no pomp and ceremony to usher us into his
presence; no underlings obsequiously bowing to mark him for a great
ruler.

We stared down, and the great brain stared up at us, seemingly equally
curious. His head was a full four feet in diameter; the little body
sat in the cup, with dangling legs. The clothes were ornamented: there
was a glowing device on the chest.

He spoke with a measured rumble, in Martian. "You are Molo, of
Ferrok-Shahn."

"Yes," said Molo.

"You must say, 'Yes, Great Master.'"

"Yes, Great Master."

"I know about you. I know that we trust you."

The huge round eyes next fastened upon me. Then to Snap, and back to
me. The words were English this time. "Men of Earth, are you decided,
like the Martian, to join with us?"

I tried with sudden vehemence to still my thoughts, or to change them
so that they lied. Fear surged upon me. Could this vast mechanism of
human mind here at my feet interpret the vibrations of my thoughts?
Could this Great Master of Wandl see into my mind?

The brain said, "You are uncertain. You do not want to die?"

"No Great Master," we both answered.

"You shall not, unless you attempt to cause us trouble. Your thoughts
are black." He addressed Molo. "Have they ever been read?"

"No, Great Master."

"When opportunity comes, have them read." He added to Snap and me: "I
plan to take prisoners. My Supreme Rulers, rulers of a neighboring
more powerful planet, which sent Wandl upon her mission of conquest,
ordered it. When your worlds are vacant of life, those who command me
will want some of you left alive to be studied. Your thoughts are very
black, Earthman. I think when they are carefully read you will prove
no great advantage to us."

There was irony in the voice, and upon the monstrous bulging face came
the horrible travesty of a grin.

The grin on the brain's face faded. His interest went again to Molo.
"That is your sister." The eyes swung to Meka and back.

"Yes, Great Master."

"She is caring for this Earth-girl and this girl from Venus?"

"Yes, Great Master. I am fond of them. I have plans."

"They are in your charge, Martian; I will not interfere with you. But
guard them well. I trust you and your sister. These others...."

"The Earth and the Venus girl can be of help to me, Great Master."

"How?"

"They knew young men who were in the Spaceship Service. They can tell
me the armament of men and weapons on most of the spaceships which
Earth will send against us."

Did Molo really believe that? Probably not, but he wanted the girls
with him. Again came that grotesque smile. "Let them not bother you,
Martian. You have work to do. Listen carefully. There will be a
battle. Earth, Mars, and Venus may perhaps have a hundred ships. I
cannot bring destruction upon those three worlds in a day. We soon
will make contact with the light-beam you placed on Earth. That I will
show you. But the rotation cannot be stopped at once. It will take
time.

"The enemy ships might dare to come to Wandl, but I shall not wait for
that. All my spaceships are very nearly ready. If there is to be a
battle, it shall be far from here, in the neighborhood of the enemy
worlds. We are at this time about sixty-two million of your miles from
the Earth, a third less than that from Mars, and about a third more
from Venus. I understand, Martian, that you are skilled in space
warfare."

The brain went on, "I have given you a vessel to command. You will be
surprised to know its name: the _Star-Streak_."

Meka gasped, "But you destroyed it, Great Master!"

"Only wrecked it, Martian girl. It is repaired now. You, Molo--and
your sister to help you--who could command it to more advantage? All
your own weapons, and ours of Wandl have been added. You may select
your crew. Is it to your liking?"

"Yes, Great Master."

"You will be housed in this city, Wor, in the dwelling-globe you
occupied before. Keep your prisoners with you, if you like."

"These two Earthmen...." began Molo, but he was interrupted.

"Settle that later. I do not want the annoyance."

I was dimly conscious of a great clanging, coming through the curtain
of barrage which was over us.

The brain added, "Keep Wyk with you, to guard the prisoners; he will
also attend your needs. In the battle, Martian, I expect great things
of you and your _Star-Streak_."

"Great Master, you will not be disappointed."

"And prisoners, but not too many. Bring me a few young specimens like
these, representative of Venus, Mars and the Earth. I want both of the
sexes, an equal number of each."

"Yes, Great Master."

"The warning signal is coming. You will now see our first contact."

The light at our feet was fading. It clung last by the gruesome face
of the huge brain; the goggling eyes shone green, and as the light in
the little mound-room dimmed there was in a moment nothing left but
those lurid green pools of the brain's eyes.

Then I was aware that the aperture at our feet had closed. Over us,
the barrage curtain was dissipating, sight and sound coming in to us.
The huge ball-shaped conclave room again became visible, the audience
crowding its entire inner surface.

I suddenly felt Anita's fingers twitching at my sleeve.

"Gregg, darling, can you hear me?"

"Yes. Be careful."

But Molo was gazing up over our heads. The crowd was shifting, bending
so that they all seemed gazing at their feet. A dim white radiance,
seeming to come from down here somewhere near us, lay in a splotch on
a segment of the throng overhead. Molo was watching.

I whispered, "All right, Anita. Quick, what is it?"

"The great control station is not far from here. Venza and I have been
trying to find out where it is exactly."

She stopped, evidently fearful of Meka. Then she added:

"Gregg, we haven't been guarded very closely; they're not suspicious
of us."

"Later, Anita. Can't talk now."

"No. Watch our chance. Later."

I turned toward Molo. "What's that up there?"

"The transparent ray is opening the top of the globe."

The clanging signal gong had stilled. The audience was hushed and
expectant. The white patch of light overhead spread until it
encompassed all the top of the globe. The whole area was glowing. The
people were white, spectral shapes, transparent! And the top of the
globe was transparent; I saw the night sky, with the gleaming reddish
stars.

It was, in a moment, as though we were staring up at a huge square
window orifice cut in the top of the room. A broad vista of cloudless
sky and stars was visible. Across it, like a shining sword, was a
narrow, opalescent beam.

"The Earth-beam which I planted," Molo whispered triumphantly. "Our
control station will contact with it now. The first contact!"

Earth was below our angle of vision, but the beam from Greater New
York, sweeping the sky with the Earth's rotation, was passing now
comparatively close to Wandl.

There was an expectant moment. Then into the sky leaped another ray,
narrow, luridly green. It swung up from Wandl and darted into space.
The hissing, agonized electrical scream from it as it burst through
the Wandl atmosphere was deafening. I saw it strike the Earth-beam,
grip it with a blinding burst of radiance up there in the sky,
clinging, pulling against the rotation of the Earth with a lever sixty
million miles long.

A moment of screaming sound in the atmosphere around us, and that
conflict of light in the sky. Then the screaming suddenly stilled. The
Wandl beam vanished.

The Earth-beam still swept the heavens like a stiff, upstanding sword.
But in that moment when Wandl gripped it, the axis of the Earth had
been changed a little. The rotation was slowed. By a few minutes, the
day and the night on Earth were lengthened.

It was the beginning of Earth's desolation.




11


"But when do we eat?" Snap demanded.

"Soon," said Molo.

"I hope so."

We were leaving the great room as we had come. Walking? I can only
call it that, though the word is futile to describe our progress as we
made our way to the lighted esplanade, across its side and into what
might have been called a street. Globular houses, single, or one set
upon another, or half a dozen swaying on a stick, gardens of
vegetables and flowers. I saw what seemed to be a round patch of
hundred-foot tree-stalks, like a thick batch of bamboo. It was laced
and latticed thick with vines.

"A house," Snap murmured. "That's a house."

Another type of dwelling. This patch of vegetable growth, so flimsy it
was all stirring with the movement of the night breeze, was woven into
circular thatched rooms, birds' nests of little dwellings. Staring up,
I seemed to see a hundred of them. Rope-vine ladders; flimsy vine
platforms; tiny lights winking up there in the trees.

On a platform twenty feet above us a group of tiny infant brains sat
in a gruesome row, goggling down on us.

We passed the tree patch; again the city seemed all a thin, flexible
metal. The ground was like a smooth rock surface, alternating with
small patches of soil where things were growing.

We walked in a slow, unsteady line. Molo led. Behind Snap and me came
the girls, ignoring us; and at the rear, the brown-shelled giant guard
stalked after us.

Molo stopped at a large globe-dwelling. "We rest here. I will go see
that our rooms are ready." He gestured to his sister. "Meka, you come
with me. Wyk will guard them."

We stood at an oval doorway. A worker came out, stared at us, then
went back. On an upper balcony, a brain was gazing down at us.

I caught Molo's brawny arm. "Won't you tell us what's going on?"

"Rest here with Wyk."

"What are you going to do?" asked Snap.

"I am going to select my men for battle."

"When do you go?"

"In a few hours, Earth-time."

"And you're taking us on the ship, Molo? Where is your _Star-Streak_?"

"That I must find out." He, gazed at us with a slow, faint smile. "Not
far. Nothing is far on Wandl. I do not know if I will take you on my
ship. You might be of help, or you might be troublesome. The Great
Master wants prisoners, or I would have killed you long ago."

He took his sister and left us. There was a brief moment when Wyk,
standing aside incuriously, gave us opportunity for swift whispers.

Again Anita clutched me. "Gregg, we'll be separated now. But with Molo
gone, Venza and I can get away from Meka."

Venza whirled on us. "Gregg, listen! Snap, be quiet! If we're ever
going to escape, now is the time. You get away from Wyk. We'll handle
Meka."

"And do what?" Snap demanded.

"The control station! We'll find it!"

Anita whispered, "We've got to wreck it, Gregg. Stop those contacts.
It'll mean the end of Earth if we don't."

I protested. "Better try for Molo's vessel. We might be able to
navigate it, escape from this world."

"The control station first," Anita insisted. "Gregg, we know something
about it. You and Snap, with your strength, can demolish it. And then,
if we can locate the _Star-Streak_...."

It was a desperate, mad plan, but there seemed nothing better. The
girls insisted now that though they did not know where the control
station was located, they knew the details of its interior; its
physical layout; its human operators.

"In an hour," whispered Snap. "Have you got a timer? Is it going?"

The little timers we still had with us were undoubtedly operating
differently from on Earth; but they were in agreement.

"An hour by our timers," I whispered. "We'll make the break then, try
to find you inside. Anita, if you get free of Meka, don't come out."

"All right."

We had only a moment to try and plan it. "Anita, in an hour, with Molo
gone...."
