service, and as soon as possible to dismiss her entirely.

The girl flew into a rage, and no whisper or urgency from another, but
her own unbridled, independent nature, which during continual struggle
had been steeled to assert herself, in spite of her poverty, among the
rich companions of her own rank, as well as the newly awakened haughty
consciousness that now, as the object of the mightiest monarch's love,
she was exalted far above the companions of her own rank--led her to
rebuff the warning of the well-meaning man with a sharpness that it ill
beseemed one so much younger to use toward the Emperor's gray-haired
messenger.

The valet shrugged his shoulders compassionately, and his regular
features, whose expression varied only under the influence of strong,
deep feelings, distinctly betrayed how sincerely he lamented her
conduct.

Barbara noticed it, and instantly remembered what Wolf had told her
about him and his wife. She did not think of the influence which he
exercised upon the Emperor and the service which he might render her,
but all the more vividly of his steadfast, devoted loyalty, and what he
was and had accomplished for the man whom she loved, and, seized with
sincere repentance, obeying a powerful impulse, she held out her hand
with frank cordiality just as he was already bowing in farewell. Adrian
hesitated a moment.

What did this mean?

What accident was causing this new change of feeling in this April day
of a girl?

But when her sparkling blue eyes gazed at him so brightly and at the
same time so plainly showed that she knew she had wronged him, he
clasped the hand, and his face again wore a friendly expression.

Then Barbara laughed in her bewitching, bell-like tones and, like a
naughty child begging forgiveness for a trivial fault, asked him gaily
not to take offence at her foolish arrogance. All the new things here
had somewhat turned her silly brain. She knew how faithfully he served
her Charles, and for that reason she could not help liking him already.

"If you have any cause to find fault with me," she concluded merrily,
"out with it honestly." Then addressing Frau Lerch, not as though she
were speaking to a servant, but to an older friend, she asked her
to leave her alone with Herr Adrian a short time; but she insisted
positively on having her own way when the dressmaker remarked that she
did not know why, after the greatest secret of all had been forced upon
her, her discretion should be distrusted.

As soon as she had retired the valet entreated Barbara to beware of the
advice of this woman, whose designs he saw perfectly. He, Adrian,
would wish her to have a companion of nobler nature and more delicate
perceptions.

But this warning seemed scarcely endurable to Barbara. Although she did
not fly into a passion again, she asked in an irritated tone whether
Adrian had been granted the power of looking into another's soul. What
she perceived with absolute certainty in Frau Lerch, who, as her dead
mother's maid, had tended her as a child, was great faithfulness and
secrecy and the most skilful hands. Still, she promised to remember his
well-meant counsel.

Adrian's warning always to consider what a position her lord occupied in
the world, and to beware of crossing the border line which separated the
monarch from his subjects, and even from those who were of the highest
rank and dearest to him, was gratefully received, for she remembered the
sharp rebuff which she had already experienced from her lover. It proved
this excellent man's good will toward her, and her eyes fairly hung
upon his lips as he informed her of some of his master's habits and
peculiarities which she must regard. He warned her, with special
earnestness, not to allow herself to be used by others to win favour or
pardon for themselves or their kindred. She might perhaps find means
for it later; now she would at once awaken in the extremely suspicious
monarch doubt of her unselfishness.

This was certainly good advice, and Barbara confessed to the valet that
the marquise had requested her at dinner that day to intercede for her
unfortunate son, who, unluckily, had the misfortune to be misunderstood
by the Emperor Charles. Master Adrian had expected something of the
kind, for the lady in waiting had more than once urged him also to
obtain his Majesty's pardon for this ruined profligate, the shame of his
noble race. He had persistently refused this request, and now enjoined
it upon Barbara to follow his example. Before leaving her, he undertook
to send her tidings of Wolf's health now and then by the violinist
Massi, as he had not leisure to do it himself. At the same time he
earnestly entreated her to repress her wish to see the sufferer again,
and to bear in mind that she could receive no visitor, take no step in
this house or in the city, which would not be known in the Golden Cross.

Barbara passionately demanded to know the spy who was watching her, and
whether she must beware specially of the marquise, her French maid,
the Spanish priest who accompanied the old woman as her confessor, the
garde-robiere Lamperi, who nevertheless had a good face, or who else
among the servants.

On this point, however, the valet would or could give no information.
He knew only his master's nature. Just as he was better acquainted with
every province than the most experienced governor, with every band of
soldiers than the sergeant, so nothing escaped him which concerned the
private lives of those whom he valued. It need not grieve her that he
watched her so carefully. Her acts and conduct would not become a matter
of indifference to him until he withdrew his confidence from her or his
love grew cold.

The deep impression which this information made upon the girl surprised
Adrian. While he was speaking her large eyes dilated more and more, and
with hurried breathing she listened until he had finished. Then pressing
both hands upon her temples, she frantically exclaimed: "But that is
horrible! it is base and unworthy! I will not be a prisoner--! will not,
can not bear it! My whole heart is his, and never belonged to any other;
but, rather than be unable to take a step that is not watched, like the
Sultan's female slaves, I will return to my father."

Here she hesitated; for the first time since she had entered Prebrunn
she remembered the old man who for her sake had been sent out into the
world. But she soon went on more calmly: "I even permitted my father to
be taken from me and sent away, perhaps to death. I gave everything to
my sovereign, and if he wants my life also," she continued with fresh
emotion, "he may have it; but the existence of a caged bird!--that will
destroy me."

Here the sensible man interrupted her with the assurance that no one,
last of all his Majesty, thought of restricting her liberty more than
was reasonable. She would be permitted to walk and to use her horses
exactly as she pleased, only the object of her walks and rides must be
one which she could mention to her royal lover without timidity.

Barbara, still with quickened breathing, then put the question how she
could know this; and Adrian, with a significant smile, replied that
her heart would tell her, and if it should ever err--of this he was
certain--the Emperor Charles.

With these words he took leave of her to go, on behalf of his master, to
the marquise, and Barbara stood motionless for some time, gazing after
him.

In the Golden Cross Quijada asked Adrian what he thought of the singer,
and it was some time ere he answered deliberately: "If only I knew
exactly myself, your lordship--I am only a plain man, who wishes every
one the best future. Here I do so out of regard for his Majesty, Sir
Wolf Hartschwert, and the inexperienced youth of this marvellously
beautiful creature. But if you were to force me by the rack to form a
definite opinion of her, I could not do it. The most favourable would
not be too good, the reverse scarcely too severe. To reconcile such
contrasts is beyond my power. She is certainly something unusual, that
will fit no mould with which I am familiar."

"If you had a son," asked Don Luis, "would you receive her gladly as a
daughter-in-law?"

A gesture of denial from the valet gave eloquent expression of his
opinion; but Quijada went on in a tone of anxious inquiry: "Then what
will she whom he loves be to the master whose happiness and peace are as
dear to you as to me?"

Adrian started, and answered firmly: "For him, it seems to me, she will
perhaps be the right one, for what power could she assert against his?
And, besides, there is something in his Majesty, as well as in this
girl, which distinguishes them from other mortals. What do I mean by
that? I see and hear it, but I can neither exactly understand nor name
it."

"That might be difficult even for a more adroit speaker," replied
Quijada; "but I think I know to what you allude. You and I, Master
Adrian, have hearts in our breasts, like thousands of other people, and
in our heads what is termed common sense. In his Majesty something else
is added. It seems as though he has at command a messenger from heaven
who brings him thought and decisions."

"That's it!" exclaimed Adrian eagerly; "and whenever she raises
her voice to sing, a second one stands by the side of this Barbara
Blomberg."

"Only we do not yet know," observed Quijada anxiously, "whether
this second one with the singer is a messenger from heaven, like his
Majesty's, or an emissary of hell."

The valet shrugged his shoulders irresolutely, and said quietly: "How
could I venture to express an opinion about so noble an art? But when
I was listening to the hymn to the Virgin yesterday, it seemed as if an
angel from heaven was singing from her lips."

"Let us hope that you may be right," replied the other. "But no matter!
I think I know whence comes the invisible ally his Majesty has at his
disposal. It is the Holy Ghost that sends him--there is no doubt of it!
His control is visible everywhere. With miraculous power he urges him
on in advance of all others, and even of himself. This becomes most
distinctly perceptible in war."

"That is true," declared the valet, "and your lordship has surely hit
the right clew. For"--he glanced cautiously around him and lowered his
voice--"whenever I put on my master's armour I always feel how he is
trembling--yes, trembling, your lordship. His face is livid, and the
drops of perspiration on his brow are not due solely to the heat."

"And then," cried Quijada, his black eyes sparkling with a fiery
light--"then in his agitation he scarcely knows what he is doing as
I hold the stirrup for him. But when, once in his saddle, his divine
companion descends to him, he dashes upon the foe like a whirlwind and,
wherever he strikes, how the chips fly! The strongest succumb to his
blows. 'Victory! victory!' men shout exultingly wherever he goes. Even
in the last accursed Algerian defeat his helper was at his side; for,
Adrian"--here he, too, lowered his voice--"without him and his wonderful
power every living soul of us, down to the last boat and camp follower,
would have been destroyed."




CHAPTER XXV.

After this conversation the two men who, in different positions, stood
nearest to the Emperor Charles, placed no obstacle in Barbara's way.

The third--the Bishop of Arras--also showed a friendly spirit toward the
Emperor's love affair. True, he had not been taken into his confidence,
but he rarely failed to be present when Barbara sang with the boy choir,
or alone, in the Golden Cross, before the monarch or distinguished
guests.

Charles summoned her there almost daily, and always at different hours.

This was done to strengthen the courtiers and the citizens of Ratisbon
in the belief that Barbara owed his favour solely to her singing.

Granvelle, who appreciated and was interested in music as well as in
painting and sculpture, found real pleasure in listening to Barbara, yet
while doing so he did not forget that she might be of service to him. If
she only remained on good terms with him she would, he was sure of that,
whether willing or not, be used as his tool.

Spite of his nine-and-twenty years, he forbade himself to cherish any
other wishes, because he would have regarded it treachery to the royal
master whom he served with faithful devotion. But, as he accepted
great gifts without ever allowing himself to be tempted to treason
or forgetfulness of duty, so he did not reject little tokens of
friendliness from Barbara, and of these she showed no lack. The young
Bishop of Arras was also an extremely fine-looking man, whose clever
brain and bright, penetrating glance harmonized with his great intellect
and his position. Wolf had already told her how much the monarch
regarded the opinion of this counsellor.

The fourth person whose good will had been represented to her as
valuable was the almoner, Pedro de Soto; but he, who usually understood
how to pay homage to beautiful women in the most delicate manner, kept
rigidly aloof.

True, he had placed no obstacle in the way of the late kindling of the
heart of his imperial master, but since his servant's report, from
which it appeared that Barbara was on friendly terms with heretics, and
therefore cherished but a lukewarm devotion to her own faith, she was no
longer the same to him. In Spain this would have been enough to deliver
her to the Holy Inquisition. Here, however, matters were different.
Everywhere he saw the lambs associating with the wolves, and the larger
number of the relatives of the Emperor's love had become converts to
heresy. Therefore indulgence was demanded, and De Soto would have
gladly been convinced of Barbara's orthodoxy under such difficult
circumstances. But if it proved that the girl not only associated with
heretics, but inclined to their error, then gentle inaction must be
transformed into inexorable sternness, even though the rejuvenating
power which she exerted upon the monarch were tenfold stronger than
it doubtless was; for what danger might threaten the Emperor and
Christianity from the bewitching woman who seemed to love Charles, if
she undertook to influence him in favour of the new doctrines, which,
in the eyes of every earnest Dominican, the Emperor treated far too
leniently!

He, the confessor, even knew that Charles considered several demands
of the Protestants to which the Church could never consent, entirely
justifiable--nay, that he deemed a reformation of the Church by the
council now in session at Trent extremely desirable.

Therefore it was a duty to withhold from him every influence which could
favour these pernicious views and wishes, and Pedro de Soto had also
been young and knew only too well what power so beautiful a woman, with
such bewitching gifts, could exert upon the man whose heart cherishes
her.

So, immediately after Barbara's entrance into Prebrunn, the confessor
adopted his measures. Although the conversation to which he subjected
her had resulted in her favour, he had deemed it beneficial to place
a priest who was devoted to him among the ecclesiastics in the little
castle.

To surround her with spies chosen from the lay class was repugnant to
his lofty nature. Besides, they would have been superfluous; for a
short time before his servant Cassian had asked permission to marry
the marquise's French maid, and Alphonsine, who was neither young nor
pretty, was inclined to all sorts of intrigues. She supplied slow, pious
Cassian's deficiencies in the best possible manner. A chance word from
the distinguished prelate had sufficed to make it their duty to watch
Barbara and her visitors.

In Alphonsine's mistress, the Marquise de Leria, the almoner also
possessed a willing tale-bearer. She had avoided him since his refusal
to commend her ruined son to the favour of his imperial penitent. Now,
unasked, she had again approached him, and her explanation first gave
many an apparently unimportant communication from the servants its real
value.

The atmosphere of the court was her vital air. Even when she had
voluntarily offered to take Barbara under her charge, in a secluded
house in the suburb, she had been aware how greatly she would miss
the presence of royalty. Yet she would have endured far more difficult
things, for a thousand signs betrayed that this time his Majesty's
heart had not been merely superficially touched, and Barbara's traits of
character made it appear probable that, like many a beauty at the court
of Francis I of France, she might obtain an influence over the Emperor.
If this occurred, the marquise had found the most powerful tool for the
deliverance of her son.

This hope filled the old noblewoman's heart and brain. It was her last,
for the Emperor was the only person who could save the worthless idol of
her soul from ruin, and yet, when she had grovelled at his knees in her
despair, she received an angry repulse and the threat of being instantly
deprived of her position if she ever again attempted to speak to him
about this vexatious matter. She knew only too well that Charles would
keep his word, and therefore had already induced every person whom she
believed possessed even a small share of influence over the monarch
to intercede for her, but they had been no less sharply rebuffed than
herself; for the sovereign, usually so indulgent to the reckless pranks
of the young nobles, would not even hear the name of the aristocratic
sharper, who was said to have sold the plans of the fortifications to
France.

Charles now loved a woman whom, with swift presence of mind, she had
bound to herself, and what no one else had succeeded in doing Barbara
might accomplish.

Therefore the marquise had retired to the solitude which she hated,
and hourly humbled herself to cringing flattery of a creature whom, on
account of her birth, she scorned.

But Barbara was warned and, difficult as it often was for her to
withstand the humble entreaties to which the old lady in waiting
frequently condescended, persisted in her refusal.

Yet the unhappy mother did not give up hope, for as soon as the singer
committed any act which she was obliged to conceal she could obtain
power over her. So she kept her eyes open and, whenever the Emperor
sought the young girl and was alone with her, she stole into the garden
and peered through the badly fitting window shutters into the lighted
room which was the scene of the happiness of the ill-matched lovers.

What she overheard, however, only increased the feeling of powerlessness
against the hated creature whom she so urgently needed; for the
tenderness which Charles showed Barbara was so great that it not only
filled the marquise with surprise and bitter envy, but also awakened the
conviction that it must be a small matter for the singer to obtain from
so ardent a lover far greater things than she had asked.

So she continued to watch and listen unweariedly, day after day and
evening after evening, but always in vain. She had not the most trivial
thing for which Barbara could be seriously reproached to report to the
confessor; yet De Soto desired nothing better, for Barbara still exerted
an extremely favourable influence upon the Emperor's mood. Therefore it
vexed him that Cassian informed him of many things which prevented his
relying firmly upon her orthodoxy.

At any rate, there were Protestants among her visitors and,
unfortunately, they included Herr Peter Schlumperger, whom De Soto knew
as an active promoter of the apostasy of the Ratisbon burghers. He had
called upon her the second day after her arrival and remained a long
time but, it is true, had not appeared again. With the others also she
held no regular intercourse--nay, she scarcely seemed to enjoy their
visits. Thus the daughters of the Woller family from the Ark, who had
appeared one afternoon, had been detained only a little longer by her
than other Protestant matrons and maidens.

All this was scarcely sufficient to foster his anxiety; but Cassian
reported one visit with which the case was different. Barbara had not
only received this guest alone, but she had kept him more than an hour,
and the servant could swear that the young man to whom she sang long
songs--which, it is true, sounded like church music--to the lute
and also to the harp, was Erasmus Eckhart, the adopted son of the
archtraitor, Dr. Hiltner, who had just obtained the degree of Master
of Arts in Wittenberg. This seemed suspicious, and induced De Soto to
investigate the matter thoroughly.

Erasmus had come in the morning, at a time when the Emperor never
visited Barbara. Nothing remarkable had taken place during their
interview, but Cassian had heard her dismiss him with a warning which,
even to a less distrustful person, would have seemed suspicious. Why had
she assured the Wittenberg theologian, as she extended her hand to him
in farewell, that what he offered her had given her great pleasure, and
she would gladly invite him to bring her similar things often, but must
deny herself this gratification from motives which he could imagine? His
urgent entreaty at least to be permitted to call on her sometimes she
had curtly and positively refused, but the Wittenberg heretic did not
allow himself to be rebuffed, for Cassian had seen him several times in
the neighbourhood of the castle.

There was as little cause to object to the visits paid to her by
Gombert, Appenzelder, Damian Feys, occasionally some noblemen or guests
of the court, and once even by no less a personage than the Bishop of
Arras, as to the rides she took every afternoon; for the latter were
always under the charge of Herr de Fours, an old equerry of the Emperor,
and in the company of several courtiers, among whom Baron Malfalconnet
was often included. A number of gay young pages always belonged to
this brilliant cavalcade, whose number never lacked the handsome
sixteen-year-old Count Tassis, who spent his whole large stock of pocket
money in flowers which he sent every morning to Barbara.

The confessor was glad to hear that the estimable violinist Massi
frequently visited the girl, for he was firm in the faith, and that he
brought her tidings of the sorely wounded Sir Wolf Hartschwert could
only be beneficial, for perhaps he warned her of the seriousness of life
and that there were other things here below than the joy of love, jest,
and laughter. The almoner's doubt of Wolf's orthodoxy had been entirely
dispelled by his confession. Men do not deceive in the presence of
death.

It would have been a genuine boon had Barbara selected him to open her
heart to him in the confessional, for her relation to the wounded man
rendered it difficult for him to trust her entirely.

Wolf's thoughts in his fever constantly dwelt upon her, and he sometimes
accused her of the basest treachery, sometimes coupled her name with
Malfalconnet's, sometimes with Luis Quijada's. The Emperor's, on the
contrary, he had not mentioned.

He must love Barbara with ardent passion, and she, too, still seemed
warmly attached to him, for to see him again she had bravely exposed
herself to serious danger.

Eye and ear witnesses had reported that, notwithstanding his Majesty's
positive orders to avoid her old home, she had entered the house and the
knight's apartments, knelt beside his couch, and even kissed his weak,
burning hand with tender devotion.

But though she still retained a portion of her former affection for Wolf
Hartschwert, she loved the Emperor Charles with passionate fervour. Even
the marquise did not venture to doubt this. Often as she had watched the
meetings of the lovers, she had marvelled at the youthful ardour of the
monarch, the joyous excitement with which Barbara awaited him, and her
sorrowful depression when he left her. During the first week the old
noblewoman thought that she had never met a happier pair. The almoner
deemed it unworthy of him to listen to a report of the caresses which
she scornfully mentioned.

The time even came when he no longer needed confirmation from others,
and forbade himself to doubt Barbara's fidelity to her religion; for at
the end of the first week in Prebrunn she had desired to ask a servant
of the Church what she must do to make herself worthy of such abundance
of the highest happiness, and to atone for the sin she was committing
through her love.

In doing so she had opened her heart to the confessor with childlike
frankness, and what De Soto heard on this occasion sincerely delighted
him and endeared to him this thoroughly sound, beautiful creature
overmastered by a first great passion. He believed her, and indignantly
rejected what the spies afterward brought to him.

Yet he did not close his ears to the marquise when, in her clever,
entertaining way, she told him what, against her will, she had overheard
in consequence of the careless construction of the little castle, built
only for a summer residence, or had seen during a walk in the garden
when the shutters, through forgetfulness, had not been closed.

How should he not have heard gladly that the monarch, at every interview
with Barbara, listened to her singing with special pleasure?

At first she chose grave, usually even religious songs, and among them
Charles's favourite was the "Quia amore langueo."

To listen to these deeply felt tones of yearning always seemed to
possess a fresh charm for him.

No wonder!

The singer understood how to produce a new effect each time by means of
wonderful gradations of expression in the comprehension and execution.

Once she had also succeeded in cheering her lover with Perissone
Cambio's merry singing lesson on the 'ut re mi fa sol', and again with
Willaert's laughing song, "Sempre mi ridesta."

Two days later there had again been a great deal of laughing because
Barbara undertook to sing to his Majesty another almost recklessly
merry song by the same composer. The marquise knew it, and declared that
Barbara's style and voice did not suit such things. She admitted that
her execution of serious, especially religious and solemn compositions,
was not amiss--nay, often it was wonderfully fine--but in such secular
tunes her real nature appeared too plainly, and the skilful singer
became a Bacchante.

It had been a sorry pleasure to her to watch the boisterous manner and
singing of this creature, who had been far too highly favoured by the
caprice of Fortune.

These reckless songs, unless she was mistaken, had also been by no means
pleasing to his Majesty. The light had fallen directly upon his face
just as she happened to glance up at the house from under the group of
lindens, and she had distinctly seen him angrily thrust out his
lower lip, which every one near his person knew was a sign of extreme
displeasure.

But the girl had gone beyond all bounds. Old as she was, she could not
help blushing at the mere thought of it. In her reckless mood she had
probably forgotten that she had drawn her imperial lover into her net
by arts of an entirely different nature. The almoner listened
incredulously, for in his youth the Emperor Charles had joined in the
wildest songs of the soldiery, and had well understood, on certain
occasions, how to be merry with the merry, laugh and carouse in a
Flemish tavern. After the confession the almoner heard things to which
he would gladly have shut his ears, though they proved that the time
which the marquise had spent at the French court had benefited her
powers of observation.

Three days before the Emperor, for the first time, had seriously found
fault with Barbara.

It had been impossible for the lady in waiting to discover the cause;
but what she knew certainly was that her lover's censure had roused
the girl to vehement contradiction, and that his Majesty, after a sharp
reply, had been on the point of leaving her. True, the reckless beauty
had repented her imprudent outburst of wrath speedily enough, and had
understood how to conciliate the far too indulgent sovereign by such
humility and such sweet tenderness that he probably must have forgiven
her--at least the farewell had been as affectionate as ever.

Nevertheless, on the following evening, for the first time, he did not
come to the castle, and the marquise had feared that the Emperor might
now withdraw his favour from Barbara, which would have been too soon for
her own wishes.

But yesterday evening, after sunset, the dark litter, to the old
noblewoman's relief, had again stopped behind the garden gate, and the
pleasure of having her lover again had so deeply overjoyed Barbara that
he, too, was infected by her radiant delight.

Then, in the midst of the most tender caresses, he had been summoned out
of the room, and when he returned, with frowning brow, the marquise had
witnessed at least the commencement of a scene which seemed to justify
her opinion that his Majesty: would have no taste for Barbara's utter
freedom from restraint and gay secular songs.

Unfortunately, she had been prematurely driven from her post of
observation; but she had seen the Emperor come in, and Barbara, without
noticing his altered expression, or rather, probably, to cheer him
by something especially merry, gaily began Baldassare Donati's superb
dancing-master's song, "Qui la gagliarda vuol imparare," at the same
time in the merriest, most graceful manner imitating the movements of
the gagliarda dancer.

But Charles soon interrupted her, sharply requesting her to sing
something else or cease entirely for that day.

Startled, she again asked forgiveness, and then pleaded in justification
the universally acknowledged beauty of this charming song, which Maestro
Gombert also admired; but the Emperor flew into a passion, and cut her
short with the loud remark that he was not in the habit of having his
own judgment corrected by the opinion of others. The jest did all honour
to the skill and merry mood of the composer, but the contrary might be
said of the singer who ventured to sing it to a person in whom it could
awaken only bitter feelings.

But when, so painfully surprised that her eyes filled with tears, she
confessed that her selection perhaps had not been very appropriate, and
sadly added the inquiry why her beloved sovereign condemned a trivial
offence so harshly, he wrathfully exclaimed, "For more than one reason."

Then, rising, he paced the room several times with a somewhat limping
gait, saying, in so loud a tone that it could be distinctly heard in the
dark, sultry garden: "Because it shows little delicacy of feeling when
the man who is satiated tells the starving one of the dainty meal which
he has just eaten; because--because I call it shameful for a person who
can see to tell one who is blind of the pleasure he derives from the
splendid colours of gay flowers; because I expect from the woman whom I
honour with my love more consideration for me and what shadows my life.
Because"--and here he raised his voice still more angrily--"I demand
from any one united to me, the Emperor, by whatever bond----"

The marquise had been unable to hear more of the monarch's violent
attack, for the messenger who had just brought the unwelcome news--it
was Adrian Dubois--had not only passed her, but ventured to call to her
and remark that she would be wise to go into the house--a thunderstorm
was rising. He was not afraid of the rain, and would wait there for his
Majesty.

So the listener did not hear how the incensed monarch continued with the
demand that the woman he loved should neither tell him falsehoods nor
deceive him.

Until then Barbara had listened, silent and pale, biting her trembling
lips in order to adhere to her resolve to submit without reply to
whatever Charles's terrible irritability inflicted upon her. But he must
have noticed what was passing in her mind, for he suddenly paused in
his walk, and, abruptly standing before her, gazed full into her face,
exclaiming: "It is not you who are offended, but I, the sovereign
whom you say you love. Day before yesterday I forbade you to go to the
musician in Red Cock Street, yet you were with him to-day. I asked
you just now whether you had obeyed me and, with smiling lips, you
assented."

Barbara was already prepared with an answer in harmony with the
sharpness of the attack, yet her lover's reproof was well founded.

When he had left the room shortly before he must have been informed
that, in defiance of his explicit command, she had gone to the knight's
house that morning.

But no one had ever charged her with lack of courage. Why had she not
dared to confess the fault which, from a good and certainly pardonable
impulse, she had committed?

Was she not free, or when had she placed herself under obligation to
render blind obedience to her lover?

But the falsehood!

How severely she must perhaps atone for it this time!

Yet the esteem, the love of the man to whom her heart clung, whom she
worshipped with all the fervour of her passionate soul, might be at
stake, and when he now seized his hat to withdraw she barred his way.

Sobbing aloud, she threw herself at his feet, confessed that she was
guilty, and remorsefully admitted that fear of his resentment, which
seemed to her more terrible than death, had induced her to deny what
she had done. She could hate herself for it. Nothing could palliate the
departure from the path of truth, but her disobedience might perhaps
appear to him in a milder light if he learned what had induced her to
commit it.

Charles, still in an angry, imperious tone, ordered her to rise. She
silently obeyed, and when he threw himself on the divan she timidly sat
down by his side, turning toward him her troubled face, which for the
first time he saw wet with tears.

Yet a hopeful smile brightened her moist eyes, for she felt that, since
he permitted her to remain at his side, all might yet be well.

Then she timidly took his hand and, as he permitted it, she held
it firmly while she explained what ties had bound her to Wolf from
childhood.

She represented herself as the sisterly counsellor of the friend who had
grown up in the same house with her. Music and the Catholic religion,
in the midst of a city which had fallen into the Protestant heresy, had
been the bond between them. After his return home he had probably been
unable to help falling in love with her, but, so truly as she hoped for
Heaven's mercy, she had kept her heart closed against Cupid until he,
the Emperor, had approached in order, like that other Caesar, to come,
to see, and to conquer. But she was only a woman, and pity in a woman's
soft heart was as hard to silence as the murmur of a swift mountain
stream or the rushing of the wind.

Yesterday she had learned from the violinist Massi that the knight's
condition was much more critical, and he desired before his death to
clasp her hand again. So, believing that disobedience committed to
lighten the last hours of a dying man would be pardonable before God and
human beings, she had visited the unfortunate Wolf.

The helpful and joy-bestowing power of good works, which the Protestants
denied, had thus become very evident to her; for since she had clasped
the sufferer's hand an indescribable sense of happiness had taken
possession of her, while the knight began to improve. The news had
reached her just before this, the Emperor's, arrival, had made her
happy, and, in spite of her evil conscience, had put her in a very
cheerful mood. But now this beautiful evening had become the saddest one
of her whole life.

Fresh tears, and the other means of conciliation inspired by her loving
heart, then induced the angry lover to forgive her.

Barbara felt this as a great piece of good fortune, and made every
effort to curb the refractory temper which, hitherto, had found nothing
less welcome than humble submission.

Day after day since that evening the confessor had been informed that
nothing interrupted the concord of the lovers, and that Barbara often
prayed very fervently in the private chapel. This pleased the almoner,
and when Cassian told him that, on the evening after the quarrel, the
Emperor had again come to the castle to remain a long time, he rejoiced.

To Barbara this visit had been a true heavenly blessing, but though
Charles showed himself sufficiently loving, she felt, even during the
succeeding visits, that since that fateful episode something difficult
to describe or explain had rested like a gloomy shadow on the Emperor's
joyous confidence.

This change in her lover could scarcely be due to her, for she had
honestly endeavoured to avoid everything which could anger him.

How should she have suspected that the great student of human nature to
whom she had given her heart perceived the restraint which she imposed
upon herself in every interview with him, and that the moderation to
which she submitted from love robbed her of a portion of the charm her
gay unconcern had exerted upon him? Charles suspiciously attributed this
change in the disposition of the woman he loved sometimes to one cause,
sometimes to another; and when he showed her that he missed something
in her which had been dear to him, she thought it a new token of his
dissatisfaction, and increased the restraint which she placed upon
herself.

If the gout again attacked him or the pressure of business, which at
that time constantly made more and more imperious demands upon the
Emperor Charles, detained him from her on one or another evening,
torturing anxiety assailed her, and she had no sleep all night.

Besides, the marquise did not cease to press her with entreaties and
expostulations, and Frau Lerch constantly urged Barbara to profit by the
favour of such a lover. She ought to think of the future, and indemnify
herself with estates and titles for the sad fate awaiting her if his
Majesty wearied of her love.

The ex-maid knew how to describe, in vivid hues, how all would turn
from her if that should happen, and how little the jewels with which he
sometimes delighted her would avail.

But Barbara had cared only for her lord's love, and it was not even
difficult for her to resist the urgency. Yet whenever she was alone with
Charles, and he showed plainly how dear she was to him, the question
forced itself upon her whether this would not be the right time to speak
of her future, and to follow the counsel of the experienced woman who
certainly meant kindly toward her.

This made her silent and constrained for a time, and when she saw that
her manner annoyed her lover she thrust aside the selfish impulse which
was rendering her unlovable, and sometimes showed her delight in the
victory of love over every other feeling so impetuously, that her
nature seemed to have lost the unvarying cheerfulness which had formerly
delighted him, and he left her in a less satisfied mood.

Besides, the marquise had received a letter from Paris, in which her son
declared that if his gambling debts were not paid by the first of August
