all the praise that had been lavished upon it by the handbook. How well
she had studied the thoughtful letters that filled it and the excellent
and well-reasoned advice--erring, if it erred at all, on the side of
overtolerance--that had been given in return. Of course, on Earth,
spiritual adjustment apparently was more important than the physical;
you could tell that from the questions that were asked. A number of the
letters had been reprinted in an appendix to the manual.

     _New York_

     _Dear Senbot Drosmig:_

     _When in contact with Terrestrial culture, I find myself constantly
     overawed and weighed down by the knowledge of my own inadequacy. I
     cannot seem to appreciate the local art forms as disseminated by
     the juke box, the comic strip, the tabloid._

     _How can I help myself toward a greater understanding?_

     _Hopefully yours,_

     _Gnurmis Plitt_

       *       *       *       *       *

     Dear Mr. Plitt:

     Remember, Orkv was not excavated in a week. It took the
     Terrestrials many centuries to develop their exquisite and esoteric
     art forms. How can you expect to comprehend them in a few short
     years? Expose yourself to their art. Work, study, meditate.

     Understanding will come, I promise you.

     Helpfully yours,

     Senbot Drosmig

       *       *       *       *       *

     _Paris_

     Dear Senbot Drosmig:

     _To think that I am enjoying the benefits of Terra while my wife
     and little ones are forced to remain on Fizbus makes my heart ache.
     Surely it is not fair that I should have so much and they so
     little. Imagine the inestimable advantage to the fledgling of even
     a short contact with Terrestrial culture!_

     _Why cannot my loved ones come to join me so that we can share all
     these wonderful spiritual experiences and be enriched by them
     together?_

     _Poignantly yours,_

     _Tpooly N'Ox_

       *       *       *       *       *

     Dear Mr. N'Ox:

     After all, it has been only five years since Fizbian spaceships
     first came into contact with Terra. In keeping with our usual
     colonial policy--so inappropriate and anachronistic when applied to
     a well-developed civilization like Terra's--at first only males are
     allowed to go to the new world until it is made certain over a
     period of years that the planet is safe for mothers and future
     mothers of Fizbus.

     But Stet Zarnon himself, the celebrated and capable editor of the
     Terran edition of _The Fizbus Times_, has taken up your cause, and
     I promise you that eventually your loved ones will be able to join
     you.

     Meanwhile, work, study, meditate.

     Helpfully yours,

     Senbot Drosmig

       *       *       *       *       *

     _Ottawa_

     _Dear Senbot Drosmig:_

     _Having just completed a two-year tour of duty on Earth as part of
     a diplomatic mission, I am regretfully leaving this fair planet.
     What books, what objects of art, what, in short, souvenirs shall I
     take back to Fizbus which will give our people some small idea of
     Earth's rich cultural heritage and, at the same time, serve as
     useful and appropriate gifts for my friends and relatives back
     Home?_

     _Inquiringly yours,_

     _Solgus Zagroot_

       *       *       *       *       *

     Dear Mr. Zagroot:

     Take back nothing but your memories. They will be your best
     souvenirs.

     Out of context, any other mementos might convey little, if
     anything, of the true beauty and advanced spirituality of
     Terrestrial culture, and you might cheapen them were you to use
     them crassly as souvenirs. Furthermore, it is possible that you, in
     your ignorance, might unwittingly select some items that give a
     distorted and false idea of our extrafizbian friends.

     The Fizbian-Earth Cultural Commission, sponsored by _The Fizbian
     Times_, in conjunction with the consulate, is preparing a vast
     program of cultural interchange. Leave it to them to do the great
     work, for you can be sure they will do it well.

     And be sure to tell your fellow-laborers in the diplomatic
     vineyards that it is wiser not to send unapproved Terran souvenirs
     back Home. They might cause a fatal misunderstanding between the
     two worlds. Tell them to spend their time on Earth in working,
     studying and meditating, rather than shopping.

     Helpfully yours,

     Senbot Drosmig

       *       *       *       *       *

And now she--Tarb Morfatch--herself was going to be the guiding spirit
that brought enlightenment and uplift to countless thousands on Terra
and millions on Fizbus. Her name wouldn't appear on the columns, but the
reward of having helped should be enough. Besides, Drosmig was due to
retire soon. If she proved herself competent, she would take over the
column entirely and get the byline. Grupe had promised faithfully.

But what, she wondered, had put Drosmig "out of commission"?

The taxi drew up before a building with a vulgar number of floors
showing above ground.

"Ah--before we--er--meet the others," Stet suggested, twitching his
crest, "I was wondering whether you would care to--er--have dinner with
me tonight?"

This roused Tarb from her speculations. "Oh, I'd love to!" _A date with
the boss right away!_

Stet fumbled in his garments for appropriate tokens with which to pay
the driver. "You--you're not engaged or anything back Home, Miss
Morfatch?"

"Why, no," she said. "It so happens that I'm not."

"Splendid!" He made an abortive gesture with his leg, then let her get
out of the taxi by herself. "It makes the natives stare," he explained
abashedly.

"But why shouldn't they?" she asked, wondering whether to laugh or not.
"How could they help but stare? We are different." _He must be joking._
She ventured a smile.

He smiled back, but made no reply.

The pavement was hard under her thinly covered soles. Now that walking
looked as if it would present a problem, the ban on wing use loomed more
threateningly. She had, of course, walked before--on wet days when her
wings were waterlogged or in high winds or when she had surface
business. However, the sidewalks on Fizbus were soft and resilient. Now
she understood why the Terrestrials wore such crippling foot armor, but
that didn't make her feel any better about it.

A box-shaped machine took the two Fizbians up to the twentieth story in
twice the time it would have taken them to fly the same distance. Tarb
supposed that the offices were in an attic instead of a basement because
exchange difficulties forced the _Times_ to such economy. She wondered
ruefully whether her own expense account would also suffer.

But it was no time to worry about such sordid matters; most important
right now was making a favorable impression on her co-workers. She did
want them to like her.

Taking out her compact, she carefully polished her eyeballs. The man at
the controls of the machine practically performed a ritual _entrechat_.

"Don't do that!" Stet ordered in a harsh whisper.

"But why not?" she asked, unable to restrain a trace of belligerence
from her voice. He hadn't been very polite himself. "The handbook said
respectable Terran women make up in public. Why shouldn't I?"

He sighed. "It'll take time for you to catch on, I suppose. There's a
lot the handbook doesn't--can't--cover. You'll find the setup here
rather different from on Fizbus," he went on as he kicked open the door
neatly lettered _THE FIZBUS TIMES_ in both Fizbian and Terran. "We've
found it expedient to follow the local newspaper practice. For
instance--" he indicated a small green-feathered man seated at a desk
just beyond the railing that bisected the room horizontally--"we have a
Copy Editor."

"What does he do?" she asked, confused.

"He copies news from the other papers, of course."

"And what are _you_ doing tonight, Miss Morfatch?" the Copy Editor
asked, springing up from his desk to execute the three ritual entrechats
with somewhat more verve than was absolutely necessary.

"Having dinner with me," Stet said quickly.

"Pulling rank, eh, old bird? Well, we'll see whether position or
sterling worth will win out in the end."

As the rest of the staff crowded around Tarb, leaping and booing as
appreciatively as any girl could want, she managed to snatch a rapid
look around. The place wasn't really so very much different from a
Fizbian newsroom, once she got over the oddity of going across, not up
and down, with the desks--queerly shaped but undeniably desks--arranged
side by side instead of one over the other. There were chairs and
stools, no perches, but that was to be expected in a wingless society.
And it was noisy. Even though the little machines had stopped clattering
when she came in, a distant roaring continued, as if, concealed
somewhere close by, larger, more sinister machines continued their work.
A peculiar smell hung in the air--not unpleasant, exactly, but strange.

She sniffed inquiringly.

"Ink," Stet said.

