
"You!  What do you know of Rollitt?  Why should he play to oblige you?"

Fisher minor, wishing he had not mentioned Rollitt's name, related,
somewhat apologetically, the story of the adventure on the Shayle.

"Why," said the elder brother, "you saved his life, young 'un.  No
wonder he's civil to you!"

"Oh, please don't tell him I told you."

"All right; but what about the boat?  It must have been smashed to bits.
What did Mrs Wisdom say?"

"Oh, Rollitt was very honourable and bought her another.  She told me
so--and I've seen the new boat."

"Rollitt bought it!  Why, he's as poor as a church mouse.  How could he
get the money, I'd like to know?"

"He got it the very next day," said Fisher minor.  "I suppose he had
some; but promise you won't say anything."

"What's the use of making a secret of it?  I won't say anything unless
you like.  But I must go to Yorke."

The captain was quite prepared for the action of the Moderns.

"They've struck," said he.  "Now the question is, shall we play on
Saturday, or scratch the match?"

The unanimous verdict was in favour of playing, whatever the result.

"Of course we are never sure of Rollitt until we've got him," said he,
"so we may have to play without him."

"Would Stratton play for us?" asked some one.

"No, don't let's go outside and ask masters.  We're in for a licking;
but we'll make the best fight we can."

So yet another notice appeared on the board before nightfall.

"The School team on Saturday will consist of the following."  (Here
followed the names, all, of course, on the Classical side.)

"A meeting of the clubs is summoned for October 3, at four p.m., in
Hall."

Of these two announcements the first amused, the second perplexed the
good young men of the Modern side.  The new fifteen consisted half of
raw outsiders who had never played in a first-class match before, and
were utterly unknown to fame on the football field.  But the summons for
October 3 was puzzling.  Did it mean a general row, or was the captain
going to resign, or was an attempt to be made to expel the mutineers?

Clapperton did not like it.  He had expected Yorke would have come to
terms before now, and it disconcerted him to see that, on the contrary,
the captain seemed determined to carry the thing through.

The only thing, of course, was for the Moderns to abstain in a body from
the meeting.  But could they depend on their forces to obey their
leaders?  It was all very well to compel four players to refuse to act;
but to constrain 120 boys to do the same was a less easy task.

It seemed to Clapperton that he would do best to strike the iron while
hot; and for that purpose he made a descent next morning into the
quarters of his fag.  If he could secure the juniors, it would be
something.

He found Percy there alone, diligently working.  That young gentleman
had in fact been reminded in pretty forcible terms by Mr Forder that he
had not yet handed in his Latin letter of apology ordered a week ago.
Percy had hoped if he forgot it long enough Mr Forder would forget it
too, and it had startled and grieved him very much to-day to receive
notice that unless he brought his _poena_ in an hour he would be sent up
to the doctor.

Consequently, while his comrades were out enjoying themselves, he was
here in a shocking bad temper, with a Latin Dictionary in front of him,
trying to express his contrition for having used bad language in class a
week ago.

He had got a little way.  Latin prose for a Modern junior is a trifle
thorny; but Percy had a rough and ready way with him which, if it did
not emulate Cicero, at least made his meaning tolerably clear.

"Care Magistere Fordere, Ego sum excessive tristis ut ego usebam malam
linguam in classem alteram diem.  Ego apologizo, et ego non facerebo
illud iterum.  Ego spero ut vos voluntas prodonnere," (it took him some
time to arrive at this classical term for "you will forgive") "me hanc
tempus."

This was all very well, but it only took up about six lines out of ten,
and he was in despair how to continue.  His ideas, his temper, and his
Latin had all evaporated.  When Clapperton entered, he did not even look
up.

"Cut, whoever you are, and hang yourself," said he.

"Hullo, Percy!  What's the row with you?"

"Don't talk to me," said Percy.  "It's that beast Forder."

"Where are the others?  I want to talk to you youngsters."

"How do I know where every ass in the place is?  What do you want?"

The tone in which the inquiry was made was not encouraging.

"It's about the meeting next week.  We don't mean to attend it."

"Don't you?  Our lot does.  We're going.  Rather."

"It's a dodge of the other side.  They're going to get the clubs into
their own hands, and we've decided none of our fellows shall go.  Then
they can't do anything."

"Can't they?  You don't know my young brother Wally as well as I do.
He'll do something, bless you; but I rather fancy they won't have it all
to themselves.  _We'll_ put a spoke in their wheels."

"Look here, young Wheatfield," said Clapperton, put out by the
obtuseness of his fag, "the long and short of it is you're not to go.
You know what's happened.  Our side has been snubbed and cut out of the
games by those fellows; and now they want to get us to come to their
precious meeting to help them collar the clubs."

"That's just why I and my chaps are going to turn up," said Percy.
"We'll let them know!"

"Do you hear what I say?  You're not to go, you or any of them.  If you
can't understand the reason, I dare say you'll understand a thrashing.
You'll get it unless you stand out like the rest of us."

"I say, what's the Latin for `wrong,' Clapperton?"

"Do you hear what I say?"

"Yes, yes--is it `malus,' or `unrectus,' or what?"

"Are you going to do what I tell you?"

"How can I say what the chaps'll do?"

"You must tell them; you're fags' captain.  They must do what you tell
them."

"I'd jolly well like to catch them not," said Percy, tossing his head:
"I'd teach 'em.  I say, do you think `unrectus' will do?"

"Remember, you'll get it pretty hot if you disobey in this, I promise
you."

"Perhaps `malus' is better form," suggested the junior.

Clapperton left in despair.

"What a fearful ass I was," said Percy when he had gone, "not to make
him write my impot!  Just like me.  Catch our lot not going to that
meeting!  We aint going to skulk.  Whew! there goes the quarter to!  I
shall never get done this brutal thing."

"Id est malus non facere quad magister dicit.  Vos voluntas laetus
audire ut Fellsgarthus liquebat Rendleshamus ad pedemballum super
Saturdaium durare," (Saturday last).  "Nos obtenebanus unum goalum ad
nil quod non erat malum.  Ego debeo nunc concludere.  Ego sum vestrum
fideliter Perceius Granum agrum."  (Percy flattered himself he knew the
correct Latin for his own name.)

He had a rush to get this work of art over to Mr Forder in time, and
was considerably mortified to observe that the master did not seem at
all gratified by the performance.  Just like Forder! the more you laid
yourself out to please him, the worse he was.

"Leave it, sir.  I'll speak to you to-morrow."

"That means a licking," said Percy to himself.  "I can see it in his
eye.  All serene.  That's his way of showing his gratitude."

And he went back in a very bad temper to his own room, where his
comrades had arrived to greet him.

"Why ever can't you chaps be in the way when you're wanted?" prowled
Percy.  "There was Clapperton in here just now talking rot about the
meeting next week.  What do you think?  He says we're not to go to it."

"Why not?"

Percy in his lucid manner tried to explain.

"All gammon," said Lickford.  "If we're to be stopped going to Hall, we
shall be stopped grub next."

This was an argument that went home.

"If Clapperton had made it worth our while, you know," said Cottle, "it
might have been different.  I don't care much about the meeting; but if
I stop away for him, I'll get something for it."

This mercenary view of the subject was new to Percy, but he frankly
accepted it.

"I tell you what," said he; "here, give us a pen; we'll just draw up a
few conditions.  If he accepts them we'll stay away; if he don't, he may
hang himself before we sit out."

After much deliberation, the following charter of six points was drawn
up and laid on Clapperton's table.

"On the following conditions the undersigned will stop out of Hall on
October 3,--namely, to wit, viz., i.e.:--

"1.  No more fagging.

"2.  Don't go to bed till 9:30.

"3.  A study a-piece.

"4.  The prefects shall be abolished.  Any prefect reporting to Forder
to be kicked.

"5.  Except between 9:30 p.m. and 7:30 a.m. we do as we like.

"6.  That the four following Classic cads get their noses pulled; namely
Wheatfield, W., D'Arcy, Ashby, and Fisher minor.

"If these are agreed to, we won't go to the meeting."

  (Signed by) Wheatfield, P., M.P.
  Cottle, Major-General.
  Lickford, D.D.
  Ramshaw minor, F.S.A.
  Cash, LL.D., etcetera, etcetera.



CHAPTER THIRTEEN.

CORDER TO THE FRONT.

The morning of the return match with Rendlesham was damp and muggy, and
so assorted well with the spirits of Fellsgarth generally.

The juniors of course were cheerful--everything came in the day's work
for them--but among the seniors on either side gloom prevailed.  Even
Ranger, the lighthearted, was snappish, as his fag discovered; and
Denton, the amiable, hoped he would not, for his temper's sake, meet too
many Moderns between morning and evening.  The captain, though he kept
up his usual show of serenity, was evidently worried.  But he had no
notion of giving in.  No!  If the School was to be thrashed let them
take their thrashing like men, and not whine about like the "other
boys."

"After all," said he to Ranger, "we may not get glory, but we needn't
lose it.  Only, for goodness' sake, let us keep our rows to ourselves,
and not talk about them out of doors."

"Right you are!" said his friend.  "I wish I had your temper.  The cads!
And after the way you've treated them, too.  Why, some of us thought
you went out of your way to favour them."

The captain grunted, and began to throw his flannels into his bag.

"What about Rollitt?" he asked.

"No go.  He's gone off for a day's fishing."

The captain whistled dismally.  "Then we must play a man short.  There's
no one else worth putting in.  It's like marching to one's execution,"
he said; "I wish it was all over.  But it's only just beginning."

The Moderns were gloomy too.  They had taken their course, and they must
stand by it now.  When they came to reflect, it was not a particularly
glorious one, nor did it seem to promise much by way of compensation.
They were done out of football for the rest of the term; they were
reduced to a faction in Fellsgarth, and what was worse, they were
secretly doubtful whether they were quite as much in the right as they
tried to persuade themselves.

They had taken their course, however, and must go on.

"I suppose none of our side will go on the omnibus," said Brinkman.

"Why not?" said Clapperton.  "It will do them good to have spectators.
I shall go; not that I care about it, but just to assert my rights."

"Hurrah for self-sacrifice!" said Fullerton.  "If your principles will
allow you to take chicken and tongue sandwiches with you, I'll go too."

"It's ten to one they'll try to prevent our going," said Dangle; "I hope
they'll try."

When the two coaches drove up to carry the fifteen and the prefects and
other privileged boys to the scene of conflict, a good deal of surprise
was evinced at the appearance of Clapperton, Brinkman, Dangle, and
Fullerton, in ordinary costume, and without bags, ready to accompany the
party.

Contrary to their expectations and hopes, no protest was made, and, as
far as the Classic seniors were concerned, no notice was vouchsafed
them.  This was annoying, particularly as the juniors present took care
to call attention to their presence.

"Look at 'em," cried Wally; "don't they look clever?"

"Kicked out of the team--serve 'em right!" shouted Ashby.

"Who's kicked out?" retorted the Modern fags.  "It would take better
chaps than you to kick them out."

"Don't you wish you could kick them in?  They know better," retorted
Percy and Co.

Amid such embarrassing comments, the four Modern heroes mounted to their
places.

The cheers of their adherents hardly made up for the chilly welcome of
their travelling companions.  Yorke, seeing Clapperton looking for a
place, politely moved up to make room, and then turned his back and
talked to Ranger.  The other three were similarly cut off, Dangle
finding himself in between Fisher major and Denton, who talked across
him.  Brinkman, on another coach, was tucked in among some rowdy Classic
middle-boys who were discussing the "strike" very vigorously among
themselves.  As for Fullerton, he was lucky enough to get the seat
beside the driver, where, at any rate, he could count on one sympathetic
soul into whose ears to pour his occasional words of wisdom.

Just as the first coach was starting, a shout was heard from across the
Green, and Corder, the Modern boy whose services were declined on the
previous occasion, equipped in an ulster and with his bag in his hand,
appeared signalling for the _cortege_ to wait.

"Well! what is it?" demanded Dangle.

"Is Yorke there?  Yorke, can I play to-day?"

"No, you can't," said Dangle in a menacing undertone.  "None of us are
playing; you know that."

"I don't see why I mayn't play if I have the chance," said Corder.  "I
awfully want to play in the fifteen."

"We're a man short," said Yorke.  "You can play, Corder."

"If you dare to come and play," said Dangle, still in a whisper, "you'll
find it so precious hot for yourself afterwards that you'll be sorry for
it."

"Yorke says I may play," persisted Corder; "I don't see why I
shouldn't."

"Cad! traitor! blackleg!" yelled Percy and Co., as they saw their man
mount the coach.

"Ha, ha! got _one_ man among you who isn't a coward and a sneak, and--
and a howling kid!" retorted Wally.  "Gee up!"  Whereat the whips
cracked and the happy party drove off.

Corder was one of those obtuse youths who can never take in more than
one idea at a time.  His present idea was football.  He had come up this
term with a consuming ambition to get into the fifteen, and had played
hard and desperately to secure his end.  Last week, when Brinkman was
obliged to retire, he thought his chance was come, and great was his
mortification when he found that his nomination was not accepted by the
captain.  Still he didn't despair.  When he saw the vacancies caused in
the team by the defection of the Moderns, his hopes rose again; but once
more they were dashed by the captain's announcement of a fifteen made up
wholly of Classics.

To-day he had not had the heart to come out and see the coaches start,
and was moping in his own room, when some one brought in word that
Rollitt was not going to play after all, and that the team was setting
out a man short.

Whereupon Corder dashed into his ulster, flung his flannels into his
bag, and tore out of his house just in time to secure for himself the
long-coveted honour, and find himself in the glorious position of
"playing for the School."

How was such a fellow likely to trouble his head about strikes, and
protests, and organised desertion?

Fortunately for the comfort of his journey, he had to pack himself away
on the floor between the feet of Ridgway and another of the team, who,
if they kicked him at all, only did it by accident or by way of
encouragement, and not as Dangle or Brinkman might have done, in spite.

The rain was coming down pretty steadily by the time the party got to
their destination, and the gloom on the brows of the four Modern
prefects deepened as they looked up and speculated on the delights of
standing for an hour on the wet grass watching their rivals play.
