The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Road to Oz, by L. Frank Baum

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Road to Oz

Author: L. Frank Baum

Posting Date: July 21, 2008 [EBook #485]
Release Date: April, 1996

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ROAD TO OZ ***




Produced by Warren Baldwin and Dennis Amundson.









The Road to Oz


  In which is related how Dorothy Gale of Kansas,
   The Shaggy Man, Button Bright, and Polychrome
         the Rainbow's Daughter met on an
           Enchanted Road and followed
              it all the way to the
                  Marvelous Land
                      of Oz.


by

L.  Frank Baum

"Royal Historian of Oz"



Contents

   --To My Readers--
   1.  The Way to Butterfield
   2.  Dorothy Meets Button-Bright
   3.  A Queer Village
   4.  King Dox
   5.  The Rainbow's Daughter
   6.  The City of Beasts
   7.  The Shaggy Man's Transformation
   8.  The Musicker
   9.  Facing the Scoodlers
  10.  Escaping the Soup-Kettle
  11.  Johnny Dooit Does It
  12.  The Deadly Desert Crossed
  13.  The Truth Pond
  14.  Tik-Tok and Billina
  15.  The Emperor's Tin Castle
  16.  Visiting the Pumpkin-Field
  17.  The Royal Chariot Arrives
  18.  The Emerald City
  19.  The Shaggy Man's Welcome
  20.  Princess Ozma of Oz
  21.  Dorothy Receives the Guests
  22.  Important Arrivals
  23.  The Grand Banquet
  24.  The Birthday Celebration




To My Readers


Well, my dears, here is what you have asked for: another "Oz Book"
about Dorothy's strange adventures.  Toto is in this story, because you
wanted him to be there, and many other characters which you will
recognize are in the story, too.  Indeed, the wishes of my little
correspondents have been considered as carefully as possible, and if
the story is not exactly as you would have written it yourselves, you
must remember that a story has to be a story before it can be written
down, and the writer cannot change it much without spoiling it.

In the preface to "Dorothy and the Wizard of Oz" I said I would like to
write some stories that were not "Oz" stories, because I thought I had
written about Oz long enough; but since that volume was published I
have been fairly deluged with letters from children imploring me to
"write more about Dorothy," and "more about Oz," and since I write only
to please the children I shall try to respect their wishes.

There are some new characters in this book that ought to win your love.
I'm very fond of the shaggy man myself, and I think you will like him,
too.  As for Polychrome--the Rainbow's Daughter--and stupid little
Button-Bright, they seem to have brought a new element of fun into
these Oz stories, and I am glad I discovered them.  Yet I am anxious to
have you write and tell me how you like them.

Since this book was written I have received some very remarkable News
from The Land of Oz, which has greatly astonished me.  I believe it
will astonish you, too, my dears, when you hear it.  But it is such a
long and exciting story that it must be saved for another book--and
perhaps that book will be the last story that will ever be told about
the Land of Oz.

L. FRANK BAUM

Coronado, 1909.




1.  The Way to Butterfield


"Please, miss," said the shaggy man, "can you tell me the road to
Butterfield?"

Dorothy looked him over.  Yes, he was shaggy, all right, but there was
a twinkle in his eye that seemed pleasant.

"Oh yes," she replied; "I can tell you.  But it isn't this road at all."

"No?"

"You cross the ten-acre lot, follow the lane to the highway, go north
to the five branches, and take--let me see--"

"To be sure, miss; see as far as Butterfield, if you like," said the
shaggy man.

"You take the branch next the willow stump, I b'lieve; or else the
branch by the gopher holes; or else--"

"Won't any of 'em do, miss?"

"'Course not, Shaggy Man.  You must take the right road to get to
Butterfield."

"And is that the one by the gopher stump, or--"

"Dear me!" cried Dorothy.  "I shall have to show you the way, you're so
stupid.  Wait a minute till I run in the house and get my sunbonnet."

The shaggy man waited.  He had an oat-straw in his mouth, which he
chewed slowly as if it tasted good; but it didn't.  There was an
apple-tree beside the house, and some apples had fallen to the ground.
The shaggy man thought they would taste better than the oat-straw, so
he walked over to get some.  A little black dog with bright brown eyes
dashed out of the farm-house and ran madly toward the shaggy man, who
had already picked up three apples and put them in one of the big wide
pockets of his shaggy coat.  The little dog barked and made a dive for
the shaggy man's leg; but he grabbed the dog by the neck and put it in
his big pocket along with the apples.  He took more apples, afterward,
for many were on the ground; and each one that he tossed into his
pocket hit the little dog somewhere upon the head or back, and made him
growl.  The little dog's name was Toto, and he was sorry he had been
put in the shaggy man's pocket.

Pretty soon Dorothy came out of the house with her sunbonnet, and she
called out:

"Come on, Shaggy Man, if you want me to show you the road to
Butterfield."  She climbed the fence into the ten-acre lot and he
followed her, walking slowly and stumbling over the little hillocks in
the pasture as if he was thinking of something else and did not notice
them.

"My, but you're clumsy!" said the little girl.  "Are your feet tired?"

"No, miss; it's my whiskers; they tire very easily in this warm
weather," said he.  "I wish it would snow, don't you?"

"'Course not, Shaggy Man," replied Dorothy, giving him a severe look.
"If it snowed in August it would spoil the corn and the oats and the
wheat; and then Uncle Henry wouldn't have any crops; and that would
make him poor; and--"

"Never mind," said the shaggy man.  "It won't snow, I guess.  Is this
the lane?"

"Yes," replied Dorothy, climbing another fence; "I'll go as far as the
highway with you."

"Thankee, miss; you're very kind for your size, I'm sure," said he
gratefully.

"It isn't everyone who knows the road to Butterfield," Dorothy remarked
as she tripped along the lane; "but I've driven there many a time with
Uncle Henry, and so I b'lieve I could find it blindfolded."

"Don't do that, miss," said the shaggy man earnestly; "you might make a
mistake."

"I won't," she answered, laughing.  "Here's the highway.  Now it's the
second--no, the third turn to the left--or else it's the fourth.  Let's
see.  The first one is by the elm tree, and the second is by the gopher
holes; and then--"

"Then what?" he inquired, putting his hands in his coat pockets.  Toto
grabbed a finger and bit it; the shaggy man took his hand out of that
pocket quickly, and said "Oh!"

Dorothy did not notice.  She was shading her eyes from the sun with her
arm, looking anxiously down the road.

"Come on," she commanded.  "It's only a little way farther, so I may as
well show you."

After a while, they came to the place where five roads branched in
different directions; Dorothy pointed to one, and said:

"That's it, Shaggy Man."

"I'm much obliged, miss," he said, and started along another road.

"Not that one!" she cried; "you're going wrong."

He stopped.

"I thought you said that other was the road to Butterfield," said he,
running his fingers through his shaggy whiskers in a puzzled way.

"So it is."

"But I don't want to go to Butterfield, miss."

"You don't?"

"Of course not.  I wanted you to show me the road, so I shouldn't go
there by mistake."

"Oh!  Where DO you want to go, then?"

"I'm not particular, miss."

This answer astonished the little girl; and it made her provoked, too,
to think she had taken all this trouble for nothing.

"There are a good many roads here," observed the shaggy man, turning
slowly around, like a human windmill.  "Seems to me a person could go
'most anywhere, from this place."

Dorothy turned around too, and gazed in surprise.  There WERE a good
many roads; more than she had ever seen before.  She tried to count
them, knowing there ought to be five, but when she had counted
seventeen she grew bewildered and stopped, for the roads were as many
as the spokes of a wheel and ran in every direction from the place
where they stood; so if she kept on counting she was likely to count
some of the roads twice.

"Dear me!" she exclaimed.  "There used to be only five roads, highway
and all.  And now--why, where's the highway, Shaggy Man?"

"Can't say, miss," he responded, sitting down upon the ground as if
tired with standing.  "Wasn't it here a minute ago?"

"I thought so," she answered, greatly perplexed.  "And I saw the gopher
holes, too, and the dead stump; but they're not here now.  These roads
are all strange--and what a lot of them there are!  Where do you
suppose they all go to?"

"Roads," observed the shaggy man, "don't go anywhere.  They stay in one
place, so folks can walk on them."

He put his hand in his side-pocket and drew out an apple--quick, before
Toto could bite him again.  The little dog got his head out this time
and said "Bow-wow!"  so loudly that it made Dorothy jump.

"O, Toto!" she cried; "where did you come from?"

"I brought him along," said the shaggy man.

"What for?" she asked.

"To guard these apples in my pocket, miss, so no one would steal them."

With one hand the shaggy man held the apple, which he began eating,
while with the other hand he pulled Toto out of his pocket and dropped
him to the ground.  Of course Toto made for Dorothy at once, barking
joyfully at his release from the dark pocket.  When the child had
patted his head lovingly, he sat down before her, his red tongue
hanging out one side of his mouth, and looked up into her face with his
bright brown eyes, as if asking her what they should do next.

Dorothy didn't know.  She looked around her anxiously for some familiar
landmark; but everything was strange.  Between the branches of the many
roads were green meadows and a few shrubs and trees, but she couldn't
see anywhere the farm-house from which she had just come, or anything
she had ever seen before--except the shaggy man and Toto.  Besides
this, she had turned around and around so many times trying to find out
where she was, that now she couldn't even tell which direction the
farm-house ought to be in; and this began to worry her and make her
feel anxious.

"I'm 'fraid, Shaggy Man," she said, with a sigh, "that we're lost!"

"That's nothing to be afraid of," he replied, throwing away the core of
his apple and beginning to eat another one.  "Each of these roads must
lead somewhere, or it wouldn't be here.  So what does it matter?"

"I want to go home again," she said.

"Well, why don't you?"  said he.

"I don't know which road to take."

"That is too bad," he said, shaking his shaggy head gravely.  "I wish I
could help you; but I can't.  I'm a stranger in these parts."

"Seems as if I were, too," she said, sitting down beside him.  "It's
funny.  A few minutes ago I was home, and I just came to show you the
way to Butterfield--"

"So I shouldn't make a mistake and go there--"

"And now I'm lost myself and don't know how to get home!"

"Have an apple," suggested the shaggy man, handing her one with pretty
red cheeks.

"I'm not hungry," said Dorothy, pushing it away.

"But you may be, to-morrow; then you'll be sorry you didn't eat the
apple," said he.

"If I am, I'll eat the apple then," promised Dorothy.

"Perhaps there won't be any apple then," he returned, beginning to eat
the red-cheeked one himself.  "Dogs sometimes can find their way home
better than people," he went on; "perhaps your dog can lead you back to
the farm."

"Will you, Toto?" asked Dorothy.

Toto wagged his tail vigorously.

"All right," said the girl; "let's go home."

Toto looked around a minute and dashed up one of the roads.

"Good-bye, Shaggy Man," called Dorothy, and ran after Toto.  The little
dog pranced briskly along for some distance; when he turned around and
looked at his mistress questioningly.

"Oh, don't 'spect ME to tell you anything; I don't know the way," she
said.  "You'll have to find it yourself."

But Toto couldn't.  He wagged his tail, and sneezed, and shook his
ears, and trotted back where they had left the shaggy man.  From here
he started along another road; then came back and tried another; but
each time he found the way strange and decided it would not take them
to the farm-house.  Finally, when Dorothy had begun to tire with
chasing after him, Toto sat down panting beside the shaggy man and gave
up.

Dorothy sat down, too, very thoughtful.  The little girl had
encountered some queer adventures since she came to live at the farm;
but this was the queerest of them all.  To get lost in fifteen minutes,
so near to her home and in the unromantic State of Kansas, was an
experience that fairly bewildered her.

"Will your folks worry?" asked the shaggy man, his eyes twinkling in a
pleasant way.

"I s'pose so," answered Dorothy with a sigh.  "Uncle Henry says there's
ALWAYS something happening to me; but I've always come home safe at the
last.  So perhaps he'll take comfort and think I'll come home safe this
time."

"I'm sure you will," said the shaggy man, smilingly nodding at her.
"Good little girls never come to any harm, you know.  For my part, I'm
good, too; so nothing ever hurts me."

Dorothy looked at him curiously.  His clothes were shaggy, his boots
were shaggy and full of holes, and his hair and whiskers were shaggy.
But his smile was sweet and his eyes were kind.

"Why didn't you want to go to Butterfield?" she asked.

"Because a man lives there who owes me fifteen cents, and if I went to
Butterfield and he saw me he'd want to pay me the money.  I don't want
money, my dear."

"Why not?" she inquired.

"Money," declared the shaggy man, "makes people proud and haughty.  I
don't want to be proud and haughty.  All I want is to have people love
me; and as long as I own the Love Magnet, everyone I meet is sure to
love me dearly."

"The Love Magnet!  Why, what's that?"

"I'll show you, if you won't tell any one," he answered, in a low,
mysterious voice.

"There isn't any one to tell, 'cept Toto," said the girl.

The shaggy man searched in one pocket, carefully; and in another
pocket; and in a third.  At last he drew out a small parcel wrapped in
crumpled paper and tied with a cotton string.  He unwound the string,
opened the parcel, and took out a bit of metal shaped like a horseshoe.
It was dull and brown, and not very pretty.

"This, my dear," said he, impressively, "is the wonderful Love Magnet.
It was given me by an Eskimo in the Sandwich Islands--where there are
no sandwiches at all--and as long as I carry it every living thing I
meet will love me dearly."

"Why didn't the Eskimo keep it?"  she asked, looking at the Magnet with
interest.

"He got tired of being loved and longed for some one to hate him.  So
he gave me the Magnet and the very next day a grizzly bear ate him."

"Wasn't he sorry then?" she inquired.

"He didn't say," replied the shaggy man, wrapping and tying the Love
Magnet with great care and putting it away in another pocket.  "But the
bear didn't seem sorry a bit," he added.

"Did you know the bear?" asked Dorothy.

"Yes; we used to play ball together in the Caviar Islands.  The bear
loved me because I had the Love Magnet.  I couldn't blame him for
eating the Eskimo, because it was his nature to do so."

"Once," said Dorothy, "I knew a Hungry Tiger who longed to eat fat
babies, because it was his nature to; but he never ate any because he
had a Conscience."

"This bear," replied the shaggy man, with a sigh, "had no Conscience,
you see."

The shaggy man sat silent for several minutes, apparently considering
the cases of the bear and the tiger, while Toto watched him with an air
of great interest.  The little dog was doubtless thinking of his ride
in the shaggy man's pocket and planning to keep out of reach in the
future.

At last the shaggy man turned and inquired, "What's your name, little
girl?"

"My name's Dorothy," said she, jumping up again, "but what are we going
to do?  We can't stay here forever, you know."

"Let's take the seventh road," he suggested.  "Seven is a lucky number
for little girls named Dorothy."

"The seventh from where?"

"From where you begin to count."

So she counted seven roads, and the seventh looked just like all the
others; but the shaggy man got up from the ground where he had been
sitting and started down this road as if sure it was the best way to
go; and Dorothy and Toto followed him.




2.  Dorothy Meets Button-Bright


The seventh road was a good road, and curved this way and that--winding
through green meadows and fields covered with daisies and buttercups
and past groups of shady trees.  There were no houses of any sort to be
seen, and for some distance they met with no living creature at all.

Dorothy began to fear they were getting a good way from the farm-house,
since here everything was strange to her; but it would do no good at
all to go back where the other roads all met, because the next one they
chose might lead her just as far from home.

She kept on beside the shaggy man, who whistled cheerful tunes to
beguile the journey, until by and by they followed a turn in the road
and saw before them a big chestnut tree making a shady spot over the
highway.  In the shade sat a little boy dressed in sailor clothes, who
was digging a hole in the earth with a bit of wood.  He must have been
digging some time, because the hole was already big enough to drop a
football into.

Dorothy and Toto and the shaggy man came to a halt before the little
boy, who kept on digging in a sober and persistent fashion.

"Who are you?" asked the girl.

He looked up at her calmly.  His face was round and chubby and his eyes
were big, blue and earnest.

"I'm Button-Bright," said he.

"But what's your real name?" she inquired.

"Button-Bright."

"That isn't a really-truly name!" she exclaimed.

"Isn't it?" he asked, still digging.

"'Course not.  It's just a--a thing to call you by.  You must have a
name."

"Must I?"

"To be sure.  What does your mama call you?"

He paused in his digging and tried to think.

"Papa always said I was bright as a button; so mama always called me
Button-Bright," he said.

"What is your papa's name?"

"Just Papa."

"What else?"

"Don't know."

"Never mind," said the shaggy man, smiling.  "We'll call the boy
Button-Bright, as his mama does.  That name is as good as any, and
better than some."

Dorothy watched the boy dig.

"Where do you live?" she asked.

"Don't know," was the reply.

"How did you come here?"

"Don't know," he said again.

"Don't you know where you came from?"

"No," said he.

"Why, he must be lost," she said to the shaggy man.  She turned to the
boy once more.

"What are you going to do?" she inquired.
