rightful inheritance, that the women may not have to weep for their
desolated homes."

Griffeth gave him a quick look, and then his eyes travelled lovingly
over the wide, fair scene, to the purple shadows and curling mists of
the valley, the dark mysterious woods in front, the clear, vivid
sunlight on the mountain tops, and the serried battlements of the
castle, now rising into larger proportions as the boys dropped down the
hillside towards the postern door, which led out upon the wild fell.
There was something of mute wistfulness in his own gaze as he did so.

"Brother," he said thoughtfully, "I think I know what those feelings are
which bring tears to the eyes of men -- tears of which they need feel no
shame. Fear not to share with me all thy inmost thoughts. Have we not
ever been brothers in all things?"

"Ay, truly have we; and I would keep nothing back, only I scarce know
how to frame my lips to give utterance to the thoughts which come
crowding into my brain. But see, we have no time for communing now. Go
on up the path to the postern; it is too narrow for company."

Indeed, so narrow was the track, so steep the uncertain steps worn in
the face of the rock, so deep the fall if one false step were made, that
few save the brothers and wilder mountaineers ever sought admission by
the postern door. But Wendot and Griffeth had no fears, and quickly
scaled the steps and reached the entrance, passing through which they
found themselves in a narrow vaulted passage, very dark, which led, with
many twists and turns, and several ascending stairs, to the great hall
of the castle, where the members of the household were accustomed for
the most part to assemble.

A door deeply set in an embrasure gave access to this place, and the
moment it was opened the sound of a harp became audible, and the
brothers paused in the deep shadow to observe what was going on in the
hall before they advanced further.

A scene that would be strange and picturesque to our eyes, but was in
the main familiar to theirs, greeted them as they stood thus. The castle
hall was a huge place, large enough to contain a muster of armed men. A
great stone staircase wound upwards from it to a gallery above. There
was little furniture to be seen, and that was of a rude kind, though not
lacking in a certain massiveness and richness in the matter of carving,
which gave something baronial to the air of the place. The walls were
adorned with trophies of all sorts, some composed of arms, others of the
spoil of fell and forest. The skins of many savage beasts lay upon the
cold stone flooring of the place, imparting warmth and harmony by the
rich tints of the furs. Light was admitted through a row of narrow
windows both above and below; but the vast place would have been dim and
dark at this hour had it not been that the huge double doors with their
rude massive bolts stood wide open to the summer air, and the last beams
of the westering sun came shining in, lying level and warm upon the
group at the upper end of the hall, which had gathered around the
white-haired, white-bearded bard, who, with head thrown backwards, and
eyes alight with strange passions and feelings, was singing in a deep
and musical voice to the sound of his instrument.

Old Wenwynwyn was a study in himself; his flowing hair, his fiery eyes,
his picturesque garb and free, untrammelled gestures giving him a weird
individuality of his own. But it was not upon him that the eyes of the
brothers dwelt, nor even upon the soldier-like figure of their stalwart
father leaning against the wall with folded arms, and eyes shining with
the patriotic fervour of his race. The attention of the lads was
enchained by another and more sumptuous figure --that of a fine-looking
man, approaching to middle life, who was seated at a little distance
from the minstrel, and was smiling with pleasure and appreciation at the
wild sweetness of the stream of melody poured forth.

One glance at the dress of the stranger would have been enough to tell
the brothers his nationality. His under tunic, which reached almost to
the feet, was of the finest cloth, and was embroidered along the lower
border with gold thread. The sur-tunic was also richly embroidered; and
the heavy mantle clasped upon the shoulder with a rare jewel was of some
rich texture almost unknown to the boys. The make and set of his
garments, and the jewelled and plumed cap which he held upon his knee,
alike proclaimed him to be English; yet as he gazed upon the noble face,
and looked into the clear depths of the calm and fearless eyes, Wendot
felt no hostility towards the representative of the hostile race, but
rather a sort of reluctant admiration.

"In faith he looks born to command," he whispered to Griffeth. "If all
were like unto him --"

But the lad did not complete the sentence, for he had suddenly caught
sight of another figure, another face, and he stopped short in a sort of
bewildered amaze.

In Dynevor Castle there had never been a girl child to share the honours
with her brothers. No sister had played in its halls, or tyrannized over
the lads or their parents. And now when Wendot's glance fell for the
first time upon this little fairy-like creature, this lovely little
golden-haired, blue-eyed maiden, he felt a new sensation enter his life,
and gazed as wonderingly at the apparition as if the child had been a ghost.

And the soft shy eyes, with their fringe of dark lashes, were looking
straight at him. As he gazed the child suddenly rose, and darted towards
the brothers as if she had wings on her feet.

"Oh, you have come back!" she said, looking from one to the other, and
for a moment seeming puzzled by the likeness; "and -- why, there are two
of you," and the child broke into the merriest and silveriest of laughs.
"Oh, I am so glad! I do like boys so much, and I never have any to play
with at home. I am so tired of this old man and his harp. Please let me
go somewhere with you," and she thrust her soft little hand confidingly
into Wendot's, looking up saucily into his face as she added, "You are
the biggest; I like you the best."

Wendot's face glowed; but on the whole he was flattered by the attention
and the preference of the little maiden. He understood her soft English
speech perfectly, for all the Dynevor brothers had been instructed in
the English tongue by an English monk who had long lived at the castle.
Res Vychan, the present Lord of Dynevor, foresaw, and had foreseen many
years, the gradual usurpation of the English, and had considered that a
knowledge of that tongue would in all probability be an advantage to
those who were likely to be involved in the coming struggle. The boys
all possessed the quick musical ear of their race, and found no
difficulty in mastering the language; but neither Llewelyn nor Howel
would ever speak a single word of the hated tongue if they could help
it, though Wendot and Griffeth conversed often with the old monk right
willingly.

So as Wendot looked down into the bright little upturned face, he was
able to reply readily and smilingly:

"Where would you like to go, little lady, and what would you like me to
show you?"

"Oh, everything -- all out there," said the little girl, with a wave of
her hand towards the front door. "I want to go and see the sun. I am
tired of it in here."

Wendot led the child through the hall, and out upon the great terrace
which overlooked the steep descent to the valley and away to the glowing
west. Griffeth followed, glad that his elder brother had been preferred
before himself by the little maiden, yet half fascinated by her nameless
charm. Wendot lifted her up in his strong arms to see over the wide
stone balustrade, and she made him set her down there and perch himself
by her side; for she seemed loath to go back to the hall again, and the
boys were as willing as she to remain out in the open air.

"It is pretty here," said the child graciously; "I think I should like
to live here sometimes, if it was always summer. Tell me your name, big
boy. I hope it is not very hard. Some people here have names I cannot
speak right."

"They call me Res Wendot," answered the lad; "generally Wendot at home
here. This is Griffeth, my youngest brother. Those are not hard names,
are they?"

"No, not very. And how old are you, Wendot?"

"I am fifteen."

"Oh, how big you are!" said the little lady, opening her eyes wide; "I
thought you must be much older than that. I am twelve, and you can lift
me up in your arms. But then I always was so little -- they all say so."

"Yet you travel about with your father," said Wendot.

"I never did before; but this time I begged, and he took me. Sometimes
he says he shall have to put me in a nunnery, because he has nobody to
take care of me when he has to travel about. But I don't think I should
like that; I would rather stay here."

Wendot and Griffeth laughed; but the child was not at all disconcerted.
She was remarkably self possessed for her years, even if she was small
of stature and infantile in appearance.

"What is your name?" asked Wendot; and the little maid answered, with
becoming gravity and importance:

"I am called Lady Gertrude Cherleton; but you may call me Gertrude if
you like, because you are kind and I like you. Are there any more of
you? Have you any sisters?"

"No; only two brothers."

"More brothers! and what are their names?"

"Llewelyn and Howel."

"Llewelyn? Why, that is the name of the Prince of North Wales that the
king is going to fight against and conquer. Do you think when he has
done so that he will come here and conquer you, too?"

Wendot's cheek burned a sudden red; but he made no reply, for at that
moment a head suddenly appeared round an angle of the wall, and a heavy
grip was laid upon the shoulder of the child. A wild face and a pair of
flashing black eyes were brought into close proximity with hers, and a
smothered voice spoke in fierce, low accents.



    CHAPTER II. THE BROTHERS


"What is that you dare to say?"

The voice was harsh, the words were spoken with a rough accent, unlike
the gentler tones of Wendot and Griffeth. The child uttered a little cry
and shrank back away from the grip of the strong hand, and might have
been in some danger of losing her balance and of falling over the
balustrade, had not Wendot thrown a protecting arm round her, whilst
pushing back with the other hand that of the rude interloper.

"Llewelyn! for shame!" he said in his own tongue. "Art thou a man, and
claimest the blood of princes, and yet canst stoop to frighten an
inoffensive child?"

"She spoke of conquest -- the conquest of our country," cried Llewelyn
fiercely, in the hated English tongue, scowling darkly at the little
girl as he spoke. "Thinkest thou that I will stand patiently by and hear
such words? What right hath she or any one besides to speak of that
tyrant and usurper in such tones?"

"He is not a tyrant, he is not a usurper!" cried the little Lady
Gertrude, recovering herself quickly, and, whilst still holding Wendot
by the hand, turning fearlessly upon the dark-faced lad who had startled
and terrified her at the first. "I know of whom you are speaking -- it
is of our great and noble King Edward. You do not know him -- you cannot
know how great and good he is. I will not hear you speak against him. I
love him next best to my own father. He is kind and good to everybody.
If you would all give your homage to him you would be happy and safe,
and he would protect you, and --"

But Llewelyn's patience was exhausted; he would listen no more. With a
fierce gesture of hatred that made the child shrink back again he turned
upon her, and it seemed for a moment almost as though he would have
struck her, despite Wendot's sturdy protecting arm, had not his own
shoulder been suddenly grasped by an iron hand, and he himself
confronted by the stern countenance of his father.

"What means this, boy?" asked Res Vychan severely. "Art thou daring to
raise thine arm against a child, a lady, and thy father's guest? For
shame! I blush for thee. Ask pardon instantly of the lady and of her
father. I will have no such dealings in mine house. Thou shouldst be
well assured of that."

The black-browed boy was crimson with rage and shame, but there was no
yielding in the haughty face. He confronted his father with flashing
eyes, and as he did so he met the keen, grave glance of the stranger's
fixed upon him with a calm scrutiny which aroused his fiercest rage.

"I will not ask pardon," he shouted. "I will not degrade my tongue by
uttering such words. I will not --"

The father's hand descended heavily upon his son's head, in a blow which
would have stunned a lad less hardy and hard-headed. Res Vychan was not
one to be defied with impunity by his own sons, and he had had hard
encounters of will before now with Llewelyn.

"Choose, boy," he said with brief sternness. "Either do my will and obey
me, or thou wilt remain a close prisoner till thou hast come to thy
senses. My guests shall not be insulted by thy forward tongue. Barbarous
and wild as the English love to call us, they shall find that Res Vychan
is not ignorant of those laws which govern the world in which they live
and move. Ask pardon of the lady, or to the dungeon thou goest."

Llewelyn glanced up into his father's face, and saw no yielding there.
Howel was making vehement signs to him which he and he alone could
interpret. His other brothers were eagerly gazing at him, and Griffeth
even went so for as to murmur into his ear some words of entreaty.

It seemed as though the silence which followed Res Vychan's words would
never be broken, but at last the culprit spoke, and spoke in a low,
sullen tone.

"I meant no harm. I would not have hurt her."

"Ask her pardon then, boy, and tell her so."

"Nay, force him no more," said the little lady, who was regarding this
curious scene with lively interest, and who began to feel sorry for the
dark wild boy who had frightened her by his vehemence before; "I was to
blame myself. I should not have spoken as I did.

"Father, tell them how my tongue is always running away with me. Hast
not thou told me a hundred times that it would get me into trouble one
of these days? It is right that he should love his country. Do not think
ill of him for that."

"Ay, let the lad go now, good friend," quoth Lord Montacute. "No doubt
this little witch of mine was at the bottom of the mischief. Her tongue,
as she truly says, is a restless and mischievous possession. She has
found a stanch protector at least, and will come to no harm amongst thy
stalwart lads. I could envy thee such a double brace of boys. I would it
had pleased Providence to send me a son."

"Nay, father, say not so," cried little Lady Gertrude coaxingly. "I
would not have a brother for all the world. Thou wouldst love him so
well, if thou hadst him, that thou wouldst have none to spare for thy
maid. I have seen how it ever is. I love to have all thy heart for mine
own."

The father smiled, but Res Vychan's face was still severe, and he had
not loosed his clasp upon Llewelyn's arm.

"Say that thou art sorry ere I let thee go," he said, in low but very
stern tones; and after a moment's hesitation, Llewelyn spoke in audible
tones.

"I am sorry," he said slowly; "I am sorry."

And then as his father's clasp upon his arm relaxed he darted away like
an arrow from the bow, and plunged with Howel through a dark and gloomy
doorway which led up a winding turret stair to a narrow circular
chamber, which the brothers shared together.
