
I must be I, thou must be thou, he must be he, she must be she, and no
one else, throughout our mortal lives, and, for aught we can tell, for
ever; alone, each of us, with our own souls, our own thoughts, our own
actions, our own hopes, our own fears, our own deservings.  Stay
alone:--with all these?  Yes, and alone with one more.  Each of us is
alone with God.  Face to face with God, seen by Him through and through,
and directly answerable to Him at every moment of our lives, for every
deed, and word, and thought.  And is that not a more terrible thought
than any?  Ah! my friends, it may be.  But it may be also the most
comforting of all thoughts, the only really comforting thought, if we
will but look at the question as the Psalmist looks at it, and cry with
him to God, "I am Thine, oh save the me whom Thou hast made."

There are those, and those who deserve a respectful hearing, who will
differ from all that I have been saying, and indeed from the beliefs of
999 out of 1000 of the human race in every age.  They will say--This
fancy that you are an I, a self, individual and indivisible, is but a
fancy; one of the many idols which man creates for himself, by bestowing
reality and personality on mere abstractions like this I and self.  Each
man is not one indivisible, much less indestructible, thing or being.  He
is really many things.  He is the net result of all the organic cells of
his body, and of all the forces which act through them within, and of all
the circumstances which influence them from without, ay, and of all the
forces and circumstances which have influenced his ancestors ever since
man appeared on the earth.  But because he remembers many states of
consciousness, many moments in which he was aware of sensations within
him, and of circumstances without him, therefore he strings all these
together, and talks of them as one thing which he calls I; and speaks of
them as his remembrances of himself, when really the many things are but
links of a chain which is perpetually growing at one end and dropping off
at the other.  To say, therefore, that he is the same person as he was
when a child, or as he would be when an old man,--is, when we know that
every atom of his physical frame has changed again and again during the
course of years, a popular delusion, or at least a misnomer used for
convenience' sake; as when we say that the sun rises and sets, when we
know that the earth moves, and not the sun.  A man, therefore, according
to this school, is really no more a person, one and indivisible, than is
the coral with its million polypes, the tree with its million buds, or
even the thunderstorm with its million vesicles of attracting and
repelling vapour.

Now that a truth underlies such a theory as this, I am the last to deny.
How much of the character of each man is inherited, how much of it
depends on his actual bodily organization; how much of it, alas! on the
circumstances of his youth; how much of it changes with the mere physical
change from youth to old age--who does not know all this, who has ever
needed to fight for himself the battle of life?  Only, I say, this is but
half the truth; and these philosophers cannot state their half-truth,
without employing the very words which they repudiate; without using the
very personal pronouns, the I and me, the thou and thee, the he and him,
to which they deny any real existence.  Beside, I ask--Is the experience
and the conclusion of the vast majority of all mankind to go for nothing?
For if there be one point on which human beings have been, and are still,
agreed, it is this--that each of them is, to his joy or his sorrow, an I;
a separate person.  And, I should have said, this conviction becomes
stronger and stronger in each of them, the more human they become,
civilized, and worthy of the respect and affection of their fellow-men.

For what rises in them, or seems to rise, more and more painfully and
fiercely?  What but that protest, that battle, between the everlasting I
within them, and their own passions, and motives, and circumstances;
which St Paul of old called the battle between the spirit on one side,
and the flesh and the world on the other.  The nobler, surely, and
healthier, even for a moment, the manhood of any man is, the more intense
is that inward struggle, which man alone of all the animals endures.  Is
it in moments of brave endeavour, whether to improve our own character,
or to benefit our fellow-men: or is it in moments of depression,
disappointment, bodily sickness, that we are tempted to say?--I will
fight no more.  I cannot mend myself, or the world.  I am what nature has
made me; and what I am, I must remain.  I, and all I know, and all I
love, are things, not persons; parts of nature, even as the birds upon
the bough, only more miserable, because tormented by a hope which never
will be fulfilled; an empty pageant of mere phenomena, blown onward
toward decay, like dying autumn leaves, before the "everlasting storm
which no one guides."  Is this the inward voice of health and strength?
or rather, for evil or for good, that voice which bids the man, the
woman, in the mysterious might of the free I within, trample on their own
passions, defy their own circumstances, even to the death; fall back, in
utter need, on the absolute instinct of self; and even though all seem
lost, say with Medea in the tragedy--

   Che resta?  Io!

Medea?--Some one will ask, and have a right to ask--Is that the model
which you set before us?  The imperious sorceress, who from the first has
known no law but self, her own passions, her own intellect; who, at last,
maddened by a grievous wrong, asserts that self by the murder of her own
babes?  You might as well set before us as a model Milton's Satan.

Just so.  Remember first, nevertheless, the old maxim, that the best,
when corrupted, is the worst; that the higher the nature, when used
aright in its right place, the baser it becomes when used wrongly, in its
wrong place.  When Satan fell from his right place, said the old Jews, he
became, remember, not a mere brute: but worse, a fiend.  There is a deep
and true philosophy in that.  As long as he was what he was meant to
be--the servant of God--he was an archangel and more; the fairest of all
the sons of the morning.  When he rebelled; when in pride and self-will
he tore himself--his person--away from that God in whom he lived and
moved and had his being: the personality remained; he could still, like
Medea, fall back, even when he knew that he had rebelled against his
Creator, on his indomitable self, and reign a self-sufficing king, even
in the depths of hell.

But the very strength and richness of that personality made him, like
Medea, only the more capable of evil.  He stood, that is, his moral
health endured, only by loyalty to God.  When he lost that, he fell; to
moral disease: disease the vaster, the vaster were his own capacities.

And so it is with you, and me, and every soul of man.  Only by loyalty to
God can this undying I, this self, this person, which each of us has--or
rather which each of us is--be anything but a torment and a curse; the
more terrible to us, and those around us, the stronger and the richer are
the nature and faculties through which it works.

Wouldest thou not be a curse unto thy self?  Then cry with him who wrote
the 119th Psalm--I am Thine.  Oh save the me, whom Thou, O God, hast
made.

For he who wrote that psalm had an intense conviction of his own
personality.  I, and me, are words for ever in his mouth: but not in self-
satisfied conceit; nor in self-tormenting superstition, crying
perpetually, Shall I be saved? shall I be lost?  No.  Faith in God
delivers him from either of these follies.  He is forced to think of
self.  Sad, persecuted, seemingly friendless, he is alone with self: yet
not alone.  For at every moment he is referring himself to his true place
in the universe; to God; God's law, God's help.  The burden of self--of
mingled responsibility and weakness--is to him past bearing.  It would be
utterly past bearing, if he could not cast it down, at least at moments,
at the foot of the throne of God, and cry, I am Thine.  Oh save me.

And if any should ask--as has been asked ere now--But is there not in
this tone of mind something undignified, something even abject? thus to
cry for help, instead of helping oneself? thus to depend on another
being, instead of bearing stoically with manly independence?  I
answer--The Psalmist does bear stoically, just because he cries for help.
For the old Stoics cried for help; the earlier and truer-hearted of them,
at least.  Some here, surely, have read Epictetus, the heathen whose
thought most exactly coincides with that of the Psalmist.  If so, do they
not see what enabled him, the slave of Nero's minion, to assert himself,
and his own unconquerable personality; to defy circumstance; and to
preserve his own calm, his own honour, his own purity, amid a degradation
which might well have driven a good man to suicide?  And was it not
this--The intensity of his faith in God?  In God the helper, God the
guide?

If any man here have learnt, to his own loss, to undervalue the
experience of prophets, psalmists, apostles: then let him turn to
Epictetus the heathen; and learn from that heroic slave, that the true
dignity of man lies in true faith in God.

Nay more.  It is a serious question, whether ungodliness--by which I
mean, as the Psalmist means, the assertion of self, independent of
God--whether ungodliness, I say, is ever dignified; whether, as has been
often said, Milton's still dignified Satan is not an impossible
character; whether Goethe's utterly undignified Mephistopheles is not the
true ideal of an utterly evil spirit.  Ungodliness, as we see it
manifested in human beings, may be repulsive, as in the mere ruffian,
whose mouth is filled with cursing, and his feet swift to shed blood.  It
may, again, be pitiable, as in those human butterflies, who live only to
enjoy, or to minister to, what they call luxury and fashion.  And it may
be again--when it calmly and deliberately asserts itself to be a
philosophy, and an explanation of man and of the universe, and gives
itself magisterial airs, however courteously and kindly--it may be then,
I dare to think, a little ludicrous.

But as for its dignity, I leave to you to say which of the two beings is
the more dignified, which the more abject--a little organism of flesh and
blood, at most not more than six feet high, liable to be destroyed by a
tile off the roof, or a blast of foul gas, or a hundred other accidents;
standing self-poised and self-complacent in the centre of such an
universe as this, and asserting that it acknowledges no superior, and
needs no guide--or the same being, awakened to the mystery of his own
actual weakness, his possible strength; his own actual ignorance, his
possible wisdom; his own actual sinfulness, his possible holiness: and
then; by a humility which is the highest daring; by a self-distrust which
is the truest self-assertion, vindicating the divine element within, by
taking personal and voluntary service under no less a personage than Him
who made him; and crying directly to the Creator of sun and stars and all
the universe--I am Thine.  Oh save the me which Thou hast made?

Make up your own minds, make up your minds, which of the two figures is
the more abject, which the more dignified.  For me, I have had too good
cause, long since, to make up mine.

And if you wish to judge further for yourselves, whether the teaching of
the Psalmist is more likely to produce an abject or a dignified
character, I advise you to ponder carefully a certain singular--I had
almost said unique--educational document, written by men who had
thoroughly imbibed the teaching of this psalm; a document which, the
oftener I peruse it, arouses in me more and more admiration; not only for
its theology, but for its knowledge of human nature; and not only for
what it does, but for what it does not, say.  I mean the Catechism of the
Church of England.

You will remark at first sight, that it does not affect to teach the
child; with one remarkable exception to be hereafter noticed.  It does
not tell the child--You should do this, you should not do that.

It is strictly an Educational Catechism.  It tries to educe--that is,
draw out--what is in the child already; its own native instincts and
native conscience.  Therefore it makes the child speak for itself.  It
makes each child feel that he or she is an I; a person, a responsible
soul.  It begins--What is your name?  It makes the child confess that it
has a name, as a sign that it is a person, a self, a soul, different from
all other persons in earth or heaven; and that its name was given it at
baptism, for a sign that God made it a person, and wishes it to know that
it is a person, and will teach it how to be a true person, and a good
person.  It teaches the child to say--I, and me, not in fear and dread,
like those heathen of whom I spoke just now, but with manly confidence,
and self-respect, and gratitude to God who has made it a person, and an
immortal soul.

To say--I am a person; and in order that I might be a right kind of
person, and not a wrong kind, I was made a member of Christ, a child of
God, and an inheritor of the kingdom of heaven.

To say--I am a person; and that I may be a right kind of person, I must
know and believe certain things concerning God Himself, Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost.  I am a person; and that I may be a right kind of person, I
must keep certain commandments and do certain duties toward God, and my
parents, and my Queen, and my country, and my neighbour, and all toward
whom I am responsible for right behaviour.

And then, and only then, after it has made the child say all this for
itself and about itself, the Catechism does begin to teach; and in a few
very short words, tell the child about that which is not itself--

"My good child, know this, that thou art not able to do these things of
thyself, nor to walk in the Commandments of God, and to serve Him,
without His special grace; which thou must learn at all times to call for
by diligent prayer."

Now consider these words.  There is comfort and strength in them; comfort
for the child; comfort for you, and me, and every human being who has
awakened to the sense of his own personal responsibility, and finds it
too often a burden heavier than he--and, alas, often, she--can bear.

The Catechism tells the child that it must not merely know doctrines
about God, or do duties to God; but more: that it is alone with God
Himself, face to face with God Himself day and night.  But that therefore
it is to dread God, and look up to God as a taskmaster and tyrant, and
try to hide from God's awful eye, and forget God, and forget itself--if
it can?--God forbid; God forbid.  The Catechism leaves such teaching for
those Pharisees who tell little children that unless they are converted,
and become as them, they shall in no wise enter into the kingdom of
heaven.  The Catechism says, My good child--not, My bad child--know this.
Know that thou art weak: but know that God is strong; and look up to Him
as the Father of all fathers, the Teacher of all teachers, the Helper of
all helpers, the Friend of all friends, who has I called thee unto His
kingdom of grace, that He might shew thee graciousness; and make thee
gracious and graceful in all thy thoughts, and works, and ways: and,
therefore, far from trying to hide from Him, call on Him with diligent
prayer.  For the Father of all fathers is the Father of thy soul, the Son
of all sons died for thee upon the Cross, the Holy Spirit of all holy
spirits will make thee a holy spirit and person, even as He is a Holy
Spirit and Person Himself.

Believing those words, no one will dare to forget to say his prayers.  For
when he prays, he is indeed a person.  He is himself; and not ashamed,
however sinful, to be himself; and to tell God about himself.  Oh, think
of that.  You, each of you, have a right, as God's children, to speak to
the God who made the universe.  Therefore be sure, that when you dislike
to say your prayers, it is because you do not like to be what you are, a
person; and prefer--ah foolish soul--to be a thing, and an animal.

Believing those words, no man need long to forget himself, to escape from
himself.  He can lift up himself to God who made him, with reverence, and
fear, and yet with gratitude and trust, and say--

I, Lord, am I; and what I am--a very poor, pitiful, sinful person.  But
Thou, Lord, art Thou; and what Thou art--happily for me, and for the
whole universe--Perfect.  Thou art what Thou oughtest to be--Goodness
itself.  And therefore Thou canst, and Thou wilt, make me what I ought to
be at last, a good person.  To thee, O Lord, I can bring the burden of
this undying I, which I carry with me, too often in shame and sadness,
and ask Thee to help me to bear it; saying--"Thou knowest, Lord, the
secrets of our hearts.  Shut not Thy merciful ears to our prayers: but
spare us, O Lord most Holy, O God most Mighty, Thou worthy Judge Eternal,
and suffer us not, for any temptation of the world, the flesh or the
devil, to fall from Thee."  Guide me, teach me, strengthen me, till I
become such a person as Thou wouldst have me be; pure and gentle,
truthful and high-minded, brave and able, courteous and generous, dutiful
and useful, like Thy Son Jesus Christ when He increased not only in
stature, but in favour with God and man.

To which may God in His mercy bring us all!  Amen.




SERMON XVI.  THE CEDARS OF LEBANON.


PSALM CIV. 16.

   The trees of the Lord are full of sap; the cedars of Lebanon, which He
   hath planted.

Let me say a few words this afternoon about the noble 104th Psalm, which
was read this afternoon, as it is now in many churches, and most wisely
and rightly, as the Harvest Psalm.  It is a fit psalm for a service in
which we thank God for such harvest as He has thought best to send us,
whether it be above or below the average.  But it is also a fit psalm to
be thought earnestly over just now, considering the turn which men's
minds are taking more and more in these times in which it has pleased God
that we should live.  For we have lost, all of us, unlearned as well as
learned, the old superstitious notions about this world around us which
our forefathers held for many hundred years.  No rational person now
believes that witches can blight crops or cattle, or that evil spirits
cause storms.  No one now believes that nymphs and fairies live in
fountains or in trees; or that the spirits of the planets rule the fates
of men.  That old belief is gone, for good and for evil, and it was good
that it should go; for it was false: and falsehoods can do no good, but
only harm, to any man, in body and in soul alike.  It has died out
quickly and strangely.  Some say that modern science has destroyed it.  I
can hardly agree to that: for it has died out--and that almost since my
own recollection and under my own eyes--in the minds of country people,
who know nothing of science.  I had rather say--as I presume the man who
wrote the 104th Psalm would have said--The Lord has taken the belief out
of men's hearts and minds.  And I cannot but hope that He has taken it
away, and allows us to believe no more in demons and fairies ruling the
world around us, in order that we may believe in Him, and nothing but
Him, the true Ruler of the world; in Him of whom it is written, "Him
shalt thou worship, and Him only shalt thou serve;" even God the Father,
of whom are all things, and God the Son, by whom are all things, and God
the Holy Spirit, who is the Lord and Giver of life, alike to sun and
stars over our heads, and to the meanest weed and insect under our feet;
the Lord and Giver of life alike to matter and spirit, soul and body,
worm and man, and angel and archangel before the throne of God.  I hope
it is so.  I trust it is so.  For we never had more need than now to
believe with all our hearts in the living God; to take into all our
hearts the teaching of the 104th Psalm.  For now that we have given up
believing in superstitions, we are in danger of going to the other
extreme, and believing in nothing at all which we cannot see with our
eyes, and handle with our hands.  Now that we have given up believing in
the fabled supernatural; in ghosts, fairies, demons, witches, and such-
like: we are in danger of giving up believing in the true and eternal
supernatural, which is the Holy Spirit of God, by whom the whole creation
is kept alive and sound.  We are in danger of falling into a low, stupid,
brutish view of this wonderful world of God in which we live; in danger
of thinking of nature--that is, of the things which we can see and
handle--only as something of which we can make use--till we fall as low
as that poor ruffian, of whom the poet says:

   A primrose on the river's brim
   A yellow primrose was to him,
      And it was nothing more.

Lower, that is, than even our own children, whom God has at least taught
to admire and love the primroses for their beauty--as something precious
and divine, quite independent of their own emotions about them.  Men in
these days are but too likely to fall into the humour of those poor
savages, of whom one who knows them well said to me once--bitterly but
truly--that when a savage sees anything new, however wonderful or
beautiful, he has but two thoughts about it; first--Will it hurt me? and
next--Can I eat it?  And from that truly brutish view of God's world, we
shall be delivered, I believe, only by taking in with our whole hearts
the teaching of the 104th Psalm; which is indeed the teaching of all Holy
Scripture throughout.

The Psalmist, in the passage which I have chosen, is talking of the
circulation of water on the earth; how wisely and well it is ordered; how
the vapours rise off the sea, till the waters stand above the mountain-
tops, to be brought down in thunder-storms--for in his country, as in
many hot ones, thunder was generally needed, at the end of the dry
season, to bring down the rain; how it forms springs in the highland, and
flows down from thence in brooks and rivers, making the whole lowland
green and fertile.  Well--all very true, you may say.  But that is simply
a matter of science, or indeed of common observation and common sense.  It
is not a subject for a psalm or for a sermon.

True: in the words in which I have purposely put it.  But not in the
words in which the Psalmist puts it; and which I purposely left out, to
shew you just the difference between even the soundest science, and
faith.  He brings in another element, which is the true cause of the
circulation of water; and that is, none other but Almighty God.

This is the way in which the inspired Psalmist puts it; and this is the
truth of it all; this is the very kernel and marrow and life and soul of
it all: while the facts which I told you just now are the mere shell and
dead skeleton of it--"_Thou_ sendest the springs into the rivers."

Thou art the Lord of the lightning and of the clouds, the Lord of the
highlands and of the lowlands, and the Lord of the rainfall and of the
drought, the Lord of good seasons and of bad, of rich harvests and of
scanty.  They, like all things, obey Thine everlasting laws; and of them,
whatever may befal, poor purblind man can say in faith and hope--"It is
the Lord, let Him do what seemeth Him good."

Yes.  He was not of course a man of science, in the modern sense of the
word, this old Psalmist.  But this I know, that he was a man of science
in the soundest and deepest sense; an inspired philosopher, as well as an
inspired poet; and had the highest of all sciences, which is the science
and knowledge of the living God.  For he saw God in everything and
everything in God.

But--he says--the trees of the Lord are full of sap; even the cedars of
Lebanon which He hath planted.  Why should he say that specially of the
cedars?  Did not God make all trees?  Does He not plant all wild trees,
and every flower and seed?  My dear friends, happy are you if you believe
that in spirit and in truth.  But let me tell you that I think you would
not have believed that, unless the Psalmist, and others who wrote the
Holy Scriptures, had told you about trees of God, and rivers of God, and
winds of God, and had taught you that the earth is the Lord's and the
fulness thereof.  You do not know--none of us can know--how much we owe
to the Bible for just and rational, as well as orthodox and Christian,
notions of the world around us.  We, and--thank God--our forefathers for
hundreds of years, have drunk in Bible thoughts, as it were, with our
mother's milk; till much that we have really learnt from the Bible we
take as a matter of course, as self-evident truths which we have found
out for ourselves by common sense.

And yet, so far from that being the case, if it had not been for the
Bible, we might be believing at this moment, that one god made one tree,
and another another; that one tree was sacred to one god, and another
flower to another goddess, as the old Greeks believed; and that the wheat
and barley were the gift, and therefore the property, of some special
deity; and be crying now in fear and trembling to the sun-god, or the
rain-god, or some other deified power of nature, because we fancied that
they were angry with us, and had therefore sent us too much rain and a
short harvest.

It is difficult, now-a-days, to make even cultivated people understand
the follies of those who, like the heathen round the Jews, worshipped
many gods: and all the more because our modern folly runs in a different
channel; because we are tempted, not to believe in many gods, but in no
God at all; to believe not that one god made one thing and another
another, but that all things have made themselves.

When Hiram, king of Tyre, sent down timber cut from the cedars of
Lebanon, to build the temple of God for Solomon; his heathen workmen,
probably, were angry and terrified at what they were doing.  They said
among themselves--"These cedars belong to Baal, or to Melkart, the gods
of Tyre.  Our king has no right to send them to build the temple of
Jehovah, the God of the Jews.  It is a robbery, and a sacrilege; and Baal
will be angry with us; and curse us with drought and blight."

