"Remember that I'm not urging you," said the hunter, politely. "I'm a
believer in personal independence and I like people to do what they
want to do, as long as it doesn't interfere with anybody else. So I
tell you to think it over. We've plenty of time. We can stay here a
week, two weeks, if need be. We'd rather you felt sure you were right
before you made up your mind. Then you wouldn't be remorseful about
any mistake."

"A wise man meditates long before he speaks," said Tayoga, "and it
follows then that our Achille Garay is very wise. He knows, too, that
his figure is improving already. He has lost at least five pounds."

"Nearer eight I sum it up, Tayoga," said Willet. "The improvement is
very marked."

"I think you are right, Great Bear. Eight it is and you also speak
truly about the improvement. If our Monsieur Garay were able to stand
up and walk he would be much more graceful than he was, when he so
kindly marched into our guiding hands."

"Don't pay him too many compliments, Tayoga. They'll prove trying to
a modest man. Come away, now. Monsieur Garay wishes to spend the next
two hours with his own wise thoughts and who are we to break in upon
such a communion?"

"The words of wisdom fall like precious beads from your lips, Great
Bear. For two hours we will leave our guest to his great thoughts."

At half past six came the question, "Your papers?" once more, and
Garay burst forth with an angry refusal, though his voice trembled.
Willet shrugged his shoulders, turned away, and helped the lads
prepare a most luxurious and abundant evening meal, Tayoga adding wild
grapes and Robert nuts to their varied course of meats, the grapes
being served on blazing red autumn leaves, the whole very pleasing to
the eye as well as to the taste.

"I think," said Willet, in tones heard easily by Garay, "that I have
in me just a trace of the epicure. I find, despite my years in the
wilderness, that I enjoy a well spread board, and that bits of
decoration appeal to me; in truth, give an added savor to the viands."

"In the vale of Onondaga when the fifty old and wise sachems make a
banquet," said Tayoga, "the maidens bring fruit and wild flowers to
it that the eye also may have its feast. It is not a weakness, but an
excellence in Great Bear to like the decorations."

They lingered long over the board, protracting the feast far after the
fall of night and interspersing it with pleasant conversation. The
ruddy flames shone on their contented faces, and their light laughter
came frequently to the ears of Garay. At half past eight the question,
grown deadly by repetition, was asked, and, when only a curse came,
Willet said:

"As it is night I'll ask you, Achille Garay, for your papers only
once every four hours. That is the interval at which we'll change our
guard, and we don't wish, either, to disturb you many times in your
pleasant slumbers. It would not be right to call a man back too often
from the land of Tarenyawagon, who, you may know, is the Iroquois
sender of dreams."

Garay, whom they had now laid tenderly upon the floor of the hut,
turned his face away, and Willet went back to the fire, humming in a
pleased fashion to himself. At half past twelve he awoke Garay from
his uneasy sleep and propounded to him his dreadful query, grown
terrifying by its continual iteration. At half past four Tayoga asked
it, and it was not necessary then to awake Garay. He had not slept
since half past twelve. He snarled at the Iroquois, and then sank back
on the blanket that they had kindly placed for him. Tayoga, his bronze
face expressing nothing, went back to his watch by the fire.

Breakfast was cooked by Robert and Willet, and again it was luscious
and varied. Robert had risen early and he caught several of the fine
lake trout that he broiled delicately over the coals. He had
also gathered grapes fresh with the morning dew, and wonderfully
appetizing, and some of the best of the nuts were left over. Bear,
deer, venison and turkey they still had in abundance.

The morning itself was the finest they had encountered so far. Much
snow had fallen in the high mountains, but winter had not touched the
earth here. The deep colors of the leaves, moved by the light wind,
shifted and changed like a prism. The glorious haze of Indian summer
hung over everything like a veil of finest gauze. The air was
surcharged with vitality and life. It was pleasant merely to sit and
breathe at such a time.

"I've always claimed," said Robert, as he passed a beautifully broiled
trout to Tayoga and another to the hunter, "that I can cook fish
better than either of you. Dave, I freely admit, can surpass me in the
matter of venison and Tayoga is a finer hand with bear than I am, but
I'm a specialist with fish, be it salmon, or trout, or salmon trout,
or perch or pickerel or what not."

"Your boast is justified, in very truth, Robert," said Willet. "I've
known none other who can prepare a fish with as much tenderness and
perfection as you. I suppose 'tis born in you, but you have a way of
preserving the juices and savors which defies description and which is
beyond praise. 'Tis worth going hungry a long while to put one's tooth
into so delicate a morsel as this salmon trout, and 'tis a great pity,
too, that our guest, Monsieur Achille Garay, will not join us, when
we've an abundance so great and a variety so rich."

The wretched spy and intermediary could hear every word they said, and
Robert fell silent, but the hunter and the Onondaga talked freely and
with abounding zest.

"'Tis a painful thing," said Willet, "to offer hospitality and to
have it refused. Monsieur Garay knows that he would be welcome at our
board, and yet he will not come. I fear, Robert, that you have cooked
too many of these superlative fish, and that they must even go to
waste, which is a sin. They would make an admirable beginning for our
guest's breakfast, if he would but consent to join us."

"It is told by the wise old sachems of the great League," said Tayoga,
"that warriors have gone many days without food, when plenty of it
was ready for their taking, merely to test their strength of body and
will. Their sufferings were acute and terrible. Their flesh wasted
away, their muscles became limp and weak, their sight failed, pain
stabbed them with a thousand needles, but they would not yield and
touch sustenance before the time appointed."

"I've heard of many such cases, Tayoga, and I've seen some, but it was
always warriors who were doing the fasting. I doubt whether white men
could stand it so long, and 'tis quite sure they would suffer more.
About the third day 'twould be as bad as being tied to the stake in the
middle of the flames."

"Great Bear speaks the truth, as he always does. No white man can
stand it. If he tried it his sufferings would be beyond anything of
which he might dream."

A groan burst suddenly from the wretched Garay. The hunter and the
Onondaga looked at each other and their eyes expressed astonishment.

"Did you hear a sound in the thicket?" asked Willet.

"I think it came from the boughs overhead," said Tayoga.

"I could have sworn 'twas the growl of a bear."

"To me it sounded like the croak of a crow."

"After all, we may have heard nothing. Imagination plays strange
tricks with us."

"It is true, Great Bear. We hear queer sounds when there are no sounds
at all. The air is full of spirits, and now and then they have sport
with us."

A second groan burst from Garay, now more wretched than ever.

"I heard it again!" exclaimed the hunter. "'Tis surely the growl of
a bear in the bush! The sound was like that of an angry wild animal!
But, we'll let it go. The sun tells meet's half past eight o'clock and
I go to ask our guest the usual question."

"Enough!" exclaimed Garay. "I yield! I cannot bear this any longer!"

"Your papers, please!"

"Unbind me and give me food!"

"Your papers first, our fish next."

As he spoke the hunter leaned over, and with his keen hunting knife
severed Garay's bonds. The man sat up, rubbed his wrists and ankles
and breathed deeply.

"Your papers!" repeated Willet.

"Bring me my pistol, the one that the Indian filched from me while I
slept," said Garay.

"Your pistol!" exclaimed the hunter, in surprise. "Now I'd certainly
be foolish to hand you a deadly and loaded weapon!"

But Robert's quick intellect comprehended at once. He snatched the
heavy pistol from the Onondaga's belt, drew forth the bullet and then
drew the charge behind it, not powder at all, but a small, tightly
folded paper of tough tissue, which he held aloft triumphantly.

"Very clever! very clever!" said Willet in admiration. "The pistol was
loaded, but 'twould never be fired, and nobody would have thought of
searching its barrel. Tayoga, give Monsieur Garay the two spare fish
and anything else he wants, but see that he eats sparingly because a
gorge will go ill with a famished man, and then we'll have a look at
his precious document."

The Onondaga treated Garay as the honored guest they had been calling
him, giving him the whole variety of their breakfast, but, at guarded
intervals, which allowed him to relish to the full all the savors and
juices that had been taunting him so long. Willet opened the letter,
smoothed it out carefully on his knee, and holding it up to the light
until the words stood out clearly, read:

"To Hendrik Martinus At Albany.

"The intermediary of whom you know, the bearer of this letter, has
brought me word from you that the English Colonial troops, after the
unfortunate battle at Lake George, have not pushed their victory. He
also informs us that the governors of the English colonies do not
agree, and that there is much ill feeling among the different Colonial
forces. He says that Johnson still suffering from his wound, does not
move, and that the spirit has gone out of our enemies. All of which is
welcome news to us at this juncture, since it has given to us the time
that we need.

"Our defeat but incites us to greater efforts. The Indian tribes who
have cast their lot with us are loyal to our arms. All the forces of
France and New France are being assembled to crush our foes. We have
lost Dieskau, but a great soldier, Louis Joseph de Saint Veran, the
Marquis de Montcalm-Gozon, is coming from France to lead our armies.
He will be assisted by the incomparable chieftains, the Chevalier de
Levis, the Chevalier Bourlamaque and others who understand the warfare
of the wilderness. Even now we are preparing to move with a great
power on Albany and we may surprise the town.

"Tell those of whom you know in Albany and New York to be ready with
rifles and ammunition and other presents for the Indian warriors. Much
depends upon their skill and promptness in delivering these valuable
goods to the tribes. It seals them to our standard. They can be landed
at the places of which we know, and then be carried swiftly across the
wilderness. But I bid you once more to exercise exceeding caution. Let
no name of those associated with us ever be entrusted to writing, as a
single slip might bring our whole fabric crashing to the ground, and
send to death those who serve us. After you have perused this letter
destroy it. Do not tear it in pieces and throw them away but burn it
to the last and least little fragment. In conclusion I say yet again,
caution, caution, caution.

Raymond Louis de St. Luc."

The three looked at one another. Garay was in the third course of his
breakfast, and no longer took notice of anything else.

"Those associated with us in Albany and New York," quoted Willet. "Now
I wonder who they are. I might make a shrewd guess at one, but no
names are given and as we have no proof we must keep silent about him
for the present. Yet this paper is of vast importance and it must be
put in hands that know how to value it."

"Then the hands must be those of Colonel William Johnson," said
Robert.

"I fancy you're right, lad. Yet 'tis hard just now to decide upon the
wisest policy."

"The colonel is the real leader of our forces," persisted the lad.
"It's to him that we must go."

"It looks so, Robert, but for a few days we've got to consider
ourselves. Now that we have his letter I wish we didn't have Garay."

"You wouldn't really have starved him, would you, Dave? Somehow it
seemed pretty hard."

The hunter laughed heartily.

"Bless your heart, lad," he replied. "Don't you be troubled about the
way we dealt with Garay. I knew all the while that he would never get
to the starving point, or I wouldn't have tried it with him. I knew by
looking at him that his isn't the fiber of which martyrs are made. I
calculated that he would give up last night or this morning."

"Are we going to take him back with us a prisoner?"

"That's the trouble. As a spy, which he undoubtedly is, his life is
forfeit, but we are not executioners. For scouts and messengers such
as we are he'd be a tremendous burden to take along with us. Moreover,
I think that after his long fast he'd eat all the game we could kill,
and we don't propose to spend our whole time feeding one of our
enemies."

"Call Tayoga," said Robert.

The Onondaga came and then young Lennox said to his two comrades:

"Are you willing to trust me in the matter of Garay, our prisoner?"

"Yes," they replied together.

Robert went to the man, who was still immersed in his gross feeding,
and tapped him on the shoulder.

"Listen, Garay," he said. "You're the bearer of secret and treacherous
dispatches, and you're a spy. You must know that under all the rules
of war your life is forfeit to your captors."

Garay's face became gray and ghastly.

"You--you wouldn't murder me?" he said.

"There could be no such thing as murder in your case, and we won't
take your life, either."

The face of the intermediary recovered its lost color.

"You will spare me, then?" he exclaimed joyfully.

"In a way, yes, but we're not going to carry you back in luxury to
Albany, nor are we thinking of making you an honored member of our
band. You've quite a time before you."

"I don't understand you."

"You will soon. You're going back to the Chevalier de St. Luc who has
little patience with failure, and you'll find that the road to him
abounds in hard traveling. It may be, too, that the savage Tandakora
will ask you some difficult questions, but if so, Monsieur Achille
Garay, it will be your task to answer them, and I take it that you
have a fertile mind. In any event, you will be equipped to meet him by
your journey, which will be full of variety and effort and which will
strengthen and harden your mind."

The face of Garay paled again, and he gazed at Robert in a sort of
dazed fashion. The imagination of young Lennox was alive and leaping.
He had found what seemed to him a happy solution of a knotty problem,
