The Project Gutenberg EBook of Jesus the Christ, by James Edward Talmage

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Jesus the Christ
       A Study of the Messiah and His Mission According to Holy
       Scriptures Both Ancient and Modern

Author: James Edward Talmage

Release Date: September 8, 2007 [EBook #22542]
Last updated: January 21, 2009

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK JESUS THE CHRIST ***




Produced by Juliet Sutherland, David King, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net





JESUS THE CHRIST

A Study of the Messiah and His Mission
according to Holy Scriptures both
Ancient and Modern

By

JAMES E. TALMAGE

One of the Twelve Apostles of the Church of
Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints


PUBLISHED BY THE CHURCH

SIXTH EDITION

TWENTY-EIGHTH TO THIRTIETH THOUSAND INCLUSIVE

Salt Lake City, Utah

Deseret Book Company

1922

Copyright

September 1915, December 1915, April 1916
and November 1916

By

JOSEPH F. SMITH

Trustee-in-Trust for the
Church of Jesus Christ of
Latter-day Saints

Copyright, October, 1922

By

HEBER J. GRANT

Trustee-in-Trust for the
Church of Jesus Christ of
Latter-day Saints


Printed in the United States of America




PREFACE.


The scope of the subject presented in this work is expressed on the
title page. It will be readily seen that the author has departed from
the course usually followed by writers on the Life of Jesus Christ,
which course, as a rule, begins with the birth of Mary's Babe and ends
with the ascension of the slain and risen Lord from Olivet. The
treatment embodied in these pages, in addition to the narrative of the
Lord's life in the flesh comprizes the antemortal existence and
activities of the world's Redeemer, the revelations and personal
manifestations of the glorified and exalted Son of God during the
apostolic period of old and in modern times, the assured nearness of the
Lord's second advent, and predicted events beyond--all so far as the
Holy Scriptures make plain.

It is particularly congruous and appropriate that the Church of Jesus
Christ of Latter-day Saints--the only Church that affirms authority
based on specific revelation and commission to use the Lord's Holy Name
as a distinctive designation--should set forth her doctrines concerning
the Messiah and His mission.

The author of this volume entered upon his welcome service under request
and appointment from the presiding authorities of the Church; and the
completed work has been read to and is approved by the First Presidency
and the Council of the Twelve. It presents, however, the writer's
personal belief and profoundest conviction as to the truth of what he
has written. The book is published by the Church of Jesus Christ of
Latter-day Saints.

A characteristic feature of the work is the guidance afforded by modern
scriptures and the explication of the Holy Writ of olden times in the
light of present day revelation, which, as a powerful and well directed
beam, illumines many dark passages of ancient construction.

The spirit of the sacredness inherent in the subject has been a constant
companion of the writer throughout his pleasing labor, and he reverently
invokes the same as a minister to the readers of the volume.

JAMES E. TALMAGE.

Salt Lake City, Utah,
September, 1915.




PREFACE TO THE SIXTH EDITION.


The second edition of this work appeared in December, 1915, and the
third in March, 1916. The third edition presented several minor
alterations in wording and contained additional notes and references.
Succeeding issues, including the fifth which was printed on India paper,
and the present edition are practically uniform with the third.

JAMES E. TALMAGE.

Salt Lake City, Utah,
October, 1922.




CONTENTS.

Chapter 1.

INTRODUCTION.

Historicity of Jesus the Christ.--Scope and purpose of the present
treatise

Chapter 2.

PREEXISTENCE AND FOREORDINATION OF THE CHRIST.

Antemortal existence of spirits.--Primeval council in heaven.--Rebellion
of Lucifer.--His defeat and expulsion.--Free agency of man insured.--The
Beloved Son chosen to be the Savior and Redeemer of mankind

Chapter 3.

THE NEED OF A REDEEMER.

Spirits of diverse capacities.--Entrance of sin into the world
foreseen.--God's foreknowledge not a determining cause.--Creation of man
in the flesh.--Fall of man.--Atonement necessary.--Jesus Christ the only
Being eligible as Redeemer and Savior.--Universal resurrection provided

Chapter 4.

THE ANTEMORTAL GODSHIP OF CHRIST.

The Godhead.--Jesus Christ the Word of power.--Jesus Christ the
Creator.--Jehovah.--The Eternal I AM.--Proclamations of Jesus Christ by
the Father

Chapter 5.

EARTHLY ADVENT OF THE CHRIST PREDICTED.

Biblical prophecies.--Revelation to Enoch.--The Prophet predicted by
Moses.--Sacrifices as prototypes.--Book of Mormon predictions

Chapter 6.

THE MERIDIAN OF TIME.

Significance of the designation.--Epitome of Israel's history.--Jews in
vassalage to Rome.--Scribes and rabbis.--Pharisees and Sadducees.--Other
sects and parties

Chapter 7.

GABRIEL'S ANNUNCIATION OF JOHN AND OF JESUS.

Angelic visitation to Zacharias.--Birth of John the
forerunner.--Annunciation to Mary the Virgin.--Mary and Joseph.--Their
genealogies.--Jesus Christ heir to the throne of David

Chapter 8.

THE BABE OF BETHLEHEM.

Birth of Jesus Christ.--His presentation in the temple.--Visit of the
magi.--Herod's evil designs.--The Child taken into Egypt.--Birth of
Christ made known to Nephites.--Time of the birth

Chapter 9.

THE BOY OF NAZARETH.

Jesus to be called a Nazarene.--At the temple when twelve years of
age.--Jesus and the doctors of the law.--Jesus of Nazareth

Chapter 10.

IN THE WILDERNESS OF JUDEA.

John the Baptist.--The voice in the wilderness.--Baptism of Jesus.--The
Father's proclamation.--Descent of the Holy Ghost.--Sign of the
dove.--Temptations of Christ

Chapter 11.

FROM JUDEA TO GALILEE.

John Baptist's testimony of Christ.--First disciples.--The Son of Man,
significance of title.--Miracle of transmuting water into
wine.--Miracles in general

Chapter 12.

EARLY INCIDENTS IN OUR LORD'S PUBLIC MINISTRY.

First clearing of the temple.--Jesus and Nicodemus.--John Baptist's
disciples in disputation.--John's tribute to and repeated testimony of
the Christ

Chapter 13.

HONORED BY STRANGERS, REJECTED BY HIS OWN.

Jesus and the Samaritan woman.--Among the Samaritans.--While at Cana
Christ heals a nobleman's son in Capernaum.--At Nazareth Christ preaches
in synagog.--Nazarenes attempt to kill him.--Demons subdued in
Capernaum.--Demoniacal possession

Chapter 14.

CONTINUATION OF OUR LORD'S MINISTRY IN GALILEE.

A leper healed.--Leprosy.--Palsied man healed and forgiven.--Imputation
of blasphemy.--Publicans and sinners.--Old cloth, old bottles, and the
new.--Preliminary call of disciples.--Fishers of men

Chapter 15.

LORD OF THE SABBATH.

Sabbath distinctively sacred to Israel.--Cripple healed on Sabbath
day.--Accusations by the Jews and the Lord's reply thereto.--Disciples
charged with Sabbath-breaking.--Man with a withered hand healed on
Sabbath day

Chapter 16.

THE CHOSEN TWELVE.

Their call and ordination.--The Twelve considered individually.--Their
characteristics in general.--Disciples and apostles

Chapter 17.

THE SERMON ON THE MOUNT.

The Beatitudes.--Dignity and responsibility in the ministry.--The Mosaic
law superseded by the gospel of Christ.--Sincerity of purpose. The
Lord's Prayer.--True wealth.--Promise and re-assurance.--Hearing and
doing

Chapter 18.

AS ONE HAVING AUTHORITY.

Healing of centurion's servant.--Young man of Nain raised from the
dead.--John Baptist's message to Jesus.--The Lord's commentary
thereon.--Death of John Baptist.--Jesus in house of Simon the
Pharisee.--Penitent woman forgiven.--Christ's authority ascribed to
Beelzebub.--The sin against the Holy Ghost.--Sign-seekers

Chapter 19.

"HE SPAKE MANY THINGS UNTO THEM IN PARABLES."

The Sower.--Wheat and Tares.--Seed growing secretly.--Mustard
Seed.--Leaven.--Hidden Treasure.--Pearl of Great Price.--Gospel
Net.--The Lord's purpose in parabolic teaching.--Parables in general

Chapter 20.

"PEACE, BE STILL."

Candidates for discipleship.--Stilling the storm.--Quieting the demons
in region of Gadara.--Raising of daughter of Jairus.--Restoration to
life and resurrection.--A woman healed amidst the throng.--Blind see and
dumb speak

Chapter 21.

THE APOSTOLIC MISSION, AND EVENTS RELATED THERETO.

Jesus again in Nazareth.--The Twelve charged and sent out.--Their
return.--Five thousand people miraculously fed.--Miracle of walking upon
the water.--People seek Christ for more loaves and fishes.--Christ the
bread of life.--Many disciples turn away

Chapter 22.

A PERIOD OF DARKENING OPPOSITION.

Ceremonial washings.--Pharisees rebuked.--Jesus in borders of Tyre and
Sidon.--Daughter of Syro-Phoenician woman healed.--Miracles wrought in
coasts of Decapolis.--Four thousand people miraculously fed.--More
seekers after signs.--Leaven of the Pharisees, Sadducees, and
Herodians.--Peter's great confession, "Thou art the Christ"

Chapter 23.

THE TRANSFIGURATION.

Visitation of Moses and Elijah.--The Father again proclaims the
Son.--The apostles temporarily restrained from testifying concerning the
transfiguration.--Elias and Elijah.--The Lesser and the Higher
Priesthood

Chapter 24.

FROM SUNSHINE TO SHADOW.

Youthful demoniac healed.--Further prediction of Christ's death and
resurrection.--The tribute money; supplied by a miracle.--Humility
illustrated by a little child.--Parable of the Lost Sheep.--In Christ's
name.--My brother and I.--Parable of the Unmerciful Servant

Chapter 25.

JESUS AGAIN IN JERUSALEM.

Departure from Galilee.--At the Feast of Tabernacles.--Another charge of
Sabbath desecration.--Living water for the spiritually thirsty.--Plans
to arrest Jesus.--Nicodemus protests.--Woman taken in adultery.--Christ
the light of the world.--The truth shall make men free.--Christ's
seniority over Abraham.--Sight restored on Sabbath day.--Physical and
spiritual blindness.--Shepherd and sheep-herder.--Christ the Good
Shepherd.--His inherent power over life and death.--Sheep of another
fold

Chapter 26.

OUR LORD'S MINISTRY IN PEREA AND JUDEA.

Jesus rejected in Samaria.--James and John reproved for revengeful
desire.--The Seventy charged and sent.--Their return.--A lawyer's
question.--Parable of Good Samaritan.--Martha and Mary.--Ask and
receive.--Parable of Friend at Midnight.--Criticism on Pharisees and
lawyers.--Parable of Foolish Rich Man.--The unrepentant to
perish.--Parable of Barren Fig Tree.--A woman healed on the
Sabbath.--Many or few to be saved?--Jesus warned of Herod's design

Chapter 27.

CONTINUATION OF THE PEREAN AND JUDEAN MINISTRY.

In the house of one of the chief Pharisees.--Parable of the Great
Supper.--Counting the cost.--Salvation even for publicans and
sinners.--Parable of the Lost Sheep repeated.--Of the Lost Coin.--Of the
Prodigal Son.--Of the Unrighteous Steward.--Of the Rich Man and
Lazarus.--Of the Unprofitable Servants.--Ten lepers healed.--Parable of
the Pharisee and Publican.--On marriage and divorce.--Jesus and the
little ones.--The rich young ruler.--First may be last and last
first.--Parable of the Laborers

Chapter 28.

THE LAST WINTER.

At the Feast of Dedication.--Sheep know the Shepherd's Voice.--The
Lord's retirement in Perea.--Lazarus raised from the dead.--Jewish
hierarchy agitated over the miracle.--Prophecy by Caiaphas, the high
priest.--Jesus in retirement at Ephraim

Chapter 29.

ON TO JERUSALEM.

Jesus again foretells His death and resurrection.--Aspiring request of
James and John.--Sight restored near Jericho.--Zaccheus the chief
publican.--Parable of the Pounds.--The supper in the house of Simon the
leper.--Mary's tribute in anointing Jesus.--Iscariot's protest.--
Christ's triumphal entry into Jerusalem.--Certain Greeks seek
interview with Jesus.--The Voice from heaven

Chapter 30.

JESUS RETURNS TO THE TEMPLE DAILY.

A leafy but fruitless fig tree cursed.--Second clearing of the
temple.--Children shout Hosanna.--Christ's authority challenged by the
rulers.--Parable of the two sons. Of the Wicked Husbandmen.--The
rejected Stone to be head of the corner.--Parable of the Royal Marriage
Feast.--The wedding garment lacking

Chapter 31.

THE CLOSE OF OUR LORD'S PUBLIC MINISTRY.

Pharisees and Herodians in conspiracy.--Caesar to have his due.--The
image on the coin.--Sadducees and the resurrection.--Levirate
marriages.--The great commandment.--Jesus turns questioner.--Scathing
denunciation of scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites!--Lamentation over
Jerusalem.--The widow's mites.--Christ's final withdrawal from
temple.--Destruction of temple predicted

Chapter 32.

FURTHER INSTRUCTION TO THE APOSTLES.

Prophecies relating to destruction of Jerusalem and the Lord's future
advent.--Watch!--Parable of Ten Virgins.--Of the Entrusted Talents.--The
inevitable judgment.--Another and specific prediction of the Lord's
impending death

Chapter 33.

THE LAST SUPPER AND THE BETRAYAL.

Judas Iscariot in conspiracy with the Jews.--Preparations for the Lord's
last Passover.--The last supper of Jesus with the Twelve.--The traitor
designated.--Ordinance of washing of feet.--Sacrament of the Lord's
Supper.--The betrayer goes out into the night.--Discourse following the
supper.--The High-Priestly Prayer.--The Lord's agony in Gethsemane.--The
betrayal and the arrest

Chapter 34.

THE TRIAL AND CONDEMNATION.

The Jewish trial.--Christ before Annas and Caiaphas.--The illegal night
court.--The morning session.--False witnesses and unrighteous
conviction.--Peter's denial of his Lord.--Christ's first arraignment
before Pilate.--Before Herod.--Second appearance before
Pilate.--Pilate's surrender to Jewish clamor.--The sentence of
crucifixion.--Suicide of Judas Iscariot

Chapter 35.

DEATH AND BURIAL.

On the way to Calvary.--The Lord's address to the daughters of
Jerusalem.--The crucifixion.--Occurrences between the Lord's death and
burial.--The burial.--The sepulchre guarded

Chapter 36.

IN THE REALM OF DISEMBODIED SPIRITS.

Actuality of the Lord's death.--Condition of spirits between death and
resurrection.--The Savior among the dead.--The gospel preached to the
spirits in prison

Chapter 37.

THE RESURRECTION AND THE ASCENSION.

Christ is risen.--The women at the sepulchre.--Angelic
communications.--The risen Lord seen by Mary Magdalene.--And by other
women.--A priestly conspiracy of falsehood.--The Lord and two disciples
on the Emmaus road.--He appears to disciples in Jerusalem and eats in
their presence.--Doubting Thomas.--The Lord appears to the apostles at
the sea of Tiberias.--Other manifestations in Galilee.--Final commission
to the apostles.--The ascension

Chapter 38.

THE APOSTOLIC MINISTRY.

Matthias ordained to the apostleship.--Bestowal of the Holy Ghost at
Pentecost.--The apostles' preaching.--Imprisoned and delivered.--
Gamaliel's advice to the council.--Stephen the martyr.--Saul of Tarsus,
his conversion.--Becomes Paul the apostle.--The record by John the
Revelator.--Close of the apostolic ministry

Chapter 39.

MINISTRY OF THE RESURRECTED CHRIST ON THE WESTERN HEMISPHERE.

The Lord's death signalized by great calamities on western
continent.--The Voice of the Lord Jesus Christ heard.--His visitations
to the Nephites.--The Nephite Twelve.--Baptism among Nephites.--The
Mosaic law fulfilled.--Address to Nephites compared with Sermon on the
Mount.--Sacrament of bread and wine instituted among Nephites.--Name of
Christ's Church.--The Three Nephites.--Growth of the Church.--Final
apostasy of Nephite nation

Chapter 40.

THE LONG NIGHT OF APOSTASY.

The great falling away as predicted.--Individual apostasy from the
Church.--Apostasy of the Church.--Constantine makes Christianity the
religion of state.--Papal claims to secular authority.--Churchly
tyranny.--The Dark Ages.--The inevitable revolt.--The Reformation.--Rise
of Church of England.--Catholicism and Protestantism.--The apostasy
affirmed.--Mission of Columbus and the Pilgrim Fathers predicted in
ancient scripture.--Fulfilment of the prophecies.--Establishment of
American nation provided for

Chapter 41.

PERSONAL MANIFESTATIONS OF GOD THE ETERNAL FATHER AND OF HIS SON JESUS
CHRIST IN MODERN TIMES.

A new dispensation.--Joseph Smith's perplexity over sectarian
strife.--The Eternal Father and His Son Jesus Christ appear to and
personally instruct Joseph Smith.--Visitation of Moroni.--The Book of
Mormon.--Aaronic Priesthood restored by John the Baptist.--Melchizedek
Priesthood restored by Peter, James, and John.--The Church of Jesus
Christ of Latter-day Saints.--Divine manifestations in Kirtland
Temple.--The Lord Jesus Christ appears.--Specific authority of olden
dispensations conferred by Moses, Elias, and Elijah.--The Holy
Priesthood now operative on earth

Chapter 42.

JESUS THE CHRIST TO RETURN.

Ancient predictions of the Lord's second advent.--Modern revelation
affirms the same.--Today and tomorrow.--The great and dreadful day near
at hand.--Kingdom of God and Kingdom of Heaven.--The Millennium.--The
celestial consummation

Index




CHAPTER 1.

INTRODUCTION.


It is a matter of history that, at or near the beginning of what has
since come to be known as the Christian era, the Man Jesus, surnamed the
Christ, was born in Bethlehem of Judea.[1] The principal data as to His
birth, life, and death are so well attested as to be reasonably
indisputable; they are facts of record, and are accepted as essentially
authentic by the civilized world at large. True, there are diversities
of deduction based on alleged discrepancies in the records of the past
as to circumstantial details; but such differences are of strictly minor
importance, for none of them nor all taken together cast a shadow of
rational doubt upon the historicity of the earthly existence of the Man
known in literature as Jesus of Nazareth.

As to who and what He was there are dissensions of grave moment dividing
the opinions of men; and this divergence of conception and belief is
most pronounced upon those matters to which the greatest importance
attaches. The solemn testimonies of millions dead and of millions living
unite in proclaiming Him as divine, the Son of the Living God, the
Redeemer and Savior of the human race, the Eternal Judge of the souls of
men, the Chosen and Anointed of the Father--in short, the Christ. Others
there are who deny His Godhood while extolling the transcendent
qualities of His unparalleled and unapproachable Manhood.

To the student of history this Man among men stands first, foremost, and
alone, as a directing personality in the world's progression. Mankind
has never produced a leader to rank with Him. Regarded solely as a
historic personage He is unique. Judged by the standard of human
estimation, Jesus of Nazareth is supreme among men by reason of the
excellence of His personal character, the simplicity, beauty, and
genuine worth of His precepts, and the influence of His example and
doctrines in the advancement of the race. To these distinguishing
characteristics of surpassing greatness the devout Christian soul adds
an attribute that far exceeds the sum of all the others--the divinity of
Christ's origin and the eternal reality of His status as Lord and God.

Christian and unbeliever alike acknowledge His supremacy as a Man, and
respect the epoch-making significance of His birth. Christ was born in
the meridian of time;[2] and His life on earth marked at once the
culmination of the past and the inauguration of an era distinctive in
human hope, endeavor, and achievement. His advent determined a new order
in the reckoning of the years; and by common consent the centuries
antedating His birth have been counted backward from the pivotal event
and are designated accordingly. The rise and fall of dynasties, the
birth and dissolution of nations, all the cycles of history as to war
and peace, as to prosperity and adversity, as to health and pestilence,
seasons of plenty and of famine, the awful happenings of earthquake and
storm, the triumphs of invention and discovery, the epochs of man's
development in godliness and the long periods of his dwindling in
unbelief--all the occurrences that make history--are chronicled
throughout Christendom by reference to the year before or after the
birth of Jesus Christ.

His earthly life covered a period of thirty-three years; and of these
but three were spent by Him as an acknowledged Teacher openly engaged in
the activities of public ministry. He was brought to a violent death
before He had attained what we now regard as the age of manhood's prime.
As an individual He was personally known to but few; and His fame as a
world character became general only after His death.

Brief account of some of His words and works has been preserved to us;
and this record, fragmentary and incomplete though it be, is rightly
esteemed as the world's greatest treasure. The earliest and most
extended history of His mortal existence is embodied within the
compilation of scriptures known as the New Testament; indeed but little
is said of Him by secular historians of His time. Few and short as are
the allusions to Him made by non-scriptural writers in the period
immediately following that of His ministry, enough is found to
corroborate the sacred record as to the actuality and period of Christ's
earthly existence.

No adequate biography of Jesus as Boy and Man has been or can be
written, for the sufficing reason that a fulness of data is lacking.
Nevertheless, man never lived of whom more has been said and sung, none
to whom is devoted a greater proportion of the world's literature. He is
extolled by Christian, Mohammedan and Jew, by skeptic and infidel, by
the world's greatest poets, philosophers, statesmen, scientists, and
historian. Even the profane sinner in the foul, sacrilege of his oath
acclaims the divine supremacy of Him whose name he desecrates.

The purpose of the present treatise is that of considering the life and
mission of Jesus _as_ the Christ. In this undertaking we are to be
guided by the light of both ancient and modern scriptures; and, thus
led, we shall discover, even in the early stages of our course, that the
word of God as revealed in latter days is effective in illuming and
making plain the Holy Writ of ancient times, and this, in many matters
of the profoundest imports.[3]

Instead of beginning our study with the earthly birth of the Holy Babe
of Bethlehem, we shall consider the part taken by the Firstborn Son of
God in the primeval councils of heaven, at the time when He was chosen
and ordained to be the Savior of the unborn race of mortals, the
Redeemer of a world then in its formative stages of development. We are
to study Him as the Creator of the world, as the Word of Power, through
whom the purposes of the Eternal Father were realized in the preparation
of the earth for the abode of His myriad spirit-children during the
appointed period of their mortal probation. Jesus Christ was and is
Jehovah, the God of Adam and of Noah, the God of Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob, the God of Israel, the God at whose instance the prophets of the
ages have spoken, the God of all nations, and He who shall yet reign on
earth as King of kings and Lord of lords.

His wondrous yet natural birth, His immaculate life in the flesh, and
His voluntary death as a consecrated sacrifice for the sins of mankind,
shall claim our reverent attention; as shall also His redeeming service
in the world of disembodied spirits; His literal resurrection from
bodily death to immortality; His several appearings to men and His
continued ministry as the Resurrected Lord on both continents; the
reestablishment of His Church through His personal presence and that of
the Eternal Father in the latter days; and His coming to His temple in
the current dispensation. All these developments in the ministration of
the Christ are already of the past. Our proposed course of investigation
will lead yet onward, into the future concerning which the word of
divine revelation is of record. We shall consider the conditions
incident to the Lord's return in power and glory to inaugurate the
dominion of the Kingdom of Heaven on earth, and to usher in the
predicted Millennium of peace and righteousness. And yet beyond we shall
follow Him, through the post-Millennial conflict between the powers of
heaven and the forces of hell, to the completion of His victory over
Satan, sin, and death, when He shall present the glorified earth and its
sanctified hosts, spotless and celestialized, unto the Father.

The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints affirms her possession
of divine authority for the use of the sacred name, Jesus Christ, as the
essential part of her distinctive designation. In view of this exalted
claim, it is pertinent to inquire as to what special or particular
message the Church has to give to the world concerning the Redeemer and
Savior of the race, and as to what she has to say in justification of
her solemn affirmation, or in vindication of her exclusive name and
title. As we proceed with our study, we shall find that among the
specific teachings of the Church respecting the Christ are these:

(1) The unity and continuity of His mission in all ages--this of
necessity involving the verity of His preexistence and foreordination.
(2) The fact of His antemortal Godship. (3) The actuality of His birth
in the flesh as the natural issue of divine and mortal parentage. (4)
The reality of His death and physical resurrection, as a result of which
the power of death shall be eventually overcome. (5) The literalness of
the atonement wrought by Him, including the absolute requirement of
individual compliance with the laws and ordinances of His gospel as the
means by which salvation may be attained. (6) The restoration of His
Priesthood and the reestablishment of His Church in the current age,
which is verily the Dispensation of the Fulness of Times. (7) The
certainty of His return to earth in the near future, with power and
great glory, to reign in Person and bodily presence as Lord and King.

FOOTNOTES:

[1] As to the year of Christ's birth, see chapter 8.

[2] See chapter 6.

[3] The Holy Bible, the Book of Mormon, the Doctrine and Covenants, and
the Pearl of Great Price constitute the standard works of the Church of
Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. These will be cited alike as
Scriptures in the following pages, for such they are.




CHAPTER 2.

PREEXISTENCE AND FOREORDINATION OF THE CHRIST.


We affirm, on the authority of Holy Scripture, that the Being who is
known among men as Jesus of Nazareth, and by all who acknowledge His
Godhood as Jesus the Christ, existed with the Father prior to birth in
the flesh; and that in the preexistent state He was chosen and ordained
to be the one and only Savior and Redeemer of the human race.
Foreordination implies and comprizes preexistence as an essential
condition; therefore scriptures bearing upon the one are germane to the
other; and consequently in this presentation no segregation of evidence
as applying specifically to the preexistence of Christ or to His
foreordination will be attempted.

John the Revelator beheld in vision some of the scenes that had been
enacted in the spirit-world before the beginning of human history. He
witnessed strife and contention between loyalty and rebellion, with the
hosts defending the former led by Michael the archangel, and the
rebellious forces captained by Satan, who is also called the devil, the
serpent, and the dragon. We read: "And there was war in heaven; Michael
and his angels fought against the dragon; and the dragon fought and his
angels."[4]

In this struggle between unembodied hosts the forces were unequally
divided; Satan drew to his standard only a third part of the children of
God, who are symbolized as the "stars of heaven";[5] the majority either
fought with Michael, or at least refrained from active opposition, thus
accomplishing the purpose of their "first estate"; while the angels who
arrayed themselves on the side of Satan "kept not their first
estate",[6] and therefore rendered themselves ineligible for the
glorious possibilities of an advanced condition or "second estate".[7]
The victory was with Michael and his angels; and Satan or Lucifer,
theretofore a "son of the morning", was cast out of heaven, yea "he was
cast out into the earth, and his angels were cast out with him".[8] The
prophet Isaiah, to whom these momentous occurrences had been revealed
about eight centuries prior to the time of John's writings, laments with
inspired pathos the fall of so great a one; and specifies selfish
ambition as the occasion: "How art thou fallen from heaven, O Lucifer,
son of the morning! how art thou cut down to the ground, which didst
weaken the nations! For thou hast said in thine heart, I will ascent
into heaven, I will exalt my throne above the stars of God: I will sit
also upon the mount of the congregation, in the sides of the north: I
will ascend above the heights of the clouds; I will be like the most
High. Yet thou shalt be brought down to hell, to the sides of the
pit."[9]

Justification for citing these scriptures in connection with our present
consideration will be found in the cause of the great contention--the
conditions that led to this war in heaven. It is plain from the words of
Isaiah that Lucifer, already of exalted rank, sought to aggrandize
himself without regard to the rights and agency of others. The matter is
set forth, in words that none may misapprehend, in a revelation given to
Moses and repeated through the first prophet of the present
dispensation: "And I, the Lord God, spake unto Moses, saying: That
Satan, whom thou hast commanded in the name of mine Only Begotten, is
the same which was from the beginning, and he came before me,
saying--Behold, here am I, send me, I will be thy son, and I will redeem
all mankind, that one soul shall not be lost, and surely I will do it;
wherefore give me thine honor. But, behold, my Beloved son, which was my
Beloved and Chosen from the beginning, said unto me--Father, thy will be
done, and the glory be thine forever. Wherefore, because that Satan
rebelled against me, and sought to destroy the agency of man, which I,
the Lord God, had given him, and also, that I should give unto him mine
own power; by the power of mine Only Begotten, I caused that he should
be cast down; and he became Satan, yea, even the devil, the father of
all lies, to deceive and to blind men, and to lead them captive at his
will, even as many as would not hearken unto my voice."[10]

Thus it is shown that prior to the placing of man upon the earth, how
long before we do not know, Christ and Satan, together with the hosts of
the spirit-children of God, existed as intelligent individuals,[11]
possessing power and opportunity to choose the course they would pursue
and the leaders whom they would follow and obey.[12] In that great
concourse of spirit-intelligences, the Father's plan, whereby His
children would be advanced to their second estate, was submitted and
doubtless discussed. The opportunity so placed within the reach of the
spirits who were to be privileged to take bodies upon the earth was so
transcendently glorious that those heavenly multitudes burst forth into
song and shouted for joy.[13]

Satan's plan of compulsion, whereby all would be safely conducted
through the career of mortality, bereft of freedom to act and agency to
choose, so circumscribed that they would be compelled to do right--that
one soul would not be lost--was rejected; and the humble offer of Jesus
the First-born--to assume mortality and live among men as their Exemplar
and Teacher, observing the sanctity of man's agency but teaching men to
use aright that divine heritage--was accepted. The decision brought war,
which resulted in the vanquishment of Satan and his angels, who were
cast out and deprived of the boundless privileges incident to the mortal
or second estate.

In that august council of the angels and the Gods, the Being who later
was born in flesh as Mary's Son, Jesus, took prominent part, and there
was He ordained of the Father to be the Savior of mankind. As to time,
the term being used in the sense of all duration past, this is our
earliest record of the Firstborn among the sons of God; to us who read,
it marks the beginning of the written history of Jesus the Christ.[14]

Old Testament scriptures, while abounding in promises relating to the
actuality of Christ's advent in the flesh, are less specific in
information concerning His antemortal existence. By the children of
Israel, while living under the law and still unprepared to receive the
gospel, the Messiah was looked for as one to be born in the lineage of
Abraham and David, empowered to deliver them from personal and national
burdens, and to vanquish their enemies. The actuality of the Messiah's
status as the chosen Son of God, who was with the Father from the
beginning, a Being of preexistent power and glory, was but dimly
perceived, if conceived at all, by the people in general; and although
to prophets specially commissioned in the authorities and privileges of
the Holy Priesthood, revelation of the great truth was given,[15] they
transmitted it to the people rather in the language of imagery and
parable than in words of direct plainness. Nevertheless the testimony of
the evangelists and the apostles, the attestation of the Christ Himself
while in the flesh, and the revelations given in the present
dispensation leave us without dearth of scriptural proof.

In the opening lines of the Gospel book written by John the apostle, we
read: "In the beginning was the Word, and the word was with God, and the
word was God. The same was in the beginning with God. All things were
made by him; and without him was not anything made that was made.... And
the Word was made flesh, and dwelt among us, (and we beheld his glory,
the glory as of the only begotten of the Father), full of grace and
truth."[16]

The passage is simple, precise and unambiguous. We may reasonably give
to the phrase "In the beginning" the same meaning as attaches thereto in
the first line of Genesis; and such signification must indicate a time
antecedent to the earliest stages of human existence upon the earth.
That the Word is Jesus Christ, who was with the Father in that beginning
and who was Himself invested with the powers and rank of Godship, and
that He came into the world and dwelt among men, are definitely
affirmed. These statements are corroborated through a revelation given
to Moses, in which he was permitted to see many of the creations of God,
and to hear the voice of the Father with respect to the things that had
been made: "And by the word of my power, have I created them, which is
mine Only Begotten Son, who is full of grace and truth."[17]

John the apostle repeatedly affirms the preexistence of the Christ and
the fact of His authority and power in the antemortal state.[18] To the
same effect is the testimony of Paul[19] and of Peter. Instructing the
saints concerning the basis of their faith, the last-named apostle
impressed upon them that their redemption was not to be secured through
corruptible things nor by the outward observance of traditional
requirements, "But with the precious blood of Christ, as of a lamb
without blemish and without spot: who verily was foreordained before the
foundation of the world, but was manifest in these last times for
you."[20]

Even more impressive and yet more truly conclusive are the personal
testimonies of the Savior as to His own pre-existent life and the
mission among men to which He had been appointed. No one who accepts
Jesus as the Messiah can consistently reject these evidences of His
eternal nature. When, on a certain occasion, the Jews in the synagogue
disputed among themselves and murmured because of their failure to
understand aright His doctrine concerning Himself, especially as
touching His relationship with the Father, Jesus said unto them: "For I
came down from heaven, not to do mine own will, but the will of him that
sent me." And then, continuing the lesson based upon the contrast
between the manna with which their fathers had been fed in the
wilderness and the bread of life which He had to offer, He added: "I am
the living bread which came down from heaven," and again declared "the
living Father hath sent me." Not a few of the disciples failed to
comprehend His teachings; and their complaints drew from Him these
words: "Doth this offend you? What and if ye shall see the Son of man
ascend up where he was before?"[21]

To certain wicked Jews, wrapped in the mantle of racial pride, boastful
of their descent through the lineage of Abraham, and seeking to excuse
their sins through an unwarranted use of the great patriarch's name, our
Lord thus proclaimed His own preeminence: "Verily, verily, I say unto
you, Before Abraham was, I am."[22] The fuller significance of this
remark will be treated later; suffice it in the present connection to
consider this scripture as a plain avowal of our Lord's seniority and
supremacy over Abraham. But as Abraham's birth had preceded that of
Christ by more than nineteen centuries, such seniority must have
reference to a state of existence antedating that of mortality.

When the hour of His betrayal was near, in the last interview with the
apostles prior to His agonizing experience in Gethsemane, Jesus
comforted them saying: "For the Father himself loveth you, because ye
have loved me, and have believed that I came out from God. I came forth
from the Father, and am come into the world again, I leave the world,
and go to the Father."[23] Furthermore, in the course of upwelling
prayer for those who had been true to their testimony of His
Messiahship, He addressed the Father with this solemn invocation: "And
this is the life eternal, that they might know thee the only true God,
and Jesus Christ, whom thou hast sent. I have glorified thee on the
earth: I have finished the work which thou gavest me to do. And now, O
Father glorify thou with thine own self with the glory which I had with
thee before the world was."[24]

Book of Mormon scriptures are likewise explicit in proof of the
preexistence of the Christ and of His foreappointed mission. One only of
the many evidences therein found will be cited here. An ancient prophet,
designated in the record as the brother of Jared,[25] once pleaded with
the Lord in special supplication: "And the Lord said unto him, Believest
thou the words which I shall speak? And he answered, Yea, Lord, I know
that thou speakest the truth, for thou art a God of truth, and canst not
lie. And when he had said these words, behold, the Lord shewed himself
unto him, and said, Because thou knowest these things, ye are redeemed
from the fall: therefore ye are brought back into my presence; therefore
I shew myself unto you. Behold, I am he who was prepared from the
foundation of the world to redeem my people. Behold, I am Jesus Christ.
I am the Father and the Son. In me shall all mankind have light, and
that eternally, even they who shall believe on my name; and they shall
become my sons and my daughters. And never have I shewed myself unto man
whom I have created, for never has man believed in me as thou hast.
Seest thou that ye are created after mine own image? Yea, even all men
were created in the beginning, after mine own image. Behold, this body,
which ye now behold, is the body of my spirit; and man have I created
after the body of my spirit; and even as I appear unto thee to be in the
spirit, will I appear unto my people in the flesh."[26] The main facts
attested by this scripture as having a direct bearing upon our present
subject are those of the Christ manifesting Himself while yet in His
antemortal state, and of His declaration that He had been chosen from
the foundation of the world as the Redeemer.

Revelation given through the prophets of God in the present dispensation
is replete with evidence of Christ's appointment and ordination in the
primeval world; and the whole tenor of the scriptures contained in the
Doctrine and Covenants may be called in witness. The following instances
are particularly in point. In a communication to Joseph Smith the
prophet, in May, 1833, the Lord declared Himself as the One who had
previously come into the world from the Father, and of whom John had
borne testimony as the Word; and the solemn truth is reiterated that He,
Jesus Christ, "was in the beginning, before the world was", and further,
that He was the Redeemer who "came into the world, because the world was
made by him, and in him was the life of men and the light of men."
Again, He is referred to as "the Only Begotten of the Father, full of
grace and truth, even the Spirit of truth, which came and dwelt in the
flesh." In the course of the same revelation the Lord said: "And now,
verily I say unto you, I was in the beginning with the Father and am the
firstborn."[27] On an earlier occasion, as the modern prophet testifies,
he and an associate in the priesthood were enlightened by the Spirit so
that they were able to see and understand the things of God--"Even those
things which were from the beginning before the world was, which were
ordained of the Father, through his Only Begotten Son, who was in the
bosom of the Father, even from the beginning, of whom we bear record,
and the record which we bear is the fulness of the gospel of Jesus
Christ, who is the Son, whom we saw and with whom we conversed in the
heavenly vision."[28]

The testimony of scriptures written on both hemispheres, that of records
both ancient and modern, the inspired utterances of prophets and
apostles, and the words of the Lord Himself, are of one voice in
proclaiming the preexistence of the Christ and His ordination as the
chosen Savior and Redeemer of mankind--in the beginning, yea, even
before the foundation of the world.


NOTES TO CHAPTER 2.

1. Graded Intelligences in the Antemortal State.--That the spirits of
men existed as individual intelligences, of varying degrees of ability
and power, prior to the inauguration of the mortal state upon this earth
and even prior to the creation of the world as a suitable abode for
human beings, is shown in great plainness through a divine revelation to
Abraham: "Now the Lord had shown unto me, Abraham, the intelligences
that were organized before the world was; and among all these there were
many of the noble and great ones; and God saw these souls that they were
good, and he stood in the midst of them, and he said: These I will make
my rulers; for he stood among those that were spirits, and he saw that
they were good; and he said unto me: Abraham, thou art one of them; thou
wast chosen before thou wast born." (P. of G.P., Abraham 3:22, 23.)

That both Christ and Satan were among those exalted intelligences, and
that Christ was chosen while Satan was rejected as the future Savior of
mankind, are shown by the portions of the revelation immediately
following that above quoted: "And there stood one among them that was
like unto God, and he said unto those who were with him: We will go
down, for there is space there, and we will take of these materials, and
we will make an earth whereon these may dwell; and we will prove them
herewith, to see if they will do all things whatsoever the Lord their
God shall command them; and they who keep their first estate shall be
added upon, and they who keep not their first estate shall not have
glory in the same kingdom with those who keep their first estate; and
they who keep their second estate shall have glory added upon their
heads forever and ever. And the Lord said: Whom shall I send? And one
answered like unto the Son of Man: Here am I, send me. And another
answered and said: Here am I, send me. And the Lord said: I will send
the first. And the second was angry, and kept not his first estate; and,
at that day, many followed after him" (verses 24-28).

2. The Primeval Council in the Heavens.--"It is definitely stated in the
Book of Genesis that God said, 'Let us make man in our image, after our
likeness;' and again, after Adam had taken of the forbidden fruit the
Lord said, 'Behold, the man has become as one of us;' and the inference
is direct that in all that related to the work of the creation of the
world there was a consultation; and though God spake as it is recorded
in the Bible, yet it is evident He counseled with others. The scriptures
tell us there are 'Gods many and Lords many. But to us there is but one
God, the Father' (1 Cor. 8:5). And for this reason, though there were
others engaged in the creation of the worlds, it is given to us in the
Bible in the shape that it is; for the fulness of these truths is only
revealed to highly favored persons for certain reasons known to God; as
we are told in the scriptures: 'The secret of the Lord is with them that
fear him; and he will show them his covenant.'--Psalms 25:14.

"It is consistent to believe that at this Council in the heavens the
plan that should be adopted in relation to the sons of God who were then
spirits, and had not yet obtained tabernacles, was duly considered. For,
in view of the creation of the world and the placing of men upon it,
whereby it would be possible for them to obtain tabernacles, and in
those tabernacles obey laws of life, and with them again be exalted
among the Gods, we are told that at that time, 'the morning stars sang
together, and all the sons of God shouted for joy.' The question then
arose, how, and upon what principle, should the salvation, exaltation
and eternal glory of God's sons be brought about? It is evident that at
that Council certain plans had been proposed and discussed, and that
after a full discussion of those principles, and the declaration of the
Father's will pertaining to His design, Lucifer came before the Father
with a plan of his own, saying, 'Behold [here am] I; send me, I will be
thy son, and I will redeem all mankind, that one soul shall not be lost,
and surely I will do it; wherefore, give me thine honor.' But Jesus, on
hearing this statement made by Lucifer, said, 'Father, thy will be done,
and the glory be thine forever.' From these remarks made by the well
beloved Son, we should naturally infer that in the discussion of this
subject the Father had made known His will and developed His plan and
design pertaining to these matters, and all that His well beloved Son
wanted to do was to carry out the will of His Father, as it would appear
had been before expressed. He also wished the glory to be given to His
Father, who, as God the Father, and the originator and designer of the
plan, had a right to all the honor and glory. But Lucifer wanted to
introduce a plan contrary to the will of his Father, and then wanted His
honor, and said: 'I will save every soul of man, wherefore give me thine
honor.' He wanted to go contrary to the will of his Father, and
presumptuously sought to deprive man of his free agency, thus making him
a serf, and placing him in a position in which it was impossible for him
to obtain that exaltation which God designed should be man's, through
obedience to the law which He had suggested; and again, Lucifer wanted
the honor and power of his Father, to enable him to carry out principles
which were contrary to the Father's wish."--John Taylor--_Mediation and
Atonement_, pp. 93, 94.

3. The Jaredites.--"Of the two nations whose histories constitute the
Book of Mormon, the first in order of time consisted of the people of
Jared, who followed their leader from the Tower of Babel at the time of
the confusion of tongues. Their history was written on twenty-four
plates of gold by Ether, the last of their prophets, who, foreseeing the
destruction of his people because of their wickedness, hid away the
historical plates. They were afterward found, B.C. 123, by an expedition
sent out by King Limhi, a Nephite ruler. The record engraved on these
plates was subsequently abridged by Moroni, and the condensed account
was attached by him to the Book of Mormon record; it appears in the
modern translation under the name of the Book of Ether.

"The first and chief prophet of the Jaredites is not mentioned by name
in the record as we have it; he is known only as the brother of Jared.
Of the people, we learn that, amid the confusion of Babel, Jared and his
brother importuned the Lord that He would spare them and their
associates from the impending disruption. Their prayer was heard, and
the Lord led them with a considerable company, who, like themselves,
were free from the taint of idolatry, away from their homes, promising
to conduct them to a land choice above all other lands. Their course of
travel is not given with exactness; we learn only that they reached the
ocean, and there constructed eight vessels, called barges, in which they
set out upon the waters. These vessels were small and dark within; but
the Lord made luminous certain stones, which gave light to the
imprisoned voyagers. After a passage of three hundred and forty-four
days, the colony landed on the western shore of North America, probably
at a place south of the Gulf of California, and north of the Isthmus of
Panama.

"Here they became a flourishing nation; but, giving way in time to
internal dissensions, they divided into factions, which warred with one
another until the people were totally destroyed. This destruction, which
occurred near the hill Ramah, afterward known among the Nephites as
Cumorah, probably took place at about the time of Lehi's landing in
South America--590 B.C."--The author, _Articles of Faith_, xiv:10-12.

FOOTNOTES:
