Phil. Take your problems one at a time. We don't even know that we'll
ever see the little creatures again. Maybe they're shy."

He scarcely heard me. He was a large, well-muscled man of 46 years, an
ex-college president and an able administrator. He and Jane, his wife,
were the only two of our party older than the 35-year age limit. His
background as a sociologist and anthropologist and his greater maturity
were important factors in stabilizing a new colony, but his point of
view had grown excessively conservative, it seemed to me.

A crew of craftsmen with their busy little power saws had constructed a
sloping ship's ramp of rough planks sawed from the nearest trees. We
stepped through and over the assembled people who were lying around in
the grass at the base of the ramp, and Benson mounted twenty feet above
us at the entrance to the ship.

Everyone was in high spirits, and a light cheer rippled through the
assembly. Benson, however, ignored it and bent a thoroughly serious gaze
out over his "flock".

"Please give me your closest attention," he began and waited until
everyone was quiet. "Until further notice, we must proceed under a
yellow alert during daylight hours and a red alert at night. All work
parties leaving the ship will check with the scribe every hour on the
hour. We will resume sleeping in the ship. Women are restricted to
within 100 yards of the ship at all times. Men will go armed and will
please inform themselves of their position on the security watch list
which will be posted tonight." He squinted in the bright sunlight. "For
the moment, you men with sidearms, post yourselves around the ship.
Sound off loud if you sight anything larger than a rabbit."

The men named got slowly to their feet, fingering their light hunting
pistols self-consciously. Benson continued, "You may appreciate these
precautions when I tell you that Sam Rogers and I just encountered two
remarkably humanoid animals on the beach less than half a mile from
here."

Tension replaced levity, as Benson described our meeting with the
natives. I thought he gave it a needlessly grim emphasis with such terms
as, "_quicker than cats_", and "_devilishly intelligent_", but I held my
peace.

He summarized, "I do not want to alarm anyone unduly, but we must face
up to the fact that we are totally unprepared for such a contingency.
The exploration group failed us badly in overlooking these creatures.
They may not be inimical to our culture, but until this is established
we must consider them prime threats. That is all," he concluded.

No one grumbled aloud, but their faces showed keen disappointment at the
resumption of quartering in the ship. Reluctantly, the women began
rolling up the still-deflated air-mattresses that were scattered about
the soft, deep grass. Sue complained, "Sam, if these people don't get a
little privacy pretty soon we'll turn into an ant colony. There'll be
lovin' in the streets."

"It's not my idea," I said. "I'll be nailed to a table at the foot of
the ramp all day making check marks. Phil is taking this entirely too
big. The little people are really charming. He neglected to mention that
they are beautifully formed and quite gentle in their--their actions."

"Actions?" she said. "What happened, really?"

I described the conditions under which we first saw the natives, and she
laughed a little strainedly. "I can just imagine the look on Phil
Benson's face."

I knew what she meant. In trying to enforce the shipboard rule of
segregation of the sexes, our leader had developed an oversensitive
attitude toward certain aspects of modesty. In the unutterable boredom
of space, the pledge we had all taken to complete continence for the
voyage was a severe test to all forty couples.

Had propriety and space considerations been the only reasons for the
infamous "no-romance" regulation, it would never have held up. But all
concerned realized the problem of childbirth in space under the
jam-packed living conditions, tight water and food rationing and the
fetid, recirculated air.

Now the second honeymoons were over before they started. It was back to
the ship and the night-life of monks and nuns.

That night, Sue and I joined the four ship's officers, their wives,
Phillip Benson and Jane in the navigation cupola atop our doomed ship
that had become a "fortress". The small control room was the only
semi-private room in the ship, and even Benson was admitted by
invitation only. The meeting was a council of war, so to speak, and the
officers were pressed into service to organize and operate the security
guard.

When the guard watch was worked out for a week in advance, I spoke up.
"I think we're getting off on the wrong foot, Phil. We can't stay penned
up like animals at night and expect to function as humans."

Benson argued: "We are a carefully balanced group, Sam. We can't afford
casualties. Look at our medical corps, two doctors and four nurses.
Suppose we were attacked and lost them?"

Captain Spooner, whose authority had lapsed when we touched down, backed
up Benson. "I see no great hardship in the precautions. Inconvenience,
yes, but nothing that the danger doesn't fully justify."

He was a cocky, virile, bald-headed little terrier of 35 years. His very
young wife and the wives of the other three officers seemed only lightly
perturbed at the prospects of continuing celibacy, which confirmed my
suspicions.

I said, "That's gritty of you, Captain, but remember, the rest of us
haven't had the relative privacy of the bridge. If this restriction
continues long I predict violations of the discipline, and probably some
serious behaviour problems."

My position as colony psychologist had become somewhat obscured under
the snowstorm of paperwork that my secondary job as official scribe had
brought. Benson seemed now to recall that mental health _was_ my
concern. He said, "I thought you reported high morale upon arrival."

"I did, but the tensions are there, and it's foolish to draw them too
tightly. We have a well-picked, highly adaptable group of people. Let's
keep them that way. The quicker we hit a more normal existence the less
risk we run of emotional disturbances."

"They'll take it," Benson said positively, and Spooner nodded in
arrogant agreement.

       *       *       *       *       *

My 20-hour wristwatch, geared to the shorter rotation of Sirius XXII,
said nine o'clock, one hour before noon, when the women began
undressing.

There had been an air of conspiracy among them all morning, a studied
casualness as they wandered around near the ship, forming small
conversational eddies, dispersing and reforming elsewhere. I had just
finished checking in the 11-man fruit-gathering detail. I looked up from
my roster in time to see the first motions of the "great disrobing".
Zippers unzipped, snaps popped open, slacks, skirts, blouses and jumpers
fell to the grass, and a dazzling spectacle of space-bleached feminine
epidermis burst into view.

The ladies were very calm about it, but a chorus of yips sounded and
swelled into a circus of cheers from the male working parties.

Before I could fathom it Benson came charging down the ramp followed by
his fruit-stowing detail. He stopped at the foot of the ramp, mouth open
and eyes pinched with annoyance.

[Illustration]

He spotted Jane and Sue. "What is going on out here?" he demanded
loudly.

Our two wives waved at us and strolled over, doing a splendid job of
acting unconcerned. "Just a little sun-bathing," Jane said, shooing a
small insect from a pale shoulder.

Susan refused to meet my eye. She was watching two birds soar overhead.
"It's fantastic," she said. "If you don't look at things too closely,
you'd never know we weren't at a summer camp up in Wisconsin--except for
the fruits. They remind me more of Tahiti. It's marvelous! The
mosquitoes don't even bite."

"They will," I said, "as soon as they get a good taste of human blood.
And baby, you're sure making it easy for them."

Benson was distracted from the conversation by the converging male
colonists, who were whooping and yelling like a horde of school boys. He
backed up the ramp and ordered, "Let's get on with the work. You've seen
your wives in the altogether before."

The men quieted a little, but one yelled, "Yeah, but not lately!"

Another added, "And not _all together_."

In spite of the fact that nude sun-bathing was a commonplace,
twenty-second-century custom on Earth, by tacit consent clothes had been
worn at all times aboard ship. The women had gone along with Benson for
two years on such matters, so this was clearly a feminine protest
against the spirit of the yellow alert.

Young doctors Sorenson and Bailey came trotting up, grinning
appreciatively but wagging their fingers. Without consulting Benson,
Bailey mounted the ramp and shouted, "Blondes and redheads, ten minutes
exposure. Brunettes, fifteen."

A great booing issued from the men, but Bailey held up his hand for
silence. "The medical staff will make no effort to enforce these
exposure maximums, but be advised that the radiation here is about the
same as Miami Beach in June, so don't let the air-conditioning fool
you."

Benson was spared further decisions on the issue, because at that moment
one of the sentries remembered to take a quick look at the vector of
forest he was supposed to be guarding. Unable to make his voice heard
over the hub-hub, the guard fired his pistol in the air.

We all jumped up and stared, and Benson muttered, "Dear God!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Our people were scattered over an acre around the ramp, and encompassing
them was a semi-circle of at least a hundred "savages", frozen like
