stay at home; but when there are two or three, it's different.  It
doesn't take three girls to arrange flowers, and write notes, and pay
calls, and sew for bazaars; and where there is a restless one among
them, who longs to do something serious with her time, I--I think the
parents should give way!  As you say, we have to live our own lives,
and, as boys are allowed to choose, I think we should have the same
liberty.  I don't know how large your family is, Bertha, or--"

"Three sisters at home.  One engaged, but the other two not likely to
be, so far as I can see, and Mother quite well, and brisk, and active!"

"Well, don't worry!  Don't force things, or get cross, and they'll give
in yet, you'll see.  Put your view of the case before them, and see if
you cannot meet each other somehow.  If they find that you are quiet and
reasonable they will be far more inclined to take you seriously, and
believe that you know your own mind.  That's all the advice I can give
you, my dear, and I'm afraid it's not what you wanted.  Perhaps someone
else can speak a word in season!"

"Well, I side with the parents, for if the rich are going to work, what
is to become of the poor ones like me, who are obliged to earn their
living?" cried Kathleen, eagerly.  "Now, if Bertha and I competed for an
appointment, she could afford to take less salary, and so, of course--"

"No, no!  That's mean!  I do beg and pray all you Blues that, whatever
you do, you never move a finger to reduce the salaries of other women!"
cried Tom fervently.  "If you don't need the money, give it away to
Governesses' Institutions--Convalescent Homes--whatever you like; but,
for pity's sake, don't take less than your due.  For my own part, I must
candidly say that when I am Principal I shall select my staff from those
who are like Kathleen, and find work a necessity rather than a
distraction.  It seems to me, if I were rich and idle, I could find lots
of ways of making myself of use in the world without jostling the poor
Marthas.  I could coach poor governesses who were behind the times, but
couldn't afford to take lessons; I'd translate books into Braille for
the blind; I'd teach working boys at their clubs, and half a dozen other
interesting, useful things.  There's no need to be idle, even if one
_does_ live at home with a couple of dear old conservative parents.
Where there's a will there's a way!"

"But I want it to be my way!" sighed Bertha, dolefully.  Like the
majority of people who ask for advice, she was far from satisfied now
that she had got it.



CHAPTER FOURTEEN.

THE "REVELS."

One of the Hurst Manor institutions was a whole holiday on the first
Saturday in June, which was technically known as "Revels."  The holiday
had been inaugurated partly to celebrate the coming of summer, and
partly as a kindly distraction for the students, who at this season of
the year were apt to be too absorbingly engrossed in the coming
examinations.  Old pupils declared that at no other time was the
Principal so indulgent and anxious to second the girls' fancies, while
the particular form of entertainment was left entirely to their
discretion.  When the programme was drawn up it was submitted to Miss
Bruce for approval, but, as she had never been known to object, the
consultation was more a matter of form than necessity.

To Rhoda's surprise, she found her name among those of the General
Committee posted on the notice board, and the delight and pride
consequent thereon diverted her thoughts into a new channel, and were as
good as a tonic to her nervous system.  It was a compliment to have been
chosen, for the dozen girls had been drawn from all five houses, and
Irene Grey and herself were the only representatives of the Blues.

"It's a beauty competition, evidently.  Can't think why they haven't
asked me!" was Tom's comment; but Rhoda felt convinced that she had been
selected because of the dramatic abilities which she had exhibited on
more than one of the Thursday "Frolics," and was not far wrong in her
surmise.  She had, in truth, a keen eye for effect, a power of
manufacturing properties, and of learning and even inventing suitable
rhymes, which were invaluable in organising an entertainment.

"And besides," said the Games Captain to her Secretary, "there's her
back hair!  She has really admirable back hair!"

The Committee held their meetings in the study of the Head Green, and
anxiously discussed their programme.  On previous years they had held
Gymkhanas and various kinds of picnics, but the ambition was ever to hit
on something so original and startling as to eclipse all that had
previously been attempted.  They racked their brains and gazed
helplessly at the ceiling, while the Chairwoman begged for remarks,
after the manner of all Committees since the world began.  Then, at
last, someone hazarded a suggestion, someone else took it up and added a
fresh idea; and the ball, once set rolling, grew bigger and bigger,
until, at last, there it was, complete and formed before them!  It was a
charming programme--quite charming!  They were full of admiration for
their own cleverness in inventing it, and away they flew, smiling and
confident, to consult Miss Bruce in her sanctum.

The Principal read the sheet handed to her, and the corners of her lips
twitched in humorous fashion.  She looked across at the twelve eager
young faces, and smiled a slow, kindly smile.

"It sounds _very_ charming!" she said; "I am sure it would be most
entertaining, but--would it not involve a great deal of preparation?  Do
you think you have realised how much work you will have?"

"Oh yes, Miss Bruce, but we can manage it easily!" cried the Chairwoman.
"We can get as many helpers as we like in game hours, and you always
allow us an afternoon off to make preparations."

"Certainly, certainly!  You can do nothing without time.  Very well,
then, if you think you can manage, I have no objection.  You have my
permission to ask the carpenter and gardeners to help you, and if
anything is needed, one of the governesses shall go into town to make
your purchases."

Nothing could have been more gracious.  The Committee gave a unanimous
murmur of acknowledgment, and were immediately smitten with
embarrassment.  So long as one has something to say it is easy to retain
self-confidence, but, when the business is finished, the necessity of
saying good-bye and beating a retreat becomes fraught with terror to the
timid guest.  The girls felt that it would be discourteous to retire
without speaking another word, but what to say they could not think, so
they huddled together beside the door, and waited to be dismissed, which
they presently were in the kindest of manners.

"I shall look forward with great pleasure to the performance.  Success
to your efforts!  You will have plenty to do, so I won't detain you any
longer.  Good afternoon!"

The Committee retired in haste, gasped relief in the corridor, and
promptly set about collecting forces for the furtherance of its aim.
They enlisted the sympathies of the workmen engaged in the grounds,
selected parties of amateur gardeners to supplement their efforts, and
chose the forty prettiest girls in the school to be on the "acting
staff."  Each new worker was pledged to secrecy, as surprise was to be
the order of the day, and a certain portion of the grounds was marked
off by placards bearing the announcement that "Trespassers would be
persecuted!"  A casual observer might have imagined a slip of the pen in
this last word, but the girls knew better.  It would be persecution,
indeed, and of no light nature, which would be visited upon a willing
violator of that order.

For the next ten days preparations went on busily, both outdoors and in
the various studies.  Lessons, of course, could not be interrupted, but
the hours usually devoted to games, added to odd five minutes of
leisure, made up a not inconsiderable total.  The onlookers reported
eagerly among themselves that the dancing mistress had been pressed into
the service, and that sundry mysterious boxes had been sent to the
leading members of the Committee from their various homes.  Everyone was
agreed that "It" was to be very grand, and they prepared to enjoy the
entertainment in a hearty, but duly critical fashion; for when we
ourselves have not been asked to take part in an enterprise, pride has
no better consolation than to think how much more successful it would
have been in happier circumstances!

The Committee announced that, should the weather prove unpropitious, a
modified form of the proposed entertainment would be given in Great
Hall, but no one seriously contemplated such a catastrophe.  Providence
was so invariably kind to "Revels" that the oldest student could not
recall a day that had been less than perfect, and this year was no
exception to the rule.  The air was soft, the sky was blue, the grass,
unscorched as yet by the heat of summer, of a rich emerald green, the
sunshine sent flickering shadows over the paths; it was one of those
perfect days when our native land is seen at its best; and when England
is at her best, go east or west, or where you will, you can find no
place to equal it!  Every single inmate of school came down to breakfast
with a smile on her face, for this was a day of all play and no work,
and as the formal entertainment did not take place until three o'clock,
the whole morning remained in which to laze after one's heart's desire.
Even the Committee were so well on with their preparations that by
eleven o'clock they were free to join their friends, and Rhoda looked
eagerly round for Miss Everett.  No one had seen her, however, and a
vague report that she was "headachy" sent the searcher indoors to
further her inquiries.  She found the study door closed, but a faint
voice bade her enter, and there on the sofa lay Miss Everett with a
handkerchief bound round her head.  She looked up and smiled at Rhoda's
entrance, and said immediately:

"Do you want me, dear?  Can I do anything to help you?"

"So likely that I would let you, isn't it?" returned Rhoda scornfully.
"What is the matter?  Is your head bad?"

"Yes!  No!  It isn't really so very bad, but one seems to give way when
there is nothing to do.  If it had been an ordinary day I should have
gone on with my work, and even played games.  I have managed to get
through many a time when I've been worse than this; but it's a luxury to
lie still and rest.  I--I'm enjoying it very much!"

"You look like it!" said Rhoda shortly, noting with sharp eyes the
flushed cheeks, the drops of tell-tale moisture on the eyelashes.  "This
room is like an oven, and it will get worse and worse as the day goes
on.  Now, it's my turn to order you about, and you've got to obey.  Get
up and put on your hat, and come out with me!"

"Rhoda, I can't!  It's cruel!  I can't walk about.  Do--do let me rest
when I get a chance.  I'm _so_ tired!"

"You are not going to walk about; you are going to rest better than you
could ever do here, so don't worry and make objections.  Here's your
hat, and here's my arm, and please come along without any more arguing.
You'll be thankful to me when I get you nicely settled!"

"_When_!" echoed Miss Everett ungratefully; but she was too languid to
oppose the girl's strong will, so she sat up, put on her hat, and
allowed herself to be led downstairs and into the grounds.  The girls
were scattered about under the trees, but Rhoda skirted round the paths
so as to avoid them as much as possible, and presently came to a
sheltered spot, where Dorothy lay swinging to and fro in a most superior
Canadian hammock which had been sent from Erley Chase at the beginning
of the summer weather.  She peered over the edge as footsteps approached
and Rhoda cried briskly:

"Tumble out, Dorothy!  I said you could have it until I needed it
myself, and I want it now for Miss Everett.  She has a headache, and is
going to rest here until lunch.  Now then, I'll shake up the pillows,
and if you don't say it is the most delicious hammock you ever lay in, I
shan't think much of your taste.  I'll put up the parasol and tuck it
into the ropes--so!--that you may feel nice and private if anyone
passes.  Now then, how's that?  Isn't that comfy?  Isn't that an
improvement on the stuffy little study?"

Miss Everett rested her head on the cushion, and drew a long breath of
enjoyment.

"It's--beautiful!  It's perfect.  I'm so happy!  I never want to move
again."

"You are not to move until I tell you.  Go fast asleep, and I'll promise
faithfully to wake you in time for lunch.  We must have you well for the
afternoon, you know.  I'd be heart-broken if you didn't see me in my
grand--.  Never mind, that's a secret, but you _will_ rest, won't you?
You will be good, and do as you are told?"

"Kiss me!" replied Miss Everett simply, lifting her dark eyes to the
girl's face with an appeal so sweet that it would have touched a heart
of stone.  No sooner was the kiss given, than down fell the eyelids, and
Rhoda crept away realising that sleep, the best of medicines, was indeed
near at hand.  She herself spent a happy morning lying flat on her back
on the grass in company with half a dozen other girls, discussing the
affairs of the world in general, the blatant follies of grown-ups, and
the wonderful improvements which would take place when they in their
turn came into power.  Rhoda was specially fervid in denunciation, and
her remarks were received with such approval that it was in high good
temper that she went to awaken the sleeper from her two hours' nap.
Miss Everett declared that she felt like a "giant refreshed," had not a
scrap of pain left, and had enjoyed herself so much that if "Revels"
ended there and then, she would still consider it an historic occasion,
which was satisfactory indeed.

But there was more to follow!  There was a great dressing up in the
cubicles after lunch, the girls making their appearance in pique skirts
and crisp new blouses, and rustling into the grounds, all starch and
importance.  The "persecuting placards" had been withdrawn, and replaced
by others directing the visitors' steps in the right direction.  They
followed meekly, "This way to the Opening Ceremony!" and found
themselves on the south side of the lake, where a semicircle of chairs
had been set for the teachers, and gaily-hued rugs spread on the grass
to protect the freshness of the pique skirts.  Here, no doubt, was the
place appointed, but where was the Ceremony?  The girls took their
places, and began to clap in impatient fashion, speculating vaguely
among themselves.

"What's going to happen now?  Why do we face this way where we can't see
anything except the lake?  There's the landing place opposite--perhaps
they are going to play water-polo?  It wouldn't be bad fun in this
weather."

"I think some one should have been here to receive us.  It's rude to let
your guests arrive without a welcome.  If I had been on the Committee--
What's that--?"

"What?  Oh, music!  But where--where?  It is growing nearer.  It's a
violin, and a 'cello--and someone singing.  This grows mysterious!  Oh,
I say--Look! look to the right!  To the right!  Oh, isn't it romantic
and lovely?"

The girls craned forward, and cried aloud in delight, for round the
corner of the lake was slowly coming into view a wonderful, rose-
wreathed barque, with Youth at the prow and Pleasure at the helm, clad
in the most fanciful and quaint of garments.  It would have been idle to
assert that this wonderful craft was the old school tub, guaranteed to
be as safe as a house, and as clumsy as hands would make it; for no one
could have been found to listen to such a statement.  Garlands of roses
fluttered overhead; roses wreathed the sides, pink linings concealed the
dark boards, and, as for the occupants, they looked more like denizens
of another world than practical, modern-day schoolgirls.  The oarswomen
stood at their post, wearing pale green caps over their flowing locks,
and loose robes of the same colour.  The musicians were robed in pink,
with fillets of gauze tied round their heads, and underneath the central
awning sat a gorgeous figure who was plainly the Queen of the Ceremony.

Amidst deafening applause the boat drew up before the landing-stage,
and, while the oarswomen stood to attention, the central figure
alighted, and moved slowly forward until she stood in front of the
semicircle of watchers.

"It's Rhoda Chester!" gasped the girls incredulously, pinching their
neighbours' arms in mingled excitement and admiration; and Rhoda Chester
in truth it was, transformed into a glorified vision, far removed from
the ordinary knickerbockered, pigtailed figure associated with the name.
A white robe swept to the ground, the upper skirts necked over with
rose-leaves of palest pink; in the right hand she bore a sceptre of
roses, and a wreath of the same flowers crowned her head.  Her cheeks
were flushed with excitement, and she bore herself with an erect,
fearless mien which justified her companions' choice.

When it had become necessary to apportion the _role_ of "Mistress June"
the Committee had unanimously agreed that it would be safest in Rhoda's
hands.  She would not quail at the critical moment, mumble her words,
nor forget her duties; but, on the contrary, would rise to the occasion,
and find the audience a stimulus to her powers.

It was her genius also which had invented the verses for recitation, so
that there seemed a double reason for giving her the place of honour.
So Rhoda had sent home an imperious dressmaking order, and here she was,
dainty as loving care could make her, her flaxen mane streaming over her
shoulders, the sceptre extended in welcome--as fair a personation of
"Mistress June" as one need wish to see--

  "Friends and companions, and our teachers dear
  We give you welcome to our kingdom here.
  Once more has kindly summer come to stay,
  And Mistress June resumes her wonted sway.
  We are your hosts, and to our leafy bowers
  We welcome you to spend the sunny hours;
  In happy revels we will all unite,
  In song, and dance, and ancient pastimes bright;
  All cares forgotten, labours laid aside,
  Hearts turned to joy, and glad eyes open wide
  To watch, as when bright fay and sportive faun
  Wove their gay dances on the woodland lawn.
  Alas! the stress of higher education
  Has vanished these, the poet's fond creation.
  But nature--not to be denied--has sent
  Yet fairer forms for gladsome merriment,
  Who wait my nod.  The beauty of the nation
  Are gathered here to win your approbation.
  But you grow weary--Hither, maidens all,
  Forth from your bowers, responsive to my call,
  With roses crowned, let each and all advance,
  And let the Revels start with song and dance!"

It was astonishing how well it sounded, recited with an air, and to an
accompaniment of smiles and waving hands.  Little Hilary Jervis, the
youngest girl in the school, remarked rhapsodically that it was "Just
like a pantomime!" and the finale to the address was so essentially
dramatic that her elders were ready to agree with her decision.

Rhoda backed gracefully to the spot where her flower-decked chair had
been placed by her attendants, and having taken her seat, clapped her
hands as a signal to her handmaidens.  Instantly from behind the shelter
of the trees there tripped forward a band of pink and green-robed
figures, bearing in their hands garlands of many-coloured roses.  The
roses were but paper, it is true, and of the flimsiest manufacture, but
at a little distance the effect could not have been improved, and when
the dance began to the accompaniment of music "on the waters" the effect
was charming enough to disarm the most exacting of critics.  It was an
adaptation of the "scarf dance" practised by the pupils, but the
dresses, the circumstances, the surroundings added charm to the
accustomed movements, and there were, of course, deviations from the
original figures, noticeably at the end, when, with a simultaneous
whirling movement, the dancers grouped themselves round their Queen,
holding up their skirts so as to entirely conceal their figures.  The
greens were on the outside, the pinks arranged in gradually deepening
lines, and Rhoda's smiling face came peeping out on top; it was evident
to the meanest intellect that the final tableau was intended to
