7 in. in size. The piece A will form the back of the kit and
should have an opening cut in the center 4 by 5 in. in size. Paste
a piece of strong black paper, C, over the under side of it to
keep the plate from falling through. Cut an opening in the other
piece, B, but cut it 1/4 in. shorter. This opening, being 1/8 in.
shorter at each end, will retain the plate in position and cut off
only that small amount of plate surface when the plate is exposed
in the

[Illustration: Camera Kit]

camera. Cut a piece of thin black cloth, D, 1 in. wide and 5 in.
long. Lay it down on a piece of newspaper and coat one side with
gum or mucilage. Stand the two pieces of 5 by 7 in. black cards on
end together so that they will be square and true and bind the
other ends with the strip of cloth so as to form a hinge. The two
cards form a thickness about equal to a thick glass plate, and go
in the holder in the same way. Lay one of these kits down against
the ground side of the focusing screen and draw a line around,
inside of the opening. This will be a guide as to just what will
be secured upon the smaller plate when the kits are used.



** How to Make a Miniature Stage [159]

A good smooth box, say 8 in. wide, 10 in. high and 12 in. long,
will serve the purpose for the main part of this small theater.
Out two rectangular holes, Fig. 1, one in each end and exactly
opposite each other. Place a screw eye about 1/2 in. from the edge
on each side of these openings. Fit an axle in the screw eyes and
fasten a spool to the middle of the axle. On one of the two spools
attach another smaller spool, Fig. 2, to be used as a driving
pulley. Cut out the front part of the box down to a level with the
top of the spools. Connect the spools with a belt made from tape
about 3/4 in. wide. On this belt fasten figures cut from heavy
paper and made in the form of people, automobiles, trolley cars,
horses and dogs. A painted scenery can be made in behind the
movable tape. The front part of the box may be draped with
curtains, making the appearance of the ordinary stage, as shown in
Fig. 3. A small motor will run the spools and drive the tape on
which the figures are attached.
--Contributed by William M. Crilly, Jr., Chicago.

[Illustration: Details of Stage]



** A Floating Compass Needle [160]

When a thoroughly dry and clean sewing needle is carefully placed
on the surface of water the needle will float even if the density
of steel is 7 or 8 times that of water. A sewing needle thus
floating upon water may be used as a compass, if it has previously
been magnetized. The needle will then point north and south, and
will maintain this position if the containing vessel is moved
about; if the needle is displaced by force it will return to its
position along the magnetic meridian as soon as the restraint is
removed.



** Home-Made Dog Cart [160]

The accompanying photograph shows a boy with his "dogmobile." The
photograph was taken when they were on a new pavement which had 2
in. of sand


Dog-Power Cart

left by the pavers and a grade of 6 per cent. The machine is
nothing more than a boy's rubber-tired wagon on which are mounted
a box for a seat and a wheel steering device extending above and
below the board of the wagon. The front wheels are guided by ropes
attached from each end of the axle and a few turns around the
lower end of the steering rod. A pair of shafts are attached to
the rear, into which the dog is harnessed.



** How to Make a Dry Battery Cell [160]

[Illustration: Dry Battery Cell]

Dry battery cells are composed of the same materials for the
poles, but instead of the liquid commonly used a paste is formed
by mixing sal ammoniac and other salts with water and packed in
the cell so it cannot spill.

A cell of this kind can easily be made, and to make it the proper
size a sheet of zinc 8-1/2 in. long and 6 in. wide will be
required. This zinc is rolled into a cylinder 2-1/2-in. in
diameter. This will allow for a lap of 5/8 in., which is tightly
soldered only on the outside of the seam. Close one end of the
cylinder by soldering a disk of zinc over it, making a watertight
receptacle. All soldering should be done on the outside and none
of the solder allowed to run on the inside of the seam. All seams
on the inside should be painted with asphaltum in order to cover
any particles of solder. Do not paint any surface, only the
joints. Secure three carbon rods 1/2- in. in diameter and 6 in.
long which are copper plated. Carbons used in arc lamps will do.
File the rods to remove the copper plate, leaving about 1/2-in. of
the plate at one end. Tie the three rods in a close bundle with
the copper-plated ends together and make a contact with each rod
by soldering a wire to the plated ends, allowing one end of the
wire to project about 2 in. for a connection. The plated ends of
the carbons should be covered with paraffin for about 1 in. This
is done by immersing them in a dish of smoking hot melted paraffin
until the pores are thoroughly saturated.

The salts for filling are 1/4 lb. zinc oxide, 1 lb. sal ammoniac,
3/4 lb. plaster of paris, 1/4 lb. chloride of zinc mixed into a
paste by adding 1/2 pt. of water. Form a 1/2-in. layer of paste in
the bottom of the cylinder and place the ends of the carbon rods
on this with their plated ends up. Hold the rods in the center of
the cylinder and put the paste in around the rods with a stick.
Pack the paste in, closely filling the cylinder to within 3/4 in.
of the top. This space at the top is filled with a mixture of 1/2
lb. of rosin and 2 oz. beeswax melted together. This wax seals the
cell and prevents any evaporation. Connection is made to the zinc
by soldering a wire to the outside of the cylinder.



** How to Paraffin Wire [161]

The following description of how to make an apparatus with which
to paraffin wire as needed makes clear a method of construction
that is simple and easy to put together in a. short time.

Secure a pan to be used for this purpose only; one that will hold
about 1 qt. The details of the construction are given in the
diagram, in which P is the pan; B is a base of 1 in. pine; S is
the spool of wire supported near one end of the base by nailing on
standards H and H; F is a spool, with narrow flanges, supported
near the bottom of the pan by the standards T and T. These may be
made of two short pieces of a roller fitted into the holes bored
in the base; A is a block of l-in. pine with a piece of leather
tacked on one side. Four nails should be driven in the base just
outside of the edge of the pan to keep it from sliding off the
pan.

Bore a hole in the base between the two spools and pass the wire
through this hole, under the spool in the paraffin, then through a
small hole in the leather and a notch in the block A, and a notch
between the base and the pan. Tie a string around the wire between
the leather and the paraffin, making the knots so they will not
pull through the hole in the leather. This makes the wire smooth,
and by making the string tighter or looser you can regulate the
thickness of the paraffin, says Electrician and Mechanic. Place
the pan on the stove; when the paraffin is melted, pull out the
wire as needed. To keep the pan from sliding place a flatiron or
some other weight on it.

[Illustration: Home-Made Apparatus for Paraffining Wire]



** Uses of Peat [161]

Peat is used in Germany for bedding, fodder, filter, fuel and
packing purposes.



** Scientific Explanation of a Toy [162]

In a recent Issue of Popular Mechanics an article on "The Turning
Card Puzzle" was described and illustrated. Outside of the
scientific side involved herein I describe a much better trick.
About the time when the expression "skidoo" first began to be used
I invented the following trick and called it "Skidoo" and
"Skidee," which created much merriment. Unless the trick is
thoroughly understood, for some it will turn one way, for others
the opposite way, while for others it will not revolve at all. One
person whom I now recall became red in the face by shouting skidoo
and skidee at it, but the thing would not move at all, and he
finally, from vexation, threw the trick into the fire and a new
one had to be made. Very few can make it turn both ways at will,
and therein is the trick.

Take a piece of hardwood 3/8-in. square and about 9 in. long. On
one of the edges cut a series of notches as indicated in Fig 1.
Then slightly taper the end marked B until it is nicely rounded as
shown in Fig. 2. Next make an arm of a two-arm windmill such as
boys make. Make a hole through the center of this one arm. Enlarge
the hole slightly, enough to allow a common pin to hold the arm to
the end B and not interfere with the revolving arm. Two or three
of these arms may have to be made before one is secured that is of
the exact proportions to catch the vibrations right.

[Illustration: How to Cut the Notches]

To operate the trick, grip the stick firmly in one hand, and with
the forward and backward motion of the other allow the first
finger to slide along the top edge, the second finger along the
side and the thumb nail will then vibrate along the notches, thus
making the arm revolve in one direction. To make the arm revolve
in the opposite direction--keep the hand moving all the time, so
the observer will not detect the change which the band
makes--allow the first finger to slide along the top, as in the
other movement, the thumb and second finger changing places: e.
g., in the first movement you scratch the notches with the thumb
nail while the hand is going from the body, and in the second
movement you scratch the notches with the nail of the second
finger when the hand is coming toward the body, thus producing two
different vibrations. In order to make it work perfectly (?) you
must of course say "skidoo" when you begin the first movement, and
then, no matter how fast the little arm is revolving when changed
to the second movement, you must say "skidee" and the arm will
immediately stop and begin revolving in the opposite direction. By
using the magic words the little arm will obey your commands
instantly and your audience will be mystified. If any of your
audience presume to dispute, or think they can do the same, let
them try it. You will no doubt be accused of blowing or drawing in
your breath, and many other things in order to make the arm
operate. At least it is amusing. Try it and see.
--Contributed by Charles Clement Bradley, Toledo, Ohio.

*     *    *    *    *    *    *

The foregoing article describing the "Skidoo-Skidee Trick"
appeared in a recent issue of Popular Mechanics. I have been told
that a similar arrangement is used by a tribe of Indians in the
state of Washington, by the Hindoos in India, and one friend tells
me that they were sold on the streets of our large cities many
years ago.

This toy interested me so much that I have made an investigation
into the causes of its action, and I think the results may be of
interest.

To operate, one end of the notched stick is held firmly in the
left hand, while with the right hand a nail or match stick is
rubbed along the notched edge, at the same time pressing with the
thumb or finger of the moving hand against the oblique face of the
stick. The direction of rotation depends upon which face is
pressed. A square stick with notches on edge is best, but the
section may be circular or even irregular in shape. The
experiments were as follows:

1. A rectangular stick had notches cut on one face. When the
pressure was applied upon a face normal to the first, no rotation
resulted. If the pressure was upon an edge, rotation was obtained.

2. Irregular spacing of the notches did not interfere with the
action. The depth of the notches was also unimportant, although it
should be suited to the size of the nail for best results.

3. The hole in the revolving piece must be larger than the pin; if
there is a close fit no rotation is obtained.

4. The center of gravity of the revolving piece must lie within
the hole. If the hole is not well centered the trick cannot be
performed.

5. If the stick be clamped in a vise no results are obtained; with
this exception: if the stick has enough spring, and the end
clamped is far enough away from the notched portion, the rotation
may be obtained.

The above experiments led me to the conclusion that the operation
of the device is dependent upon a circular motion of the pin, and
this was confirmed by the following experiments. The action is
somewhat similar to swinging the toy known as a locust around with
a slight circular motion of the hand, It is necessary to show here
that a slight circular motion is sufficient to produce the result
and, secondly, that such motion can be produced by the given
movements of the hands.

6. A piece of brass rod was clamped in the chuck of a lathe, and a
depression made in the end slightly eccentric, by means of a
center punch. If the end of the pin is inserted in this
depression,

[Illustration: The Lathe Experiment]

while the hand holding the other end of the stick is kept as
nearly as possible in the axis of the lathe, rotation of the lathe
will produce rotation of the revolving piece. Speeds between 700
and 1,100 r. p. m. gave the best results.

7. A tiny mirror was attached to the end of the pin, and the hand
held in the sunlight so that a spot of sunlight was reflected upon
the wall. The notches were then rubbed in the usual way. The spot
of light upon the wall moved in a way which disclosed two
components of motion, one circular and one due to the irregular
movements of the hand holding the stick. Usually the orbit was too
irregular to show a continuous and closed circular path, but at
times the circular motion became very pronounced. It was observed
and the direction of rotation correctly stated by a man who was
unaware of the source of the motion. The production of the
circular motion can be explained in this way:

When the rubbing nail comes to a notch the release of pressure
sends the stick upward; this upward motion against the oblique
pressure upon the (say) right hand side gives also a lateral
component of motion towards the left. As the nail strikes the
opposite side of the notch the stick is knocked down again, this
motion relieves somewhat the oblique pressure from the right hand
side, and, the reaction from the holding (left) hand moves the
stick to the right slightly, so that it is back in the old
position for the next upward motion. Thus a circular or elliptic
motion is repeated for each notch, and the direction of this
motion is the same whether the nail be rubbed forward or back. For
oblique side pressure from the right (notches assumed upward), the
motion of the stick and hence of the revolving piece will be
counter-clockwise; if the pressure is from the left, it will be
clockwise.

That the motion of the revolving piece is due to a swinging
action, and not to friction of the pin in the hole, is proved by
experiments 3 and 4.
--Contributed by M. G. Lloyd, Ph.D., Washington, D. C.



** Home-Made Lantern [163]

[Illustration: Tin Can Lantern]

The accompanying picture shows a lantern which can be made almost
anywhere for immediate use. All that is needed is an empty tomato
or coffee can, a piece of wire and a candle. Make a hole a little
smaller than the diameter of a candle and about one-third of the
way from the closed end of the can, as shown. A wire is tied
around the can, forming a handle for carrying. This kind of
lantern can be carried against almost any wind and the light will
not be blown out.
--Contributed by G. A. Sloan, Duluth, Minn.



** A Study of Splashes [164]

When a rough, or greasy, or dusty sphere falls into a liquid, the
liquid is

[Illustration: Splashes from a Sphere In Milk and Water]

forced away from the sphere. If the sphere is quite smooth the
liquid rises up around and enclosing it in a sheath says Knowledge
and Scientific News.

Reproduced herewith are a series of photographs showing successive
stages in the entry of a rough sphere into milk and water, and the
resultant "basket splash." The diameter of this sphere was about
3/5 in., and the height of the fall about 6 in. Examination of the
photographs shows that the liquid, instead of flowing over and
wetting the surface of the sphere, is driven violently away, so
far as can be seen from the photographs, the upper portion is, at
first, unwetted by the liquid. The gradual thickening of the
crater wall and the corresponding reduction in the number of its
lobes as the subsidence proceeds is beautifully shown. Thereafter
there rises from the depth of the crater an exquisite jet which in
obedience to the law of segmentation at once splits up in its
upper portion into little drops, while at the same time it gathers
volume from below and rises ultimately as a tall, graceful column
to a height which may be even greater than that from which the
sphere fell.



** How to Make a Stick Pin [164]

A fine stick pin or button can be made from a new one-cent piece.
Carefully file out all the metal around the Indian head and
slightly round the edges. Solder a pin to the back of the head
when it is to be used for a stick pin. If a collar button base is
soldered to the back of the head instead of the pin it can be used
for a button. These can be gold plated by a jeweler and then you
will have a neat pin or button, or a good emblem for the Order of
Redmen.

[Illustration: Stick Pin]



** How to Make a Miniature Electric Locomotive [165]

A miniature electric railway is a thing that attracts the
attention of almost any person. The cost of a toy electric
locomotive is beyond the reach of many boys who could just as well
make such a toy without much expense and be proud to say they
"built it themselves." The electric locomotive described herewith
uses for its power a small battery motor costing about $1. The
first thing to do is to make the wheels and axles. If one has no

[Illustration: The Different Parts for Making the Electric
Locomotive]

lathe, the wheels can be turned at some machine shop. Four wheels
are made from a round bar of metal, as shown in Fig. 1. Each wheel
is 1/4 in. thick and 1 in. in diameter, with a 1/16-in. flange and
a 1/4-in. hole drilled in the center. Each pair of wheels is
fitted on a 1/4-in. axle, about 2-5/8 in. long. One of the axles
should be fitted with a grooved belt wheel, as shown. Make the
frame from three pieces of heavy brass, as shown in Fig. 2.

The first piece, or main part of the frame, is made from brass,
3/4 in. wide and 16 in. long, bent into an oblong shape and the
ends soldered or bolted together. If the ends are to be soldered,
before doing so drill four 1/4-in. holes 1 in. from the ends and
insert the ends of the axles. The other two pieces are 1/2-in.
wide and of the dimensions shown in the sketch. These pieces are
riveted in the middle of the oblong frame, each in its proper
place. The motor is now bolted, bottom side up, to the top of the
piece fastened to the frame lengthwise. A trolley, Fig. 3, is made
from a piece of clock spring, bent as shown, and a small piece of
tin soldered to the top end for a brush connection. A groove is
made in the tin to keep the trolley wire in place.

The trolley wire is fastened to supports made of wood and of the
dimensions given in Fig. 4. The trolley should be well insulated
from the frame. The parts, put together complete, are shown in
Fig. 5. Run a belt from the pulley on the motor to the grooved
wheel on the axle, as shown in Fig. 6, and the locomotive is ready
for running.

In making the connections the travel of the locomotive may be made
more complicated by placing a rheostat and controlling switches in
the line, so that the engine can be started and stopped at will
from a distance and the speed regulated. Automatic switches can be
attached at the ends of the line to break the circuit when the
locomotive passes a certain point.

One connection from the batteries is made to the trolley wire and
the other to a rail. The connection for the motor runs from one
binding post to the trolley and this connection must be well
insulated to avoid a short-circuit. The other binding-post is
connected to the frame.

The cost of making the wheels and purchasing the track will not be
over $1.50. The track can be made from strips of tin put in a saw
cut made in pieces of wood used for ties. This will save buying a
track.
--Contributed by Maurice E. Fuller, San Antonio, Texas.



** Demagnetizing a Watch [166]

A test can be made to know if your watch is magnetized by placing
a small compass on the side of the watch nearest the escapement
wheel if the compass pointer moves with the escapement wheel the
watch is magnetized. A magnetized watch must be placed in a

[Illustration: Watch Demagnetizer]

coil that has an alternating current of electricity flowing
through it to remove the magnetism. A demagnetizer can be made as
shown in the illustration. Two end pieces for the coil are made as
shown in Fig. 1 from 1/4-in. wood. These ends are fastened
together, Fig. 2, with cardboard 3 in. long glued to the inside
edges of the holes cut in them. Wind upon the spool thus formed
about 2 lb. of No. 16 cotton-covered copper wire. As it will be
necessary to place a 16-cp. lamp in series with the coil, both the
coil and lamp can be mounted on a suitable base and connected as
shown in Fig. 3. The current, which must be 110 volt alternating
current, is turned on the lamp and coil and the magnetized watch
slowly drawn through the opening in the center of the coil.
--Contributed by Arthur Liebenberg, Cincinnati, O.



** How to Make a Pocket Skate Sharpener [166]

Secure a square file and break off a piece, Fig 1, the length of a
paper clip, Fig. 2. Draw the temper in the ends of this piece of
file, but do not heat the center. This can be done by wrapping a
wet piece of cloth or asbestos around the middle and holding it in
the jaws of a pair of tongs which will only leave the end
uncovered and projecting from the tongs about 1/2 in. Hold this
projecting end in a flame of a plumber's torch until it is a dull
red. Allow this to cool slowly while in the tongs. When cold treat
the other end in the same way. This will draw the temper in only
the ends which are filed, as shown in Fig. 1, and holes drilled in
them. Also drill a hole in each end of the spring on the paper
clip to match those drilled in the piece of file. Fasten the file
in the clip with small bolts, as shown in Fig. 3. When the file
gets filled with filings it can be removed and cleaned. Place the
runner of the skate in the clip and hold flat on the surface of
the runner. If the piece of file is fitted to the same width as
the skate runner the sides of the paper clip will hold the file
level with the surface of the runner without any trouble. Push the
clip back and forth until the skate is sharpened.

[Illustration: Sharpener for Skates]



** Old-Time Magic [167]



** Trick with a Coin in a Wine Glass [167]

The accompanying sketch shows a. trick of removing a dime from the
bottom of an old fashioned wine glass without touching the coin.
The dime is first placed in the bottom of the glass and then a
silver quarter dropped in on top. The quarter will not go all the
way down. Blow hard into the glass in the position shown and the
dime will fly out and strike the blower on the nose.

[Illustration: Coin Trick]



** Untying-a-Knot Trick [167]

Tie a double knot in a silk handkerchief, as shown in the
accompanying sketch and tighten the last tie a little by slightly
drawing the two upper ends; then continue to tighten much more,
pulling vigorously at the first corner of the handkerchief, and as
this end belongs to the same corner it cannot be pulled much
without loosening the twisted line of the knot to become a
straight line. The other corner forms a slip knot on the end,
which can be drawn out without disturbing the form, or apparent
security of the knot, at the moment when you cover the knot with
the unused part of the handkerchief. When the trick is to be
performed, tie two or three very hard knots that are tightly drawn
and show your audience that they are not easy to untie. The slip
knot as described then must be made in apparently the same way

[Illustration: Knot Trick]

and untied with the thumb while the knot is in the folds of the
handkerchief.



** Gear-Cutting Attachment for Small Lathes [167]

When in need of small gears for experimental or model machines the
amateur usually purchases them, never thinking that he could make
them on his own lathe. A small attachment can be made to fasten in
the tool post of a lathe and the attachment made to take a mandrel
on which to place the blank for cutting a gear. The frame is made
from a 1/2 in. square iron bent as shown in the sketch with the

[Illustration: Gear-Cutting Attachment for Lathes]

projecting end filed to fit the tool post of the lathe. A pair of
centers are fitted, one of which should have a screw thread and
lock nut for adjustment in putting in and removing the mandrel.

All the old clock wheels that can be found should be saved and
used for index wheels. All of these wheels should be fitted to one
end of the mandrel. The blank wheel is put on the outer end of the
mandrel and a clock wheel having the number of teeth desired
placed on the other end. When the mandrel is put in between the
centers a small pawl is fastened with a screw to the frame with
its upper end engaging in a tooth of the clock wheel. One clock
wheel will index more than one number of teeth on a blank wheel.
For instance: if the clock wheel has 18 teeth it can be made to
index 6, 9 or 18 teeth to the blank by moving the number of teeth
each time 3, 2 and 1 respectively. In the sketch, A shows the end
of the cutter and B the side and the shape of the cutting tool.
When the cutter A, which is in a mandrel placed in the centers of
the lathe, has finished a cut for a tooth, the pawl is disengaged
and the mandrel turned to another tooth in the clock wheel.

In order to get the desired height it is sometimes necessary to
block up the lathe head and the final depth of the tooth adjusted
by the two screws in the projecting end of the frame which rests
on the rocker in the tool post. Should too much spring occur when
cutting iron gears the frame can be made rigid by blocking up the
space between it and the lathe bed.

The cutter mandrel is placed in the centers of the lathe, or
should the lathe head be raised, a short mandrel with the cutter
near the end can be placed in a chuck, and adjusted to run true.
The frame holding the mandrel, gear blank and clock wheel is
inserted in the tool post of the lathe and adjusted for depth of
the cutter. The lathe is started and the gear blank fed on the
cutter slowly until the tooth is cut. The pawl is released and the
mandrel turned to the proper number of teeth and the operation
repeated. In this manner gears 3 in. in diameter can be made on a
6-in. swing lathe.
--Contributed by Samuel C. Bunker, Brooklyn, N.Y.



** Wire Terminals for Battery Connections [168]

[Illustration: Cotter Pin Wire Terminal]

Good connections on the end of wires for batteries can be made
from cotter pins, Fig. 1, about 1-1/2 in. long. Each end of the
wire is put through the eye of a cotter pin, twisted around itself
and soldered. The connection and eye are then covered with tape as
shown in Fig. 2. When connecting to batteries, spread the pin and
push the parts under the nut with one part on each side of the
binding-post. When the nuts are tightened the connection will be
better than with the bare wire.
--Contributed by Howard S. Bott.



** Simple Arts and Crafts Leather Work [168]

Very interesting and useful pieces of leather work can be done
with nothing more for equipment than a cup pointed nail set such
as carpenter use, and a nut pick.

The accompanying illustrations show some of the things that can be
made. Beginning at the left and reading to the right they are:
Case for court-plaster, coin purse, lady's card case, eye glass
cleaner or pen wiper (has chamois skin within). Second row: Two
book marks, note book, blotter back, book mark. Third row: Pin
ball (has saddler's felt between the two leather disks), tea
cosey, gentleman's card case or bill book. Fourth row: Needle or
pin case, tea cosey, lady's belt bag, watch fob ready for
fastenings.

Procure a piece of Russian calf modeling leather. (1.) Make on
paper the design wanted. (2.) Moisten the back side of the leather
with sponge or cloth with as much water as it will take yet not
show through on the face side. (3.) Place the leather on some hard
non-absorbent material, such as brass or marble. (4.) Place the
paper design on the leather and, holding it in place with the left
hand, trace the outline, of the object and the decorative design
with the nut pick so as to make a V-shaped groove in the leather.
(5.) Take the paper off and working on the leather directly make
the grooves deeper. (6.) With the cup-pointed nail set stamp the
background promiscuously. This is done by making an effort to hold
the point of the set about 1/4 in. above the surface, at the same
time striking light, rapid blows on the top with a hammer or
mallet.

[Illustration: This Work Is Done with a Nail Set and Nut Pick]

With such objects as coin purses and card cases, a sewing machine
will be needed to fasten the parts together. An ordinary machine
will do. Frequently the parts are fastened by punching holes and
lacing through these with leather thongs or silk cord.

In making symmetrical designs such as are here shown, draw center
lines across the required space, dividing it into as many parts as
desired. Make free-hand one quarter of the design, if four parts
are to be alike, or one-half of the design, if but two parts. Fold
over along these center lines. Put a piece of double-surfaced
carbon paper between the parts and trace over the design already
drawn.



** How to Make a Simple Still [170]

A still to distill water can be made from a test tube, some heavy
rubber hose, and an ordinary bottle. Secure

[Illustration: Distilling Water]

a stopper for the test tube, and bore a hole through the center,
into which fit a small piece of tube. The bottle is also fitted
with a stopper containing a piece of tube, and both bottle and
test tube connected with a rubber tube.

The test tube is partly filled with water and supported or held
over an alcohol lamp. The bottle should stand in a basin of cold
water. When the water in the test tube begins to boil the steam
passes over to the bottle, where it condenses. The basin should be
supplied with cold water as fast as it begins to get warm. The
rubber tube will not stand the heat very long and if the still is
to be used several times, a metal tube should be supplied to
connect the test tube and bottle.



** Homemade Mariner's Compass [170]

Magnetize an ordinary knitting needle, A, and push it through a
cork, B, and place the cork exactly in the middle of the needle.
Thrust a pin, C, through the cork at right angles to the needle
and stick two sharpened matches in the sides of the cork so that
they will project downward as shown. The whole arrangement is
balanced on a thimble with balls of wax stuck on the heads of the
matches. If the needle is not horizontal, pull it through the cork
to one side or the other, or change

[Illustration: Magnetized Needle Revolving on a Pin]

the wax balls. The whole device is placed in a glass berry dish
and covered with a pane of glass.



** Brighten White Paint [170]

Add aluminum bronze to a white or light paint that is to be used
for lettering on a dark ground.



** Quartz Electrodes Used in Receiving Wireless Messages [170]

[Illustration: Details of the Receiving Instrument]

Wireless messages have been received at Washington, D.C., from Key
West, Florida, a distance of 900 miles, through a receiving
instrument in which two pieces of quartz of different composition
were used on the electrodes. In making an instrument of this kind
the quartz can be purchased from a dealer in minerals. One piece
must contain copper pyrites and the other zincites. The electrodes
are made cupping to hold the minerals and each should have a screw
adjustment to press the pieces of quartz in contact with each
other. Connect as shown in the illustration, using a high
resistance receiver.
--Contributed by Edwin L. Powell, Washington, D. C.



** How to Make a Glider [171]
By Carl Bates

A gliding machine is a motorless aeroplane, or flying-machine,
propelled by gravity and designed to carry a passenger through the
air from a high point to a lower point some distance away. Flying
in a glider is simply coasting down hill on the air, and is the
most interesting and exciting sport imaginable. The style of
glider described in this article is known as the "two-surface" or
"double-decked" aeroplane, and is composed of two arched cloth
surfaces placed one above the other.

In building a glider the wood material used should be
straight-grained spruce, free from knots. First prepare from
spruce planks the following strips of wood. Four long beams 3/4
in. thick, 1-1/4 in. wide and 20 ft. long; 12 crosspieces 3/4 in.
thick, 3/4 in. wide and 3 ft. long; 12 uprights 1/2 in. thick,
1-1/2 in. wide and 4 ft long; 41 strips for the bent ribs 3/16 in.
thick, 1/2-in. wide and 4 ft. long; 2 arm sticks 1 in. thick, 2
in. wide and 3 ft. long; the rudder sticks 3/4 in. square and 8 ft
long; several strips 1/2 in. by 3/4 in. for building the vertical
and horizontal rudders. The frames for the two main surfaces
should be constructed first, by bolting the crosspieces to the
long beams at the places shown by the dimensions in Fig. 1. If
20-ft. lumber cannot be procured, use 10-ft. lengths and splice
them, as shown in Fig. 3. All bolts used should be 1/8 in. in
diameter and fitted with washers on both ends. These frames formed
by the crosspieces should be braced by diagonal wires as shown.
All wiring is done with No. 16 piano wire.

The 41 ribs may be nailed to the main frames on the upper side by
using fine flat-headed brads 7/8 in. long. These ribs are spaced 1
ft. apart and extend 1 ft. beyond the rear edges of the main
frames, as shown in Fig. 1. After nailing one end of a rib to the
front long beam, the rib is arched by springing down the loose end
and nailing to the rear beam. The ribs should have a curve as
shown in Fig. 2, the amount of curvature being the same in all the
ribs.

The frames of the main surfaces are now ready to be covered with
cloth. Cambric or bleached muslin should be used for the covering,
which is tacked to the front edge, stretched tightly over the bent
ribs and fastened securely with tacks to the rear ends of the
ribs. The cloth should also be glued to the ribs for safety. In
the center of the lower plane surface there should be an opening 2
ft. wide and 4 ft. long for the body of the operator. Place the
two main surfaces 4 ft. apart and connect with the 12 uprights,
placed in the corner of each crosspiece and beam. The uprights are
fastened by bolting to the crosspieces, as shown in Fig. 2. The
whole structure is made strong and rigid by bracing with diagonal
wires, both laterally and longitudinally.

The vertical rudder is to keep the machine headed into the wind
and is not movable. This rudder is made of cloth stretched over a
light wooden frame, which is nailed to the rudder sticks
connecting to the main frame. The horizontal rudder is also made
of cloth stretched over a light wooden frame, and arranged to
intersect the vertical rudder at its center. This rudder is held
in position and strengthened by diagonal wires and guy wires. The
horizontal rudder is also immovable and its function is to prevent
the machine from diving, and also to keep it steady in its flight.
The rudders are fastened to the glider by the two rudder sticks,
and these sticks are held rigid by diagonal wire and also by guy
wires leading to the sides of the main frames as shown in Fig. 1.
The two arm sticks should be spaced about 13 in. apart and bolted
to the long beams in the center of the opening in the lower plane
where the operator is to take his position.

The glider should be examined to see

[Illustration: Details of the Glider]

that the frame is not warped or twisted. The surfaces must be true
or the machine will be hard to balance when in flight. To make a
glide, take the glider to the top of a hill, get in between the
arm sticks and lift the machine up until the arm sticks are under
the arms as shown run a few steps against the wind and leap from
the ground. You will find that the machine has a surprising amount
of lift, and if the weight of the body is in the right place you
will go shooting down the hillside in free flight. The landing is
made by pushing the weight of the body backwards. This will cause
the glider to tip up in front, slacken speed and settle. The
operator can then land safely and gently on his feet. Of course,
the beginner should learn by taking short jumps, gradually
increasing the distance as he gains skill and experience in
balancing and landing.

The proper position of the body is slightly ahead of the center of
the planes, but this must be found by experience. The machine
should not be used in winds blowing faster than 15 miles an hour.
Glides are always made against the wind, and the balancing is done
by moving the legs. The higher the starting point the farther one
may fly. Great care should be exercised in making landings;
otherwise the operator might suffer a sprained ankle or perhaps a
broken limb. The illustration shows two lines of flight from a
hilltop, the glider travels on the upper line caused by the body
of the operator taking a position a little back of the proper
place, and on the lower line he changes his position from front to
back while flying, which causes the dip in the line.



** Boys Representing the Centaur [173]

This is a diversion in which two boys personate a Centaur, a
creature of Greek mythology, half man and half horse. One of the
players stands erect and the other behind him in a stooping
position with his hands upon the first player's hips, as shown in
Fig. 1. The

[Illustration: Making Up the Centaur]

second player is covered over with a. shawl or table cover which
is pinned around the waist of the first player. A tail made of
strips of cloth or paper is pinned to the rear end of the cover.
The first player should hold a bow and arrow and have a cloak
thrown loosely over his shoulder as shown in Fig. 2. Imitation
hoofs of pasteboard may be made and fastened over the shoes.



** Home-Made Ladle for Melting Babbitt [173]

Secure a large sized old bicycle bell and rivet a heavy wire or
strap iron on one side for a handle. When heated a little, hammer
out the edge on one side for a lip to pour from. This makes a good
ladle for melting small amounts of babbit or lead. --Contributed
by L. M. Olson, Bellingham, Wash



** How to Make a Flash Lamp [174]

Indoor photographs are made much better with the use of a
flashlight than by depending on light from windows. The lighting
can be made from any direction to suit the operator. If lighting
flash powder when not in a regular flash lamp the flash cannot be
depended upon and in some instances is dangerous. To make a simple
and inexpensive flash lamp, first secure from your druggist an
empty salve box about 3 in. in diameter. While at the drug store
get 3 ft. of small rubber tubing; this will cost about 15 cents.
Now visit the tin shop and get a small piece of scrap tin 3 or 4
in. square; a piece of brass or steel wire, about the size of
stove pipe wire, 14 in. long. These with a strip of light asbestos
paper and some small iron wire, about the size of door screen
wire, will complete the material list.

Carefully punch a hole through the salve box on one side near the
bottom with a 10-penny nail. Cut a strip of tin 2 in. long and
about 3/8 in. wide and roll this around a 8-penny nail so as to
form a small tube which will just fit the hole made in the salve
box. Next roll up a strip of tin 1/2 in. wide into a small cup
about 3/8 in. in diameter at one end and 1/4 in. at the other.

Place the tube in the nail hole so that one end comes almost to
the center of the box inside and the other end projects about 1/2
in. outside the box. Cut out a little place for the tube to enter
the cup at the small end and then solder the tube and cup to the
bottom of the box as shown in the illustration. The tube and cup
should be well soldered on the seams to make them airtight. Bend a
ring on one end of the larger piece of wire, making it 2-1/2 in.
in diameter and form the remaining portion of the wire into a
spiral, soldering the end in the bottom of the box near the cup.
Wrap the ring at the top of the spiral piece of wire all the way

[Illustration: Made from a Tin Salve Box ]

around with the strip of asbestos paper, wrapping them together
over and over until the entire ring is covered. Slip the end of
the rubber tube over the tin tube on the side of the box and the
flash lamp is complete.

To make a flash with this lamp fill the little cup in the center
with flash powder and moisten the asbestos ring with alcohol. When
all is ready for the picture the alcohol is lighted and a quick
blow of the breath through the rubber tube will force the flash
powder upward into the flame and cause the flash.

When through with the lamp place the cover over it, pushing the
asbestos ring down inside the box. Wind the rubber tubing around
the box and you have a neat outfit that can be carried in the
pocket.



** Photographing the New Moon [174]

To make a photograph of the moon is quite difficult and no good
picture can be made without an expensive apparatus. At home and
with your own hand camera you can make a good picture of the new
moon by the use of a flash light on a tennis ball, the tennis ball
taking the part of the moon. The ball is suspended in front of a
black cloth screen, the camera focused by holding a burning match
near the ball and the exposure made by burning a

[Illustration: Tennis Ball Photographed]

small quantity of flash powder at one side and a little below the
ball. The light from the flash only striking one side of the ball
gives the effect of the new moon. --Photo by M. M. Hunting,
Dayton, O.



** Old-Time Magic- Part II [175]



** Removing Scissors from a Cord [175]

A piece of strong cord is doubled and fastened to a pair of
scissors with a slip knot, as shown in Fig. 1. After passing the
ends of the cord through the thumb hole of the scissors they are
tied fast to a chair, door knob or any other object that may be of
sufficient size to make the ends secure. The trick is to release
the scissors without cutting the cord.

Take hold of the loop end of the cord in the lower handle and
drawing it first

[Illustration: How the Scissors Are Removed]

through the upper handle and then completely over the blades of
the scissors, as shown in Fig. 2. This is very simple when you
know how, but puzzling when the trick is first seen.



** Coin and Card on the First Finger [175]

This is a simple trick that many can do at the first attempt,
while others will fail time after time. It is a good trick to
spring upon a company casually if you have practiced it
beforehand. A playing card is balanced on the tip of the
forefinger and a penny placed on top immediately over the finger
end, as shown in the sketch. With the right hand forefinger and
thumb strike the edge of the card sharply. If done properly the
card will flyaway, leaving the penny poised on the finger end.

[Illustration: Coin and Card]



** How to Make Sealing Wax Hat Pins [175]

Select a stick of sealing wax of the desired color for the
foundation of the hat pin. Hold the end of the stick over a flame
until the wax is soft enough to drop; then put it on the hat-pin
head. When sufficient wax has adhered to the pin, hold the lump
over the flame, revolving the pin at the same time so the wax will
not drop and the head will form a round ball. The head can be made
in any shape desired while warm. When the desired shape has been
obtained, cool thoroughly in cold water and dry carefully.

Stripes and designs may be put on the foundation by applying drops
of other brilliant colored wax, and by careful manipulation the
wax when warm can be made to flow around the pin head and form
pretty stripes and designs. If a certain color is to be more
prominent, the wax to make this color must be applied last and the
pin put through the flame again. Cool in water and dry, as before,
and pass once more through the flame to obtain the luster.



** Old-Time Magic-Part III [176]



** Disappearing Coin [176]

While this is purely a sleight-of-hand trick, it will take very
little practice to cause the coin to disappear instantly. Take a
quarter of a dollar between the thumb and finger, as shown, and by
a rapid twist of the fingers whirl the coin and at the same time
close the hand, and the coin will disappear up your coat sleeve.
On opening the hand the coin will not be seen. Take three quarters
and hold one in the palm of the left hand, place the other two,
one between the thumb and finger of each hand, then give the coin
in the right hand a whirl, as described, closing both hands
quickly. The coin in the right hand will disappear up your sleeve,
and the left hand on being unclosed will contain two quarters,
while the one in the right shall have disappeared.

[Illustration: Disappearing Coin]



** Sticking a Coin Against the Wall [176]

Cut a small notch in a coin--ten cent piece or quarter will do--so
a small point will project. When this is pressed firmly against a
wood casing or partition the coin will stick tightly.


