3. Meaning of Name.

4. Author.

5. Beginning and Ending Dates.

6. Outline of Contents.

7. Key Verse.

8. Leading Thought.

9. Leading Phrases and Verses.

10. Leading Chapters with Names.

11. Leading Characters.

12. Leading Lessons.

13. What of Christ:

(a) Symbol.

(b) Type.

(c) Analogy.

(d) Prophecy.

14. Questions.

15. Items of Special Interest.

16. Individual Finds.


NOTES ON HISTORICAL OUTLINE AND ITS USE

Most of the books in the first four divisions will be studied with this
outline as a basis. In the pursuance of these lessons the numbers left
vacant in the outline are to be wrought out by the pupils. In recording
the work in the blank book the first page is to be given to the
pictorial device. One of these will be printed in its appropriate place.
Let students prepare the others. Urge the pupils to use originality of
thought and pen in producing them. The aim of the device is to impress
by a simple picture the contents of the book as a whole. Under No. 2 the
kind of literature may be described, as history, law, discourse,
biography, etc. Secure answers to Nos. 2, 3, 4, 5 in Bible Dictionary.
As a rule, Nos. 7, 8, 9, 11, 12 will be given. Under No. 10 part of the
chapters will be named, and part are to be read and named by the pupils.
After the pupils present the names of these chapters in class, one must
be agreed upon, so that the names will be uniform. When the names of
chapters are given in the outline, require the pupils to glance over the
chapters and verify them. Under No. 13 the foreshadowed facts of Christ
are given, so as to manifest Him as the living center of the Book. Only
the leading ones are selected. The teacher or pupil may add others. For
convenience sake they are classified as follows: (a) Symbol; (b) Type;
(c) Analogy; (d) Prophecy. Though the words symbol and type are not
technically distinct, we have agreed to use the word _symbol_ to
designate an _object_ or _animal_ that prefigures Christ, as "star" or
"lamb," and the word _type_ to designate a _person_ that prefigures
Christ, as Melchizedek or Moses. We have also agreed to limit the
symbols and types to those directly or indirectly mentioned in the New
Testament. By analogy we mean a person who, though widely differing from
Christ in many particulars, bears some one resemblance to Him in quality
or deed. These analogies are not mentioned in the New Testament. The
word _prophecy_ in the outline is confined, then, to _facts_ foretold
regarding Christ. Under No. 15 let the teacher call for five or ten
(suit the number to conditions) items of peculiar interest, touching the
literary form, events, facts, teachings, etc. This topic is in accord
with the first article of the Creed recorded on the opening page of the
book. Under No. 16 let the teacher assign at least one chapter rich in
contents for individual search upon the part of the pupils. Let the
pupils record and number their individual finds. This in accord with the
fifth article of the Creed. The purpose is to cultivate the "seeing eye"
and to develop originality in Bible research.



GENESIS

I. _Pictorial Device._

                      _____
                  ,-'| GOD |'-.
               ,-'  , ----- .  '-.
            ,-'   ,'   / \   '.   '-.
         ,-'    ,'    /   \    '.    '-.
      ,-'     ,'     /     \     '.     '-.
   ,-'      ,'      /       \      '.      '-.
,-'       ,'       /         \       '.       '-.
+--+-----+--+-----+--+-----+--+-----+--+-----+--+
|2 |     |6 |     |12|     |21|     |25|     |37|
+--+-----+--+-----+--+-----+--+-----+--+-----+--+
|A |     |N |     |A |     |I |     |J |     |J |
|D |     |O |     |B |     |S |     |A |     |O |
|A |     |A |     |R |     |A |     |C |     |S |
|M |     |H |     |A |     |A |     |O |     |E |
|  |     |  |     |H |     |C |     |B |     |P |
|  |     |  |     |A |     |  |     |  |     |H |
|  |     |  |     |M |     |  |     |  |     |  |
+--+-----+--+-----+--+-----+--+-----+--+-----+--+
|                   BEGINNINGS                  |
+-----------------------------------------------+
|                      GOD                      |
+-----------------------------------------------+


NOTE.--In order to make the work and the method of recording it as clear
as possible, the outline study of Genesis is printed in full, except the
answers to the questions.

II. _Kind of Literature:_ History.

III. _Meaning of Name:_ Beginning.

IV. _Author:_ Moses.

V. _Beginning and Ending Dates:_ 4004 B.C. to 1689 B.C., making 2315
years.

VI. _Outline of Contents:_

1. 1 to 11. God's Dealings with the Human Race.

2. 12 to 50. God's Dealings with the Chosen Race.

VII. _Key Verse:_ 1:1 in part: "In the beginning God--"

VIII. _Leading Thought:_ God before all and in all and over all.

IX. _Leading Phrases and Verses:_

4:9--"Am I my brother's keeper?"

15:1--"Fear not, Abram: I am thy shield, and thy exceeding great
reward."

18:4--"Is anything too hard for Jehovah?"

X. _Leading Chapters with Names:_

1. The Six Days of Creation.

3. The Temptation, the Fall and the Promise.

4. Cain and Abel.

6 to 8. The Flood.

11. Babel.

12. Abraham.

22. The Sacrifice of Isaac.

23. The Wrestling of Jacob.

37. Joseph.

49. The Blessings of Jacob.

XI. _Leading Characters._ See Device.

XII. _Leading Lessons:_

1. God's Intimate Acquaintanceship with Man.

2. The Wide Influence of One Person. (Let teacher and scholar illustrate
these.)

XIII. _What of Christ:_

(a) Symbol: (The blood of Abel. Heb. 12:24.)

(b) Type: Adam. Rom. 5:14.

Melchizedek. Heb. 6:20.

(c) Analogy: Noah. Joseph.

(d) Prophecy: 3:15: "I will put enmity between thee and the woman and
between thy seed and her seed: he shall bruise thy head, and thou shall
bruise his heel."

12:3: "In thee shall all the families of the earth be blessed." See
Matt. 1:1.

49:10: "The sceptre shall not depart from Judah, nor the ruler's staff
from between his feet, until Shiloh come: and unto him shall the
obedience of the peoples be."

XIV. _Questions:_

1. Name the first two great institutions established by Jehovah.

2. Name the beginnings recorded in Chapters 3 and 4.

3. Name five facts mentioned about the Garden of Eden.

4. Name God's first recorded words, Satan's, Adam's.

5. Name the curses pronounced upon the serpent, upon the woman, upon the
ground for man's sake.

6. Name the first blacksmith, the first musician, the first piece of
poetry, the first city, the first and second tithers.

7. Give ages of Adam, Methuselah, Noah, Abraham, Joseph.

8. Name the cause of the flood and the number of people saved.

9. Name the three sons of Noah and the prophecies regarding the
descendants of each.

10. Why did the people build the Tower of Babel?

11. Name the seven promises made to Abraham in Chapter 15.

12. By what quality was Abraham saved? 15:6. See Gal. 3:8.

13. Who was Melchizedek? Hagar? Ishmael?

14. Name the wife and sons of Isaac.

15. In what two ways did Jacob mistreat Esau?

16. How long did Jacob serve for his wives and cattle?

17. Fill out the following diagram of Jacob's wives, concubines and
children. See 35:23.

+---------+---------+---------+---------+
|         |         |         |         |
+---------+---------+---------+---------+
|         |         |         |         |
|         |         |         |         |
|         |         |         |         |
|         |         |         |         |
+---------+---------+---------+---------+


18. Give origin, meaning and location of Mizpah.

19. Give the two chief reasons for the elevation of Joseph.

20. Name the dreams interpreted by Joseph.

21. Locate and give the substance of Judah's plea.

22. How many of the house of Jacob went down into Egypt?

NOTES ON THE QUESTIONS

These questions must needs be few in number. If the time permits, let
the teacher add others. They are designed to be mere surface questions,
to secure acquaintanceship with a few of the great facts. In assigning
the questions on each book of the Bible let the teacher go over them
with the class, seeking their knowledge (or imparting it) as to the
chapters in which the answers may be found. If the class has the time
and desires a more thorough acquaintance with each book, let each member
prepare two "large" questions on each chapter, or upon as many chapters
as they desire. The following questions on Chapter 1 will serve as
examples: (1) Name the seven purposes of the lights. (2) State the
number of times the word God occurs.

XV. _Items of Special Interest:_

1. The symmetry of the paragraphs in the record of the six creative days
in Chapter 1.

2. God's notice of the human countenance. 4:6.

3. The first piece of recorded poetry is degenerating, bloody. 4:23, 24.

4. The word for "rooms," 6:14, in the margin is "nests"--a primitive
description.

5. The richness of the historical prophecy in 9:27.

XVI. _Individual Finds:_

Chapters 10, or 23, or 37, or all. Or each of these three chapters could
be assigned to a third of the class.



JOB


SECTION I. INTRODUCTION

From personal knowledge and reading, from perusal of articles in Bible
helps and dictionaries, write out in your own language a
two-hundred-word description of the book as a whole, its purpose, its
nature, etc.

SECTION II. NARRATIVES

(To be memorized and told, with care in regard to all details.)

1. Description of Job and His Household. Chapter 1.

2. First Interview between Jehovah and Satan. 1.

3. First Test and Result. 1.

4. Second Interview between Jehovah and Satan. 2.

5. Second Test and Result. 2.

6. The Three Friends. 2.

SECTION III. GEOGRAPHY

Locate by chapter and verse, naming the thought, or fact, or person
connected therewith, the following geographical terms: Uz, Sabeans,
Chaldeans, Temanite, Shuhite, Naamathite, Buzite, Tema, Sheba, Ophir,
Rahab, Ethiopia. (Locate chapter and verse by reference to concordance.)
(Make record in blank book on same page as map.)

Draw full-page map, locating each place as far as known.

SECTION IV. NATURE OF JOB'S DISEASE

Write out the descriptions as narrated in the following verses: 7:5;
13:28; 19:20; 30:17, 18, 30. Describe in your own words the
characteristics of the disease as noted in these verses. Give name of
disease, as agreed upon by interpreters.

SECTION V. SPEAKERS AND SPEECHES

In order to secure a skeleton idea of the book write out the names of
the speakers in consecutive order and the chapters containing the
speeches. Space in each line could be reserved to fill in at a later
study the general thought of each speech. At the close make any
observations regarding the number and order of speeches. The following
is a sample of the first four speeches:

_Historical Introduction. Chapters I and 2_

1. Job. Chapter 3.

2. Eliphaz. Chapters 4 and 5.

3. Job. Chapters 6 and 7.

4. Bildad. Chapter 8.

SECTION VI. THE ARGUMENT

Analyze the argument of Chapters 3 and 4. The following is a sample:

_Job's First Speech. Chapter 3_

1. A curse upon the day of his birth. Verses 1-10.

2. He questions why he should not have died at birth. Verses 11-19.

SECTION VII. THE CONCLUSION

Give narrative, with details, as recorded in Chapter 42:7-17.

SECTION VIII. QUESTIONS

1. Name three general lessons taught in the book about suffering.

2. What two things did Job do at the close of the speeches?

3. How did Job's condition after the test compare with that previous to
the test?

4. Name eight facts regarding Satan gleaned from Chapters 1 and 2.

5. Locate and commit Job's two sublime statements of faith. (See
Chapters 13 and 19.)

6. Name five kinds of people that Job helped. 29:12-16.

7. Name six classes of people who spurned him in his trouble. 19:13-19.

8. What two general statements about man does Job make? 14:1.

9. Select any six phrases that serve to indicate the life and customs of
Job's time.

10. What writers of the Bible refer to Job and what is their estimate?

11. Read Chapter 38 and write out your impressions of it in concise
statements, using fifty words.

12. Give three general reasons why the narrative of Job is to be
received as an historical fact.




II

THE KINGDOM FORMING

Exodus         Page

Leviticus      Page

Deuteronomy    Page



EXODUS

I. _Pictorial Device._

Originate one, or omit.

