



Things to See in Wintertime


TALE 49

The North Star, or the Home Star

If you are going to be a Woodcrafter, you must begin by knowing the
North Star, because that is the star which will show you the way home,
if you get lost in the woods at night. That is why the Indians call it
the "Home Star."

But first, I must tell you how it came to be, and the story begins a
long, long time ago.

In those far-off days, we are told, there were two wonderful hunters,
one named Orion, and the other named Booetes (Bo-o-tees). Orion hunted
everything and I shall have to leave him for another story. Booetes was
an ox-driver and only hunted bears to save his cattle. One day he went
after a Mother Bear, that had one little cub.

[Illustration: The Pappoose on the Squaw's Back]

He chased them up to the top of a mountain so high, that they leaped off
into the sky, and just as they were going, Booetes shot his arrows after
them. His very first arrow hit the Little Bear in the tail--they had
long tails in those days--and pinned him to the sky. There he has hung
ever since, swinging round and round, on the arrow in his tail, while
his mother runs bawling around him, with Booetes and his dogs chasing
her. He shot arrows into her tail, which was long and curved, into her
body, and into her shoulder. Seven big arrows he shot, and there they
are yet, in the form of a dipper pointing always to the cub who is
called the "Little Bear." The shining head of the big arrow in the end
of the Little Bear's tail is called the North Star or Pole Star. You can
always tell which is the North Star, by the two Pointers; these are the
two bright stars that make the outer side of the Dipper on the Big
Bear's shoulder. A line drawn through them, points out the North Star.

The Dipper, that is the Big Bear, goes round and round the Pole
Star, once in about twenty-four hours; so that sometimes the Pointers are
over, sometimes under, to left or to right; but always pointing out the
Pole Star or North Star.

This star shows nearly the true north; and, knowing that, a traveller
can find his way in any strange country, so long as he can see this
friendly Home Star.


TALE 50

The Pappoose on the Squaw's Back

Now that you know how the Bears and the Big Dipper came, you should know
the Indian story of the Old Squaw.

First find the bright star that is at the bend of the Dipper handle.
This is called the "Old Squaw"; on her back is a tiny star that they
call "The Pappoose."

As soon as an Indian boy is old enough to understand, his mother takes
him out into the night when it is calm and clear, and without any moon
or any bright lights near, and says, "My child, yonder is the Old Squaw,
the second of the seven stars; she is going over the top of the hill; on
her back she carries her pappoose. Tell me, my child, can you see the
pappoose?"

[Illustration: Orion Fighting the Bull]

Then the little redskin gazes, and from his mother's hand he takes two
pebbles, a big one and a little one, and he sets them together on her
palm, to show how the two stars seem to him. When the mother is sure
that he did see them clearly, she rejoices. She goes to the fire and
drops a pinch of tobacco into it, for incense to carry her message, then
looking toward the sky she says: "Great Spirit, I thank Thee that my
child has the eyes of a hunter."

       *       *       *       *       *

These things are not new, O Woodcrafter. The wise men of our race call
the Big Star "Mizar" one of the chariot horses, and the little star
"Alcor" or the Rider. In all ages it has been considered proof of
first-class eyes, to see this little star. Can you see it? Have you the
eyes of a hunter?


TALE 51

Orion the Hunter, and His Fight With the Bull

In the 49th Tale I told you there were two giants among the mighty
hunters in the sky, Booetes, whose adventure with the Bears you have
already heard, and Orion. (O-ry'-on).

Orion was the most famous of all. In his day men had no guns; they had
nothing but clubs, spears, and arrows to fight with, and the beasts were
very big and fierce as well as plentiful, yet Orion went whenever he was
needed, armed chiefly with his club, fought the wild beasts, all alone,
killing them or driving them out, and saving the people, for the joy of
doing it. Once he killed a lion with his club, and ever afterward wore
the lion's skin on his arm. Bears were as nothing to him; he killed them
as easily as most hunters would rabbits, but he found his match, when he
went after a ferocious wild Bull as big as a young elephant.

As soon as the Bull saw him, it came rushing at him. It happened to be
on the other side of a stream, and as it plunged in, Orion drew his bow
and fired seven quick shots at the Bull's heart. But the monster was
coming head on, and the seven arrows all stuck in its shoulder, making
it madder than ever. So Orion waved his lion skin in his left hand, and
with his club in the right, ran to meet the Bull, as it was scrambling
up the bank from the water.

The first whack of the club tumbled the Bull back into the water, but it
turned aside, went to another place, and charged again. And again Orion
landed a fearful blow with the club on the monster's curly forehead.

By this time, all the animals had gathered around to see the big fight,
and the gods in heaven got so interested that they shouted out, "Hold
on, that is good enough for us to see. Come up here."

So they moved the mighty Hunter and the Bull, and the River and all the
animals, up to heaven, and the fight has gone on there ever since.

In the picture I have shown a lot of animals besides Orion and the Bull,
but the only things I want you to look now in the sky, are Orion's belt
with the three stars on it, and the Pleiades on the Bull's shoulder, the
seven spots where the seven arrows struck.

And remember these stars cannot be seen in summer, they pass over us in
winter time. You can find Orion by drawing a straight line across the
rim of the Dipper, beginning at the inner or handle side, passing
through the outer or Pointers side, and continued for twice the length
of the Dipper, handle and all, this will bring you to Betelgeuze, the
big star in the Giant's right shoulder, below that are the three stars
of his belt, sometimes called the "Three Kings."


TALE 52

The Pleiades, that Orion Fired at the Bull

[Illustration: The Pleiades]

When late autumn comes the Pleiades (Ply'-a-dees) appear in the evening
sky to the eastward. These are the seven shots in the Bull's shoulder,
the seven arrows from Orion's bow. The Guide can locate them by
continuing the line of Orion's belt, eight times the length of the belt
to the right, as one faces the Hunter, so Orion must have been very
close indeed. At first they look like a faint light with a few bright
pin-points scattered through. Tennyson described them as:

        Glittering like a swarm of fireflies
        Tangled in a silver braid.

The best time to see them is some clear night about Christmas, when
there is no moon, and the Pleiades are nearly overhead, above the mist
and smoke of the horizon, and there are no electric lights near by.

Study them attentively. Make a tube of your two hands and look through.
Look on the ground, then look back again; look not straight at them, but
a little to one side; and at last, mark down on paper how many you can
clearly see, putting a big spot for the big one, and little spots for
the little ones. Poor eyes see nothing but a haze; fairly good eyes see
four of the pin-points; good eyes see five; the best of eyes see seven.
I can see seven on a clear winter night when there are no clouds and no
moon. This is as high as you need expect to get, although it is said
that some men in clear air on a mountain top have seen ten, while the
telescope shows that there are 2,000.

In taking these eyesight tests you may use your spectacles if you
usually wear them.


TALE 53

The Twin Stars

        Two-Bright-Eyes went wandering out
        To chase the Whippoorwill;
        Two-Bright-Eyes got lost and left
        Our teepee--oh, so still!

        Two-Bright-Eyes was carried up
        To sparkle in the skies
        And look like stars--but we know well
        That that's our lost Bright-Eyes.

        She is looking for the camp,
        She would come back if she could;
        She still peeps thro' the tree-tops
        For the teepee in the wood.


TALE 54

Stoutheart and His Black Cravat

Do you know the bird that wears a black cravat, which he changes once a
year? It is the English Sparrow, the commonest of all our birds. His
hair is gray, but he must have been red-headed once, for just back of
his ears there is still a band of red; and his collar, maybe, was white
once, but it is very dingy now. His shirt and vest are gray; his coat is
brown with black streaks--a sort of sporting tweed. The new cravat comes
when the new feathers grow in late summer; and, at first, it is barred
with gray as if in half mourning for his sins. As the gray tips wear
off, it becomes solid black; that is, in March or April. In summer, it
gets rusty and worn out; so every year he puts on a new one in late
August.

The hen sparrow is quite different and wears no cravat. She has a
black-and-brown cape of the sporting pattern, but her dress is
everywhere of brownish Quaker gray.

The song of the English Sparrow is loud and short; but he tries to make
up, by singing it over and over again, for many minutes.

He eats many bad bugs, and would be well liked, if he did not steal the
nests and the food of Bluebirds, Woodpeckers, Swallows, and others that
are prettier and more useful birds, as well as far better singers than
he is.

But there is much to admire in the Sparrow. I do not know of any bird
that is braver, or more ready to find a way out of trouble; and if he
cannot find a way, he cheerfully makes the best of it.

Some years ago I was at Duluth during a bitterly cold spell of weather.
The thermometer registered 20 deg. or 30 deg. below zero, and the blizzard wind
was blowing. Oh my, it was cold. But out in the street were dozens of
English Sparrows chirruping and feeding; thriving just as they do in
warmer lands and in fine weather.

When black night came down, colder yet, I wondered what the little
stout-hearts would do. Crawl into some hole or bird-house, maybe? or
dive into a snowdrift? as many native birds do.

I found out; and the answer was most unexpected.

In front of the hotel was a long row of electric lights. At nine
o'clock, when I chanced to open the window for a breath of air, my eye
fell on these; on every bulb was an English Sparrow sound asleep with
the overarching reflector to turn the storm, and the electric bulb below
him to warm his toes. My hat is off. Our Department of Agriculture may
declare war on the Sparrow; but what is the use? Don't you think that a
creature who is not afraid of blizzard or darkness, and knows how to use
electric lights, is going to win its life-battle, and that he surely is
here to stay?


TALE 55

Tracks, and the Stories They Tell

[Illustration: Tracks, and the Stories They Tell]

Sometimes, in town, just after rain, when the gutters are wet, and the
pavement dry, look for the tracks of some Dog that walked with wet
feet on the pavement. You will find that they are like "a" in the
drawing. A Dog has five toes on his front feet, but only four touch the
pavement as he walks. The claws also touch, and make each a little mark.

Now look for the track of a Cat; it is somewhat like that of the Dog,
but it is smaller, softer, and the claws do not show (b). They are too
good to be wasted on a pavement; she keeps them pulled in, so they are
sharp when she has use for them.

Make a drawing of each of these, and make it life size.

When there is dust on the road, or snow, look for Sparrow tracks; they
are like "c."

Note how close together the front three toes are. The inner two are
really fast together, so they cannot be separated far and the hind toe
is very large. Last of all, note that the tracks go two and two, because
the Sparrow goes "hop hop, hop." These things mean that the Sparrow is
really a tree bird; and you will see that, though often on the ground he
gets up into a tree when he wishes to feel safe.

Look for some Chicken tracks in the dust; they are like "d" in the
drawing because the Chicken does not go "hop, hop, hop" like the
Sparrow, but "walk, walk, walk." The Chicken is a ground bird. Most of
the song birds hop like the Sparrow, and most of the game birds walk
like a Chicken. But the Robin (e) goes sometimes hopping and sometimes
running, because part of his life is in the trees, and part on the
ground.


TALE 56

A Rabbit's Story of His Life, Written by Himself

Yes, the Rabbit wrote it himself and about himself in the oldest writing
on earth, that is the tracks of his feet.

[Illustration: A WOODCRAFT TRAGEDY

As shown by the Tracks and Signs in the Snow]

In February of 1885, one morning after a light snowfall, I went tramping
through the woods north of Toronto, when I came on something that always
makes me stop and look--the fresh tracks of an animal. This was the
track of a Cottontail Rabbit and I followed its windings with thrills of
interest. There it began under a little brush pile (a); the bed of brown
leaves showing that he settled there, before the snow-fall began. Now
here (b) he leaped out after the snow ceased, for the tracks are sharp,
and sat looking around. See the two long marks of his hind feet and in
front the two smaller prints of his front feet; behind is the mark made
by his tail, showing that he was sitting on it.

Then he had taken alarm at something and dashed off at speed (c), for
now his hind feet are tracking ahead of the front feet, as in most
bounding forefoots, and the faster he goes, the farther ahead those hind
feet get.

See now how he dodged about here and there, this way and that, among the
trees, as though trying to escape some dreaded enemy (c, d, e, f).

