"I don't believe there had better be a 'next time' right away,"
declared Mr. Lenton.

"The next attempt you make to invent a powerful gas, you had
better generate it in something stronger than a glass test tube.
Use an iron retort."

"Yes, sir," replied Jack.

"And now you had better report for your geometry lesson," went on
the professor.  "I need the laboratory now for a class in
physics.  Just tell the janitor to come here and sweep up the
broken glass.  I am very glad neither of you boys was seriously
injured.  You must be more careful next time."

"Oh, Mark was careful enough," said Jack.  "It was all my fault.
I didn't think the gas was quite so powerful."

"All right," answered the professor with a smile as Jack and Mark
passed out on their way to another classroom.

The two lads, whom some of my readers have met before in the
previous books of this series, were friends who had become
acquainted under peculiar circumstances.  They were orphans, and,
after having had many trying experiences, each of them had left
his cruel employers, and, unknown to each other previously, had
met in a certain village, where they were obliged to beg for
food.  They decided to cast their lots together, and, boarding a
freight train, started West.

The train, as told in the first volume to this series, called
"Through the Air to the North Pole," was wrecked near a place
where a certain Professor Amos Henderson, and his colored helper,
Washington White, lived.  Mr. Henderson was a learned scientist
who was constantly building new wonderful machines.  He was
working on an airship, in which to set out and locate the North
Pole, when he discovered Jack and Mark, injured in the freight
wreck.  He and Washington White carried the lads to the
inventor's workshop, and there the boys recovered.  When they
were well enough, the professor invited them to live with him,
and, more than that, to take a trip with him North Pole.

They went, in company with Washington and an old hunter, named
Andy Sudds, and some other men, whom the professor took along to
help him.

Many adventures befell the party.  They had battles with wild
beasts in the far north, and were attacked by savage Esquimaux.
Once they were caught in a terrible storm. They actually passed
over the exact location of the North Pole, and Professor
Henderson made some interesting scientific observations.

In the second volume of this series, entitled "Under the Ocean to
the South Pole," Professor Henderson, Jack, Mark, Washington and
old Andy Sudds, made even a more remarkable trip.  The professor
had a theory that there was an open sea at the South Pole, and he
wanted to prove it.  He decided that the best way to get there
was to go under the ocean in a submarine boat, and he and the
boys built a very fine, craft, called the Porpoise, which was
capable of being propelled under water at a great depth.

The voyagers had rather a hard time of it.  They were caught in a
great sea of Sargasso grass, monstrous suckers held the boat in
immense arms, and it required hard fighting to get free.  The
boys and the others had the novel experience of walking about on
the bottom of the sea in new kinds of diving suits invented by
the professor.

On their journey to the South Pole, the adventurers came upon a
strange island in the Atlantic, far from the coast of South
America.  On it was a great whirlpool, into which the Porpoise
was nearly sucked by a powerful current.  They managed to escape,
and had a glimpse of unfathomable depths.  They passed on, but
could not forget the strange hole in the island.

Mark suggested that it might lead to the center of the earth,
which is hollow, according to some scientists, and after some
consideration, Professor Henderson, on his return from the South
Pole, decided to go down the immense shaft.

To do this required a different kind of vessel from any he had
yet built.  He would need one that could sail on the water, and
yet float in the air like a balloon or aeroplane.

How he built this queer craft and took a most remarkable voyage,
you will find set down in the third book of this series, entitled
"Five Thousand Miles Underground."

In their new craft, called the Flying Mermaid, the professor, the
boys, Washington and Andy, sailed until they came to the great
shaft leading downward.  Then the ship rose in the air and
descended through clouds of vapor.  After many perils they
reached the center of the earth, where they found a strange race
of beings.

One day, to their horror, an earthquake dosed the shaft by which
they had come to the center of the earth.  The boys were in
despair of ever getting to the surface again, but the professor
had been prepared for this emergency, and he had built a strong
cylinder, into which all the travelers placed themselves.  Then
it was projected into a powerful upward shooting column of water,
which Professor Henderson hoped would take them to the surface of
the earth.  Nor was he mistaken.  They had a terrible journey,
but came safely out of it.

They opened the cylinder, to find themselves floating on the sea,
and they were rescued by a passing vessel.  Of course, they had
abandoned the Mermaid, leaving the craft in the center of the
earth, but they had brought back with them some valuable
diamonds, which formed their fortune.

This ended, for a time, the experiments of the professor, who
decided to settle down to a quiet life, and write out the
observations he had made on the three voyages.  The boys wanted
to get an education, and, investing their share from the sale of
the diamonds, they took up a course at the Universal Electrical
and Chemical College.  Each had an ambition to become as great an
inventor as was Professor Henderson, with whom they continued to
live in a small city on the Maine coast.  Washington White and
Andy Sudds also dwelt with the professor, Andy going off on
occasional hunting trips, and Washington acting as a sort of body
servant to Mr. Henderson.

Jack and Mark had completed one term at the college, and were in
the midst of the second when this story opens.

They had not lost their love for making queer voyages, and one of
their greatest desires was to help the professor turn out a craft
even more wonderful than the Electric Monarch, the Porpoise or
the Flying Mermaid.  It was in this connection that Jack was
experimenting on the new gas, when the slight accident happened.

"Are you going to try that again?" asked Mark, as he and his chum
walked along to their geometry class.

"Sure," replied Jack.  "I want that to succeed.  I know I am on
the right track."

"You came near getting blown off the track," remarked his
companion, which was as near to a joke as he ever would come,
for, though Jack was jolly and full of fun, Mark was more
serious, inclined to take a sterner view of life.

"Oh, I'll succeed yet!" exclaimed Jack.  "And when I do--you'll
see something--that's all."

"And feel it, too," added Mark, putting his hand on his head, the
book having raised quite a lump.

It was several days after this before the boys had the chance to
work alone in the laboratory again, and Jack had to promise not
to try his experiment with the new gas before this privilege was
granted him.

"Want any help?" asked Dick Jenfer, another student, as he saw
Jack and Mark enter the laboratory.

"Yes, if you want to hold a test tube for me," answered Jack.
"I'm going to try a new way of making oxygen."

"No, thanks!  Not for mine!" exclaimed Dick as he turned away.
"I don't want to be around when you try your new experiments.
The old way of making oxygen is good enough for me."

"Well, I have a new scheme," went on Jack.

Soon he and Mark, whom he had again induced to help him, were
busy with test tubes, rubber hose, Bunsen flames, jars of water,
and all that is required to make oxygen.

Somewhat to his own surprise, the experiment Jack tried was a
success.  He collected a jarful of oxygen, generated in a way he
had thought out for himself.  It was much simpler than the usual
method.

Just as he concluded the test, some one opened the laboratory
door.  It was Professor Lenton.

"I have a telegram for you," he said.

"A telegram?"

"Yes.  It just arrived."

Jack tore open the yellow envelope.

"It's from Professor Henderson," he said.

"Is anything the matter?" asked Mark.

"I don't know," answered Jack.  "It says: 'Come home at once.'
I wonder what's wrong?"

"I hope nothing serious," said Professor Lenton.

"You may both prepare to leave this afternoon.  I am sorry.  Let
me hear from you when you reach Professor Henderson.  I trust
nothing has happened to him.  He is too great a scientist for us
to lose."




CHAPTER III

WASHINGTON MEETS THE BOYS


All thoughts of experiments were driven from the minds of Jack
and Mark by the telegram.  They imagined that something had
happened to their old friend, and it worried them.  If he was
dangerously hurt, as might be, for he was constantly experimenting
in a small way, it would mean that a great change must take place
in their lives.

"What do you suppose can have happened?" asked Mark, as he and
Jack went to their rooms to get ready to leave the college.

"I haven't the least idea.  Maybe he wants us to go on another
trip."

Mark finished packing, and Jack was not far behind him.  Then the
lads went to the railroad station, where they purchased tickets
for home and were soon on a train.  On the journey they could not
help but refer occasionally to the telegram, though Jack kept
insisting that nothing so serious had happened.  Mark was not
quite in such good spirits.

"Well, here we are," announced Jack, about three hours later, as
the train pulled into a small station.  "And there's Washington
on the platform waiting for us."

Jack hurried out of the car, followed by Mark.

"Hello, Wash!" cried the fat lad.  "How are you?  Catch this
valise!" and he threw it to the colored man before the train had
come to a stop.  Washington deftly caught the grip, though he had
to make a quick movement to accomplish it.

"I 'clar t' gracious!" he exclaimed.  "Dat suttinly am a most
inconsequential mannah in which to project a transmigatory object
in contiguousness to mah predistination."

"Whoa, there!" cried Jack.  "Better take two bites at that,
Wash!"

"Dat's all right, Massa Jack," answered the colored man.  "I'se
glad to see yo', an' I suttinly hopes dat de transubstantiationableness
ob my--"

"Wow!" cried Jack.  "Say that over again, and say it slow."

"Don't yo' foregather mah excitability?" asked the colored man
rather anxiously.

"Yes, I guess so.  What's the answer?  How's the professor?
How's Andy?  What's the matter?  Why did he send for us?"

"Wait! Wait!  Please wait!" begged Washington.  "One ob dem
interrogatorial projections at a time, Massa Jack.  Where am
Massa Mark?"

"Here I am," replied Jack's chum, as he followed him out on the
platform of the train, which had come to a stop.

"Dats right!" exclaimed Washington.  "Let me hab yo' extended
article ob transportation an' I'll jest expidite it in--"

"I guess you mean it, all right," interrupted Jack.  "But what's
up?  Why did the professor send for us?"

"I doan't know, Massa Jack."

"You don't know?"

"Nopy.  He jest done gone tell me to send dat transmigatory
telegraph, an' dat's all."

"But why does he want us?  He's not sick, is he?" asked Mark.

"Never felt bettah!" exclaimed Washington as he walked along the
street leading from the depot, a valise in either hand.  "His
state ob health am equal to de sophistication ob de soporiferousness."

"You mean he sleeps well?" questioned Jack.

"Dat's what I done meant to convey to yo', Massa Jack."

"Well, why don't you say it?" asked Mark.

"Dat's jest what I done.  I said--"

"Never mind," interrupted Jack.

"Then you can't tell us why the professor sent for us?"

"He's got company," went on Washington, as if he had just thought
of that.

"Company?" exclaimed both boys.

"Yyais."

"Who is it?"

"Why, his name am Santell Roumann."

"What an odd name!" commented Mark.

"Is he a doctor?" asked Jack.

"He speaks wid a Germannes aceetnuation," said Washington.  "He
suttinly uses de most ogilistic conglomerations--"

"If he can beat you, he's a wonder," said Jack.  "But where did
he come from?"

"I 'clar t' goodness I doan't know.  All I knows is dat he jest
comed.  One day he wasn't dere, and come next day he was."

"Does the professor know him?"

"Suah!  He's a friend ob de perfesser," added Washington.  "De
perfesser was pow'ful glade t' see him."

"'Then he must be some scientist," said Mark.

"Dat's it!  He's chock full obscientistical bombasticness an'
labiodentalisms," said the colored man.

"I guess the professor wanted us to meet him and learn something
that we couldn't in college," spoke Mark.  "Well, we'll soon be
there."

"Yes," assented Jack.  "I want to find out what it's all about.
Santell Roumann--that's an odd name."

"An' he's a mighty odd man," supplemented Washington.

They reached the house a few minutes later, and went in the front
door.  The sounds of two voices came from the library.  One of
them was that of Professor Henderson. He was saying:

"I tell you it can't be done!  It is utterly impossible!  It is
madness to think of such a terrible trip!"

"And I tell you it can be done--it shall be done and you are the
very man to accomplish it," insisted the other.  "You and your
young assistants will succeed.  I know you will.  You will go
with me, and we will make the longest journey on record."




CHAPTER IV

WONDERFUL PLAN


"I wonder what they can be talking about?" asked Mark of Jack, as
