
The Grey Goose also avoided dates, but this was partly because her
brain, though intelligent, was not mathematical, and computation was
beyond her. She never got farther than "last Michaelmas," "the
Michaelmas before that," and "the Michaelmas before the Michaelmas
before that." After this her head, which was small, became confused,
and she said, "Ga, ga!" and changed the subject.

But she remembered the little Miss Jessamine, the Miss Jessamine with
the "conspicuous" hair. Her aunt, the big Miss Jessamine, said it was
her only fault. The hair was clean, was abundant, was glossy, but do
what you would with it, it never looked like other people's. And at
church, after Saturday night's wash, it shone like the best brass
fender after a Spring cleaning. In short, it was conspicuous, which
does not become a young woman--especially in church.

Those were worrying times altogether, and the Green was used for
strange purposes. A political meeting was held on it with the village
Cobbler in the chair, and a speaker who came by stage coach from the
town, where they had wrecked the bakers' shops, and discussed the
price of bread. He came a second time, by stage, but the people had
heard something about him in the meanwhile, and they did not keep him
on the Green. They took him to the pond and tried to make him swim,
which he could not do, and the whole affair was very disturbing to all
quiet and peaceable fowls. After which another man came, and preached
sermons on the Green, and a great many people went to hear him; for
those were "trying times," and folk ran hither and thither for
comfort. And then what did they do but drill the ploughboys on the
Green, to get them ready to fight the French, and teach them the
goose-step! However, that came to an end at last, for Bony was sent to
St. Helena, and the ploughboys were sent back to the plough.

Everybody lived in fear of Bony in those days, especially the naughty
children, who were kept in order during the day by threats of, "Bony
shall have you," and who had nightmares about him in the dark. They
thought he was an Ogre in a cocked hat. The Grey Goose thought he was
a fox, and that all the men of England were going out in red coats to
hunt him. It was no use to argue the point, for she had a very small
head, and when one idea got into it there was no room for another.

Besides, the Grey Goose never saw Bony, nor did the children, which
rather spoilt the terror of him, so that the Black Captain became more
effective as a Bogy with hardened offenders. The Grey Goose remembered
_his_ coming to the place perfectly. What he came for she did not
pretend to know. It was all part and parcel of the war and bad times.
He was called the Black Captain, partly because of himself, and partly
because of his wonderful black mare. Strange stories were afloat of
how far and how fast that mare could go, when her master's hand was on
her mane and he whispered in her ear. Indeed, some people thought we
might reckon ourselves very lucky if we were not out of the frying-pan
into the fire, and had not got a certain well-known Gentleman of the
Road to protect us against the French. But that, of course, made him
none the less useful to the Johnson's Nurse, when the little Miss
Johnsons were naughty.

"You leave off crying this minnit, Miss Jane, or I'll give you right
away to that horrid wicked officer. Jemima! just look out o' the
windy, if you please, and see if the Black Cap'n's a-com-ing with his
horse to carry away Miss Jane."

And there, sure enough, the Black Captain strode by, with his sword
clattering as if it did not know whose head to cut off first. But he
did not call for Miss Jane that time. He went on to the Green, where
he came so suddenly upon the eldest Master Johnson, sitting in a
puddle on purpose, in his new nankeen skeleton suit, that the young
gentleman thought judgment had overtaken him at last, and abandoned
himself to the howlings of despair. His howls were redoubled when he
was clutched from behind and swung over the Black Captain's shoulder,
but in five minutes his tears were stanched, and he was playing with
the officer's accoutrements. All of which the Grey Goose saw with her
own eyes, and heard afterwards that that bad boy had been whining to
go back to the Black Captain ever since, which showed how hardened he
was, and that nobody but Bonaparte himself could be expected to do him
any good.

But those were "trying times." It was bad enough when the pickle of a
large and respectable family cried for the Black Captain; when it came
to the little Miss Jessamine crying for him, one felt that the sooner
the French landed and had done with it the better.

The big Miss Jessamine's objection to him was that he was a soldier,
and this prejudice was shared by all the Green. "A soldier," as the
speaker from the town had observed, "is a bloodthirsty, unsettled sort
of a rascal; that the peaceable, home-loving, bread-winning citizen
can never conscientiously look on as a brother, till he has beaten his
sword into a ploughshare, and his spear into a pruning-hook."

On the other hand there was some truth in what the Postman (an old
soldier) said in reply; that the sword has to cut a way for us out of
many a scrape into which our bread-winners get us when they drive
their ploughshares into fallows that don't belong to them. Indeed,
whilst our most peaceful citizens were prosperous chiefly by means of
cotton, of sugar, and of the rise and fall of the money-market (not to
speak of such salable matters as opium, firearms, and "black ivory"),
disturbances were apt to arise in India, Africa and other outlandish
parts, where the fathers of our domestic race were making fortunes for
their families. And, for that matter, even on the Green, we did not
wish the military to leave us in the lurch, so long as there was any
fear that the French were coming.[1]

[Footnote 1: "The political men declare war, and generally for
commercial interests; but when the nation is thus embroiled with its
neighbors the soldier ... draws the sword, at the command of his
country.... One word as to thy comparison of military and commercial
persons. What manner of men be they who have supplied the Caffres with
the firearms and ammunition to maintain their savage and deplorable
wars? Assuredly they are not military.... Cease then, if thou would'st
be counted among the just, to vilify soldiers."--W. NAPIER, Lieut.
General, _November_, 1851.]

To let the Black Captain have little Miss Jessamine, however, was
another matter. Her Aunt would not hear of it; and then, to crown all,
it appeared that the Captain's father did not think the young lady
good enough for his son. Never was any affair more clearly brought to
a conclusion.

But those were "trying times;" and one moon-light night, when the Grey
Goose was sound asleep upon one leg, the Green was rudely shaken under
her by the thud of a horse's feet. "Ga, ga!" said she, putting down
the other leg, and running away.

By the time she returned to her place not a thing was to be seen or
heard. The horse had passed like a shot. But next day, there was
hurrying and skurrying and cackling at a very early hour, all about
the white house with the black beams, where Miss Jessamine lived. And
when the sun was so low, and the shadows so long on the grass that the
Grey Goose felt ready to run away at the sight of her own neck, little
Miss Jane Johnson, and her "particular friend" Clarinda, sat under the
big oak-tree on the Green, and Jane pinched Clarinda's little finger
till she found that she could keep a secret, and then she told her in
confidence that she had heard from Nurse and Jemima that Miss
Jessamine's niece had been a very naughty girl, and that that horrid
wicked officer had come for her on his black horse, and carried her
right away.

[Illustration]

"Will she never come back?" asked Clarinda.

"Oh, no!" said Jane decidedly. "Bony never brings people back."

"Not never no more?" sobbed Clarinda, for she was weak-minded, and
could not bear to think that Bony never, never let naughty people go
home again.

Next day Jane had heard more.

"He has taken her to a Green?"

"A Goose Green?" asked Clarinda.

"No. A Gretna Green. Don't ask so many questions, child," said Jane;
who, having no more to tell, gave herself airs.

Jane was wrong on one point. Miss Jessamine's niece did come back, and
she and her husband were forgiven. The Grey Goose remembered it well,
it was Michaelmastide, the Michaelmas before the Michaelmas before the
Michaelmas--but ga, ga! What does the date matter? It was autumn,
harvest-time, and everybody was so busy prophesying and praying about
the crops, that the young couple wandered through the lanes, and got
blackberries for Miss Jessamine's celebrated crab and blackberry jam,
and made guys of themselves with bryony-wreaths, and not a soul
troubled his head about them, except the children, and the Postman.
The children dogged the Black Captain's footsteps (his bubble
reputation as an Ogre having burst), clamoring for a ride on the black
mare. And the Postman would go somewhat out of his postal way to catch
the Captain's dark eye, and show that he had not forgotten how to
salute an officer.

But they were "trying times." One afternoon the black mare was
stepping gently up and down the grass, with her head at her master's
shoulder, and as many children crowded on to her silky back as if she
had been an elephant in a menagerie; and the next afternoon she
carried him away, sword and _sabre-tache_ clattering war-music at her
side, and the old Postman waiting for them, rigid with salutation, at
the four cross roads.

War and bad times! It was a hard winter, and the big Miss Jessamine
and the little Miss Jessamine (but she was Mrs. Black-Captain now),
lived very economically that they might help their poorer neighbors.
They neither entertained nor went into company, but the young lady
