world to meet one myself, so would Buckie here, wouldn't you?"

The Indian boy, whose name Tolly had thus modified, tried to assent to
this proposal by bending his little head in a stately manner, in
imitation of his dignified father.

"Well, I don't mind if I do," replied the trapper, with a twinkle of his
eyes.

Mahoghany Drake was blessed with that rare gift, the power to invest
with interest almost any subject, no matter how trivial or commonplace,
on which he chose to speak.  Whether it was the charm of a musical
voice, or the serious tone and manner of an earnest man, we cannot tell,
but certain it is, that whenever or wherever he began to talk, men
stopped to listen, and were held enchained until he had finished.

On the present occasion the trapper seated himself on a green bank that
lay close to the edge of a steep precipice, and laid his rifle across
his knees, while the boys sat down one on each side of him.

The view from the elevated spot on which they sat was most exquisite,
embracing the entire length of the valley at the other end of which the
Indian village lay, its inhabitants reduced to mere specks and its
wigwams to little cones, by distance.  Owing also to the height of the
spot, the view of surrounding mountains was extended, so that range upon
range was seen in softened perspective, while a variety of lakelets,
with their connecting watercourses, which were hidden by foliage in the
lower grounds, were now opened up to view.  Glowing sunshine glittered
on the waters and bathed the hills and valleys, deepening the near
shadows and intensifying the purple and blue of those more distant.

"It often makes me wonder," said the trapper, in a reflective tone, as
if speaking rather to himself than to his companions, "why the Almighty
has made the world so beautiful an' parfect an' allowed mankind to grow
so awful bad."

The boys did not venture to reply, but as Drake sat gazing in dreamy
silence at the far-off hills, little Trevor, who recalled some of his
conversations with the Rose of Oregon, ventured to say, "P'r'aps we'll
find out some day, though we don't understand it just now."

"True, lad, true," returned Drake.  "It would be well for us if we
always looked at it in that light, instead o' findin' fault wi' things
as they are, for it stands to reason that the Maker of all can fall into
no mistakes."

"But what about the ornithologist?" said Tolly, who had no desire that
the conversation should drift into abstruse subjects.

"Ay, ay, lad, I'm comin' to him," replied the trapper, with the humorous
twinkle that seemed to hover always about the corners of his eyes, ready
for instant development.  "Well, you must know, this was the way of it--
and it do make me larf yet when I think o' the face o' that
spider-legged critter goin' at the rate of twenty miles an hour or
thereabouts wi' that most awful-lookin' grizzly b'ar peltin' after
him.--Hist!  Look there, Tolly.  A chance for your popgun."

The trapper pointed as he spoke to a flock of wild duck that was coming
straight towards the spot on which they sat.  The "popgun" to which he
referred was one of the smooth-bore flint-lock single-barrelled
fowling-pieces which traders were in the habit of supplying to the
natives at that time, and which Unaco had lent to the boy for the day,
with his powder-horn and ornamented shot-pouch.

For the three hunters to drop behind the bank on which they had been
sitting was the work of a moment.

Young though he was, Tolly had already become a fair and ready shot.  He
selected the largest bird in the flock, covered it with a deadly aim,
and pulled the trigger.  But the click of the lock was not followed by
an explosion as the birds whirred swiftly on.

"Ah! my boy," observed the trapper, taking the gun quietly from the
boy's hand and proceeding to chip the edge of the flint, "you should
never go a-huntin' without seein' that your flint is properly fixed."

"But I did see to it," replied Tolly, in a disappointed tone, "and it
struck fire splendidly when I tried it before startin'."

"True, boy, but the thing is worn too short, an' though its edge is
pretty well, you didn't screw it firm enough, so it got drove back a bit
and the hammer-head, as well as the flint, strikes the steel, d'ye see?
There now, prime it again, an' be sure ye wipe the pan before puttin' in
the powder.  It's not worth while to be disap'inted about so small a
matter.  You'll git plenty more chances.  See, there's another flock
comin'.  Don't hurry, lad.  If ye want to be a good hunter always keep
cool, an' take time.  Better lose a chance than hurry.  A chance lost
you see, is only a chance lost, but blazin' in a hurry is a bad lesson
that ye've got to unlarn."

The trapper's advice was cut short by the report of Tolly's gun, and
next moment a fat duck, striking the ground in front of them, rolled
fluttering to their feet.

"Not badly done, Tolly," said the trapper, with a nod, as he reseated
himself on the bank, while Leaping Buck picked up the bird, which was by
that time dead, and the young sportsman recharged his gun; "just a
leetle too hurried.  If you had taken only half a second more time to
put the gun to your shoulder, you'd have brought the bird to the ground
dead; and you boys can't larn too soon that you should never give
needless pain to critters that you've got to kill.  You must shoot, of
course, or you'd starve; but always make sure of killin' at once, an'
the only way to do that is to keep cool an' take time.  You see, it
ain't the aim you take that matters so much, as the coolness an'
steadiness with which ye put the gun to your shoulder.  If you only do
that steadily an' without hurry, the gun is sure to p'int straight
for'ard an' the aim'll look arter itself.  Nevertheless, it was smartly
done, lad, for it's a difficult shot when a wild duck comes straight for
your head like a cannon-ball."

"But what about the ornithologist;" said Tolly, who, albeit well pleased
at the trapper's complimentary remarks, did not quite relish his
criticism.

"Yes, yes; I'm comin' to that.  Well, as I was sayin', it makes me larf
yet, when I thinks on it.  How he did run, to be sure!  Greased
lightnin' could scarce have kep' up wi' him."

"But where was he a-runnin' to, an' why?" asked little Trevor,
impatiently.

"Now, you leetle boy," said Drake, with a look of grave remonstrance,
"don't you go an' git impatient.  Patience is one o' the backwoods
vartues, without which you'll never git on at all.  If you don't
cultivate patience you may as well go an' live in the settlements or the
big cities--where it don't much matter what a man is--but it'll be no
use to stop in the wilderness.  There's Leapin' Buck, now, a-sittin' as
quiet as a Redskin warrior on guard!  Take a lesson from him, lad, an'
restrain yourself.  Well, as I was goin' to say, I was out settin' my
traps somewheres about the head-waters o' the Yellowstone river at the
time when I fell in wi' the critter.  I couldn't rightly make out what
he was, for, though I've seed mostly all sorts o' men in my day, I'd
never met in wi' one o' this sort before.  It wasn't his bodily shape
that puzzled me, though that was queer enough, but his occupation that
staggered me.  He was a long, thin, spider-shaped article that seemed to
have run to seed--all stalk with a frowsy top, for his hair was long an'
dry an' fly-about.  I'm six-futt one myself, but my step was a mere joke
to his stride!  He seemed split up to the neck, like a pair o' human
compasses, an' his clo's fitted so tight that he might have passed for a
livin' skeleton!

"Well, it was close upon sundown, an' I was joggin' along to my tent in
the bush when I came to an openin' where I saw the critter down on one
knee an' his gun up takin' aim at somethin'.  I stopped to let him have
his shot, for I count it a mortal sin to spoil a man's sport, an' I
looked hard to see what it was he was goin' to let drive at, but never a
thing could I see, far or near, except a small bit of a bird about the
size of a big bee, sittin' on a branch not far from his nose an' cockin'
its eye at him as much as to say, `Well, you air a queer 'un!'
`Surely,' thought I, `he ain't a-goin' to blaze at _that_!'  But I'd
scarce thought it when he did blaze at it an' down it came flop on its
back, as dead as mutton!

"`Well, stranger,' says I, goin' for'ard, `you do seem to be hard up for
victuals when you'd shoot a small thing like that!'  `Not at all, my
good man,' says he--an' the critter had a kindly smile an' a sensible
face enough--`you must know that I am shootin' birds for scientific
purposes.  I am an ornithologist.'

"`Oh!' say I, for I didn't rightly know what else to say to that.

"`Yes,' says he; `an' see here.'

"Wi' that he opens a bag he had on his back an' showed me a lot o'
birds, big an' small, that he'd been shootin'; an' then he pulls out a
small book, in which he'd been makin' picturs of 'em--an' r'ally I was
raither took wi' that for the critter had got 'em down there almost as
good as natur'.  They actooally looked as if they was alive!

"`Shut the book, sir,' says I, `or they'll all escape!'

"It was only a small joke I meant, but the critter took it for a big 'un
an' larfed at it till he made me half ashamed.

"`D'ye know any of these birds?' he axed, arter we'd looked at a lot of
'em.

"`Know 'em?' says I; `I should think I does!  Why, I've lived among 'em
ever since I was a babby!'

"`Indeed!' says he, an' he got quite excited, `how interestin'!  An' do
you know anythin' about their habits?'

"`If you mean by that their ways o' goin' on,' says I, `there's hardly a
thing about 'em that I don't know, except what they _think_, an'
sometimes I've a sort o' notion I could make a pretty fair guess at that
too.'

"`Will you come to my camp and spend the night with me?' he asked,
gettin' more an' more excited.

"`No, stranger, I won't,' says I; `but if you'll come to mine I'll feed
you an' make you heartily welcome,' for somehow I'd took quite a fancy
to the critter.

"`I'll go,' says he, an' he went an' we had such a night of it!  He
didn't let me have a wink o' sleep till pretty nigh daylight the next
mornin', an' axed me more questions about birds an' beasts an' fishes
than I was iver axed before in the whole course o' my life--an' it
warn't yesterday I was born.  I began to feel quite like a settlement
boy at school.  An' he set it all down, too, as fast as I could speak,
in the queerest hand-writin' you ever did see.  At last I couldn't stand
it no longer.

"`Mister Ornithologist' says I.

"`Well,' says he.

"`There's a pecooliar beast in them parts,' says I, `'as has got some
pretty stiff an' settled habits.'

"`Is there?' says he, wakin' up again quite fresh, though he had been
growin' sleepy.

"`Yes,' says I, `an' it's a obstinate sort o' brute that won't change
its habits for nobody.  One o' these habits is that it turns in of a
night quite reg'lar an' has a good snooze before goin' to work next day.
Its name is Mahoghany Drake, an' that's me, so I'll bid you good-night,
stranger.'

"Wi' that I knocked the ashes out o' my pipe, stretched myself out wi'
my feet to the fire, an' rolled my blanket round me.  The critter larfed
again at this as if it was a great joke, but he shut up his book, put it
and the bag o' leetle birds under his head for a pillow, spread himself
out over the camp like a great spider that was awk'ard in the use o' its
limbs, an' went off to sleep even before I did--an' that was sharp
practice, let me tell you.

"Well," continued the trapper, clasping his great bony hands over one of
his knees, and allowing the lines of humour to play on his visage, while
the boys drew nearer in open-eyed expectancy, "we slep' about three
hours, an' then had a bit o' breakfast, after which we parted, for he
said he knew his way back to the camp, where he left his friends; but
the poor critter didn't know nothin'--'cept ornithology.  He lost
himself an took to wanderin' in a circle arter I left him.  I came to
know it 'cause I struck his trail the same arternoon, an' there could be
no mistakin' it, the length o' stride bein' somethin' awful!  So I
followed it up.

"I hadn't gone far when I came to a place pretty much like this, as I
said before, and when I was lookin' at the view--for I'm fond of a fine
view, it takes a man's mind off trappin' an' victuals somehow--I heerd a
most awful screech, an' then another.  A moment later an' the
ornithologist busted out o' the bushes with his long legs goin' like the
legs of a big water-wagtail.  He was too fur off to see the look of his
face, but his hair was tremendous to behold.  When he saw the precipice
before him he gave a most horrible yell, for he knew that he couldn't
escape that way from whatever was chasin' him.  I couldn't well help
him, for there was a wide gully between him an' me, an' it was too fur
off for a fair shot.  Howsever, I stood ready.  Suddenly I seed the
critter face right about an' down on one knee like a pair o' broken
compasses; up went the shot-gun, an' at the same moment out busted a
great old grizzly b'ar from the bushes.  Crack! went my rifle at once,
but I could see that the ball didn't hurt him much, although it hit him
fair on the head.  Loadin' in hot haste, I obsarved that the
ornithologist sat like a post till that b'ar was within six foot of him,
when he let drive both barrels of his popgun straight into its face.
Then he jumped a one side with a spurt like a grasshopper, an' the b'ar
tumbled heels over head and got up with an angry growl to rub its face,
then it made a savage rush for'ard and fell over a low bank, jumped up
again, an' went slap agin a face of rock.  I seed at once that it was
blind.  The small shot used by the critter for his leetle birds had put
out both its eyes, an' it went blunderin' about while the ornithologist
kep' well out of its way.  I knew he was safe, so waited to see what
he'd do, an' what d'ye think he did?"

"Shoved his knife into him," suggested Tolly Trevor, in eager anxiety.

"What! shove his knife into a healthy old b'ar with nothin' gone but his
sight?  No, lad, he did do nothing so mad as that, but he ran coolly up
to it an' screeched in its face.  Of course the b'ar went straight at
the sound, helter-skelter, and the ornithologist turned an' ran to the
edge o' the precipice, screechin' as he went.  When he got there he
pulled up an' darted a one side, but the b'ar went slap over, an' I
believe I'm well within the mark when I say that that b'ar turned five
complete somersaults before it got to the bottom, where it came to the
ground with a whack that would have busted an elephant.  I don't think
we found a whole bone in its carcass when the ornithologist helped me to
cut it up that night in camp."

"Well done!" exclaimed little Trevor, with enthusiasm, "an' what came o'
the orny-what-d'ye-callum?"

"That's more than I can tell, lad.  He went off wi' the b'ar's claws to
show to his friends, an' I never saw him again.  But look there, boys,"
continued the trapper in a suddenly lowered tone of voice, while he
threw forward and cocked his rifle, "d'ye see our supper?"

"What?  Where?" exclaimed Tolly, in a soft whisper, straining his eyes
in the direction indicated.

The sharp crack of the trapper's rifle immediately followed, and a fine
buck lay prone upon the ground.

"'Twas an easy shot," said Drake, recharging his weapon, "only a man
needs a leetle experience before he can fire down a precipice correctly.
Come along, boys."



CHAPTER SEVENTEEN.

Nothing further worth mentioning occurred to the hunters that day, save
that little Tolly Trevor was amazed--we might almost say petrified--by
the splendour and precision of the trapper's shooting, besides which he
was deeply impressed with the undercurrent of what we may style grave
fun, coupled with calm enthusiasm, which characterised the man, and the
utter absence of self-assertion or boastfulness.

But if the remainder of the day was uneventful, the stories round the
camp-fire more than compensated him and his friend Leaping Buck.  The
latter was intimately acquainted with the trapper, and seemed to derive
more pleasure from watching the effect of his anecdotes on his new
friend than in listening to them himself.  Probably this was in part
owing to the fact that he had heard them all before more than once.

The spot they had selected for their encampment was the summit of a
projecting crag, which was crowned with a little thicket, and surrounded
on three sides by sheer precipices.  The neck of rock by which it was
reached was free from shrubs, besides being split across by a deep chasm
of several feet in width, so that it formed a natural fortress, and the
marks of old encampments seemed to indicate that it had been used as a
camping-place by the red man long before his white brother--too often
his white foe--had appeared in that western wilderness to disturb him.
The Indians had no special name for the spot, but the roving trappers
who first came to it had named it the Outlook, because from its summit a
magnificent view of nearly the whole region could be obtained.  The
great chasm or fissure already mentioned descended sheer down, like the
neighbouring precipices, to an immense depth, so that the Outlook, being
a species of aerial island, was usually reached by a narrow plank which
bridged the chasm.  It had stood many a siege in times past, and when
used as a fortress, whether by white hunters or savages, the plank
bridge was withdrawn, and the place rendered--at least esteemed--
impregnable.

When Mahoghany Drake and his young friends came up to the chasm a little
before sunset Leaping Buck took a short run and bounded clear over it.

"Ha!  I knowed he couldn't resist the temptation," said Mahoghany, with
a quiet chuckle, "an' it's not many boys--no, nor yet men--who could
jump that.  I wouldn't try it myself for a noo rifle--no, though ye was
to throw in a silver-mounted powder-horn to the bargain."

"But you _have_ jumped it?" cried the Indian boy, turning round with a
gleeful face.

"Ay, lad, long ago, and then I was forced to, when runnin' for my life.
A man'll do many a deed when so sitooate that he couldn't do in cold
blood.  Come, come, young feller," he added, suddenly laying his heavy
hand on little Trevor's collar and arresting him, "you wasn't thinkin'
o' tryin' it was ye?"

"Indeed I was, and I _think_ I could manage it," said the foolishly
ambitious Tolly.

"Thinkin' is not enough, boy," returned the trapper, with a grave shake
of the head.  "You should always make _sure_.  Suppose you was wrong in
your thinkin', now, who d'ee think would go down there to pick up the
bits of 'ee an' carry them home to your mother."

"But I haven't got a mother," said Tolly.

"Well, your father, then."

"But I haven't got a father."

"So much the more reason," returned the trapper, in a softened tone,
"that you should take care o' yourself, lest you should turn out to be
the last o' your race.  Come, help me to carry this plank.  After we're
over I'll see you jump on safe ground, and if you can clear enough,
mayhap I'll let 'ee try the gap.  Have you a steady head?"

"Ay, like a rock," returned Tolly, with a grin.

"See that you're _sure_, lad, for if you ain't I'll carry you over."

In reply to this Tolly ran nimbly over the plank bridge like a
tight-rope dancer.  Drake followed, and they were all soon busily
engaged clearing a space on which to encamp, and collecting firewood.

"Tell me about your adventure at the time you jumped the gap,
Mahoghany," begged little Trevor, when the first volume of smoke arose
from their fire and went straight up like a pillar into the calm air.

"Not now, lad.  Work first, talk afterwards.  That's my motto."

"But work is over now--the fire lighted and the kettle on," objected
Tolly.

"Nay, lad, when you come to be an old hunter you'll look on supper as
about the most serious work o' the day.  When that's over, an' the pipe
a-goin', an' maybe a little stick-whittlin' for variety, a man may let
his tongue wag to some extent."

Our small hero was fain to content himself with this reply, and for the
next half-hour or more the trio gave their undivided attention to steaks
from the loin of the fat buck and slices from the breast of the wild
duck which had fallen to Tolly's gun.  When the pipe-and-stick-whittling
period arrived, however, the trapper disposed his bulky length in front
of the fire, while his young admirers lay down beside him.

The stick-whittling, it may be remarked, devolved upon the boys, while
the smoking was confined to the man.

"I can't see why it is," observed Tolly, when the first whiffs curled
from Mahoghany Drake's lips, "that you men are so strong in discouragin'
us boys from smokin'.  You keep it all selfishly to yourselves, though
Buckie an' I would give anythin' to be allowed to try a whiff now an'
then.  Paul Bevan's just like you--won't hear o' _me_ touchin' a pipe,
though he smokes himself like a wigwam wi' a greenwood fire!"

Drake pondered a little before replying.

"It would never do, you know," he said, at length, "for you boys to do
'zackly as we men does."

"Why not?" demanded Tolly, developing an early bud of independent
thought.

"Why, 'cause it wouldn't" replied Drake.  Then, feeling that his answer
was not a very convincing argument he added, "You see, boys ain't men,
no more than men are boys, an' what's good for the one ain't good for
the tother."

"I don't see that" returned the radical-hearted Tolly.  "Isn't eatin',
an' drinkin', an' sleepin', an' walkin', an' runnin', an' talkin', an'
thinkin', an' huntin', equally good for boys and men?  If all these
things is good for us both, why not smokin'?"

"That's more than I can tell 'ee, lad," answered the honest trapper,
with a somewhat puzzled look.

If Mahoghany Drake had thought the matter out a little more closely he
might perhaps have seen that smoking _is_ as good for boys as for men--
or, what comes to much the same thing, is equally bad for both of them!
But the sturdy trapper liked smoking; hence, like many wiser men, he did
not care to think the matter out.  On the contrary, he changed the
subject, and, as the change was very much for the better in the
