to repress the sobbing scream of fury that came to her throat; and the
struggles with her gasping breath, the surging of the blood in her ears,
hindered her from hearing or seeing anything for some seconds,
though she kept her station. By the time her perceptions had cleared
themselves, Martin, cap in hand, was in the lane below, listening
deferentially to the two gentlemen, who were assuring him that inquiry
had been made, and a guard carefully set at the fugitive could have
passed those, or be able to do so. She must certainly be hidden
somewhere near home, and Martin had better warn all his friends against
hiding her, unless they wished to be hung up on the thresholds of their
burning farm-steads. Martin bowed, and thought the fellows would know
their own interest and Mademoiselle's better.

'Well,' said the Chevalier, 'we must begin without loss of time. My son
has brought down a set of fellows here, who are trained to ferret out
heretics. Not a runaway weasel cold escape them! We will set them on as
soon as ever they have taken a bit of supper up there at the Chateau;
and do you come up with us just to show them the way across to
Leonard's. That's no unlikely place for her to lurk in, as you said this
morning, good fellow.'

It was the most remote farm from that of Martin, and Eustacie felt how
great were his services, even while she flushed with anger to hear him
speaking of her as Mademoiselle. He was promising to follow immediately
to the castle, to meet _ces Messieurs_ there almost as soon as they
could arrive, but excusing himself from accompanying them, by the need
of driving home the big bull, whom no one else could manage.

They consented, and rode on. Martin watched them out of sight, then
sprang up by some stepping-stones in the bank, a little below where
Eustacie sat, and came crackling through the boughs to where she was
crouching down, with fierce glittering eyes and panting breath, like a
wild animal ready to spring.

'Madame has heard,' said Martin, under his breath.

'If I have heard! Oh that I were a man, to slay them where they stood!
Martin, Martin! you will not betray me. Some day WE will reward you.'

'Madame need not have said THAT to me,' said Martin, rather hurt. 'I am
only thinking what she can do. Alas! I fear that she must remain in this
covert till it is dark, for these men's eyes are all on the alert. At
dark, I or Lucette will come and find a shelter for her for the night.'

Long, long, then, did Eustacie sit, muffled in her gray cloak, shrinking
together to shelter herself from the sunset chill of early spring, but
shuddering more with horror than with cold as the cruel cold-blooded
words she had heard recurred to her, and feeling as if she were fast
within a net, every outlet guarded against her, and search everywhere;
yet still with the indomitable determination to dare and suffer to the
utmost ere that which was dearer than her own life should come into
peril from her enemies.

The twilight closed in, the stars came out, sounds of life died away,
and still she sat on, becoming almost torpid in the cold darkness, until
at length she heard the low call of Lucette, 'MADAME! AH!_la pauvre
Madame_.' She started up, so stiff that she could hardly more, and only
guided by the voice to feel her way through the hedgerow in the right
direction. Another moment, and Lucette's warn arms had received her; and
she was guided, scarce knowing how or where, in cautious silence to the
farmyard, and into the house, where a most welcome sight, a huge fire,
blazed cheerfully on the hearth, and Martin himself held open the door
for her. The other occupants of the kitchen were the sleeping child
in its wooden cradle, some cocks and hens upon the rafters, and a big
sheep-dog before the fire.

The warmth, and the chicken that Lucette had killed and dressed, brought
the colour back to the exhausted wanderer's cheek, and enabled her again
to hold council for her safety. It was plain, as Martin had found in
conversation with the men-at-arms, that precautions had been taken
against her escaping in any of the directions where she might hope to
have reached friends. Alone she could not go, and any escort sufficient
to protect her would assuredly be stopped at the first town;
besides which, collecting it in secret was impossible under present
circumstances, and it would be sure to be at once overtaken and
demolished by the Chevalier Narcisse's well-armed followers. Martin,
therefore, saw no alternative but for her to lurk about in such
hiding-places as her faithful vassals could afford her, until the search
should blow over, and the vigilance of her uncle and cousin relax. Hope,
the high-spirited hope of early youth, looked beyond to indefinite but
infinite possibility. Anything was better than the shame and horror
of yielding, and Eustacie trusted herself with all her heart for the
present, fancying, she knew not what, the future.

Indeed, the Vendean fidelity has often been tested, and she made full
proof of it among the lanes, copses, and homesteads of her own broad
lands. The whole country was a network of deep lanes, sunk between
impenetrable hedgerows, inclosing small fields, orchards, and thickets,
and gently undulating in low hills and shallow valleys, interspersed
with tall wasp-waisted windmills airily waving their arms on the top
of lofty masts. It was partitioned into small farms, inhabited by a
simple-hearted peasantry, religious and diligent, with a fair amount of
rural wealth and comfort. Their love for their lords was loyally warm,
and Eustacie monopolized it, from their detestation of her uncle's
exactions; they would risk any of the savage punishments with which they
were threatened for concealing her; and as one by one it was needful to
take them into the secret, so as to disarm suspicion, and she was passed
from one farm to another, each proved his faithful attachment, and
though himself repaid by her thankful smile and confiding manner.

The Chevalier and his son searched vigorously. On the slightest
suspicion, they came down to the farm, closed up the outlets, threatened
the owners, turned out the house, and the very place they had last
searched would become her quarters on the next night! Messages always
had warned her in time. Intelligence was obtained by Martin, who
contrived to remain a confidential agent, and warnings were dispatched
to her by many a strange messenger--by little children, by old women, or
even by the village innocent.

The most alarming days were those when she was not the avowed object
of the chase, but when the pursuit of game rendered the coverts in the
woods and fields unsafe, and the hounds might lead to her discovery. On
one of these occasions Martin locked her up in the great hayloft of the
convent, where she could actually hear the chants in the chapel, and
distinguish the chatter of the lay-sisters in the yard. Another time, in
conjunction with the sacristan, he bestowed her in the great seigneurial
tribune (or squire's pew) in the village church, a tall carved box,
where she was completely hidden; and the only time when she had failed
to obtain warning beforehand, she stood kneading bread at a tub in
Martin's cottage, while the hunt passed by, and a man-at-arms looked in
and questioned the master on the last traces of the runaway.

It was seldom possible to see Mere Perrine, who was carefully watched,
under the conviction that she must know where her nursling was; but one
evening Veronique ventured up to Martin's farm, trusting to tidings that
the gentlemen had been Eustacie's only secure harbour; and when, in
a bright evening gleam of the setting sun from beneath the clouds,
Veronique came in sight of her Lady, the Queen's favourite, it was to
see her leading by a string a little shaggy cow, with a bell round its
neck, her gray cloak huddled round her, though dank with wet, a long
lock of black hair streaming over her brow, her garments clinging with
damp, her bare ankles scratched with thorns, her heavy SABOTS covered
with mire, her cheeks pale with cold and wet.

The contrast overwhelmed poor Veronique. She dropped on her knees,
sobbing as if her heart would break, and declaring that this was what
the Abbess had feared; her Lady was fast killing herself.

'Hush! Veronique,' said Eustacie; 'that is all folly. I am wet and weary
now, but oh! if you knew how much sweeter to me life is now than it
was, shut up down there, with my fears. See,' and she held up a bunch
of purple pasque-flowers and wood-sorrel, 'this is what I found in the
wood, growing out of a rugged old dead root; and just by, sheltered
by the threefold leaves of the alleluia-flower, was a bird's nest, the
mother-bird on her eggs, watching me with the wise black eye that saw I
would not hurt her. And it brought back the words I had heard long ago,
of the good God caring for the sparrows; and I knew He would care the
more for me and mine, because I have not where to lay my head.'

'Alas!' sobbed Veronique, 'now she is getting to be a saint outright.
She will be sure to die! Ah, Madame--dear Madame! do but listen to me.
If you did but know how Madame de Bellaise is afflicting herself on your
account! She sent for me--ah! do not be angry, dear Lady?'

'I wish to hear nothing about her,' said Eustacie.

'Nay, listen, _de grace_--one moment, Madame! She has wept, she has
feared for you, all the lay-sisters say so. She takes no pleasure in
hawking, nor in visiting; and she did not eat more than six of Soeur
Bernardine's best conserves. She does nothing but watch for tidings of
Madame. And she sent for me, as I told you, and conjured me, if I knew
where you were, or had any means of finding out, to implore you to trust
to her. She will swear on all the relics in the chapel never to give a
hint to Messieurs les Chevaliers if only you would trust her, and not
slay yourself with all this dreadful wandering.'

'Never!' said Eustacie; 'she said too much!'

'Ah! but she declares that, had she known the truth, she never would
have said that. Ah, yes, Madame, the Abbess is good!' And Veronique,
holding her mistress's cloak to secure a hearing, detailed the Abbess'
plan for lodging her niece in secret apartments within the thickness
of the convent walls, where Mere Perrine could be with her, and every
sacred pledge should be given that could remove her fears.

'And could they make me believe them, so that the doubt and dread would
not kill me in themselves?' said Eustacie.

'But it is death--certain death, as it is. Oh, if Madame would hear
reason!--but she is headstrong! She will grieve when it is too late!'

'Listen, Veronique. I have a far better plan. The sacristan has a sister
who weaves red handkerchiefs at Chollet. She will receive me, and keep
me as long as there is need. Martin is to take me in his cart when he
carries the hay to the garrison. I shall be well hidden, and within
reach of your mother. And then, when my son is once come--then all will
be well! The peasants will rise in behalf of their young Lord, though
not for a poor helpless woman. No one will dare to dispute his claim,
when I have appealed to the King; and then, Veronique, you shall come
back to me, and all will be well!'

Veronique only began to wail aloud at her mistress' obstinacy. Martin
came up, and rudely silenced her, and said afterwards to his wife, 'Have
a care! That girl has--I verily believe--betrayed her Lady once; and if
she do not do so again, from pure pity and faintness of heart, I shall
be much surprised.'




CHAPTER XVII. THE GHOSTS OF THE TEMPLARS



 'Tis said, as through the aisles they passed,
 They heard strange voices on the blast,
 And through the cloister galleries small,
 Which at mid-height thread the chancel wall,
 Loud sobs and laughter louder ran,
 And voices unlike the voice of man,
 As if the fiends kept holiday.
                    Scott, LAY OF THE LAST MINSTREL


'Ill news, Martin, I see by your look!' cried Eustacie, starting to her
feet from the heap of straw on which she was sitting in his cowhouse,
one early April day, about seven weeks since her evasion from the
convent.

'Not so, I hope, Madame, but I do not feel at ease. Monsieur has not
sent for me, nor told me his plans for the morrow, and I much doubt me
whether that bode not a search here. Now I see a plan, provided Madame
would trust herself to a Huguenot.'

'They would guard me for my husband's sake.'

'And could Madame walk half a league, as far as the Grange du Temple?
There live Matthieu Rotrou and his wife, who have, they say, baffled
a hundred times the gendarmes who sought their ministers. No one ever
found a pastor, they say, when Rotrou had been of the congregation; and
if they can do so much for an old preacher with a long tongue, surely
they can for a sweet young lady; and if they could shelter her just for
tomorrow, till the suspicion is over, then would I come for Madame with
my cart, and carry her into Chollet among the trusses of hay, as we had
fixed.'

Eustacie was already tying her cloak, and asking for Lucette; but
she was grieved to hear that Martin had sent her to vespers to disarm
suspicion, and moreover that he meant not to tell her of his new device.
'The creature is honest enough,' he said, 'but the way to be safe with
women is not to let them know.'

He cut short all messages and expressions of gratitude, and leading
Eustacie to a small stream, he made her creep along its course, with her
feet in the water so as to be sheltered by the boughs that hung over the
banks, while he used his ling strides to enable him to double back
and enter into conversation with passers-by, quite of the track of the
Grange du Temple, but always telling her where he should join her again,
and leaving with her the great dog, whom she had come to regard as a
friend and protector. Leaving the brook, he conducted her beneath hedges
and by lonely woodland paths beyond the confines of her own property,
to a secluded valley, so shut in by wooded hills that she had not been
aware of its existence. Through an extensive orchard, she at length,
when nearly spent with the walk, beheld the cluster of stone buildings,
substantial as the erections of religious orders were wont to be.

Martin found a seat for her, where she might wait while he went on alone
to the house, and presently returned with both the good people of the
farm. They were more offhand and less deferential than were her own
people, but were full of kindliness. They were middle-aged folk, most
neatly clad, and with a grave, thoughtful look about them, as if
life were a much heavier charge to them than to their light-hearted
neighbours.

'A fair day to you, Madame,' said the farmer, doffing his wide-flapped
hat. 'I am glad to serve a sufferer for the truth's sake.'

'My husband was,' faltered Eustacie.

'AH! _la pauvre_,' cried the good woman, pressing forward as she saw how
faint, heated, and exhausted was the wanderer. 'Come in, _ma pauvrette_.
Only a bride at the Bartholomew! Alas! There, lean on me, my dear.'

To be _tutoyee_ by the Fermiere Rotrou was a shock; yet the kind manner
was comfortable, and Eustacie suffered herself to be led into
the farm-house, where, as the dame observed, she need not fear
chance-comers, for they lived much to themselves, and no one would be
about till their boy Robinet came in with the cows. She might rest and
eat there in security, and after that they would find a hiding-place for
her--safe as the horns of the altar--for a night or two; only for two
nights at most.

'Nor do I ask more,' said Eustacie. 'Then Martin will come for me.'

'Ah, I or Blaise, or whichever of us can do it with least suspicion.'

'She shall meet you here,' added Rotrou.

'All right, good man; I understand; it is best I should not know where
you hide her. Those rogues have tricks that make it as well to know
nothing. Farewell, Madame, I commend you to all the saints till I come
for you on Monday morning.'

Eustacie gave him her hand to kiss, and tried to thank him, but somehow
her heart sank, and she felt more lonely than ever, when entirely cast
loose among these absolute strangers, than amongst her own vassals. Even
the farm-kitchen, large, stone-built, and scrupulously clean, seemed
strange and dreary after the little, smoky, earth-built living-rooms in
which her peasantry were content to live, and she never had seemed to
herself so completely desolate; but all the time she was so wearied out
with her long and painful walk, that she had no sooner taken some food
than she began to doze in her chair.

'Father,' said the good wife, 'we had better take _la pauvrette_ to her
rest at once.'

'Ah! must I go any farther?' sighed Eustacie.

'It is but a few fields beyond the yard, _ma petite_,' said the good
woman consolingly; 'and it will be safer to take you there ere we need a
light.'

The sun had just set on a beautiful evening of a spring that happily for
Eustacie had been unusually warm and mild, when they set forth, the dame
having loaded her husband with a roll of bedding, and herself taking a
pitcher of mild and a loaf of bread, whilst Eustacie, as usual, carried
her own small parcel of clothes and jewels. The way was certainly
not long to any one less exhausted than she; it was along a couple of
fields, and then through a piece of thicket, where Rotrou held back the
boughs and his wife almost dragged her on with kind encouraging words,
till they came up to a stone ivy-covered wall, and coasting along it
to a tower, evidently a staircase turret. Here Rotrou, holding aside an
enormous bush of ivy, showed the foot of a winding staircase, and his
wife assured her that she would not have far to climb.

She knew where she was now. She had heard of the old Refectory of the
Knights Templars. Partly demolished by the hatred of the people upon the
abolition of the Order, it had ever since lain waste, and had become the
centre of all the ghostly traditions of the country; the locality of
all the most horrid tales of REVENANTS told under the breath at Dame
Perrine's hearth or at recreation hour at Bellaise. Her courage was not
proof against spiritual terrors. She panted and leant against the wall,
as she faintly exclaimed, 'The Temple--there--and alone!'

'Nay, Lady, methought as _Monsieur votre mari_ knew the true light, you
would fear no vain terror nor power of darkness.'

Should these peasants--these villeins--be bold, and see the descendant
of the 'bravest of knights,' the daughter of the house of Ribaumont,
afraid? She rallied herself, and replied manfully, 'I FEAR not, no!' but
then, womanfully, 'But it is the Temple! It is haunted! Tell me what I
must expect.'

'I tell you truly, Madame,' said Rotrou; 'none whom I have sheltered
here have seen aught. On the faith of a Christian, no evil spirit--no
ghost--has ever alarmed them; but they were fortified by prayer and
psalm.'

'I do pray! I have a psalm-book,' said Eustacie, and she added to
herself, 'No, they shall never see that I fear. After all, REVENANTS can
do nothing worse than scare one; they cannot touch one; the saints and
angels will not let them--and my uncle would do much worse.'

But to climb those winding stairs, and resign herself to be left alone
with the Templars for the night, was by far the severest trial that had
yet befallen the poor young fugitive. As her tire feet dragged up the
crumbling steps, her memory reverted to the many tales of the sounds
heard by night within those walls--church chants turning into diabolical
songs, and bewildered travelers into thickets and morasses, where they
had been found in the morning, shuddering as they told of a huge white
monk, with clanking weapons, and a burning cross of fire printed on his
shoulder and breast, who stood on the walls and hurled a shrieking babe
into the abyss. Were such spectacles awaiting her? Must she bear them?
And could her endurance hold out? Our Lady be her aid, and spare her in
her need!

At the top of the stairs she found Rotrou's hand, ready to help her
out on a stone floor, quite dark, but thickly covered, as she felt and
smelt, with trusses of hay, between which a glimmering light showed a
narrow passage. A few steps, guided by Rotrou's hand, brought her out
into light again, and she found herself in a large chamber, with the
stone floor broken away in some places, and with a circular window,
thickly veiled with ivy, but still admitting a good deal of evening
light.

It was in fact a chamber over the vaulted refectory of the knights. The
walls and vaults still standing in their massive solidity, must have
tempted some peasant, or mayhap some adventurer, rudely to cover in the
roof (which had of course been stripped of its leading), and thus in
the unsuspected space to secure a hiding-place, often for less innocent
commodities than the salt, which the iniquitous and oppressive _gabelle_
had always led the French peasant to smuggle, ever since the days of the
first Valois. The room had a certain appearance of comfort; there was a
partition across it, a hearth with some remains of wood-ashes, a shelf,
holding a plate, cup, lamp, and a few other necessaries; and altogether
the aspect of the place was so unlike what Eustacie had expected, that
she almost forgot the Templar as she saw the dame begin to arrange
a comfortable-looking couch for her wearied limbs. Yet she felt very
unwilling to let them depart, and even ventured on faltering out the
inquiry whether the good woman could not stay with her,--she would
reward her largely.

'It is for the love of Heaven, Madame, not for gain,' said Nanon Rotrou,
rather stiffly. 'If you were ill, or needed me, all must then give way;
but for me to be absent this evening would soon be reported around the
village down there, for there are many who would find occasion against
us.' But, by way of consolation, they gave her a whistle, and showed
her that the window of their cottage was much nearer to a loophole-slit
looking towards the east than she had fancied. The whistle perpetrated
a mist unearthly screech, a good deal like that of an owl, but more
discordant, and Nanon assured her that the sound would assuredly break
her slumbers, and bring her in a few minutes at any moment of need.
In fact, the noise was so like the best authenticated accounts of the
shrieks indulged in by the spirits of the Temple, that Eustacie had
wit enough to suspect that it might be the foundation of some of the
stories; and with that solace to her alarms, she endured the departure
of her hosts, Nanon promising a visit in the early morning.

The poor child was too weary to indulge in many terrors, the beneficent
torpor of excessive fatigue was upon her, happily bringing slumberous
oblivion instead of feverish restlessness. She strove to repeat her
accustomed orisons; but sleep was too strong for her, and she was soon
lying dreamlessly upon the clean homely couch prepared for her.

When she awoke, it was with a start. The moon was shining in through the
circular window, making strange white shapes on the floor, all quivering
with the shadows of the ivy sprays. It looked strange and eerie enough
at the moment, but she understood it the next, and would have been
reassured if she had not become aware that there was a low sound, a
tramp, tramp, below her. 'Gracious saints! The Templar! Have mercy on
me! Oh! I was too sleepy to pray! Guard me from being driven wild by
fright!' She sat upright, with wide-spread eyes, and, finding that she
herself was in the moonlight, through some opening in the roof, she took
refuge in the darkest corner, though aware as she crouched there,
that if this were indeed the Templar, concealment would be vain, and
remembering suddenly that she was out of reach of the loophole-window.

And therewith there was a tired sound in the tread, as if the Templar
found his weird a very length one; then a long heavy breath, with
something so essentially human in its sound that the fluttering heart
beat more steadily. If reason told her that the living were more
perilous to her than the dead, yet feeling infinitely preferred them! It
might be Nanon Rotrou after all; then how foolish to be crouching there
in a fright! It was rustling through the hay. No-no Nanon; it is a
male figure, it has a long cloak on. Ah! it is in the moonlight-silver
hair--silver beard. The Templar! Fascinated with dismay, yet calling to
mind that no ghost has power unless addressed, she sat still, crossing
herself in silence, but unable to call to mind any prayer or invocation
save a continuous 'Ave Mary,' and trying to restrain her gasping breath,
lest, if he were not the Templar after all, he might discover her
presence.

He moved about, took off his cloak, laid it down near the hay, then his
cap, not a helmet after all, and there was no fiery cross.

He was in the gloom again, and she heard him moving much as though he
were pulling down the hay to form a bed. Did ghosts ever do anything so
sensible? If he were an embodied spirit, would it be possible to
creep past him and escape while he lay asleep? She was almost becoming
familiarized with the presence, and the supernatural terror was passing
off into a consideration of resources, when, behold, he was beginning to
sing. To sing was the very way the ghosts began ere they came to their
devilish outcries. 'Our Lady keep it from bringing frenzy. But hark!
hark!' It was not one of the chants, it was a tune and words heard
in older times of her life; it was the evening hymn, that the little
husband and wife had been wont to sing to the Baron in the Chateau de
Leurre--Marot's version of the 4th Psalm.

                     '_Plus de joie m'est donnee_
                      _Par ce moyen, O Dieu Tres-Haut_,
                      _Que n'ont ceux qui ont grand annee_
                      _De froment et bonne vinee_,
                      _D'huile et tout ce qu'il leur faut_.'

If it had indeed been the ghostly chant, perhaps Eustacie would not
have been able to help joining it. As it was, the familiar home words
irresistibly impelled her to mingle her voice, scarce knowing what she
did, in the verse--

                    '_Si qu'en paix et surete bonne_
                     _Coucherai et reposerai_;
                     _Car, Seigneur, ta bonte tout ordonne_
                     _Et elle seule espoir me donne_
                     _Que sur et seul regnant serai_.'

The hymn died away in its low cadence, and then, ere Eustacie had
had time to think of the consequences of thus raising her voice, the
new-comer demanded:

'Is there then another wanderer here?'

'Ah! sir, pardon me!' she exclaimed. 'I will not long importune you, but
only till morning light--only till the Fermiere Rotrou comes.'

'If Matthieu and Anne Rotrou placed you here, then all is well,' replied
the stranger. 'Fear not, daughter, but tell me. Are you one of my
scattered flock, or one whose parents are known to me?' Then, as she
hesitated, 'I am Isaac Gardon--escaped, alas! alone, from the slaughter
of the Barthelemy.'

'Master Gardon!' cried Eustacie. 'Oh, I know! O sir, my husband loved
and honoured you.'

'Your husband?'

'Yes, sir, le Baron de Ribaumont.'

'That fair and godly youth! My dear old patron's son! You--you! But--'
with a shade of doubt, almost of dismay, 'the boy was wedded--wedded to
the heiress---'

'Yes, yes, I am that unhappy one! We were to have fled together on that
dreadful night. He came to meet me to the Louvre--to his doom!' she
gasped out, nearer to tears than she had ever been since that time, such
a novelty was it to her to hear Berenger spoken of in kind or tender
terms; and in her warmth of feeling, she came out of her corner, and
held our her hand to him.

'Alas! poor thing!' said the minister, compassionately, 'Heaven has
tried you sorely. Had I known of your presence here, I would not have
entered; but I have been absent long, and stole into my lair here
without disturbing the good people below. Forgive the intrusion,
Madame.'

The minister replied warmly that surely persecution was a brotherhood,
even had she not been the window of one he had loved and lamented.

'Ah! sir, it does me good to hear you say so.'

And therewith Eustacie remembered the hospitalities of her loft. She
perceived by the tones of the old man's voice that he was tired, and
probably fasting, and she felt about for the milk and bread with which
she had been supplied. It was a most welcome refreshment, though he only
partook sparingly; and while he ate, the two, so strangely met, came to
a fuller knowledge of one another's circumstances.

Master Isaac Gardon had, it appeared, been residing at Paris, in the
house of the watchmaker whose daughter had been newly married to his
son; but on the fatal eve of St. Bartholomew, he had been sent for to
pray with a sick person in another quarter of the city. The Catholic
friends of the invalid were humane, and when the horrors began, not only
concealed their kinsman, but almost forcibly shut up the minister in
the same cellar with him. And thus, most reluctantly, had he been spared
from the fate that overtook his son and daughter-in-law. A lone and
well-night broken-hearted man, he had been smuggled out of the city,
and had since that time been wandering from one to another of the many
scattered settlements of Huguenots in the northern part of France,
who, being left pastorless, welcomed visits from the minister of their
religion, and passed him on from one place to another, as his stay in
each began to be suspected by the authorities. He was now on his way
along the west side of France, with no fixed purpose, except so far as,
since Heaven had spared his life when all that made it dear had been
taken from him, he resigned himself to believe that there was yet some
duty left for him to fulfil.

Meantime the old man was wearied out; and after due courtesies had
passed between him and the lady in the dark, he prayed long and
fervently, as Eustacie could judge from the intensity of the low murmurs
she heard; and then she heard him, with a heavy irrepressible sigh, lie
down on the couch of hay he had already prepared for himself, and soon
his regular breathings announced his sound slumbers. She was already on
the bed she had so precipitately quitted, and not a thought more did
she give to the Templars, living or dead, even though she heard an
extraordinary snapping and hissing, and in the dawn of the morning saw
a white weird thing, like a huge moth, flit in through the circular
window, take up its station on a beam above the hay, and look down with
the brightest, roundest eyes she had ever beheld. Let owls and bats
come where they would, she was happier than she had been for months.
Compassion for herself was plentiful enough, but to have heard Berenger
spoken of with love and admiration seemed to quiet the worst ache of her
lonely heart.




CHAPTER XVIII. THE MOONBEAM



     She wandered east, she wandered west,
       She wandered out and in;
     And at last into the very swine's stythe
       The queen brought forth a son.--Fause Foodrage


The morrow was Sunday, and in the old refectory, in the late afternoon,
a few Huguenots, warned by messages from the farm, met to profit by one
of their scanty secret opportunities for public worship. The hum of the
prayer, and discourse of the pastor, rose up through the broken vaulting
to Eustacie, still lying on her bed; for she had been much shaken by the
fatigues of the day and alarm of the night, and bitterly grieved, too,
by a message which Nanon conveyed to her, that poor Martin was in no
state to come for her in the next day; but he and his wife having been
seized upon by Narcisse and his men, and so savagely beaten in order to
force from them a confession of her hiding-place, that both were
lying helpless on their bed; and could only send an entreaty by the
trustworthy fool, that Rotrou would find means of conveying Madame into
Chollet in some cart of hay or corn, in which she could be taken past
the barriers.

But this was not to be. Good Nanon had sacrificed the sermon to creep up
to Eustacie, and when the congregation were dispersing in the dusk, she
stole down the stairs to her husband; and a few seconds after he was
hurrying as fast as _detours_ would allow him to Blaise's farm. An hour
and a half later, Dame Perrine, closely blindfolded for the last mile,
was dragged up the spiral staircase, and ere the bandage was removed
heard Eustacie's voice, with a certain cheeriness, say, 'Oh! nurse; my
son will soon come!'

The full moon gave her light, and the woman durst not have any other,
save from the wood-fire that Nanon had cautiously lighted and screened.
The moonshine was still supreme, when some time later a certain ominous
silence and half-whisper between the two women at the hearth made
Eustacie, with a low cry of terror, exclaim, 'Nurse, nurse, what means
this? Oh! He lives! I know he lives! Perrine, I command you tell me!'

'Living! Oh, yes, my love, my Lady,' answered Perrine, returning towards
her; 'fair and perfect as the day. Be not disquieted for a moment.'

'I will--I will disquiet myself,' panted Eustacie, 'unless you tell me
what is amiss.'

'Nothing amiss,' said Nanon, gruffly. 'Madame will give thanks for this
fair gift of a daughter.'

It must be owned the words felt chill. She had never thought of this! It
was as if the being for whom she had dared and suffered so much, in the
trust that he would be Berenger's representative and avenger, had failed
her and disappointed her. No defender, no paladin, no so to be proud of!
Her heart and courage sank down in her weakness as they had never done
before; and, without speaking, she turned her head away towards the
darkness, feeling as if had been for nothing, and she might as well
sink away in her exhaustion. Mere Perrine was more angry with Nanon than
conscious of her Lady's weakness. 'Woman, you speak as if you knew not
the blow to this family, and to all who hoped for better days. What,
that my Lady, the heiress, who ought to be in a bed of state, with
velvet curtains, lace pillows, gold caudle-cups, should be here in a
vile ruin, among owls and bats, like any beggar, and all for the sake,
not of a young Lord to raise up the family, but of a miserable little
girl! Had I known how it would turn out, I had never meddled in this mad
scheme.'

Before Nanon could express her indignation, Eustacie had turned her head
opened her eyes, and called out, 'Miserable! Oh! what do you mean? Oh,
it is true, Nanon? is it well with her?

'As well as heart could wish,' answered Nanon, cheerily. 'Small, but
a perfect little piece of sugar. There, Lady, she shall speak for
herself.'

And as Nanon laid the babe on the young mother's bosom, the thrilling
touch at once put an end to all the repinings of the heiress, and awoke
far other instincts.

'My child! my little one, my poor little orphan--all cruel to her! Oh,
