    When rock'd to rest on their Mother's breast,
      As she dances about the sun.
    I wield the flail of the lashing hail,
      And whiten the green plains under;
    And then again I dissolve it in rain,
      And laugh as I pass in thunder.


II.

    I sift the snow on the mountains below,
      And their great pines groan aghast;
    And all the night 'tis my pillow white,
      While I sleep in the arms of the Blast.
    Sublime on the towers of my skyey bowers
      Lightning, my pilot, sits;
    In a cavern under is fetter'd the Thunder,--
      It struggles and howls at fits.
    Over earth and ocean with gentle motion
      This pilot is guiding me,
    Lured by the love of the Genii that move
      In the depths of the purple sea;
    Over the rills and the crags and the hills,
      Over the lakes and the plains,
    Wherever he dream under mountain or stream
      The Spirit he loves remains;
    And I all the while bask in heaven's blue smile,
      Whilst he is dissolving in rains.


III.

    The sanguine Sunrise, with his meteor eyes,
      And his burning plumes outspread,
    Leaps on the back of my sailing rack,
      When the morning star shines dead;
    As on the jag of a mountain-crag,
      Which an earthquake rocks and swings,
    An eagle alit one moment may sit
      In the light of its golden wings.
    And, when Sunset may breathe, from the lit sea beneath,
      Its ardor of rest and of love,
    And the crimson pall of eve may fall
      From the depth of heaven above,
    With wings folded I rest on mine airy nest,
      As still as a brooding dove.


IV.

    That orbed maiden, with white-fire laden,
      Whom mortals call the Moon,
    Glides glimmering o'er my fleece-like floor
      By the midnight breezes strewn;
    And wherever the beat of her unseen feet,
      Which only the angels hear,
    May have broken the woof of my tent's thin roof,
      The Stars peep behind her and peer.
    And I laugh to see them whirl and flee
      Like a swarm of golden bees,
    When I widen the rent in my wind-built tent,--
      Till the calm rivers, lakes, and seas,
    Like strips of the sky fallen through me on high,
      Are each pav'd with the moon and these.


V.

    I bind the Sun's throne with a burning zone,
      And the Moon's with a girdle of pearl;
    The volcanoes are dim, and the Stars reel and swim,
      When the Whirlwinds my banner unfurl.
    From cape to cape, with a bridge-like shape,
      Over a torrent sea,
    Sunbeam-proof, I hang like a roof,--
      The mountains its columns be.
    The triumphal arch, through which I march,
      With hurricane, fire, and snow,
    When the Powers of the air are chain'd to my chair,
      Is the million-color'd bow;
    The Sphere-fire above its soft colors wove,
      While the moist Earth was laughing below.


VI.

    I am the daughter of Earth and Water,
      And the nursling of the Sky;
    I pass through the pores of the ocean and shores;
      I change, but I cannot die.
    For after the rain, when with never a stain
      The pavilion of heaven is bare,
    And the winds and sunbeams with their convex gleams
      Build up the blue dome of air,
    I silently laugh at my own cenotaph,--
      And out of the caverns of rain,
    Like a child from the womb, like a ghost from the tomb,
      I arise, and unbuild it again.




XLII. ON FIRST LOOKING INTO CHAPMAN'S HOMER.

JOHN KEATS.--1795-1821.


    Much have I travell'd in the realms of gold,
    And many goodly states and kingdoms seen;
    Round many western islands have I been
    Which bards in fealty to Apollo hold.
    Oft of one wide expanse had I been told
    That deep-brow'd Homer ruled as his demesne:
    Yet did I never breathe its pure serene
    Till I heard Chapman speak out loud and bold:
    Then felt I like some watcher of the skies
    When a new planet swims into his ken;
    Or like stout Cortez when with eagle eyes
    He stared at the Pacific--and all his men
    Look'd at each other with a wild surmise--
    Silent, upon a peak in Darien.




XLIII. ON THE GRASSHOPPER AND THE CRICKET.

KEATS.


    The poetry of earth is never dead:
    When all the birds are faint with the hot sun,
    And hide in cooling trees, a voice will run
    From hedge to hedge about the new-mown mead:
    That is the grasshopper's--he takes the lead
    In summer luxury,--he has never done
    With his delights, for, when tired out with fun,
    He rests at ease beneath some pleasant weed.
    The poetry of earth is ceasing never:
    On a lone winter evening, when the frost
    Has wrought a silence, from the stove there shrills
    The cricket's song, in warmth increasing ever,
    And seems to one in drowsiness half lost,
    The grasshopper's among some grassy hills.




XLIV. THE POWER AND DANGER OF THE CAESARS.

THOMAS DE QUINCEY.--1785-1859.

_From_ THE CAESARS.


To this view of the imperial character and relations must be added one
single circumstance, which in some measure altered the whole for the
individual who happened to fill the office. The emperor _de facto_ might
be viewed under two aspects; there was the man, and there was the
office. In his office he was immortal and sacred: but as a question
might still be raised, by means of a mercenary army, as to the claims of
the particular individual who at any time filled the office, the very
sanctity and privilege of the character with which he was clothed might
actually be turned against himself; and here it is, at this point, that
the character of Roman emperor became truly and mysteriously awful.
Gibbon has taken notice of the extraordinary situation of a _subject_ in
the Roman empire who should attempt to fly from the wrath of the Caesar.
Such was the ubiquity of the emperor that this was metaphysically
hopeless. Except across pathless deserts or amongst barbarous nomads, it
was impossible to find even a transient sanctuary from the imperial
pursuit. If the fugitive went down to the sea, there he met the emperor:
if he took the wings of the morning, and fled to the uttermost parts of
the earth, there was also Caesar in the person of his lieutenants. But,
by a dreadful counter-charm, the same omnipresence of imperial anger and
retribution which withered the hopes of the poor humble prisoner, met
and confounded the emperor himself, when hurled from his elevation by
some fortunate rival. All the kingdoms of the earth, to one in that
situation, became but so many wards of the same infinite prison. Flight,
if it were even successful for the moment, did but a little retard his
inevitable doom. And so evident was this, that hardly in one instance
did the fallen prince _attempt_ to fly; passively he met the death which
was inevitable, in the very spot where ruin had overtaken him. Neither
was it possible even for a merciful conqueror to show mercy; for, in
the presence of an army so mercenary and factious, his own safety was
but too deeply involved in the extermination of rival pretenders to
the crown.

Such, amidst the sacred security and inviolability of the office, was
the hazardous tenure of the individual. Nor did his dangers always arise
from persons in the rank of competitors and rivals. Sometimes it menaced
him in quarters which his eye had never penetrated, and from enemies too
obscure to have reached his ear. By way of illustration we will cite a
case from the life of the Emperor Commodus, which is wild enough to have
furnished the plot of a romance, though as well authenticated as any
other passage in that reign. The story is narrated by Herodian, and the
outline was this:--A slave of noble qualities, and of magnificent
person, having liberated himself from the degradations of bondage,
determined to avenge his own wrongs by inflicting continual terror upon
the town and neighborhood which had witnessed his humiliation. For this
purpose he resorted to the woody recesses of the province (somewhere in
the modern Transylvania), and, attracting to his wild encampment as many
fugitives as he could, by degrees he succeeded in training a very
formidable troop of freebooters. Partly from the energy of his own
nature, and partly from the neglect and remissness of the provincial
magistrates, the robber captain rose from less to more, until he had
formed a little army, equal to the task of assaulting fortified cities.
In this stage of his adventures he encountered and defeated several of
the imperial officers commanding large detachments of troops; and at
length grew of consequence sufficient to draw upon himself the emperor's
eye, and the honor of his personal displeasure. In high wrath and
disdain at the insults offered to his eagles by this fugitive slave,
Commodus fulminated against him such an edict as left him no hope of
much longer escaping with impunity.

Public vengeance was now awakened; the imperial troops were marching
from every quarter upon the same centre; and the slave became sensible
that in a very short space of time he must be surrounded and destroyed.
In this desperate situation he took a desperate resolution: he assembled
his troops, laid before them his plan, concerted the various steps for
carrying it into effect, and then dismissed them as independent
wanderers. So ends the first chapter of the tale.

The next opens in the passes of the Alps, whither, by various routes, of
seven or eight hundred miles in extent, these men had threaded their way
in manifold disguises, through the very midst of the emperor's camps.
According to this man's gigantic enterprise, in which the means were as
audacious as the purpose, the conspirators were to rendezvous, and first
to recognize each other, at the gates of Rome. From the Danube to the
Tiber did this band of robbers severally pursue their perilous routes
through all the difficulties of the road and the jealousies of the
military stations, sustained by the mere thirst of vengeance--vengeance
against that mighty foe whom they knew only by his proclamations against
themselves. Everything continued to prosper; the conspirators met under
the walls of Rome; the final details were arranged; and those also would
have prospered but for a trifling accident. The season was one of
general carnival at Rome; and, by the help of those disguises which the
license of this festival time allowed, the murderers were to have
penetrated as maskers to the emperor's retirement, when a casual word or
two awoke the suspicions of a sentinel. One of the conspirators was
arrested; under the terror and uncertainty of the moment, he made much
ampler discoveries than were expected of him; the other accomplices were
secured: and Commodus was delivered from the uplifted daggers of those
who had sought him by months of patient wanderings, pursued through all
the depths of the Illyrian forests, and the difficulties of the Alpine
passes. It is not easy to find words of admiration commensurate to the
energetic hardihood of a slave--who, by way of answer and reprisal to an
edict summarily consigning him to persecution and death, determines to
cross Europe in quest of its author, though no less a person than the
master of the world--to seek him out in the inmost recesses of his
capital city, of his private palace, of his consecrated bed-chamber--and
there to lodge a dagger in his heart, as the adequate reply to the
imperial sentence of proscription against himself.

Such, amidst the superhuman grandeur and hallowed privileges of the
Roman emperor's office, were the extraordinary perils which menaced the
individual officer. The office rose by its grandeur to a region above
the clouds and vapors of earth: the officer might find his personal
security as unsubstantial as those wandering vapors. Nor is it possible
that these circumstances of violent opposition can be better
illustrated than in this tale of Herodian. Whilst the emperor's mighty
arms were stretched out to arrest some potentate in the heart of Asia, a
poor slave is silently and stealthily creeping round the base of the
Alps, with the purpose of winning his way as a murderer to the imperial
bed-chamber; Caesar is watching some potent rebel of the Orient, at a
distance of two thousand leagues, and he overlooks the dagger which is
within three stealthy steps, and one tiger's leap, of his own heart. All
the heights and the depths which belong to man's frailty, all the
contrasts of glory and meanness, the extremities of what is highest and
lowest in human casualties, meeting in the station of the Roman Caesar
Semper Augustus--have combined to call him into high marble relief, and
to make him the most interesting study of all whom history has
emblazoned with colors of fire and blood, or has crowned most lavishly
with diadems of cyprus and laurel.




XLV. UNTHOUGHTFULNESS.

DR. ARNOLD.--1795-1842.

_A Lecture delivered in Rugby Chapel._


The state of spiritual folly is, I suppose, one of the most universal
evils in the world. For the number of those who are naturally foolish is
exceedingly great; of those, I mean, who understand no worldly thing
well; of those who are careless about everything, carried about by every
breath of opinion, without knowledge, and without principle. But the
term spiritual folly includes, unhappily, a great many more than these;
it takes in not those only who are in the common sense of the term
foolish, but a great many who are in the common sense of the term
clever, and many who are even in the common sense of the terms, prudent,
sensible, thoughtful, and wise. It is but too evident that some of the
ablest men who have ever lived upon earth, have been in no less a degree
spiritually fools. And thus, it is not without much truth that Christian
writers have dwelt upon the insufficiency of worldly wisdom, and have
warned their readers to beware, lest, while professing themselves to be
wise, they should be accounted as fools in the sight of God.

But the opposite to this notion, that those who are, as it were, fools
in worldly matters are wise before God,--although this also is true in a
certain sense, and under certain peculiar circumstances, yet taken
generally, it is the very reverse of truth; and the careless and
incautious language which has been often used on this subject, has been
extremely mischievous. On the contrary, he who is foolish in worldly
matters is likely also to be, and most commonly is, no less foolish in
the things of God. And the opposite belief has arisen mainly from that
strange confusion between ignorance and innocence, with which many
ignorant persons seem to solace themselves. Whereas, if you take away a
man's knowledge, you do not bring him to the state of an infant, but to
that of a brute; and of one of the most mischievous and malignant of the
brute creation. For you do not lessen or weaken the man's body by
lowering his mind; he still retains his strength and his passions, the
passions leading to self-indulgence, the strength which enables him to
feed them by continued gratification. He will not think, it is true, to
any good purpose; it is very possible to destroy in him the power of
reflection, whether as exercised upon outward things, or upon himself
and his own nature, or upon God. But you cannot destroy the power of
adapting means to ends, nor that of concealing his purposes by fraud or
falsehood; you take only his wisdom, and leave that cunning which marks
so notoriously both the savage and the madman. He, then, who is a fool
as far as regards earthly things, is much more a fool with regard to
heavenly things; he who cannot raise himself even to the lower height,
how is he to attain to the higher? he who is without reason and
conscience, how shall he be endowed with the spirit of God?

It is my deep conviction and long experience of this truth, which makes
me so grieve over a want of interest in your own improvement in human
learning, whenever I observe it,--over the prevalence of a thoughtless
and childish spirit amongst you.... The idleness and want of interest
which I grieve for, is one which extends itself, but too impartially, to
knowledge of every kind: to divine knowledge, as might be expected, even
more than to human. Those whom we commonly find careless about their
general lessons, are quite as ignorant and as careless about their
Bibles; those who have no interest in general literature, in poetry, or
in history, or in philosophy, have certainly no greater interest, I do
not say in works of theology, but in works of practical devotion, in the
lives of holy men, in meditations, or in prayers. Alas, the interest of
their minds is bestowed on things far lower than the very lowest of all
which I have named; and therefore, to see them desiring something only a
little higher than their present pursuits, could not but be encouraging;
it would, at least, show that the mind was rising upwards. It may,
indeed, stop at a point short of the highest, it may learn to love
earthly excellence, and rest there contented, and seek for nothing
more perfect; but that, at any rate, is a future and merely contingent
evil. It is better to love earthly excellence than earthly folly; it is
far better in itself, and it is, by many degrees, nearer to the Kingdom
of God.

There is another case, however, which I cannot but think is more
frequent now than formerly; and if it is so, it may be worth while to
direct our attention to it. Common idleness and absolute ignorance are
not what I wish to speak of now, but a character advanced above these; a
character which does not neglect its school-lessons, but really attains
to considerable proficiency in them; a character at once regular and
amiable, abstaining from evil, and for evil in its low and grosser forms
having a real abhorrence. What, then, you will say, is wanting here? I
will tell you what seems to be wanting--a spirit of manly, and much more
of Christian, thoughtfulness. There is quickness and cleverness; much
pleasure, perhaps, in distinction, but little in improvement; there is
no desire of knowledge for its own sake, whether human or divine. There
is, therefore, but little power of combining and digesting what is read;
and, consequently, what is read passes away, and takes no root in the
mind. This same character shows itself in matters of conduct; it will
adopt, without scruple, the most foolish, commonplace notions of boys,
about what is right and wrong; it will not, and cannot, from the
lightness of its mind, concern itself seriously about what is evil in
the conduct of others, because it takes no regular care of its own, with
reference to pleasing God; it will not do anything low or wicked, but it
will sometimes laugh at those who do; and it will by no means take
pains to encourage, nay, it will sometimes thwart and oppose anything
that breathes a higher spirit, and asserts a more manly and Christian
standard of duty.

One cause of this consists in the number and character and cheapness,
and peculiar mode of publication, of the works of amusement of the
present day. The works of amusement published only a very few years
since were comparatively few in number; they were less exciting, and
therefore less attractive; they were dearer, and therefore less
accessible; and, not being published periodically, they did not occupy
the mind for so long a time, nor keep alive so constant an expectation;
nor, by thus dwelling upon the mind, and distilling themselves into it
as it were drop by drop, did they possess it so largely, coloring even,
in many instances, its very language, and affording frequent matter for
conversation.

The evil of all these circumstances is actually enormous. The mass of
human minds, and much more of the minds of young persons, have no great
appetite for intellectual exercise; but they have some, which by careful
treatment may be strengthened and increased. But here to this weak and
delicate appetite is presented an abundance of the most stimulating and
least nourishing food possible. It snatches it greedily, and is not only
satisfied, but actually conceives a distaste for anything simpler and
more wholesome. That curiosity which is wisely given us to lead us on to
knowledge, finds its full gratification in the details of an exciting
and protracted story, and then lies down as it were gorged, and goes to
sleep. Other faculties claim their turn, and have it. We know that in
youth the healthy body and lively spirits require exercise, and in this
they may and ought to be indulged; but the time and interest which
remain over when the body has had its enjoyment, and the mind desires
its share, this has been already wasted and exhausted upon things
utterly unprofitable: so that the mind goes to its work hurriedly and
languidly, and feels it to be no more than a burden. The mere lessons
may be learnt from a sense of duty; but that freshness of power which in
young persons of ability would fasten eagerly upon some one portion or
other of the wide field of knowledge, and there expatiate, drinking in
health and strength to the mind, as surely as the natural exercise of
the body gives to it bodily vigor,--that is tired prematurely,
perverted, and corrupted; and all the knowledge which else it might so
covet, it now seems a wearying effort to retain.

Great and grievous as is the evil, it is peculiarly hard to find the
remedy for it. If the books to which I have been alluding were books of
downright wickedness, we might destroy them wherever we found them; we
might forbid their open circulation; we might conjure you to shun them
as you would any other clear sin, whether of word or deed. But they are
not wicked books for the most part; they are of that class which cannot
be actually prohibited; nor can it be pretended that there is a sin in
reading them. They are not the more wicked for being published so cheap,
and at regular intervals; but yet these two circumstances make them so
peculiarly injurious. All that can be done is to point out the evil;
that it is real and serious I am very sure, and its defects are most
deplorable on the minds of the fairest promise; but the remedy for it
rests with yourselves, or rather with each of you individually, so far
as he is himself concerned. That an unnatural and constant excitement of
the mind is most injurious, there is no doubt; that excitement involves
a consequent weakness, is a law of our nature than which none is surer;
that the weakness of mind thus produced is and must be adverse to quiet
study and thought, to that reflection which alone is wisdom, is also
clear in itself, and proved too largely by experience. And that without
reflection there can be no spiritual understanding, is at once evident;
while without spiritual understanding, that is, without a knowledge and
a study of God's will, there can be no spiritual life. And therefore
childishness and unthoughtfulness cannot be light evils; and if I have
rightly traced the prevalence of these defects to its cause, although
that cause may seem to some to be trifling, yet surely it is well to
call your attention to it, and to remind you that in reading works of
amusement, as in every other lawful pleasure, there is and must be an
abiding responsibility in the sight of God; that, like other lawful
pleasures, we must beware of excess in it; and not only so, but if we
find it hurtful to us, either because we have used it too freely in
times past, or because our nature is too weak to bear it, that then we
are bound most solemnly to abstain from it; because, however lawful in
itself, or to others who can practise it without injury, whatever is to
us an hindrance in the way of our intellectual and moral and spiritual
improvement, that is in our case a positive sin.

       *       *       *       *       *


    _There is a book, who runs may read, which heavenly truth
        imparts;
    And all the lore its scholars need,--pure eyes and Christian
        hearts.
    The works of God, above, below, within us and around,
    Are pages in that book, to show how God Himself is found._

        JOHN KEBLE.--1792-1866.




XLVI. THE BRIDGE OF SIGHS.

THOMAS HOOD.--1799-1845.


    One more Unfortunate,
    Weary of breath,
    Rashly importunate,
    Gone to her death!

    Take her up tenderly,
    Lift her with care;
    Fashion'd so slenderly,
    Young, and so fair!

    Look at her garments
    Clinging like cerements;
    Whilst the wave constantly
    Drips from her clothing;
    Take her up instantly,
    Loving, not loathing.--

    Touch her not scornfully;
    Think of her mournfully,
    Gently and humanly;
    Not of the stains of her,--
    All that remains of her
    Now is pure womanly.

    Make no deep scrutiny
    Into her mutiny
    Rash and undutiful:
    Past all dishonor,
    Death has left on her
    Only the beautiful.

    Still, for all slips of hers,
    One of Eve's family,--
    Wipe those poor lips of hers
    Oozing so clammily.

    Loop up her tresses
    Escaped from the comb,--
    Her fair auburn tresses;
    Whilst wonderment guesses
    Where was her home?

    Who was her father?
    Who was her mother?
    Had she a sister?
    Had she a brother?
    Or was there a dearer one
    Still, and a nearer one
    Yet, than all other?

    Alas! for the rarity
    Of Christian charity
    Under the sun!
    Oh! it was pitiful!
    Near a whole city full,
    Home she had none.

    Sisterly, brotherly,
    Fatherly, motherly
    Feelings had changed:
    Love, by harsh evidence,
    Thrown from its eminence;
    Even God's providence
    Seeming estranged.

    Where the lamps quiver
    So far in the river,
    With many a light
    From window and casement,
    From garret to basement,
    She stood, with amazement,
    Houseless by night.

    The bleak wind of March
    Made her tremble and shiver;
    But not the dark arch,
    Or the black flowing river:
    Mad from life's history,
    Glad to death's mystery,
    Swift to be hurl'd--
    Anywhere, anywhere
    Out of the world!

    In she plunged boldly,--
    No matter how coldly
    The dark river ran,--
