"Very well--so far, then, we have nothing in this phenomenon which the
human mind cannot conceive as possible; therefore intellectually we
still remain masters of the phenomena; for it is only that which human
thought cannot encompass which it need fear."

"Metallic," he said, "and crystalline. And yet--why not? What are we but
bags of skin filled with certain substances in solution and stretched
over a supporting and mobile mechanism largely made up of lime? Out of
that primeval jelly which Gregory * calls Protobion came after untold
millions of years us with our skins, our nails, and our hair; came, too,
the serpents with their scales, the birds with their feathers; the horny
hide of the rhinoceros and the fairy wings of the butterfly; the shell
of the crab, the gossamer loveliness of the moth and the shimmering
wonder of the mother-of-pearl.

     * J. W. Gregory, F.R.S.D.Sc., Professor of Geology,
     University of Glasgow.

"Is there any greater gap between any of these and the metallic? I think
not."

"Not materially," I answered. "No. But there remains--consciousness!"

"That," he said, "I cannot understand. Ventnor spoke of--how did he put
it?--a group consciousness, operating in our sphere and in spheres above
and below ours, with senses known and unknown. I got--glimpses--Goodwin,
but I cannot understand."

"We have agreed for reasons that seem sufficient to us to call these
Things metallic, Dick," I replied. "But that does not necessarily mean
that they are composed of any metal that we know. Nevertheless, being
metal, they must be of crystalline structure.

"As Gregory has pointed out, crystals and what we call living matter had
an equal start in the first essentials of life. We cannot conceive life
without giving it the attribute of some sort of consciousness. Hunger
cannot be anything but conscious, and there is no other stimulus to eat
but hunger.

"The crystals eat. The extraction of power from food is conscious
because it is purposeful, and there can be no purpose without
consciousness; similarly the power to work from such derived energy is
also purposeful and therefore conscious. The crystals do both. And the
crystals can transmit all these abilities to their children, just as we
do. For although there would seem to be no reason why they should not
continue to grow to gigantic size under favorable conditions--yet they
do not. They reach a size beyond which they do not develop.

"Instead, they bud--give birth, in fact--to smaller ones, which increase
until they reach the size of the preceding generation. And like the
children of man and animals, these younger generations grow on precisely
as their progenitors!

"Very well, then--we arrive at the conception of a metallically
crystalline being, which by some explosion of the force of evolution
has burst from the to us familiar and apparently inert stage into these
Things that hold us. And is there any greater difference between the
forms with which we are familiar and them than there is between us and
the crawling amphibian which is our remote ancestor? Or between that and
the amoeba--the little swimming stomach from which it evolved? Or the
amoeba and the inert jelly of the Protobion?

"As for what Ventnor calls a group consciousness I would assume that
he means a communal intelligence such as that shown by the bees and the
ants--that in the case of the former Maeterlinck calls the 'Spirit
of the Hive.' It is shown in their groupings--just as the geometric
arrangement of those groupings shows also clearly their crystalline
intelligence.

"I submit that in their rapid coordination either for attack or movement
or work without apparent communication having passed between the units,
there is nothing more remarkable than the swarming of a hive of bees
where also without apparent communication just so many waxmakers,
nurses, honey-gatherers, chemists, bread-makers, and all the varied
specialists of the hive go with the old queen, leaving behind sufficient
number of each class for the needs of the young queen.

"All this apportionment is effected without any means of communication
that we recognize. Still it is most obviously intelligent selection.
For if it were haphazard all the honeymakers might leave and the hive
starve, or all the chemists might go and the food for the young bees not
be properly prepared--and so on and so on."

"But metal," he muttered, "and conscious. It's all very well--but where
did that consciousness come from? And what is it? And where did they
come from? And most of all, why haven't they overrun the world before
this?

"Such development as theirs, such an evolution, presupposes aeons of
time--long as it took us to drag up from the lizards. What have
they been doing--why haven't they been ready to strike--if Ventnor's
right--at humanity until now?"

"I don't know," I answered, helplessly. "But evolution is not the
slow, plodding process that Darwin thought. There seem to be
explosions--nature will create a new form almost in a night. Then comes
the long ages of development and adjustment, and suddenly another new
race appears.

"It might be so of these--some extraordinary conditions that shaped
them. Or they might have developed through the ages in spaces within
the earth--there's that incredible abyss we saw that is evidently one of
their highways. Or they might have dropped here upon some fragment of a
broken world, found in this valley the right conditions and developed in
amazing rapidity. * They're all possible theories--take your pick."

     * Professor Svante Arrhenius's theory of propagation of life
     by means of minute spores carried through space. See his
     "Worlds in the Making."--W.T.G.

"Something's held them back--and they're rushing to a climax," he
whispered. "Ventnor's right about that--I feel it. And what can we do?"

"Go back to their city," I said. "Go back as he ordered. I believe he
knows what he's talking about. And I believe he'll be able to help us.
It wasn't just a request he made, nor even an appeal--it was a command."

"But what can we do--just two men--against these Things?" he groaned.

"Maybe we'll find out--when we're back in the city," I answered.

"Well," his old reckless cheerfulness came back to him, "in every crisis
of this old globe it's been up to one man to turn the trick. We're two.
And at the worst we can only go down fighting a little before the rest
of us. So, after all, whatEVER the hell, WHAT the hell."

For a time we were silent.

"Well," he said at last, "we have to go to the city in the morning."
He laughed. "Sounds as though we were living in the suburbs, somehow,
doesn't it?"

"It can't be many hours before dawn," I said. "Turn in for a while, I'll
wake you when I think you've slept enough."

"It doesn't seem fair," he protested, but sleepily.

"I'm not sleepy," I told him; nor was I.

But whether I was or not, I wanted to question Yuruk, uninterrupted and
undisturbed.

Drake stretched himself out. When his breathing showed him fast asleep
indeed, I slipped over to the black eunuch and crouched, right hand
close to the butt of my automatic, facing him.




CHAPTER XVII. YURUK

"Yuruk," I whispered, "you love us as the wheat field loves the hail;
we are as welcome to you as the death cord to the condemned. Lo, a door
opened into a land of unpleasant dreams you thought sealed, and we came
through. Answer my questions truthfully and it may be that we shall
return through that door."

Interest welled up in the depths of the black eyes.

"There is a way from here," he muttered. "Nor does it pass
through--Them. I can show it to you."

I had not been blind to the flash of malice, of cunning, that had shot
across the wrinkled face.

"Where does that way lead?" I asked. "There were those who sought us;
men clad in armor with javelins and arrows. Does your way lead to them,
Yuruk?"

For a time he hesitated, the lashless lids half closed.

"Yes," he said sullenly. "The way leads to them; to their place. But
will it not be safer for you there--among your kind?"

"I don't know that it will," I answered promptly. "Those who are unlike
us smote those who are like us and drove them back when they would have
taken and slain us. Why is it not better to remain with them than to go
to our kind who would destroy us?"

"They would not," he said "If you gave them--her." He thrust a long
thumb backward toward sleeping Ruth. "Cherkis would forgive much for
her. And why should you not? She is only a woman."

He spat--in a way that made me want to kill him.

"Besides," he ended, "have you no arts to amuse him?"

"Cherkis?" I asked.

"Cherkis," he whined. "Is Yuruk a fool not to know that in the world
without, new things have arisen since long ago we fled from Iskander
into the secret valley? What have you to beguile Cherkis beyond this
woman flesh? Much, I think. Go then to him--unafraid."

Cherkis? There was a familiar sound to that. Cherkis? Of course--it
was the name of Xerxes, the Persian Conqueror, corrupted by time into
this--Cherkis. And Iskander? Equally, of course--Alexander. Ventnor had
been right.

"Yuruk," I demanded directly, "is she whom you call goddess--Norhala--of
the people of Cherkis?"

"Long ago," he answered; "long, long ago there was trouble in their
city, even in the great dwelling place of Cherkis. I fled with her who
was the mother of the goddess. There were twenty of us; and we fled
here--by the way which I will show you--"

He leered cunningly; I gave no sign of interest.

"She who was the mother of the goddess found favor in the sight of the
ruler here," he went on. "But after a time she grew old and ugly and
withered. So he slew her--like a little mound of dust she danced and
blew away after he had slain her; and also he slew others who had grown
displeasing to him. He blasted me--as he was blasted--" He pointed to
Ventnor.

"Then it was that, recovering, I found my crooked shoulder. The goddess
was born here. She is kin to Him Who Rules! How else could she shed the
lightnings? Was not the father of Iskander the god Zeus Ammon, who came
to Iskander's mother in the form of a great snake? Well? At any rate the
goddess was born--shedder of the lightnings even from her birth. And she
is as you see her.

"Cleave to your kind! Cleave to your kind!" Suddenly he shrilled.
"Better is it to be whipped by your brother than to be eaten by the
tiger. Cleave to your kind. Look--I will show you the way to them."

He sprang to his feet, clasped my wrist in one of his long hands, led
me through the curtained oval into the cylindrical hall, parted the
curtainings of Norhala's bedroom and pushed me within. Over the floor he
slid, still holding fast to me, and pressed against the farther wall.


An ovoid slice of the gemlike material slid aside, revealing a doorway.
I glimpsed a path, a trail, leading into a forest pallid green beneath
the wan light. This way thrust itself like a black tongue into the
boskage and vanished in the depths.

"Follow it." He pointed. "Take those who came with you and follow it."

The wrinkles upon his face writhed with his eagerness.

"You will go?" panted Yuruk. "You will take them and go by that path?"

"Not yet," I answered absently. "Not yet."

And was brought abruptly to full alertness, vigilance, by the flame of
rage that filled the eyes thrust so close.

"Lead back," I directed curtly. He slid the door into place, turned
sullenly. I followed, wondering what were the sources of the bitter
hatred he so plainly bore for us; the reasons for his eagerness to be
rid of us despite the commands of this woman who to him at least was
goddess.

And by that curious human habit of seeking for the complex when the
simple answer lies close, failed to recognize that it was jealousy of
us that was the root of his behavior; that he wished to be, as it would
seem he had been for years, the only human thing near Norhala; failed
to realize this, and with Ruth and Drake was terribly to pay for this
failure.

I looked down upon the pair, sleeping soundly; upon Ventnor lost still
in trance.

"Sit," I ordered the eunuch. "And turn your back to me."

I dropped down beside Drake, my mind wrestling with the mystery, but
every sense alert for movement from the black. Glibly enough I had
passed over Dick's questioning as to the consciousness of the Metal
People; now I faced it knowing it to be the very crux of these
incredible phenomena; admitting, too, that despite all my special
pleading, about that point swirled in my own mind the thickest mists of
uncertainty. That their sense of order was immensely beyond a man's was
plain.

As plain was it that their knowledge of magnetic force and its
manipulation were far beyond the sphere of humanity. That they had
realization of beauty this palace of Norhala's proved--and no human
imagination could have conceived it nor human hands have made its
thought of beauty real. What were their senses through which their
consciousness fed?

Nine in number had been the sapphire ovals set within the golden zone of
the Disk. Clearly it came to me that these were sense organs!

But--nine senses!

And the great stars--how many had they? And the cubes--did they open as
did globe and pyramid?

Consciousness itself--after all what is it? A secretion of the brain?
The cumulative expression, wholly chemical, of the multitudes of cells
that form us? The inexplicable governor of the city of the body of which
these myriads of cells are the citizens--and created by them out of
themselves to rule?

Is it what many call the soul? Or is it a finer form of matter, a
self-realizing force, which uses the body as its vehicle just as other
forces use for their vestments other machines? After all, I thought,
what is this conscious self of ours, the ego, but a spark of realization
running continuously along the path of time within the mechanism we call
the brain; making contact along that path as the electric spark at the
end of a wire?

Is there a sea of this conscious force which laps the shores of the
farthest-flung stars; that finds expression in everything--man and rock,
metal and flower, jewel and cloud? Limited in its expression only by the
limitations of that which animates, and in essence the same in all. If
so, then this problem of the life of the Metal People ceased to be a
problem; was answered!

So thinking I became aware of increasing light; strode past Yuruk to
the door and peeped out. Dawn was paling the sky. I stooped over Drake,
shook him. On the instant he was awake, alert.

"I only need a little sleep, Dick," I said. "When the sun is well up,
call me."

"Why, it's dawn," he whispered. "Goodwin, you ought not to have let me
sleep so long. I feel like a damned pig."

"Never mind," I said. "But watch the eunuch closely."

I rolled myself up in his warm blanket; sank almost instantly into
dreamless slumber.




CHAPTER XVIII. INTO THE PIT

High was the sun when I awakened; or so, I supposed, opening my eyes
upon a flood of daylight. As I lay, lazily, recollection rushed upon me.

It was no sky into which I was gazing; it was the dome of Norhala's
elfin home. And Drake had not aroused me. Why? And how long had I slept?

I jumped to my feet, stared about. Ruth nor Drake nor the black eunuch
was there!

"Ruth!" I shouted. "Drake!"

There was no answer. I ran to the doorway. Peering up into the white
vault of the heavens I set the time of day as close to seven; I had
slept then three hours, more or less. Yet short as that time of slumber
had been, I felt marvelously refreshed, reenergized; the effect, I was
certain, of the extraordinarily tonic qualities of the atmosphere of
this place. But where were the others? Where Yuruk?

I heard Ruth's laughter. Some hundred yards to the left, half hidden
by a screen of flowering shrubs, I saw a small meadow. Within it a
half-dozen little white goats nuzzled around her and Dick. She was
milking one of them.

Reassured, I drew back into the chamber, knelt over Ventnor. His
condition was unchanged. My gaze fell upon the pool that had been
Norhala's bath. Longingly I looked at it; then satisfying myself
that the milking process was not finished, slipped off my clothes and
splashed about.

I had just time to get back in my clothes when through the doorway came
the pair, each carrying a porcelain pannikin full of milk.

There was no shadow of fear or horror on her face. It was the old Ruth
who stood before me; nor was there effort in the smile she gave me. She
