He left the saloon in better spirits, and resumed his travels from house
to house.

I am sorry to say, however, that though he certainly exerted himself to
the utmost in the interests of the Great Pekin Tea Company and his own,
he did not sell another pound of tea that day.

About three o'clock he got on board a Third Avenue horse car, bound
downtown and sat quietly down in a corner.

"Harlem doesn't seem to be a very promising field for an agent," he said
to himself. "Perhaps it isn't fair to judge it by the first day. Still,
I don't think I shall have courage to come here to-morrow. I would
rather go to Jersey City or Brooklyn."

Frank got off the cars at the Bible House and walked to his boarding
house, where a disagreeable surprise was in store for him.

The night brought perplexity to Frank, but not discouragement. He was
naturally hopeful, and, in a large city like New York, he felt that
there are always chances of obtaining employment, provided he could
maintain his position, as he would have been able to do if he had not
lost the thirty-five dollars which his fellow boarder had stolen. Now,
however, circumstances were materially changed.

One thing was tolerably clear to Frank, and this was, that he must give
up his agency. He had tried it, and been unsuccessful. That is, he had
failed to earn money enough to support himself, and this was necessary.

As to what he should take up next, Frank was quite in the dark. As a boy
in a counting room he would be paid not more than four dollars a week,
if he could gain such a situation, which was by no means certain.

The more he thought about the matter the more perplexed he felt, and it
was in an uncomfortable frame of mind that he came down to breakfast the
next morning.




CHAPTER XXV

PERPLEXITY


He went out as usual after breakfast, and then walked leisurely
downtown. He proposed to go to the shop of the Great Pekin Tea Company
and resign his agency. He was on the watch during his walk for any
opportunities to repair his unlucky loss:

At one place he saw a notice:

     "BOY WANTED."

Though he felt sure the compensation would not be sufficient to allow of
his accepting it, he thought it would do no harm to make inquiry, and
accordingly entered.

It was an extensive retail store, where a large number of clerks were
employed.

"Is a boy wanted here?" asked Frank of the nearest salesman.

"Yes. You may inquire at the desk."

He pointed to a desk some distance back, and Frank went up to it.

"You advertise for a boy," he said to a tall, stout man, who chanced to
be the proprietor. "Is the place filled."

"No," was the answer; "but I don't think it would suit you."

"Do you think I would not be competent, sir?"

"No, that is not the difficulty. It would not be worth your acceptance."

"May I inquire what are the duties, sir?"

"We want a boy to open the door to customers, and this would not be
worth your accepting."

"No, sir. Thank you for explaining it to me."

The gentleman was favorably impressed by Frank's polite and gentlemanly
manners.

"I wish I had a place for you," he said. "Have you ever had any
experience in our line of business?"

"No, sir; I have very little experience of any kind. I have acted for a
short time as agent for a tea company."

"You may leave your name if you like, and I will communicate with you if
I have a vacancy which you can fill."

Frank thanked the polite proprietor and walked out of the store.

Though this is a story written for boys, it may be read by some business
men, who will allow me to suggest that a refusal kindly and
considerately expressed loses half its bitterness, and often inspires
hope, instead of discouragement.

Frank proceeded to the office of the tea company and formally resigned
his agency. He was told that he could resume it whenever he pleased.

Leaving the store, he walked down Broadway in the direction of Wall
Street.

He passed an elderly man, with stooping shoulders and a gait which
showed that he was accustomed to live in the country.

He was looking about him in rather an undecided way. His glance happened
to rest on Frank, and, after a little hesitation, he addressed him.

"Boy," he said, "do you live around here?"

"I live in the city; sir."

"Then I guess you can tell me what I want to know."

"I will if I can, sir," said Frank, politely.

"Whereabouts is Wall Street?"

"Close by, sir. I am going that way, and will be happy to show you."

Frank had no idea his compliance with the stranger's request was likely
to have an important effect up his fortunes.




CHAPTER XXVI

FRANK HEARS SOMETHING TO HIS ADVANTAGE


"My name," said the stranger, "is Peters--Jonathan Peters, of
Craneville, Onondaga County. I am a farmer, and don't know much about
New York. I've got a few hundred dollars that I want to put into
government bonds."

"All right," said Frank, "there won't be any difficulty about it."

"I've heerd there are a good many swindlers in New York," continued Mr.
Peters. "The squire--Squire Jackson, of our village--perhaps you may
have heard of him?"

"I don't think I have, Mr. Peters."

"Well, the squire told me I'd better take good keer of my money, as
there were plenty of rascals here who would try to cheat me out of it."

"That is true, Mr. Peters. Only yesterday I was robbed of thirty-five
dollars by a man who boarded in the same house."

"You don't say so?"

"He opened my trunk and took out my pocketbook while I was absent on
business."

"I wouldn't dare to live in York!" said the farmer, whose apprehensions
were increased by Frank's story.

By this time they had reached the office of Jones & Robinson, with whom,
it will be remembered, Frank had once before had dealings.

"If you will come in here, Mr. Peters," said our hero, "you will be sure
of honorable treatment. I will introduce you if you like."

"I should be obleeged if you would," said the farmer. "Out in Craneville
I am to home, but I ain't used to York business men, and don't know how
to talk to them."

It pleased Frank to find that, in spite of his inexperience, he was able
to be of service to one more unaccustomed than himself to city scenes
and city ways.

He walked up to the counter, followed by the farmer, and said:

"This gentleman wishes to buy some government bonds. I told him that he
could transact his business here."

"Thank you! Mr. Benton, you may attend to this gentleman."

Frank was about to leave the office, when Mr. Robinson called him back.

"You have been in the office before, have you not?" he asked.

"Yes, sir."

"Are you not the boy who assisted in the capture of the man who robbed
Mr. Henry Percival, of Madison Avenue?"

"Yes, sir."

"I thought so. I have been trying to find you for the last week."

Naturally Frank looked surprised.

"Mr. Henry Percival was at that time in Europe," said Mr. Robinson. "On
his return, a week since, he called on us, and expressed a desire to
have you call upon him. We had mislaid or lost your address, and were
unable to give him the information he desired."

Frank's heart beat high with hope as the broker spoke.

"Perhaps," he thought, "Mr. Percival may offer me a situation of some
kind, and I certainly am greatly in need of one."

"Did Mr. Percival recover all his bonds?" he asked.

"Nearly all," answered Mr. Robinson. "He considered himself exceedingly
fortunate, and he certainly was so."

"Do you know how much he was robbed of?" asked Frank.

"Rather over five thousand dollars. Of this sum all has been recovered
except three bonds of a hundred dollars each. Mr. Percival is a rich
man, and he won't miss that small amount."

"I wish I were rich enough not to miss three hundred dollars," thought
our hero. "If I had my rights, I could say the same."

Just now, in his extremity, Frank thought regretfully of the fortune he
had lost. Had he been so situated as to be earning enough to defray all
his expenses, he would scarcely have given a thought of it.

"You had better go up to see Mr. Percival this evening," said the
banker, "if you have no other engagement."

"Even if I had an engagement, I would put it off," said Frank. "Will you
give me Mr. Percival's number?"

"No. 265," said Mr. Robinson.

Frank noted it down and left the office. By this time Mr. Peters had
completed his business, and was ready to go out, also.

"I'm much obliged to you," he said to Frank. "I was afraid I'd get into
a place where they'd cheat me. I guess Mr. Jones and Robinson are pretty
good folks."

"I think you can depend upon them," said Frank.

"If ever you come to Craneville, I should like to have you stay a few
days with me on my farm," said Mr. Peters, hospitably. "We are plain
folks, but will treat you about right."

"Thank you, Mr. Peters. If I ever come to Craneville, I shall certainly
call upon you."

Frank had something to look forward to in his approaching interview with
Mr. Percival. He had been able to do this gentleman a service, and it
was not unlikely that the capitalist would wish to make him some
acknowledgment. Frank did not exaggerate his own merits in the matter.
He felt that it was largely owing to a lucky chance that he had been the
means of capturing the bond robber. However, it is to precisely such
lucky chances that men are often indebted for the advancement of their
fortunes.

While he was in a state of suspense, and uncertain what Mr. Percival
might be disposed to do for him, he decided not to exert himself to
obtain any employment. If he should be disappointed in his hopes, it
would be time enough to look about him the following day.

What should he do in the meantime?

He determined to treat himself to an excursion. From the end of the
Battery he had often looked across to Staten Island, lying six miles
away, and thought it would prove a pleasant excursion. Now, having
plenty of time on his hands, he decided to go on board one of the boats
that start hourly from the piers adjoining the Battery. The expense was
but trifling and, low as Frank's purse was, he ventured to spend the
amount for pleasure. He felt that he needed a little recreation after
the weeks of patient labor he had spent in the service of the Great
Pekin Tea Company.




CHAPTER XXVII

AN INCIDENT IN A STREET CAR


When Frank returned to the city, he walked slowly up through the Battery
to the foot of Broadway. He passed the famous house, No. 1, which, a
hundred years ago, was successively the headquarters of Washington and
the British generals, who occupied New York with their forces, and soon
reached the Astor House, then the most notable structure in the lower
part of the city.

With his small means, Frank felt that it was extravagant to ride uptown,
when he might have walked, but he felt some confidence in the success of
his visit to Mr. Percival, and entered a Fourth Avenue horse car. It so
chanced that he seated himself beside a pleasant-looking young married
lady, who had with her a young boy about seven years old.

Soon after the car started the conductor came around to collect the
fares.

Frank paid his, and the conductor held out his hand to the lady.

She put her hand into her pocket to draw out her purse, but her
countenance changed as her hand failed to find it.

Probably no situation is more trying than to discover that you have lost
or mislaid your purse, when you have an urgent use for it. The lady was
evidently in that predicament. Once more she searched for her purse, but
her search was unavailing.

"I am afraid I have lost my purse," she said, apologetically, to the
conductor.

This official was an ill-mannered person, and answered, rudely:

"In that case, ma'am, you will have to get off."

"I will give you my card," said the lady, "and will send double the fare
to the office."

"That won't do," said the man, rudely. "I am responsible for your fare,
if you stay on the car, and I can't afford to lose the money."

"You shall not lose it, sir; but I cannot walk home."

"I think you will have to, madam."

Here Frank interposed. He had been trained to be polite and considerate
to ladies, and he could not endure to see a lady treated with rudeness.

"Take the lady's fare out of this," he said.

"And the boy's, too?"

"Of course."

The lady smiled gratefully.

"I accept your kindness, my young friend," she said. "You have saved me
much annoyance."

"I am very glad to have had the opportunity," said Frank, politely.

"Of course, I shall insist upon reimbursing you. Will you oblige me with
your address, that I may send you the amount when I return home?"

A boy of less tact than Frank would have expostulated against repayment,
but he knew that this would only embarrass the lady, and that he had no
right, being a stranger, to force such a favor upon her. He answered,
therefore:

"Certainly, I will do so, but it will be perfectly convenient for me to
call upon you."

"If it will give you no trouble, I shall be glad to have you call any
evening. I live at No. ---- Madison Avenue."

Now it was Frank's turn to be surprised. The number mentioned by the
lady was that of the house in which Mr. Henry Percival lived.

"I thought Mr. Percival lived at that number?" said Frank.

"So he does. He is my father. Do you know him?"

"No; but I was about to call on him. This morning Mr. Robinson, a broker
in Wall Street, told me that he wished to see me."

