range, now, with sharp rocks among the wads of filth--he could take
refuge in the memory of those last glorious days on Earth.

       *       *       *       *       *

Remembrance was itself a change brought by the roaring ship; usually he
moped in a vegetative daze. But now he recalled how he'd looked in the
tight white uniform: six feet of well-fed muscle accentuated by the
garment's lines, the blue stars on each lapel just matching his eyes,
the peak of his cap harmonizing with the straight line of his jaw.

He remembered how he'd sounded, speaking words of nonchalant and unfelt
modesty in the soft Southern voice the girls had liked so well. He could
have had his pick of girls. He'd been a picked man himself.

Highly selected--that was the phrase. He was highly selected, Chet
reminded himself, shrinking as the children came closer and their
missiles began to really hurt.

He'd been highly selected since his eighteenth year. At 25 he'd had
seven years of pre-flight training--seven years of indoctrination
specifically designed to give him self-confidence enough to face the
void itself without flinching.

Now he flinched from children.... Still, the schooling had worked, he
acknowledged--so well that when their ship crashed into this planet
Hedlot's salty sea, his first reaction had been indignation at the
elements.

His second thought had been for his comrades. But they went down with
the ship; he alone had been hurled clear. Learning that, he'd swum
resolutely in the direction he knew the shore to be, and made it.

Exhausted, all right--shocked, naked, half-dead really. But quite ready
to point out his rank and identity to the first passer-by.

Lucky for him, Chet mused, that he'd had no chance to express his callow
arrogance. Shock saved his life--sank him into a stupor, so when the
Agvars found him, he was helpless. He knew it was only because it had
seemed perfectly safe that they'd tied him up and brought him to the
village, instead of killing him then and there.

By the time he'd recovered somewhat from the initial shock and
exhaustion, they were used to him, convinced he was harmless if well
chained-up. And they played it safe by giving him nothing but a little
water--no clothing, no shelter, no food....

They let him live, amused by the thirst that drove him to lap up each
morning's drenching dew, fascinated by his ravenous appetite for the
garbage they flung at him.

The Agvars--furry, savage half-men, with something of the dog and
something of the ape and little of the man about them--the Agvars let
him live, Chet realized, for exactly one reason: he made them feel
superior.

They'd learn now! Even though the children had stopped shrieking and
gone away, disgusted at his passivity, no villager's insensitive ears
could yet hear the ship.

In their boastfulness, the Agvars had invited other tribes to come and
look at him and poke at him and laugh at him. His presence was known
over the whole planet. He'd be found, no matter where on Hedlot the
spaceship landed.

And then would come the showdown!

       *       *       *       *       *

But the showdown came earlier than he expected, speeded because the ship
landed close by. Chet told himself he should have counted on that kind
of accuracy, but he'd underestimated his fellow pilots.

He had himself signalled Earthside, just before the crash, that his ship
was about to land. He'd given his position--described sea and shoreline.
They'd find him, if he stayed chained to the post.

But he didn't. Taken unaware by the Agvars who loosed him, Chet was
docile, happy even--certain they wouldn't hurt him now, but would try to
minimize their former cruelty as they turned him over to the spacemen.

When they put new chains on him, around neck and waist, he thought it
was only to make sure he didn't run away before they could deliver him
ostentatiously to the ship.

A dozen adult males had gathered in the clearing, but that was hardly an
unusual event. Even when they all started out, on a winding trail that
didn't head in the direction of the ship's recent landing-sounds, Chet
was convinced they were just circling some geographic obstacle.

He was interested in the forest of 20-foot mosses and 50-foot evergreen
hardwoods pressing densely on each side of the trail. Unconscious when
they'd carried him from the beach, he'd never been out of the village
since, had never inspected these woods. And he thought his mates from
Earth would want to know about them.

Chet could easily have outdistanced the clumsy Agvars if not forced to
imitate their crouching walk. But he knew from experience that to show
off his erect stance and 18-inch height advantage would make them find
some unpleasant way to put him in his place.

They'd shown him that quite often. He'd show _them_--but later, not just
yet. And after showing them, he'd put these Agvars behind him--them,
their filthy planet, and their scorching sun.

It had often tortured him, that gauzy, amorphous solar blaze, but never
more than now. For the sun of Hedlot, when he glanced at it vengefully,
proved from its position that he was not being taken to the ship, but
