The Project Gutenberg EBook of Scientific American Supplement, No. 365,
December 30, 1882, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Scientific American Supplement, No. 365, December 30, 1882

Author: Various

Release Date: July 6, 2006 [EBook #18763]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN ***




Produced by David King, Juliet Sutherland and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net





[Illustration]




SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN SUPPLEMENT NO. 365




NEW YORK, DECEMBER 30, 1882.

Scientific American Supplement. Vol. XIV., No. 365.

Scientific American established 1845

Scientific American Supplement, $5 a year.

Scientific American and Supplement, $7 a year.

       *       *       *       *       *




TABLE OF CONTENTS.


I.    ENGINEERING AND MECHANICS.--Louis Favre, Constructor
      of the St. Gothard Tunnel.--2 figures.--Portrait and
      monument at Turin to commemorate the tunneling of the
      Alps                                                      5817

      The New Harbor of Vera Cruz.--New artificial harbor
      for Vera Cruz.--Capt. Eads's plan.--1 figure.--Plan
      of harbor and improvement                                 5818

      Cost of Power to Make Flour                               5818

      Driving gear Mechanism for Lift Hammers.--2 figures       5819

      De Junker and Ruh's Machine for Cutting Annular
      Wheels.--3 figures                                        5819

      Recent Hydraulic Experiments.--Results of experiments
      on the flow of water in the Ganges Canal                  5819

      The Germ: Shall It be Retained in Flour? By Arthur
      Atkins                                                    5820

      Wheat Tests                                               5820

II.   TECHNOLOGY AND CHEMISTRY.--Apparatus for Manufacturing
      Gaseous or Aerated Beverages.--11 figures.--Bicarbonate
      of soda apparatus. Generator. Washer.--Suction
      pump.--Saturator.--Apparatus for using carbonate of
      lime.--Apparatus completely mechanical in operation       5815

      Detection and Estimation of Fusel Oil                     5816

      On Silicon.--Curious formation of silicide of platinum    5816

      Stannous Nitrates.--The formation of explosive
      compounds in machines by the corrosion of bronze and
      tin solder                                                5816

      Metallic Thorium. By L.F. Nilson                          5816

      Friedrich Woehler.--Obituary notice of the great German
      chemist                                                   5816

      Apparatus for Printing by the Blue Process. By
      Channing Whitaker.--3 figures                             5820

III.  ELECTRICITY, LIGHT, HEAT, ETC.--Spectrum Gratings         5822

      A New Pocket Opera Glass.--4 figures                      5822

      Atoms, Molecules, and Ether Waves. By JOHN TYNDALL.
      Action of heat and light on molecules.--Heat as an
      agent in exploring molecular conditions.--The results
      of a recent incursion into the extra-sensible world
      of atoms and molecules                                    5823

      Apparatus for Measuring Electricity at the Upper
      School of Telegraphy. By E. MERCADIER.--5 figures.
      Constant vibrator.--The Electrical tuning fork.
      Arrangement for testing electric piles.--Very rapid
      electric tuning fork.--A vibrating micrometer             5824

IV.   NATURAL HISTORY.--Our Origin as a Species. By RICHARD
      OWEN.--The Neanderthal skull.--Differential characters
      between the lowest _Homo_ and the highest _Simia_         5825

      The Aba or Odika. By Dr. W.H. BACHELER.--A remarkable
      tree of West Africa                                       5826

      California Cedars                                         5826

       *       *       *       *       *




APPARATUS FOR MANUFACTURING GASEOUS OR AERATED BEVERAGES.


The apparatus employed at present for making gaseous beverages are
divided into two classes--intermittent apparatus based on chemical
compression, and continuous ones based on mechanical compression.

The first are simple in appearance and occupy small space, but their use
is attended with too great inconveniences and losses to allow them to be
employed in cases where the manufacture is of any extent, so the
continuous apparatus are more and more preferred by those engaged in the
industry.

Continuous apparatus, however, other than those that we now propose to
occupy ourselves with, are not without some defects, for the gas is
produced in them intermittingly and at intervals, and more rapidly than
it is used, thus necessitating the use of a gasometer, numerous and
large washers, complicated piping, and, besides, of an acid cock.

To get rid of such drawbacks, it became necessary to seek a means of
rendering the production of the gas continuous, and of regulating it
automatically without the aid of the operator. Mr. Mondollot has
obtained such a result through a happy modification of the primitive
system of the English engineer Bramah. He preserves the suction and
force pump but, while applying it to the same uses, he likewise employs
it, by the aid of a special arrangement, so as to distribute the
sulphuric acid automatically over the chalk in the generator, and to
thus obtain a regular and continuous disengagement of carbonic acid gas.
The dangers and difficulties in the maneuver of an acid cock are
obviated, the gasometer and its cumbersome accessories are dispensed
with, and the purification is more certain, owing to the regularity with
which the gas traverses the washers.

In the accompanying plate we have figured three types of these
apparatus. The first that we shall describe is arranged for the use of
bicarbonate of soda. This apparatus consists (1) of a _generator_, C D,
(2) of a double _washer_ G G, (3) of a _suction pump_, P, and (4) of a
_saturator_, S (See Figs 1 to 9).

_The Generator._--This consists of a cylindrical leaden receptacle, D,
on the bottom of which rests a leaden bell containing apertures, c, at
its base. A partition, c, into which is screwed a leaden tube, C,
containing apertures divides the interior of the bell into two
compartments. The upper of these latter is surmounted by a mouth, B,
closed by a clamp, and through which the bicarbonate of soda is
introduced. A definite quantity of water and sulphuric acid having been
poured into the receptacle, D, a level tends to take place between the
latter and the bell, C, the liquid passing through the apertures. But
the acidulated water, coming in contact with the soda, sets free
carbonic acid gas, which, having no exit, forces the water back and
stops the production of gas until the apparatus is set in motion. At
this moment, the suction of the pump causes a new inflow of acidulated
water upon the soda, from whence another disengagement of gas, and then
a momentary forcing of the water, whose level thus alternately rises and
falls and causes a continuous production of gas proportionate with the
suction of the pump.

The consumption of soda and acid is about 2 kilogrammes each for
charging 100 siphons or 150 bottles. The bicarbonate is known to be used
up when the liquid in the generator is seen to descend to the bottom of
the water level, n, fixed to the vessel, D.

_The Washer_ (Figs 1 and 4)--The gas, on leaving the generator, enters
the washer through a bent copper pipe, R. The washer is formed of two
ovoid glass flasks G G, mounted on a bronze piece, L, to which they are
fixed by screw rings, l, of the same metal. The two flasks, G G,
communicate with each other only through the tinned-copper tube q,
which is held in the mounting q, of the same metal. This latter is
screwed into the piece, L, and contains numerous apertures, through
which the gas coming in from the pipe, R, passes to reach the upper
flask, G. The gas is washed by bubbling up through water that has been
introduced through the cock, R. After it has traversed both flasks, it
escapes through the copper pipe, p, into which it is sucked by the
pump, P.

_The Pump_ (Figs 1, 5 and 6)--This consists of a cylindrical chamber, P,
of bronze, bolted to a bracket on the frame, and cast in a piece, with
the suction valve chamber, P, in which the valve, p, plays. It is
surmounted by the distributing valve chamber P squared. This latter is held
by means of two nuts screwed on to the extremity of the rods, p cubed,
connected with the shell, E, of the distributing-cock, E. In the shell,
E, terminates, on one side, the pipe, p, through which enters the gas
from the washer, and, on the other, the pipe i, that communicates with
a feed-reservoir not shown in the cuts. The cock E, permits of the
simultaneous regulation of the entrance of the gas and water. Its
position is shown by an index e, passing over a graduated dial, _e¹_.
From the distributing valve chamber, P squared the pipe, s, leads the
mixture of water and gas under pressure into

_The Saturator_, S (Figs 1, 7 and 9)--This consists of a large copper
vessel, s, affixed to the top of the frame through the intermedium of
a bronze collar h, and a self closing bottom H. This latter is
provided with two pipes, one of which, s, leads the mixture of water
and carbonic acid forced by the pump, and the other, b, communicates
with the siphons or bottles to be filled. The pipe, b, is not affixed
directly to the bottom, but is connected therewith through the
intermedium of a cock, r. The object of the broken form of this pipe
is to cause the pressure to act according to the axis of the screw, r,
which is maneuvered by the key, r squared.

The water under pressure, having been forced into the vessel, S, is
submitted therein to an agitation that allows it to dissolve a larger
quantity of gas. Such agitation is produced by two pairs of paddles, J
J, mounted at the extremity of an axle actuated by the wheel, A, through
the intermedium of gearings, g and g.

The course of the operation in the saturator may be followed by an
inspection of the water level, n, seen at the front and side in Figs.
2 and 3. This apparatus, in which the pressure reaches 4 to 6
atmospheres in the manufacture of Seltzer water or gaseous lemonade in
bottles, and from 10 to 12 atmospheres in that of Seltzer water in
siphons, is provided also with a pressure gauge, m, and a safety
valve, both screwed, as is also the tube, n squared, into a sphere, S, on
the top of the saturator.

_Apparatus for Using Carbonate of Lime_ (Figs 2, 3, and 10)--When chalk
is acted upon by sulphuric acid, there is formed an insoluble sulphate
which, by covering the chalk, prevents the action of the acid from
continuing if care be not taken to constantly agitate the materials.
This has led to a change in the arrangement of the generator in the
apparatus designed for the use of chalk.

It consists in this case of a leaden vessel, D, having a hemispherical
bottom set into a cylindrical cast iron base, K, and of an agitator
similar to that shown in Fig. 11, for keeping the chalk in suspension in
the water. These latter materials are introduced through the mouth, B
(Fig. 3). Then a special receptacle, C, of lead, shown in detail in Fig.
10, and the cock, c, of which is kept closed, is filled with sulphuric
acid. The acid is not introduced directly into the vessel, C, but is
poured into the cylinder, C, whose sides contain numerous apertures
which prevent foreign materials from passing into the siphon tube c,
and obstructing it.

To put the apparatus in operation, the acid cock, c, is opened and the
wheel, A, is turned, thus setting in motion both the pump piston, P, and
the agitator, within S and D. Then the play of the pump produces a
suction in the washers and from thence in the generator and causes the
acid in the vessel, C, to flow into the generator through the leaden
siphon tubes, c. Coming in contact with the chalk in suspension, the
acid produces a disengagement of gas which soon establishes sufficient
pressure to stop the flow of the acid and drive it back into the siphon
tube. The play of the pump continuing, a new suction takes place and
consequently a momentary flow of acid and a new disengagement of gas.
Thus the production of the latter is continuous, and is regulated by the
very action of the pump, without the operator having to maneuver an
acid-cock. The latter he only has to open when he sets the apparatus in
operation, and to close it when he stops it.

The arrangement of the washer is the same as in the preceding apparatus,
save that a larger cylindrical copper reservoir, G', is substituted for
the lower flask. The pump and saturator offer nothing peculiar.

A bent tube, u, which communicates with the generator, D, on one side,
and with a cylindrical tube, V, ending in a glass vessel on the other,
serves as a safety-valve for both the generator and the acid vessel.

The consumption of chalk is about 2.5 kilogrammes, and the same of acid,
for charging 100 siphons or 150 bottles. The apparatus shown in the
figure is capable of charging 600 siphons or 900 bottles per day.

_An Apparatus Completely Mechanical in Operation_ (Fig. 11).--This
apparatus consists of two very distinct parts. The saturator, pump, and
driving shaft are supported by a hollow base, in whose interior are
placed a copper washer and the water-inlet controlled by a float-cock.
This part of the apparatus is not shown in the plate. The generator,
partially shown in Fig. 11, is placed on a base of its own, and is
connected by a pipe with the rest of the apparatus. It consists of two
similar generators, D, made of copper lined with lead, and working
alternately, so as to avoid all stoppages in the manufacture when the
materials are being renewed. The pipe, d, connecting the two parts of
the apparatus forks so as to lead the gas from one or the other of the
generators, whence it passes into the copper washer within the base,
then into the glass indicating washer, and then to the pump which forces
it into the saturator.

Each of the generators communicates by special pipes, a, with a single
safety vessel, V, that operates the same as in the preceding apparatus.
The agitator, Q, is of bronze, and is curved as shown in Fig. 11.

The production of this type of apparatus is dependent upon the number of
siphons that can be filled by a siphon filler working without
interruption.--_Machines, Outils et Appareils._

       *       *       *       *       *




DETECTION AND ESTIMATION OF FUSEL OIL.


Until quite recently we have had no accurate method for the
determination of fusel oil in alcohol or brandy. In 1837 Meurer
suggested a solution of one part of silver nitrate in nine parts of
water as a reagent for its detection, stating that when added to alcohol
containing fusel oil, a reddish brown color is produced, and in case
large quantities are present, a dark brown precipitate is formed. It was
soon found, however, that other substances than amyl alcohol produce
brown colored solutions with silver nitrate; and Bouvier[1] observed
that on adding potassium iodide to alcohol containing fusel oil, the
solution is colored yellow, from the decomposition of the iodide.
Subsequently Boettger[2] proved that potassium iodide is not decomposed
by pure amyl alcohol, and that the decomposition is due to the presence
of acids contained in fusel oil. More accurate results are obtained by
using a very dilute solution of potassium permanganate, which is
decomposed by amyl alcohol much more rapidly than by ethyl alcohol.

    [Footnote 1: Zeitschrift f. Anal. Chem. xi., 343.]

    [Footnote 2: Dingler's Polytech. Jour., ccxii., 516.]

Depre[3] determines fusel oil by oxidizing a definite quantity of the
alcohol in a closed vessel with potassium bichromate and sulphuric acid.
after removal of excess of the oxidizing reagents, the organic acids are
distilled, and, by repeated fractional distillation, the acetic acid is
separated as completely as possible. The remaining acids are saturated
with barium hydroxide, and the salts analyzed; a difference between the
percentage of barium found and that of barium in barium acetate proves
the presence of fusel oil, and the amount of difference gives some idea
of its quantity. Betelli[4] dilutes 5 c.c. of the alcohol to be tested
with 6 to 7 volumes of water, and adds 15 to 20 drops of chloroform and
shakes thoroughly. If fusel oil is present, its odor may be detected by
evaporating the chloroform; or, by treatment with sulphuric acid and
sodium acetate, the ether is obtained, which can be readily recognized.
Jorissen[5] tests for fusel oil by adding 10 drops of colorless aniline
and 2 to 3 drops of hydrochloric acid to 10 c.c. of the alcohol. In the
presence of fusel oil a red color is produced within a short time, which
can be detected when not more than 0.1 per cent. is present. But
Foerster[6] objects to this method because he finds the color to be due
to the presence of furfurol, and that pure amyl alcohol gives no color
with aniline and hydrochloric acid.

    [Footnote 3: Pharm. J. Trans. [3] vi., 867.]

    [Footnote 4: Berichte d. Deutschen Chem. Gesellsch., viii., 72.]

    [Footnote 5: Pharm. Centralhalle, xxii., 3.]

    [Footnote 6: Berichte d. Deutsch. Chem. Gesellsch., xv., 230.]

Hager[7] detects fusel oil as follows: If the spirit contains more than
60 per cent. of alcohol, it is diluted with an equal volume of water and
some glycerine added, pieces of filter paper are then saturated with the
liquid and exposed to the After the evaporation of the alcohol, the odor
of the fusel oil can be readily detected. For the quantitative
determination he distills 100 c.c. of the alcohol in a flask of 150 to
200 c.c. capacity connected with a condenser, and so arranged that the
