to circumstances so far as to consider liquid mud good water!  More than
that, I found that most of the party deemed it a sufficient beverage,
for they were all temperance men, if not total abstainers.  Still
further, I followed their example, drank of that yellow pond, and
actually enjoyed it.  Subsequently I made the discovery that there were
small animals in it; after that I preferred it in the form of tea, which
was quickly infused by our active Hottentots.

The discovery above referred to was made when Green, (or Brownarms, or
Broadshoulders, I forget which), was quaffing a cup of the cold element.
Having drained it he spat out the last mouthful, and along with it a
lively creature like a small shrimp, with something like a
screw-propeller under its tail!

Enjoying our tea under the shade of the mimosa, we rested for an hour,
and then, saddling our steeds and slinging on rifles and
cartridge-pouches, we mounted, and sallied forth upon the plain.

A glorious sensation of freedom came over me as I felt my horse's
springy step,--a sensation which brought powerfully back the memory of
those days when I first galloped over the American prairies.  Surely
there must be a sympathy, a mesmeric influence, between a horse and his
rider which sends a thrill through each.  Hobson had lent me his own
favourite horse, Rob Roy.  He was a charming creature; well made,
active, willing, and tender in the mouth, but, best of all, he
"trippled" splendidly.

Trippling is a favourite gait in South Africa, especially among the
Dutch farmers.  It is something between pacing and ambling, a motion so
easy that one scarce rises at all from the saddle.  We trippled off into
the vast plain towards the horizon, each horseman diverging a little
from his comrades, like a fleet of fishing-boats putting out to sea.
Most of the party rode without coats, for the sky was cloudless, and we
looked for a broiling day.  Brownarms, I observed, had his sleeves
rolled up, as usual, to the shoulder.  Six-foot Johnny rode a
cream-coloured pony, which, like himself, enjoyed itself intensely, and
seemed ready for anything.  Each man grasped his rifle by the middle
with the right hand, and rested the stock on his thigh.

Being a stranger to the work, I had been supplied with a Hottentot as
well as a horse,--to guide me and carry my rifle; but I scorned to ride
without my weapon, and did not at first see the necessity of a guide in
the circumstances.  Ultimately I was only too glad to avail myself of
his services!

The South Africans call Hottentots "boys," whatever their age or size
may be.  My "boy" was named Michael.  He was a small wiry man of twenty
or thirty,--more or less,--with a dirty brown face, dirty brown
garments, and a dirty brown horse.  Though a bad one to look at, it was
a marvellous horse to go.  Michael had a cavernous red mouth, and
magnificent white teeth.  Likewise he was gifted with a strong sense of
the ludicrous, as I have reason to know.

We advanced slowly into the plain at first, and gradually scattered
until some of the party began to look like mere specks in the distance.
Presently I saw two or three of them break into a gallop, and observed a
few moving spots of white on the horizon.  I looked anxiously at my boy.
He returned the gaze with glittering eyes and said "bok."

"Boks! are they?" said I, applying my spur and making a leap over an
ant-bear hole.

Rob Roy stretched his legs with a will, but a howl from Michael caused
me to look round.  He was trending off in another direction, and
pointing violently towards something.  He spoke nothing but Dutch.  My
acquaintance with that tongue was limited to the single word "Ja."

He was aware of this, and his visage became all eyes and mouth in his
frantic effort to assure me it would be wise were I to follow his lead.

I turned at once and galloped alongside of him in faith.

It soon became clear what he aimed at.  The horsemen on the far off
horizon were driving the springboks towards the stream which bounded one
side of the great plain, Mike was making for the bushes that bordered
that stream in the hope of reaching them before the boks should observe
us.

Oh! it was a glorious burst, that first race over the wild Karroo, on a
spirited steed, in the freshness of early morning--

  With the silent bushboy alone by my side,

for he _was_ silent, though tremendously excited.  His brown rags
fluttered in the self-made breeze, and his brown pony scrambled over the
ground quite as fast as Rob Roy.  We reached a clump of underwood in
time, and pulled up, panting, beside a bush which was high enough to
conceal the horses.

Anxiously we watched here, and carefully did I look to my rifle,--a
double-barrelled breech-loading "Soaper-Henry,"--to see that it was
loaded and cocked, and frequently did I take aim at stump and stone to
get my hand and eye well "in," and admiringly, with hope in every
lineament, did Michael observe me.

"See anything of them, Mike?"  I asked.

I might as well have asked a baboon.  Mike only grinned, but Mike's grin
once seen was not easily forgotten.

Suddenly Mike caught sight of something, and bolted.  I followed.  At
the same moment pop! pop! went rifles in different parts of the plain.
We could not see anything distant for the bushes, but presently we came
to the edge of an open space, into which several springboks were
trotting with a confusedly surprised air.

"Now, Sar,--now's you chance," said Mike, using the only English
sentence he possessed, and laying hold of the bridle of my horse.

I was on the ground and down on one knee in such a hurry, that to this
day I know not by what process I got off the horse.

Usually, when thus taken by surprise, the springboks stop for a moment
or two and gaze at the kneeling hunter.  This affords a splendid though
brief chance to take good aim, but the springboks were not inquisitive
that day.  They did not halt.  I had to take a running shot, and the
ball fell short, to my intense mortification.  I had sighted for three
hundred yards.  Sighting quickly for five hundred, while the frightened
animals were scampering wildly away, I put a ball in the dust just
between the legs of one.

The leap which that creature gave was magnificent.  Much too high to be
guessed at with a hope of being believed!  The full significance of the
animal's name was now apparent.  Charging a breech-loader is rapid work,
but the flock was nine hundred or a thousand yards off before I could
again take aim.  In despair I fired and sent a bullet into the midst of
them, but without touching one.

I now turned to look at the "boy," who was sitting on his pony with both
eyes nearly shut, and a smile so wide that the double row of his teeth
were exposed to the very last grinders!

But he became extremely grave and sympathetic as I turned towards him,
and made a remark in Dutch which was doubtless equivalent to "better
luck next time."

Remounting I rode to the edge of the clump of bushes and found several
of my companions, some of whom carried the carcasses of springboks at
their cruppers.  Hope revived at once, and I set off with them in search
of another flock.

"You've failed, I see," remarked my friend Jonathan Hobson in a
sympathetic tone.

Ah! what a blessed thing is sympathy!

"Yes," said I; "my shots fell short."

"Don't let that discourage you," returned Jonathan, "you're not used to
the Karroo.  Distance is very deceptive.  Sighting one's rifle is the
chief difficulty in these regions, but you'll soon come to it."

Another flock of springboks was discovered at this moment on a distant
knoll, towards which we trotted, trippled, and cantered.  We quickly
scattered,--each man taking his own course.  Six-foot Johnny, already
burdened with a buck, went off at reckless speed.  He soon came near
enough to cause the game to look up inquiringly.  This made him draw
rein, and advance with caution in a sidling and indirect manner.  In a
few minutes the boks trotted off.  We were now within long range, and
made a dash at racing-speed to head them.  The creatures absolutely
played with us at first, and performed some of their astounding leaps,
as if for our special amusement.  Had they set off at full speed at once
we should not have had a chance, for they are fleeter than horses.
Their manner of leaping is _a la_ indiarubber ball.  It is not a bound
forwards, but a "stott" straight upwards,--six, eight, or nine feet,
without apparent effort, and displaying at each bound a ridge, or fold,
of pure white hair on their backs which at other times is concealed.

We now "put on a spurt," and the leading men got near enough--between
two and three hundred yards.  They dismounted, dropped their bridles,
and kneeled to take aim.  Brownarms fired and brought one down--so did
Broadshoulders.  Six-foot Johnny, in his eagerness, let the cream pony
stumble, somehow, and went over its head--also over his own, and landed
on his knees.  The bok he was after stopped to gaze at the catastrophe.
Johnny, profiting by his position, took aim and tumbled it over.

Mike was by this time leading me towards an animal.  We got within three
hundred yards when it began to stretch out.  Further pursuit being
useless, I pulled up, leaped off, kneeled, fired, and missed again--the
ball, although straight, falling short.  With wild haste I scrambled on
Rob Roy--who, by the way, stood as still as a stone when left with the
bridle thrown over his head and hanging from his nose.  The horses were
trained to this.

Loading as I ran we soon came to a bok which had been turned by some of
the other hunters.  Again I raced, pulled up, leaped off, and fired.
The pop! pop! was now going on all over the plain, and balls were
whistling everywhere.  Again my bok refused to stop to look at me--as he
ought to have done--and again I missed.  Michael's eyes were now quite
shut, and his jaws visible to the wisdom teeth--supposing he possessed
any.

Growing reckless under disappointment I now dashed away in pursuit of
animals that had been scattered by the fusillade, and fired right and
left at all ranges between two and ten hundred yards, but without any
other effect than that of driving up the dust under two or three of
them, and causing many of their astounding leaps.  Soon the rest of the
party were scattered so far on the plain as to be utterly out of sight
and hearing.  As far as sensation went, my "Tottie" and I were as lonely
in that wilderness as was Mungo Park in days gone by.

All this time the sun was blazing in the sky with unclouded and fervent
heat.  It had been 110 degrees in the shade at Ebenezer a day or two
before, therefore I judged it to have been much the same on this
occasion.  There was not a breath of wind.  Everything was tremulous
with heat.

Suddenly I beheld, with the deepest interest, a magnificent lake with
beautiful islets scattered over its crystal breast.  Often had I read of
the _mirage_ of African deserts, and much had I thought about it.  Now,
for the first time, it was before me.  Never was deception more perfect.
If I had not known that no such lake existed in the region I should
have been almost ready to stake my life on the reality of what I saw.
No wonder that thirsty travellers in unknown regions should have so
often pushed forward in eager pursuit of this beautiful phantom.

"Things are not what they seem," truly!  This applies to many
terrestrial things, but to none of them more thoroughly than to the
_mirage_.

While I was looking at it, the form of the lake altered sufficiently to
have dispelled the illusion, if I had been labouring under it.  In a few
minutes it passed away altogether, but only to reappear elsewhere.

Another curious effect, and rather absurd mistake, resulted from the
different densities in the super-heated atmosphere which caused this
_mirage_.  Fancying that I saw two springboks on the horizon I pointed
them out to my boy.

"Ja!" said Mike, nodding his head and riding towards them at a smart
canter.  As we advanced I observed that the boks began to grow rather
larger than life, and that Mike slackened his pace and began to grin.
It turned out that the objects were two carts with white canvas hoods,
and when we came up to them we found they belonged to a party who had
come out to join us, but who, up to that hour, had been unable to
discover us in the vast hunting-field!

After directing them to our camp we proceeded on our way.  That is to
say Mike did.  For myself, I was completely lost, and if left to myself
should have been quite unable to return to camp.

While galloping along, revelling in the sunshine--in the love of which I
will not yield to cats--we came suddenly on the largest snake I had yet
seen.  It was, I believe, a cobra, must have been fully six feet long,
if not more, and was gliding with an easy sinuous motion over the plain
as fast apparently, as a man's ordinary running-pace.  I observed that
it did not get out of the way of small bushes, but went straight through
them without the smallest check to its speed.  It suddenly dived into a
hole and disappeared.  It is said that when snakes take to a hole to
escape pursuit, some of them have a habit of causing their heads to stop
abruptly at the entrance, and allowing their bodies and tails to flip
past like the lash of a whip, so that if the pursuer were to thrust in
his hand to grasp the tail he would be met by the fangs!  As the bite of
most South African snakes means death, if the part be not cut out, or
otherwise effectually treated, handling them is carefully avoided.
Nevertheless my friend Jonathan--when a younger man, let us hope!--was
in the habit of occasionally catching deadly snakes by the tail,
swinging them round his head, and dashing out their brains on a stone or
tree!

Soon we perceived two of our comrades driving a flock of springboks
towards the river.  Mike at once diverged towards a clump of bushes
which it seemed probable they would pass.  In ten minutes we were down
in a hollow, with the horses hid behind a mimosa-thorn.  The boks had
not seen us, being too much taken up with their pursuers; they came
straight towards us.

"Now, sar," whispered Mike once again, while his eyes glared with glee,
"_now's_ you chance!"

I went down on one knee, carefully sighted the rifle, and looked up.
The foremost bok was within good range.  I fired and missed!
"Desolation!" said I, cramming in another cartridge while the flock
diverged to the left.

There was no hope now of anything but a running shot.  I aimed
carefully.  The smoke cleared off, the flock dashed on, but--one bok lay
prone upon the earth.  Bang! went my second barrel, and another bok,
leaping into the air, fell, rose, fell again, then rose and ran on.

Mike was now jubilant.  The whole internal structure of his mouth was
disclosed to view in his satisfaction, as he viewed the prostrate
animal.  I may add that although we did not find the wounded bok that
evening, we found him next day.

With our prize strapped behind Mike's saddle we rode in triumph into
camp, a little before sunset, and found most of our companions
assembled, busy preparing supper and making other arrangements for
camping out on the veldt--as they call the plain.  Some had been
successful, some had failed, but a good many springboks had been killed,
and all were hearty as crickets and hungry as hyenas.

To kindle fires, boil tea, roast venison steaks, spread blankets on the
ground, and otherwise attend to the duties of the bivouac, was now the
order of the hour.  The moon rose while we were thus engaged, and
mingled her pale light with the ruddy blaze of camp-fires.  We spoke
little and ate much.  Then followed the inevitable pipe and the pleasant
chat, but we were all too ready for rest to care about keeping it up
long.  I was constrained to take the bed of honour in the cart.  The
others stretched their limbs on the Karroo, and in ten minutes every man
was in the land of nod.

Next day we mounted at daybreak and renewed the hunt, but I will say no
more about it than that we bagged twenty-six springboks amongst us, and
that Six-foot Johnny, having killed the greatest number of animals,
returned home "King of the hunt," with a scrap of ostrich feather in his
cap.



LETTER THREE.

SOMERSET--THE BRITISH SETTLERS--ORIGINAL "OWNERS"--NATIVE CHURCH-GOING.

On my way to the Karroo I had to pass through Somerset East, and it so
fell out that I fell in with a countryman from Edinburgh, who chanced to
be going to Somerset in the same "passenger-cart" with myself.  His name
must have been a novelty once, though much of its freshness is worn off
now--it was Brown.

Our cart had a hood; the roads were very bad, and the behaviour of that
hood was stupendous!  Its attachment to the cart was, so to speak,
partial; therefore it possessed a semi-independent motion which was
perplexing.  You could not count on its actions.  A sudden lurch of the
cart to right or left did, of course, carry the hood with it, and,
counting on that, you laid your sudden plans to avoid collision; but the
elasticity of the hood enabled it to give you a slap on the face before
obeying its proper impulse.  So, too, it would come down on your head
unexpectedly, or, without the slightest provocation, would hit you on
the neck behind.  I learned with painful certainty in that cart that I
had a "small" to my back!  It seemed to me that it grew large before the
journey was over.

Brown was an intelligent man,--not an unusual state of things with the
"Browns."  He had two pretty daughters with him, aged eight and twelve
respectively.  We got on well together, and crossed the Zuurberg range
in company on the last day of the year.

It was over passes in this range that the settlers of 1820 went in long
trains of Cape wagons, with wives and little ones, and household goods,
and civilised implements of husbandry, and weapons of defence, with high
hopes and strong courage, and with their "lives in their hands," to
subdue the wilderness.  It was from these heights that they looked over
the beautiful and bush-clad plains of "Albany," which lay before them as
the lot of their inheritance.

The breaking up and scattering of the various "parties" was most
eloquently and graphically told by the Reverend H.H. Dugmore in a
lecture delivered at Grahamstown, on the occasion of the "British
Settlers' Jubilee," in May 1870--fifty years after the arrival of the
"fathers."  [See Note 1.] I quote one passage, which gives a good idea
of the manner in which the land was taken up.

"And now the Sunday's River is crossed, and the terrible old Ado Hill is
climbed, and Quaggas Flat is passed, and the Bushman's river heights are
scaled.  The points of divergence are reached, and the long column
breaks into divisions.  Baillie's party made their way to the mouth of
the Fish River, where, it was said, the `Head' had been allowed to
choose a territory, and where he hoped to realise imaginations of
commercial wealth by founding a seaport town.  And the Duke of
Newcastle's proteges from Nottingham took possession of the beautiful
vale of Clumber, naming it in honour of their noble patron.  And
Wilson's party settled between the plains of Waay-plaats and the Kowie
bush, right across the path of the elephants, some of which they tried
to shoot with fowling-pieces.  And Sefton's party founded the village of
Salem, the religious importance of which to the early progress of the
settlement, is not to be estimated by its present size and population.
These four were the large parties.  The smaller ones filled up the
intervening spaces between them.  Behind the thicket-clad sandhills of
the Kowie and Green Fountain, and extending over the low plains beyond
Bathurst, were the locations of Cock's, Thornhill's, Ostler's, Smith's,
and Richardson's parties.  Skirting the wooded Kloofs from Bathurst
towards the banks of the Klienemonden, were ranged the parties of James
and Hyman.  It was the latter who gravely announced to Captain Trapps,
the Bathurst magistrate, the discovery of `precious stones' on his
location; and which the angry gentleman, jealous of the reserved rights
of Government, found, on further inquiry, were only `precious big ones!'
The rich valley of Lushington afforded a resting-place to Dyason's
party.  Holder's people called their location New Bristol; which never,
however, acquired any resemblance to _Old_ Bristol.  Passing on towards
the front, there were Mouncey's party, Hayhurst's party, Bradshaw's
party, Southey's party, stretching along the edge of the wide plains of
the Round Hill, and drinking their Western waters.  The post of honour
and of danger was the line of the Kap River.  This was occupied by the
party of Scott below Kafir Drift, and by the Irish party above it.  The
forlorn hope of the entire settlement was Mahony's party at the clay
pits, who had to bear the first brunt of every Kafir depredation in the
Lower Albany direction.  Names thicken as we proceed from Waay-plaats
towards Grahamstown.  Passing Greathead's location, we come among the
men of Dalgairns at Blauw Krantz.  Then those of Liversage about Manly's
Flats.  John Stanley, `Head of all Parties,' as he styled himself,
belonged to the same neighbourhood.  Turvey's party were in Grobblaar's
Kloof; William Smith's at Stony Vale, Dr Clarke's at Collingham.
Howard's, Morgan's, and Carlisle's, bring us by successive steps to the
neighbourhood of Grahamstown.

"My `reminiscences' are those of an Albany settler; but I do not forget
that there was another party, who, though locally separated from the
main body, occupied a position, the importance of which developed itself
in the after-history of the settlement.  I refer to the Scotch party,
who were located on the Baviaans River, among mountains and glens that
have been rendered classic by the poetry of their leader and historic by
the gallant deeds and endurance of his compatriots in the
after-struggles of the frontier.  I need make no particular reference,
however, to the early circumstances of that body of men, as in Pringle's
_African Sketches_ they have a most graphically-written history of their
own."

Thus, in 1820, was the land overrun and taken possession of by the
"British Settlers."  It had once been the land of the Hottentots, but
had never at any time rightfully belonged to the Kafirs, who, after
wrongfully entering it and rendering themselves by their thievish
disposition and deceit an unbearable nuisance, were finally driven out
of it in 1819.

The idea of Government in sending the settlers out to occupy these
vacated lands was, that a convenient buffer might thus be placed on the
frontier of the colony to keep the savages in check.  That these
settlers and their descendants received many a rude shock, and played
their part nobly, has been proved, and is admitted on all hands.  That
they received less encouragement and help from those who induced them to
emigrate than might have been expected, is equally certain.

Brown and I chatted, more or less, of these things as we toiled up the
slopes of the Zuurberg, where the original settlers had toiled
fifty-five years before us, and in the afternoon came to a pretty good
inn, where a small misfortune befell us.  While we were indulging in a
cup of tea, one of our horses escaped.  We had crossed the mountain
range by that time, and the truant had a fine range of undulating
country to scamper over.  That animal gave us some trouble, for,
although nearly a dozen men went, after him on horseback, he kept
dodging about actively with many flourishes of heels and tail during the
whole afternoon.

When one is in no hurry, and the weather is fine, a delay of this kind
is rather pleasant than otherwise.  While men and boys were engaged in
the fruitless chase, I wandered off into the bush in the hope of
stumbling on a tortoise or a snake, or some other creature that I had
previously been accustomed to see in zoological collections, but the
reptiles kept close, and refused to show themselves.  I came, however,
on a gigantic beehive; at least it resembled one in appearance, though
the smoke that issued from a hole in its top suggested humanity.  There
was also a hole in one side partially covered by a rickety door.  Close
beside it stood a little black creature which resembled a fat and
hairless monkey.  It might have been a baboon.  The astonished gaze and
grin with which it greeted me warranted such an assumption, but when it
