these chief matters commanded of God are neither regarded nor
observed? Just as though He were bound to honor our jugglery
as a reward of our treading His solemn commandments under
foot. But our sins weigh upon us and cause God not to be
gracious to us; for we do not repent, and, besides, wish to
defend every abomination.

O Lord Jesus Christ, do Thou Thyself convoke a Council, and
deliver Thy servants by Thy glorious advent! The Pope and his
adherents are done for; they will have none of Thee. Do Thou,
then, help us, who are poor and needy, who sigh to Thee, and
beseech Thee earnestly, according to the grace which Thou hast
given us, through Thy Holy Ghost who liveth and reigneth with
Thee and the Father, blessed forever. Amen.




THE FIRST PART

Treats of the Sublime Articles Concerning the Divine Majesty,
as:

I.
That Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, three distinct persons in
one divine essence and nature, are one God, who has created
heaven and earth.

II.
That the Father is begotten of no one; the Son of the Father;
the Holy Ghost proceeds from Father and Son.

III.
That not the Father nor the Holy Ghost but the Son became man.

IV.
That the Son became man in this manner, that He was conceived,
without the cooperation of man, by the Holy Ghost, and was
born of the pure, holy [and always] Virgin Mary. Afterwards He
suffered, died, was buried, descended to hell, rose from the
dead, ascended to heaven, sits at the right hand of God, will
come to judge the quick and the dead, etc. as the Creed of the
Apostles, as well as that of St. Athanasius, and the Catechism
in common use for children, teach.

Concerning these articles there is no contention or dispute,
since we on both sides confess them. Therefore it is not
necessary now to treat further of them.




THE SECOND PART

Treats of the Articles which Refer to
the Office and Work of Jesus Christ,
or Our Redemption.

The first and chief article is this,

That Jesus Christ, our God and Lord, died for our sins, and
was raised again for our justification, Rom. 4, 25.

And He alone is the Lamb of God which taketh away the sins of
the world, John 1, 29; and God has laid upon Him the
iniquities of us all, Is. 53, 6.

Likewise: All have sinned and are justified without merit
[freely, and without their own works or merits] by His grace,
through the redemption that is in Christ Jesus, in His blood,
Rom. 3, 23 f.

Now, since it is necessary to believe this, and it cannot be
otherwise acquired or apprehended by any work, law, or merit,
it is clear and certain that this faith alone justifies us as
St. Paul says, Rom. 3, 28: For we conclude that a man is
justified by faith, without the deeds of the Law. Likewise v.
26: That He might be just, and the Justifier of him which
believeth in Christ.

Of this article nothing can be yielded or surrendered [nor can
anything be granted or permitted contrary to the same], even
though heaven and earth, and whatever will not abide, should
sink to ruin. For there is none other name under heaven, given
among men whereby we must be saved, says Peter, Acts 4, 12.
And with His stripes we are healed, Is. 53, 5. And upon this
article all things depend which we teach and practice in
opposition to the Pope, the devil, and the [whole] world.
Therefore, we must be sure concerning this doctrine, and not
doubt; for otherwise all is lost, and the Pope and devil and
all things gain the victory and suit over us.




Article II: Of the Mass.

That the Mass in the Papacy must be the greatest and most
horrible abomination, as it directly and powerfully conflicts
with this chief article, and yet above and before all other
popish idolatries it has been the chief and most specious. For
it has been held that this sacrifice or work of the Mass, even
though it be rendered by a wicked [and abandoned] scoundrel,
frees men from sins, both in this life and also in purgatory,
while only the Lamb of God shall and must do this, as has been
said above. Of this article nothing is to be surrendered or
conceded, because the first article does not allow it.

If, perchance, there were reasonable Papists we might speak
moderately and in a friendly way, thus: first, why they so
rigidly uphold the Mass. For it is but a pure invention of
men, and has not been commanded by God; and every invention of
man we may [safely] discard, as Christ declares, Matt. 15, 9:
In vain do they worship Me, teaching for doctrines the
commandments of men.

Secondly. It is an unnecessary thing, which can be omitted
without sin and danger.

Thirdly. The Sacrament can be received in a better and more
blessed way [more acceptable to God], (yea, the only blessed
way), according to the institution of Christ. Why, then, do
they drive the world to woe and [extreme] misery on account of
a fictitious, unnecessary matter, which can be well obtained
in another and more blessed way?

Let [care be taken that] it be publicly preached to the people
that the Mass as men's twaddle [commentitious affair or human
figment] can be omitted without sin, and that no one will be
condemned who does not observe it, but that he can be saved in
a better way without the Mass. I wager [Thus it will come to
pass] that the Mass will then collapse of itself, not only
among the insane [rude] common people, but also among all
pious, Christian, reasonable, God-fearing hearts; and that the
more, when they would hear that the Mass is a [very] dangerous
thing, fabricated and invented without the will and Word of
God.

Fourthly. Since such innumerable and unspeakable abuses have
arisen in the whole world from the buying and selling of
masses, the Mass should by right be relinquished, if for no
other purpose than to prevent abuses, even though in itself it
had something advantageous and good. How much more ought we to
relinquish it, so as to prevent [escape] forever these
horrible abuses, since it is altogether unnecessary, useless,
and dangerous, and we can obtain everything by a more
necessary, profitable, and certain way without the Mass.

Fifthly. But since the Mass is nothing else and can be nothing
else (as the Canon and all books declare), than a work of men
(even of wicked scoundrels), by which one attempts to
reconcile himself and others to God, and to obtain and merit
the remission of sins and grace (for thus the Mass is observed
when it is observed at the very best; otherwise what purpose
would it serve?), for this very reason it must and should
[certainly] be condemned and rejected. For this directly
conflicts with the chief article, which says that it is not a
wicked or a godly hireling of the Mass with his own work, but
the Lamb of God and the Son of God, that taketh away our sins.

But if any one should advance the pretext that as an act of
devotion he wishes to administer the Sacrament, or Communion,
to himself, he is not in earnest [he would commit a great
mistake, and would not be speaking seriously and sincerely].
For if he wishes to commune in sincerity, the surest and best
way for him is in the Sacrament administered according to
Christ's institution. But that one administer communion to
himself is a human notion, uncertain, unnecessary, yea, even
prohibited. And he does not know what he is doing, because
without the Word of God he obeys a false human opinion and
invention. So, too, it is not right (even though the matter
were otherwise correct) for one to use the common Sacrament of
[belonging to] the Church according to his own private
devotion, and without God's Word and apart from the communion
of the Church to trifle therewith.

This article concerning the Mass will be the whole business of
the Council. [The Council will perspire most over, and be
occupied with this article concerning the Mass.] For if it
were [although it would be] possible for them to concede to us
all the other articles, yet they could not concede this. As
Campegius said at Augsburg that he would be torn to pieces
before he would relinquish the Mass, so, by the help of God,
I, too, would suffer myself to be reduced to ashes before I
would allow a hireling of the Mass, be he good or bad, to be
made equal to Christ Jesus, my Lord and Savior, or to be
exalted above Him. Thus we are and remain eternally separated
and opposed to one another. They feel well enough that when
the Mass falls, the Papacy lies in ruins. Before they will
permit this to occur, they will put us all to death if they
can.

In addition to all this, this dragon's tail, [I mean] the
Mass, has begotten a numerous vermin-brood of manifold
idolatries.

