like one in a dream. If Peter did but speak a little quickly to her, she
started and fixed two terrified eyes on him. She went less often to her
friend Margaret Van Eyck, and was ill at her ease when there. Instead of
meeting her warm old friend's caresses, she used to receive them passive
and trembling, and sometimes almost shrink from them. But the most
extraordinary thing was, she never would go outside her own house in
daylight. When she went to Tergou it was after dusk, and she returned
before daybreak. She would not even go to matins. At last Peter,
unobservant as he was, noticed it, and asked her the reason.

"Methinks the folk all look at me."

One day, Margaret Van Eyck asked her what was the matter.

A scared look and a flood of tears were all the reply; the old lady
expostulated gently. "What, sweetheart, afraid to confide your sorrows
to me?"

"I have no sorrows, madam, but of my own making. I am kinder treated
than I deserve; especially in this house."

"Then why not come oftener, my dear?"

"I come oftener than I deserve;" and she sighed deeply.

"There, Reicht is bawling for you," said Margaret Van Eyck; "go,
child!--what on earth can it be?"

Turning possibilities over in her mind, she thought Margaret must be
mortified at the contempt with which she was treated by Gerard's family.
"I will take them to task for it, at least such of them as are women;"
and the very next day she put on her hood and cloak and followed by
Reicht, went to the hosier's house. Catherine received her with much
respect, and thanked her with tears for her kindness to Gerard. But
when, encouraged by this, her visitor diverged to Margaret Brandt,
Catherine's eyes dried, and her lips turned to half the size, and she
looked as only obstinate, ignorant women can look. When they put on
this cast of features, you might as well attempt to soften or convince a
brick wall. Margaret Van Eyck tried, but all in vain. So then, not being
herself used to be thwarted, she got provoked, and at last went out
hastily with an abrupt and mutilated curtsey, which Catherine, returned
with an air rather of defiance than obeisance. Outside the door Margaret
Van Eyck found Reicht conversing with a pale girl on crutches. Margaret
Van Eyck was pushing by them with heightened colour, and a scornful
toss intended for the whole family, when suddenly a little delicate hand
glided timidly into hers, and looking round she saw two dove-like eyes,
with the water in them, that sought hers gratefully and at the same time
imploringly. The old lady read this wonderful look, complex as it was,
and down went her choler. She stopped and kissed Kate's brow. "I see,"
said she. "Mind, then, I leave it to you." Returned home, she said--"I
have been to a house to-day, where I have seen a very common thing and
a very uncommon thing; I have seen a stupid, obstinate woman, and I have
seen an angel in the flesh, with a face-if I had it here I'd take down
my brushes once more and try and paint it."

Little Kate did not belie the good opinion so hastily formed of her. She
waited a better opportunity, and told her mother what she had learned
from Reicht Heynes, that Margaret had shed her very blood for Gerard in
the wood.

"See, mother, how she loves him."

"Who would not love him?"

"Oh, mother, think of it! Poor thing."

"Ay, wench. She has her own trouble, no doubt, as well as we ours. I
can't abide the sight of blood, let alone my own."

This was a point gained; but when Kate tried to follow it up she was
stopped short.

About a month after this a soldier of the Dalgetty tribe, returning from
service in Burgundy, brought a letter one evening to the hosier's house.
He was away on business; but the rest of the family sat at Supper. The
soldier laid the letter on the table by Catherine, and refusing all
guerdon for bringing it, went off to Sevenbergen.

The letter was unfolded and spread out; and curiously enough, though not
one of them could read, they could all tell it was Gerard's handwriting.

"And your father must be away," cried Catherine. "Are ye not ashamed of
yourselves? not one that can read your brother's letter."

But although the words were to them what hieroglyphics are to us, there
was something in the letter they could read. There is an art can speak
without words; unfettered by the penman's limits, it can steal through
the eye into the heart and brain, alike of the learned and unlearned;
and it can cross a frontier or a sea, yet lose nothing. It is at the
mercy of no translator; for it writes an universal language.

When, therefore, they saw this,

[a picture of two hands clasped together]

which Gerard had drawn with his pencil between the two short paragraphs,
of which his letter consisted, they read it, and it went straight to
their hearts.

Gerard was bidding them farewell.

As they gazed on that simple sketch, in every turn and line of which
they recognized his manner, Gerard seemed present, and bidding them
farewell.

The women wept over it till they could see it no longer.

Giles said, "Poor Gerard!" in a lower voice than seemed to belong to
him.

Even Cornelis and Sybrandt felt a momentary remorse, and sat silent and
gloomy.

But how to get the words read to them. They were loth to show their
ignorance and their emotion to a stranger.

"The Dame Van Eyck?" said Kate timidly.

"And so I will, Kate. She has a good heart. She loves Gerard, too. She
will be glad to hear of him. I was short with her when she came here;
but I will make my submission, and then she will tell me what my poor
child says to me."

She was soon at Margaret Van Eyck's house. Reicht took her into a room,
and said, "Bide a minute; she is at her orisons."

There was a young woman in the room seated pensively by the stove; but
she rose and courteously made way for the visitor.

"Thank you, young lady; the winter nights are cold, and your stove is a
treat." Catherine then, while warming her hands, inspected her companion
furtively from head to foot, inclusive. The young person wore an
ordinary wimple, but her gown was trimmed with fur, which was, in those
days, almost a sign of superior rank or wealth. But what most struck
Catherine was the candour and modesty of the face. She felt sure of
sympathy from so good a countenance, and began to gossip.

"Now, what think you brings me here, young lady? It is a letter! a
letter from my poor boy that is far away in some savage part or other.
And I take shame to say that none of us can read it. I wonder whether
you can read?"

"Yes."

"Can ye, now? It is much to your credit, my dear. I dare say she won't
be long; but every minute is an hour to a poor longing mother."

"I will read it to you."

"Bless you, my dear; bless you!"

In her unfeigned eagerness she never noticed the suppressed eagerness
with which the hand was slowly put out to take the letter. She did not
see the tremor with which the fingers closed on it.

"Come, then, read it to me, prithee. I am wearying for it."

"The first words are, 'To my honoured parents.'"

"Ay! and he always did honour us, poor soul."

"'God and the saints have you in His holy keeping, and bless you by
night and by day. Your one harsh deed is forgotten; your years of love
remembered.'"

Catherine laid her hand on her bosom, and sank back in her chair with
one long sob.

"Then comes this, madam. It doth speak for itself; 'a long farewell.'"

"Ay, go on; bless you, girl you give me sorry comfort. Still 'tis
comfort."

"'To my brothers Cornelis and Sybrandt--Be content; you will see me no
more!'"

"What does that mean? Ah!"

"'To my sister Kate. Little angel of my father's house. Be kind to
her--' Ah!"

"That is Margaret Brandt, my dear--his sweetheart, poor soul. I've not
been kind to her, my dear. Forgive me, Gerard!"

"'--for poor Gerard's sake: since grief to her is death to me--Ah!"
And nature, resenting the poor girl's struggle for unnatural composure,
suddenly gave way, and she sank from her chair and lay insensible, with
the letter in her hand and her head on Catherine's knees.



CHAPTER XLIV

Experienced women are not frightened when a woman faints, or do they
hastily attribute it to anything but physical causes, which they have
often seen produce it. Catherine bustled about; laid the girl down with
her head on the floor quite flat, opened the window, and unloosed her
dress as she lay. Not till she had done all this did she step to the
door and say, rather loudly:

"Come here, if you please."

Margaret Van Eyck and Reicht came, and found Margaret lying quite flat,
and Catherine beating her hands.

"Oh, my poor girl! What have you done to her?"

"Me?" said Catherine angrily.

"What has happened, then?"

"Nothing, madam; nothing more than is natural in her situation."

Margaret Van Eyck coloured with ire.

"You do well to speak so coolly," said she, "you that are the cause of
her situation."

"That I am not," said Catherine bluntly; "nor any woman born."

"What! was it not you and your husband that kept them apart? and now he
has gone to Italy all alone. Situation indeed! You have broken her heart
amongst you."

"Why, madam? Who is it then? in Heaven's name! To hear you, one would
think this was my Gerard's lass. But that can't be. This fur never cost
less than five crowns the ell; besides, this young gentlewoman is a
wife; or ought to be."

"Of course she ought. And who is the cause she is none? Who came before
them at the very altar?"

"God forgive them, whoever it was," said Catherine gravely; "me it was
not, nor my man."

"Well," said the other, a little softened, "now you have seen her,
perhaps you will not be quite so bitter against her madam. She is coming
to, thank Heaven."

"Me bitter against her?" said Catherine; "no, that is all over. Poor
soul! trouble behind her and trouble afore her; and to think of my
setting her, of all living women, to read Gerard's letter to me. Ay, and
that was what made her go off, I'll be sworn. She is coming to. What,
sweetheart! be not afeard, none are here but friends."

They seated her in an easy chair. As the colour was creeping back to her
face and lips. Catherine drew Margaret Van Eyck aside.

"Is she staying with you, if you please?"

"No, madam."

"I wouldn't let her go back to Sevenbergen to-night, then."

"That is as she pleases. She still refuses to bide the night."

"Ay, but you are older than she is; you can make her. There, she is
beginning to notice."

Catherine then put her mouth to Margaret Van Eyck's ear for half a
moment; it did not seem time enough to whisper a word, far less a
sentence. But on some topics females can flash communication to female
like lightning, or thought itself.

The old lady started, and whispered back--

"It's false! it is a calumny! it is monstrous! look at her face. It is
blasphemy to accuse such a face."

"Tut! tut! tut!" said the other; "you might as well say this is not my
hand. I ought to know; and I tell ye it is so."

Then, much to Margaret Van Eyck's surprise, she went up to the girl, and
taking her round the neck, kissed her warmly.

"I suffered for Gerard, and you shed your blood for him I do hear; his
own words show me that I have been to blame, the very words you have
read to me. Ay, Gerard, my child, I have held aloof from her; but I'll
make it up to her once I begin. You are my daughter from this hour."

Another warm embrace sealed this hasty compact, and the woman of impulse
was gone.

Margaret lay back in her chair, and a feeble smile stole over her face.
Gerard's mother had kissed her and called her daughter; but the next
moment she saw her old friend looking at her with a vexed air.

"I wonder you let that woman kiss you."

"His mother!" murmured Margaret, half reproachfully.

"Mother, or no mother, you would not let her touch you if you knew what
she whispered in my ear about you."

"About me?" said Margaret faintly.

"Ay, about you, whom she never saw till to-night." The old lady was
proceeding, with some hesitation and choice of language, to make
Margaret share her indignation, when an unlooked-for interruption closed
her lips.

The young woman slid from her chair to her knees, and began to pray
piteously to her for pardon. From the words and the manner of her
penitence a bystander would have gathered she had inflicted some cruel
wrong, some intolerable insult, upon her venerable friend.



CHAPTER XLV

The little party at the hosier's house sat at table discussing the
recent event, when their mother returned, and casting a piercing glance
all round the little circle, laid the letter flat on the table. She
repeated every word of it by memory, following the lines with her
finger, to cheat herself and bearers into the notion that she could read
the words, or nearly. Then, suddenly lifting her head, she cast another
keen look on Cornelis and Sybrandt: their eyes fell.

On this the storm that had long been brewing burst on their heads.

Catherine seemed to swell like an angry hen ruffling her feathers, and
out of her mouth came a Rhone and Saone of wisdom and twaddle, of great
and mean invective, such as no male that ever was born could utter in
one current; and not many women.

The following is a fair though a small sample of her words: only they
were uttered all in one breath.

"I have long had my doubts that you blew the flame betwixt Gerard and
your father, and set that old rogue, Ghysbrecht, on. And now, here are
Gerard's own written words to prove it. You have driven your own flesh
and blood into a far land, and robbed the mother that bore you of her
darling, the pride of her eye, the joy of her heart. But you are all of
a piece from end to end. When you were all boys together, my others were
a comfort; but you were a curse: mischievous and sly; and took a woman
half a day to keep your clothes whole: for why? work wears cloth, but
play cuts it. With the beard comes prudence; but none came to you:
still the last to go to bed, and the last to leave it; and why? because
honesty goes to bed early, and industry rises betimes; where there are
two lie-a-beds in a house there are a pair of ne'er-do-weels. Often I've
sat and looked at your ways, and wondered where ye came from: ye don't
take after your father, and ye are no more like me than a wasp is to an
ant; sure ye were changed in the cradle, or the cuckoo dropped ye on my
floor: for ye have not our hands, nor our hearts: of all my blood, none
but you ever jeered them that God afflicted; but often when my back was
turned I've heard you mock at Giles, because he is not as big as some;
and at my lily Kate, because she is not so strong as a Flanders mare.
After that rob a church an you will! for you can be no worse in His eyes
that made both Kate and Giles, and in mine that suffered for them, poor
darlings, as I did for you, you paltry, unfeeling, treasonable curs!
No, I will not hush, my daughter, they have filled the cup too full. It
takes a deal to turn a mother's heart against the sons she has nursed
upon her knees; and many is the time I have winked and wouldn't see too
much, and bitten my tongue, lest their father should know them as I do;
he would have put them to the door that moment. But now they have filled
the cup too full. And where got ye all this money? For this last month
you have been rolling in it. You never wrought for it. I wish I may
never hear from other mouths how ye got it. It is since that night you
were out so late, and your head came back so swelled, Cornelis. Sloth
and greed are ill-mated, my masters. Lovers of money must sweat or
steal. Well, if you robbed any poor soul of it, it was some woman, I'll
go bail; for a man would drive you with his naked hand. No matter, it is
good for one thing. It has shown me how you will guide our gear if ever
it comes to be yourn. I have watched you, my lads, this while. You have
spent a groat to-day between you. And I spend scarce a groat a week, and
keep you all, good and bad. No I give up waiting for the shoes that will
maybe walk behind your coffin; for this shop and this house shall never
be yourn. Gerard is our heir; poor Gerard, whom you have banished and
done your best to kill; after that never call me mother again! But you
have made him tenfold dearer to me. My poor lost boy! I shall soon see
him again shall hold him in my arms, and set him on my knees. Ay, you
may stare! You are too crafty, and yet not crafty enow. You cut the
stalk away; but you left the seed--the seed that shall outgrow you, and
outlive you. Margaret Brandt is quick, and it is Gerard's, and what is
Gerard's is mine; and I have prayed the saints it may be a boy; and it
will--it must. Kate, when I found it was so, my bowels yearned over her
child unborn as if it had been my own. He is our heir. He will outlive
us. You will not; for a bad heart in a carcass is like the worm in the
nut, soon brings the body to dust. So, Kate, take down Gerard's bib and
tucker that are in the drawer you wot of, and one of these days we will
carry them to Sevenbergen. We will borrow Peter Buyskens' cart, and
go comfort Gerard's wife under her burden. She is his wife. Who is
Ghysbrecht Van Swieten? Can he come between a couple and the altar, and
sunder those that God and the priest make one? She is my daughter, and
I am as proud of her as I am of you, Kate, almost; and as for you, keep
out of my way awhile, for you are like the black dog in my eyes."

Cornelis and Sybrandt took the hint and slunk out, aching with remorse,
and impenitence, and hate. They avoided her eye as much as ever
they could; and for many days she never spoke a word, good, bad, or
indifferent, to either of them. Liberaverat animum suum.



CHAPTER XLVI

Catherine was a good housewife who seldom left home for a day, and then
one thing or another always went amiss. She was keenly conscious of
this, and watching for a slack tide in things domestic, put off her
visit to Sevenbergen from day to day, and one afternoon that it really
could have been managed, Peter Buyskens' mule was out of the way.

At last, one day Eli asked her before all the family, whether it was
true she had thought of visiting Margaret Brandt.

"Ay, my man."

"Then I do forbid you."

"Oh, do you?"

"I do."

"Then there is no more to be said, I suppose," said she, colouring.

"Not a word," replied Eli sternly.

When she was alone with her daughter she was very severe, not upon Eli,
but upon herself.

"Behoved me rather go thither like a cat at a robin. But this was me all
over. I am like a silly hen that can lay no egg without cackling, and
convening all the house to rob her on't. Next time you and I are after
aught the least amiss, let's do't in Heaven's name then and there, and
not take time to think about it, far less talk; so then, if they take us
to task we can say, alack we knew nought; we thought no ill; now, who'd
ever? and so forth. For two pins I'd go thither in all their teeth."

Defiance so wild and picturesque staggered Kate. "Nay, mother, with
patience father will come round."

"And so will Michaelmas; but when? and I was so bent on you seeing the
girl. Then we could have put our heads together about her. Say what they
will, there is no judging body or beast but by the eye. And were I to
have fifty more sons I'd ne'er thwart one of them's fancy, till such
time as I had clapped my eyes upon her and seen Quicksands; say you,
I should have thought of that before condemning Gerard his fancy; but
there, life is a school, and the lesson ne'er done; we put down one
fault and take up t'other, and so go blundering here, and blundering
there, till we blunder into our graves, and there's an end of us."

"Mother," said Kate timidly.

"Well, what is a-coming now? no good news though, by the look of you.
What on earth can make the poor wretch so scared?"

"An avowal she hath to make," faltered Kate faintly.

"Now, there is a noble word for ye," said Catherine proudly. "Our Gerard
taught thee that, I'll go bail. Come then, out with thy vowel."

"Well then, sooth to say, I have seen her."

"And?"

"And spoken with her to boot."

"And never told me? After this marvels are dirt."

"Mother, you were so hot against her. I waited till I could tell you
without angering you worse."

"Ay," said Catherine, half sadly, half bitterly, "like mother, like
daughter; cowardice it is our bane. The others I whiles buffet, or how
would the house fare? but did you, Kate, ever have harsh word or look
from your poor mother, that you--Nay, I will not have ye cry, girl; ten
to one ye had your reason; so rise up, brave heart, and tell me all,
better late than ne'er; and first and foremost when ever, and how ever,
wend you to Sevenbergen wi' your poor crutches, and I not know?"

"I never was there in my life; and, mammy dear, to say that I ne'er
wished to see her that I will not, but I ne'er went nor sought to see
her."

"There now," said Catherine disputatively, "said I not 'twas all unlike
my girl to seek her unbeknown to me? Come now, for I'm all agog.

"Then thus 'twas. It came to my ears, no matter how, and prithee, good
mother, on my knees ne'er ask me how, that Gerard was a prisoner in the
Stadthouse tower."

"Ah"

"By father's behest as 'twas pretended."

Catherine uttered a sigh that was almost a moan. "Blacker than I
thought," she muttered faintly.

"Giles and I went out at night to bid him be of good cheer. And there at
the tower foot was a brave lass, quite strange to me I vow, on the same
errand."

"Lookee there now, Kate."

"At first we did properly frighten one another, through the place his
bad name, and our poor heads being so full o' divels, and we whitened a
bit in moonshine. But next moment, quo' I, 'You are Margaret.' 'And you
are Kate,' quo' she. Think on't!"

"Did one ever? 'Twas Gerard! He will have been talking backards and
forrards of thee to her, and her to thee."

In return for this, Kate bestowed on Catherine one of the prettiest
presents in nature--the composite kiss, i.e., she imprinted on her cheek
a single kiss, which said--

     1. Quite correct.
     2. Good, clever mother, for guessing so right and quick.
     3. How sweet for us twain to be' of one mind again after
     never having been otherwise.
     4. Etc.

"Now then, speak thy mind, child, Gerard is not here. Alas, what am I
saying? would to Heaven he were."

"Well then, mother, she is comely, and wrongs her picture but little."

"Eh, dear; hark to young folk! I am for good acts, not good looks. Loves
she my boy as he did ought to be loved?"

"Sevenbergen is farther from the Stadthouse than we are," said Kate
thoughtfully; "yet she was there afore me."

Catherine nodded intelligence.

"Nay, more, she had got him out ere I came. Ay, down from the captive's
tower."

Catherine shook her head incredulously. "The highest tower for miles! It
is not feasible."

"'Tis sooth though. She and an old man she brought found means and wit
to send him up a rope. There 'twas dangling from his prison, and our
Giles went up it. When first I saw it hang, I said, 'This is glamour.'
But when the frank lass's arms came round me, and her bosom' did beat
on mine, and her cheeks wet, then said I, ''Tis not glamour: 'tis love.'
For she is not like me, but lusty and able; and, dear heart, even I,
poor frail creature, do feel sometimes as I could move the world for
them I love: I love you, mother. And she loves Gerard."

"God bless her for't! God bless her!"

"But

"But what, lamb?"

"Her love, is it for very certain honest? 'Tis most strange; but that
very thing, which hath warmed your heart, hath somewhat cooled mine
towards her; poor soul. She is no wife, you know, mother, when all is
done."

"Humph! They have stood at the altar together."

"Ay, but they went as they came, maid and bachelor."

"The parson, saith he so?"

"Nay, for that I know not."

"Then I'll take no man's word but his in such a tangled skein."
After some reflection she added, "Natheless art right, girl; I'll to
Sevenbergen alone. A wife I am but not a slave. We are all in the dark
here. And she holds the clue. I must question her, and no one by; least
of all you. I'll not take any lily to a house Wi' a spot, no, not to a
palace o' gold and silver."

The more Catherine pondered this conversation, the more she felt drawn
towards Margaret, and moreover "she was all agog" with curiosity, a
potent passion with us all, and nearly omnipotent with those who like
Catherine, do not slake it with reading. At last, one fine day, after
dinner, she whispered to Kate, "Keep the house from going to pieces, an
ye can;" and donned her best kirtle and hood, and her scarlet clocked
hose and her new shoes, and trudged briskly off to Sevenbergen,
troubling no man's mule.

When she got there she inquired where Margaret Brandt lived. The first
person she asked shook his head, and said--"The name is strange to me."
She went a little farther and asked a girl of about fifteen who was
standing at a door. "Father," said the girl, speaking into the house,
"here is another after that magician's daughter." The man came out and
told Catherine Peter Brandt's cottage was just outside the town on the
east side. "You may see the chimney hence;" and he pointed it out to
her. "But you will not find them there, neither father nor daughter;
they have left the town this week, bless you."

"Say not so, good man, and me walken all the way from Tergou."

"From Tergou? then you must ha' met the soldier."

"What soldier? ay, I did meet a soldier."

"Well, then, yon soldier was here seeking that self-same Margaret."

"Ay, and warn't a mad with us because she was gone?" put in the girl.
"His long beard and her cheek are no strangers, I warrant."

"Say no more than ye know," said Catherine sharply. "You are young to
take to slandering your elders. Stay! tell we more about this soldier,
good man.

"Nay, I know no more than that he came hither seeking Margaret Brandt,
and I told him she and her father had made a moonlight flit on't this
day sennight, and that some thought the devil had flown away with them,
being magicians. 'And,' says he, 'the devil fly away with thee for thy
ill news;' that was my thanks. 'But I doubt 'tis a lie,' said he. 'An
you think so,' said I, 'go and see.' 'I will,' said he, and burst out
wi' a hantle o' gibberish: my wife thinks 'twas curses; and hied him to
the cottage. Presently back a comes, and sings t'other tune. 'You were
right and I was wrong,' says he, and shoves a silver coin in my hand.
Show it the wife, some of ye; then she'll believe me; I have been called
a liar once to-day."

"It needs not," said Catherine, inspecting the coin all the same.

"And he seemed quiet and sad like, didn't he now, wench?"

"That a did," said the young woman warmly; "and, dame, he was just as
pretty a man as ever I clapped eyes on. Cheeks like a rose, and shining
beard, and eyes in his head like sloes."

"I saw he was well bearded," said Catherine; "but, for the rest, at my
age I scan them not as when I was young and foolish. But he seemed right
civil: doffed his bonnet to me as I had been a queen, and I did drop him
my best reverence, for manners beget manners. But little I wist he had
been her light o' love, and most likely the--Who bakes for this town?"

The man, not being acquainted with her, opened his eyes at this
transition, swift and smooth.

"Well, dame, there be two; John Bush and Eric Donaldson, they both bide
in this street."

"Then, God be with you, good people," said she, and proceeded; but her
sprightly foot came flat on the ground now, and no longer struck it with
little jerks and cocking heel. She asked the bakers whether Peter
Brandt had gone away in their debt. Bush said they were not customers.
Donaldson said, "Not a stiver: his daughter had come round and paid
him the very night they went. Didn't believe they owed a copper in the
town." So Catherine got all the information of that kind she wanted with
very little trouble.

"Can you tell me what sort this Margaret was?" said she, as she turned
to go.

"Well, somewhat too reserved for my taste. I like a chatty
customer--when I'm not too busy. But she bore a high character for being
a good daughter."

"'Tis no small praise. A well-looking lass, I am told?"

"Why, whence come you, wyfe?"

"From Tergou."

"Oh, ay. Well you shall judge: the lads clept her 'the beauty of
Sevenbergen;' the lasses did scout it merrily, and terribly pulled her
to pieces, and found so many faults no two could agree where the fault
lay."

"That is enough," said Catherine. "I see, the bakers are no fools in
Sevenbergen, and the young women no shallower than in other burghs."

She bought a manchet of bread, partly out of sympathy and justice (she
kept a shop), partly to show her household how much better bread she
gave them daily; and returned to Tergou dejected.

Kate met her outside the town with beaming eyes.

"Well, Kate, lass, it is a happy thing I went; I am heartbroken. Gerard
has been sore abused. The child is none of ourn, nor the mother from
this hour."

"Alas, mother, I fathom not your meaning."

"Ask me no more, girl, but never mention her name to me again. That is
all."

Kate acquiesced with a humble sigh, and they went home together.

They found a soldier seated tranquilly by their fire. The moment they
entered the door he rose, and saluted them civilly. They stood and
looked at him; Kate with some little surprise, but Catherine with a
great deal, and with rising indignation.

"What makes you here?" was Catherine's greeting.

"I came to seek after Margaret."

"Well, we know no such person."

"Say not so, dame; sure you know her by name, Margaret Brandt."

"We have heard of her for that matter--to our cost."

"Comes, dame, prithee tell me at least where she bides."

"I know not where she bides, and care not."

Denys felt sure this was a deliberate untruth. He bit his lip. "Well, I
looked to find myself in an enemy's country at this Tergou; but maybe if
ye knew all ye would not be so dour."

"I do know all," replied Catherine bitterly. "This morn I knew nought."
Then suddenly setting her arms akimbo she told him with a raised voice
and flashing eyes she wondered at his cheek sitting down by that hearth
of all hearths in the world.

"May Satan fly away with your hearth to the lake of fire and brimstone,"
shouted Denys, who could speak Flemish fluently. "Your own servant bade
me sit there till you came, else I had ne'er troubled your hearth. My
malison on it, and on the churlish roof-tree that greets an unoffending
stranger this way," and he strode scowling to the door.

"Oh! oh!" ejaculated Catherine, frightened, and also a little
conscience-stricken; and the virago sat suddenly down and burst into
tears. Her daughter followed suit quietly, but without loss of time.

A shrewd writer, now unhappily lost to us, has somewhere the following
dialogue:

She. "I feel all a woman's weakness."

He. "Then you are invincible."

Denys, by anticipation, confirmed that valuable statement; he stood at
the door looking ruefully at the havoc his thunderbolt of eloquence had
made.

"Nay, wife," said he, "weep not neither for a soldier's hasty word. I
mean not all I said. Why, your house is your own, and what right in it
have I? There now, I'll go."

"What is to do?" said a grave manly voice.

It was Eli; he had come in from the shop.

"Here is a ruffian been a-scolding of your women folk and making them
cry," explained Denys.

"Little Kate, what is't? for ruffians do not use to call themselves
ruffians," said Eli the sensible.

Ere she could explain, "Hold your tongue, girl," said Catherine; "Muriel
bade him sat down, and I knew not that, and wyted on him; and he was
going and leaving his malison on us, root and branch. I was never so
becursed in all my days, oh! oh! oh!"

"You were both somewhat to blame; both you and he," said Eli calmly.
"However, what the servant says the master should still stand to. We
keep not open house, but yet we are not poor enough to grudge a seat at
our hearth in a cold day to a wayfarer with an honest face, and, as I
think, a wounded man. So, end all malice, and sit ye down!"

"Wounded?" cried mother and daughter in a breath.

"Think you a soldier slings his arm for sport?"

"Nay, 'tis but an arrow," said Denys cheerfully.

"But an arrow?" said Kate, with concentrated horror. "Where were our
eyes, mother?"

"Nay, in good sooth, a trifle. Which, however, I will pray mesdames to
accept as an excuse for my vivacity. 'Tis these little foolish trifling
wounds that fret a man, worthy sir. Why, look ye now, sweeter temper
than our Gerard never breathed, yet, when the bear did but strike a
piece no bigger than a crown out of his calf, he turned so hot and
choleric y'had said he was no son of yours, but got by the good knight
Sir John Pepper on his wife dame Mustard; who is this? a dwarf? your
servant, Master Giles."

"Your servant, soldier," roared the newcomer. Denys started. He had not
counted on exchanging greetings with a petard.

Denys's words had surprised his hosts, but hardly more than their
deportment now did him. They all three came creeping up to where he sat,
and looked down into him with their lips parted, as if he had been some
strange phenomenon.

And growing agitation succeeded to amazement.

"Now hush!" said Eli, "let none speak but I. Young man," said he
solemnly, "in God's name who are you, that know us though we know you
not, and that shake our hearts speaking to us of--the absent-our poor
rebellious son: whom Heaven forgive and bless?"

"What, master," said Denys, lowering his voice, "hath he not writ to
you? hath he not told you of me, Denys of Burgundy?"

"He hath writ, but three lines, and named not Denys of Burgundy, nor any
stranger."

"Ay, I mind the long letter was to his sweetheart, this Margaret, and
she has decamped, plague take her, and how I am to find her Heaven
knows."

"What, she is not your sweetheart then?"

"Who, dame? an't please you."

"Why, Margaret Brandt."

"How can my comrade's sweetheart be mine? I know her not from Noah's
niece; how should I? I never saw her."

"Whist with this idle chat, Kate," said Eli impatiently, "and let the
young man answer me. How came you to know Gerard, our son? Prithee now
think on a parent's cares, and answer me straightforward, like a soldier
as thou art."

"And shall. I was paid off at Flushing, and started for Burgundy. On
the German frontier I lay at the same inn with Gerard. I fancied him. I
said, 'Be my comrade.' He was loth at first; consented presently. Many a
weary league we trode together. Never were truer comrades: never will be
while earth shall last. First I left my route a bit to be with him: then
he his to be with me. We talked of Sevenbergen and Tergou a thousand
times; and of all in this house. We had our troubles on the road; but
battling them together made them light. I saved his life from a bear; he
mine in the Rhine: for he swims like a duck and I like a hod o' bricks
and one another's lives at an inn in Burgundy, where we two held a room
for a good hour against seven cut-throats, and crippled one and slew
two; and your son did his devoir like a man, and met the stoutest
champion I ever countered, and spitted him like a sucking-pig. Else I
had not been here. But just when all was fair, and I was to see him safe
aboard ship for Rome, if not to Rome itself, met us that son of a--the
Lord Anthony of Burgundy, and his men, making for Flanders, then in
insurrection, tore us by force apart, took me where I got some broad
pieces in hand, and a broad arrow in my shoulder, and left my poor
Gerard lonesome. At that sad parting, soldier though I be, these eyes
did rain salt scalding tears, and so did his, poor soul. His last word
to me was, 'Go, comfort Margaret!' so here I be. Mine to him was, 'Think
no more of Rome. Make for Rhine, and down stream home.' Now say, for you
know best, did I advise him well or ill?"

"Soldier, take my hand," said Eli. "God bless thee! God bless thee!"
and his lip quivered. It was all his reply, but more eloquent than many
words.

Catherine did not answer at all, but she darted from the room and bade
Muriel bring the best that was in the house, and returned with wood in
both arms, and heaped the fire, and took out a snow-white cloth from
the press, and was going in a great hurry to lay it for Gerard's friend,
when suddenly she sat down and all the power ebbed rapidly out of her
body.

"Father!" cried Kate, whose eye was as quick as her affection.

Denys started up; but Eli waved him back and flung a little water
sharply in his wife's face. This did her instant good. She gasped, "So
sudden. My poor boy!" Eli whispered Denys, "Take no notice! she thinks
of him night and day." They pretended not to observe her, and she shook
it off, and hustled and laid the cloth with her own hands; but as she
smoothed it, her hands trembled and a tear or two stole down her cheeks.

They could not make enough of Denys. They stuffed him, and crammed him;
and then gathered round him and kept filling his glass in turn, while by
that genial blaze of fire and ruby wine and eager eyes he told all that
I have related, and a vast number of minor details, which an artist,
however minute, omits.

But how different the effect on my readers and on this small circle! To
them the interest was already made before the first word came from his
lips. It was all about Gerard, and he who sat there telling it them, was
warm from Gerard and an actor with him in all these scenes.

The flesh and blood around that fire quivered for their severed member,
hearing its struggles and perils.

I shall ask my readers to recall to memory all they can of Gerard's
journey with Denys, and in their mind's eye to see those very matters
told by his comrade to an exile's father, all stoic outside, all father
within, and to two poor women, an exile's mother and a sister, who were
all love and pity and tender anxiety both outside and in. Now would you
mind closing this book for a minute and making an effort to realize all
this? It will save us so much repetition.


Then you will not be surprised when I tell you that after a while Giles
came softly and curled himself up before the fire, and lay gazing at the
speaker with a reverence almost canine; and that, when the rough soldier
had unconsciously but thoroughly betrayed his better qualities, and
above all his rare affection for Gerard, Kate, though timorous as a
bird, stole her little hand into the warrior's huge brown palm, where
it lay an instant like a tea-spoonful of cream spilt on a platter, then
nipped the ball of his thumb and served for a Kardiometer. In other
words, Fate is just even to rival storytellers, and balances matters.
Denys had to pay a tax to his audience which I have not. Whenever Gerard
was in too much danger, the female faces became so white, and their poor
little throats gurgled so, he was obliged in common humanity to
spoil his recital. Suspense is the soul of narrative, and thus dealt
Rough-and-Tender of Burgundy with his best suspenses. "Now, dame, take
not on till ye hear the end; ma'amselle, let not your cheek blanch so;
courage! it looks ugly; but you shall hear how we won through. Had he
miscarried, and I at hand, would I be alive?"

And meantime Kate's little Kardiometer, or heart-measurer, graduated
emotion, and pinched by scale. At its best it was by no means a
high-pressure engine. But all is relative. Denys soon learned the tender
gamut; and when to water the suspense, and extract the thrill as far as
possible. On one occasion only he cannily indemnified his narrative for
this drawback. Falling personally into the Rhine, and sinking, he got
pinched, he Denys, to his surprise and satisfaction. "Oho!" thought he,
and on the principle of the anatomists, "experimentum in corpore vili,"
kept himself a quarter of an hour under water; under pressure all the
time. And even when Gerard had got hold of him, he was loth to leave the
river, so, less conscientious than I was, swam with Gerard to the east
bank first, and was about to land, but detected the officers and their
intent, chaffed them a little space, treading water, then turned and
swam wearily all across, and at last was obliged to get out, for very
shame, or else acknowledge himself a pike; so permitted himself to land,
exhausted: and the pressure relaxed.


It was eleven o'clock, an unheard-of hour, but they took no note of time
this night; and Denys had still much to tell them, when the door was
opened quietly, and in stole Cornelis and Sybrandt looking hang-dog.
They had this night been drinking the very last drop of their mysterious
funds.

Catherine feared her husband would rebuke them before Denys; but he only
looked sadly at them, and motioned them to sit down quietly.

Denys it was who seemed discomposed. He knitted his brows and eyed them
thoughtfully and rather gloomily. Then turned to Catherine. "What say
you, dame? the rest to-morrow; for I am somewhat weary, and it waxes
late."

"So be it," said Eli. But when Denys rose to go to his inn, he was
instantly stopped by Catherine. "And think you to lie from this house?
Gerard's room has been got ready for you hours agone; the sheets I'll
not say much for, seeing I spun the flax and wove the web."

"Then would I lie in them blindfold," was the gallant reply. "Ah, dame,
our poor Gerard was the one for fine linen. He could hardly forgive the
honest Germans their coarse flax, and whene'er my traitors of countrymen
did amiss, a would excuse them, saying, 'Well, well; bonnes toiles sont
en Bourgogne:' that means, there be good lenten cloths in Burgundy.' But
indeed he beat all for bywords and cleanliness.

"Oh, Eli! Eli! doth not our son come back to us at each word?"

"Ay. Buss me, my poor Kate. You and I know all that passeth in each
other's hearts this night. None other can, but God."



CHAPTER XLVII

Denys took an opportunity next day and told mother and daughter the
rest, excusing himself characteristically for not letting Cornelis and
Sybrandt hear of it. "It is not for me to blacken them; they come of
a good stock. But Gerard looks on them as no friends of his in this
matter; and I'm Gerard's comrade and it is a rule with us soldiers not
to tell the enemy aught--but lies."

Catherine sighed, but made no answer.

The adventures he related cost them a tumult of agitation and grief, and
sore they wept at the parting of the friends, which even now Denys could
not tell without faltering. But at last all merged in the joyful hope
and expectation of Gerard's speedy return. In this Denys confidently
shared; but reminded them that was no reason why he should neglect his
friend's wishes and last words. In fact, should Gerard return next week,
and no Margaret to be found, what sort of figure should he cut?

Catherine had never felt so kindly towards the truant Margaret as now;
and she was fully as anxious to find her, and be kind to her before
Gerard's return, as Denys was; but she could not agree with him that
anything was to be gained by leaving this neighbourhood to search for
her. "She must have told somebody whither she was going. It is not
as though they were dishonest folk flying the country; they owe not a
stiver in Sevenbergen; and dear heart, Denys, you can't hunt all Holland
for her."

"Can I not?" said Denys grimly. "That we shall see." He added, after
some reflection, that they must divide their forces; she stay here with
eyes and ears wide open, and he ransack every town in Holland for her,
if need be. "But she will not be many leagues from here. They be three.
Three fly not so fast, nor far, as one."

"That is sense," said Catherine. But she insisted on his going first to
the demoiselle Van Eyck. "She and our Margaret were bosom friends. She
knows where the girl is gone, if she will but tell us." Denys was for
going to her that instant, so Catherine, in a turn of the hand, made
herself one shade neater, and took him with her.

She was received graciously by the old lady sitting in a richly
furnished room; and opened her business. The tapestry dropped out of
Margaret Van Eyck's hands. "Gone? Gone from Sevenbergen and not told me;
the thankless girl."

This turn greatly surprised the visitors. "What, you know not? when was
she here last?"

"Maybe ten days agone. I had ta'en out my brushes, after so many years,
to paint her portrait. I did not do it, though; for reasons."

Catherine remarked it was "a most strange thing she should go away bag
and baggage like this, without with your leave or by your leave, why, or
wherefore. Was ever aught so untoward; just when all our hearts are warm
to her; and here is Gerard's mate come from the ends of the earth with
comfort for her from Gerard, and can't find her, and Gerard himself
expected. What to do I know not. But sure she is not parted like this
without a reason. Can ye not give us the clue, my good demoiselle?
Prithee now.

"I have it not to give," said the elder lady, rather peevishly.

"Then I can," said Reicht Heynes, showing herself in the doorway, with
colour somewhat heightened.

"So you have been hearkening all the time, eh?"

"What are my ears for, mistress?"

"True. Well, throw us the light of thy wisdom on this dark matter."

"There is no darkness that I see," said Reicht. "And the clue, why, an
ye call't a two-plye twine, and the ends on't in this room e'en now,
ye'll not be far out. Oh, mistress, I wonder at you sitting there
pretending."

"Marry, come up." and the mistress's cheek was now nearly as red as the
servant's. "So 'twas I drove the foolish girl away."

"You did your share, mistress. What sort of greeting gave you her
last time she came? Think you she could miss to notice it, and she all
friendless? And you said, 'I have altered my mind about painting of
you,' says you, a turning up your nose at her."

"I did not turn up my nose. It is not shaped like yours for looking
heavenward."

"Oh, all our nosen can follow our heartys bent, for that matter. Poor
soul. She did come into the kitchen to me. 'I am not to be painted now,'
said she, and the tears in her eyes. She said no more. But I knew well
what she did mean. I had seen ye."

"Well," said Margaret Van Eyck, "I do confess so much, and I make you
the judge, madam. Know that these young girls can do nothing of their
own heads, but are most apt at mimicking aught their sweethearts do. Now
your Gerard is reasonably handy at many things, and among the rest at
the illuminator's craft. And Margaret she is his pupil, and a patient
one: what marvel? having a woman's eye for colour, and eke a lover to
ape. 'Tis a trick I despise at heart: for by it the great art of colour,
which should be royal, aspiring, and free, becomes a poor slave to the
petty crafts of writing and printing, and is fettered, imprisoned, and
made little, body and soul, to match the littleness of books, and go to
church in a rich fool's pocket. Natheless affection rules us all, and
when the poor wench would bring me her thorn leaves, and lilies, and
ivy, and dewberries, and ladybirds, and butterfly grubs, and all the
scum of Nature-stuck fast in gold-leaf like wasps in a honey-pot, and
withal her diurnal book, showing she had pored an hundred, or an hundred
and fifty, or two hundred hours over each singular page, certes I was
wroth that an immortal soul, and many hours of labour, and much manual
skill, should be flung away on Nature's trash, leaves, insects, grubs,
and on barren letters; but, having bowels, I did perforce restrain, and
as it were, dam my better feelings, and looked kindly at the work to
see how it might be bettered; and said I, 'Sith Heaven for our sins
hath doomed us to spend time, and soul, and colour on great letters and
little beetles, omitting such small fry as saints and heroes, their
acts and passions, why not present the scum naturally?' I told her 'the
grapes I saw, walking abroad, did hang i' the air, not stick in a wall;
and even these insects,' quo' I, 'and Nature her slime in general, pass
not their noxious lives wedged miserably in metal prisons like flies
in honey-pots and glue-pots, but do crawl or hover at large, infesting
air.' 'Ah my dear friend,' says she, 'I see now whither you drive; but
this ground is gold; whereon we may not shade.' 'Who said so?' quoth
I. 'All teachers of this craft,' says she; and (to make an end o' me at
once, I trow) 'Gerard himself!' 'That for Gerard himself,' quoth I, 'and
all the gang; gi'e me a brush!'

"Then chose I, to shade her fruit and reptiles, a colour false in
nature, but true relatively to that monstrous ground of glaring gold;
and in five minutes out came a bunch of raspberries, stalk and all, and
a'most flew in your mouth; likewise a butterfly grub she had so truly
presented as might turn the stoutest stomach. My lady she flings her
arms round my neck, and says she, 'Oh!'"

"Did she now?"

"The little love!" observed Denys, succeeding at last in wedging in a
word.

Margaret Van Eyck stared at him; and then smiled. She went on to tell
them how from step to step she had been led on to promise to resume the
art she had laid aside with a sigh when her brothers died, and to paint
the Madonna once more--with Margaret for model. Incidentally she even
revealed how girls are turned into saints. "Thy hair is adorable," said
I. "Why, 'tis red," quo' she. "Ay," quoth I, "but what a red! how brown!
how glossy! most hair is not worth a straw to us painters; thine the
artist's very hue. But thy violet eyes, which smack of earth, being now
languid for lack of one Gerard, now full of fire in hopes of the same
Gerard, these will I lift to heaven in fixed and holy meditation, and
thy nose, which doth already somewhat aspire that way (though not so
piously as Reicht's), will I debase a trifle, and somewhat enfeeble thy
chin."

"Enfeeble her chin? Alack! what may that mean? Ye go beyond me,
mistress."

"'Tis a resolute chin. Not a jot too resolute for this wicked world; but
