
"Take my advice and hold on to them. What square is this?"

They had reached Seventeenth Street.

"Union Square."

"It's a pretty place. Is Tiffany's near here?"

"Yes, sir; only two blocks away. We shall pass it."

"All right! Point it out to me. I'm going to buy a gold watch for
myself there. I've needed one for a long time, but I wanted the
satisfaction of buying one at Tiffany's. Anything that is sold there
must be A No. 1."

"I have no doubt of it, but I don't trade there much yet."

"No; you must wait till you have realized on your Western lots."

They turned down Fourteenth Street, and soon stood in front of Mr.
Fairchild's office. They entered, and this brings us to the point where
the last chapter ends.




CHAPTER XXI.

MR. PERKINS MAKES AN ACQUAINTANCE.


Dick Ralston and the bookkeeper stared at their Western friend in
undisguised amazement. Finally Mr. Mullins said, "What did I understand
you to call yourself?"

"Paul Perkins, of Minneapolis."

"And--you are staying at the Fifth Avenue Hotel?"

"Certainly. Didn't you send this boy with a message?" said Mr. Perkins,
rather impatiently.

"Ye-es."

"How did you know that I was coming to New York? That's what beats me."

Mullins began to appreciate the situation, and he was cudgeling his
brains for an explanation. Finally one came.

"I may be misinformed, but I learned from a friend of yours that you
were coming here with an intention of locating in our city. Now, as we
are in the real estate business, I thought we would offer our services
to find you a suitable house."

"Some friend of mine notified you of my coming to New York? Why, I
started off on a sudden without consulting anyone. I don't see how
anyone could give you the information."

"I won't undertake to explain it," said the bookkeeper. "I will only
say that I am glad to meet you."

"Thank you! You are very polite. What was the name of the friend who
spoke about me and my plans?"

"I have a poor memory for names, but I believe I have the gentleman's
card in my desk."

He opened the desk and made an elaborate search for what he knew he
should not find.

"It's no use," he said, after a pause. "It's disappeared."

"What was the appearance of the person?" persisted Mr. Perkins.

"He was--tall, and--yes, with a dark complexion and--and side
whiskers."

"About how old?"

"I should say about forty."

"I know plenty of people answering that description. But how did he
happen to call on you?"

"There you have me. He had some business with Mr. Fairchild, and
unfortunately Mr. F. started West this morning."

"I see. I can get no clew to the mystery. However, I am glad to have
made the acquaintance of this young man," indicating Chester.

"Oh, you mean our office boy," returned Mullins, coldly.

Just then Dick Ralston nudged the bookkeeper.

"Introduce me," he said, _sotto voce_.

The bookkeeper did not incline favorably to this request, but did not
dare to refuse. Dick Ralston's appearance was decidedly against him,
and his "loud" attire was in keeping with his face and manners.

"Mr. Perkins," said Mullins, "allow me to introduce my friend, Mr.
Ralston."

"Glad to meet you, Mr. Ralston," said the man from Minneapolis,
extending his hand, which Dick seized and pressed warmly.

"Proud to make your acquaintance, Mr. Perkins," rejoined the gambler.
"I always did like Western people."

"Thank you. I am not Western by birth, though I went out to Minnesota
when I was a mere boy."

"And I have no doubt you have prospered," said Ralston, who was really
anxious to learn whether Mr. Perkins was well provided with money and
was worth fleecing.

"Well, I don't complain," answered Perkins, in a matter-of-fact tone.

"I shall be glad to pay you any attentions," insinuated Ralston. "I
know the ropes pretty well, and I flatter myself I can show you the
town as well as anyone, eh, Mullins?"

"Oh, yes," assented the bookkeeper, not over cordially.

"I have no doubt of it, Mr. Ralston, and I take your offer kindly, but
I am afraid I won't have time to go round much."

"Won't you go out and take a drink? Mullins, you go, too!"

"Thank you, but I don't drink--at any rate, when I am away from home.
By the way, Mr.----" and he stopped short, for he did not remember the
bookkeeper's name.

"Mr. Mullins," suggested that gentleman.

"You are misinformed about my wanting to locate in this city. New
York's a right smart place, I admit, but give me Minneapolis. That
suits me."

"All right, sir. I am misinformed, that's all."

"If you find my friend's card just write and let me know his name. I'd
like to know who it is that knows so much about my plans."

"I will. Where shall I direct?"

"Oh, just direct to Minneapolis. I'm well known there. A letter will be
sure to reach me."

"Shall you be at the hotel this evening, Mr. Perkins?" added Dick
Ralston, who found it hard to give up his design upon his new
acquaintance.

"I don't know. I haven't made any plans."

"I was thinking I might call upon you."

"Don't trouble yourself, Mr. Ralston. Probably you would not find me
in."

Mr. Perkins was a tolerably shrewd man. He had "sized up" the gambler,
and decided that he did not care to become any better acquainted with
him.

"Just as you say," returned Dick Ralston, looking discomfited. "I
thought perhaps I could make it pleasant for you."

"If I find I have time I can call at your place of business," said the
man from Minneapolis, with a shrewd glance at the gambler.

"I have no place of business," returned Ralston, rather awkwardly. "I
am a--a capitalist, and sometimes speculate in real estate. Don't I,
Mullins?"

"Of course. By the way, I forgot to tell you that I have four lots on
Ninety-sixth Street which would make a good investment."

"Ninety-sixth Street! Ahem, rather far uptown. What's the figure?"

"Five thousand dollars."

"I'll take a look at them as soon as I have time. You see, Mr. Perkins,
I do all my real estate business through my friend, Mr. Mullins."

"Just so."

Neither Mr. Perkins nor Chester was taken in by Ralston's assumption of
the character of a capitalist. The Western man had already a shrewd
suspicion of the gambler's real business, and being a cautious and
prudent man, did not care to cultivate him.

"Good-morning!" said Mr. Perkins. "I must not take up any more of your
time. Will you allow Chester to go out with me for five minutes?"

"Certainly."

David Mullins would have liked to refuse, but had no good excuse for
doing so.

"Don't stay long!" he said, rather sharply.

"I won't keep him long."

When they were in the street Mr. Perkins said: "I don't like the looks
of that bookkeeper of yours."

"Nor do I," returned Chester.

"I wouldn't trust him any further than I could see him. Who was that
Ralston? Have you ever seen him before?"

"Once. He doesn't come into the office when Mr. Fairchild is at home."

"Do you know anything about him?"

"I know--that is, I have heard that he is a well-known gambler."

"By the great horn spoon, if I didn't think so! He seemed very anxious
to show me round the city."

"He would probably have taken you to a gambling house."

"Not if I was in my senses. I don't gamble, and I hope you don't."

"I shouldn't know how," answered Chester, with a smile.

"Have you any engagement for this evening?"

"No, sir."

"What time do you leave the office?"

"At five o'clock."

"Then come round to the hotel and take dinner with me. I don't know
anyone in the city, and I shall be glad to have your company this
evening. We will take a walk together, and you can show me what's worth
seeing."

"Are you not afraid that I will take you to a gambling house?" asked
Chester, with a smile.

"I'll risk it."

"You would find Mr. Ralston a better guide."

"But not so safe a one. I shall be satisfied with you."

When Chester returned to the office Mullins asked, sharply: "What did
Perkins want to say to you?"

"He asked me to dine with him to-night at the Fifth Avenue Hotel."

"Speak a good word for me, Chester," said Ralston, with unusual
affability. "I would like to become better acquainted with him."

"What shall I say, Mr. Ralston?"

"Tell him I am a prominent man, and expect to be nominated for Congress
next fall."

This he said with a wink. Chester and the bookkeeper laughed.

"I'll tell him," said Chester.




CHAPTER XXII.

DICK RALSTON'S FATHER.


When Chester followed Mr. Perkins into the great dining room of the
Fifth Avenue he was rather dazzled by its size and the glistening
appearance of the tables.

"I hope you have brought your appetite with you, Chester," said his
Western friend. "The Fifth Avenue sets a good table."

"My appetite is sure to be good. I was kept so busy to-day that I had
hardly time to buy a sandwich for lunch."

"All the better! You'll enjoy your meal. As for me, I don't have the
appetite I do at home. There's nothing like a tramp on the open prairie
to make a man feel peckish."

"Have you ever been in New York before, Mr. Perkins?"

"Not since I was a boy. I was born up Albany way, and came here when I
was about your age. But, Lord, the New York of that day wasn't a
circumstance to what it is now. There was no Elevated railroad then,
nor horse cars either, for that matter, and where this hotel stands
there was a riding school or something of that sort."

"Are you going to stay here long?"

"I go to Washington to-morrow, stopping at Philadelphia and Baltimore
on the way. No. I have no business in Washington, but I think by the
time a man is fifty odd he ought to see the capital of his country. I
shall shake hands with the President, too, if I find him at home."

"Have you ever been further West than Minneapolis?"

"Yes, I have been clear out to the Pacific. I've seen the town of
Tacoma, where you've got five lots. I shall write out to a friend in
Portland to buy me as many. Then we shall both have an interest there."

"You think the lots are worth something?"

"I know it. When the Northern Pacific Railroad is finished, every
dollar your friend spent for his lots will be worth thirty or forty."

"I hope your predictions will come true, Mr. Perkins."

"Did I hear you speaking of Tacoma?" asked a gentleman on Chester's
left hand.

"Yes, sir."

"I can tell you something about it. I live at Seattle."

"Am I right about there being a future for the place?" asked Paul
Perkins.

"You are. I may say that lots there are already worth twice what they
were last week."

"How's that?"

