
EMILY.

But, I do not understand by what means chemistry can facilitate labour;
is not that rather the province of the mechanic?

MRS. B.

There are many ways by which labour may be rendered more easy,
independently of mechanics; but even the machine, the most wonderful in
its effects, the Steam-engine, cannot be understood without the
assistance of chemistry. In agriculture, a chemical knowledge of the
nature of soils, and of vegetation, is highly useful; and, in those arts
which relate to the comforts and conveniences of life, it would be
endless to enumerate the advantages which result from the study of this
science.

CAROLINE.

But, pray, tell us more precisely in what manner the discoveries of
chemists have proved so beneficial to society?

MRS. B.

That would be an injudicious anticipation; for you would not comprehend
the nature of such discoveries and useful applications, as well as you
will do hereafter. Without a due regard to method, we cannot expect to
make any progress in chemistry. I wish to direct your observations
chiefly to the chemical operations of Nature; but those of Art are
certainly of too high importance to pass unnoticed. We shall therefore
allow them also some share of our attention.

EMILY.

Well, then, let us now set to work regularly. I am very anxious to
begin.

MRS. B.

The object of chemistry is to obtain a knowledge of the intimate nature
of bodies, and of their mutual action on each other. You find therefore,
Caroline, that this is no narrow or confined science, which comprehends
every thing material within our sphere.

CAROLINE.

On the contrary, it must be inexhaustible; and I am a loss to conceive
how any proficiency can be made in a science whose objects are so
numerous.

MRS. B.

If every individual substance were formed of different materials, the
study of chemistry would, indeed, be endless; but you must observe that
the various bodies in nature are composed of certain elementary
principles, which are not very numerous.

CAROLINE.

Yes; I know that all bodies are composed of fire, air, earth, and water;
I learnt that many years ago.

MRS. B.

But you must now endeavour to forget it. I have already informed you
what a great change chemistry has undergone since it has become a
regular science. Within these thirty years especially, it has
experienced an entire revolution, and it is now proved, that neither
fire, air, earth, nor water, can be called elementary bodies. For an
elementary body is one that has never been decomposed, that is to say,
separated into other substances; and fire, air, earth, and water, are
all of them susceptible of decomposition.

EMILY.

I thought that decomposing a body was dividing it into its minutest
parts. And if so, I do not understand why an elementary substance is not
capable of being decomposed, as well as any other.

MRS. B.

You have misconceived the idea of _decomposition_; it is very different
from mere _division_. The latter simply reduces a body into parts, but
the former separates it into the various ingredients, or materials, of
which it is composed. If we were to take a loaf of bread, and separate
the several ingredients of which it is made, the flour, the yeast, the
salt, and the water, it would be very different from cutting or
crumbling the loaf into pieces.

EMILY.

I understand you now very well. To decompose a body is to separate from
each other the various elementary substances of which it consists.

CAROLINE.

But flour, water, and other materials of bread, according to our
definition, are not elementary substances?

MRS. B.

No, my dear; I mentioned bread rather as a familiar comparison, to
illustrate the idea, than as an example.

The elementary substances of which a body is composed are called the
_constituent_ parts of that body; in decomposing it, therefore, we
separate its constituent parts. If, on the contrary, we divide a body by
chopping it to pieces, or even by grinding or pounding it to the finest
powder, each of these small particles will still consist of a portion of
the several constituent parts of the whole body: these are called the
_integrant_ parts; do you understand the difference?

EMILY.

Yes, I think, perfectly. We _decompose_ a body into its _constituent_
parts; and _divide_ it into its _integrant_ parts.

MRS. B.

Exactly so. If therefore a body consists of only one kind of substance,
though it may be divided into its integrant parts, it is not possible to
decompose it. Such bodies are therefore called _simple_ or _elementary_,
as they are the elements of which all other bodies are composed.
_Compound bodies_ are such as consist of more than one of these
elementary principles.

CAROLINE.

But do not fire, air, earth, and water, consist, each of them, but of
one kind of substance?

MRS. B.

No, my dear; they are every one of them susceptible of being separated
into various simple bodies. Instead of four, chemists now reckon upwards
of forty elementary substances. The existence of most of these is
established by the clearest experiments; but, in regard to a few of
them, particularly the most subtle agents of nature, _heat_, _light_,
and _electricity_, there is yet much uncertainty, and I can only give
you the opinion which seems most probably deduced from the latest
discoveries. After I have given you a list of the elementary bodies,
classed according to their properties, we shall proceed to examine each
of them separately, and then consider them in their combinations with
each other.

Excepting the more general agents of nature, heat, light, and
electricity, it would seem that the simple form of bodies is that of a
metal.

CAROLINE.

You astonish me! I thought the metals were only one class of minerals,
and that there were besides, earths, stones, rocks, acids, alkalies,
vapours, fluids, and the whole of the animal and vegetable kingdoms.

MRS. B.

You have made a tolerably good enumeration, though I fear not arranged
in the most scientific order. All these bodies, however, it is now
strongly believed, may be ultimately resolved into metallic substances.
Your surprise at this circumstance is not singular, as the decomposition
of some of them, which has been but lately accomplished, has excited the
wonder of the whole philosophical world.

But to return to the list of simple bodies--these being usually found in
combination with oxygen, I shall class them according to their
properties when so combined. This will, I think, facilitate their future
investigation.

EMILY.

Pray what is oxygen?

MRS. B.

A simple body; at least one that is supposed to be so, as it has never
been decomposed. It is always found united with the negative
electricity. It will be one of the first of the elementary bodies whose
properties I shall explain to you, and, as you will soon perceive, it is
one of the most important in nature; but it would be irrelevant to enter
upon this subject at present. We must now confine our attention to the
enumeration and classification of the simple bodies in general. They may
be arranged as follows:

CLASS I.

_Comprehending the imponderable agents, viz._

  HEAT or CALORIC,
  LIGHT,
  ELECTRICITY.

CLASS II.

_Comprehending agents capable of uniting with inflammable bodies, and in
most instances of effecting their combustion._

  OXYGEN,
  CHLORINE,
  IODINE.*

    [Footnote *: It has been questioned by some eminent chemists,
    whether these two last agents should not be classed among the
    inflammable bodies, as they are capable of combining with oxygen,
    as well as with inflammable bodies. But they seem to be more
    distinctly characterised by their property of supporting
    combustion than by any other quality.]

CLASS III.

_Comprehending bodies capable of uniting with oxygen, and, forming with
it various compounds. This class may be divided as follows:_

DIVISION 1.

  HYDROGEN, _forming_ water.

DIVISION 2.

_Bodies forming acids._

  NITROGEN,    _forming_ nitric acid.
  SULPHUR,     _forming_ sulphuric acid.
  PHOSPHORUS,  _forming_ phosphoric acid.
  CARBON,      _forming_ carbonic acid.
  BORACIUM,    _forming_ boracic acid.
  FLUORIUM,    _forming_ fluoric acid.
  MURIATIUM,   _forming_ muriatic acid.

DIVISION 3.

_Metallic bodies forming alkalies._

  POTASSIUM,  _forming_ potash.
  SODIUM,     _forming_ soda.
  AMMONIUM,   _forming_ ammonia.

DIVISION 4.

_Metallic bodies forming earths._

  CALCIUM, _or metal forming_ lime.
  MAGNIUM,    _forming_ magnesia.
  BARIUM,     _forming_ barytes.
  STRONTIUM,  _forming_ strontites.
  SILICIUM,   _forming_ silex.
  ALUMIUM,    _forming_ alumine.
  YTTRIUM,    _forming_ yttria.
  GLUCIUM,    _forming_ glucina.
  ZIRCONIUM,  _forming_ zirconi.*

    [Footnote *: Of all these earths, three or four only have as yet
    been distinctly decomposed.]

DIVISION 5.

_Metals, either naturally metallic, or yielding their oxygen to carbon
or to heat alone._

_Subdivision 1._

_Malleable Metals._

  GOLD,
  PLATINA,
  PALLADIUM,
  SILVER*
  MERCURY**
  TIN,
  COPPER,
  IRON,
  LEAD,
  NICKEL,
  ZINC.

    [Footnote *: These first four metals have commonly been
    distinguished by the appellation of perfect or noble metals, on
    account of their possessing the characteristic properties of
    ductility, malleability, inalterability, and great specific
    gravity, in an eminent degree.]

    [Footnote **: Mercury, in its liquid state, cannot, of course,
    be called a malleable metal. But when frozen, it possesses a
    considerable degree of malleability.]

_Subdiv. 2._

_Brittle Metals._

  ARSENIC,
  BISMUTH,
  ANTIMONY,
  MANGANESE,
  TELLURIUM,
  COBALT,
  TUNGSTEN,
  MOLYBDENUM,
  TITANIUM,
  CHROME,
  URANIUM,
  COLUMBIUM _or_ TANTALIUM,
  IRIDIUM,
  OSMIUM,
  RHODIUM.*

    [Footnote *: These last four or five metallic bodies are placed
    under this class for the sake of arrangement, though some of their
    properties have not been yet fully investigated.]

CAROLINE.

Oh, what a formidable list! You will have much to do to explain it,
Mrs. B.; for I assure you it is perfectly unintelligible to me, and I
think rather perplexes than assists me.

MRS. B.

Do not let that alarm you, my dear; I hope that hereafter this
classification will appear quite clear, and, so far from perplexing you,
will assist you in arranging your ideas. It would be in vain to attempt
forming a division that would appear perfectly clear to a beginner: for
you may easily conceive that a chemical division being necessarily
founded on properties with which you are almost wholly unacquainted, it
is impossible that you should at once be able to understand its meaning
or appreciate its utility.

But, before we proceed further, it will be necessary to give you some
idea of chemical attraction, a power on which the whole science depends.

_Chemical Attraction_, or the _Attraction of Composition_, consists in
the peculiar tendency which bodies of a different nature have to unite
with each other. It is by this force that all the compositions, and
decompositions, are effected.

EMILY.

What is the difference between chemical attraction, and the attraction
of cohesion, or of aggregation, which you often mentioned to us, in
former conversations?

MRS. B.

The attraction of cohesion exists only between particles of the _same_
nature, whether simple or compound; thus it unites the particles of a
piece of metal which is a simple substance, and likewise the particles
of a loaf of bread which is a compound. The attraction of composition,
on the contrary, unites and maintains, in a state of combination,
particles of a _dissimilar_ nature; it is this power that forms each of
the compound particles of which bread consists; and it is by the
attraction of cohesion that all these particles are connected into a
single mass.

EMILY.

The attraction of cohesion, then, is the power which unites the
integrant particles of a body: the attraction of composition that which
combines the constituent particles. Is it not so?

MRS. B.

Precisely: and observe that the attraction of cohesion unites particles
of a similar nature, without changing their original properties; the
result of such an union, therefore, is a body of the same kind as the
particles of which it is formed; whilst the attraction of composition,
by combining particles of a dissimilar nature, produces compound bodies,
quite different from any of their constituents. If, for instance, I pour
on the piece of copper, contained in this glass, some of this liquid
(which is called nitric acid), for which it has a strong attraction,
every particle of the copper will combine with a particle of acid, and
together they will form a new body, totally different from either the
copper or the acid.

Do you observe the internal commotion that already begins to take place?
It is produced by the combination of these two substances; and yet the
acid has in this case to overcome not only the resistance which the
strong cohesion of the particles of copper opposes to their combination
with it, but also to overcome the weight of the copper, which makes it
sink to the bottom of the glass, and prevents the acid from having such
free access to it as it would if the metal were suspended in the liquid.

EMILY.

The acid seems, however, to overcome both these obstacles without
difficulty, and appears to be very rapidly dissolving the copper.

MRS. B.

By this means it reduces the copper into more minute parts than could
possibly be done by any mechanical power. But as the acid can act only
on the surface of the metal, it will be some time before the union of
these two bodies will be completed.

You may, however, already see how totally different this compound is
from either of its ingredients. It is neither colourless, like the acid,
nor hard, heavy, and yellow like the copper. If you tasted it, you would
no longer perceive the sourness of the acid. It has at present the
appearance of a blue liquid; but when the union is completed, and the
water with which the acid is diluted is evaporated, the compound will
assume the form of regular crystals, of a fine blue colour, and
perfectly transparent*. Of these I can shew you a specimen, as I have
prepared some for that purpose.

    [Footnote *: These crystals are more easily obtained from a
    mixture of sulphuric with a little nitric acid.]

CAROLINE.

How very beautiful they are, in colour, form, and transparency!

EMILY.

Nothing can be more striking than this example of chemical attraction.

MRS. B.

The term _attraction_ has been lately introduced into chemistry as a
substitute for the word _affinity_, to which some chemists have
objected, because it originated in the vague notion that chemical
combinations depended upon a certain resemblance, or relationship,
between particles that are disposed to unite; and this idea is not only
imperfect, but erroneous, as it is generally particles of the most
dissimilar nature, that have the greatest tendency to combine.

CAROLINE.

Besides, there seems to be no advantage in using a variety of terms to
express the same meaning; on the contrary it creates confusion; and as
we are well acquainted with the term Attraction in natural philosophy,
we had better adopt it in chemistry likewise.

MRS. B.

If you have a clear idea of the meaning, I shall leave you at liberty to
express it in the terms you prefer. For myself, I confess that I think
the word Attraction best suited to the general law that unites the
integrant particles of bodies; and Affinity better adapted to that which
combines the constituent particles, as it may convey an idea of the
preference which some bodies have for others, which the term _attraction
of composition_ does not so well express.

EMILY.

So I think; for though that preference may not result from any
relationship, or similitude, between the particles (as you say was once
supposed), yet, as it really exists, it ought to be expressed.

MRS. B.

Well, let it be agreed that you may use the terms _affinity_, _chemical
attraction_ and _attraction of composition_, indifferently, provided you
recollect that they have all the same meaning.

EMILY.

I do not conceive how bodies can be decomposed by chemical attraction.
That this power should be the means of composing them, is very obvious;
but that it should, at the same time, produce exactly the contrary
effect, appears to me very singular.

MRS. B.

To decompose a body is, you know, to separate its constituent parts,
which, as we have just observed, cannot be done by mechanical means.

EMILY.

No: because mechanical means separate only the integrant particles; they
act merely against the attraction of cohesion, and only divide a
compound into smaller parts.

MRS. B.

The decomposition of a body is performed by chemical powers. If you
present to a body composed of two principles, a third, which has a
greater affinity for one of them than the two first have for each other,
it will be decomposed, that is, its two principles will be separated by
means of the third body. Let us call two ingredients, of which the body
is composed, A and B. If we present to it another ingredient C, which
has a greater affinity for B than that which unites A and B, it
necessarily follows that B will quit A to combine with C. The new
ingredient, therefore, has effected a decomposition of the original body
A B; A has been left alone, and a new compound, B C, has been formed.

EMILY.

We might, I think, use the comparison of two friends, who were very
happy in each other's society, till a third disunited them by the
preference which one of them gave to the new-comer.

MRS. B.

Very well. I shall now show you how this takes place in chemistry.

Let us suppose that we wish to decompose the compound we have just
formed by the combination of the two ingredients, copper and nitric
acid; we may do this by presenting to it a piece of iron, for which the
acid has a stronger attraction than for copper; the acid will,
consequently, quit the copper to combine with the iron, and the copper
will be what the chemists call _precipitated_, that is to say, it will
be thrown down in its separate state, and reappear in its simple form.

In order to produce this effect, I shall dip the blade of this knife
into the fluid, and, when I take it out, you will observe, that, instead
of being wetted with a bluish liquid, like that contained in the glass,
it will be covered with a thin coat of copper.

CAROLINE.

So it is really! but then is it not the copper, instead of the acid,
that has combined with the iron blade?

MRS. B.

No; you are deceived by appearances: it is the acid which combines with
the iron, and, in so doing, deposits or precipitates the copper on the
surface of the blade.

EMILY.

But, cannot three or more substances combine together, without any of
them being precipitated?

MRS. B.

That is sometimes the case; but, in general, the stronger affinity
destroys the weaker; and it seldom happens that the attraction of
several substances for each other is so equally balanced as to produce
such complicated compounds.

CAROLINE.

But, pray, Mrs. B., what is the cause of the chemical attraction of
bodies for each other? It appears to me more extraordinary or unnatural,
if I may use the expression, than the attraction of cohesion, which
unites particles of a similar nature.

MRS. B.

Chemical attraction may, like that of cohesion or gravitation, be one of
the powers inherent in matter which, in our present state of knowledge,
admits of no other satisfactory explanation than an immediate reference
to a divine cause. Sir H. Davy, however, whose important discoveries
have opened such improved views in chemistry, has suggested an
hypothesis which may throw great light upon that science. He supposes
that there are two kinds of electricity, with one or other of which all
bodies are united. These we distinguish by the names of _positive_ and
_negative_ electricity; those bodies are disposed to combine, which
possess opposite electricities, as they are brought together by the
attraction which these electricities have for each other. But, whether
this hypothesis be altogether founded on truth or not, it is impossible
to question the great influence of electricity in chemical combinations.

EMILY.

So, that we must suppose that the two electricities always attract each
other, and thus compel the bodies in which they exist to combine?

CAROLINE.

And may not this be also the cause of the attraction of cohesion?

MRS. B.

No, for in particles of the same nature the same electricities must
prevail, and it is only the different or opposite electric fluids that
attract each other.

CAROLINE.

These electricities seem to me to be a kind of chemical spirit, which
animates the particles of bodies, and draws them together.

EMILY.

If it is known, then, with which of the electricities bodies are united,
it can be inferred which will, and which will not, combine together?

MRS. B.

Certainly. --I should not omit to mention, that some doubts have been
entertained whether electricity be really a material agent, or whether
it might not be a power inherent in bodies, similar to, or, perhaps
identical with, attraction.

EMILY.

But what then would be the electric spark which is visible, and must
therefore be really material?

MRS. B.

What we call the electric spark, may, Sir H. Davy says, be merely the
heat and light, or fire produced by the chemical combinations with which
these phenomena are always connected. We will not, however, enter more
fully on this important subject at present, but reserve the principal
facts which relate to it to a future conversation.

Before we part, however, I must recommend you to fix in your memory the
names of the simple bodies, against our next interview.




CONVERSATION II.

ON LIGHT AND HEAT OR CALORIC.


CAROLINE.

We have learned by heart the names of all the simple bodies which you
have enumerated, and we are now ready to enter on the examination of
each of them successively. You will begin, I suppose, with LIGHT?

MRS. B.

Respecting the nature of light we have little more than conjectures. It
is considered by most philosophers as a real substance, immediately
emanating from the sun, and from all luminous bodies, from which it is
projected in right lines with prodigious velocity. Light, however, being
imponderable, it cannot be confined and examined by itself; and
therefore it is to the effects it produces on other bodies, rather than
to its immediate nature, that we must direct our attention.

The connection between light and heat is very obvious; indeed, it is
such, that it is extremely difficult to examine the one independently of
the other.

EMILY.

But, is it possible to separate light from heat; I thought they were
only different degrees of the same thing, fire?

MRS. B.

I told you that fire was not now considered as a simple element. Whether
light and heat be altogether different agents, or not, I cannot pretend
to decide; but, in many cases, light may be separated from heat. The
first discovery of this was made by a celebrated Swedish chemist,
Scheele. Another very striking illustration of the separation of heat
and light was long after pointed out by Dr. Herschell. This philosopher
discovered that these two agents were emitted in the rays of the sun,
and that heat was less refrangible than light; for, in separating the
different coloured rays of light by a prism (as we did some time ago),
he found that the greatest heat was beyond the spectrum, at a little
distance from the red rays, which, you may recollect, are the least
refrangible.

EMILY.

I should like to try that experiment.

MRS. B.

It is by no means an easy one: the heat of a ray of light, refracted by
a prism, is so small, that it requires a very delicate thermometer to
distinguish the difference of the degree of heat within and without the
spectrum. For in this experiment the heat is not totally separated from
the light, each coloured ray retaining a certain portion of it, though
the greatest part is not sufficiently refracted to fall within the
spectrum.

EMILY.

I suppose, then, that those coloured rays which are the least
refrangible, retain the greatest quantity of heat?

MRS. B.

They do so.

EMILY.

Though I no longer doubt that light and heat can be separated, Dr.
Herschell's experiment does not appear to me to afford sufficient proof
that they are essentially different; for light, which you call a simple
body, may likewise be divided into the various coloured rays.

MRS. B.

No doubt there must be some difference in the various coloured rays.
Even their chemical powers are different. The blue rays, for instance,
have the greatest effect in separating oxygen from bodies, as was found
by Scheele; and there exist also, as Dr. Wollaston has shown, rays more
refrangible than the blue, which produce the same chemical effect, and,
what is very remarkable, are invisible.

EMILY.

Do you think it possible that heat may be merely a modification of
light?

MRS. B.

That is a supposition which, in the present state of natural philosophy,
can neither be positively affirmed nor denied. Let us, therefore,
instead of discussing theoretical points, be contented with examining
what is known respecting the chemical effects of light.

Light is capable of entering into a kind of transitory union with
certain substances, and this is what has been called phosphorescence.
Bodies that are possessed of this property, after being exposed to the
sun's rays, appear luminous in the dark. The shells of fish, the bones
of land animals, marble, limestone, and a variety of combinations of
earths, are more or less powerfully phosphorescent.

CAROLINE.

I remember being much surprised last summer with the phosphorescent
appearance of some pieces of rotten wood, which had just been dug out of
the ground; they shone so bright that I at first supposed them to be
glow-worms.

EMILY.

And is not the light of a glow-worm of a phosphorescent nature?

MRS. B.

It is a very remarkable instance of phosphorescence in living animals;
this property, however, is not exclusively possessed by the glow-worm.
The insect called the lanthorn-fly, which is peculiar to warm climates,
emits light as it flies, producing in the dark a remarkably sparkling
appearance. But it is more common to see animal matter in a dead state
possessed of a phosphorescent quality; sea fish is often eminently so.

EMILY.

I have heard that the sea has sometimes had the appearance of being
illuminated, and that the light is supposed to proceed from the spawn of
fishes floating on its surface.

MRS. B.

This light is probably owing to that or some other animal matter. Sea
water has been observed to become luminous from the substance of a fresh
