It was nightfall when the wagon that had brought them turned into a
muddy drive and stopped before a bare looking house situated in a
meadow, and surrounded by a number of vast barns and sheep-pens. Out of
this house came a broad-shouldered, bronzed man who stood on the steps,
waiting their approach. He wore trousers of sheepskin, a soiled flannel
shirt, and round his neck--knotted in the back--was a red handkerchief.
Donald noticed that into his belt of Mexican leather was tucked a
revolver. He stared at the strangers inquiringly.

Mr. Clark jumped out as soon as the wagon stopped, and extended his
hand.

"I do not know your name," he said pleasantly, "but mine is Clark. My
son Donald and I have come from Boston to see the ranch."

The man sprang forward.

"I'm Tom Thornton, sir. What a pleasure to have a visit from you! Such
an unexpected visit, too."

He slapped Mr. Clark heartily on the shoulder and took Donald's hand in
a tight grip.

But though he talked loudly, and laughed a great deal while carrying in
their luggage, for some reason Donald felt certain that really Tom
Thornton was not glad to see them at all.

[Illustration]




Chapter II

WHO SANDY WAS


The next morning both Donald and his father were astir early.

There was nothing to keep them within the great chilly house, and
everything to lure them into the sunshine. The sky was without a cloud,
and into its blueness stretched distant ranges of hazy mountains at
whose feet nestled lower hills covered with faint green. Near at hand
patches of meadow were toned to grayish white by grazing bands of sheep.
On the still air came the flat, metallic note of herd-bells, and the
bleating of numberless unseen flocks within the pens and barns.

What a novel scene it was!

The newcomers found their way to a sheltered corner where they could
look out before them into the vastness.

It was all so strange, so interesting!

Somewhere in the ravine below they could catch the rushing music of a
stream which wove itself in and out a maze of rolling hills and was lost
at last in the shadows of the green valleys.

As they stood silent and drank in the beauty about them, an angry voice
broke the stillness.

It came from the interior of the barn near which they were standing.

"I tell you what, Tom Thornton, I'm with Sandy McCulloch. The sheep
always were washed after shearing in Old Angus's day, and in Johnson's
as well. That is how Crescent Ranch came to have the good name it now
holds. There were no scabby sheep here to infect the rest of the herd."

"What's that to you, Jack Owen? You are here to mind the boss, ain't
you? What's the use of our working like beavers for ten days to dip the
flock if we don't have to? Dipping is a dirty, tiresome job. You are not
in for making work for yourself, are you?"

"The flocks will be ruined!"

"What do you care--they are not your sheep."

"Well, I have been on this ranch a long time, Thornton, and I can't help
caring what becomes of 'em. I take the same pride in the place Sandy
does. We have won a reputation here for doing things the way they ought
to be done--for minding the laws--for having clean, healthy stock. Sandy
says he shall dip his herd, anyway."

"Bother Sandy! He's talked to you men until he's got you all upset. You
would have been with me if he had kept his mouth shut. But no matter
what he says I am running this ranch at present. I mean to run it in the
future, too. If you're wise you will do as I tell you."

"Mr. Clark may have something to say about the dipping."

"Don't you fret," sneered Thornton. "I sounded him last night. He's a
tenderfoot. I don't believe he knows a thing about sheeping."

Mr. Clark drew Donald into the sun-flooded field before he spoke.

Then, after a thoughtful silence he turned:

"Well, Don?"

"I wouldn't have that Thornton here another day, father!" broke out the
boy hotly.

"Slowly, son, slowly! We must be sure about Thornton before we condemn
him. He has been ten years on the ranch; more than that, we are without
a manager, and we have none in view. Remember 'he stumbles who runs
fast.' Take time, Don, take time."

Donald flushed.

"I know it is the best way, but I was so angry to hear him talking that
way about you."

"Loyalty is a fine trait, Don." Mr. Clark laid his hand affectionately
on his son's shoulder. "I like to see you loyal. But in this matter we
must move slowly."

"What about this dipping, father? What is it?"

"Something about washing the sheep. I do not clearly understand it
myself."

"Shall you have it done?"

"What do you say?"

"Of course I do not know anything about it," Donald replied modestly,
"but somehow I feel as if Sandy and the men are right."

"I think so too."

"Couldn't I ask Sandy what it is, father?"

"I am thinking of asking him myself, Don, if I get a good chance."

The chance came unexpectedly, for at that very moment Sandy McCulloch
came out of one of the sheep-pens and crossed the walk to the central
barn.

"What are you up to to-day, Sandy?" called Mr. Clark.

"I am going to dip my flock, sir, down in the south meadow."

"I am glad of that, for it will give us a chance to see it done,"
observed Mr. Clark. Then lowering his voice he asked: "Why do you dip
the sheep, Sandy?"

"Are you asking because you want to know?" inquired Sandy with the
directness which characterized everything he said.

"Yes, Both Donald and I wish to learn."

"Well, sir, it is this way. After the shearing is over and the fleece
removed, the coat of the sheep is light and therefore easily dried. We
then take the flocks and run them through a bath of lime and sulphur.
Some shepherds prefer a coal-tar dip. Whatever the dip is made of, the
purpose is the same. It is to kill the parasites on the sheep and cure
any diseases of the eyes. If sheep are not dipped they get the 'scab.'
Some bit of a creature gets under their skin and burrows until it makes
the sheep sick. Often, too, the wool will peel off in great patches. One
sheep will take it from another, until by and by the whole herd is
infected."

Mr. Clark nodded.

"I never mean to let a sickly sheep go on the range," continued Sandy.
"I try to flax round and find out what is the matter with him so I can
cure him. We don't want our herd spoiling the feeding grounds and the
water-holes and giving their diseases to all the flocks that graze after
them. If we are let graze on the range the least we can do is to be
decent about it--that's the way I look at it."

"Have our sheep always been dipped?"

"Aye, sir, that they have--dipped every spring after shearing; then we
clipped their feet before they started for the range. Sheep, you know,
walk on two toes, and if their feet are not trimmed they get sore from
traveling so much. I suppose nature intended sheep to climb over the
rocks and wear their hoofs down that way. They have a queer foot. Did
you know that there is a little oily gland between the toes to make the
hoof moist, and keep it from cracking?"

"No, I guess neither Donald nor I knew that, did we, Donald? Now about
this dipping--do you thoroughly understand how it is done, Sandy?"

"I do that, sir."

Donald wondered why his father was so thoughtful.

"How long have you been at Crescent Ranch, Sandy?" asked Mr. Clark at
last.

"Ever since I was a lad of fifteen, sir."

"That must be about ten years!"

"Fourteen."

A new thought came to Mr. Clark.

"Why, then you must have known Old Angus," he exclaimed.

"I did, sir."

"He was a fine old man, they tell me."

"He was."

"I never saw him--I wish I had. It was a great loss to the ranch and to
all of us when he went."

"It was indeed."

"You must remember him well, Sandy."

Throwing back his head with a gesture of pride, Sandy confronted Mr.
Clark.

"I do, sir," he replied simply. "He was my father."

Mr. Clark and Donald stared.

"Why didn't you tell me that in the first place?" cried Donald's father,
stepping forward eagerly and seizing the hand of the young ranchman.

"I thought mayhap you knew it. If not--why prate about it? It's on my
own feet I must stand and not on my father's. If I am of any use you
will find it out fast enough, father or no father; if I'm not 'twere
best you found that out as well."

"Independent as your forebears, Sandy!" laughed Mr. Clark.

"I be a McCulloch, sir!" was all Sandy said.

[Illustration]




CHAPTER III

THE DIPPING


It was a great surprise to Tom Thornton when Mr. Clark informed him that
he wanted the men to start in dipping the sheep as soon as they could
get ready.

"I suppose, Thornton, you have everything in readiness for the work,"
continued the owner casually.

Thornton did not hesitate.

"Yes, indeed, sir. We can start right in to-day if you wish. It is for
you to say. But really, Mr. Clark, the flock hardly needs it. Our sheep
are in prime condition."

"That's all the more reason for keeping them so, Thornton," was the
smiling reply.

"Of course that is true, sir. Very well. We will go ahead. I think I
shall have time to give the orders, although I have got to be in Glen
City about ten days shipping the clip."

"What?"

"Shipping the wool, sir."

"Oh, yes."

"I can start the work before I go."

"I don't think you need bother, Thornton," remarked Mr. Clark slowly.
"You go on down to Glen City and finish up your business there."

"But somebody must see to the dipping if you really want it done."

"I'll attend to it."

"You!"

"Why not?"

"Why--why--nothing, sir. I beg your pardon. Only I thought you might be
too tired after your trip."

"Oh, no. I am not tired at all."

Thornton eyed him.

Even Donald was astonished.

Mr. Clark did not seem to be at all disturbed by the embarrassing
stillness, but went on shaving down a stick he was whittling.

"I do not mean to manage the dipping myself," he explained at last. "I
shall let Sandy McCulloch take charge of it."

"Sandy McCulloch! Why, sir, that boy could never do it in the world! He
is a good lad--well enough in his way--but not very smart. Not at all
like his father."

"Well, if he has no ability I shall soon find it out. I mean to try him,
anyway."

"Oh, you can try him if you like, but I know the fellow better than you
do. You are foolish to turn any big work over to him. He can't handle
it."

"I intend to give him the chance."

Thornton's annoyance began to get beyond his control.

"Very well. It is not my business," he snapped as he left the room.

The instant he was gone Donald, who could not keep silent another
moment, cried:

"Oh, father! I am so glad you are going to let Sandy manage the
dipping!"

"It is an experiment, Don. Sandy is young and he may make a mess of
things--not because he does not mean well, but because he lacks
experience. He has been here a long time, to be sure, but he never has
taken any care beyond watching his own flocks."

"I do not think he will fail. The men will all help him. They like him."

"I can see that."

"And I like him too, father."

"So do I, son. I am trusting him with this work not only because I like
him but because I feel sure that the son of such a father cannot go far
astray. It was a great surprise to me when I found Sandy was the son of
Old Angus. You see we all thought so much of the old Scotchman that he
was Old Angus to everybody. I had almost forgotten he had another name.
I don't think I ever heard any one call him Angus McCulloch in my life.
And yet I remember the name now, for I can recall seeing it written out
on checks and letters."

"It is a fine name," Donald declared.

"Sandy comes of good stock. I want to help him all I can. If he has the
right stuff in him perhaps we can give him a lift. I wish we might, for
I feel we owe his father more than we ever can repay."

It was great news to Sandy when he learned that not only was he to dip
his own flock, but that into his hands was to be put the dipping of the
entire herd.

"I'm no so sure I can manage it, Mr. Clark," he said modestly, lapsing,
as he often did, into his broad Scotch. "I'll do the best I can though,
sir."

"I am sure you will."

And Sandy did do his best!

The hot dip, with the proper proportions of lime and sulphur, was
prepared, and Sandy tested its temperature by seeing if he could bear
his hand in it. Then the long cement troughs were filled. These troughs
were just wide enough so the sheep were not able to turn. Groups of
sheep that had been driven from the larger enclosures to the small pens
near the dipping troughs were then hurried, one by one, to the men
standing at the head of the troughs; it was the duty of these men to
push each sheep in turn down the smooth metal incline into the dip. The
sheep slipped in easily. As they swam along through the steaming bath
other men were posted midway and when a sheep passed they thrust the
head twice under water with their crooks so that the eyes and heads--as
well as the bodies--might be cleansed. At the far end of the troughs
still other herders helped the bedraggled creatures out onto a draining
platform where they dripped for a time and were afterward driven back
into their pens.

"I shouldn't think the sheep would ever dry!" Donald remarked to Sandy
as they watched the process.

"Oh, they do; only it takes a couple of days--and sometimes more before
their wool is thoroughly dry," answered the Scotchman.

Donald looked on, fascinated.

The work proceeded without a hitch.

The sheep were fed into the troughs, hurried on and away, only to give
place to others. Whenever the dip cooled a fresh, hot supply was added.
Within an hour Donald counted a hundred sheep swim their way through the
one trough near which he chanced to be standing.

Sandy McCulloch was everywhere at once--now here, now there, giving
orders. Gladly the herders obeyed him. They all liked Sandy, not only
for his own sake but for the sake of Old Angus, his father, under whom
most of them had worked in years past.

"Sandy's a fine lad!" Donald heard one of the herders say.

"There's not a better on Crescent Ranch!" was the prompt reply from a
grizzled old Mexican who was ducking the heads of the herd that sped
past him.

"He wouldn't make a bad boss of the ranch," murmured another in an
undertone.

[Illustration: "HE WOULDN'T MAKE A BAD BOSS"]

Sandy did not hear them. He was too intent on his work. He went about it
simply, yet with his whole soul. Day after day his cheery voice could
be heard:

"Your dip is cooling, Bernardo! Warm it up a bit. Dinna you know you'll
have your labor for your pains unless the stuff is hot as the sheep can
bear it? Hurry your flock ahead there, Jose. Think you we want to be
dipping sheep the rest of the season? If those ewes have drained off
enough let the dogs drive them back to the pens. They'll rub their sides
up against the boards and cleanse the pen as well as themselves. Now
bring out the new herd that came last week from Kansas City. You'll find
them in pens seventeen and eighteen. We kept them by themselves so they
would scatter no disease through the flock. After they are dipped they
can be put with the others."

The men took all he said good-naturedly. Sandy used no unnecessary
words, but what he did say was crisp and to the point, and the herders
liked it. They liked, too, to watch his face when his lips parted and
his glistening white teeth gleamed between them. Sandy had a very
contagious smile. He worked tirelessly, and ever as he moved about among
the sheep two great Scotch collies tagged at his heels. Busy as he was
he often bent down to pat one of the shaggy heads, and was rewarded by
having the beautiful dogs thrust their long noses into his hand or rub
up against his knees. It was amusing to Donald to watch these dogs dash
after the sheep and drive them into the pens. Sometimes they leaped on
the backs of the herd and ran the entire length of the line until they
reached the ones at the front. They then proceeded to bite the necks of
these leaders until they turned them in the desired direction. This
done, the collies would run back and by nipping the heels of the sheep
at the rear they would compel them to follow where they wished to have
them go.

Donald had never seen anything like it.

During the time that the dipping process continued he did not lack for
entertainment, you may be sure.

"You'll soon have nothing more to do, Sandy," the boy said one night
when he and the Scotchman were sitting in the twilight on the steps of
the big barn.

"How's that, laddie?"

"Why, the dipping will be over to-morrow, won't it?"

"Yes; but that is only the beginning of trouble. We shall then put the
herd out in the wet grass a while and soften their hoofs so they can be
trimmed before the flocks start for the range. Then the bells must be
put on, and the bands of sheep made up for the herders."

"What do you mean by making up the herd?"

"I'll try to tell you. Sheep, you must know, are the queerest creatures
under the blue of heaven. It ain't in the power of man to understand
them. Some minutes they are doing as you'd likely think they would; the
next thing you know they are all stampeding off by themselves, and try
as you will you cannot stop 'em. They dinna seem sometimes to have a bit
of brains."

Donald laughed.

"Aye! You may well laugh, sitting here, but it's no so funny when they
go chasing after the leaders and jumping over the face of some cliff.
Think of seeing a hundred of 'em piled up dead at your feet!"

"Did such a thing as that really ever happen, Sandy?" questioned Donald
incredulously.

"It did so. Didn't bears get after a flock on one of the ranges and
didn't the whole lot of scared creatures start running? If they had but
waited either the dogs or the herders might have driven off the bears.
But no! Nothing would do but they must run--and run they did. One after
another they leaped over the edge of the rimrock until most of the flock
was destroyed. Folks named the place 'Pile-Up Chasm.' It was a sorry
loss to the owner."

"But I don't see why----"
