The Project Gutenberg EBook of Astounding Stories, March, 1931, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Astounding Stories, March, 1931

Author: Various

Release Date: October 3, 2009 [EBook #30166]
[Last updated: November 24, 2012]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ASTOUNDING STORIES, MARCH, 1931 ***




Produced by Sankar Viswanathan, Greg Weeks, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net







                              ASTOUNDING

                               STORIES

                                 20c


              _On Sale the First Thursday of Each Month_


                       W. M. CLAYTON, Publisher
                         HARRY BATES, Editor
                  DOUGLAS M. DOLD, Consulting Editor


The Clayton Standard on a Magazine Guarantees

    _That_ the stories therein are clean, interesting, vivid, by leading
           writers of the day and purchased under conditions approved by
           the Authors' League of America;

    _That_ such magazines are manufactured in Union shops by American
           workmen;

    _That_ each newsdealer and agent is insured a fair profit;

    _That_ an intelligent censorship guards their advertising pages.


_The other Clayton magazines are:_

ACE-HIGH MAGAZINE, RANCH ROMANCES, COWBOY STORIES, CLUES, FIVE-NOVELS
MONTHLY, ALL STAR DETECTIVE STORIES, RANGELAND LOVE STORY MAGAZINE,
WESTERN ADVENTURES, and WESTERN LOVE STORIES.

_More than Two Million Copies Required to Supply the Monthly Demand
for Clayton Magazines._

       *       *       *       *       *




VOL. V, No. 3            CONTENTS            MARCH, 1931


COVER DESIGN                            H. W. WESSO

    _Painted in Water-Colors from a Scene in "Beyond the Vanishing
     Point."_

WHEN THE MOUNTAIN CAME TO MIRAMAR       CHARLES W. DIFFIN       297

    _It is Magic against Magic As Garry Connell Bluffs for His Life with
     a Prehistoric Savage in the Heart of Sentinel Mountain._

BEYOND THE VANISHING POINT              RAY CUMMINGS            314

    _The Tale of a Golden Atom--an Astounding Adventure in Size._
     (A Complete Novelette.)

TERRORS UNSEEN                          HARL VINCENT            360

    _One after Another the Invisible Robots Escape Shelton's Control--and
     Their Trail Leads Straight to the Gangster Chief Cadorna._

PHALANXES OF ATLANS                     F. V. W. MASON          376

    _Never Did an Aviator Ride a More Amazing Sky-Steed Than Alden on His
     Desperate Dash to the Great Jarmuthian Ziggurat._ (Conclusion of
     a Two-Part Novel.)

THE METEOR GIRL                         JACK WILLIAMSON         404

    _Through the Complicated Space-Time of the Fourth Dimension Goes
     Charlie King in an Attempt to Rescue the Meteor Girl._

THE READERS' CORNER                     ALL OF US               417

    _A Meeting Place for Readers of Astounding Stories._


Single Copies, 20 Cents (In Canada, 25 Cents) Yearly Subscription,
$2.00

Issued monthly by Readers' Guild, Inc., 80 Lafayette Street, New York,
N. Y. W. M. Clayton, President; Francis P. Pace, Secretary. Entered as
second-class matter December 7, 1929, at the Post Office at New York,
N. Y., under Act of March 3, 1879. Title registered as a Trade Mark in
the U. S. Patent Office. Member Newsstand Group--Men's List. For
advertising rates address E. R. Crowe & Co., Inc., 25 Vanderbilt Ave.,
New York; or 225 North Michigan Ave., Chicago.

       *       *       *       *       *




When the Mountain Came To Miramar

_By Charles W. Diffin_

[Illustration: "_That'll be all from you," he told the black one._]

[Sidenote: It is magic against magic as Garry Connell bluffs for his
life with a prehistoric savage in the heart of Sentinel Mountain.]


The first tremor that set the timbers of the house to creaking brought
Garry Connell out of his bunk and into the middle of the floor. Then
the floor heaved and 'dobe walls swayed while the man fought to keep
his footing and pull himself through the doorway to the safety of the
dark night. The earthquake that came with the spring of 1932 was on.

He was nauseated with that deathly sickness that only an earthquake
gives, and he dropped breathlessly in the shelter of a date palm while
the earth beneath him rolled and groaned in agony. A deeper roar was
rising above all other sounds, and Connell looked up at the nearby top
of Sentinel Mountain.

The stars of the desert land showed clear; the grim blackness of
Sentinel's lone peak rose abruptly from the sand of the desert floor
in darker silhouette against the velvet of a midnight sky. And the
mountain was roaring.

Softened by the distance, the deep, grumbling bass sang thunderingly
through and above the other noises of the night, as if old Sentinel
itself were voicing its remonstrance against this disturbance of its
age-long rest.

The grumbling died to a clatter of falling boulders a hundred yards
away at the mountain's base, and Connell's eyes discerned a puff of
vaporous gray, a cloud of wind-blown dust, high up on the mountain's
flank.

"Holy cats!" said Garry explosively, "what a slide! That must have
ripped the old boy wide open."

His eyes followed the white scar far up on the mountainside, followed
it down to the last loosened stones that had crashed among the date
palms of Miramar ranch. "I don't just like the idea of the whole
mountain moving in on me," he told himself; "I'll have to go up and
look at that to-morrow."

       *       *       *       *       *

It was afternoon of the following day when Garry rolled blankets and
food into a snug pack and prepared for the ascent. "Guess likely I'll
sleep out to-night," he mused and looked at the pistol he held in his
hand.

"I don't want that thing slapping against me," he argued; "too darned
hot! And there's nothing to use a gun on up on Sentinel.... Oh, well!"
He threw the holster upon his bunk and dropped the automatic into the
pack he was rolling. "I'll take it along. Might meet up with a
rattler."

He brushed the sandy hair from his wet forehead and straightened to
his full six feet of slender height before he slipped the straps of
his pack about his shoulders. And a broad grin made pleasant lines
about his gray eyes as he realized the boyish curiosity that was
driving him to a stiff climb in the heat of the day.

There was no real trail up the thousand-foot slope of Sentinel
Mountain. Prospectors had been over it, doubtless, in earlier days,
but in all of Garry's twenty-one years no one besides himself had ever
made the ascent.

There was nothing in all that solitary, desolate peak to call them;
nothing, for that matter, to beckon Garry, except the hot desert days,
the cool breath of evening and the glory of nights when the stars hung
low over all the miles of sand and sagebrush that reached far out to
the rippling sand-dunes shimmering in the distance. Nothing, that is,
but the "feel" of the desert--and young Garry Connell was desert-born
and bred.

He stopped once and dropped his pack while he mopped his wet face.
From this point he could see his own ranch spread below him. Miramar,
he had named it--"Beautiful Sea." The name was half an affectionate
mockery of this land where the nearest water was fifty miles away, and
half because of the sea of blue that he looked at now. Garry had never
ceased to wonder at the mirage.

It was always the same in the summer heat--a phantom ocean of water.
Garry's eyes loved to follow the quivering blue expanse that seemed so
cool and deep. It rippled softly away to end in a line of white, like
distant breakers on the horizon's rolling dunes.

This had been the bed of an ocean in some distant past, and that
ancient ocean could never have seemed more real than this; yet Garry
knew that this sea would vanish with the setting sun. He had watched
it often.

       *       *       *       *       *

A hundred yards farther and he stopped again. It was no well-trodden
path that Garry followed, but he knew his landmarks. There was the big
split rock a half mile ahead, and the three-branched cactus beside it.
But between these and the place where Garry stood was a fan-shaped
sweep of boulders--and this where smooth going had been before.

He forgot for the moment all discomfort. He stood staring under the
hot sun that cast purple shadows beside the weathered rocks, and his
eyes followed up the scarred mountainside.

"That whole ledge that stood out up there--that's gone!" he told
himself. "The whole side of the mountain just shook itself loose...."

Far above, his eyes found another towering mass that reared itself
menacingly. "That will come down next time," he said with conviction,
"and I don't want to be under it when it breaks loose." Then his
searching eyes found the lower ledge and its shattered remains.

It had held a welter of rocks above it as a dam holds the pressure of
water--and the dam had burst. The torrent of stone from above had
swept into motion and carried with it the accumulation of loose rubble
below. Where the ledge had been was now a cliff--a sheer wall of rock.
It had been covered before by the talus that was swept away.

Garry's eyes narrowed to see more plainly under the sun's glare. He
was staring not alone at the cliff but at a shadow within it--a black
shadow in the white face of the cliff itself.

"That was all covered up before," Garry stated; "buried for thousands
of years, I suppose. But it can't be a cave; not a natural one, at
least. There are no caves in this rock."

He stopped at times for breath, and his wonder grew as he climbed and
the black mark took clearer form. At last he stood panting before it,
to stare deep into the utter blackness of a passageway beyond an
entrance of carved stone.

It was carved; there was no mistaking it! Here was a passage that
nature had never formed. He took a quick stride forward to see the
tool marks that showed on hard walls where symbols and figures of
strange design were carved. An intrusion of harder rock had formed a
roof, and they had cut in below--

"They!" He spoke the word aloud. Who were "they?"

       *       *       *       *       *

He remembered the scientist who had stopped at the ranch some time
before, and he recalled enough of the talk of Aztec and Toltec and
Mayas to know that none of these old civilizations could explain the
things he saw.

"This goes way back beyond them--it must," he reasoned. And there were
pictures, long forgotten, that came to his mind to show him a vision
from the past--figures whose coppery faces shone dark above their
brilliant, colored robes--slaves, toiling and sweating to drive this
tunnel into solid rock. He was suddenly a-quiver with a feeling of the
presence of living things. His breath seemed stifled within him as he
stepped into the dark where a pencil of light from his pocket-flash
made the blackness more intense.

He tried to shake off the feeling, but an indefinable oppression was
heavy upon him; the weight of the uncounted centuries these walls had
seen filled him with strange forebodings.

His feet stumbled and scuffed over chips of stone; he steadied himself
against the wall at times as he followed the corridor that went down
and still down before him. It turned and twisted, then leveled off at
last, and Garry Connell drew himself up sharply with a quick-drawn
breath.

His flash was making a circle of light a dozen steps ahead, and showed
a litter of sharp stone fragments. And, scattered over them, a tangle
of bones shone white; one skull stood upright to stare mockingly from
hollow sockets. The sudden white of them was startling in the black
pit.

"Bones!" he said, and forced himself to disregard the echoes that
tried to shout him down; "just bones! And the old-timers that wore
them haven't been using them for thousands of years." He moved forward
with determined steps to the end of the passage that finished in solid
stone. He stopped abruptly. At closer range was something that froze
him to a tense, waiting crouch.

This wall of solid stone--it was not solid as it had seemed. There was
a doorway; the stone was swung inward; and at one side in a
straight-marked crack, he saw a thread of light.

He snapped off his own flash. Someone was there! Someone had beaten
him to it! He held himself crouched and rigid at the thought. But who
could it be? The utter silence and the steady, unchanging, pale-green
light showed him the folly of the thought. There was no one there;
there couldn't be anyone.

       *       *       *       *       *

His hand, that trembled with excitement, reached across and over the
skeleton remains posted like a ghostly guard before the door. He threw
his weight upon the stone.

Its bearings groaned, but it moved at his touch. The stone swung
slowly and ponderously into a silent room, and Garry Connell stared
wide-eyed and wondering where rock walls, in carved and colored
brilliance reflected the softest of diffused light.

A great room, hewn from the solid rock!--and Garry tried to see it and
all that it held at one glance. He grasped the extent of the stone
vault, a hundred feet across; the distant walls were plain in the soft
light.

One high point of flashing color caught his eye and held it in
marveling amazement. A thing of beauty and grace. It was a shining,
silvery shape like a mushroom growth; it towered high in air, almost
to the ceiling, a slender rod that swelled and opened to a curved and
gleaming head. Graceful as a fairy parasol, huge enough to shelter a
giant, it was like nothing he had ever seen.

But there was no time now for conjectures. He made no effort to
understand; he wanted only to see what might be here; and his eyes
flashed quickly over sculptured walls and a stone floor where metal
boxes were arranged in orderly rows.

Hundreds of them, he estimated; huge cases, some eight or ten feet
long. Two nearby were raised above the floor on bases of carved stone.
Lusterless gray in color--metal, unmistakably--and in them....

"No use getting all hopped up over treasure hunting," Garry had told
himself. But under all his incredulous amazement had been flickering
thoughts of what he might find.

He stared hungrily at those two boxes near him. Each of the hundreds
was big enough to hold a fortune. He reached for a metal bar beside
the scattered bones, and, like a man in a sleep-walking dream, he
stepped across those relics of earlier men and entered the room that
