north. Most of the long knives who are pursuing us were called out by
the Great Father of the Illinois country. Once we are out of Illinois,
maybe they will not follow."

Wolf Paw grunted, clearly insulted at the thought of their not being
pursued.

The Prophet bestirred himself. "Many of my Winnebago brothers dwell in
that country to the north. They will join us in fighting the long
knives."

_Like your people from Prophet's Town, who've been deserting us?_ White
Bear thought.

A warrior set a long knives' saddlebag before Black Hawk, who opened it.
The war chief pulled out an expensive-looking black wool suit and some
white silk shirts with ruffles. Finally he took out two books bound in
red and white leather. White Bear leaned over for a closer look.

"Bundles of the pale eyes' talking paper," said Black Hawk.

Wolf Paw said, "They are worthless, Father. Keep the clothing and put
the talking paper on the fire."

But Black Hawk handed one of the books to White Bear. "What do the
talking papers say to you, White Bear?"

White Bear picked up a book and read on the spine, _Chitty's Pleadings,
Vol. I_. He opened and saw close-packed type, his eyes skimming over
many legal terms in Latin. White Bear wondered whether the lawyer who
owned these books was still alive. At the sight of books his heart gave
an unexpected lurch. He felt a longing to be not in a plundered enemy
camp on the prairie, but in a library, with books, pen and paper. The
feeling took him by surprise. It had been many months since he had
missed the pale eyes' world. A few pages of _Paradise Lost_ now and then
had satisfied any hankering for what they called "civilization."

"These papers tell about the pale eyes' laws," he said. "It is sometimes
said that they have no magic. But there is powerful magic in their books
and in their laws. It is the magic that binds them together."

The Prophet said, "The pale eyes' paper is bad medicine."

Black Hawk held out his hand, and White Bear gave him the book. It
pained White Bear to think Black Hawk might throw it into the fire.

White Bear had seen many white leaders--mayors, congressmen, military
officers, once even Sharp Knife himself, Andrew Jackson, the President
of the United States. He had learned about them in school and read about
them in newspapers. He felt Black Hawk was a match for any of them. More
than a match in some ways; he was stronger and healthier than any white
man his age that White Bear had known. What pale eyes of nearly seventy
years could personally lead a cavalry charge against an enemy
outnumbering him by ten to one and rout them? Black Hawk's great
weakness was one that he shared with most people, whatever their race or
their position in life: if he wanted a thing to be true, he believed it.
That was why last winter he had listened to the Winnebago Prophet and
not to White Bear.

Now White Bear hoped Black Hawk would show his intelligence by
respecting the value of the book. Black Hawk frowned at the
leather-bound volume, weighing it in his hand. He picked the other book
up with his other hand.

"They are heavy. But since there is magic in them, I will keep these
talking-paper bundles by me. And I will bring them with me when I speak
in council."

White Bear breathed a small sigh of satisfaction.

Black Hawk laid the books down, one on each side of him, and put one
hand on each book. He sat like that for a time, staring into the fire.

"I have done with trying to surrender to the long knives," he said, and
it seemed to White Bear that his face became a fearsome mask in the
firelight. "They have left me no choice. Yes, we will retreat from them.
But we will not run like hunted deer. We will send out war parties, big
and small, in every direction. We will lie in ambush on every trail. We
will fall upon every settlement. We will attack every traveling party of
long knives. No pale eyes north of the Rock River will be safe from us.
Until we have crossed the Great River, we will give the pale eyes no
peace."

At Black Hawk's words White Bear felt that an ice-cold hand had laid
itself flat on his back, between his shoulder blades. With those words
Black Hawk was condemning to cruel death hundreds of people--pale eyes
and his own.

And one of the largest settlements north of the Rock River was Victor.

"What is the use of more killing?" he said. "It will only madden the
long knives. They will come after us till they have destroyed us."

"I have decided," Black Hawk said. "We must fight back. We must be
avenged. They stole our land. They burned Saukenuk. They burned
Prophet's Town. We asked them for peace, and they killed us. Black Hawk
will show them that they cannot do this and go unpunished."

"So it shall be!" the Winnebago Prophet growled.

_And after that the long knives in their turn will have to be avenged._

Hopelessness lay like a heavy sodden blanket on White Bear. He saw the
old warrior's determination, and said no more.

He could only pray that Earthmaker spare those he loved. On both sides.

Black Hawk stood up. "Let us go back to our camp."

Wolf Paw said, "Father, I want to stay here till tomorrow with a party
of warriors. There are dead long knives scattered all over the prairie,
but we cannot find them in the dark. In the morning we can take their
scalps and their weapons."

His words stopped White Bear as he was about to turn away from the fire.
Otto Wegner might still be hiding in that hollow tree, waiting for dawn.

Hurriedly, White Bear said, "I, too, will stay. I will help Wolf Paw
search for the dead."

What could he do if Wolf Paw and his men captured Wegner? Perhaps not
save the Prussian's life, but at least persuade the warriors to kill him
cleanly and not torture him.

_Haven't I done enough for Wegner? I want to go back to Redbird._

But his impulses were a shaman's impulses, and the harder to explain
they were, the more he trusted them. It was important, for some reason,
that he stay at Old Man's Creek a while longer.

Owl Carver looked surprised. "After all you have suffered, do you not
want to return to your family?"

White Bear thought quickly. "There is a chance that murdering uncle of
mine is one of those lying on the ground somewhere around here. It would
be good to see him dead."

Owl Carver grunted. "I will tell Redbird that you are safe."

Fear and exertion had exhausted White Bear beyond ordinary fatigue, and
he had barely enough energy now to roll himself in a blanket by the
small fire. Unconsciousness hit him instantly.

In the morning he watched, sickened, as Wolf Paw not only scalped a long
knife who lay dead in the tall grass, but slashed open the man's woollen
trousers and sliced off his manly parts. Blood spattered over innocent
prairie flowers of violet and yellow, and a swarm of flies buzzed around
Wolf Paw, waiting to settle on the dead man when he moved away.

"Why do you do that?" White Bear demanded. "The Sauk have never done
such things to a dead enemy before."

"The Winnebago Prophet says that the long knives are planning to kill
all Sauk men, and then bring up black men from the country to the south
to mate with our women. That way they hope to breed a race of slaves.
This is our answer to that."

The story sounded absurd to White Bear. The pale eyes in Illinois didn't
even keep black slaves. Just more of the Winnebago Prophet's babblings.
But Wolf Paw firmly believed it.

At a sudden drumming of hooves, Wolf Paw and White Bear both looked
south at Old Man's Creek. A Sauk warrior splashed through, waving his
arm.

"Long knives coming!" he shouted.

Wolf Paw picked up two rifles, his own and the dead man's. They had
found eleven bodies scattered along the edge of the Rock River, none of
them Raoul's.

White Bear was disappointed, but not surprised, that Raoul had managed
to escape. Surely he deserved killing more than any of his followers who
did die. But White Bear had not stayed behind just to see Raoul dead.

In fact, it was a relief that the spirits had not answered White Bear's
forbidden prayer.

He kept looking for movement out of the corner of his eye, trying to see
whether Otto Wegner was anywhere about. But he saw no sign of him.

"How many long knives?" Wolf Paw said to the scout as he rode up. "Can
we fight them?"

The scout's hand slashed a no. "Too many. Fifty at least. All on
horseback. And they have a wagon with them."

"Coming to collect their dead," said Wolf Paw. "They will not like what
they find." He grinned down at the corpse he had just carved.

"Better mount up and ride away from here," said the scout. "If they see
us, they will chase us."

"They will not chase us," said Wolf Paw. "They will be afraid of an
ambush." His smile broadened. "Maybe we will give them one."

At Wolf Paw's shouted command the six warriors who had remained with him
moved into the trees north of Old Man's Creek, the same trees where
White Bear had taken refuge last night. White Bear tried to see the
tree where he had hidden Wegner, but the woods looked different in
daylight.

Wolf Paw ordered his party to mount their horses, tied up amidst the
trees, and ride north to Black Hawk's camp. But though he swung into the
saddle, he did not ride off with them. He sat on his white-spotted gray
pony facing the direction the long knives would be coming from. A screen
of low-hanging maple branches and wild grape vines concealed him. White
Bear, on a brown mare captured in Raoul's camp last night, drew up
beside him.

"Why are you staying?" White Bear asked.

"I counted only eleven dead long knives," said Wolf Paw. "I want to make
it twelve." He put the hammer of his flintlock on half-cock, poured
fine-grained priming powder on the pan from a small flask, and closed
the fizzen over it.

White Bear sensed that something very important was about to happen and
that he must wait with Wolf Paw.

"Why do _you_ wait?" Wolf Paw demanded. "You have never killed anyone."

"Here they come," said White Bear, choosing not to answer him.

The two horses pulling the wagon, a flatbed with railed sides, halted at
the creek. Most of the long knives dismounted and began to search
through the remains of Raoul's camp. A few others rode across the creek.
Wolf Paw raised his rifle.

The long knives cried out to one another and cursed as they found the
mutilated bodies of their comrades.

_Now they hate us more._

The long knives had rolled-up blankets tied across their horses' backs.
They opened the blankets and used them to pick up the dead. One pair of
men on foot was already carrying a blanket-wrapped body across the creek
to the wagon.

One long knife rode slowly toward them. He was so tall that his legs
dangled down from his horse almost to the ground. He came to the body
Wolf Paw had just been stripping, and climbed down. He took off his
broad-brimmed gray hat and stood holding it in both hands as he looked
down at the body.

White Bear heard the click of a flintlock hammer being drawn back to
full-cock. Wolf Paw sighted along the barrel.

The militiaman raised his head, and White Bear saw tears glistening in
the morning sun as they ran down his cheeks.

White Bear knew this man.

A gaunt brown face with strong bones, deep-set gray eyes, a young face
aged by grief. In White Bear's vision of last winter this man had a
black beard; now he was clean-shaven. But this was the man the Turtle
had shown him.

A sudden shout from the woods made both White Bear and Wolf Paw jump
with surprise.

"Help! Help me, please!"

White Bear saw Otto Wegner stagger from the trees about a hundred feet
to his right. He was trying to run toward the tall man.

He limped badly and let out an "Oh!" of pain with every step.

The tall man set his hat back on his head and ran toward the Prussian,
who fell forward on his face in the grass a short distance from the edge
of the woods.

Wolf Paw swung the rifle toward Otto, but before he could fire, Otto
fell and was almost obscured by the tall grass. The blue-black rifle
barrel lifted toward the man going to his aid. White Bear heard Wolf Paw
draw a deep breath through his nostrils and saw his finger tighten on
the trigger.

Even as the hammer fell and the spark set the powder sizzling in the
pan, White Bear thrust his hand out. In the instant between the pulling
of the trigger and the firing of the rifle White Bear pushed the barrel
off target.

The rifle went off with a boom and a flash and a puff of blue smoke.

The lanky man jerked his head around and stared into the trees where
Wolf Paw and White Bear sat hidden on their horses. He shouted and
pointed. The long knives spread out between the creek and the woods
brought their rifles to their shoulders. Some of them jumped on their
horses.

"_Why did you do that?_" Wolf Paw shouted. It no longer mattered that
the long knives could hear him.

He raised his rifle as if to hit White Bear with the butt end, as Eli
Greenglove had done many moons ago.

"Come on," said White Bear, ignoring the threat and kicking his horse's
sides to start him galloping through the woods. Wolf Paw, who had no
time to reload, thundered behind him, uttering shouts of inarticulate
rage.

White Bear was certain Wolf Paw would strike at him with rifle butt or
tomahawk or knife before they cleared the woods, but Wolf Paw was wholly
bent now on escape.

_Now I understand!_

The realization hit White Bear so suddenly and surprisingly that he sat
up in his saddle. A tree limb flying toward him nearly hit him in the
face. He ducked under it at the last moment.

This was why he had wanted to stay behind with Wolf Paw, even at the
cost of delaying his reunion with Redbird, even at the risk of his life.
It was not just to protect Otto Wegner. The Turtle--or perhaps even
Earthmaker himself--had ordained it. If he had not been there Wolf Paw
would have killed that tall, thin man who came to bury his fallen
comrades.

White Bear remembered the rest of his vision--hundreds of blue-coated
long knives charging and dying. Would this man send those long knives or
their enemy into battle?

It was impossible to puzzle out. He might never know the answer.

They rode over the prairie on the other side of the woods, heading for
Black Hawk's camp. The long knives following them had dropped away,
doubtless afraid, as Wolf Paw had predicted, of an ambush.

Still expecting to feel a tomahawk blade split his spine, White Bear
slowed down.

"So!" Wolf Paw shouted. "You are still a pale eyes!"

"No," White Bear tried to explain. "It was a vision I had. I had to save
that man."

"A vision," Wolf Paw sneered. "I should kill you. If you were not a
shaman-- A warrior needs all his luck. But, since your pale eyes people
are so precious to you, I will kill _them_. You heard what my father
said. I will lead the war party that goes to your pale eyes' home. And
this time you will not be along to save anyone."

They spoke no more. Though the morning sky was bright, a cloud of dread
settled over White Bear. What would become of Nicole, Grandpapa, Frank
and all the people of Victoire and Victor who had been his friends? At
the prompting of some spirit, he had saved the tall, thin man, a
stranger to him. And he had saved Otto Wegner, one of Raoul's hired men.

Was there _nothing_ he could do for his own loved ones?




15

The Blockhouse


The devil's reek of gunpowder seared Nicole's nostrils. Arrows flew over
the trading post palisade to fall in the courtyard, some quivering
upright in the ground. She heard the piercing shrieks of the Indians
above the steady crackling of rifle fire.

She stood in the open doorway of the blockhouse, her body tense with
fear as she watched Frank, up on the catwalk above the main gate. He
crouched behind the pointed logs of the palisade. Frowning with
concentration, he was slowly reloading his rifle.

"Look at Frank up there," Nicole said to Pamela Russell, who stood
beside her. "Oh, God, I hate to see him out in the open. Frank," she
said, though she knew he couldn't hear her, "get into one of the
towers!"

"Burke too," Pamela said. "Why do they do it?" She pointed to the east
side of the palisade where her husband, a stocky man wearing spectacles,
stood on the catwalk. With the Indians attacking the front gate, he was
left alone to guard the east parapet. The rest of the men, ten of them,
were at the front part of the palisades, banging away.

_Twelve men. Twelve men who know how to use rifles. That's all we've
got._

And four were Nicole's husband, two of her sons and her father.

She gasped.

She saw a loop of rope fly through the air above the eastern wall and
catch on one of the sharpened logs. A moment later a dark head crowned
with feathers appeared above the palisade. And Burke Russell was looking
the other way.

"Burke, look out!" Pamela screamed.

Burke heard that. He swung around, raising his rifle to his shoulder.

"Please, God!" Nicole cried.

The Indian leaped over the parapet. He seemed twice as tall as Burke,
with bulging muscles that gleamed with oil. He wore only a loincloth,
and his walnut-brown body was painted with red, yellow and black
stripes. His scalplock flew out behind him as he rushed Burke, swinging
a war club with a glittering metal spike protruding from its thick end.

Burke's rifle went off with an orange flash, a boom, a cloud of smoke.

The Indian wasn't stopped. The war club came down on Burke's head.
Nicole heard the hollow thud and heard herself cry out.

Pamela screamed. "Oh, no, oh God, no! Burke! Burke!"

Burke's glasses flew from his face, hit the catwalk and caromed off to
the ground. With his free hand the Indian giant seized the rifle as
Burke crumpled. He raised both arms over his head, rifle in one hand,
bloodstained club in the other, and shouted his triumph.

Nicole's stomach heaved.

Pamela fell against her, fainting. She threw an arm around Pamela and
eased her to the ground, and she saw half a dozen more Indians waving
rifles and tomahawks leap over the eastern parapet and land on the
catwalk near Burke Russell's body.

"Frank! Behind you!" she screamed.

Frank turned, took aim and fired at the Indians. He ran for the nearest
corner tower.

Nicole didn't see whether he hit any of the Indians. She dragged Pamela
out of the doorway with the help of Ellen Slattery, the blacksmith's
wife. They got Pamela sitting on a bench by the wall. Her thick chestnut
hair tumbled forward as Nicole pushed her head down to revive her.

_I don't know why I'm doing this. It's a mercy she's unconscious._

_Frank!_

Her heart in her throat, Nicole pushed herself to her feet and ran back
to the door. An arrow whizzed through the open doorway. It clanged off
the iron muzzle of the cannon that stood in the center of the blockhouse
hall.

_I'd make a mighty big target for those Indians_, she thought, the wry
little joke helping to keep her from crying in her terror.

She peered around the edge of the doorway to see a fury of brown bodies
on the southern catwalk where Frank had been standing. In the center of
the catwalk, one brave with a rooster's comb of red-dyed hair shouted
and brandished a steel-headed tomahawk, sending parties to hammer at the
doors of the corner towers with clubs, tomahawks and rifle butts. Black
rings painted around his eyes and yellow slashes on his cheekbones gave
him a terrifying look.

Even in the midst of her fear and hatred she could see that his body was
magnificent. The most beautiful man's body she'd ever seen.

To her relief Nicole saw no dead white men anywhere--except for Burke
Russell, who lay still, his head a bright red mess, one arm hanging down
over the edge of the eastern catwalk. She looked at him quickly and then
looked away, feeling sick again.

What made it even more of a shame that Burke had died on the palisade
was that the men never planned to hold it. They just wanted to delay the
Indians a bit. Here in the blockhouse was where they hoped to be able to
hold out.

With God's help.

"Oh, Burke! Oh, my Burke!" Pamela Russell was awake and screaming. Ellen
Slattery looked helplessly at Nicole.

Nicole felt heartbroken for Pamela, but she had to let her be. There was
too much to do. She ran through the people crowded into the main room on
the ground floor of the blockhouse. There must be four hundred people
here, mostly women and children, she thought.

_And Raoul's got over a hundred men from Victor with him. God knows
where._

Here they had more rifles than men. Two dozen rifles leaned against the
stone wall. Many families owned two or three rifles, and people had
grabbed them as they fled to the trading post.

_Well, a woman can ram a ball down a muzzle and pull a trigger too._

And miss, she thought, her heart a ball of ice. She hadn't seen one
Indian hit yet.

Nicole spoke loudly to the women around her. "The Indians will be
shooting down from the catwalk at our men when they try to get back here
to us." She started to load a rifle. "We've got to shoot at the Indians
and drive them to cover."

She had not held a rifle in her hands since marrying Frank, who would
not have a firearm in the house. But Elysee de Marion had taught his
daughter how to shoot, and she had not forgotten.

Piled by the rifles were flannel bags, powder horns and five small
barrels, all full of gunpowder. In that frantic dawn, after fleeing
here, the men and women had formed a relay line to rush the bags and
barrels of gunpowder from Raoul's stone magazine to the blockhouse.

Feeling a bit more hopeful, Nicole noticed lead ingots lying beside the
ammunition--probably from the lead mine that Raoul had shut down just
before leaving Victor. And she saw scissor-shaped bullet molds. They had
some of the things they needed.

If only they knew how to use these things.

"Who knows how to mold bullets?" she asked the group of women who'd been
standing silently, watching her.

"I know," Elfrida Wegner said. Of course, thought Nicole. Her husband
had been a soldier, over in Europe.

"Take some others and show them how to do it," Nicole said. "We're going
to need all the bullets we can make."

Elfrida and two other women carried the lead bars and the molds to the
huge fireplace at the rear of the hall.

From the hundred and more women crowded into the hall Nicole collected
ten volunteers who knew something about rifles, five to shoot and five
to load.

She called two of the bigger boys to carry baskets of shot upstairs. But
carrying powder--that was dangerous. She couldn't make herself ask
anyone else to do that.

She filled a bushel basket with sacks of cartridges, added a powder horn
on top, swung it up to her shoulder and charged up the stairs, terrified
all the way.

"Judas Priest, you're _strong_, Missuz Hopkins," said one of the boys
carrying shot. It gave her a warm feeling to hear that; she figured most
people thought of her as just plain fat.

She still couldn't believe she was going to do this. Going to try to
kill people. She picked out a slot in the log wall and pushed her rifle
barrel through it. She could see a bit of the courtyard below. White men
were falling back from the towers. Indians were coming at them. All of
them were moving slowly. White men backing up a step at a time. Indians
matching them step for step. A dance. The brave with the red crest was
still standing on the catwalk above the front gate, waving his tomahawk
and shouting orders. The caller.

Nicole pulled open the drawstring of a bag of cartridges, bit off the
end of a paper cartridge and poured the black powder down the muzzle of
her rifle. She detached the ramrod from the stock of the rifle and
wrapped a bullet in greased cloth, ramming it into place down the tight,
rifled barrel. She thanked Heaven she hadn't forgotten how to do this.

She dropped the fine grains of priming powder from the horn into the
powder pan, pointed her rifle at the red-crested brave and sighted down
the black barrel at the center of his chest.

Her finger quivered on the trigger. She couldn't kill a man. Her eyes
blurred.

If she didn't kill him, he might kill Frank. Or Tom or Ben. Or Papa. She
remembered Burke Russell's smashed, bloody skull.

She had to do it. Her vision cleared.

She took deep breaths, steadying herself.

She heard the click of the hammer as she pulled back the trigger. The
hammer snapped forward, the flint hit the fizzen, the spark struck the
powder pan. The rifle went off with a thunderclap that made her ears
ring, and her target was obscured by cream-colored smoke in front of the
rifle port.

When the smoke cleared, the brave was still standing on the catwalk.

She clenched her fist and whispered, "Damn!"

The red-crested Indian glanced down to his right, as if he had heard a
bullet strike the palisade wall there, then looked straight at her. She
knew he couldn't really see her. She was hidden behind a log wall, and a
hundred feet or more separated them. Even so, it seemed to her that his
malevolent stare met her eyes.

She handed her rifle back to Bernadette Bosquet, a cook from the
chateau, who gave her a loaded one.

Down in the yard, the Indians were charging the fur shop and the inn.
The white men, retreating, were converging on the front door of the
blockhouse.

She saw Elysee and Guichard emerge from behind the inn. The two old men
moved slowly, Elysee limping heavily, both walking backward. Guichard
fired a shot at the six or more crouching Indians coming at them.
Elysee, his walking stick in his left hand, raised his pistol. Guichard
worked quickly with powder horn and ramrod to load his rifle. Elysee
fired, bringing down one of the Indians. Both men took a few steps
backward as powder smoke enveloped their attackers. The Indians darted
forward, and Guichard raised his rifle. The Indians hesitated. Elysee
stepped behind Guichard and tucked his stick under one arm to reload his
pistol. At a word from Elysee, Guichard fired, and a red man with a
rifle crumpled. Guichard, reaching for his powder horn, stepped backward
behind Elysee, who now kept the Indians covered.

Nicole felt her legs tremble and a lump form in her throat as she
watched the fearless precision with which her father and his lifelong
servant carried out their retreat. Those two old men shouldn't have to
fight at all, but today every man was needed.

She saw Frank and her two oldest sons, Tom and Ben, running across the
yard to the front door. They vanished under the overhang of the
blockhouse's second story, made of logs. Thank God they'd made it to
safety! She felt faint and took a deep breath.

She handed her rifle to Bernadette. "Here, you shoot. I've got to see my
husband and sons."

"Merci, madame. I thought you'd never give me a turn."

By the time Nicole got downstairs, Frank and the other men had crowded
into the hall. The heavy front door of the blockhouse was shut and
barred, throwing the stone-walled lower floor into near-darkness. Two
men were shooting through the rifle ports on either side of the door.
Women were lighting oil lamps and candles and setting them on shelves
around the edges of the room.

Women whose men were here were holding them tight. Nicole threw her arms
around Frank, then opened them wider to take in Tom and Ben as they ran
to join their mother and father.

She eyed the boys. Their faces were rosy and their eyes bright with
excitement. They'd be men in another year or two. And after today, she
thought, Frank would have a hard time keeping them away from rifles.

_If we live through this day._

As she felt Frank strong and alive against her, a sudden intense desire
to make love to him came over her. She was shocked at herself.

But she'd seen one man struck down already and knew that before sundown
she or Frank might be dead. The realization of how precious Frank was to
her had brought her body to passionate life.

She heard the shrieks and yips of the Indians in the yard of the trading
post.

Hard-eyed David Cooper said, "We can't hold 'em off just shooting from
the ground floor. We need shooters at every rifle port upstairs."

He nodded approvingly when he saw Elfrida Wegner and three other women
molding bullets by the fire they had just kindled.

He called, "All right, four men and four of you women take rifle ports
down here. The rest of you come up to the second story."

Gathering up extra rifles, five men and thirty or more women followed
Cooper upstairs, where he organized them to shoot, each shooter to have
someone to reload and carry ammunition.

Nicole might herself have volunteered to shoot through one of the
upstairs rifle ports, but she chose to load for Frank. She felt it might
be important to Frank that he be the one to shoot and she stand by,
helping him. She would rather be at his side, anyway, than across the
room somewhere shooting.

Frank pushed his octagonal rifle barrel out through his port. The port
was only about six inches wide and three inches high, and the log wall
was a foot thick or more, but Nicole still trembled at the thought that
an Indian might manage to hit Frank with an arrow or a bullet. Working
to load his second rifle, she tried not to think about that.

Thank God they had David Cooper here, someone who seemed to know what to
do. She remembered how Cooper had spoken up the day Raoul had forced
Auguste out of the chateau-- _Is this how you do things in Smith
County?_ It was Cooper who had thrown open the trading post to the first
refugees from the Indian raid, people from Victoire, shortly after dawn.
He and Burke Russell. Burke. Her heart sank.

Nicole's fears turned to Victoire and to the outlying farms. The Indians
had attacked so suddenly, whooping on horseback across the prairie, that
there was just time for the people in Victor and some from the chateau
to crowd into the trading post. Many of the children and some of the
women gathered into the main room were still in their nightgowns. But
missing from the crowd downstairs were people Nicole knew. Reverend
Philip Hale and Nancy Hale, Clarissa Greenglove and her two sons by
Raoul, Marchette Perrault, many others. Fear twisted her belly as she
thought of what the Indians might have done to them.

Cooper had assigned himself to a gunport in the east wall of the
blockhouse. Nicole went to him.

"Mr. Cooper, could I have a look out there?"

"Certainly, ma'am." He sighed. "That used to be your home, that mansion
on the hill, didn't it?"

Poor Burke Russell, she saw, was still lying on the eastern catwalk.
Three dead Indians were sprawled there now to keep him company, though.
She was a bit more hardened to such sights than she had been just a
short time ago. But what she saw in the cheerful June sky beyond the
palisade made her body go clammy-cold with horror.

A rope of thick, black smoke coiled upward, twisting this way and that,
spreading till it seemed to stain the entire eastern quarter of the sky.
The palisade was too high for her to see the fire itself, though red
tongues of flame shot up now and again in the midst of the smoke. But
she had no doubt at all about where the fire was.

"They're burning Victoire!" She started to cry.

She felt Frank's hand patting her shoulder, and turned.

"I was hoping the people of Victoire might be able to hold out," she
said.

Frank put his arm around her. "Nicole, I'm sorry, it's pretty likely the
only people left alive from Victoire are already here. Lucky most of
them could outrun the Indians and get here."

"But, Frank, what's happened to the rest of them--Marchette,
Clarissa--are they all dead?"

Frank didn't answer. He just stood there holding her.

Grief weighed on her like a cloak of iron. If she hadn't had Frank to
lean against, she would surely have fallen to the floor. She looked out
again and saw other, more distant columns of smoke. The Indians must
have come from the east and struck every farmhouse they came across.
They had surely destroyed Philip Hale's church. Poor Nancy!

David Cooper said, "Sometimes people manage to hide. The Indians can't
look everywhere."

The weight on her back and shoulders seemed to lighten with that
thought.

"Yes, the lead mine, for instance," Frank said. "A perfect place."

"Oh, they can't have killed all those people," Nicole said.

_Please, let Marchette and Clarissa and Nancy and Reverend Hale be
alive._

She desperately wanted to pray. She wanted to believe that a loving God
was looking down on Victoire and Victor, protecting her friends and the
people she had grown up with.

For the next hour or more Nicole thought of nothing and did nothing but
bite cartridges and dump powder, ram home bullets, put one rifle into
Frank's ink-stained hands, take the other rifle and load it. Her mouth
was sore from biting the heavy paper. Her arms and hands ached from
making the same movements over and over. The incessant shooting all
around her deafened her, the stink--and, worse, the taste--of gunpowder
turned her stomach, and her hands were blacker with the stuff than
Frank's ever were from his printing press.

Frank was firing less and less often. He leaned against the log wall,
wiping his arm across his forehead.

"We've kept pouring lead into the courtyard. That's driven them under
cover. But they broke holes in the corner tower walls, and they're
shooting back at us from there." An Indian yelp caught his attention,
and he peered out again.

"Now, would you look at that!" he said. Nicole put her head next to his
at the rifle port.

A blizzard in the trading post courtyard. Flecks of white filled the air
between the inn and the blockhouse. She saw brown arms shaking slashed
mattresses and pillows out the windows. Feathers floated up to the
gunport. More feathers slowly drifted down to dot the fresh June grass
with white. She heard yells and laughter from the inn.

_They'd cut me open as soon as they'd cut open a pillow, and think that
was just as funny._

"They're getting drunk," Frank said. "On all the liquor in Raoul's
tavern. Must be looting the town too."

_They'll burn our home. Everything will be gone, the beds and the
dishes, the mirrors, the bureaus, the spinning wheel, the clock, the
plates and silverware, our clothes, our books and old letters,
children's toys, the spices, the cradle I rocked all our babies in. The
machines and carpentry tools, and, oh, please, God, not Frank's printing
press!_

_Stop it, Nicole. You're blessed! Blessed that they attacked at dawn
when all the children were in the house and not scattered all over the
countryside, and now they're safely in here. Blessed that your husband
is standing here beside you and not dead on the palisade parapet like
Burke Russell._

But even as she thought of things to be thankful for, she remembered
what might happen to them in the next few hours.

An Indian charged out of the front door of the inn. He was waving a
curving Navy cutlass. He ran at the blockhouse, screaming. His steps
wavered, though, and Nicole guessed he must be full of whiskey.

Still she was terrified. What if everyone missed him and he somehow got
in and others followed?

"Look out," Frank said, and gently nudged her away from the port. He
pushed his rifle out and fired.

"I hit him, but he isn't falling."

Getting back into the routine, Nicole took Frank's rifle and loaded it.
Rifles were booming all along the front of the blockhouse as men tried
to stop the Indian with the cutlass. Frank's second rifle went off.

"He doesn't want to die," said Frank. "He's full of bullets." She heard
pain in his voice, and as she handed him his freshly loaded rifle,
Nicole saw that his upper lip was beaded with sweat. She hurt for him.
He hated killing, and now he was forced to try again and again to kill
this man.

Frank aimed and fired again. "There. I got him. He's down."

Frank pulled his rifle in and handed it to Nicole. As she started to
reload it, he leaned against the wall. Slowly his knees bent and he slid
down till he was sitting on the floor. She put the rifle down and
crouched beside him, stroking his arm, her heart aching.

He covered his mouth with his hand. His body jerked, but he managed to
hold in the vomit. After a moment, breathing heavily, he took his hand
away from his mouth.

"Oh, Jesus! What am I doing?"

Nicole put her arms around him, and his head fell against her breast.

"Excuse me, Miz Hopkins," said a voice above her. She let go of Frank as
David Cooper squatted down beside them and laid his hand on Frank's
knee.

"Hopkins, you're all right. I was with Harrison at Tippecanoe Village,
and when the Indians came at us out of the woods, I don't believe more
than half the men fired their rifles. There's really few men find it
easy to kill. There's times we got to."

Frank wiped his eyes and laid a hand on top of Cooper's. "Thanks."
