The Project Gutenberg EBook of Wilton School, by Fred E. Weatherly

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Wilton School
       or, Harry Campbell's Revenge

Author: Fred E. Weatherly

Release Date: July 31, 2007 [EBook #22183]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WILTON SCHOOL ***




Produced by Al Haines








[Frontispiece: "His eyes were greedily fixed on the book; then he would
write a little, then look again, then write again.  He was
cribbing."--WILTON SCHOOL, page 33.]




WILTON SCHOOL:

OR,

HARRY CAMPBELL'S REVENGE.

A Tale.



BY

FRED. E. WEATHERLY, B.A.,

AUTHOR OF "MURIEL, AND OTHER POEMS."




EDINBURGH:

W. P. NIMMO, HAY, & MITCHELL

1872




[Transcriber's note: In the original book, each page had its own
header.  In this e-book, each chapter's headers have been collected
into an introductory paragraph at the start of that chapter.]




TO

My Little Brothers,

ALFRED, ARTHUR, HERBERT,

LEWIS, AND CECIL,

I DEDICATE

THIS TALE.




CONTENTS.


CHAP.

     I.--A LONG GOOD-BYE
    II.--WHY THE SAD GOOD-BYE WAS GIVEN
   III.--SAD INFORMATION
    IV.--WILTON SCHOOL
     V.--MOTHER AND SON
    VI.--INJURED INNOCENCE
   VII.--A BOY FIGHT AT SCHOOL
  VIII.--FRIENDS IN MISFORTUNE
    IX.--HARRY PUT ON TRIAL
     X.--SUNLIGHT
    XI.--MOVING HOME
   XII.--BULLYING
  XIII.--FLIGHT
   XIV.--AT SLEEP AT LAST
    XV.--THE BITERS BIT
   XVI.--BLEWCOME'S ROYAL MENAGERIE
  XVII.--THE LOST FOUND
 XVIII.--FATHER AND SON
   XIX.--AT WILTON ONCE MORE
    XX.--AVENGED AT LAST




ILLUSTRATIONS


"His eyes were greedily fixed on the book; then he would
  write a little, then look again, then write again.  He
  was cribbing." . . . . . . . . . _Frontispiece_

"'Leave him to me,' said Warburton, a tall ungainly boy of
  fourteen, as boy after boy was eager to take the quarrel
  to himself."

"There he was, safe on the ground at last."

"He never uttered a word, but ate his breakfast, and enjoyed
  it thoroughly."




WILTON SCHOOL


CHAPTER I.

A LONG GOOD-BYE.

Gathering shadows--Harry's wonder--Ambiguous--A long good-bye--The
anchor's weighed.


It was a sad evening in the little farm by the church of Wilton, yet
very sweet and summer-like without.  Very sad it was in the low, dim,
oak-panelled parlour, whose diamonded window looked across the quiet
churchyard, with its swinging wicket, its gravel-path beneath green
aisles of lindens, and all the countless

  "Grassy barrows of the happier dead."

Very sad were those three sitters in the summer twilight, there, at the
farm; for a good-bye had to be said--a long, long farewell between that
weeping pale woman, and the stout sailor, her husband.  And Harry,
their blue-eyed, sunny-haired boy, did not understand what it all
meant;--why papa did not cheer mamma with hopes of soon coming home
again--why mamma did not try to console herself by saying, over and
over, that he would soon come back, as she always used in the old days
when papa had to go to sea.  She had never cried so bitterly before,
although these good-byes had come so often.  And now it made her cough;
she seemed scarcely to have strength to cry.  And papa, who was always
so brave and stern, why was it even he could not stop the tears from
rolling down his bronzed cheeks?  And so Harry sat in the window-seat,
quite unable to understand the meaning of all the sorrow, and looked
out of the window at the farmer's wife nursing her last baby in the
orchard, and then at the old sexton in the churchyard throwing up the
red earth, and wondered why he always whistled such a jovial tune,
while he himself felt so sad.

And the evening drew on over the straggling village, weary with its
long day's work.  The last loaded waggon had passed down the lane by
the farm; the last troop of tired hay-makers had trudged gaily
homewards; and with the deepening dusk the winds grew cooler, blowing
in fresh, along the valley, from the sea.

And, all this while, poor Harry sat with his face pressed closely
against the window-pane; and his papa and mamma, apparently unheeding
him, sat talking in the far dim corner of the room, while ever anon her
great sobs broke the train of comforting words her husband strove to
utter.

Presently, he got up, moved to the window, and without saying a word,
took Harry's hand and led him across the room to his mother's side.
Then his faltering lips said:

"Harry, my boy, mamma is going away soon--before I come back;--I shall
not see her again."

"Not see her again, papa?" cried Harry in amazement.  "And why is mamma
going away, with her cough so bad, too?"

"Mamma's cough won't trouble her long, my boy.  You'll take care of her
for me, won't you, Harry? and see her safe off on her journey?"

He spoke very quietly now; but if he had not used those ambiguous
sentences, he would have broken down, he knew.

And then the good-bye was said.  He kissed Harry tenderly, and then
gathered his weeping wife to his breast.  And with an earnest "God
guard you!" that well-nigh seemed to break the bursting heart from
whence the words arose, he moved quickly from the room.  So it was all
over now!  The long good-bye had been said.

"Take care of her and the boy, Mrs Valentine," he said to the farmer's
wife, as she came hurrying up from the orchard to see him before he
left, "and God will reward you.  It will not be for long, I fancy.  The
boy must stay with you till I come back."

"I will, I will sir; bless her dear heart!" the farmer's wife cried,
while the tears started to her eyes.  "Poor soul, poor soul!" she
murmured after him, as he passed bravely down the lane, villagewards.

And there, in the little farm by the church, sat the pale wife weeping
over her wondering boy, while the shadows of the summer night stole
ghost-like over the lands, till the window was but a faint dim square
in the sad darkness that was within.

That night the Queen's good ship "Thunderer" weighed anchor from the
roadstead where she had been lying off Wilton, and with canvass
stretched, and engines at full speed, swung down the Bristol channel on
the ebb tide, to join the flying squadron on a six months' cruise.  And
though many a heart, of seamen and officer alike, felt heavy at parting
from sweetheart or wife, in none was there the dull, hopeless agony
that dwelt behind the stern face of Chief-engineer Campbell, as he
talked on deck with his fellow-officers, or issued his orders to his
men below.




CHAPTER II.

WHY THE SAD GOOD-BYE WAS GIVEN.

In commission--At home in Malta--After long years--Settled at
Wilton--Unwelcome tidings--Unavailing skill.


Fourteen years ago, amid the mists of Scotland, there was a bonny
wedding at a hill-side kirk; the bride, a sweet young English girl, who
had left her southern home to pay a visit to her uncle, the old
village-pastor; the bridegroom, a stout sailor, home from sea for a
short while at his native village.  And after a six weeks' happy
wooing, a happy wedding took the two away, far from the heathery hills
and the mountain lochs; far from the moors and fells of Scotland.

A brief honeymoon of quiet, unmarred happiness, and Alan Campbell
received instructions to join his ship, ordered to Malta for three
years.  His wife, of course, could not sail with him, so he took a
berth for her in one of the ordinary passenger steamers that run from
Southampton to the island.  And after seeing her safe on board one
rainy April afternoon, her tearful face itself like April weather, he
took the evening mail-train to Plymouth, and the following morning was
on board his ship.  It was not long before his impatience was
gratified, and the "Thunderer" steamed out into the English Channel.

Thus over the great waves, through time of sun and stars, through storm
and shine, sailed the two parted many miles of heaving sea; Minnie,
pale and trembling in her little cabin, with the noise of the waters
ever sounding in her sleepless ears; Alan pacing to and fro in the heat
and throbbing of the engines of the "Thunderer."

It was a joyful meeting at the island-fortress in the blue
Mediterranean.  Alan obtained leave to sleep on shore, and took a
little white cottage that overlooked the bay, where the good ship
"Thunderer" lay at anchor; and there, at her outhanging window, every
evening Minnie would sit, looking so anxiously across the bay towards
the great black hull of the vessel, till a gig would put off that
brought Alan home to her.

So the days and weeks went on.  The spring died into the summer's
flowery lap; the summer ripened and mellowed unto the golden autumn;
and when the year's late last months were come, there was another
inmate in the little cottage by the bay; another pair of eyes, blue as
the mother's, to greet Alan as he came home at night; another pair of
hands to hold and call his own.

The time ran as quickly as it ran happily.  The three years passed, and
again Alan had to put his wife on board a passenger steamer bound for
England--this time with her boy Harry to bear her company, a sturdy
young gentleman of somewhat over two years; while he himself sailed for
Plymouth in the "Thunderer."  And so it came to pass, that after many
such changes of abode, and many voyages over the dangerous waters,
twelve years from the date of their marriage, they came to Wilton.
They found lodgings at Mrs Valentine's farm, near the old church--a
strange contrast after the home on the blue waters of the
Mediterranean, but a very nice contrast withal.  And it seemed, at
last, as if poor Mrs Campbell had found a climate that suited her, and
that put new life and strength into her failing, fragile form.  For
those happy and treacherous nights, spent in looking over the bay at
Malta for her husband's home-coming, had sown the seeds of a
consumption, that each month now seemed to be increasing its wasting,
rapid strides.

Yet at Wilton she seemed revived and better than she had been for long;
and Alan grew more cheerful and hopeful that, if God pleased, her life,
with care and watching, might be spared.  So he took rooms at the farm
for a length of time; sent his boy, now grown into a young image of his
stout father, to a grammar-school in the village, and determined that,
as the place agreed with her so well, Minnie should make it her home,
even when he went to sea.

And once more their happiness lost the cloud of doubt and anxiety that
for long had been hanging over it.  But the dream was soon to be snapt.

One evening Alan came home to find his wife much worse than she had
ever been.  He learnt the cause.  She had been sitting with a sick
person, and from the hot, sickroom had passed out into the damp evening
air.  And this was the result.
