"Please do not worry about the ship, Kelly. In fifty years nothing has
gone wrong. We can trust the ship thoroughly now, it will take care of
us."

"_It_ will take care of _us_! That's a helluva way to look at it!"

"There can be no danger now, Kelly. In fifty years we have encountered
every conceivable danger, every imaginable kind of world or possible
menace."

"Have we?" Kelly thought. "Every danger from outside maybe, and I'm not
even sure of that. But how about danger from inside?"

"Inside?"

"Us. How about apathy for instance? Apathy's a real danger. You talk
about this space-can like it was a big metal mother! Listen, I'm
supposed to see that this tub holds together. At least until we get back
somewhere near enough to the Solar system so we'll feel we've been
somewhere else!"

"But, Kelly--"

"I'm getting out for a while, I tell you!"

"All right," the Crew sighed. The light loom faded a bit, down to a
self-indulgent glow. "Hurry back to us, Kelly."

"I'll give some thought to it."

So Kelly concentrated on the increasingly painful and difficult task of
tearing his consciousness free of the big glob of protoplasm in the
tank, and getting it back into his body that hibernated in the bunkroom.

As usual the switch was too painful. It stretched and stretched and
finally snapped in an all too familiar explosion of shocking light.

       *       *       *       *       *

His bones creaked. His skin rustled as he sat up and looked around.
There was the old feeling that there was dust over everything when there
was no dust. There was all that emptiness sweeping away into the endless
silence and he thought again, as he always did, how comforting and cozy
it was being a part of the Crew.

But someone had to check the ship. It was only machinery after all, and
machinery could wear out, sooner or later. And he wasn't at all sure, as
he kept insisting, that they had encountered all the possible dangers.

It might seem that in fifty years you could run into everything. But
fifty years was no time at all out here where time had no real meaning
any more.

His body squeaked as he took a few tentative steps about the bunkroom.
One did not actually forget how to walk. It was just awkward as the
devil. And the blood, the entire autonomic system, tended to slow down.
It seemed reluctant to step up general metabolism.

Apathy. Sure it was a danger. This time, Kelly decided, I'll do
something about it. He was the engineer and he had signed on the great
odyssey to keep the ship going. But the Crew was part of the ship. Was
not there an obligation even greater to keep the Crew going?

The four others lived but almost imperceptibly in some very low state of
slowed metabolism there in the bunkroom and Kelly looked at them. The
faithful and the wonderful ones. The ones with whom he had shared so
many dangers and awful silences that the five of them had been able to
evolve the idea of the protoplasm in the tank and merge their
consciousness in it.

Kew, the Venusian, in her bowl of self-renewing nitrate. Lakrit from a
Jovian satellite, a fluorine fellow of distinction inside a sphere of
gaseous sulphur. A crystalline character with a sense of humor named
Lljub, whose form gave off a paled glint as it nourished itself on
silicates. And a highly intelligent but humble six-foot-long sponge
labeled Urdaz stuck in a foundation of chemical sediment at the bottom
of a tank of reprocessing salt water.

Each with their own special kind of appendages and sensitivities, each
able to move his special closed-system about through the ship by means
of clever types of mobility.

But basically, in outward form, they were too alien to have much in
common. Only as intelligences, as life forces, could they share a common
bed. And it had evolved to that in fifty years. A bed of protoplasm in a
shock-absorbent tank.

Kelly looked at them warmly and thought about how it had worked out. The
strange thing was that it did have a lot of good things to recommend it.
