His help and love, is capable of reproduction in ourselves? Do we put
Him on as 'the Lord Jesus _Christ_,' who was anointed with the Divine
Spirit, that from the head it might flow, even to the skirts of the
garments, and every one of us might partake of that unction and be
made pure and clean thereby? 'Put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ,' and
do it day by day, and then you have 'put on the whole armour of God.'

And when the day that is dawning has risen to its full, then, not
till then, may we put off the armour and put on the white robe, lay
aside the helmet, and have our brows wreathed with the laurel,
sheathe the sword, and grasp the palm, being 'more than conquerors
through Him who loved us,' and fights in us, as well as for us.




THE LIMITS OF LIBERTY

   'So then every one of us shall give account of himself
   to God. 13. Let us not therefore judge one another any
   more: but judge this rather, that no man put a
   stumblingblock, or an occasion to fall, in his brother's
   way. 14. I know, and am persuaded by the Lord Jesus,
   that there is nothing unclean of itself: but to him that
   esteemeth anything to be unclean, to him it is unclean.
   15. But if thy brother be grieved with thy meat, now
   walkest thou not charitably. Destroy not him with thy
   meat, for whom Christ died. 16. Let not then your good
   be evil spoken of: 17. For the kingdom of God is not
   meat and drink; but righteousness, and peace, and joy
   in the Holy Ghost. 18. For he that in these things
   serveth Christ is acceptable to God, and approved of
   men. 19. Let us therefore follow after the things which
   make for peace, and things wherewith one may edify
   another. 20. For meat destroy not the work of God. All
   things indeed are pure; but it is evil for that man
   who eateth with offence. 21. It is good neither to eat
   flesh, nor to drink wine, nor any thing whereby thy
   brother stumbleth, or is offended, or is made weak.
   22. Hast thou faith? have it to thyself before God.
   Happy is he that condemneth not himself in that thing
   which he alloweth. 23. And he that doubteth is damned
   if he eat, because he eateth not of faith: for
   whatsoever is not of faith is sin.'--ROMANS xiv. 12-23.


The special case in view, in the section of which this passage is
part, is the difference of opinion as to the lawfulness of eating
certain meats. It is of little consequence, so far as the principles
involved are concerned, whether these were the food which the Mosaic
ordinances made unclean, or, as in Corinth, meats offered to idols.
The latter is the more probable, and would be the more important in
Rome. The two opinions on the point represented two tendencies of
mind, which always exist; one more scrupulous, and one more liberal.
Paul has been giving the former class the lesson they needed in the
former part of this chapter; and he now turns to the 'stronger'
brethren, and lays down the law for their conduct. We may, perhaps,
best simply follow him, verse by verse.

We note then, first, the great thought with which he starts, that of
the final judgment, in which each man shall give account of himself.
What has that to do with the question in hand? This, that it ought to
keep us from premature and censorious judging. We have something more
pressing to do than to criticise each other. Ourselves are enough to
keep our hands full, without taking a lift of our fellows' conduct.
And this, further, that, in view of the final judgment, we should
hold a preliminary investigation on our own principles of action, and
'decide' to adopt as the overruling law for ourselves, that we shall
do nothing which will make duty harder for our brethren. Paul
habitually settled small matters on large principles, and brought the
solemnities of the final account to bear on the marketplace and the
meal.

In verse 13 he lays down the supreme principle for settling the case
in hand. No Christian is blameless if he voluntarily acts so as to
lay a stumbling-block or an occasion to fall in another's path. Are
these two things the same? Possibly, but a man may stumble, and not
fall, and that which makes him stumble may possibly indicate a
temptation to a less grave evil than that which makes him fall does.
It may be noticed that in the sequel we hear of a brother's being
'grieved' first, and then of his being 'overthrown.' In any case,
there is no mistake about the principle laid down and repeated in
verse 21. It is a hard saying for some of us. Is my liberty to be
restricted by the narrow scruples of 'strait-laced' Christians? Yes.
Does not that make them masters, and attach too much importance to
their narrowness? No. It recognises Christ as Master, and all His
servants as brethren. If the scrupulous ones go so far as to say to
the more liberal, 'You cannot be Christians if you do not do as we
do' then the limits of concession have been reached, and we are to do
as Paul did, when he flatly refused to yield one hair's-breadth to
the Judaisers. If a man says, You must adopt this, that, or the other
limitation in conduct, or else you shall be unchurched, the only
answer is, I will not. We are to be flexible as long as possible, and
let weak brethren's scruples restrain our action. But if they insist
on things indifferent as essential, a yet higher duty than that of
regard to their weak consciences comes in, and faithfulness to Christ
limits concession to His servants.

But, short of that extreme case, Paul lays down the law of curbing
liberty in deference to 'narrowness.' In verse 14 he states with
equal breadth the extreme principle of the liberal party, that
nothing is unclean of itself. He has learned that 'in the Lord
Jesus.' Before he was 'in Him,' he had been entangled in cobwebs of
legal cleanness and uncleanness; but now he is free. But he adds an
exception, which must be kept in mind by the liberal-minded
section--namely, that a clean thing is unclean to a man who thinks it
is. Of course, these principles do not affect the eternal
distinctions of right and wrong. Paul is not playing fast and loose
with the solemn, divine law which makes sin and righteousness
independent of men's notions. He is speaking of things
indifferent--ceremonial observances and the like; and the modern
analogies of these are conventional pieces of conduct, in regard to
amusements and the like, which, in themselves, a Christian man can do
or abstain from without sin.

Verse 15 is difficult to understand, if the 'for' at the beginning is
taken strictly. Some commentators would read instead of it a simple
'but' which smooths the flow of thought. But possibly the verse
assigns a reason for the law in verse 13, rather than for the
statements in verse 14. And surely there is no stronger reason for
tender consideration for even the narrowest scruples of Christians
than the obligation to walk in love. Our common brotherhood binds us
to do nothing that would even grieve one of the family. For instance,
Christian men have different views of the obligations of Sunday
observance. It is conceivable that a very 'broad' Christian might see
no harm in playing lawn-tennis in his garden on a Sunday; but if his
doing so scandalised, or, as Paul says, 'grieved' Christian people of
less advanced views, he would be sinning against the law of love if
he did it.

There are many other applications of the principle readily suggested.
The principle is the thing to keep clearly in view. It has a wide
field for its exercise in our times, and when the Christian
brotherhood includes such diversities of culture and social
condition. And that is a solemn deepening of it, 'Destroy not with
thy meat him for whom Christ died.' Note the almost bitter emphasis
on 'thy,' which brings out not only the smallness of the
gratification for which the mischief is done, but the selfishness of
the man who will not yield up so small a thing to shield from evil
which may prove fatal, a brother for whom Christ did not shrink from
yielding up life. If He is our pattern, any sacrifice of tastes and
liberties for our brother's sake is plain duty, and cannot be
neglected without selfish sin. One great reason, then, for the
conduct enjoined, is set forth in verse 15. It is the clear dictate
of Christian love.

Another reason is urged in verses 16 to 18. It displays the true
character of Christianity, and so reflects honour on the doer. 'Your
good' is an expression for the whole sum of the blessings obtained by
becoming Christians, and is closely connected with what is here meant
by the 'kingdom of God.' That latter phrase seems here to be
substantially equivalent to the inward condition in which they are
who have submitted to the dominion of the will of God. It is 'the
kingdom within us' which is 'righteousness, peace, and joy in the
Holy Ghost.' What have you won by your Christianity? the Apostle in
effect says, Do you think that its purpose is mainly to give you
greater licence in regard to these matters in question? If the most
obvious thing in your conduct is your 'eating and drinking,' your
whole Christian standing will be misconceived, and men will fancy
that your religion permits laxity of life. But if, on the other hand,
you show that you are Christ's servants by righteousness, peace, and
joy, you will be pleasing to God, and men will recognise that your
religion is from Him, and that you are consistent professors of it.

Modern liberal-minded brethren can easily translate all this for
to-day's use. Take care that you do not give the impression that your
Christianity has its main operation in permitting you to do what your
weaker brethren have scruples about. If you do not yield to them, but
flaunt your liberty in their and the world's faces, your advanced
enlightenment will be taken by rough-and-ready observers as mainly
cherished because it procures you these immunities. Show by your life
that you have the true spiritual gifts. Think more about them than
about your 'breadth,' and superiority to 'narrow prejudices.' Realise
the purpose of the Gospel as concerns your own moral perfecting, and
the questions in hand will fall into their right place.

In verses 19 and 20 two more reasons are given for restricting
liberty in deference to others' scruples. Such conduct contributes to
peace. If truth is imperilled, or Christ's name in danger of being
tarnished, counsels of peace are counsels of treachery; but there are
not many things worth buying at the price of Christian concord. Such
conduct tends to build up our own and others' Christian character.
Concessions to the 'weak' may help them to become strong, but flying
in the face of their scruples is sure to hurt them, in one way or
another.

In verse 15, the case was supposed of a brother's being grieved by
what he felt to be laxity. That case corresponded to the
stumbling-block of verse 13. A worse result seems contemplated in
verse 20,--that of the weak brother, still believing that laxity was
wrong, and yet being tempted by the example of the stronger to
indulge in it. In that event, the responsibility of overthrowing what
God had built lies at the door of the tempter. The metaphor of
'overthrowing' is suggested by the previous one of 'edifying.'
Christian duty is mutual building up of character; inconsiderate
exercise of 'liberty' may lead to pulling down, by inducing to
imitation which conscience condemns.

From this point onwards, the Apostle first reiterates in inverse
order his two broad principles, that clean things are unclean to the
man who thinks them so, and that Christian obligation requires
abstinence from permitted things if our indulgence tends to a
brother's hurt. The application of the latter principle to the
duty of total abstinence from intoxicants for the sake of others is
perfectly legitimate, but it is an application, not the direct
purpose of the Apostle's injunctions.

In verses 22 and 23, the section is closed by two exhortations, in
which both parties, the strong and the weak, are addressed. The
former is spoken to in verse 22, the latter in verse 23. The strong
brother is bid to be content with having his wider views, or
'faith'--that is, certainty that his liberty is in accordance with
Christ's will. It is enough that he should enjoy that conviction,
only let him make sure that he can hold it as in God's sight, and do
not let him flourish it in the faces of brethren whom it would
grieve, or might lead to imitating his practice, without having risen
to his conviction. And let him be quite sure that his conscience is
entirely convinced, and not bribed by inclination; for many a man
condemns himself by letting wishes dictate to conscience.

On the other hand, there is a danger that those who have scruples
should, by the example of those who have not, be tempted to do what
they are not quite sure is right. If you have any doubts, says Paul,
the safe course is to abstain from the conduct in question. Perhaps a
brother can go to the theatre without harm, if he believes it right
to do so; but if you have any hesitation as to the propriety of
going, you will be condemned as sinning if you do. You must not
measure your corn by another man's bushel. Your convictions, not his,
are to be your guides. 'Faith' is used here in a somewhat unusual
sense. It means certitude of judgment. The last words of verse 23
have no such meaning as is sometimes extracted from them; namely,
that actions, however pure and good, done by unbelievers, are of the
nature of sin. They simply mean that whatever a Christian man does
without clear warrant of his judgment and conscience is sin to him,
whatever it is to others.




TWO FOUNTAINS, ONE STREAM

   'That we, through patience and comfort of the
   Scriptures, might have hope.... 13. The God of
   hope fill you with all joy and peace in believing,
   that ye may abound in hope.'--ROMANS xv. 4, 13.


There is a river in Switzerland fed by two uniting streams, bearing
the same name, one of them called the 'white,' one of them the
'grey,' or dark. One comes down from the glaciers, and bears
half-melted snow in its white ripple; the other flows through a
lovely valley, and is discoloured by its earth. They unite in one
common current. So in these two verses we have two streams, a white
and a black, and they both blend together and flow out into a common
hope. In the former of them we have the dark stream--'through
patience and comfort,' which implies affliction and effort. The issue
and outcome of all difficulty, trial, sorrow, ought to be hope. And
in the other verse we have the other valley, down which the light
stream comes: 'The God of hope fill you with all joy and peace in
believing, that ye may abound in hope.'

So both halves of the possible human experience are meant to end in
the same blessed result; and whether you go round on the one side of
the sphere of human life, or whether you take the other hemisphere,
you come to the same point, if you have travelled with God's hand in
yours, and with Him for your Guide.

Let us look, then, at these two contrasted origins of the same
blessed gift, the Christian hope.

I. We have, first of all, the hope that is the child of the night,
and born in the dark.

'Whatsoever things,' says the Apostle, 'were written aforetime, were
written for our learning, that we, through patience,'--or rather
_the brave perseverance_--'and consolation'--or rather perhaps
_encouragement_--'of the Scriptures might have hope.' The written
word is conceived as the source of patient endurance which acts as
well as suffers. This grace Scripture works in us through the
encouragement which it ministers in manifold ways, and the result of
both is hope.

So, you see, our sorrows and difficulties are not connected with, nor
do they issue in, bright hopefulness, except by reason of this
connecting link. There is nothing in a man's troubles to make him
hopeful. Sometimes, rather, they drive him into despair; but at all
events, they seldom drive him to hopefulness, except where this link
comes in. We cannot pass from the black frowning cliffs on one side
of the gorge to the sunny tablelands on the other without a
bridge--and the bridge for a poor soul from the blackness of sorrow,
and the sharp grim rocks of despair, to the smiling pastures of hope,
with all their half-open blossoms, is builded in that Book, which
tells us the meaning and purpose of them all; and is full of the
histories of those who have fought and overcome, have hoped and not
been ashamed.

Scripture is given for this among other reasons, that it may
encourage us, and so may produce in us this great grace of active
patience, if we may call it so.

The first thing to notice is, how Scripture gives encouragement--for
such rather than consolation is the meaning of the word. It is much
to dry tears, but it is more to stir the heart as with a trumpet
call. Consolation is precious, but we need more for well-being than
only to be comforted. And, surely, the whole tone of Scripture in its
dealing with the great mystery of pain and sorrow, has a loftier
scope than even to minister assuagement to grief, and to stay our
weeping. It seeks to make us strong and brave to face and to master
our sorrows, and to infuse into us a high-hearted courage, which
shall not merely be able to accept the biting blasts, but shall feel
that they bring a glow to the cheek and oxygen to the blood, while
wrestling with them builds up our strength, and trains us for higher
service. It would be a poor aim to comfort only; but to encourage--to
make strong in heart, resolved in will, and incapable of being
overborne or crushed in spirit by any sorrows--that is a purpose
worthy of the Book, and of the God who speaks through it.

This purpose, we may say, is effected by Scripture in two ways. It
encourages us by its records, and by its revelation of principles.

Who can tell how many struggling souls have taken heart again, as
they pondered over the sweet stories of sorrow subdued which stud its
pages, like stars in its firmament? The tears shed long ago which God
has put 'in His bottle,' and recorded in 'His book,' have truly been
turned into pearls. That long gallery of portraits of sufferers, who
have all trodden the same rough road, and been sustained by the same
hand, and reached the same home, speaks cheer to all who follow them.
Hearts wrung by cruel partings from those dearer to them than their
own souls, turn to the pages which tell how Abraham, with calm
sorrow, laid his Sarah in the cave at Macpelah; or how, when Jacob's
eyes were dim that he could not see, his memory still turned to the
hour of agony when Rachael died by him, and he sees clear in its
light her lonely grave, where so much of himself was laid; or to the
still more sacred page which records the struggle of grief and faith
in the hearts of the sisters of Bethany. All who are anyways
afflicted in mind, body, or estate find in the Psalms men speaking
their deepest experiences before them; and the grand majesty of
sorrow that marks 'the patience of Job,' and the flood of sunshine
that bathes him, revealing the 'end of the Lord,' have strengthened
countless sufferers to bear and to hold fast, and to hope. We are all
enough of children to be more affected by living examples than by
dissertations, however true, and so Scripture is mainly history,
revealing God by the record of His acts, and disclosing the secret of
human life by telling us the experiences of living men.

But Scripture has another method of ministering encouragement to our
often fainting and faithless hearts. It cuts down through all the
complications of human affairs, and lays bare the innermost motive
power. It not only shows us in its narratives the working of sorrow,
and the power of faith, but it distinctly lays down the source and
the purpose, the whence and the whither of all suffering. No man need
quail or faint before the most torturing pains or most disastrous
strokes of evil, who holds firmly the plain teaching of Scripture on
these two points. They all come _from_ my Father, and they all
come _for_ my good. It is a short and simple creed, easily
apprehended. It pretends to no recondite wisdom. It is a homely
philosophy which common intellects can grasp, which children can
understand, and hearts half paralysed by sorrow can take in. So much
the better. Grief and pain are so common that their cure had need to
be easily obtained. Ignorant and stupid people have to writhe in
agony as well as wise and clever ones, and until grief is the portion
only of the cultivated classes, its healing must come from something
more universal than philosophy; or else the nettle would be more
plentiful than the dock; and many a poor heart would be stung to
death. Blessed be God! the Christian view of sorrow, while it leaves
much unexplained, focuses a steady light on these two points; its
origin and its end. 'He for our profit, that we may be partakers of
His holiness,' is enough to calm all agitation, and to make the
faintest heart take fresh courage. With that double certitude clear
before us, we can face anything. The slings and arrows which strike
are no more flung blindly by an 'outrageous fortune,' but each bears
an inscription, like the fabled bolts, which tells what hand drew the
bow, and they come with His love.

Then, further, the courage thus born of the Scriptures produces
another grand thing--patience, or rather perseverance. By that word
is meant more than simply the passive endurance which is the main
element in patience, properly so called. Such passive endurance is a
large part of our duty in regard to difficulties and sorrows, but is
never the whole of it. It is something to endure and even while the
heart is breaking, to submit unmurmuring, but, transcendent as that
is, it is but half of the lesson which we have to learn and to put in
practice. For if all our sorrows have a disciplinary and educational
purpose, we shall not have received them aright, unless we have tried
to make that purpose effectual, by appropriating whatsoever moral and
spiritual teaching they each have for us. Nor does our duty stop
there. For while one high purpose of sorrow is to deaden our hearts
to earthly objects, and to lift us above earthly affections, no
sorrow can ever relax the bonds which oblige us to duty. The solemn
pressure of 'I ought,' is as heavy on the sorrowful as on the happy
heart. We have still to toil, to press forward, in the sweat of our
brow, to gain our bread, whether it be food for our bodies, or
sustenance for our hearts and minds. Our responsibilities to others
do not cease because our lives are darkened. Therefore, heavy or
light of heart, we have still to stick to our work, and though we may
never more be able to do it with the old buoyancy, still to do it
with our might.

It is that dogged persistence in plain duty, that tenacious
continuance in our course, which is here set forth as the result of
the encouragement which Scripture gives. Many of us have all our
strength exhausted in mere endurance, and have let obvious duties
slip from our hands, as if we had done all that we could do when we
had forced ourselves to submit. Submission would come easier if you
took up some of those neglected duties, and you would be stronger for
patience, if you used more of your strength for service. You do well
if you do not sink under your burden, but you would do better if,
with it on your shoulders, you would plod steadily along the road;
and if you did, you would feel the weight less. It seems heaviest
when you stand still doing nothing. Do not cease to toil because you
suffer. You will feel your pain more if you do. Take the
encouragement which Scripture gives, that it may animate you to bate
no jot of heart or hope, but still bear up and steer right onward.

And let the Scripture directly minister to you perseverance as well
as indirectly supply it through the encouragement which it gives. It
abounds with exhortations, patterns, and motives of such patient
continuance in well-doing. It teaches us a solemn scorn of ills. It,
angel-like, bears us up on soft, strong hands, lest we bruise
ourselves on, or stumble over, the rough places on our roads. It
summons us to diligence by the visions of the prize, and glimpses of
the dread fate of the slothful, by all that is blessed in hope, and
terrible in foreboding, by appeals to an enlightened self-regard, and
by authoritative commands to conscience, by the pattern of the
Master, and by the tender motives of love to Him to which He,
Himself, has given voice. All these call on us to be followers of
them who, through faith and perseverance, inherit the promises.

But we have yet another step to take. These two, the encouragement
and perseverance produced by the right use of Scripture, will lead to
hope.

It depends on how sorrow and trial are borne, whether they produce a
dreary hopelessness which sometimes darkens into despair, or a
brighter, firmer hope than more joyous days knew. We cannot say that
sorrow produces hope. It does not, unless we have this connecting
link--the experience in sorrow of a God-given courage which falters
not in the onward course, nor shrinks from any duty. But if, in the
very press and agony, I am able, by God's grace, to endure nor cease
to toil, I have, in myself, a living proof of His power, which
entitles me to look forward with the sure confidence that, through
all the uproar of the storm, He will bring me to my harbour of rest
where there is peace. The lion once slain houses a swarm of bees who
lay up honey in its carcase. The trial borne with brave persistence
yields a store of sweet hopes. If we can look back and say, 'Thou
hast been with me in six troubles,' it is good logic to look forward
and say, 'and in seven Thou wilt not forsake me.' When the first wave
breaks over the ship, as she clears the heads and heels over before
the full power of the open sea, inexperienced landsmen think they are
all going to the bottom, but they soon learn that there is a long way
between rolling and foundering, and get to watch the highest waves
towering above the bows in full confidence that these also will slip
quietly beneath the keel as the others have done, and be left
harmless astern.

The Apostle, in this very same letter, has another word parallel to
this, in which he describes the issues of rightly-borne suffering
when he says, 'Tribulation worketh perseverance'--the same word that
is used here--'and perseverance worketh' the proof in our experience
of a sustaining God; and the proof in our experience of a sustaining
God works hope. We know that of ourselves we could not have met
tribulation, and therefore the fact that we have been able to meet
and overcome it is demonstration of a mightier power than our own,
working in us, which we know to be from God, and therefore
inexhaustible and ever ready to help. That is foundation firm enough
to build solid fabrics of hope upon, whose bases go down to the
centre of all things, the purpose of God, and whose summits, like the
upward shooting spire of some cathedral, aspire to, and seem almost
to touch, the heavens.

So hope is born of sorrow, when these other things come between. The
darkness gives birth to the light, and every grief blazes up a
witness to a future glory. Each drop that hangs on the wet leaves
twinkles into rainbow light that proclaims the sun. The garish
splendours of the prosperous day hide the stars, and through the
night of our sorrow there shine, thickly sown and steadfast, the
constellations of eternal hopes. The darker the midnight, the surer,
and perhaps the nearer, the coming of the day. Sorrow has not had its
perfect work unless it has led us by the way of courage and
perseverance to a stable hope. Hope has not pierced to the rock, and
builds only 'things that can be shaken,' unless it rests on sorrows
borne by God's help.

II. So much then for the genealogy of one form of the Christian hope.
But we have also a hope that is born of the day, the child of
sunshine and gladness; and that is set before us in the second of the
two verses which we are considering, 'The God of hope fill you with
all joy and peace in believing, that ye may abound in hope.'

So then, 'the darkness and the light are both alike' to our hope, in
so far as each may become the occasion for its exercise. It is not
only to be the sweet juice expressed from our hearts by the winepress
of calamities, but that which flows of itself from hearts ripened and
mellowed under the sunshine of God-given blessedness.

We have seen that the bridge by which sorrow led to hope, is
perseverance and courage; in this second analysis of the origin of
hope, joy and peace are the bridge by which Faith passes over into
it. Observe the difference: there is no direct connection between
affliction and hope, but there is between joy and hope. We have no
right to say, 'Because I suffer, I shall possess good in the future';
but we have a right to say, 'Because I rejoice'--of course with a joy
in God--'I shall never cease to rejoice in Him.' Such joy is the
prophet of its own immortality and completion. And, on the other
hand, the joy and peace which are naturally the direct progenitors of
Christian hope, are the children of faith. So that we have here two
generations, as it were, of hope's ancestors;--Faith produces joy and
peace, and these again produce hope.

Faith leads to joy and peace. Paul has found, and if we only put it
to the proof, we shall also find, that the simple exercise of simple
faith fills the soul with '_all_ joy and peace.' Gladness in all
its variety and in full measure, calm repose in every kind and
abundant in its still depth, will pour into my heart as water does
into a vessel, on condition of my taking away the barrier and opening
my heart through faith. Trust and thou shalt be glad. Trust, and thou
shalt be calm. In the measure of thy trust shall be the measure of
thy joy and peace.

Notice, further, how indissolubly connected the present exercise of
faith is with the present experience of joy and peace. The exuberant
language of this text seems a world too wide for anything that many
professing Christians ever know even in the moments of highest
elevation, and certainly far beyond the ordinary tenor of their
lives. But it is no wonder that these should have so little joy, when
they have so little faith. It is only while we are looking to Jesus
that we can expect to have joy and peace. There is no flashing light
on the surface of the mirror, but when it is turned full to the sun.
Any interruption in the electric current is registered accurately by
an interruption in the continuous line perforated on the telegraph
ribbon; and so every diversion of heart and faith from Jesus Christ
is recorded by the fading of the sunshine out of the heart, and the
silencing of all the song-birds. Yesterday's faith will not bring joy
to-day; you cannot live upon past experience, nor feed your souls
with the memory of former exercises of Christian faith. It must be
like the manna, gathered fresh every day, else it will rot and smell
foul. A present faith, and a present faith only, produces a present
joy and peace. Is there, then, any wonder that so much of the
ordinary experience of ordinary Christians should present a sadly
broken line--a bright point here and there, separated by long
stretches of darkness? The gaps in the continuity of their joy are
the tell-tale indicators of the interruptions in their faith. If the
latter were continuous, the former would be unbroken. Always believe,
and you will always be glad and calm.

It is easy to see that this is the natural result of faith. The very
act of confident reliance on another for all my safety and well-being
has a charm to make me restful, so long as my reliance is not put to
shame. There is no more blessed emotion than the tranquil happiness
which, in the measure of its trust, fills every trustful soul. Even
when its objects are poor, fallible, weak, ignorant dying men and
women, trust brings a breath of more than earthly peace into the
heart. But when it grasps the omnipotent, all-wise, immortal Christ,
there are no bounds but its own capacity to the blessedness which it
brings into the soul, because there is none to the all-sufficient
grace of which it lays hold.

Observe again how accurately the Apostle defines for us the
conditions on which Christian experience will be joyful and tranquil.
It is 'in believing,' not in certain other exercises of mind, that
these blessings are to be realised. And the forgetfulness of that
plain fact leads to many good people's religion being very much more
gloomy and disturbed than God meant it to be. For a large part of it
consists in sadly testing their spiritual state, and gazing at their
failures and imperfections. There is nothing cheerful or
tranquillising in grubbing among the evils of your own heart, and it
is quite possible to do that too much and too exclusively. If your
favourite subject of contemplation in your religious thinking is
yourself, no wonder that you do not get much joy and peace out of
that. If you do, it will be of a false kind. If you are thinking more
about your own imperfections than about Christ's pardon, more about
the defects of your own love to Him than about the perfection of His
love to you, if instead of practising faith you are absorbed in
self-examination, and instead of saying to yourself, 'I know how foul
and unworthy I am, but I look away from myself to my Saviour,' you
are bewailing your sins and doubting whether you are a Christian, you
need not expect God's angels of joy and peace to nestle in your
heart. It is 'in believing,' and not in other forms of religious
contemplation, however needful these may in their places be, that
these fair twin sisters come to us and make their abode with us.

Then, the second step in this tracing of the origin of the hope which
has the brighter source is the consideration that the joy and peace
which spring from faith, in their turn produce that confident
anticipation of future and progressive good.

Herein lies the distinguishing blessedness of the Christian joy and
peace, in that they carry in themselves the pledge of their own
eternity. Here, and here only, the mad boast which is doomed to be so
miserably falsified when applied to earthly gladness is simple truth.
Here 'to-morrow _shall_ be as this day and much more abundant.'
Such joy has nothing in itself which betokens exhaustion, as all the
less pure joys of earth have. It is manifestly not born for death, as
are they. It is not fated, like all earthly emotions or passions, to
expire in the moment of its completeness, or even by sudden revulsion
to be succeeded by its opposite. Its sweetness has no after pang of
bitterness. It is not true of this gladness, that 'Hereof cometh in
the end despondency and madness,' but its destiny is to 'remain' as
long as the soul in which it unfolds shall exist, and 'to be full' as
long as the source from which it flows does not run dry.

So that the more we experience the present blessedness, which faith
in Christ brings us, the more shall we be sure that nothing in the
future, either in or beyond time, can put an end to it; and hence a
hope that looks with confident eyes across the gorge of death, to the
'shining tablelands' on the other side, and is as calm as certitude,
shall be ours. To the Christian soul, rejoicing in the conscious
exercise of faith and the conscious possession of its blessed
results, the termination of a communion with Christ, so real and
spiritual, by such a trivial accident as death, seems wildly absurd
and therefore utterly impossible. Just as Christ's Resurrection seems
inevitable as soon as we grasp the truth of His divine nature, and it
becomes manifestly impossible that He, being such as He is--should
be holden of death,' being such as it is, so for His children, when
once they come to know the realities of fellowship with their Lord,
they feel the entire dissimilarity of these to anything in the realm
which is subjected to the power of death, and to know it to be as
impossible that these purely spiritual experiences should be reduced
to inactivity, or meddled with by it, as that a thought should be
bound with a cord or a feeling fastened with fetters. They, and
death, belong to two different regions. It can work its will on 'this
wide world, and all its fading sweets'--but is powerless in the still
place where the soul and Jesus hold converse, and all His joy passes
into His servant's heart. I saw, not long since, in a wood a mass of
blue wild hyacinths, that looked like a little bit of heaven dropped
down upon earth. You and I may have such a tiny bit of heaven itself
lying amidst all the tangle of our daily lives, if only we put our
trust in Christ, and so get into our hearts some little portion of
that joy that is unspeakable, and that peace that passeth
understanding.

Thus, then, the sorrows of the earthly experience and the joys of the
Christian life will blend together to produce the one blessed result
of a hope that is full of certainty, and is the assurance of
immortality. There is no rainbow in the sky unless there be both a
black cloud and bright sunshine. So, on the blackest, thickest
thunder-mass of our sorrows, if smitten into moist light by the
sunshine of joy and peace drawn from Jesus Christ by faith, there may
be painted the rainbow of hope, the many-coloured, steadfast token of
the faithful covenant of the faithful God.




JOY AND PEACE IN BELIEVING

   'The God of hope fill you with all joy and peace in
   believing, that ye may abound in hope, through the
   power of the Holy Ghost.'--ROMANS xv. 13.


With this comprehensive and lofty petition the Apostle closes his
exhortation to the factions in the Roman Church to be at unity. The
form of the prayer is moulded by the last words of a quotation which
he has just made, which says that in the coming Messiah 'shall the
Gentiles hope.' But the prayer itself is not an instance of being led
away by a word--in form, indeed, it is shaped by verbal resemblance;
in substance it points to the true remedy for religious controversy.
Fill the contending parties with a fuller spiritual life, and the
ground of their differences will begin to dwindle, and look very
contemptible. When the tide rises, the little pools on the rocks are
all merged into one.

But we may pass beyond the immediate application of these words, and
see in them the wish, which is also a promise, and like the
exhibition of every ideal is a command. This is Paul's conception of
the Christian life as it might and should be, in one aspect. You
notice that there is not a word in it about conduct. It goes far
deeper than action. It deals with the springs of action in the
individual life. It is the depths of spiritual experience here set
forth which will result in actions that become a Christian. And in
these days, when all around us we see a shallow conception of
Christianity, as if it were concerned principally with conduct and
men's relations with one another, it is well to go down into the
depths, and to remember that whilst 'Do, do, do!' is very important,
'Be, be, be!' is the primary commandment. Conduct is a making visible
of personality, and the Scripture teaching which says first faith and
then works is profoundly philosophical as well as Christian. So we
turn away here from externals altogether, and regard the effect of
Christianity on the inward life.

I. I wish to notice man's faith and God's filling as connected, and
as the foundation of everything.

'The God of hope fill you ...'--let us leave out the intervening
words for a moment--'in believing.' Now, you notice that Paul does
not stay to tell us what or whom we are to believe in, or on. He
takes that for granted, and his thought is fastened, for the moment,
not on the object but on the act of faith. And he wishes to drive
home to us this, that the attitude of trust is the necessary
prerequisite condition of God's being able to fill a man's soul, and
that God's being able to fill a man's soul is the necessary
consequence of a man's trust. Ah, brethren, we cannot altogether shut
God out from our spirits. There are loving and gracious gifts that,
as our Lord tells us, He makes to 'fall on the unthankful and the
evil.' His rain is not like the summer showers that we sometimes see,
that fall in one spot and leave another dry; nor like the destructive
thunderstorms, that come down bringing ruin upon one cane-brake and
leave the plants in the next standing upright. But the best, the
highest, the truly divine gifts which He is yearning to give to us
all, cannot be given except there be consent, trust, and desire for
them. You can shut your hearts or you can open them. And just as the
wind will sigh round some hermetically closed chamber in vain search
for a cranny, and the man within may be asphyxiated though the
atmosphere is surging up its waves all round his closed domicile, so
by lack of our faith, which is at once trust, consent, and desire, we
shut out the gift with which God would fain fill our spirits. You can
take a porous pottery vessel, wrap it up in waxcloth, pitch it all
over, and then drop it into mid-Atlantic, and not a drop will find
its way in. And that is what we can do with ourselves, so that
although in Him 'we live and move and have our being,' and are like
the earthen vessel in the ocean, no drop of the blessed moisture will
ever find its way into the heart. There must be man's faith before
there can be God's filling.

Further, this relation of the two things suggests to us that a
consequence of a Christian man's faith is the direct action of God
upon him. Notice how the Apostle puts that truth in a double form
here, in order that he may emphasise it, using one form of
expression, involving the divine, direct activity, at the beginning
of his prayer, and another at the end, and so enclosing, as it were,
within a great casket of the divine action, all the blessings, the
flashing jewels, which he desires his Roman friends to possess. 'The
God of hope fill you ... through the power of the Holy Ghost.' I wish
I could find words by which I could bear in upon the ordinary type of
the Evangelical Christianity of this generation anything like the
depth and earnestness of my own conviction that, for lack of a
proportionate development of that great truth, of the direct action
of the giving God on the believing heart, it is weakened and harmed
in many ways. Surely He that made my spirit can touch my spirit;
surely He who filleth all things according to their capacity can
Himself enter into and fill the spirit which is opened for Him by
simple faith. We do not need wires for the telegraphy between heaven
and the believing soul, but He comes directly to, and speaks in, and
moves upon, and moulds and blesses, the waiting heart. And until you
know, by your own experience rightly interpreted, that there is such
a direct communion between the giving God and the recipient believing
spirit, you have yet to learn the deepest depth, and the most blessed
blessedness, of Christian faith and experience. For lack of it a
hundred evils beset modern Christianity. For lack of it men fix their
faith so exclusively as that the faith is itself harmed thereby, on
the past act of Christ's death on the Cross. You will not suspect me
of minimising that, but I beseech you remember one climax of the
Apostle's which, though not bearing the same message as my text, is
in harmony with it, 'Christ that died, yea, rather, that is risen
again, who is even at the right hand of God, who also maketh
intercession for us.' And remember that Christ Himself bestows the
gift of His Divine Spirit as the result of the humiliation and the
agony of His Cross. Faith brings the direct action of the giving God.

And one more word about this first part of my text: the result of
that direct action is complete--'the God of hope fill you' with no
shrunken stream, no painful trickle out of a narrow rift in the rock,
but a great exuberance which will pass into a man's nature in the
measure of his capacity, which is the measure of his trust and
desire. There are two limits to God's gifts to men: the one is the
limitless limit of God's infinitude, the other is the working
limit--our capacity--and that capacity is precisely measured, as the
capacity of some built-in vessel might be measured by a little gauge
on the outside, by our faith. 'The God of hope' fills you in
'believing,' and 'according to thy faith shall it be unto thee.'

II. Notice the joy and peace which come from the direct action of the
God of hope on the believer's soul.

Now, it is not only towards God that we exercise trust, but wherever
it is exercised, to some extent, and in the measure in which the
object on which it rests is discovered by experience to be worthy, it
produces precisely these results. Whoever trusts is at peace, just as
much as he trusts. His confidence may be mistaken, and there will
come a tremendous awakening if it is, and the peace will be shattered
like some crystal vessel dashed upon an iron pavement, but so long as
a man's mind and heart are in the attitude of dependence upon
another, conceived to be dependable, one knows that there are few
phases of tranquillity and blessedness which are sweeter and deeper
than that. 'The heart of her husband doth safely trust in her'--that
is one illustration, and a hundred more might be given. And if you
will take that attitude of trust which, even when it twines round
some earthly prop, is upheld for a time, and bears bright flowers--if
you take it and twine it round the steadfast foundations of the
Throne of God, what can shake that sure repose? 'Joy and peace' will
come when the Christian heart closes with its trust, which is God in
Christ.

He that believes has found the short, sure road to joy and peace,
because his relations are set right with God. For these relations are
the disturbing elements in all earthly tranquillity, and like the
skeleton at the feast in all earthly joy, and a man can never, down
to the roots of his being, be at rest until he is quite sure that
there is nothing wrong between him and God. And so believing, we come
to that root of all real gladness which is anything better than a
crackling of thorns under a pot, and to that beginning of all true
tranquillity. Joy in the Lord and peace with God are the parents of
all joy and peace that are worthy of the name.

And that same faith will again bring these two bright-winged angels
into the most saddened and troubled lives, because that faith brings
right relations with ourselves. For our inward strifes stuff thorns
into the pillow of our repose, and mingle bitterness with the
sweetest, foaming draughts of our earthly joys. If a man's conscience
and inclinations pull him two different ways, he is torn asunder as
by wild horses. If a man has a hungry heart, for ever yearning after
unattained and impossible blessings, then there is no rest there. If
a man's little kingdom within him is all anarchical, and each passion
and appetite setting up for itself, then there is no tranquillity.
But if by faith we let the God of hope come in, then hungry hearts
are satisfied, and warring dispositions are harmonised, and the
conscience becomes quieted, and fair imaginations fill the chamber of
the spirit, and the man is at rest, because he himself is unified by
the faith and fear of God.
