

72,070.--AUTOMATIC TABLE FOR TEACHING.--Hannah Munson, Rockford, Ill.,
administratrix of the estate of Wm. C. Munson, deceased.

I claim the combination of the frame, A, with its pivoted pointers, C C,
and hooks, e e, and movable bars, B B, with pointers and charts, D, as
constructed, the whole being arranged and used substantially as and for
the purpose specified.


72,071.--HYDRANT.--John G. Murdock, Cincinnati, Ohio.

I claim, 1st, The hollow plunger, E, having the interior valve, I, and
sleeve packing, F, which respectively close and encircle the supply and
waste pipe, B, as and for the purpose set forth.

2d, In combination with the supply and waste pipe, B, and valve, I, the
vertically adjustable hollow plunger, E, for the object stated.

3d, The adjustable shoulder or lock nut, J, in combination and
arrangement with the elements, B, D, I and E.

4th, The arrangement of internally packed plunger, E, which surrounds
and packs a vertical supply pipe, B, having one or more waste ways,
D, and being enclosed within and guided by a cup, C, substantially as
described.


72,072.--CLEANER FOR LAMP CHIMNEYS.--R.B. Musson, Champaign, Ill.

I claim a cleaner for lamp chimneys, bottles, and other articles of a
similar character, consisting of strips of rubber, or other soft elastic
substance, secure to a holder, and arranged in manner and for the
purposes substantially above set forth and described.


72,073.--BOOT AND SHOE HEEL.--Erastus Newhall, Lynn, assignor to himself
and John R. Moffitt, Chelsea, Mass.

I claim a heel made with a circular thread and a corresponding seat,
when one or both of the two parts are made of elastic material, and are
united substantially as described.


72,074.--PORTABLE HOT AIR CONDUCTOR.--John B. Oldershaw, Baltimore, Md.

I claim a portable hot air receiver and conductor, constructed, arranged
and operating in connection with a stove, for the purpose of heating
apartments above it, substantially as described.


72,075.--VINE HOLDER.--Garret J. Olendorf and Albert O. Parshall,
Middlefield, N.Y.

We claim, 1st, The frame, A, constructed as described and set forth, for
the purpose specified.

2d. The cord, B, combined with and supported by frame, A, as described
and set forth, for the purpose specified.


72,076.--BREECH-LOADING FIRE-ARMS.--Henry O. Peabody (assignor to the
Providence Tool Company), Providence, R.I.

I claim combining the breech block, A, hinged at its posterior
extremity, and operating as described, with the hammer, D, by means of
the protuberant inclined plane, C, or its equivalent, substantially as
described for the purposes specified.


72,077.--RAILWAY CROSSINGS.--Stanhope Perkins, Fairfield, England.

I claim forming the points or V-parts of crossings, without splice, by
bending the rail, prepared as above described, back upon itself, and
securing the abutting parts in the manner and for the purpose above set
forth.


72,078.--MANUFACTURE OF LAMP BLACK.--R.N. Perlee, Jersey City, N.J.

I claim the method herein specified of manufacturing lamp black, by
introducing atmospheric air to the flame, by artificial means, for the
purposes set forth.


72,079.--AXLE BOX.--Henry B. Pitner, La Porte, Ind.

I claim, 1st, An axle box, substantially as shown and described, and for
the purpose set forth.

2d, The sleeve or thimble, A, in combination with the end pieces, B,
substantially as shown and described, and for the purposes set forth.

3d, The shoulder, a1, and the shoulder, a2, in combination with the
sleeve A, and end pieces, B, substantially as shown and described, and
for the purposes set forth.


72,080.--RAILWAY CHAIR.--Leander Pollock, (assignor to himself and John
P. Schenck, Jr.), Matteawan, N.Y.

I claim 1st, A railroad-chair which is divided by an inclined line drawn
through the base, into two parts, A and B, each part carrying one of the
cheeks, and all made and operating substantially as herein shown and
described.

2d, Interposing an elastic plate, g, between the edge of the upper base,
d, and the stationary cheek, a, substantially as and for the purpose
herein shown and described.


72,081.--VENTILATING HAY-MOWS.--Geo. Race, Norwich, N.Y.

I claim making vertical perforated pipes, having lateral branches
extending out from the main pipe for the purpose of ventilating
hay-mows, and stacks of hay or grain, substantially as herein set forth.


72,082.--PNEUMATIC CAR.--Louis Ransom, Lansingburg, N.Y.

I claim in combination with a pneumatic car, a series of metal cylinders
for containing compressed air, the said cylinders being connected by
pipes, so as to form one common reservoir substantially as described.

2d, I also claim the combination, with a stove for warming the car, or
other heating apparatus, a conducting pipe, for the compressed air, so
located with reference to the stove or other heating apparatus that the
compressed air in passing through it will become heated, and have its
expansive power increased thereby, substantially as described.

3d, I also claim the compound flexible pipe, constructed substantially
as described.

4th, I also claim the muffler, D, for the purpose of deadening the sound
of the escaping air as described.


72,083.--MACHINE FOR SHARPENING SAWS.--E.B. Rich, (assignor to himself
and Andre Cashing), Boston, Mass.

I claim the sliding holder, B. and adjustable rail, C, in combination
with the grinding wheel, D, constructed and arranged to operate as
herein described, for the purpose specified.

72.084.--AUTOMATIC REGISTER.--J.T. Buckley, Ottawa, Ill. administrator
of the estate of Stephen Rigler, deceased.

I claim 1st, Operating a register slide so as to regulate the
temperature of apartments, by means of a column of mercury within a
tube, which is arranged within the register itself and acts upon said
slide through the means substantially as described.

2d, The combination of an index hand, B, with a register arranged and
operated by a column of mercury within a tube, which is arranged within
the register itself, substantially as described.

3d, The combination with a circular turning register slide, B, of
mercury pipe, G', piston rod, g1, cross head, g, toothed lever, F,
spur wheel, d, and shaft, b, arranged, constructed and operating
substantially as described.


72,085.--SHOVEL PLOW, CULTIVATOR, ETC.--P.A. Ross, Harveys, Pa.

I claim 1st, The combination of the notched rack, E, and removable pin,
F, with the pivoted or rocking cross-bar, C, and slotted standard, B,
substantially as herein shown and described and for the purpose set
forth.

2d, Connecting the forward ends of the handles, D, to the beam, A, by
means of the hook or eye-bolt, G, and pivoted bar or plate, H, when used
in connection with the pivoted or rocking cross bar, C, and pin, F,
substantially as herein shown and described and for the purpose set
forth.


72,086.--FENCE POST.--Robert Ramsey, New Wilmington, Pa.

I claim the fence-post, P P' P", having dove-tail gains at its lower
end, in combination with the parallel slits, A A', and the keys, e e e
e, substantially in the manner and for the purpose set forth.


72,087.--CHURN.--J.A. Rowley, Vanceburg, Ky.

I claim the arrangement substantially as described of the driving wheel,
C, shafts, c c', spring, D, notched bracket, E e. and friction pulley, F
G, for the purpose of imparting a rotary motion to the dasher shaft, f,
in the manner herein described and set forth.


72,088.--STEAM TRAP.--David Saunders, Brooklyn, N.Y. assignor to Jos.
Nason & Co., New York city.

I claim 1st, The arrangement of the central part, C, of the cover and
main cover, B, substantially as herein set forth.

2d, The arrangement of the stop-joint between the floating part and
the fixed part of the apparatus, whereby to avoid the clogging by
accumulations of dirt as specified.

3d, The arrangement of the tubes E and H, the tube, H, being mounted
upon the floating part, substantially as herein specified.


72,089.--DOOR SPRING.--Rudolph Schrader, Indianapolis, Ind.

I claim 1st, The door-spring, constructed as described, consisting of
the hollow socket, F, placed over the square shank of the door arm: and
provided with the right angular arm, J, sleeve, E, to which the inner
end of the coiled spring, D, is securely fastened, fitting at or
alternating upon the socket, F, and provided with the right angular arm,
I, resting against the post, H, in the case, A, the free end, G, of the
spring resting against the opposite side of said post, all operating as
described for the purpose specified.

2d, The spring, D, operated by means of the right angular arm, J, of the
hollow shank, F, engaging with the outer end, G, of the spring when the
door moves in one direction, and when moving in the opposite direction
engaging with the arm, I, of the sleeve, E, to which the inner end
of the spring is secured substantially as described for the purpose
specified.

3d, The combination and arrangement within the case, A, of the spring,
D, hollow socket, F, having arm, J, sleeve, E, having arm, I, post, H,
and hook, G, operating as described for the purpose specified.


72,090.--POLE COUPLING FOR VEHICLES.--Anson Searls, N.Y. city.

I claim the circular joints, B B, and the arrangement of the ratchet
teeth, K K, springs, D D, and bolts, E E, in combination with the arm,
A, substantially as described and for the purposes set forth.


72,091.--CARRIAGE.--Anson Searls, San Francisco, Cal.

I claim, 1st, The axle composed of the steel bars, d and g, attached, as
herein described.

2d, The clip b, passing around under the axle, with its ends fastened
to the plate a, on the rocker, both before and behind the axle,
substantially as described.


72,092.--STEAM ENGINE.--George Shale, Taunton, Mass.

I claim, 1st, The steam-chest, B, constructed with the chambers, gh,
and partition, p, in combination with the steam and exhaust pipes, and
cylinder, a, substantially as described.

2d, The valve-rods, i i', provided with the recesses or chambers, k k,
in combination with the partition, p, constructed as described, and
operated by the lever, l, as and for the purpose set forth.


72,093.--FERRULE.--Archibald Shaw, Philadelphia, Pa.

I claim a ferrule, provided internally, or at its inner side, with
oblique spurs or projections, substantially as and for the purpose
specified.


72,094.--FENCE POST.--Warren H. Shay, Sylvania, Ohio.

I claim the plank standards, B B, joined by the pins, a a, the braces, A
A, and the cross-piece, C, combined and secured by the dove-tail tenons,
o b, the gib and key, c d, and the keys, g g, substantially as and for
the purpose herein shown and described.


72,095.--TABULAR HEATER.--C.J.Shepard, Brooklyn, N.Y.

I claim, 1st, The combination of the grate, E, ash-pit, D, and
combustion-chamber, C, with the slide-valve, I, for the purposes
indicated.

2d, The slide-valve at the junction of the upper and under front flue,
for the purposes described.

3d, The upper front flue covered externally with a non-conducting lining
as a portion of the combustion-chamber.

4th, The corrugated tubular externally-flanged chamber, provided with an
incombustible termination, constructed and operating substantially as
shown for the purposes pointed out.

5th, A semi-cylindrical reverberating chamber of combustion, when
combined with a flue and a series of tubes, for the purposes specified.

6th, A feeding-chamber in combination with an arched chamber of
combustion and the abutments for properly distributing the fuel upon the
grate.

7th, Constructing the bed-plate or grate-plate in such a manner that the
same shall form a support for the grate and brick-work of the chamber of
combustion, as well as the bed of the front flue.

8th, The division-plate, in combination with a series of tubes, for the
purposes fully described.


72,096.--WINDOW-SASH SUPPORTER.--J.W.Simpson, Newark, N.J.

I claim the lever, d, and wedge, b, constructed, combined, and operated
substantially in the manner and for the purpose hereinabove set forth.

Also, the socket, m, with its ratch, n, and the catch, i, on the lever,
d, in combination with the lever and wedge, in the manner and for the
purpose specified.


72,097.--STAKE-HOLDER FOR RAILROAD CARS.--Thomas A. Slack, Peoria
county, Ill.

I claim the combination of revolving staple, stakes, and divisional
"coal sides." as described and for the purpose set forth.


72,098.--EXCAVATOR.--Benjamin Slusser, Sidney, Ohio, assignor to himself
