will be found, upon examination, to have been incomparably
greater than that of any other individual.--STEWART, DUGALD.

                         _Philosophy of the Human Mind, Part 3,
                         chap. 1, sect. 3._


=989.= Leibnitz's discoveries lay in the direction in which all
modern progress in science lies, in establishing order, symmetry,
and harmony, i.e., comprehensiveness and perspicuity,--rather
than in dealing with single problems, in the solution of which
followers soon attained greater dexterity than himself.

                                                    --MERZ, J. T.

                         _Leibnitz, Chap. 6._


=990.= It was his [Leibnitz's] love of method and order, and the
conviction that such order and harmony existed in the real world,
and that our success in understanding it depended upon the degree
and order which we could attain in our own thoughts, that
originally was probably nothing more than a habit which by
degrees grew into a formal rule.[8] This habit was acquired by
early occupation with legal and mathematical questions. We have
seen how the theory of combinations and arrangements of elements
had a special interest for him. We also saw how mathematical
calculations served him as a type and model of clear and orderly
reasoning, and how he tried to introduce method and system into
logical discussions, by reducing to a small number of terms the
multitude of compound notions he had to deal with. This tendency
increased in strength, and even in those early years he
elaborated the idea of a general arithmetic, with a universal
language of symbols, or a characteristic which would be
applicable to all reasoning processes, and reduce philosophical
investigations to that simplicity and certainty which the use of
algebraic symbols had introduced into mathematics.

    [8]  This sentence has been reworded for the
         purpose of this quotation.

A mental attitude such as this is always highly favorable for
mathematical as well as for philosophical investigations.
Wherever progress depends upon precision and clearness of
thought, and wherever such can be gained by reducing a variety of
investigations to a general method, by bringing a multitude of
notions under a common term or symbol, it proves inestimable. It
necessarily imports the special qualities of number--viz., their
continuity, infinity and infinite divisibility--like mathematical
quantities--and destroys the notion that irreconcilable contrasts
exist in nature, or gaps which cannot be bridged over. Thus, in
his letter to Arnaud, Leibnitz expresses it as his opinion that
geometry, or the philosophy of space, forms a step to the
philosophy of motion--i.e., of corporeal things--and the
philosophy of motion a step to the philosophy of mind.

                                                    --MERZ, J. T.

                         _Leibnitz (Philadelphia), pp. 44-45._


=991.= Leibnitz believed he saw the image of creation in his
binary arithmetic in which he employed only two characters, unity
and zero. Since God may be represented by unity, and nothing by
zero, he imagined that the Supreme Being might have drawn all
things from nothing, just as in the binary arithmetic all numbers
are expressed by unity with zero. This idea was so pleasing to
Leibnitz, that he communicated it to the Jesuit Grimaldi,
President of the Mathematical Board of China, with the hope that
this emblem of the creation might convert to Christianity the
reigning emperor who was particularly attached to the sciences.

                                                       --LAPLACE.

                         _Essai Philosophique sur les
                         Probabilites; Oeuvres (Paris, 1896), t.
                         7, p. 119._


=992.= Sophus Lie, great comparative anatomist of geometric
theories.--KEYSER, C. J.

                         _Lectures on Science, Philosophy and Art
                         (New York, 1908), p. 31._


=993.= It has been the final aim of Lie from the beginning to
make progress in the theory of differential equations; as
subsidiary to this may be regarded both his geometrical
developments and the theory of continuous groups.--KLEIN, F.

                         _Lectures on Mathematics (New York,
                         1911), p. 24._


=994.= To fully understand the mathematical genius of Sophus Lie,
one must not turn to books recently published by him in
collaboration with Dr. Engel, but to his earlier memoirs, written
during the first years of his scientific career. There Lie shows
himself the true geometer that he is, while in his later
publications, finding that he was but imperfectly understood by
the mathematicians accustomed to the analytic point of view, he
adopted a very general analytic form of treatment that is not
always easy to follow.--KLEIN, F.

                         _Lectures on Mathematics (New York,
                         1911), p. 9._


=995.= It is said that the composing of the Lilawati was
occasioned by the following circumstance. Lilawati was the name
of the author's [Bhascara] daughter, concerning whom it appeared,
from the qualities of the ascendant at her birth, that she was
destined to pass her life unmarried, and to remain without
children. The father ascertained a lucky hour for contracting her
in marriage, that she might be firmly connected and have
children. It is said that when that hour approached, he brought
his daughter and his intended son near him. He left the hour cup
on the vessel of water and kept in attendance a time-knowing
astrologer, in order that when the cup should subside in the
water, those two precious jewels should be united. But, as the
intended arrangement was not according to destiny, it happened
that the girl, from a curiosity natural to children, looked into
the cup, to observe the water coming in at the hole, when by
chance a pearl separated from her bridal dress, fell into the
cup, and, rolling down to the hole, stopped the influx of water.
So the astrologer waited in expectation of the promised hour.
When the operation of the cup had thus been delayed beyond all
moderate time, the father was in consternation, and examining, he
found that a small pearl had stopped the course of the water, and
that the long-expected hour was passed. In short, the father,
thus disappointed, said to his unfortunate daughter, I will write
a book of your name, which shall remain to the latest times--for
a good name is a second life, and the ground-work of eternal
existence.--FIZI.

                         _Preface to the Lilawati. Quoted by A.
                         Hutton: A Philosophical and Mathematical
                         Dictionary, Article "Algebra" (London,
                         1815)._


=996.= Is there anyone whose name cannot be twisted into either
praise or satire? I have had given to me,

        _Thomas Babington Macaulay
        Mouths big: a Cantab anomaly._
                                             --DE MORGAN, A.

                         _Budget of Paradoxes (London, 1872), p.
                         83._




  CHAPTER X

  PERSONS AND ANECDOTES

  (N-Z)


=1001.= When he had a few moments for diversion, he [Napoleon]
not unfrequently employed them over a book of logarithms, in
which he always found recreation.--ABBOTT, J. S. C.

                         _Napoleon Bonaparte (New York, 1904),
                         Vol. 1, chap. 10._


=1002.= The name of Sir Isaac Newton has by general consent been
placed at the head of those great men who have been the ornaments
of their species.... The philosopher [Laplace], indeed, to whom
posterity will probably assign a place next to Newton, has
characterized the Principia as pre-eminent above all the
productions of human intellect.--BREWSTER, D.

                         _Life of Sir Isaac Newton (London,
                         1831), pp. 1, 2._


=1003.= Newton and Laplace need myriads of ages and thick-strewn
celestial areas. One may say a gravitating solar system is
already prophesied in the nature of Newton's mind.--EMERSON.

                         _Essay on History._


=1004.= The law of gravitation is indisputably and incomparably
the greatest scientific discovery ever made, whether we look at
the advance which it involved, the extent of truth disclosed, or
the fundamental and satisfactory nature of this truth.

                                                    --WHEWELL, W.

                         _History of the Inductive Sciences, Bk.
                         7, chap. 2, sect. 5._


=1005.= Newton's theory is the circle of generalization which
includes all the others [as Kepler's laws, Ptolemy's theory,
etc.];--the highest point of the inductive ascent;--the
catastrophe of the philosophic drama to which Plato had
prologized;--the point to which men's minds had been journeying
for two thousand years.--WHEWELL, W.

                         _History of the Inductive Sciences, Bk.
                         7, chap. 2, sect. 5._


=1006.= The efforts of the great philosopher [Newton] were always
superhuman; the questions which he did not solve were incapable
of solution in his time.--ARAGO.

                         _Eulogy on Laplace, [Baden Powell]
                         Smithsonian Report, 1874, p. 133._


=1007.=

        Nature and Nature's laws lay hid in night:
        God said, "Let Newton be!" and all was light.
                                                  --POPE, A.

                         _Epitaph intended for Sir Isaac Newton._


=1008.=

        There Priest of Nature! dost thou shine,
        _Newton!_ a King among the Kings divine.
                                                  --SOUTHEY.

                         _Translation of a Greek Ode on
                         Astronomy._


=1009.=

        O'er Nature's laws God cast the veil of night,
        Out-blaz'd a Newton's soul--and all was light.
                                              --HILL, AARON.

                         _On Sir Isaac Newton._


=1010.= Taking mathematics from the beginning of the world to the
time when Newton lived, what he had done was much the better
half.--LEIBNITZ.

                         _Quoted by F. R. Moulton: Introduction
                         to Astronomy (New York, 1906), p. 199._


=1011.= Newton was the greatest genius that ever existed, and the
most fortunate, for we cannot find more than once a system of the
world to establish.--LAGRANGE.

                         _Quoted by F. R. Moulton: Introduction
                         to Astronomy (New York, 1906), p. 199._


=1012.= A monument to Newton! a monument to Shakespeare! Look
up to Heaven--look into the Human Heart. Till the planets
and the passions--the affections and the fixed stars are
extinguished--their names cannot die.--WILSON, JOHN.

                         _Noctes Ambrosianae._


=1013.= Such men as Newton and Linnaeus are incidental, but
august, teachers of religion.--WILSON, JOHN.

                         _Essays: Education of the People._


=1014.= Sir Isaac Newton, the supreme representative of
Anglo-Saxon genius.--ELLIS, HAVELOCK.

                         _Study of British Genius (London, 1904),
                         p. 49._


=1015.= Throughout his life Newton must have devoted at least as
much attention to chemistry and theology as to mathematics....

                                                 --BALL, W. W. R.

                         _History of Mathematics (London, 1901),
                         p. 335._


=1016.= There was a time when he [Newton] was possessed with the
old fooleries of astrology; and another when he was so far gone
in those of chemistry, as to be upon the hunt after the
philosopher's stone.--REV. J. SPENCE.

                         _Anecdotes, Observations, and Characters
                         of Books and Men (London, 1868), p. 54._


=1017.= For several years this great man [Newton] was intensely
occupied in endeavoring to discover a way of changing the base
metals into gold.... There were periods when his furnace fires
were not allowed to go out for six weeks; he and his secretary
sitting up alternate nights to replenish them.--PARTON, JAMES.

                         _Sir Isaac Newton._


=1018.= On the day of Cromwell's death, when Newton was sixteen,
a great storm raged all over England. He used to say, in his old
age, that on that day he made his first purely scientific
experiment. To ascertain the force of the wind, he first jumped
with the wind and then against it; and, by comparing these
distances with the extent of his own jump on a calm day, he was
enabled to compute the force of the storm. When the wind blew
thereafter, he used to say it was so many feet strong.

                                                 --PARTON, JAMES.

                         _Sir Isaac Newton._


=1019.= Newton lectured now and then to the few students who
chose to hear him; and it is recorded that very frequently he
came to the lecture-room and found it empty. On such occasions he
would remain fifteen minutes, and then, if no one came, return to
his apartments.--PARTON, JAMES.

                         _Sir Isaac Newton._


=1020.= Sir Isaac Newton, though so deep in algebra and fluxions,
could not readily make up a common account: and, when he was
Master of the Mint, used to get somebody else to make up his
accounts for him.--REV. J. SPENCE.

                         _Anecdotes, Observations, and Characters
                         of Books and Men (London, 1858), p.
                         132._


=1021.= We have one of his [Newton's] college memorandum-books,
which is highly interesting. The following are some of the
entries: "Drills, gravers, a hone, a hammer, and a mandril, 5s.;"
"a magnet, 16s.;" "compasses, 2s.;" "glass bubbles, 4s.;" "at the
tavern several other times, L1;" "spent on my cousin, 12s.;" "on
other acquaintances, 10s.;" "Philosophical Intelligences, 9s.
6d.;" "lost at cards twice, 15s.;" "at the tavern twice, 3s.
6d.;" "to three prisms, L3;" "four ounces of putty, 1s. 4d.;"
"Bacon's Miscellanies, 1s. 6d.;" "a bible binding, 3s.;" "for
oranges to my sister, 4s. 2d.;" "for aquafortis, sublimate, oyle
pink, fine silver, antimony, vinegar, spirit of wine, white lead,
salt of tartar, L2;" "Theatrum chemicum, L1 8s."--PARTON, JAMES.

                         _Sir Isaac Newton._


=1022.= On one occasion, when he was giving a dinner to some
friends at the university, he left the table to get them a bottle
of wine; but, on his way to the cellar, he fell into reflection,
forgot his errand and his company, went to his chamber, put on
his surplice, and proceeded to the chapel. Sometimes he would go
into the street half dressed, and on discovering his condition,
run back in great haste, much abashed. Often, while strolling in
his garden, he would suddenly stop, and then run rapidly to his
room, and begin to write, standing, on the first piece of paper
that presented itself. Intending to dine in the public hall, he
would go out in a brown study, take the wrong turn, walk a while,
and then return to his room, having totally forgotten the dinner.
Once having dismounted from his horse to lead him up a hill, the
horse slipped his head out of the bridle; but Newton, oblivious,
never discovered it till, on reaching a tollgate at the top of
the hill, he turned to remount and perceived that the bridle
which he held in his hand had no horse attached to it. His
secretary records that his forgetfulness of his dinner was an
excellent thing for his old housekeeper, who "sometimes found
both dinner and supper scarcely tasted of, which the old woman
has very pleasantly and mumpingly gone away with." On getting out
of bed in the morning, he has been discovered to sit on his
bedside for hours without dressing himself, utterly absorbed in
thought.--PARTON, JAMES.

                         _Sir Isaac Newton._


=1023.= I don't know what I may seem to the world, but, as to
myself, I seem to have been only as a boy playing on the
seashore, and diverting myself in now and then finding a smoother
pebble or a prettier shell than ordinary, whilst the great ocean
of truth lay all undiscovered before me.--NEWTON, I.

                         _Quoted by Rev. J. Spence: Anecdotes,
                         Observations, and Characters of Books
                         and Men (London, 1858), p. 40._


=1024.= If I have seen farther than Descartes, it is by standing
on the shoulders of giants.--NEWTON, I.

                         _Quoted by James Parton: Sir Isaac
                         Newton._


=1025.= Newton could not admit that there was any difference
between him and other men, except in the possession of such
habits as ... perseverance and vigilance. When he was asked how
he made his discoveries, he answered, "by always thinking about
them;" and at another time he declared that if he had done
anything, it was due to nothing but industry and patient thought:
"I keep the subject of my inquiry constantly before me, and wait
till the first dawning opens gradually, by little and little,
into a full and clear light."--WHEWELL, W.

                         _History of the Inductive Sciences, Bk.
                         7, chap. 2, sect. 5._


=1026.= Newton took no exercise, indulged in no amusements, and
worked incessantly, often spending eighteen or nineteen hours out
of the twenty-four in writing.--BALL, W. W. R.

                         _History of Mathematics (London, 1901),
                         p. 358._


=1027.= Foreshadowings of the principles and even of the language
of [the infinitesimal] calculus can be found in the writings of
Napier, Kepler, Cavalieri, Pascal, Fermat, Wallis, and Barrow. It
was Newton's good luck to come at a time when everything was ripe
for the discovery, and his ability enabled him to construct
almost at once a complete calculus.--BALL, W. W. R.

                         _History of Mathematics (London, 1901),
                         p. 356._


=1028.= Kepler's suggestion of gravitation with the inverse
distance, and Bouillaud's proposed substitution of the inverse
square of the distance, are things which Newton knew better than
his modern readers. I have discovered two anagrams on his name,
which are quite conclusive: the notion of gravitation was _not
new_; but Newton _went on_.--DE MORGAN, A.

                         _Budget of Paradoxes (London, 1872), p.
                         82._


=1029.= For other great mathematicians or philosophers, he
[Gauss] used the epithets magnus, or clarus, or clarissimus; for
Newton alone he kept the prefix summus.--BALL, W. W. R.

                         _History of Mathematics (London, 1901),
                         p. 362._


=1030.= To know him [Sylvester] was to know one of the historic
figures of all time, one of the immortals; and when he was really
moved to speak, his eloquence equalled his genius.--HALSTED, G. B.

                         _F. Cajori's Teaching and History of
                         Mathematics in the U. S. (Washington,
                         1890), p. 265._


=1031.= Professor Sylvester's first high class at the new
university Johns Hopkins consisted of only one student, G. B.
Halsted, who had persisted in urging Sylvester to lecture on the
modern algebra. The attempt to lecture on this subject led him
into new investigations in quantics.--CAJORI, F.

                         _Teaching and History of Mathematics in
                         the U. S. (Washington, 1890), p. 264._


=1032.= But for the persistence of a student of this university
in urging upon me his desire to study with me the modern algebra
I should never have been led into this investigation; and the
new facts and principles which I have discovered in regard to it
(important facts, I believe), would, so far as I am concerned,
have remained still hidden in the womb of time. In vain I
represented to this inquisitive student that he would do better
to take up some other subject lying less off the beaten track of
study, such as the higher parts of the calculus or elliptic
functions, or the theory of substitutions, or I wot not what
besides. He stuck with perfect respectfulness, but with
invincible pertinacity, to his point. He would have the new
algebra (Heaven knows where he had heard about it, for it is
almost unknown in this continent), that or nothing. I was obliged
to yield, and what was the consequence? In trying to throw light
upon an obscure explanation in our text-book, my brain took fire,
I plunged with re-quickened zeal into a subject which I had for
years abandoned, and found food for thoughts which have engaged
my attention for a considerable time past, and will probably
occupy all my powers of contemplation advantageously for several
months to come.--SYLVESTER, J. J.

                         _Johns Hopkins Commemoration Day
                         Address; Collected Mathematical Papers,
                         Vol. 3, p. 76._


=1033.= Sylvester was incapable of reading mathematics in a
purely receptive way. Apparently a subject either fired in his
brain a train of active and restless thought, or it would not
retain his attention at all. To a man of such a temperament, it
would have been peculiarly helpful to live in an atmosphere in
which his human associations would have supplied the stimulus
which he could not find in mere reading. The great modern work in
the theory of functions and in allied disciplines, he never
became acquainted with....

What would have been the effect if, in the prime of his powers,
he had been surrounded by the influences which prevail in Berlin
or in Goettingen? It may be confidently taken for granted that he
would have done splendid work in those domains of analysis, which
have furnished the laurels of the great mathematicians of Germany
and France in the second half of the present century.--FRANKLIN, F.

                         _Johns Hopkins University Circulars 16
                         (1897), p. 54._


=1034.= If we survey the mathematical works of Sylvester, we
recognize indeed a considerable abundance, but in contradistinction
to Cayley--not a versatility toward separate fields, but, with few
exceptions--a confinement to arithmetic-algebraic branches....

The concept of _Function_ of a continuous variable, the fundamental
concept of modern mathematics, plays no role, is indeed scarcely
mentioned in the entire work of Sylvester--Sylvester was
combinatorist [combinatoriker].--NOETHER, M.

                         _Mathematische Annalen, Bd. 50 (1898),
                         pp. 134-135._


=1035.= Sylvester's _methods!_ He had none. "Three lectures will
be delivered on a New Universal Algebra," he would say; then,
"The course must be extended to twelve." It did last all the
rest of that year. The following year the course was to be
_Substitutions-Theorie_, by Netto. We all got the text. He
lectured about three times, following the text closely and
stopping sharp at the end of the hour. Then he began to think
about matrices again. "I must give one lecture a week on those,"
he said. He could not confine himself to the hour, nor to the one
lecture a week. Two weeks were passed, and Netto was forgotten
entirely and never mentioned again. Statements like the following
were not unfrequent in his lectures: "I haven't proved this, but
I am as sure as I can be of anything that it must be so. From
this it will follow, etc." At the next lecture it turned out that
what he was so sure of was false. Never mind, he kept on forever
guessing and trying, and presently a wonderful discovery
followed, then another and another. Afterward he would go back
and work it all over again, and surprise us with all sorts of
side lights. He then made another leap in the dark, more
treasures were discovered, and so on forever.--DAVIS, E. W.

                         _Cajori's Teaching and History of
                         Mathematics in the U.S. (Washington,
                         1890), pp. 265-266._


=1036.= I can see him [Sylvester] now, with his white beard and
few locks of gray hair, his forehead wrinkled o'er with thoughts,
writing rapidly his figures and formulae on the board, sometimes
explaining as he wrote, while we, his listeners, caught the
reflected sounds from the board. But stop, something is not
right, he pauses, his hand goes to his forehead to help his
thought, he goes over the work again, emphasizes the leading
points, and finally discovers his difficulty. Perhaps it is some
error in his figures, perhaps an oversight in the reasoning.
Sometimes, however, the difficulty is not elucidated, and then
there is not much to the rest of the lecture. But at the next
lecture we would hear of some new discovery that was the outcome
of that difficulty, and of some article for the Journal, which he
had begun. If a text-book had been taken up at the beginning,
with the intention of following it, that text-book was most
likely doomed to oblivion for the rest of the term, or until the
class had been made listeners to every new thought and principle
that had sprung from the laboratory of his mind, in consequence
of that first difficulty. Other difficulties would soon appear,
so that no text-book could last more than half of the term. In
this way his class listened to almost all of the work that
subsequently appeared in the Journal. It seemed to be the quality
of his mind that he must adhere to one subject. He would think
about it, talk about it to his class, and finally write about it
for the Journal. The merest accident might start him, but once
started, every moment, every thought was given to it, and, as
much as possible, he read what others had done in the same
direction; but this last seemed to be his real point; he could
not read without finding difficulties in the way of understanding
the author. Thus, often his own work reproduced what had been
done by others, and he did not find it out until too late.

A notable example of this is in his theory of cyclotomic
functions, which he had reproduced in several foreign journals,
only to find that he had been greatly anticipated by foreign
authors. It was manifest, one of the critics said, that the
learned professor had not read Kummer's elementary results in the
theory of ideal primes. Yet Professor Smith's report on the
theory of numbers, which contained a full synopsis of Kummer's
theory, was Professor Sylvester's constant companion.

This weakness of Professor Sylvester, in not being able to read
what others had done, is perhaps a concomitant of his peculiar
genius. Other minds could pass over little difficulties and not
be troubled by them, and so go on to a final understanding of
the results of the author. But not so with him. A difficulty,
however small, worried him, and he was sure to have difficulties
until the subject had been worked over in his own way, to
correspond with his own mode of thought. To read the work of
others, meant therefore to him an almost independent development
of it. Like the man whose pleasure in life is to pioneer the way
for society into the forests, his rugged mind could derive
satisfaction only in hewing out its own paths; and only when his
efforts brought him into the uncleared fields of mathematics did
he find his place in the Universe.--HATHAWAY, A. S.

                         _F. Cajori's Teaching and History of
                         Mathematics in the U. S. (Washington,
                         1890), pp. 266-267._


=1037.= Professor Cayley has since informed me that the theorem
about whose origin I was in doubt, will be found in Schlaefli's
"De Eliminatione." This is not the first unconscious plagiarism I
have been guilty of towards this eminent man whose friendship I
am proud to claim. A more glaring case occurs in a note by me in
the "Comptes Rendus," on the twenty-seven straight lines of cubic
surfaces, where I believe I have followed (like one walking in
his sleep), down to the very nomenclature and notation, the
substance of a portion of a paper inserted by Schlaefli in the
"Mathematical Journal," which bears my name as one of the editors
upon the face.--SYLVESTER, J. J.

                         _Philosophical Transactions of the Royal
                         Society (1864), p. 642._


=1038.= He [Sylvester] had one remarkable peculiarity. He seldom
remembered theorems, propositions, etc., but had always to deduce
them when he wished to use them. In this he was the very
antithesis of Cayley, who was thoroughly conversant with
everything that had been done in every branch of mathematics.

I remember once submitting to Sylvester some investigations that
I had been engaged on, and he immediately denied my first
statement, saying that such a proposition had never been heard
of, let alone proved. To his astonishment, I showed him a paper
of his own in which he had proved the proposition; in fact, I
believe the object of his paper had been the very proof which was
so strange to him.--DURFEE, W. P.

                         _F. Cajori's Teaching and History of
                         Mathematics in the U. S. (Washington,
                         1890), p. 268._


=1039.= A short, broad man of tremendous vitality, the physical type
of Hereward, the last of the English, and his brother-in-arms,
Winter, Sylvester's capacious head was ever lost in the highest
cloud-lands of pure mathematics. Often in the dead of night he
would get his favorite pupil, that he might communicate the very
last product of his creative thought. Everything he saw suggested
to him something new in the higher algebra. This transmutation of
everything into new mathematics was a revelation to those who knew
him intimately. They began to do it themselves. His ease and
fertility of invention proved a constant encouragement, while
his contempt for provincial stupidities, such as the American
hieroglyphics for [pi] and _e_, which have even found their way
into Webster's Dictionary, made each young worker apply to himself
the strictest tests.--HALSTED, G. B.

                         _F. Cajori's Teaching and History of
                         Mathematics in the U. S. (Washington,
                         1890), p. 265._


=1040.= Sylvester's writings are flowery and eloquent. He was
able to make the dullest subject bright, fresh and interesting.
His enthusiasm is evident in every line. He would get quite close
up to his subject, so that everything else looked small in
comparison, and for the time would think and make others think
that the world contained no finer matter for contemplation. His
handwriting was bad, and a trouble to his printers. His papers
were finished with difficulty. No sooner was the manuscript in
the editor's hands than alterations, corrections, ameliorations
and generalizations would suggest themselves to his mind, and
every post would carry further directions to the editors and
printers.--MACMAHON. P. A.

                         _Nature, Vol. 55 (1897), p. 494._


=1041.= The enthusiasm of Sylvester for his own work, which manifests
itself here as always, indicates one of his characteristic qualities:
a high degree of _subjectivity_ in his productions and publications.
Sylvester was so fully possessed by the matter which for the time
being engaged his attention, that it appeared to him and was
designated by him as the summit of all that is important, remarkable
and full of future promise. It would excite his phantasy and power
of imagination in even a greater measure than his power of
reflection, so much so that he could never marshal the ability to
master his subject-matter, much less to present it in an orderly
manner.

Considering that he was also somewhat of a poet, it will be easier
to overlook the poetic flights which pervade his writing, often
bombastic, sometimes furnishing apt illustrations; more damaging
is the complete lack of form and orderliness of his publications
and their sketchlike character, ... which must be accredited at
least as much to lack of objectivity as to a superfluity of
ideas. Again, the text is permeated with associated emotional
expressions, bizarre utterances and paradoxes and is everywhere
