
"Ah," said the sweet little voice again, "you had much better let me
out. I am not like those naughty creatures that have stings in their
tails. They are no brothers and sisters of mine, as you would see at
once, if you were only to get a glimpse of me. Come, come, my pretty
Pandora! I am sure you will let me out!"

And, indeed, there was a kind of cheerful witchery in the tone that made
it almost impossible to refuse anything which this little voice asked.
Pandora's heart had insensibly grown lighter at every word that came
from within the box. Epimetheus, too, though still in the corner, had
turned half round, and seemed to be in rather better spirits than
before.

"My dear Epimetheus," cried Pandora, "have you heard this little voice?"

"Yes, to be sure I have," answered he, but in no very good humor as yet.
"And what of it?"

"Shall I lift the lid again?" asked Pandora.

"Just as you please," said Epimetheus. "You have done so much mischief
already that perhaps you may as well do a little more. One other
Trouble, in such a swarm as you have let adrift about the world, can
make no very great difference."

"You might speak a little more kindly!" murmured Pandora, wiping her
eyes.

"Ah, naughty boy!" cried the little voice within the box, in an arch and
laughing tone. "He knows he is longing to see me. Come, my dear Pandora,
lift up the lid. I am in a great hurry to comfort you. Only let me have
some fresh air, and you shall soon see that matters are not quite so
dismal as you think them."

"Epimetheus," exclaimed Pandora, "come what may, I am resolved to open
the box."

"And, as the lid seems very heavy," cried Epimetheus, running across the
room, "I will help you!"

So, with one consent, the two children again lifted the lid. Out flew a
sunny and smiling little personage, and hovered about the room, throwing
a light wherever she went. Have you never made the sunshine dance into
the dark corners by reflecting it from a bit of looking-glass? Well, so
looked the winged cheerfulness of this fairy-like stranger amid the
gloom of the cottage. She flew to Epimetheus, and laid the least touch
of her finger on the inflamed spot where the Trouble had stung him, and
immediately the anguish of it was gone. Then she kissed Pandora on the
forehead, and her hurt was cured likewise.

After performing these good offices, the bright stranger fluttered
sportively over the children's heads, and looked so sweetly at them,
that they both began to think it not so very much amiss to have opened
the box, since, otherwise, their cheery guest must have been kept a
prisoner among those naughty imps with stings in their tails.

"Pray, who are you, beautiful creature?" inquired Pandora.

"I am to be called Hope!" answered the sunshiny figure. "And because I
am such a cheery little body, I was packed into the box to make amends
to the human race for that swarm of ugly Troubles which was destined to
be let loose among them. Never fear! we shall do pretty well, in spite
of them all."

"Your wings are colored like the rainbow!" exclaimed Pandora. "How very
beautiful!"

"Yes, they are like the rainbow," said Hope, "because, glad as my nature
is, I am partly made of tears as well as smiles."

"And will you stay with us," asked Epimetheus, "forever and ever?"

"As long as you need me," said Hope, with her pleasant smile,--"and that
will be as long as you live in the world,--I promise never to desert
you. There may come times and seasons, now and then, when you will think
that I have utterly vanished. But again, and again, and again, when
perhaps you least dream of it, you shall see the glimmer of my wings on
the ceiling of your cottage. Yes, my dear children, and I know
something very good and beautiful that is to be given you hereafter!"

"Oh, tell us," they exclaimed--"tell us what it is!"

"Do not ask me," replied Hope, putting her finger on her rosy mouth.
"But do not despair, even if it should never happen while you live on
this earth. Trust in my promise, for it is true."

"We do trust you!" cried Epimetheus and Pandora, both in one breath.

And so they did; and not only they, but so has everybody trusted Hope,
that has since been alive. And, to tell you the truth, I cannot help
being glad--(though, to be sure, it was an uncommonly naughty thing for
her to do)--but I cannot help being glad that our foolish Pandora peeped
into the box. No doubt--no doubt--the Troubles are still flying about
the world, and have increased in multitude, rather than lessened, and
are a very ugly set of imps, and carry most venomous stings in their
tails. I have felt them already, and expect to feel them more as I grow
older. But then that lovely and lightsome little figure of Hope! What in
the world could we do without her? Hope spiritualizes the earth; Hope
makes it always new; and, even in the earth's best and brightest aspect,
Hope shows it to be only the shadow of an infinite bliss hereafter!



257

        "The Miraculous Pitcher," taken from _A
        Wonder-Book for Girls and Boys_, is Hawthorne's
        version of the Greek myth of Baucis and
        Philemon. The two mysterious visitors are
        Jupiter and Mercury, who, according to the
        Greek myth, visited earth in disguise and were
        entertained by Baucis and Philemon.


THE MIRACULOUS PITCHER

NATHANIEL HAWTHORNE

One evening, in times long ago, old Philemon and his old wife Baucis sat
at their cottage door, enjoying the calm and beautiful sunset. They had
already eaten their frugal supper, and intended now to spend a quiet
hour or two before bedtime. So they talked together about their garden
and their cow, and their bees, and their grape-vine, which clambered
over the cottage-wall, and on which the grapes were beginning to turn
purple. But the rude shouts of children and the fierce barking of dogs,
in the village near at hand, grew louder and louder, until, at last, it
was hardly possible for Baucis and Philemon to hear each other speak.

"Ah, wife," cried Philemon, "I fear some poor traveler is seeking
hospitality among our neighbors yonder, and, instead of giving him food
and lodging, they have set their dogs at him, as their custom is!"

"Well-a-day!" answered old Baucis, "I do wish our neighbors felt a
little more kindness for their fellow-creatures. And only think of
bringing up their children in this naughty way, and patting them on the
head when they fling stones at strangers!"

"Those children will never come to any good," said Philemon, shaking his
white head. "To tell you the truth, wife, I should not wonder if some
terrible thing were to happen to all the people in the village, unless
they mend their manners. But, as for you and me, so long as Providence
affords us a crust of bread, let us be ready to give half to any poor,
homeless stranger that may come along and need it."

"That's right, husband!" said Baucis. "So we will!"

These old folks, you must know, were quite poor, and had to work pretty
hard for a living. Old Philemon toiled diligently in his garden, while
Baucis was always busy with her distaff, or making a little butter and
cheese with their cow's milk, or doing one thing and another about the
cottage. Their food was seldom anything but bread, milk, and vegetables,
with sometimes a portion of honey from their beehive, and now and then a
bunch of grapes, that had ripened against the cottage wall. But they
were two of the kindest old people in the world, and would cheerfully
have gone without their dinners, any day, rather than refuse a slice of
their brown loaf, a cup of nice milk, and a spoonful of honey, to the
weary traveler who might pause before their door. They felt as if such
guests had a sort of holiness, and that they ought, therefore, to treat
them better and more bountifully than their own selves.

Their cottage stood on a rising ground, at some short distance from a
village, which lay in a hollow valley, that was about half a mile in
breadth. This valley, in past ages, when the world was new, had probably
been the bed of a lake. There, fishes had glided to and fro in the
depths, and water-weeds had grown along the margin, and trees and hills
had seen their reflected images in the broad and peaceful mirror. But,
as the waters subsided, men had cultivated the soil, and built houses on
it, so that it was now a fertile spot, and bore no traces of the ancient
lake, except a very small brook, which meandered through the midst of
the village, and supplied the inhabitants with water. The valley had
been dry land so long that oaks had sprung up, and grown great and high,
and perished with old age, and been succeeded by others, as tall and
stately as the first. Never was there a prettier or more fruitful
valley. The very sight of the plenty around them should have made the
inhabitants kind and gentle and ready to show their gratitude to
Providence by doing good to their fellow-creatures.

But, we are sorry to say, the people of this lovely village were not
worthy to dwell in a spot on which Heaven had smiled so beneficently.
They were a very selfish and hard-hearted people, and had no pity for
the poor, nor sympathy with the homeless. They would only have laughed
had anybody told them that human beings owe a debt of love to one
another, because there is no other method of paying the debt of love and
care which all of us owe to Providence. You will hardly believe what I
am going to tell you. These naughty people taught their children to be
no better than themselves, and used to clap their hands, by way of
encouragement, when they saw the little boys and girls run after some
poor stranger, shouting at his heels, and pelting him with stones. They
kept large and fierce dogs, and whenever a traveler ventured to show
himself in the village street, this pack of disagreeable curs scampered
to meet him, barking, snarling, and showing their teeth. Then they would
seize him by his leg, or by his clothes, just as it happened; and if he
were ragged when he came, he was generally a pitiable object before he
had time to run away. This was a very terrible thing to poor travelers,
as you may suppose, especially when they chanced to be sick, or feeble,
or lame, or old. Such persons (if they once knew how badly these unkind
people, and their unkind children and curs, were in the habit of
behaving) would go miles and miles out of their way rather than try to
pass through the village again.

What made the matter seem worse, if possible, was that when rich persons
came in their chariots, or riding on beautiful horses, with their
servants in rich liveries attending on them, nobody could be more civil
and obsequious than the inhabitants of the village. They would take off
their hats, and make the humblest bows you ever saw. If the children
were rude, they were pretty certain to get their ears boxed; and as for
the dogs, if a single cur in the pack presumed to yelp, his master
instantly beat him with a club, and tied him up without any supper. This
would have been all very well, only it proved that the villagers cared
much about the money that a stranger had in his pocket, and nothing
whatever for the human soul, which lives equally in the beggar and the
prince.

So now you can understand why old Philemon spoke so sorrowfully when he
heard the shouts of the children and the barking of the dogs at the
further extremity of the village street. There was a confused din, which
lasted a good while, and seemed to pass quite through the breadth of the
valley.

"I never heard the dogs so loud!" observed the good old man.

"Nor the children so rude!" answered his good old wife.

They sat shaking their heads, one to another, while the noise came
nearer and nearer; until, at the foot of the little eminence on which
their cottage stood, they saw two travelers approaching on foot. Close
behind them came the fierce dogs, snarling at their very heels. A little
farther off, ran a crowd of children, who sent up shrill cries, and
flung stones at the two strangers, with all their might. Once or twice,
the younger of the two men (he was a slender and very active figure)
turned about, and drove back the dogs with a staff which he carried in
his hand. His companion, who was a very tall person, walked calmly
along, as if disdaining to notice either the naughty children or the
pack of curs, whose manners the children seemed to imitate.

Both of the travelers were very humbly clad, and looked as if they might
not have money enough in their pockets to pay for a night's lodging. And
this, I am afraid, was the reason why the villagers had allowed their
children and dogs to treat them so rudely.

"Come, wife," said Philemon to Baucis, "let us go and meet these poor
people. No doubt they feel almost too heavy-hearted to climb the hill."

"Go you and meet them," answered Baucis, "while I make haste within
doors and see whether we can get them anything for supper. A comfortable
bowl of bread and milk would do wonders towards raising their spirits."

Accordingly, she hastened into the cottage. Philemon, on his part, went
forward and extended his hand with so hospitable an aspect that there
was no need of saying, what nevertheless he did say, in the heartiest
tone imaginable,--

"Welcome, strangers! welcome!"

"Thank you!" replied the younger of the two, in a lively kind of way,
notwithstanding his weariness and trouble. "This is quite another
greeting than we have met with yonder, in the village. Pray, why do you
live in such a bad neighborhood?"

"Ah," observed old Philemon, with a quiet and benign smile, "Providence
put me here, I hope, among other reasons, in order that I may make you
what amends I can for the inhospitality of my neighbors."

"Well said, old father!" said the traveler, laughing; "and, if the truth
must be told, my companion and myself need some amends. Those children
(the little rascals!) have bespattered us finely with their mud-balls;
and one of the curs has torn my cloak, which was ragged enough already.
But I took him across the muzzle with my staff; and I think you may have
heard him yelp, even thus far off."

Philemon was glad to see him in such good spirits; nor, indeed, would
you have fancied, by the traveler's look and manner, that he was weary
with a long day's journey, besides being disheartened by rough treatment
at the end of it. He was dressed in rather an odd way, with a sort of
cap on his head, the brim of which stuck out over both ears. Though it
was a summer evening, he wore a cloak, which he kept wrapt closely about
him, perhaps because his under garments were shabby. Philemon perceived,
too, that he had on a singular pair of shoes; but, as it was now growing
dusk, and as the old man's eyesight was none the sharpest, he could not
precisely tell in what the strangeness consisted. One thing, certainly,
seemed queer. The traveler was so wonderfully light and active, that it
appeared as if his feet sometimes rose from the ground of their own
accord, or could only be kept down by an effort.

"I used to be light-footed, in my youth," said Philemon to the traveler.
"But I always found my feet grow heavier towards nightfall."

"There is nothing like a good staff to help one along," answered the
stranger; "and I happen to have an excellent one, as you see."

This staff, in fact, was the oddest-looking staff that Philemon had ever
beheld. It was made of olive-wood, and had something like a little pair
of wings near the top. Two snakes, carved in the wood, were represented
as twining themselves about the staff, and were so very skillfully
executed that old Philemon (whose eyes, you know, were getting rather
dim) almost thought them alive, and that he could see them wriggling and
twisting.

"A curious piece of work, sure enough!" said he. "A staff with wings! It
would be an excellent kind of stick for a little boy to ride astride
of!"

By this time, Philemon and his two guests had reached the cottage door.

"Friends," said the old man, "sit down and rest yourselves here on this
bench. My good wife Baucis has gone to see what you can have for supper.
We are poor folks; but you shall be welcome to whatever we have in the
cupboard."

The younger stranger threw himself carelessly on the bench, letting his
staff fall as he did so. And here happened something rather marvelous,
though trifling enough, too. The staff seemed to get up from the ground
of its own accord, and, spreading its little pair of wings, it half
hopped, half flew, and leaned itself against the wall of the cottage.
There it stood quite still, except that the snakes continued to wriggle.
But, in my private opinion, old Philemon's eyesight had been playing him
tricks again.

Before he could ask any questions, the elder stranger drew his attention
from the wonderful staff by speaking to him.

"Was there not," asked the stranger, in a remarkably deep tone of voice,
"a lake, in very ancient times, covering the spot where now stands
yonder village?"

"Not in my day, friend," answered Philemon; "and yet I am an old man, as
you see. There were always the fields and meadows, just as they are now,
and the old trees, and the little stream murmuring through the midst of
the valley. My father, nor his father before him, ever saw it otherwise,
so far as I know; and doubtless it will still be the same when old
Philemon shall be gone and forgotten!"

"That is more than can be safely foretold," observed the stranger; and
there was something very stern in his deep voice. He shook his head,
too, so that his dark and heavy curls were shaken with the movement.
"Since the inhabitants of yonder village have forgotten the affections
and sympathies of their nature, it were better that the lake should be
rippling over their dwellings again!"

The traveler looked so stern that Philemon was really almost frightened;
the more so, that, at his frown, the twilight seemed suddenly to grow
darker, and that, when he shook his head, there was a roll as of thunder
in the air.

But, in a moment afterwards, the stranger's face became so kindly and
mild that the old man quite forgot his terror. Nevertheless, he could
not help feeling that this elder traveler must be no ordinary personage,
although he happened now to be attired so humbly, and to be journeying
on foot. Not that Philemon fancied him a prince in disguise, or any
character of that sort; but rather some exceedingly wise man, who went
about the world in this poor garb, despising wealth and all worldly
objects, and seeking everywhere to add a mite to his wisdom. This idea
appeared the more probable, because, when Philemon raised his eyes to
the stranger's face, he seemed to see more thought there, in one look,
than he could have studied out in a lifetime.

While Baucis was getting the supper, the travelers both began to talk
very sociably with Philemon. The younger, indeed, was extremely
loquacious, and made such shrewd and witty remarks, that the good old
man continually burst out a-laughing, and pronounced him the merriest
fellow whom he had seen for many a day.

"Pray, my young friend," said he, as they grew familiar together, "what
may I call your name?"

"Why, I am very nimble, as you see," answered the traveler. "So, if you
call me Quicksilver, the name will fit tolerably well."

"Quicksilver? Quicksilver!" repeated Philemon, looking in the traveler's
face, to see if he were making fun of him. "It is a very odd name! And
your companion there? Has he as strange a one?"

"You must ask the thunder to tell you it!" replied Quicksilver, putting
on a mysterious look. "No other voice is loud enough."

This remark, whether it were serious or in jest, might have caused
Philemon to conceive a very great awe of the elder stranger, if, on
venturing to gaze at him, he had not beheld so much beneficence in his
visage. But, undoubtedly, here was the grandest figure that ever sat so
humbly beside a cottage door. When the stranger conversed, it was with
gravity, and in such a way that Philemon felt irresistibly moved to tell
him everything which he had most at heart. This is always the feeling
that people have, when they meet with any one wise enough to comprehend
all their good and evil, and to despise not a tittle of it.

But Philemon, simple and kind-hearted old man that he was, had not many
secrets to disclose. He talked, however, quite garrulously, about the
events of his past life, in the whole course of which he had never been
a score of miles from this very spot. His wife Baucis and himself had
dwelt in the cottage from their youth upward, earning their bread by
honest labor, always poor, but still contented. He told what excellent
butter and cheese Baucis made and how nice were the vegetables which he
raised in his garden. He said, too, that, because they loved one another
so very much, it was the wish of both that death might not separate
them, but that they should die, as they had lived, together.

As the stranger listened, a smile beamed over his countenance, and made
its expression as sweet as it was grand.

"You are a good old man," said he to Philemon, "and you have a good old
wife to be your helpmeet. It is fit that your wish be granted."

And it seemed to Philemon, just then, as if the sunset clouds threw up a
bright flash from the west, and kindled a sudden light in the sky.

Baucis had now got supper ready, and coming to the door, began to make
apologies for the poor fare which she was forced to set before her
guests.

"Had we known you were coming," said she, "my good man and myself would
have gone without a morsel, rather than you should lack a better supper.
But I took the most part of to-day's milk to make cheese; and our last
loaf is already half eaten. Ah me! I never feel the sorrow of being
poor, save when a poor traveler knocks at our door."

"All will be very well; do not trouble yourself, my good dame," replied
the elder stranger, kindly. "An honest hearty welcome to a guest works
miracles with the fare, and is capable of turning the coarsest food to
nectar and ambrosia."

"A welcome you shall have," cried Baucis, "and likewise a little honey
that we happen to have left, and a bunch of purple grapes besides."

"Why, Mother Baucis, it is a feast!" exclaimed Quicksilver, laughing,
"an absolute feast! And you shall see how bravely I will play my part at
it! I think I never felt hungrier in my life."

"Mercy on us!" whispered Baucis to her husband. "If the young man has
such a terrible appetite, I am afraid there will not be half enough
supper!"

They all went into the cottage.

And now, my little auditors, shall I tell you something that will make
you open your eyes very wide? It is really one of the oddest
circumstances in the whole story. Quicksilver's staff, you recollect,
had set itself up against the wall of the cottage. Well, when its master
entered the door, leaving this wonderful staff behind, what should it do
but immediately spread its little wings, and go hopping and fluttering
up the doorsteps! Tap, tap, went the staff, on the kitchen floor; nor
did it rest until it had stood itself on end, with the greatest gravity
and decorum, beside Quicksilver's chair. Old Philemon, however, as well
as his wife, was so taken up in attending to their guests, that no
notice was given to what the staff had been about.

As Baucis had said, there was but a scanty supper for two hungry
travelers. In the middle of the table was the remnant of a brown loaf,
with a piece of cheese on one side of it, and a dish of honeycomb on the
other. There was a pretty good bunch of grapes for each of the guests.
A moderately sized earthen pitcher, nearly full of milk, stood at a
corner of the board; and when Baucis had filled two bowls, and set them
before the strangers, only a little milk remained in the bottom of the
pitcher. Alas! it is a very sad business, when a bountiful heart finds
itself pinched and squeezed among narrow circumstances. Poor Baucis kept
wishing that she might starve for a week to come, if it were possible,
by so doing, to provide these hungry folks a more plentiful supper.

And, since the supper was so exceedingly small, she could not help
wishing that their appetites had not been quite so large. Why, at their
very first sitting down, the travelers both drank off all the milk in
their two bowls, at a draught.

"A little more milk, kind Mother Baucis, if you please," said
Quicksilver. "The day has been hot, and I am very much athirst."

"Now, my dear people," answered Baucis, in great confusion, "I am so
sorry and ashamed! But the truth is, there is hardly a drop more milk in
the pitcher. O husband! husband! why didn't we go without our supper?"

"Why, it appears to me," cried Quicksilver, starting up from the table
and taking the pitcher by the handle, "it really appears to me that
matters are not quite so bad as you represent them. Here is certainly
more milk in the pitcher."

So saying, and to the vast astonishment of Baucis, he proceeded to fill,
not only his own bowl, but his companion's likewise, from the pitcher,
that was supposed to be almost empty. The good woman could scarcely
believe her eyes. She had certainly poured out nearly all the milk, and
had peeped in afterwards, and seen the bottom of the pitcher, as she set
it down upon the table.

"But I am old," thought Baucis to herself, "and apt to be forgetful. I
suppose I must have made a mistake. At all events, the pitcher cannot
help being empty now, after filling the bowls twice over."

"What excellent milk!" observed Quicksilver, after quaffing the contents
of the second bowl. "Excuse me, my kind hostess, but I must really ask
you for a little more."

Now Baucis had seen, as plainly as she could see anything, that
Quicksilver had turned the pitcher upside down, and consequently had
poured out every drop of milk, in filling the last bowl. Of course,
there could not possibly be any left. However, in order to let him know
precisely how the case was, she lifted the pitcher, and made a gesture
as if pouring milk into Quicksilver's bowl, but without the remotest
idea that any milk would stream forth. What was her surprise, therefore,
when such an abundant cascade fell bubbling into the bowl, that it was
immediately filled to the brim, and overflowed upon the table! The two
snakes that were twisted about Quicksilver's staff (but neither Baucis
nor Philemon happened to observe this circumstance) stretched out their
heads, and began to lap up the spilt milk.

And then what a delicious fragrance the milk had! It seemed as if
Philemon's only cow must have pastured, that day, on the richest herbage
that could be found anywhere in the world. I only wish that each of you,
my beloved little souls, could have a bowl of such nice milk at
supper-time!

"And now a slice of your brown loaf, Mother Baucis," said Quicksilver,
"and a little of that honey!"

Baucis cut him a slice, accordingly; and though the loaf, when she and
her husband ate of it, had been rather too dry and crusty to be
palatable, it was now as light and moist as if but a few hours out of
the oven. Tasting a crumb, which had fallen on the table, she found it
more delicious than bread ever was before, and could hardly believe that
it was a loaf of her own kneading and baking. Yet, what other loaf could
it possibly be?

But, oh, the honey! I may just as well let it alone, without trying to
describe how exquisitely it smelt and looked. Its color was that of the
purest and most transparent gold; and it had the odor of a thousand
flowers; but of such flowers as never grew in an earthly garden, and to
seek which the bees must have flown high above the clouds. The wonder
is, that, after alighting on a flower-bed of so delicious fragrance and
immortal bloom, they should have been content to fly down again to their
hive in Philemon's garden. Never was such honey tasted, seen, or smelt.
The perfume floated around the kitchen, and made it so delightful, that,
had you closed your eyes, you would instantly have forgotten the low
ceiling and smoky walls, and have fancied yourself in an arbor, with
celestial honeysuckles creeping over it.

Although good Mother Baucis was a simple old dame, she could not but
think that there was something rather out of the common way in all that
had been going on. So, after helping the guests to bread and honey, and
laying a bunch of grapes by each of their plates, she sat down by
Philemon, and told him what she had seen, in a whisper.

"Did you ever hear the like?" asked she.

"No, I never did," answered Philemon, with a smile. "And I rather think,
my dear old wife, you have been walking about in a sort of a dream. If I
had poured out the milk, I should have seen through the business at
once. There happened to be a little more in the pitcher than you
thought,--that is all."

"Ah, husband," said Baucis, "say what you will, these are very uncommon
people."

"Well, well," replied Philemon, still smiling, "perhaps they are. They
certainly do look as if they had seen better days; and I am heartily
glad to see them making so comfortable a supper."

Each of the guests had now taken his bunch of grapes upon his plate.
Baucis (who rubbed her eyes, in order to see the more clearly) was of
opinion that the clusters had grown larger and richer, and that each
separate grape seemed to be on the point of bursting with ripe juice. It
was entirely a mystery to her how such grapes could ever have been
produced from the old stunted vine that climbed against the cottage
wall.

"Very admirable grapes, these!" observed Quicksilver, as he swallowed
one after another, without apparently diminishing his cluster. "Pray, my
good host, whence did you gather them?"

"From my own vine," answered Philemon. "You may see one of its branches
twisting across the window, yonder. But wife and I never thought the
grapes very fine ones."

"I never tasted better," said the guest. "Another cup of this delicious
milk, if you please, and I shall then have supped better than a
prince."

This time, old Philemon bestirred himself, and took up the pitcher; for
he was curious to discover whether there was any reality in the marvels
which Baucis had whispered to him. He knew that his good old wife was
incapable of falsehood, and that she was seldom mistaken in what she
supposed to be true; but this was so very singular a case that he wanted
to see into it with his own eyes. On taking up the pitcher, therefore,
he slyly peeped into it, and was fully satisfied that it contained not
so much as a single drop. All at once, however, he beheld a little white
fountain, which gushed up from the bottom of the pitcher, and speedily
filled it to the brim with foaming and deliciously fragrant milk. It was
lucky that Philemon, in his surprise, did not drop the miraculous
pitcher from his hand.

"Who are ye, wonder-working strangers?" cried he, even more bewildered
than his wife had been.

"Your guests, my good Philemon, and your friends," replied the elder
traveler, in his mild, deep voice, that had something at once sweet and
awe-inspiring in it. "Give me likewise a cup of the milk; and may your
pitcher never be empty for kind Baucis and yourself, any more than for
the needy wayfarer!"

The supper being now over, the strangers requested to be shown to their
place of repose. The old people would gladly have talked with them a
little longer, and have expressed the wonder which they felt, and their
delight at finding the poor and meager supper prove so much better and
more abundant than they hoped. But the elder traveler had inspired them
with such reverence that they dared not ask him any questions. And when
Philemon drew Quicksilver aside, and inquired how under the sun a
fountain of milk could have got into an old earthen pitcher, this latter
personage pointed to his staff.

"There is the whole mystery of the affair," quoth Quicksilver; "and if
you can make it out, I'll thank you to let me know. I can't tell what to
make of my staff. It is always playing such odd tricks as this;
sometimes getting me a supper, and quite as often stealing it away. If I
had any faith in such nonsense, I should say the stick was bewitched!"

He said no more, but looked so slyly in their faces, that they rather
fancied he was laughing at them. The magic staff went hopping at his
heels, as Quicksilver quitted the room. When left alone, the good old
couple spent some little time in conversation about the events of the
evening, and then lay down on the floor, and fell fast asleep. They had
given up their sleeping-room to the guests, and had no other bed for
themselves, save these planks, which I wish had been as soft as their
own hearts.

The old man and his wife were stirring, betimes, in the morning, and the
strangers likewise arose with the sun, and made their preparations to
depart. Philemon hospitably entreated them to remain a little longer,
until Baucis could milk the cow, and bake a cake upon the hearth, and,
perhaps, find them a few fresh eggs, for breakfast. The guests, however,
seemed to think it better to accomplish a good part of their journey
before the heat of the day should come on. They, therefore, persisted in
setting out immediately, but asked Philemon and Baucis to walk forth
with them a short distance, and show them the road which they were to
take.

So they all four issued from the cottage, chatting together like old
friends. It was very remarkable, indeed, how familiar the old couple
insensibly grew with the elder traveler, and how their good and simple
spirits melted into his, even as two drops of water would melt into the
illimitable ocean. And as for Quicksilver, with his keen, quick,
laughing wits, he appeared to discover every little thought that but
peeped into their minds, before they suspected it themselves. They
sometimes wished, it is true, that he had not been quite so
quick-witted, and also that he would fling away his staff, which looked
so mysteriously mischievous, with the snakes always writhing about it.
But then, again, Quicksilver showed himself so very good-humored, that
they would have been rejoiced to keep him in their cottage, staff,
snakes, and all, every day, and the whole day long.

"Ah, me! Well-a-day!" exclaimed Philemon, when they had walked a little
way from their door. "If our neighbors only knew what a blessed thing it
is to show hospitality to strangers, they would tie up all their dogs,
and never allow their children to fling another stone."

"It is a sin and shame for them to behave so,--that it is!" cried good
old Baucis, vehemently. "And I mean to go this very day and tell some of
them what naughty people they are!"

"I fear," remarked Quicksilver, slyly smiling, "that you will find none
of them at home."

The elder traveler's brow, just then, assumed such a grave, stern, and
awful grandeur, yet serene withal, that neither Baucis nor Philemon
dared to speak a word. They gazed reverently into his face, as if they
had been gazing at the sky.

"When men do not feel towards the humblest stranger as if he were a
brother," said the traveler, in tones so deep they sounded like those of
an organ, "they are unworthy to exist on earth, which was created as the
abode of a great human brotherhood!"

"And, by the by, my dear old people," cried Quicksilver, with the
liveliest look of fun and mischief in his eyes, "where is this same
village that you talk about? On which side of us does it lie? Methinks I
do not see it hereabouts."

Philemon and his wife turned towards the valley, where, at sunset, only
the day before, they had seen the meadows, the houses, the gardens, the
clumps of trees, the wide, green-margined street, with children playing
in it, and all the tokens of business, enjoyment, and prosperity. But
what was their astonishment! There was no longer any appearance of a
village! Even the fertile vale, in the hollow of which it lay, had
ceased to have existence. In its stead, they beheld the broad, blue
surface of a lake, which filled the great basin of the valley from brim
to brim, and reflected the surrounding hills in its bosom, with as
tranquil an image as if it had been there ever since the creation of the
world. For an instant, the lake remained perfectly smooth. Then, a
little breeze sprang up, and caused the water to dance, glitter, and
sparkle in the early sunbeams, and to dash, with a pleasant rippling
murmur, against the hither shore.

The lake seemed so strangely familiar, that the old couple were greatly
perplexed, and felt as if they could only have been dreaming about a
village having lain there. But, the next moment, they remembered the
vanished dwellings, and the faces and characters of the inhabitants,
far too distinctly for a dream. The village had been there yesterday,
and now was gone!

"Alas!" cried these kind-hearted old people, "what has become of our
poor neighbors!"

"They exist no longer as men and women," said the elder traveler, in his
grand and deep voice, while a roll of thunder seemed to echo it at a
distance. "There was neither use nor beauty in such a life as theirs;
for they never softened or sweetened the hard lot of mortality by the
exercise of kindly affections between man and man. They retained no
image of the better life in their bosoms: therefore, the lake, that was
of old, has spread itself forth again, to reflect the sky!"

"And as for those foolish people," said Quicksilver, with his
mischievous smile, "they are all transformed to fishes. There needed but
little change, for they were already a scaly set of rascals, and the
coldest-blooded beings in existence. So, kind Mother Baucis, whenever
you or your husband have an appetite for a dish of broiled trout, he can
throw in a line, and pull out half a dozen of your old neighbors!"

"Ah," cried Baucis, shuddering, "I would not, for the world, put one of
them on the gridiron!"

"No," added Philemon, making a wry face, "we could never relish them!"

"As for you, good Philemon," continued the elder traveler,--"and you,
kind Baucis,--you, with your scanty means, have mingled so much
heartfelt hospitality with your entertainment of the homeless stranger,
that the milk became an inexhaustible fount of nectar, and the brown
loaf and the honey were ambrosia. Thus, the divinities have feasted, at
your board, off the same viands that supply their banquets on Olympus.
You have done well, my dear old friends. Wherefore, request whatever
favor you have most at heart, and it is granted."

Philemon and Baucis looked at one another, and then,--I know not which
of the two it was who spoke, but that one uttered the desire of both
their hearts.

"Let us live together, while we live, and leave the world at the same
instant, when we die! For we have always loved one another!"

"Be it so!" replied the stranger, with majestic kindness. "Now, look
towards your cottage!"

They did so. But what was their surprise on beholding a tall edifice of
white marble, with a wide-open portal, occupying the spot where their
humble residence had so lately stood!

"There is your home," said the stranger, beneficently smiling on them
both. "Exercise your hospitality in yonder palace as freely as in the
poor hovel to which you welcomed us last evening."

The old folks fell on their knees to thank him; but, behold! neither he
nor Quicksilver was there.

So Philemon and Baucis took up their residence in the marble palace, and
spent their time, with vast satisfaction to themselves, in making
everybody jolly and comfortable who happened to pass that way. The
milk-pitcher, I must not forget to say, retained its marvelous quality
of being never empty, when it was desirable to have it full. Whenever an
honest, good-humored, and free-hearted guest took a draught from this
pitcher, he invariably found it the sweetest and most invigorating fluid
that ever ran down his throat. But, if a cross and disagreeable
curmudgeon happened to sip, he was pretty certain to twist his visage
into a hard knot, and pronounce it a pitcher of sour milk!

Thus the old couple lived in their palace a great, great while, and grew
older and older, and very old indeed. At length, however, there came a
summer morning when Philemon and Baucis failed to make their appearance,
as on other mornings, with one hospitable smile overspreading both their
pleasant faces, to invite the guests of over-night to breakfast. The
guests searched everywhere, from top to bottom of the spacious palace,
and all to no purpose. But, after a great deal of perplexity, they
espied, in front of the portal, two venerable trees, which nobody could
remember to have seen there the day before. Yet there they stood, with
their roots fastened deep into the soil, and a huge breadth of foliage
overshadowing the whole front of the edifice. One was an oak, and the
other a linden-tree. Their boughs--it was strange and beautiful to
see--were intertwined together, and embraced one another, so that each
tree seemed to live in the other's bosom, much more than in its own.

While the guests were marveling how these trees, that must have required
at least a century to grow, could have come to be so tall and venerable
in a single night, a breeze sprang up, and set their intermingled boughs
astir. And then there was a deep, broad murmur in the air, as if the two
mysterious trees were speaking.

"I am old Philemon!" murmured the oak.

"I am old Baucis!" murmured the linden-tree.

But, as the breeze grew stronger, the trees both spoke at
once,--"Philemon! Baucis! Baucis! Philemon!"--as if one were both and
both were one, and talking together in the depths of their mutual heart.
It was plain enough to perceive that the good old couple had renewed
their age, and were now to spend a quiet and delightful hundred years or
so, Philemon as an oak, and Baucis as a linden-tree. And oh, what a
hospitable shade did they fling around them! Whenever a wayfarer paused
beneath it, he heard a pleasant whisper of the leaves above his head,
and wondered how the sound should so much resemble words like these:--

"Welcome, welcome, dear traveler, welcome!"

And some kind soul, that knew what would have pleased old Baucis and old
Philemon best, built a circular seat around both their trunks, where,
for a great while afterwards, the weary, and the hungry, and the thirsty
used to repose themselves, and quaff milk abundantly out of the
miraculous pitcher.

And I wish, for all our sakes, that we had the pitcher here now!



258

        One of the very satisfactory attempts to retell
        the classic myths for young readers is to be
        found in _Gods and Heroes_ by R. E. Francillon.
        The stories are brought together into a "single
        _saga_, free from inconsistencies and
        contradictions." This gives the book all the
        charm of a single story made of many dramatic
        episodes. Francillon's version of the familiar
        tale of Narcissus and Echo follows by
        permission of the publishers. (Copyright. Ginn
        & Co., Boston.)


THE NARCISSUS

R. E. FRANCILLON

There was a very beautiful nymph named Echo, who had never, in all her
life, seen anybody handsomer than the god Pan. You have read that Pan
was the chief of all the Satyrs, and what hideous monsters the Satyrs
were. So, when Pan made love to her, she very naturally kept him at a
distance: and, as she supposed him to be no worse-looking than the rest
of the world, she made up her mind to have nothing to do with love or
lovemaking, and was quite content to ramble about the woods all alone.

But one day, to her surprise, she happened to meet with a young man who
was as different from Pan as any creature could be. Instead of having a
goat's legs and long hairy arms, he was as graceful as Apollo himself:
no horns grew out of his forehead, and his ears were not long, pointed,
and covered with hair, but just like Echo's own. And he was just as
beautiful in face as he was graceful in form. I doubt if Echo would have
thought even Apollo himself so beautiful.

The nymphs were rather shy, and Echo was the very shyest of them all.
But she admired him so much she could not leave the spot, and at last
she even plucked up courage enough to ask him, "What is the name of the
most beautiful being in the whole world?"

"Whom do you mean?" asked he. "Yourself? If you want to know your own
name, you can tell it better than I can."

"No," said Echo, "I don't mean myself. I mean _you_. What is _your_
name?"

"My name is Narcissus," said he. "But as for my being beautiful--that is
absurd."

"Narcissus!" repeated Echo to herself. "It is a beautiful name. Which of
the nymphs have you come to meet here in these woods all alone? She is
lucky--whoever she may be."

"I have come to meet nobody," said Narcissus. "But--am I really so
beautiful? I have often been told so by other girls, of course; but
really it is more than I can quite believe."

"And you don't care for any of those girls?"

"Why, you see," said Narcissus, "when all the girls one knows call one
beautiful, there's no reason why I should care for one more than
another. They all seem alike when they are all always saying just the
same thing. Ah! I do wish I could see myself, so that I could tell if it
was really true. I would marry the girl who could give me the wish of my
heart--to see myself as other people see me. But as nobody can make me
do that, why, I suppose I shall get on very well without marrying
anybody at all."

Looking-glasses had not been invented in those days, so that Narcissus
had really never seen even so much of himself as his chin.

"What!" cried Echo, full of hope and joy; "if I make you see your own
face, you will marry _me_?"

"I said so," said he. "And of course what I say I'll do, I'll do."

"Then--come with me!"

Echo took him by the hand and led him to the edge of a little lake in
the middle of the wood, full of clear water.

"Kneel down, Narcissus," said she, "and bend your eyes over the
waterside. That lake is the mirror where Diana comes every morning to
dress her hair, and in which, every night, the moon and the stars behold
themselves. Look into that water, and see what manner of man you are!"

Narcissus kneeled down and looked into the lake. And, better than in any
common looking-glass, he saw the reflected image of his own face--and he
looked, and looked, and could not take his eyes away.

But Echo at last grew tired of waiting. "Have you forgotten what you
promised me?" asked she. "Are you content now? Do you see now that what
I told you is true?"

He lifted his eyes at last. "Oh, beautiful creature that I am!" said he.
"I am indeed the most divine creature in the whole wide world. I love
myself madly. Go away. I want to be with my beautiful image, with
myself, all alone. I can't marry you. I shall never love anybody but
myself for the rest of my days." And he kneeled down and gazed at
himself once more, while poor Echo had to go weeping away.

Narcissus had spoken truly. He loved himself and his own face so much
that he could think of nothing else: he spent all his days and nights by
the lake, and never took his eyes away. But unluckily his image, which
was only a shadow in the water, could not love him back again. And so he
pined away until he died. And when his friends came to look for his
body, they found nothing but a flower, into which his soul had turned.
So they called it the Narcissus, and we call it so still. And yet I
don't know that it is a particularly conceited or selfish flower.

As for poor Echo, she pined away too. She faded and faded until nothing
was left of her but her voice. There are many places where she can even
now be heard. And she still has the same trick of saying to vain and
foolish people whatever they say to themselves, or whatever they would
like best to hear said to them. If you go where Echo is, and call out
loudly, "I am beautiful!"--she will echo your very words.



259

        "The Apple of Discord" is also taken, by
        permission of the publishers, from Francillon's
        _Gods and Heroes_. It is the story of how the
        world's first great war was brought about.
        Teachers who wish to use some of the stories
        from Homer's _Iliad_ might well follow this
        story with some selected episodes from that
        work. The prose translation of the _Iliad_ by
        Lang, Leaf, and Myers is the most satisfactory.
        Of versions adapted for children, Church's
        _Story of the Iliad_ has long been a favorite.


THE APPLE OF DISCORD

R. E. FRANCILLON


Never was such a wedding-feast known as that of Peleus and Thetis. And
no wonder; for Peleus was King of Thessaly, and Thetis was a
goddess--the goddess who keeps the gates of the West, and throws them
open for the chariot of the Sun to pass through when its day's journey
is done.

Not only all the neighboring kings and queens came to the feast, but the
gods and goddesses besides, bringing splendid presents to the bride and
bridegroom. Only one goddess was not there, because she had not been
invited; and she had not been invited for the best of all reasons. Her
name was Ate, which means Mischief; and wherever she went she caused
quarreling and confusion. Jupiter had turned her out of heaven for
setting even the gods by the ears; and ever since then she had been
wandering about the earth, making mischief, for they would not have her
even in Hades.

"So they won't have _Me_ at their feast!" she said to herself, when she
heard the sound of the merriment to which she had not been bidden. "Very
well; they shall be sorry. I see a way to make a bigger piece of
mischief than ever was known."

So she took a golden apple, wrote some words upon it, and, keeping
herself out of sight, threw it into the very middle of the feasters,
just when they were most merry.

Nobody saw where the apple came from; but of course they supposed it had
been thrown among them for frolic; and one of the guests, taking it up,
read aloud the words written on it. The words were:

                            "FOR THE MOST BEAUTIFUL!"

--nothing more.

"What a handsome present somebody has sent me!" said Juno, holding out
her hand for the apple.

"Sent _you_?" asked Diana. "What an odd mistake, to be sure! Don't you
see it is for the most beautiful? I will thank you to hand me what is so
clearly intended for _Me_."

"You seem to forget _I_ am present!" said Vesta, making a snatch at the
apple.

"Not at all!" said Ceres; "only I happen to be here, too. And who doubts
that where I am there is the most beautiful?"

"Except where _I_ am," said Proserpine.

"What folly is all this!" said Minerva, the wise. "Wisdom is the only
true beauty; and everybody knows that I am the wisest of you all."

"But it's for the _most_ beautiful!" said Venus. "The idea of its being
for anybody but _Me_!"

Then every nymph and goddess present, and even every woman, put in her
claim, until from claiming and disputing it grew to arguing and
wrangling and downright quarreling: insults flew about, until the
merriment grew into an angry din, the like of which had never been
heard. But as it became clear that it was impossible for everybody to be
the most beautiful, the claimants gradually settled down into three
parties--some taking the side of Venus, others of Juno, others of
Minerva.

"We shall never settle it among ourselves," said one, when all were
fairly out of breath with quarreling. "Let the gods decide."

For the gods had been silent all the while; and now they looked at one
another in dismay at such an appeal. Jupiter, in his heart, thought
Venus the most beautiful; but how could he dare decide against either
his wife Juno or his daughter Minerva? Neptune hated Minerva on account
of their old quarrel; but it was awkward to choose between his daughter
Venus and his sister Juno, of whose temper he, as well as Jupiter, stood
in awe. Mars was ready enough to vote for Venus; but then he was afraid
of a scandal. And so with all the gods--not one was bold enough to
decide on such a terrible question as the beauty of three rival
goddesses who were ready to tear out each other's eyes. For Juno was
looking like a thundercloud, and Minerva like lightning, and Venus like
a smiling but treacherous sea.

"I have it," said Jupiter at last. "Men are better judges of beauty than
the gods are, who never see anything but its perfection. King Priam of
Troy has a son named Paris, whose judgment as a critic I would take even
before my own. I propose that you, Juno, and you, Minerva, and you,
Venus, shall go together before Paris and submit yourselves to his
decision, whatever it may be."

And so it was settled, for each of the three goddesses was equally sure
that, whoever the judge might be, the golden apple was safe to be hers.
The quarrel came to an end, and the feast ended pleasantly; but Ate, who
had been watching and listening, laughed in her sleeve.

Troy, where King Priam reigned, was a great and ancient city on the
shore of Asia: it was a sacred city, whose walls had been built by
Neptune, and it possessed the Palladium, the image of Minerva, which
kept it from all harm. Priam--who had been the friend of Hercules--and
his wife Hecuba had many sons and daughters, all brave and noble princes
and beautiful princesses; and of his sons, while the bravest and noblest
was his first-born, Hector, the handsomest and most amiable was Paris,
whom Jupiter had appointed to be the judge of beauty.

Paris, unlike his brothers, cared nothing for affairs of State, but
lived as a shepherd upon Mount Ida with his wife Oenone, a nymph of that
mountain, in perfect happiness and peace, loved and honored by the whole
country round, which had given him the name of "Alexander," which means
"The Helper." One would think that if anybody was safe from the mischief
of Ate, it was he.

But one day, while he was watching his flocks and thinking of Oenone,
there came to him what he took for three beautiful women--the most
beautiful he had ever seen. Yet something told him they were more than
mere women, or even than Oreads, before the tallest said--

"There is debate in Olympus which is the most beautiful of us three, and
Jupiter has appointed you to be the judge between us. I am Juno, the
queen of gods and men, and if you decide for me, I will make you king of
the whole world."

"And I," said the second, "am Minerva, and you shall know everything in
the whole universe if you decide for me."

"But I," said the third, "am Venus, who can give neither wisdom nor
power; but if you decide for me, I will give you the love of the most
beautiful woman that ever was or ever will be born."

Paris looked from one to the other, wondering to which he should award
the golden apple, the prize of beauty. He did not care for power; he
would be quite content to rule his sheep, and even that was not always
easy. Nor did he care for wisdom or knowledge: he had enough for all his
needs. Nor ought he to have desired any love but Oenone's. But then
Venus was really the most beautiful of all the goddesses--the very
goddess of beauty; no mortal could refuse anything she asked him, so
great was her charm. So he took the apple and placed it in the hands of
Venus without a word, while Juno and Minerva departed in a state of
wrath with Paris, Venus, and each other, which made Ate laugh to herself
more than ever.

Now the most beautiful woman in the whole world was Helen, step-daughter
of King Tyndarus of Sparta, and sister of Castor and Pollux: neither
before her nor after her has there been any to compare with her for
beauty. Thirty-one of the noblest princes in Greece came to her father's
Court at the same time to seek her in marriage, so that Tyndarus knew
not what to do, seeing that, whomsoever he chose for his son-in-law, he
would make thirty powerful enemies. The most famous among them were
Ulysses, King of the island of Ithaca; Diomed, King of Aetolia; Ajax,
King of Salamis, the bravest and strongest man in Greece; his brother
Teucer; Philoctetes, the friend of Hercules; and Menelaus, King of
Sparta. At last, as there was no other way of deciding among them, an
entirely new idea occurred to Ulysses--namely, that Helen should be
allowed to choose her own husband herself, and that, before she chose,
all the rival suitors should make a great and solemn oath to approve her
choice, and to defend her and her husband against all enemies
thenceforth and forever. This oath they all took loyally and with one
accord, and Helen chose Menelaus, King of Sparta, who married her with
great rejoicing, and took her away to his kingdom.

And all would have gone well but for that wretched apple. For Venus was
faithful to her promise that the most beautiful of all women should be
the wife of Paris: and so Menelaus, returning from a journey, found that
a Trojan prince had visited his Court during his absence, and had gone
away, taking Helen with him to Troy. This Trojan prince was Paris, who,
seeing Helen, had forgotten Oenone, and could think of nothing but her
whom Venus had given him.

Then, through all Greece and all the islands, went forth the summons of
King Menelaus, reminding the thirty princes of their great oath: and
each and all of them, and many more, came to the gathering-place with
all their ships and all their men, to help Menelaus and to bring back
Helen. Such a host as gathered together at Aulis had never been seen
since the world began; there were nearly twelve hundred ships and more
than a hundred thousand men: it was the first time that all the Greeks
joined together in one cause. There, besides those who had come for
their oath's sake, were Nestor, the old King of Pylos--so old that he
remembered Jason and the Golden Fleece, but, at ninety years old, as
ready for battle as the youngest there; and Achilles, the son of Peleus
and Thetis, scarcely more than a boy, but fated to outdo the deeds of
the bravest of them all. The kings and princes elected Agamemnon, King
of Mycenae and Argos, and brother of Menelaus, to be their
general-in-chief; and he forthwith sent a herald to Troy to demand the
surrender of Helen.

But King Priam was indignant that these chiefs of petty kingdoms should
dare to threaten the sacred city of Troy: and he replied to the demand
by a scornful challenge, and by sending out his summons also to his
friends and allies. And it was as well answered as that of Menelaus had
been. There came to his standard Rhesus, with a great army from Thrace;
and Sarpedon, the greatest king in all Asia; and Memnon, king of
Aethiopia, with twenty thousand men--the hundred thousand Greeks were
not so many as the army of Priam. Then Agamemnon gave the order to sail
for Troy: and Ate laughed aloud, for her apple had brought upon mankind
the First Great War.



260

        The little book of _Old Greek Folk Stories_, by
        Josephine P. Peabody, is especially valuable,
        not only for its fine versions of many of the
        more interesting myths, but because it
        supplements the dozen retold by Hawthorne in
        his _Wonder-Book_ and _Tanglewood Tales_. The
        two stories that follow are taken from that
        book and are used by permission of and by
        special arrangement with the publishers.
        (Copyright: Houghton Mifflin Co., Boston.) It
        is worth noticing that the idea of being able
        to fly through the air successfully is found in
        a very remote past, and that Daedalus discarded
        his invention because of the tragedy related
        below. Only a few years since, most people
        looked upon one who tried to work out
        practically the problem of flying as somewhat
        "short" mentally. Hence the use of such efforts
        for comic effect as in "Darius Green and His
        Flying Machine" (No. 375).


ICARUS AND DAEDALUS

JOSEPHINE PRESTON PEABODY

Among all those mortals who grew so wise that they learned the secrets
of the gods, none was more cunning than Daedalus.

He once built, for King Minos of Crete, a wonderful Labyrinth of winding
ways so cunningly tangled up and twisted around that, once inside, you
could never find your way out again without a magic clue. But the king's
favor veered with the wind, and one day he had his master architect
imprisoned in a tower. Daedalus managed to escape from his cell; but it
seemed impossible to leave the island, since every ship that came or
went was well guarded by order of the king.

At length, watching the sea gulls in the air,--the only creatures that
were sure of liberty,--he thought of a plan for himself and his young
son Icarus, who was captive with him.

Little by little, he gathered a store of feathers great and small. He
fastened these together with thread, moulded them in with wax, and so
fashioned two great wings like those of a bird. When they were done,
Daedalus fitted them to his own shoulders, and after one or two efforts,
he found that by waving his arms he could winnow the air and cleave it,
as a swimmer does the sea. He held himself aloft, wavered this way and
that with the wind, and at last, like a great fledgling, he learned to
fly.

Without delay, he fell to work on a pair of wings for the boy Icarus,
and taught him carefully how to use them, bidding him beware of rash
adventures among the stars. "Remember," said the father, "never to fly
very low or very high, for the fogs about the earth would weigh you
down, but the blaze of the sun will surely melt your feathers apart if
you go too near."

For Icarus, these cautions went in at one ear and out by the other. Who
could remember to be careful when he was to fly for the first time? Are
birds careful? Not they! And not an idea remained in the boy's head but
the one joy of escape.

The day came, and the fair wind that was to set them free. The father
bird put on his wings, and, while the light urged them to be gone, he
waited to see that all was well with Icarus, for the two could not fly
hand in hand. Up they rose, the boy after his father. The hateful ground
of Crete sank beneath them; and the country folk, who caught a glimpse
of them when they were high above the tree-tops, took it for a vision of
the gods,--Apollo, perhaps, with Cupid after him.

At first there was a terror in the joy. The wide vacancy of the air
dazed them,--a glance downward made their brains reel. But when a great
wind filled their wings, and Icarus felt himself sustained, like a
halcyon-bird in the hollow of a wave, like a child uplifted by his
mother, he forgot everything in the world but joy. He forgot Crete and
the other islands that he had passed over: he saw but vaguely that
winged thing in the distance before him that was his father Daedalus. He
longed for one draught of flight to quench the thirst of his captivity:
he stretched out his arms to the sky and made towards the highest
heavens.

Alas for him! Warmer and warmer grew the air. Those arms, that had
seemed to uphold him, relaxed. His wings wavered, drooped. He fluttered
his young hands vainly,--he was falling,--and in that terror he
remembered. The heat of the sun had melted the wax from his wings; the
feathers were falling, one by one, like snowflakes; and there was none
to help.

He fell like a leaf tossed down the wind, down, down, with one cry that
overtook Daedalus far away. When he returned, and sought high and low
for the poor boy, he saw nothing but the bird-like feathers afloat on
the water, and he knew that Icarus was drowned.

The nearest island he named Icaria, in memory of the child; but he, in
heavy grief, went to the temple of Apollo in Sicily, and there hung up
his wings as an offering. Never again did he attempt to fly.



261

        This story of how Apollo, god of music and
        poetry, was sent to earth for a space to serve
        a mortal is also from _Old Greek Folk Stories_,
        by arrangement with the publishers. (Houghton
        Mifflin Co., Boston.) James Russell Lowell
        wrote a very fine poetic treatment of this same
        story in "The Shepherd of King Admetus" (No.
        373).


ADMETUS AND THE SHEPHERD

JOSEPHINE PRESTON PEABODY

Apollo did not live always free of care, though he was the most glorious
of the gods. One day, in anger with the Cyclopes who work at the forges
of Vulcan, he sent his arrows after them, to the wrath of all the gods,
but especially of Zeus. (For the Cyclopes always make his thunderbolts,
and make them well.) Even the divine archer could not go unpunished, and
as a penalty he was sent to serve some mortal for a year. Some say one
year and some say nine, but in those days time passed quickly; and as
for the gods, they took no heed of it.

Now there was a certain king in Thessaly, Admetus by name, and there
came to him one day a stranger, who asked leave to serve about the
palace. None knew his name, but he was very comely, and moreover, when
they questioned him he said that he had come from a position of high
trust. So without further delay they made him chief shepherd of the
royal flocks.

Every day thereafter, he drove his sheep to the banks of the river
Amphrysus, and there he sat to watch them browse. The country folk that
passed drew near to wonder at him, without daring to ask questions. He
seemed to have a knowledge of leech-craft, and knew how to cure the ills
of any wayfarer with any weed that grew near by; and he would pipe for
hours in the sun. A simple-spoken man he was, yet he seemed to know much
more than he would say, and he smiled with a kindly mirth when the
people wished him sunny weather.

Indeed, as days went by, it seemed as if summer had come to stay, and,
like the shepherd, found the place friendly. Nowhere else were the
flocks so white and fair to see, like clouds loitering along a bright
sky; and sometimes, when he chose, their keeper sang to them. Then the
grasshoppers drew near and the swans sailed close to the river banks,
and the countrymen gathered about to hear wonderful tales of the slaying
of the monster Python, and of a king with ass's ears, and of a lovely
maiden, Daphne, who grew into a laurel-tree. In time the rumor of these
things drew the king himself to listen; and Admetus, who had been to see
the world in the ship Argo, knew at once that this was no earthly
shepherd, but a god. From that day, like a true king, he treated his
guest with reverence and friendliness, asking no questions; and the god
was well pleased.

Now it came to pass that Admetus fell in love with a beautiful maiden,
Alcestis, and, because of the strange condition that her father Pelias
had laid upon all suitors, he was heavy-hearted. Only that man who
should come to woo her in a chariot drawn by a wild boar and a lion
might ever marry Alcestis; and this task was enough to puzzle even a
king.

As for the shepherd, when he heard of it he rose, one fine morning, and
left the sheep and went his way,--no one knew whither. If the sun had
gone out, the people could not have been more dismayed. The king himself
went, late in the day, to walk by the river Amphrysus, and wonder if his
gracious keeper of the flocks had deserted him in a time of need. But at
that very moment, whom should he see returning from the woods but the
shepherd, glorious as sunset, and leading side by side a lion and a
boar, as gentle as two sheep! The very next morning, with joy and
gratitude, Admetus set out in his chariot for the kingdom of Pelias, and
there he wooed and won Alcestis, the most loving wife that was ever
heard of.

It was well for Admetus that he came home with such a comrade, for the
year was at an end, and he was to lose his shepherd. The strange man
came to take leave of the king and queen whom he had befriended.

"Blessed be your flocks, Admetus," he said, smiling. "They shall prosper
even though I leave them. And, because you can discern the gods that
come to you in the guise of wayfarers, happiness shall never go far from
your home, but ever return to be your guest. No man may live on earth
forever, but this one gift have I obtained for you. When your last hour
draws near, if any one shall be willing to meet it in your stead, he
shall die, and you shall live on, more than the mortal length of days.
Such kings deserve long life."

So ended the happy year when Apollo tended sheep.



262

        This version of the Midas story is taken from
        Bulfinch's _Age of Fable_, which is still one
        of the most valuable and interesting handbooks
        in its field. One who wishes simply good
        versions of the old myths without any of the
        apparatus of scholarship will find Bulfinch
        excellent. It serves well for younger or
        general readers who would be worried by
        references or interpretations. Hawthorne's
        version of this favorite myth may be found in
        his _Wonder-Book_ as "The Golden Touch."


MIDAS

Bacchus, on a certain occasion, found his old schoolmaster and
foster-father, Silenus, missing. The old man had been drinking, and in
that state had wandered away, and was found by some peasants, who
carried him to their king, Midas. Midas recognized him and treated him
hospitably, entertaining him for ten days and nights with an unceasing
round of jollity. On the eleventh day he brought Silenus back, and
restored him in safety to his pupil. Whereupon Bacchus offered Midas his
choice of whatever reward he might wish. He asked that whatever he might
touch should be changed into _gold_. Bacchus consented, though sorry
that he had not made a better choice.

Midas went his way, rejoicing in his newly acquired power, which he
hastened to put to the test. He could scarce believe his eyes when he
found that a twig of an oak, which he plucked from the branch, became
gold in his hand. He took up a stone--it changed to gold. He touched a
sod--it did the same. He took an apple from the tree--you would have
thought he had robbed the garden of the Hesperides. His joy knew no
bounds, and as soon as he got home, he ordered the servants to set a
splendid repast on the table. Then he found to his dismay that whether
he touched bread, it hardened in his hand; or put a morsel to his lips,
it defied his teeth. He took a glass of wine, but it flowed down his
throat like melted gold.

In consternation at the unprecedented affliction, he strove to divest
himself of his power; he hated the gift he had lately coveted. But all
in vain; starvation seemed to await him. He raised his arms, all shining
with gold, in prayer to Bacchus, begging to be delivered from his
glittering destruction. Bacchus, merciful deity, heard and consented.
"Go," said he, "to the River Pactolus, trace the stream to its
fountain-head, there plunge in your head and body and wash away your
fault and its punishment." He did so, and scarce had he touched the
waters before the gold-creating power passed into them, and the river
sands became changed into _gold_, as they remain to this day.

Thenceforth Midas, hating wealth and splendor, dwelt in the country and
became a worshipper of Pan, the god of the fields. On a certain occasion
Pan had the temerity to compare his music with that of Apollo, and to
challenge the god of the lyre to a trial of skill. The challenge was
accepted; and Tmolus, the mountain-god, was chosen umpire. Tmolus took
his seat and cleared away the trees from his ears to listen. At a given
signal Pan blew on his pipes, and with his rustic melody gave great
satisfaction to himself and his faithful follower Midas, who happened to
be present. Then Tmolus turned his head toward the sun-god, and all his
trees turned with him. Apollo rose, his brow wreathed with Parnassian
laurel, while his robe of Tyrian purple swept the ground. In his left
hand he held the lyre, and with his right hand struck the strings.
Ravished with the harmony, Tmolus at once awarded the victory to the god
of the lyre, and all but Midas acquiesced in the judgment. He dissented,
and questioned the justice of the award. Apollo would not suffer such a
depraved pair of ears any longer to wear the human form, but caused them
to increase in length, grow hairy within and without, and to become
movable on their roots; in short, to be on the perfect pattern of those
of an ass.

Mortified enough was King Midas at this mishap; but he consoled himself
with the thought that it was possible to hide his misfortune, which he
attempted to do by means of an ample turban or headdress. But his
hairdresser of course knew the secret. He was charged not to mention it,
and threatened with dire punishment if he presumed to disobey. But he
found it too much for his discretion to keep such a secret; so he went
out into the meadow, dug a hole in the ground, and stooping down,
whispered the story, and covered it up. Before long a thick bed of reeds
sprang up in the meadow, and as soon as it had gained its growth, began
whispering the story, and has continued to do so, from that day to this,
with every breeze which passes over the place.



263

        The story of Phaethon is taken by permission
        from Gayley's _Classic Myths in English
        Literature and Art_. (Copyright. Ginn & Co.,
        Boston.) Gayley is by all odds the one handbook
        for the whole field of mythology that teachers
        should always have access to. Based upon the
        older Bulfinch, it brings the whole subject up
        to date and reflects all the results of later
        scholarship on the matters of origins and
        interpretations. Its bibliographies and
        extended commentaries make it invaluable. The
        story of Phaethon is usually thought of as a
        warning against presumption, conceit, whim,
        self-will. It was probably invented in the
        first place to account for the extremely hot
        weather of the summer months.


PHAETHON

CHARLES MILLS GAYLEY

Phaethon was the son of Apollo and the nymph Clymene. One day Epaphus,
the son of Jupiter and Io, scoffed at the idea of Phaethon's being the
son of a god. Phaethon complained of the insult to his mother Clymene.
She sent him to Phoebus to ask for himself whether he had not been truly
informed concerning his parentage. Gladly Phaethon traveled toward the
regions of sunrise and gained at last the palace of the sun. He
approached his father's presence, but stopped at a distance, for the
light was more than he could bear.

Phoebus Apollo, arrayed in purple, sat on a throne that glittered with
diamonds. Beside him stood the Day, the Month, the Year, the Hours, and
the Seasons. Surrounded by these attendants, the Sun beheld the youth
dazzled with the novelty and splendor of the scene, and inquired the
purpose of his errand. The youth replied, "Oh, light of the boundless
world, Phoebus, my father--if thou dost yield me that name--give me some
proof, I beseech thee, by which I may be known as thine!"

He ceased. His father, laying aside the beams that shone around his
head, bade him approach, embraced him, owned him for his son, and swore
by the river Styx that whatever proof he might ask should be granted.
Phaethon immediately asked to be permitted for one day to drive the
chariot of the sun. The father repented of his promise and tried to
dissuade the boy by telling him the perils of the undertaking. "None but
myself," he said, "may drive the flaming car of day. Not even Jupiter,
whose terrible right arm hurls the thunderbolts. The first part of the
way is steep and such as the horses when fresh in the morning can hardly
climb; the middle is high up in the heavens, whence I myself can
scarcely, without alarm, look down and behold the earth and sea
stretched beneath me. The last part of the road descends rapidly and
requires most careful driving. Tethys, who is waiting to receive me,
often trembles for me lest I should fall headlong. Add to this that the
heaven is all the time turning round and carrying the stars with it.
Couldst thou keep thy course while the sphere revolved beneath thee? The
road, also, is through the midst of frightful monsters. Thou must pass
by the horns of the Bull, in front of the Archer, and near the Lion's
jaws, and where the Scorpion stretches its arms in one direction and the
Crab in another. Nor wilt thou find it easy to guide those horses, with
their breasts full of fire that they breathe forth from their mouths and
nostrils. Beware, my son, lest I be the donor of a fatal gift; recall
the request while yet thou canst." He ended; but the youth rejected
admonition and held to his demand. So, having resisted as long as he
might, Phoebus at last led the way to where stood the lofty chariot.

It was of gold, the gift of Vulcan,--the axle of gold, the pole and
wheels of gold, the spokes of silver. Along the seat were rows of
chrysolites and diamonds, reflecting the brightness of the sun. While
the daring youth gazed in admiration, the early Dawn threw open the
purple doors of the east and showed the pathway strewn with roses. The
stars withdrew, marshaled by the Daystar, which last of all retired
also. The father, when he saw the earth beginning to glow and the Moon
preparing to retire, ordered the Hours to harness up the horses. They
led forth from the lofty stalls the steeds full fed with ambrosia, and
attached the reins. Then the father, smearing the face of his son with a
powerful unguent, made him capable of enduring the brightness of the
flame. He set the rays on the lad's head, and, with a foreboding sigh,
told him to spare the whip and hold tight the reins; not to take the
straight road between the five circles, but to turn off to the left; to
keep within the limit of the middle zone and avoid the northern and the
southern alike; finally, to keep in the well-worn ruts and to drive
neither too high nor too low, for the middle course was safest and best.

Forthwith the agile youth sprang into the chariot, stood erect, and
grasped the reins with delight, pouring out thanks to his reluctant
parent. But the steeds soon perceived that the load they drew was
lighter than usual; and as a ship without its accustomed weight, was
dashed about as if empty. The horses rushed headlong and left the
traveled road. Then, for the first time, the Great and Little Bears were
scorched with heat, and would fain, if it were possible, have plunged
into the water; and the Serpent which lies coiled round the north pole,
torpid and harmless, grew warm, and with warmth felt its rage revive.
Booetes, they say, fled away, though encumbered with his plow and unused
to rapid motion.

When hapless Phaethon looked down upon the earth, now spreading in vast
extent beneath him, he grew pale, and his knees shook with terror. He
lost his self-command and knew not whether to draw tight the reins or
throw them loose; he forgot the names of the horses. But when he beheld
the monstrous forms scattered over the surface of heaven,--the Scorpion
extending two great arms, his tail, and his crooked claws over the space
of two signs of the zodiac,--when the boy beheld him, reeking with
poison and menacing with fangs, his courage failed, and the reins fell
from his hands. The horses, unrestrained, went off into unknown regions
of the sky in among the stars, hurling the chariot over pathless places,
now up in high heaven, now down almost to the earth. The moon saw with
astonishment her brother's chariot running beneath her own. The clouds
began to smoke. The forest-clad mountains burned,--Athos and Taurus and
Tmolus and Oete; Ida, once celebrated for fountains; the Muses' mountain
Helicon, and Haemus; Aetna, with fires within and without, and
Parnassus, with his two peaks, and Rhodope, forced at last to part with
his snowy crown. Her cold climate was no protection to Scythia; Caucasus
burned, and Ossa and Pindus, and, greater than both, Olympus,--the Alps
high in air, and the Apennines crowned with clouds.

Phaethon beheld the world on fire and felt the heat intolerable. Then,
too, it is said, the people of Aethiopia became black because the blood
was called by the heat so suddenly to the surface; and the Libyan desert
was dried up to the condition in which it remains to this day. The
Nymphs of the fountains, with disheveled hair, mourned their waters, nor
were the rivers safe beneath their banks; Tanais smoked, and Caicus,
Xanthus, and Maeander; Babylonian Euphrates and Ganges, Tagus, with
golden sands, and Cayster, where the swans resort. Nile fled away and
hid his head in the desert, and there it still remains concealed. Where
he used to discharge his waters through seven mouths into the sea, seven
dry channels alone remained. The earth cracked open and through the
chinks light broke into Tartarus and frightened the king of shadows and
his queen. The sea shrank up. Even Nereus and his wife Doris with the
Nereids, their daughters, sought the deepest caves for refuge. Thrice
Neptune essayed to raise his head above the surface and thrice was
driven back by the heat. Earth, surrounded as she was by waters, yet
with head and shoulders bare, screening her face with her hand, looked
up to heaven, and with husky voice prayed Jupiter, if it were his will
that she should perish by fire, to end her agony at once by his
thunderbolts, or else to consider his own Heaven, how both the poles
were smoking that sustained his palace, and that all must fall if they
were destroyed.

Earth, overcome with heat and thirst, could say no more. Then Jupiter,
calling the gods to witness that all was lost unless some speedy remedy
were applied, thundered, brandished a lightning bolt in his right hand,
launched it against the charioteer, and struck him at the same moment
from his seat and from existence. Phaethon, with his hair on fire, fell
headlong, like a shooting star which marks the heavens with its
brightness as it falls, and Eridanus, the great river, received him and
cooled his burning frame. His sisters, the Heliades, as they lamented
his fate, were turned into poplar trees on the banks of the river; and
their tears, which continued to flow, became amber as they dropped into
the stream. The Italian Naiads reared a tomb for him and inscribed
these words upon the stone:

        Driver of Phoebus' chariot, Phaethon,
        Struck by Jove's thunder, rests beneath this stone.
        He could not rule his father's car of fire,
        Yet was it much so nobly to aspire.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Norse myths originated among peoples who lived in the country which
is now Norway, Sweden, Denmark, and Iceland. In these lands of the
North, winter is long and dark, and the intense cold is not easily
endured; but summer brings sunshine, warmth, and happiness. It is not
strange, therefore, that the evil spirits of Norse mythology should be
represented as huge frost giants and mountain giants. These giants, or
Jotuns, were first formed from the mist that came from fields of ice.
They lived in a dreary country called Joetunheim, and were enemies of the
gods, who lived in the bright, beautiful city of Asgard.

To live the life of the old Norse folk required strength and courage,
for the little boats in which they went to fish were too small for
storm-tossed Arctic seas, and the weapons with which they hunted in the
cold, lonely forests were primitive. It is but natural, therefore, that
they should have idealized strength and courage and that they should
have represented the gods of Asgard as being large, strong, and
courageous. Although Thor, the eldest son of Odin, was small in
comparison with the giants, we are told in one of the myths that he was
a mile in height; also he had great strength and a wonderful hammer,
called Mjolmer, with which he always defeated the giants and kept them
from Asgard. Thunder was caused by the stroke of Thor's hammer; hence
Thor was called the Thunderer.

The spiritual ideals in Norse mythology are more important than the
physical ideals. The long, cold winter nights kept the Norse folk at
home; hence they had a love for home and family relations and a respect
for women that may not be found revealed in the mythology of Greece.
Wisdom and judgment, too, were more essential than craft and fraud in
encountering the hardships of their life; therefore they represented
Odin, the supreme god of Asgard, as being the god of wisdom. The gods of
Greek mythology often used craft and fraud to accomplish their purposes,
but only Loke among the inhabitants of Asgard relied upon deception.
Loke was descended from the giants, but was also related to the gods; so
he was permitted to live in Asgard. It is significant of the spirit of
the Norse folk that the gods did not trust Loke and came to regard him
as their enemy; and it was he who finally brought misfortune to the
gods.



264

        This story of Thor's visit to the land of the
        giants is taken from Bulfinch. It deals with
        one of the favorite sections of Norse
        mythology, satisfying, as it does, the
        listeners' demand for courageous struggle
        against great and mysterious forces. The use of
        illusion by the giant forces of evil as a
        method of defeating the open-minded forces of
        truth is strikingly exemplified in the various
        contests staged at Joetunheim.


THOR'S VISIT TO JOeTUNHEIM

One day the god Thor, with his servant Thialfi, and accompanied by Loki,
set out on a journey to the giants' country. Thialfi was of all men the
swiftest of foot. He bore Thor's wallet, containing their provisions.
When night came on they found themselves in an immense forest, and
searched on all sides for a place where they might pass the night, and
at last came to a very large hall, with an entrance that took the whole
breadth of one end of the building. Here they lay down to sleep, but
towards midnight were alarmed by an earthquake which shook the whole
edifice. Thor, rising up, called on his companions to seek with him a
place of safety. On the right they found an adjoining chamber, into
which the others entered, but Thor remained at the doorway with his
mallet in his hand, prepared to defend himself, whatever might happen. A
terrible groaning was heard during the night, and at dawn of day Thor
went out and found lying near him a huge giant, who slept and snored in
the way that had alarmed them so. It is said that for once Thor was
afraid to use his mallet, and as the giant soon waked up, Thor contented
himself with simply asking his name.

"My name is Skrymir," said the giant, "but I need not ask thy name, for
I know that thou art the god Thor. But what has become of my glove?"
Thor then perceived that what they had taken overnight for a hall was
the giant's glove, and the chamber where his two companions had sought
refuge was the thumb. Skrymir then proposed that they should travel in
company, and Thor consenting, they sat down to eat their breakfast, and
when they had done, Skrymir packed all the provisions into one wallet,
threw it over his shoulder, and strode on before them, taking such
tremendous strides that they were hard put to it to keep up with him. So
they traveled the whole day, and at dusk Skrymir chose a place for them
to pass the night in under a large oak tree. Skrymir then told them he
would lie down to sleep. "But take ye the wallet," he added, "and
prepare your supper."

Skrymir soon fell asleep and began to snore strongly; but when Thor
tried to open the wallet, he found the giant had tied it up so tight he
could not untie a single knot. At last Thor became wroth, and grasping
his mallet with both hands he struck a furious blow on the giant's head.
Skrymir, awakening, merely asked whether a leaf had not fallen on his
head, and whether they had supped and were ready to go to sleep. Thor
answered that they were just going to sleep, and so saying went and laid
himself down under another tree. But sleep came not that night to Thor,
and when Skrymir snored again so loud that the forest reechoed with the
noise, he arose, and grasping his mallet launched it with such force at
the giant's skull that it made a deep dint in it. Skrymir, awakening,
cried out, "What's the matter? Are there any birds perched on this tree?
I felt some moss from the branches fall on my head. How fares it with
thee Thor?" But Thor went away hastily, saying that he had just then
awoke, and that as it was only midnight, there was still time for sleep.
He, however, resolved that if he had an opportunity of striking a third
blow, it should settle all matters between them.

A little before daybreak he perceived that Skrymir was again fast
asleep, and again grasping his mallet, he dashed it with such violence
that it forced its way into the giant's skull up to the handle. But
