"Wait a minute!" crisply shouted Crane. "Don't go off half-cocked. What
is your plan?"

"Plan, hell!" barked the enraged chemist. "Chase 'em!"

"Which way did they go, and when?"

"Straight up, full power, twenty minutes ago."

"Too long ago. Straight up has changed its direction several degrees
since then. They may have covered a million miles, or they may have come
back and landed next door. Sit down and think--we need all your brains
now."

Regaining his self-possession as the wisdom of his friend's advice came
home to him, Seaton sat down and pulled out his pipe. There was a tense
silence for an instant. Then he leaped to his feet and darted into his
room, returning with an object-compass whose needle pointed upward.

"DuQuesne did it," he cried exultantly. "This baby is still looking
right at him. Now let's go--make it snappy!"

"Not yet. We should find out how far away they are; that may give us an
idea."

Suiting action to word, he took up his stopwatch and set the needle
swinging. They watched it with strained faces as second after second
went by and it still continued to swing. When it had come to rest Crane
read his watch and made a rapid calculation.

"About three hundred and fifty million miles," he stated. "Clear out of
our solar system already, and from the distance covered he must have had
a constant acceleration so as to approximate the velocity of light, and
he is still going with full...."

"But nothing can possibly go that fast, Mart, it's impossible. How about
Einstein's theory?"

"That is a theory, this measurement of distance is a fact, as you know
from our tests."

"That's right. Another good theory gone to pot. But how do you account
for his distance? D'you suppose he's lost control?"

"He must have. I do not believe that he would willingly stand that
acceleration, nor that he would have gone that far of his own accord. Do
you?"

"I sure don't. We don't know how big a bar they are carrying, so we
can't estimate how long it is going to take us to catch them. But let's
not waste any more time, Mart. For Cat's sake, let's get busy!"

"We have only those four bars, Dick--two for each unit. Do you think
that will be enough? Think of how far we may have to go, what we may
possibly get into, and what it will mean to Dottie if we fail for lack
of power."

Seaton, though furiously eager to be off, paused at this new idea, and
half-regretfully he replied:

"We are so far behind them already that I guess a few hours more won't
make much difference. It sure would be disastrous to get out near one of
the fixed stars and have our power quit. I guess you're right, we'd
better get a couple more--make it four, then we'll have enough to chase
them half our lives. We'd better load up on grub and X-plosive
ammunition, too."

       *       *       *       *       *

While Crane and Shiro carried additional provisions and boxes of
cartridges into the "Skylark," Seaton once more mounted his motorcycle
and sped across the city to the brass foundry. The manager of the plant
took his order, but blandly informed him that there was not that much
copper in the city, that it would be a week or ten days before the order
could be filled. Seaton suggested that they melt up some copper cable
and other goods already manufactured, offering ten times their value,
but the manager was obdurate, saying that he could not violate the rule
of priority of orders. Seaton then went to other places, endeavoring to
buy scrap copper, trolley wire, electric cable, anything made of the
ruddy metal, but found none for sale in quantities large enough to be of
any use. After several hours of fruitless search, he returned home in a
towering rage and explained to Crane, in lurid language, his failure to
secure the copper. The latter was unmoved.

"After you left, it occurred to me that you might not get any. You see,
Steel is still watching us."

Fire shot from Seaton's eyes.

"I'm going to clean up that bunch," he gritted through his teeth as he
started straight for the door.

"Not yet, Dick," Crane remonstrated. "We can go down to Wilson's in a
few minutes, and I know we can get it there if he has it. The "Skylark"
is all ready to travel."

No more words were needed. They hurried into the space-car and soon were
standing in the office of the plant in which the vessel had been built.
When they had made their wants known, the iron-master shook his head.

"I'm sorry, Crane, but I have only a few pounds of copper in the shop,
and we have no suitable furnace."

Seaton broke out violently at this, but Crane interrupted him,
explaining their inability to get the metal anywhere else and the
urgency of their need. When he had finished, Wilson brought his fist
down upon his desk.

"I'll get it if I have to melt up our dynamos," he roared. "We'll have
to rig a crucible, but we'll have your bars out just as soon as the
whole force of this damned scrap-heap can make 'em!"

Calling in his foreman, he bellowed orders, and while automobiles
scoured the nearby towns for scrap copper, the crucible and molds were
made ready.

Nearly two days passed before the gleaming copper cylinders were
finished. During this time Crane added to their already complete
equipment every article he could conceive of their having any use for,
while Seaton raged up and down the plant in a black fury of impatience.
Just before the bars were ready, they made another reading on the
object-compass. Their faces grew tense and drawn and their hearts turned
sick as second followed second and minute followed minute and the needle
still oscillated. Finally, however, it came to rest, and Seaton's voice
almost failed him as he read his figures.

"Two hundred and thirty-five light-years, Mart. They're lost, and still
going. Good-bye, old scout," holding out his hand, "Tell Vaneman that
I'll bring her back or else stay out there myself."

"You must be crazy, Dick. You know I am going."

"Why? No use in both of us taking such a chance. If Dottie's gone, of
course I want to go too, but you don't."

"Nonsense, Dick. Of course this is somewhat farther than we had planned
on going for our maiden voyage, but where is the difference? It is just
as safe to go a thousand light-years as only one, and we have power and
food for any contingency. There is no more danger in this trip than
there is in one to Mars. At all events, I am going whether you want me
to or not, so save your breath."

"You lie like a thief, Mart--you know what we are up against as well as
I do. But if you insist on coming along, I'm sure glad to have you."

As their hands met in a crushing grip, the bars were brought up and
loaded into the carriers. Waving good-bye to Wilson, they closed the
massive door and took their positions. Seaton adjusted the bar parallel
with the needle of the object-compass, turned on the coil, and advanced
the speed-lever until Crane, reading the pyro-meters, warned him to slow
down, as the shell was heating. Free of the earth's atmosphere, he
slowly advanced the lever, one notch at a time, until he could no
longer support the increasing weight of his hand, but had to draw out
the rolling support designed for that emergency. He pushed the lever a
few notches farther, and felt himself forced down violently into the
seat. He was now lying at full length, the seat having automatically
moved upward so that his hand still controlled the lever. Still he kept
putting on more power, until the indicator showed that more than
three-quarters of the power was in operation and he felt that he could
stand but little more.

"How are you making it, Mart?" he asked, talking with difficulty because
of the great weight of his tongue and jaws.

"All right so far," came the response, in a hesitating, almost
stammering voice, "but I do not know how much more I can take. If you
can stand it, go ahead."

"This is enough for awhile, until we get used to it. Any time you want
to rest, tell me and I'll cut her down."

"Keep her at this for four or five hours. Then cut down until we can
walk, so that we can eat and take another reading on distance. Remember
that it will take as long to stop as it does to get up speed, and that
we must be careful not to ram them. There would be nothing left of
either car."

"All right. Talking's too darn much work, I'll talk to you again when we
ease down. I sure am glad we're on our way at last."




CHAPTER IX

Lost In Space


For forty-eight hours the uncontrolled atomic motor dragged the
masterless vessel with its four unconscious passengers through the
illimitable reaches of empty space, with an awful and constantly
increasing velocity. When only a few traces of copper remained in the
power-plant, the acceleration began to decrease and the powerful springs
began to restore the floor and the seats to their normal positions. The
last particle of copper having been transformed into energy, the speed
of the vessel became constant. Apparently motionless to those inside it,
it was in reality traversing space with a velocity thousands of times
greater than that of light. As the force which had been holding them
down was relaxed, the lungs, which had been able to secure only air
enough to maintain faint sparks of life, began to function more normally
and soon all four recovered consciousness, drinking in the life-giving
oxygen in a rapid succession of breaths so deep that it seemed as though
their lungs must burst with each inhalation.

DuQuesne was the first to gain control of himself. His first effort to
rise to his feet lifted him from the floor, and he floated lightly to
the ceiling, striking it with a gentle bump and remaining suspended in
the air. The others, who had not yet attempted to move, stared at him in
wide-eyed amazement. Reaching out and clutching one of the supporting
columns, he drew himself back to the floor and cautiously removed his
leather suit, transferring two heavy automatic pistols as he did so. By
gingerly feeling of his injured body, he discovered that no bones were
broken, although he was terribly bruised. He then glanced around to
learn how his companions were faring. He saw that they were all sitting
up, the girls resting, Perkins removing his aviator's costume.

"Good morning, Doctor DuQuesne. What happened when I kicked your
friend?"

DuQuesne smiled.

"Good morning, Miss Vaneman. Several things happened. He fell into the
controls, turning on all the juice. We left shortly afterward. I tried
to shut the power off, and in doing so I balled things up worse than
ever. Then I went to sleep, and just woke up."

"Have you any idea where we are?"

"No, but I can make a fair estimate, I think," and glancing at the empty
chamber in which the bar had been, he took out his notebook and pen and
figured for a few minutes. As he finished, he drew himself along by a
handrail to one of the windows, then to another. He returned with a
puzzled expression on his face and made a long calculation.

"I don't know exactly what to make of this," he said thoughtfully. "We
are so far away from the earth that even the fixed stars are
unrecognizable. The power was on exactly forty-eight hours, since that
is the life of that particular bar under full current. We should still
be close to our own solar system, since it is theoretically impossible
to develop any velocity greater than that of light. But in fact, we
have. I know enough about astronomy to recognize the fixed stars from
any point within a light-year or so of the sun, and I can't see a single
familiar star. I never could see how mass could be a function of
velocity, and now I am convinced that it is not. We have been
accelerating for forty-eight hours!"

He turned to Dorothy.

"While we were unconscious, Miss Vaneman, we had probably attained a
velocity of something like seven billion four hundred thirteen million
miles per second, and that is the approximate speed at which we are now
traveling. We must be nearly six quadrillion miles, and that is a space
of several hundred light-years--away from our solar system, or, more
plainly, about six times as far away from our earth as the North Star
is. We couldn't see our sun with a telescope, even if we knew which way
to look for it."

       *       *       *       *       *

At this paralyzing news, Dorothy's face turned white and Margaret
Spencer quietly fainted in her seat.

"Then we can never get back?" asked Dorothy slowly.

At this question, Perkins' self-control gave way and his thin veneer of
decency disappeared completely.

"You got us into this whole thing!" he screamed as he leaped at Dorothy
with murderous fury gleaming in his pale eyes and his fingers curved
into talons. Instead of reaching her, however, he merely sprawled
grotesquely in midair, and DuQuesne knocked him clear across the vessel
with one powerful blow of his fist.

"Get back there, you cowardly cur," he said evenly. "Even though we are
a long way from home, try to remember you're a man, at least. One more
break like that and I'll throw you out of the boat. It isn't her fault
that we are out here, but our own. The blame for it is a very small
matter, anyway; the thing of importance is to get back as soon as
possible."

"But how can we get back?" asked Perkins sullenly from the corner where
he was crouching, fear in every feature. "The power is gone, the
controls are wrecked, and we are hopelessly lost in space."

"Oh, I wouldn't say 'hopelessly,'" returned the other, "I have never
been in any situation yet that I couldn't get out of, and I won't be
convinced until I am dead that I can't get out of this one. We have two
extra power bars, we can fix the board, and if I can't navigate us back
close enough to our solar system to find it, I am more of a dub than I
think I am. How about a little bite to eat?"

"Show us where it is!" exclaimed Dorothy. "Now that you mention it, I
find that I am starved to death."

DuQuesne looked at her keenly.

"I admire your nerve, Miss Vaneman. I didn't suppose that that animal
over there would show such a wide streak of yellow, but I was rather
afraid that you girls might go to pieces."

"I'm scared blue, of course," Dorothy admitted frankly, "but hysterics
won't do any good, and we simply _must_ get back."

"Certainly, we must and we will," stated DuQuesne calmly. "If you like,
you might find something for us to eat in the galley there, while I see
what I can do with this board that I wrecked with my head. By the way,
that cubby-hole there is the apartment reserved for you two ladies. We
are in rather cramped quarters, but I think you will find everything you
need."

As Dorothy drew herself along the handrail toward the room designated,
accompanied by the other girl who, though conscious, had paid little
attention to anything around her, she could not help feeling a thrill of
admiration for the splendid villain who had abducted her. Calm and cool,
always master of himself, apparently paying no attention to the terrible
bruises which disfigured half his face and doubtless half his body as
well, she admitted to herself that it was only his example, which had
enabled her to maintain her self-control in their present plight. As she
crawled over Perkins' discarded suit, she remembered that he had not
taken any weapons from it. After a rapid glance around to assure herself
that she was not being watched, she quickly searched the coat, bringing
to light not one, but two pistols, which she thrust into her pocket. She
saw with relief that they were regulation army automatics, with whose
use she was familiar from much target practise with Seaton.

In the room, which was a miniature of the one she had seen on the
Skylark, the girls found clothing, toilet articles, and everything
necessary for a long trip. As they were setting themselves to rights,
Dorothy electing to stay in her riding suit, they surveyed each other
frankly and each was reassured by what she saw. Dorothy saw a girl of
twenty-two, of her own stature, with a mass of heavy, wavy black hair.
Her eyes, a singularly rich and deep brown, contrasted strangely with
the beautiful ivory of her skin. She was normally a beautiful girl,
thought Dorothy, but her beauty was marred by suffering and privation.
Her naturally slender form was thin, her face was haggard and worn. The
stranger broke the silence.

       *       *       *       *       *

"I'm Margaret Spencer," she began abruptly, "former secretary to His
Royal Highness, Brookings of Steel. They swindled my father out of an
invention worth millions and he died, broken-hearted. I got the job to
see if I couldn't get enough evidence to convict them, and I had quite a
lot when they caught me. I had some things that they were afraid to
lose, and I had them so well hidden that they couldn't find them, so
