upper-priests, and many of them would be First Level paratimers. Then,
there would be a second commandment: A house must be built for
Yat-Zar, against the rear wall of each temple. Its dimensions were
minutely stipulated; its walls were to be of stone, without windows,
and there was to be a single door, opening into the Holy of Holies,
and before the walls were finished, the door was to be barred from
within. A triple veil of brocaded fabric was to be hung in front of
this door. Sometimes such innovations met with opposition from the
more conservative members of the hierarchy: when they did, the
principal objector would be seized with a sudden and violent illness;
he would recover if and when he withdrew his objections.

Very shortly after the House of Yat-Zar would be completed, strange
noises would be heard from behind the thick walls. Then, after a
while, one of the younger priests would announce that he had been
commanded in a vision to go behind the veil and knock upon the door.
Going behind the curtains, he would use his door-activator to let
himself in, and return by paratime-conveyer to the First Level to
enjoy a well-earned vacation. When the high priest would follow him
behind the veil, after a few hours, and find that he had vanished, it
would be announced as a miracle. A week later, an even greater miracle
would be announced. The young priest would return from behind the
Triple Veil, clad in such raiment as no man had ever seen, and bearing
in his hands a strange box. He would announce that Yat-Zar had
commanded him to build a new temple in the mountains, at a place to be
made known by the voice of the god speaking out of the box.

This time, there would be no doubts and no objections. A procession
would set out, headed by the new revelator bearing the box, and when
the clicking voice of the god spoke rapidly out of it, the site would
be marked and work would begin. No local labor would ever be employed
on such temples; the masons and woodworkers would be strangers, come
from afar and speaking a strange tongue, and when the temple was
completed, they would never be seen to leave it. Men would say that
they had been put to death by the priest and buried under the altar to
preserve the secrets of the god. And there would always be an idol to
preserve the secrets of the god. And there would always be an idol of
Yat-Zar, obviously of heavenly origin, since its workmanship was
beyond the powers of any local craftsman. The priests of such a temple
would be exempt, by divine decree, from the rule of yearly travel.

Nobody, of course, would have the least idea that there was a uranium
mine in operation under it, shipping ore to another time-line. The
Hulgun people knew nothing about uranium, and neither did they as much
as dream that there were other time-lines. The secret of paratime
transposition belonged exclusively to the First Level civilization
which had discovered it, and it was a secret that was guarded well.

       *       *       *       *       *

Stranor Sleth, dropping to the bottom of the antigrav shaft, cast a
hasty and instinctive glance to the right, where the freight conveyers
were. One was gone, taking its cargo over hundreds of thousands of
para-years to the First Level. Another had just returned, empty, and a
third was receiving its cargo from the robot mining machines far back
under the mountain. Two young men and a girl, in First Level costumes,
sat at a bank of instruments and visor-screens, handling the whole
operation, and six or seven armed guards, having inspected the
newly-arrived conveyer and finding that it had picked up nothing
inimical en route, were relaxing and lighting cigarettes. Three of
them, Stranor Sleth noticed, wore the green uniforms of the Paratime
Police.

"When did those fellows get in?" he asked the people at the control
desk, nodding toward the green-clad newcomers.

"About ten minutes ago, on the passenger conveyer," the girl told him.
"The Big Boy's here. Brannad Klav. And a Paratime Police officer.
They're in your office."

"Uh huh; I was expecting that," Stranor Sleth nodded. Then he turned
down the corridor to the left.

Two men were waiting for him, in his office. One was short and stocky,
with an angry, impatient face--Brannad Klav, Transtemporal's vice
president in charge of operations. The other was tall and slender with
handsome and entirely expressionless features; he wore a Paratime
Police officer's uniform, with the blue badge of hereditary nobility
on his breast, and carried a sigma-ray needler in a belt holster.

"Were you waiting long, gentlemen?" Stranor Sleth asked. "I was
holding Sunset Sacrifice up in the temple."

"No, we just got here," Brannad Klav said. "This is Verkan Vall,
Mavrad of Nerros, special assistant to Chief Tortha of the Paratime
Police, Stranor Sleth, our resident agent here."

Stranor Sleth touched hands with Verkan Vall.

"I've heard a lot about you, sir," he said. "Everybody working in
paratime has, of course. I'm sorry we have a situation here that calls
for your presence, but since we have, I'm glad you're here in person.
You know what our trouble is, I suppose?"

"In a general way," Verkan Vall replied. "Chief Tortha, and Brannad
Klav, have given me the main outline, but I'd like to have you fill in
the details."

"Well, I told you everything," Brannad Klav interrupted impatiently.
"It's just that Stranor's let this blasted local king, Kurchuk, get
out of control. If I--" He stopped short, catching sight of the
shoulder holster under Stranor Sleth's left arm. "Were you wearing
that needler up in the temple?" he demanded.

"You're blasted right I was!" Stranor Sleth retorted. "And any time I
can't arm myself for my own protection on this time-line, you can have
my resignation. I'm not getting into the same jam as those people at
Zurb."

"Well, never mind about that," Verkan Vall intervened. "Of course
Stranor Sleth has a right to arm himself; I wouldn't think of being
caught without a weapon on this time-line, myself. Now, Stranor,
suppose you tell me what's been happening, here, from the beginning of
this trouble."

"It started, really, about five years ago, when Kurchuk, the King of
Zurb, married this Chuldun princess, Darith, from the country over
beyond the Black Sea, and made her his queen, over the heads of about
a dozen daughters of the local nobility, whom he'd married previously.
Then he brought in this Chuldun scribe, Labdurg, and made him Overseer
of the Kingdom--roughly, prime minister. There was a lot of
dissatisfaction about that, and for a while it looked as though he was
going to have a revolution on his hands, but he brought in about five
thousand Chuldun mercenaries, all archers--these Hulguns can't shoot a
bow worth beans--so the dissatisfaction died down, and so did most of
the leaders of the disaffected group. The story I get is that this
Labdurg arranged the marriage, in the first place. It looks to me as
though the Chuldun emperor is intending to take over the Hulgun
kingdoms, starting with Zurb.

[Illustration:]

"Well, these Chulduns all worship a god called Muz-Azin. Muz-Azin is a
crocodile with wings like a bat and a lot of knife blades in his tail.
He makes this Yat-Zar look downright beautiful. So do his habits.
Muz-Azin fancies human sacrifices. The victims are strung up by the
ankles on a triangular frame and lashed to death with iron-barbed
whips. Nasty sort of a deity, but this is a nasty time-line. The
people here get a big kick out of watching these sacrifices. Much
better show than our bunny-killing. The victims are usually criminals,
or overage or incorrigible slaves, or prisoners of war.

"Of course, when the Chulduns began infiltrating the palace, they
brought in their crocodile-god, too, and a flock of priests, and King
Kurchuk let them set up a temple in the palace. Naturally, we preached
against this heathen idolatry in our temples, but religious bigotry
isn't one of the numerous imperfections of this sector. Everybody's
deity is as good as anybody else's--indifferentism, I believe, is the
theological term. Anyhow, on that basis things went along fairly well,
till two years ago, when we had this run of bad luck."

"Bad luck!" Brannad Klav snorted. "That's the standing excuse of every
incompetent!"

"Go on, Stranor; what sort of bad luck?" Verkan Vall asked.

"Well, first we had a drought, beginning in early summer, that burned
up most of the grain crop. Then, when that broke, we got heavy rains
and hailstorms and floods, and that destroyed what got through the dry
spell. When they harvested what little was left, it was obvious
there'd be a famine, so we brought in a lot of grain by conveyer and
distributed it from the temples--miraculous gift of Yat-Zar, of
course. Then the main office on First Level got scared about flooding
this time-line with a lot of unaccountable grain and were afraid we'd
make the people suspicious, and ordered it stopped.

"Then Kurchuk, and I might add that the kingdom of Zurb was the
hardest hit by the famine, ordered his army mobilized and started an
invasion of the Jumdun country, south of the Carpathians, to get
grain. He got his army chopped up, and only about a quarter of them
got back, with no grain. You ask me, I'd say that Labdurg framed it to
happen that way. He advised Kurchuk to invade, in the first place, and
I mentioned my suspicion that Chombrog, the Chuldun Emperor, is
