The Project Gutenberg EBook of General Max Shorter, by Kris Ottman Neville

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: General Max Shorter

Author: Kris Ottman Neville

Release Date: November 20, 2007 [EBook #23571]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK GENERAL MAX SHORTER ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                          GENERAL MAX SHORTER

                            By KRIS NEVILLE

                         Illustrated by GIUNTA

[Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced from Galaxy December 1962.
Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S. copyright
on this publication was renewed.]


     _To spread Mankind to the stars carries a high cost in lives--and
     not all of them are human!_




I


Miracastle: The initial landing had been made on a flat plateau among
steep, foreboding mountains which seemed to float through briefly
cleared air. In the distance a sharp rock formation stood revealed like
an etching: a castle of iron-gray stone whose form had been carved by
alien winds and eroded by acid tears from acid clouds.

Far above was a halo where the sun should be. The sun was an orange star
only slightly larger than Sol and as near to Miracastle as Sol to Earth.
The orange rays splintered against the fog and gloom was perpetually
upon the dark face of existence.

This was the first two-stage planet man had ever attempted to colonize.
Miracastle was so far from Earth that the long ships were destroyed
twice to reach it.

       *       *       *       *       *

The technicians came, commanded by General Max Shorter, sixty-three
years old. Men wearing the circle whose diameter was etched in ruby
steel enclosing a background of gleaming ebon--the emblem was a silver D
over a sunburst of hammered gold.

The surface of Miracastle roiled with unfamiliar storms and tornados and
hurricanes. Before these, the films of lichen evaporated into dust, and
the sparse and stunted vegetation with ochre foliage turned sear and was
powdered by the fury in the air.

Earth equipment, alien to the orange sun, hammered into the heart of
Miracastle. Night and day it converted the pulverized substance of the
planet in the white-hot core of its atomic furnaces.

Acid rivers snapped at the wind and changed to salt deposits and
super-heated steam. In the gaseous atmosphere, neutral crystals formed
and fell like powdered rain. Miracastle heated and cooled and shivered
with the virus of man-made chemical reactions, and the storms screamed
and tore at the age-old mountains.

Inside the eternal, self-renewing Richardson domes, the technicians
worked and waited and superintended the computers which controlled the
processes raging beyond them.

The long ship lifted steadily and majestically through the battering
storm and the driving rain of dust and crystals. Out beyond the dense
space that surrounds all stars, the long ship probed the ever-shifting
currents in the four-dimensional universe. The long ship found a
low-density flaw, where space could hardly be said to exist at all. The
long ship, described mathematically, was half as long as the
continuum--the length being inversely proportional and related only to
mass. Time was but a moth's wing between twin cliffs of eternity.

Inside Miracastle's orange sun, at its very core, an atom of hydrogen
was destroyed completely; and in the inconceivable distance, an atom of
hydrogen appeared. The pulsing, steady-state equation of the universe
maintained its knife-edge and inevitable thermo-dynamic balance.

Inside the long ship, a pilot-machine ordered the destruction of a
vastly greater collection of matter. The atoms of the ship and the
sailors--fixed in relationship, each to each--imploded into nothingness.

And the long ship and the men aboard it were born again at a low-density
area a million light years away--halfway to Earth. Born and were
destroyed again, in the blink of an eye.

Beyond the ship now lay Sol, pulsing in its own warmth and warming its
children embedded in the cold and distant texture of the universe. The
sailors were ghosts come home.

Miracastle was alone with her conquerors.

       *       *       *       *       *

General Max Shorter, a few weeks later, began writing a diary.

"I have been Destroyed thirty-seven times during forty years' service
with the long ships," he wrote. He wrote with a pen, using a metal
straight edge as a line rule.

"I have served faithfully and I believe as well as any man the Corps,
the planet and mankind. It is perhaps appropriate at this time, as I
approach the end of my long service, to record a few observations which
have occurred to me during the course of it as well as to record the
day-to-day details of my present command."

The general wrote: "A man is given a job to do. And when all is said and
done, that is the most important thing in his life: to do his job."

It took perhaps ten seconds for the soft knock to penetrate his
concentration. He adjusted himself to the moment and closed the diary
softly. He deposited it in the upper right-hand drawer of the writing
desk and locked the drawer.

The knock came again.
