himself devested of the gun he turned his horse about and laid whip
leaving the women to follow him as well as they could. Drewyer now
returned to the place they had left their baggage and brought it with
him to my camp. it consisted of several dressed and undressed skins; a
couple of bags wove with the fingers of the bark of the silk-grass
containing each about a bushel of dryed service berries some checherry
cakes and about a bushel of roots of three different kinds dryed and
prepared for uce which were foalded in as many parchment hides of
buffaloe. some flint and the instrument of bone for manufactureing the
flint into arrow points. some of this flint was as transparent as the
common black glass and much of the same colour easily broken, and
flaked off much like glass leaving a very sharp edge. one speceis of
the roots were fusiform abot six inches long and about the size of a
man's finger at the larger end tapering to a small point. the radicles
larger than in most fusiform roots. the rind was white and thin. the
body or consistence of the root was white mealy and easily reduced by
pounding to a substance resembleing flour which thickens with boiling
water something like flour and is agreeably flavored. this rout is
frequently eaten by the Indians either green or in it's dryed state
without the preparation of boiling. another speceis was much mutilated
but appeared to be fibrous; the parts were brittle, hard of the size of
a small quill, cilindric and as white as snow throughout, except some
small parts of the hard black rind which they had not seperated in the
preperation. this the Indians with me informed were always boiled for
use. I made the exprement, found that they became perfectly soft by
boiling, but had a very bitter taste, which was naucious to my pallate,
and I transfered them to the Indians who had eat them heartily. a third
speceis were about the size of a nutmeg, and of an irregularly rounded
form, something like the smallest of the Jerusalem artichoke, which
they also resemble in every other appearance. they had become very hard
by being dryed these I also boiled agreeably to the instruction of the
Indians and found them very agreeable. they resemble the Jerusalem
Artichoke very much in their flavor and I thought them preferable,
however there is some allowance to be made for the length of time I
have now been without vegitable food to which I was always much
attatched. these are certainly the best root I have yet seen in uce
among the Indians. I asked the Indians to shew me the plant of which
these roots formed a part but they informed me that neither of them
grew near this place. I had set most of the men at work today to dress
the deerskin belonging to those who had gone on command with Capt.
Clark. at 11 A.M. Charbono the Indian Woman, Cameahwait and about 50
men with a number of women and children arrived. they encamped near us.
after they had turned out their horses and arranged their camp I called
the Cheifs and warriors together and addressed them a second time; gave
them some further presents, particularly the second and third Cheifs
who it appeared had agreeably to their promise exerted themselves in my
favour. having no fresh meat and these poor devils half starved I had
previously prepared a good meal for them all of boiled corn and beans
which I gave them as soon as the council was over and I had distributed
the presents. this was thankfully received by them. the Chief wished
that his nation could live in a country where they could provide such
food. I told him that it would not be many years before the whitemen
would put it in the power of his nation to live in the country below
the mountains where they might cultivate corn beans and squashes. he
appeared much pleased with the information. I gave him a few dryed
squashes which we had brought from the Mandans he had them boiled and
declared them to be the best thing he had ever tasted except sugar, a
small lump of which it seems his sister Sah-cah-gar Wea had given him.
late in the evening I made the men form a bush drag, and with it in
about 2 hours they caught 528 very good fish, most of them large trout.
among them I now for the first time saw ten or a douzen of a whte
speceis of trout. they are of a silvery colour except on the back and
head, where they are of a bluish cast. the scales are much larger than
the speckled trout, but in their form position of their fins teeth
mouth &c they are precisely like them they are not generally quite as
large but equally well flavored. I distributed much the greater portion
of the fish among the Indians. I purchased five good horses of them
very reasonably, or at least for about the value of six dollars a peice
in merchandize. the Indians are very orderly and do not croud about our
camp nor attempt to disterb any article they see lying about. they
borrow knives kettles &c from the men and always carefully return them.
Capt. Clark says, "we set out early and passed a small creek at one
mile, also the points of four mountains which were high steep and
rocky. the mountains are so steep that it is almost incredible to
mention that horses had passed them. our road in many places lay over
the sharp fragments of rocks which had fallen from the mountains and
lay in confused heaps for miles together; yet notwithstanding our
horsed traveled barefoot over them as fast as we could and did not
detain us. passed two bold runing streams, and arrived at the entrance
of a small river" where some Indian families resided. they had some
scaffoalds of fish and burries exposed to dry. they were not acquainted
with the circumstance of any whitemen being in their country and were
therefore much allarmed on our approach several of the women and
children fled in the woods for shelter. the guide was behind and the
wood thick in which their lodges were situated we came on them before
they had the least notice of us. those who remained offered us every
thing they had, which was but little; they offered us collars of elks
tusks which their children woar Salmon beries &c. we eat some of their
fish and buries but returned them the other articles they had offered
with a present of some small articles which seemed to add much to their
pacification.

The guide who had by this time arrived explained to them who we were
and our object in visiting them; but still there were some of the women
and Children inconsoleable, they continued to cry during our stay,
which was about an hour. a road passes up this river which my guide
informed me led over the mountains to the Missouri. from this place I
continued my rout along the steep side of a mountain for about 3 miles
and arrived at the river near a small Island on the lower point of
which we encamped in the evening we attempted to gig fish but were
unsuccessfull only obtaining one small salmon. in the course of the day
we had passed several women and children geathering burries who were
very liberal in bestoing us a part of their collections. the river is
very rapid and shoaly; many rocks lie in various derections scattered
throughout it's bed. There are some few small pine scattered through
the bottoms, of which I only saw one which appeared as if it would
answer for a canoe and that was but small. the tops of the mountains on
the Lard. side are covered with pine and some also scattered on the
sides of all the mountains. I saw today a speceis of woodpecker, which
fed on the seeds of the pine. it's beak and tail were white, it's wings
were black, and every other part of a dark brown. it was about the size
of a robin-




[Clark, August 22, 1805]
August 22d Thursday 1805
We Set out early passed a Small Creek on the right at 1 mile and the
points of four mountains verry Steap high & rockey, the assent of three
was So Steap that it is incrediable to describe the rocks in maney
places loose & Sliped from those mountains and is a bed of rugid loose
white and dark brown loose rock for miles. the Indian horses pass over
those Clifts hills Sids & rocks as fast as a man, the three horses with
me do not detain me any on account of those dificuelties, passed two
bold rung. Streams on the right and a Small river at the mouth of Which
Several families of Indians were encamped and had Several Scaffolds of
fish & buries drying we allarmed them verry much as they knew nothing
of a white man being in their Countrey, and at the time we approached
their lodges which was in a thick place of bushes-my guiedes were
behind.--They offered every thing they possessed (which was verry
littl) to us, Some run off and hid in the bushes The first offer of
theirs were Elks tuskes from around their Childrens necks, Sammon &c.
my guide attempted passifyed those people and they Set before me
berres, & fish to eate, I gave a fiew Small articles to those fritened
people which added verry much to their pasification but not entirely as
Some of the women & Childn. Cried dureing my Stay of an hour at this
place, I proceeded on the Side of a verry Steep & rockey mountain for 3
miles and Encamped on the lower pt. of an Island. we attempted to gig
fish without Suckcess. caught but one Small one.The last Creek or Small
river is on the right Side and "a road passes up it & over to the
Missouri" in this day passed Several womin and Children gathering and
drying buries of which they were very kind and gave us a part. the
river rapid and Sholey maney Stones Scattered through it in different
directions. I Saw to day Bird of the wood pecker kind which fed on Pine
burs its Bill and tale white the wings black every other part of a
light brown, and about the Size of a robin. Some fiew Pine Scattered in
the bottoms & Sides of the Mountains (the Top of the Motn. to the left
Covered & inaxcessable) I Saw one which would make a Small Canoe.




[Lewis, August 23, 1805]
Friday August 23rd 1805.
This morning I arrose very early and despatched two hunters on
horseback with orders to extend their hunt to a greater distance up the
S. E. fork than they had done heretofore, in order if possible to
obtain some meet for ourselves as well as the Indians who appeared to
depend on us for food and our store of provision is growing too low to
indulge them with much more corn or flour. I wished to have set out
this morning but the cheef requested that I would wait untill another
party of his nation arrived which he expected today, to this I
consented from necessity, and therefore sent out the hunters as I have
mentioned. I also laid up the canoes this morning in a pond near the
forks; sunk them in the water and weighted them down with stone, after
taking out the plugs of the gage holes in their bottoms; hoping by this
means to guard against both the effects of high water, and that of the
fire which is frequently kindled in these plains by the natives. the
Indians have promised to do them no intentional injury and beleive they
are too lazy at any rate to give themselves the trouble to raise them
from their present situation in order to cut or birn them. I reminded
the chief of the low state of our stores of provision and advised him
to send his young men to hunt, which he immediately recommended to them
and most of them turned out. I wished to have purchased some more
horses of them but they objected against disposing of any more of them
untill we reach their camp beyond the mountains. the Indians pursued a
mule buck near our camp I saw this chase for about 4 miles it was
really entertaining, there were about twelve of them in pursuit of it
on horseback, they finally rode it down and killed it. the all came in
about 1 P.M. having killed 2 mule deer and three goats. this mule buck
was the largest deer of any kind I had ever seen. it was nearly as
large as a doe Elk. I observed that there was but little division or
distribution of the meat they had taken among themselves. some familes
had a large stock and others none. this is not customary among the
nations of Indians with whom I have hitherto been acquainted I asked
Cameahwait the reason why the hunters did not divide the meat among
themselves; he said that meat was so scarce with them that the men who
killed it reserved it for themselves and their own families. my hunters
arrived about 2 in the evening with two mule deer and three common
deer. I distributed three of the deer among those families who appeared
to have nothing to eat. at three P.M. the expected party of Indians
arrived, about 50 men women and Children. I now learnt that most of
them were thus far on their way down the valley towards the buffaloe
country, and observed that there was a good deel of anxiety on the part
of some of those who had promised to assist me over the mountains to
accompany this party, I felt some uneasiness on this subject but as
they still said they would return with me as they had promised I said
nothing to them but resolved to set out in the morning as early as
possible. I dispatched two hunters this evening into the cove to hunt
and leave the meat they might kill on the rout we shall pass tomorrow.

The metal which we found in possession of these people consited of a
few indifferent knives, a few brass kettles some arm bands of iron and
brass, a few buttons, woarn as ornaments in their hair, a spear or two
of a foot in length and some iron and brass arrow points which they
informed me they obtained in exchange for horses from the Crow or Rocky
Mountain Indians on the yellowstone River. the bridlebits and stirrips
they obtained from the Spaniards, tho these were but few. many of them
made use of flint for knives, and with this instrument, skined the
animals they killed, dressed their fish and made their arrows; in short
they used it for every purpose to which the knife is applyed. this
flint is of no regular form, and if they can only obtain a part of it,
an inch or two in length that will cut they are satisfyed, they renew
the edge by fleaking off the flint by means of the point of an Elk's or
deer's horn. with the point of a deer or Elk's horn they also form
their arrow points of the flint, with a quickness and neatness that is
really astonishing. we found no axes nor hatchets among them; what wood
they cut was done either with stone or Elk's horn. the latter they use
always to rive or split their wood. their culinary eutensils exclusive
of the brass kettle before mentioned consist of pots in the form of
ajar made either of earth, or of a white soft stone which becomes black
and very hard by birning, and is found in the hills near the three
forks of the Missouri betwen Madison's and Gallitin's rivers they have
also spoons made of the Buffaloe's horn and those of the Bighorn. Their
bows are made of ceader or pine and have nothing remarkable about them.
the back of the bow is covered with sinues and glue and is about 21/2
feet long. much the shape of those used by the Siouxs Mandans
Minnetares &c. their arrows are more slender generally than those used
by the nations just mentioned but much the same in construction. Their
Sheild is formed of buffaloe hide, perfectly arrow proof, and is a
circle of 2 feet 4 I. or 2 F. 6 I. in diameter. this is frequently
painted with varios figures and ornamented around the edges with
feather and a fringe of dressed leather. they sometimes make bows of
the Elk's horn and those also of the bighorn. those of the Elk's horn
are made of a single peice and covered on the back with glue and sinues
like those made of wood, and are frequently ornamented with a stran
wrought porcupine quills and sinues raped around them for some distance
at both extremities. the bows of the bighorn are formed of small peices
laid flat and cemented with gleue, and rolled with sinews, after which,
they are also covered on the back with sinews and glew, and highly
ornamented as they are much prized. forming the sheild is a cerimony of
great importance among them, this implement would in their minds be
devested of much of its protecting power were it not inspired with
those virtues by their old men and jugglers. their method of preparing
it is thus, an entire skin of a bull buffaloe two years old is first
provided; a feast is next prepared and all the warriors old men and
jugglers invited to partake. a hole is sunk in the ground about the
same in diameter with the intended sheild and about 18 inches deep. a
parcel of stones are now made red hot and thrown into the hole water is
next thrown in and the hot stones cause it to emit a very strong hot
steem, over this they spread the green skin which must not have been
suffered to dry after taken off the beast. the flesh side is laid next
to the groround and as many of the workmen as can reach it take hold on
it's edges and extend it in every direction. as the skin becomes
heated, the hair seperates and is taken of with the fingers, and the
skin continues to contract untill the whoe is drawn within the compas
designed for the shield, it is then taken off and laid on a parchment
hide where they pound it with their heels when barefoot. this operation
of pounding continues for several days or as long as the feast lasts
when it is delivered to the propryeter and declared by the jugglers and
old men to be a sufficient defence against the arrows of their enimies
or even bullets if feast has been a satisfactory one. many of them
beleive implisitly that a ball cannot penitrate their sheilds, in
consequence of certain supernaural powers with which they have been
inspired by their jugglers.--The Poggamoggon is an instrument with a
handle of wood covered with dressed leather about the size of a whip
handle and 22 inches long; a round stone of 2 pounds weight is also
covered with leather and strongly united to the leather of the handle
by a throng of 2 inches long; a loop of leather united to the handle
passes arond the wrist. a very heavy blow may be given with this
instrument. They have also a kind of armor which they form with many
foalds of dressed Atelope's skin, unite with glue and sand. with this
they cover their own bodies and those of their horses. these are
sufficient against the effects of the arrow.--the quiver which contains
their arrows and implements for making fire is formed of various skins.
that of the Otter seems to be prefered. they are but narrow, of a
length sufficent to protect the arrow from the weather, and are woarn
on the back by means of a strap which passes over the left sholder and
under the wright arm.their impliments for making fire is nothing more
than a blunt arrow and a peice of well seasoned soft spongey wood such
as the willow or cottonwood. the point of this arrow they apply to this
dry stick so near one edge of it that the particles of wood which are
seperated from it by the friction of the arrow falls down by it's side
in a little pile. the arrow is held between the palms of the hand with
the fingers extended, and being pressed as much as possible against the
peice is briskly rolled between the palms of the hands backwards and
forwards by pressing the arrow downwards the hands of course in rolling
arrow also decend; they bring them back with a quick motion and repeat
the operation till the dust by the friction takes fire; the peice and
arrow are then removed and some dry grass or Boated wood is added. it
astonished me to see in what little time these people would kindle fire
in this way. in less than a minute they will produce fire.

Capt. Clark set out this morning very early and poroceeded but slowly
in consequence of the difficulty of his road which lay along the steep
side of a mountain over large irregular and broken masses of rocks
which had tumbled from the upper part of the mountain. it was with much
wrisk and pain that the horses could get on. at the distance of four
miles he arrived at the river and the rocks were here so steep and
juted into the river such manner that there was no other alternative
but passing through the river, this he attempted with success tho water
was so deep for a short distance as to swim the horses and was very
rapid; he continued his rout one mile along the edge of the river under
this steep Clift to a little bottom, below which the whole current of
the river beat against the Stard. shore on which he was, and which was
formed of a solid rock perfectly inaccessible to horses. here also the
little track which he had been pursuing, terminated. he therefore
determined to leave the horses and the majority of the party here and
with his guide and three men to continue his rout down the river still
further, in order more fully to satisfy himself as to it's
practicability. accordingly he directed the men to hunt and fish at
this place untill his return. they had not killed anything today but
one goose, and the ballance of the little provision they had brought
with them, as well as the five salmon they had procured yesterday were
consumed last evening; there was of tours no inducement for his halting
any time, at this place; after a few minutes he continued his rout
clambering over immence rocks and along the sides of lofty precepices
on the border of the river to the distance of 12 miles, at which place
a large creek discharged itself on the Norh side 12 yds. wide and deep.
a short distance above the entrance of this creek there is a narrow
bottom which is the first that he had found on the river from that in
which he left the horses and party. a plain indian road led up this
creek which the guide informed him led to a large river that ran to the
North, and was frequented by another nation who occasionally visited
this river for the purpose of taking fish. at this place he saw some
late appearance of Indians having been encamped and the tracks of a
number of horses. Capt. C. halted here about 2 hours, caught some small
fish, on which, with the addition of some berries, they dined. the
river from the place at which he left the party to his present station
was one continued rapid, in which there were five shoals neither of
which could be passed with loaded canoes nor even run with empty ones.
at those several places therefore it would be necessary to unload and
transport the baggage for a considerable distance over steep and almost
inacassable rocks where there was no possibility of employing horses
for the releif of the men; the canoes would next have to be let down by
cords and even with this precaution Capt. C. conceived there would be
much wriske of both canoes and men. at one of those shoals the lofty
perpendicular rocks which from the bases of the mountains approach the
river so nearly on each side, as to prevent the possibility of a
portage, or passage for the canoes without expending much labour in
removing rocks and cuting away the earth in some places. to surmount
These difficulties, precautions must be observed which in their
execution must necessarily consume much time and provision, neither of
which we can command. the season is now far advanced to remain in these
mountains as the Indians inform us we shall shortly have snow; the
salmon have so far declined that they are themselves haistening from
the country and not an animal of any discription is to be seen in this
difficult part of the river larger than a pheasant or a squirrel and
they not abundant; add to this that our stock of provision is now so
low that it would not support us more than ten days. the bends of the
river are short and the currant beats from side to side against the
rocks with great violence. the river is about 100 yds. wide and so deep
that it cannot be foarded but in a few places, and the rocks approach
the river so near in most places that there is no possibility of
passing between them and the water; a passage therefore with horses
along the river is also impracticable. The sides of these mountains
present generally one barren surface of confused and broken masses of
stone. above these are white or brown and towards the base of a grey
colour and so hard that when struck with a steel, yeald fire like
flint. those he had just past were scarcely releived by the appearance
of a tree; but those below the entrance of the creek were better
covered with timber, and there were also some tall pine near the river.
The sides of the mountains are very steep, and the torrents of water
which roll down their sides at certain seasons appear to carry with
them vast quantities of the loose stone into the river. after dinner
Capt. C. continued his rout down the river and at 1/2 a mile pased
another creek not so large as that just mentioned, or about 5 yards
wide. here his guide informed him that by ascending this creek some
distance they would have a better road and would cut off a considerable
bend which the river made to the south; accordingly he pursued a well
beaten Indian track which led up this creek about six miles, then
leaving the creek on the wright he passed over a ridge, and at the
distance of a mile arrived at the river where it passes through a well
timbered bottom of about eighty acres of land; they passed this bottom
and asscended a steep and elivated point of a mountain, from whence the
guide shewed him the brake of the river through the mountains for about
20 miles further. this view was terminated by one of the most lofty
mountains, Capt. C. informed me, he had ever seen which was perfectly
covered with snow. the river directed it's course immediately to this
stupendous mountain at the bace of which the gude informe him those
difficulties of which himself and nation had spoken, commenced. that
after the river reached this mountain it continued it's rout to the
North for many miles between high and perpendicular rocks, roling
foaming and beating against innumerable rocks which crouded it's
channel; that then it penetrated the mountain through a narrow gap
leaving a perpendicular rock on either side as high as the top of the
mountain which he beheld. that the river here making a bend they could
not see through the mountain, and as it was impossible to decend the
river or clamber over that vast mountain covered with eternal snow,
neither himself nor any of his nation had ever been lower in this
direction, than in view of the place at which the river entered this
mountain; that if Capt. C. wished him to do so, he would conduct him to
that place, where he thought they could probably arrive by the next
evening. Capt. C. being now perfictly satisfyed as to the
impractability of this rout either by land or water, informed the old
man, that he was convinced of the varacity of his assertions and would
now return to the village from whence they had set out where he
expected to meet myself and party. they now returned to the upper part
of the last creek he had passed, and encamped. it was an hour after
dark before he reached this place. a small river falls into this fork
of the Columbia just above the high mountain through which it passes on
the south side.




[Clark, August 23, 1805]
August 23rd Friday 1805
We Set out early proceed on with great dificuelty as the rocks were So
Sharp large and unsettled and the hill sides Steep that the horses
could with the greatest risque and dificulty get on, no provisions as
the 5 Sammons given us yesterday by the Indians were eaten last night,
one goose killed this morning; at 4 miles we came to a place the horses
Could not pass without going into the river, we passed one mile to a
verry bad riffle the water Confined in a narrow Channel & beeting
against the left Shore, as we have no parth further and the Mounts. jut
So close as to prevent the possibiley of horses proceeding down, I
deturmined to delay the party here and with my guide and three men
proceed on down to examine if the river continued bad or was
practiable. I Set out with three men directing those left to hunt and
fish until my return. I proceeded on Somtims in a Small wolf parth & at
other times Climeing over the rocks for 12 miles to a large Creek on
the right Side above the mouth of this Creek for a Short distance is a
narrow bottom & the first, below the place I left my partey, a road
passes down this Creek which I understoode passed to the water of a
River which run to Th North & was the ground of another nation, Some
fresh Sign about this Creek of horse and Camps. I delayd 2 hours to
fish, Cought Some Small fish on which we dined.

The River from the place I left my party to this Creek is almost one
continued rapid, five verry Considerable rapids the passage of either
with Canoes is entirely impossable, as the water is Confined betwen
hugh Rocks & the Current beeting from one against another for Some
distance below &c. &c. at one of those rapids the mountains Close So
Clost as to prevent a possibility of a portage with great labour in
Cutting down the Side of the hill removeing large rocks &c. &c. all the
others may be passed by takeing every thing over Slipery rocks, and the
Smaller ones Passed by letting down the Canoes empty with Cords, as
running them would certainly be productive of the loss of Some Canoes,
those dificuelties and necessary precautions would delay us an emince
time in which provisions would be necessary. (we have but little and
nothing to be precured in this quarter except Choke Cheres & red haws
not an animal of any kind to be seen and only the track of a Bear)
below this Creek the lofty Pine is thick in the bottom hill Sides on
the mountains & up the runs. The river has much the resemblance of that
above bends Shorter and no passing, after a few miles between the river
& the mountains & the Current So Strong that is dangerous crossing the
river, and to proceed down it would rendr it necessarey to Cross almost
at every bend This river is about 100 yards wide and can be forded but
in a few places. below my guide and maney other Indians tell me that
the Mountains Close and is a perpendicular Clift on each Side, and
Continues for a great distance and that the water runs with great
violence from one rock to the other on each Side foaming & roreing thro
rocks in every direction, So as to render the passage of any thing
impossible. those rapids which I had Seen he said was Small & trifleing
in comparrison to the rocks & rapids below, at no great distance & The
Hills or mountains were not like those I had Seen but like the Side of
a tree Streight up--Those Mountains which I had passed were Steep
Contain a white, a brown, & low down a Grey hard stone which would make
fire, those Stone were of different Sises all Sharp and are continuly
Slipping down, and in maney places one bed of those Stones inclined
from the river bottom to the top of the mountains, The Torrents of
water which come down aftr a rain carries with it emence numbers of
those Stone into the river about 1/2 a mile below the last mentioned
Creek another Creek falls in, my guide informed me that our rout was up
this Creek by which rout we would Save a considerable bend of the river
to the South. we proceeded on a well beeten Indian parth up this Creak
about 6 miles and passed over a ridge 1 mile to the river in a Small
vally through which we passed and assended a Spur of the Mountain from
which place my guide Shew me the river for about 20 miles lower &
pointed out the dificulty we returned to the last Creek & camped about
one hour after dark.

There my guide Shewed me a road from the N Which Came into the one I
was in which he Said went to a large river which run to the north on
which was a Nation he called Tushapass, he made a map of it




[Lewis, August 24, 1805]
Saturday August 24th 1805.
As the Indians who were on their way down the Missouri had a number of
spare hoses with them I thought it probable that I could obtain some of
them and therefore desired the Cheif to speak to them and inform me
whether they would trade. they gave no positive answer but requested to
see the goods which I was willing to give in exchange. I now produced
some battle axes which I had made at Fort Mandan with which they were
much pleased. knives also seemed in great demand among them. I soon
purchased three horses and a mule. for each horse I gave an ax a knife
handkercheif and a little paint; & for the mule the addition of a knife
a shirt handkercheif and a pair of legings; at this price which was
quite double that given for the horses, the fellow who sold him made a
merit of having bestoed me one of his mules. I consider this mule a
great acquisition. These Indians soon told me that they had no more
horses for sale and I directed the party to prepare to set out. I had
now nine horses and a mule, and two which I had hired made twelve these
I had loaded and the Indian women took the ballance of the baggage. I
had given the Interpreter some articles with which to purchase a horse
for the woman which he had obtained. at twelve Oclock we set out and
passed the river below the forks, directing our rout towards the cove
along the track formerly mentioned. most of the horses were heavily
laden, and it appears to me that it will require at least 25 horses to
convey our baggage along such roads as I expect we shall be obliged to
pass in the mountains. I had now the inexpressible satisfaction to find
myself once more under way with all my baggage and party. an Indian had
the politeness to offer me one of his horses to ride which I accepted
with cheerfullness as it enabled me to attend better to the march of
the party. I had reached the lower part of the cove when an Indian rode
up and informed me that one of my men was very sick and unable to come
on. I directed the party to halt at a small run which falls into the
creek on Lard. at the lower part of the Cove and rode back about 2
Miles where I found Wiser very ill with a fit of the cholic. I sent
Sergt. Ordway who had remained with him for some water and gave him a
doze of the essence of Peppermint and laudinum which in the course of
half an hour so far recovered him that he was enabled to ride my horse
and I proceeded on foot and rejoined the party. the sun was yet an hour
high but the Indians who had for some time impatiently waited my return
at length unloaded and turned out their horses and my party had
followed there ex-ample. as it was so late and the Indians had prepared
their camp for the night I thought it best to acquiess and determined
also to remain. we had traveled only about six miles. after we encamped
we had a slight shower of rain. Goodrich who is our principal fisherman
caught several fine trout. Drewyer came to us late in the evening and
had not killed anything. I gave the Indians who were absolutely engaged
in transporting the baggage, a little corn as they had nothing to eat.
I told Cameahwait that my stock of provision was too small to indulge
all his people with provision and recommended it to him to advise such
as were not assisting us with our baggage to go on to their camp to
morrow and wait our arrival; which he did accordingly. Cameahwait
literally translated is one who never walks. he told me that his nation
had also given him another name by which he was signalized as a warrior
which was Too-et'-te-con'-e or black gun. these people have many names
in the course of their lives, particularly if they become distinguished
characters. for it seems that every important event by which they
happen to distinguish themselves intitles them to claim another name
which is generally scelected by themselves and confirmed by the nation.
those distinguishing acts are the killing and scalping an enemy, the
killing a white bear, leading a party to war who happen to be
successfull either in destroying their enemies or robing them of their
horses, or individually stealing the horses of an enemy. these are
considered acts of equal heroism among them, and that of killing an
enemy without scalping him is considered of no importance; in fact the
whole honour seems to be founded in the act of scalping, for if a man
happens to slay a dozen of his enemies in action and others get the
scalps or first lay their hand on the dead person the honor is lost to
him who killed them and devolves on those who scalp or first touch
them. Among the Shoshones, as well as all the Indians of America,
bravery is esteemed the primary virtue; nor can any one become eminent
among them who has not at some period of his life given proofs of his
possessing this virtue. with them there can be no preferment without
some warelike achievement, and so completely interwoven is this
principle with the earliest Elements of thought that it will in my
opinion prove a serious obstruction to the restoration of a general
peace among the nations of the Missouri. while at Fort Mandan I was one
day addressing some cheifs of the Minetares wo visited us and pointing
out to them the advantages of a state of peace with their neighbours
over that of war in which they were engaged. the Chiefs who had already
geathered their havest of larals, and having forceably felt in many
instances some of those inconveniences attending a state of war which I
pointed out, readily agreed with me in opinon. a young fellow under the
full impression of the Idea I have just suggested asked me if they were
in a state of peace with all their neighhours what the nation would do
for Cheifs?, and added that the cheifs were now oald and must shortly
die and that the nation could not exist without cheifs. taking as
granted that there could be no other mode devised for making Cheifs but
that which custom had established through the medium of warlike
acievements.

The few guns which the Shoshones have are reserved for war almost
exclusively and the bow and arrows are used in hunting. I have seen a
few skins among these people which have almost every appearance of the
common sheep. they inform me that they finde this animals on the high
mountains to the West and S. W. of them. it is about the size of the
common sheep, the wool is reather shorter and more intermixed with long
hairs particularly on the upper part of the neck. these skins have been
so much woarn that I could not form a just Idea of the animal or it's
colour. the Indians however inform me that it is white and that it's
horns are lunated comprest twisted and bent backward as those of the
common sheep. the texture of the skin appears to be that of the sheep.
I am now perfectly convinced that the sheep as well as the Bighorn
exist in these mountains.

The usual caparison of the Shoshone horse is a halter and saddle. the
1st consists either of a round plated or twisted cord of six or seven
strands of buffaloe's hair, or a throng of raw hide made pliant by
pounding and rubing. these cords of bufaloe's hair are about the size
of a man's finger and remarkably strong. this is the kind of halter
which is prefered by them. the halter of whatever it may be composed is
always of great length and is never taken from the neck of the horse
which they commonly use at any time. it is first attatched at one end
about the neck of the horse with a knot that will not slip, it is then
brought down to his under jaw and being passed through the mouth
imbaces the under jaw and tonge in a simple noose formed by crossing
the rope inderneath the jaw of the horse. this when mounted he draws up
on the near side of the horse's neck and holds in the left hand,
suffering it to trail at a great distance behind him sometimes the
halter is attatched so far from the end that while the shorter end
serves him to govern his horse, the other trails on the grond as before
mentioned. they put their horses to their full speed with those cords
trailing on the ground. when they turn out the horse to graze the noose
is mearly loosed from his mouth. the saddle is made of wood and covered
with raw hide which holds the parts very firmly together. it is made
like the pack saddles in uce among the French and Spaniards. it
consists of two flat thin boards which fit the sides of the horses
back, and are held frirm by two peices which are united to them behind
and before on the outer side and which rise to a considerable hight
terminating sometimes in flat horizontal points extending outwards, and
alwas in an accute angle or short bend underneath the upper part of
these peices. a peice of buffaloe's skin with the hair on, is usually
put underneath the saddle; and very seldom any covering on the saddle.
stirrups when used are made of wood and covered with leather. these are
generally used by the elderly men and women; the young men scarcely
ever use anything more than a small pad of dressed leather stuffed with
hair, which is confined with a leather thong passing arond the body of
the horse in the manner of a girth. they frequently paint their
favorite horses, and cut their ears in various shapes. they also
decorate their mains and tails, which they never draw or trim, with the
feathers of birds, and sometimes suspend at the breast of the horse the
finest ornaments they possess. the Spanish bridle is prefered by them
when they can obtain them, but they never dispence with the cord about
the neck of the horse, which serves them to take him with more ease
when he is runing at large. They are excellent horsemen and extreemly
expert in casting the cord about the neck of a horse. the horses that
have been habituated to be taken with the cord in this way, however
wild they may appear at first, surrender the moment they feel the cord
about their necks.--There are no horses in this quarter which can with
propriety be termed wild. there are some few which have been left by
the indians at large for so great a length of time that they have
become shye, but they all shew marks of having been in possession of
man. such is that one which Capt. Clark saw just below the three forks
of the Missouri, and one other which I saw on the Missouri below the
entrance of the Mussle shell river.--Capt. Clark set out very early
this morning on his return, he traveled down the creek to it's entrance
by the same Indian track he had ascended it; at the river he marked his
name on a pine tree, then ascended to the bottom above the second
creek, and brekfasted on burries, which occupyed them about one hour.
he now retraced his former track and joined the party where he had left
them at 4 P.M. on his way Capt. C. fell from a rock and injured one of
his legs very much. the party during his absence had killed a few
pheasants and caught a few small fish on which together with haws and
Serviceburies they had subsisted. they had also killed one cock of the
Mountains Capt. Clark now wrote me a discription of the river and
country, and stated our prospects by this rout as they have been
heretofore mentioned and dispatched Colter on horseback with orders to
loose no time reaching me. he set out late with the party continued his
rout about two miles and encamped. Capt Clark had seen some trees which
would make small canoes but all of them some distance below the Indian
Caps which he passed at the entrance of fish Creek.




[Clark, August 24, 1805]
August 24th Satturday 1805
Set out verry early this morning on my return passed down the Creek at
the mouth marked my name on a pine Tree, proceed on to the bottom above
the Creek & Brackfast on buries & delayed 1 hour, then proceed on up
the river by the Same rout we decended to the place I left my party
where we arrived at 4 oClock, (I Sliped & bruised my leg verry much on
a rock) the party had killed Several phesents and Cought a fiew Small
fish on which they had Subsisted in my absence. also a heath hen, near
the Size of a Small turkey.

I wrote a letter to Capt Lewis informing him of the prospects before us
and information recved of my guide which I thought favourable &c. &
Stating two plans one of which for us to pursue &c. and despatched one
man & horse and directed the party to get ready to march back, every
man appeared disheartened from the prospects of the river, and nothing
to eate, I Set out late and Camped 2 miles above, nothing to eate but
Choke Cherries & red haws which act in different ways So as to make us
Sick, dew verry heavy, my beding wet in passing around a rock the
horses were obliged to go deep into the water.

The plan I stated to Capt Lewis if he agrees with me we shall adopt is
to procure as many horses (one for each man) if possible and to hire my
present guide who I sent on to him to interegate thro the Intprtr. and
proceed on by land to Some navagable part of the Columbia River, or to
the Ocean, depending on what provisions we can procure by the gun aded
to the Small Stock we have on hand depending on our horses as the last
resort.

a second plan to divide the party one part to attempt this deficuet
river with what provisions we had, and the remaindr to pass by Land on
hose back Depending on our gun &c for Provisions &c. and come together
occasionally on the river.

the 1s of which I would be most pleased with &c.

I saw Several trees which would make Small Canoes and by putting 2
together would make a Siseable one, all below the last Indian Camp
Several miles




[Lewis, August 25, 1805]
Sunday August 25th 1805.
This morning loaded our horses and set out a little after sunrise; a
few only of the Indians unengaged in assisting us went on as I had
yesterday proposed to the Cheif. the others flanked us on each side and
started some Antelope which they pursued for several hours but killed
none of them. we proceeded within 2 Ms. of the narrow pass or seven
miles from our camp of last evening and halted for dinner. Our hunters
joined us at noon with three deer the greater part of which I gave the
indians. sometime after we had halted, Charbono mentioned to me with
apparent unconcern that he expected to meet all the Indians from the
camp on the Columbia tomorrow on their way to the Missouri. allarmed at
this information I asked why he expected to meet them. he then informed
me that the 1st Cheif had dispatched some of his young men this morning
to this camp requesting the Indians to meet them tomorrow and that
himself and those with him would go on with them down the Missouri, and
consequently leave me and my baggage on the mountain or thereabouts. I
was out of patience with the folly of Charbono who had not sufficient
sagacity to see the consequencies which would inevitably flow from such
a movement of the indians, and altho he had been in possession of this
information since early in the morning when it had been communicated to
him by his Indian woman yet he never mentioned it untill the after
noon. I could not forbear speaking to him with some degree of asperity
on this occasion. I saw that there was no time to be lost in having
those orders countermanded, or that we should not in all probability
obtain any more horses or even get my baggage to the waters of the
Columbia. I therefore Called the three Cheifs together and having
smoked a pipe with them, I asked them if they were men of their words,
and whether I could depent on the promises they had made me; they
readily answered in the affermative; I then asked them if they had not
promised to assist me with my baggage to their camp on the other side
of the mountains, or to the place at which Capt. Clark might build the
canoes, should I wish it. they acknowledged that they had. I then asked
them why they had requested their people on the other side of the
mountain to meet them tomorrow on the mountain where there would be no
possibility of our remaining together for the purpose of trading for
their horses as they had also promised. that if they had not promised
to have given me their assistance in transporting my baggage to the
waters on the other side of the mountain that I should not have
attempted to pass the mountains but would have returned down the river
and that in that case they would never have seen anymore white men in
their country. that if they wished the white men to be their friends
and to assist them against their enemies by furnishing them with arms
and keeping their enemies from attacking them that they must never
promis us anything which they did not mean to perform. that when I had
first seen them they had doubted what I told them about the arrival of
the party of whitemen in canoes, that they had been convinced that what
I told them on that occasion was true, why then would they doubt what I
said on any other point. I told them that they had witnessed my
liberality in dividing the meat which my hunters killed with them; and
that I should continue to give such of them as assisted me a part of
whatever we had ourselves to eat. and finally concluded by telling them
if they intended to keep the promisses they had made me to dispatch one
of their young men immediately with orders to their people to remain
where they were untill our arrival. the two inferior cheifs said that
they wished to assist me and be as good as their word, and that they
had not sent for their people, that it was the first Chief who had done
so, and they did not approve of the measure. Cameahwait remained silent
for some time, at length he told me that he knew he had done wrong but
that he had been induced to that measure from seeing all his people
hungary, but as he had promised to give me his assistance he would not
in future be worse than his word. I then desired him to send
immediately and countermand his orders; acordingly a young man was sent
for this purpose and I gave him a handkerchief to engage him in my
interest. this matter being arranged to my satisfaction I called all
the women and men together who had been assisting me in the
transportation of the baggage and gave them a billet for each horse
which they had imployed in that service and informed them when we
arrived at the plaice where we should finally halt on the river I would
take the billet back and give them merchandize for it. every one
appeared now satisfyed and when I ordered the horses loaded for our
departure the Indians were more than usually allert. we continued our
march untill late in the evening and encamped at the upper part of the
cove where the creek enters the mountains; here our hunters joined us
with another deer which they had killed, this I gave to the women and
Children, and for my own part remained supperless. I observed
considerable quantities of wild onions in the bottom lands of this
cove. I also saw several large hares and many of the cock of the plains.

Capt. Clark set out early this morning and continued his rout to the
indian camp at the entrance of fish Creek; here he halted about an
hour; the indians gave himself and party some boiled salmon and
hurries. these people appeared extreemly hospitable tho poor and dirty
in the extreem. he still pursued the track up the river by which he had
decended and in the evening arrived at the bluff on the river where he
had encamped on the 21st Inst. it was late in the evening before he
reached this place. they formed their camp, and Capt. C. sent them in
different directions to hunt and fish. some little time after they
halted a party of Indians passed by on their way down the river,
consisting of a man a woman and several boys; from these people the
guide obtained 2 salmon which together with some small fish they caught
and a beaver which Shannon killed furnished them with a plentifull
supper. the pine grows pretty abundantly high up on the sides of the
mountains on the opposite side of the river. one of the hunters saw a
large herd of Elk on the opposite side of the river in the edge of the
timbered land.--Winsor was taken very sick today and detained Capt C.
very much on his march. three hunters whom he had sent on before him
this morning joined him in the evening having killed nothing; they saw
only one deer.

The course and the distances, of Capt. Clark's rout down this branch of
the Columbia below this bluff, commencing opposite to an Island, are as
follow.

This morning while passing through the Shoshone cove Frazier fired his
musquet at some ducks in a little pond at the distance of about 60
yards from me; the ball rebounded from the water and pased within a
very few feet of me. near the upper part of this cove the Shoshonees
suffered a very severe defeat by the Minnetares about six years since.
this part of the cove on the N. E. side of the Creek has lately been
birned by the Indians as a signal on some occasion.




[Clark, August 25, 1805]
August 25th Sunday 1805
Set out verry early and halted one hour at the Indian Camp, they were
kind gave us all a little boiled Sarnmon & dried buries to eate, abt.
half as much as I could eate, those people are kind with what they have
but excessive pore & Durtey.--we proceeded on over the mountains we had
before passed to the Bluff we Encamped at on the 21s instant where we
arrived late and turned out to hunt & fish, Cought Several Small fish,
a party of Squars & one man with Several boys going down to guathe
berries below, my guide got two Sammon from this party (which made
about half a Supper for the party), after Dark Shannon came in with a
beaver which the Party suped on Sumptiously--one man verry Sick to day
which detained us verry much I had three hunters out all day, they saw
one Deer, killed nothing. one of the Party Saw 9 Elk on a Mountain to
our right assending, amongst the Pine timber which is thick on that side




[Lewis, August 26, 1805]
Monday August 26th 1805.
This morning was excessively cold; there was ice on the vessels of
water which stood exposed to the air nearly a quarter of an inch thick.
we collected our horses and set out at sunrise. we soon arrived at the
extreem source of the Missouri; here I halted a few minutes, the men
drank of the water and consoled themselves with the idea of having at
length arrived at this long wished for point. from hence we proceeded
to a fine spring on the side of the mountain where I had lain the
evening before I first arrived at the Shoshone Camp. here I halted to
dine and graize our horses, there being fine green grass on that part
of the hillside which was moistened by the water of the spring while
the grass on the other parts was perfectly dry and parched with the
sun. I directed a pint of corn to be given each Indian who was engaged
in transporting our baggage and about the same quantity to each of the
men which they parched pounded and made into supe. one of the women who
had been assisting in the transportation of the baggage halted at a
little run about a mile behind us, and sent on the two pack horses
which she had been conducting by one of her female friends. I enquired
of Cameahwait the cause of her detention, and was informed by him in an
unconcerned manner that she had halted to bring fourth a child and
would soon overtake us; in about an hour the woman arrived with her
newborn babe and passed us on her way to the camp apparently as well as
she ever was. It appears to me that the facility and ease with which
the women of the aborigines of North America bring fourth their
children is reather a gift of nature than depending as some have
supposed on the habitude of carrying heavy burthens on their backs
while in a state of pregnancy. if a pure and dry air, an elivated and
cold country is unfavourable to childbirth, we might expect every
difficult incident to that operation of nature in this part of the
continent; again as the snake Indians possess an abundance of horses,
their women are seldom compelled like those in other parts of the
continent to carry burthens on their backs, yet they have their
children with equal convenience, and it is a rare occurrence for any of
them to experience difficulty in childbirth. I have been several times
informed by those who were conversent with the fact, that the indian
women who are pregnant by whitemen experience more difficulty in
childbirth than when pregnant by an Indian. if this be true it would go
far in suport of the opinion I have advanced.

the tops of the high and irregular mountains which present themselves
to our view on the opposite side of this branch of the Columbia are yet
perfectly covered with snow; the air which proceeds from those
mountains has an agreeable coolness and renders these parched and South
hillsides much more supportable at this time of the day it being now
about noon. I observe the indian women collecting the root of a speceis
of fennel which grows in the moist grounds and feeding their poor
starved children; it is really distressing to witness the situation of
those poor wretches. the radix of this plant is of the knob kind, of a
long ovate form terminating in a single radicle, the whole bing about 3
or four inches in length and the thickest part about the size of a
man's little finger. it is white firm and crisp in it's present state,
when dryed and pounded it makes a fine white meal; the flavor of this
root is not unlike that of annisseed but not so pungent; the stem rises
to the hight of 3 or four feet is jointed smooth and cilindric; from r
to 4 of those knobed roots are attatched to the base of this stem. the
leaf is sheathing sessile, & pultipartite, the divisions long and
narrow; the whole is of a deep green. it is now in blame; the flowers
are numerous, small, petals white, and are of the umbellaferous kind.
several small peduncles put forth from the main stock one at each joint
above the sheathing leaf. it has no root leaves. the root of the
present year declines when the seeds have been matured and the
succeeding spring other roots of a similar kind put fourth from the
little knot which unites the roots and stem and grow and decline with
the stem as before mentioned. The sunflower is very abundant near the
watercourses the seeds of this plant are now rip and the natives
collect them in considerable quantities and reduce them to meal by
pounding and rubing them between smooth stones. this meal is a favorite
food their manner of using it has been beforementiond. after dinner we
continued our rout towards the village. on our near approach we were
met by a number of young men on horseback. Cameahwait requested that we
would discharge our guns when we arrived in sight of the Village,
accordingly when I arrived on an eminence above the village in the
plain I drew up the party at open order in a single rank and gave them
a runing fire discharging two rounds. they appeared much gratifyed with
this exhibition. we then proceeded to the village or encampment of
brush lodges 32 in number. we were conducted to a large lodge which had
been prepared for me in the center of their encampmerit which was
situated in a beautifull level smooth and extensive bottom near the
river about 3 miles above the place I had first found them encamped.
here we arrived at 6 in the evening arranged our baggage near my tent
and placed those of the men on either side of the baggage facing
outwards. I found Colter here who had just arrived with a letter from
Capt. Clark in which Capt. C. had given me an account of his
peregrination and the description of the river and country as before
detailed from this view of the subject I found it a folly to think of
attemping to decend this river in canoes and therefore to commence the
purchase of horses in the morning from the indians in order to carry
into execution the design we had formed of passing the rocky Mountains.
I now informed Cameahwait of my intended expedition overland to the
great river which lay in the plains beyond the mountains and told him
that I wished to purchase 20 horses of himself and his people to convey
our baggage. he observed that the Minnetares had stolen a great number
of their horses this spring but hoped his people would spear me the
number I wished. I also asked a guide, he observed that he had no doubt
but the old man who was with Capt. C. would accompany us if we wished
him and that he was better informed of the country than any of them.
matters being thus far arranged I directed the fiddle to be played and
the party danced very merily much to the amusement and gratification of
the natives, though I must confess that the state of my own mind at
this moment did not well accord with the prevailing mirth as I somewhat
feared that the caprice of the indians might suddenly induce them to
withhold their horses from us without which my hopes of prosicuting my
voyage to advantage was lost; however I determined to keep the indians
in a good humour if possible, and to loose no time in obtaining the
necessary number of horses. I directed the hunters to turn out early in
the morning and indeavor to obtain some meat. I had nothing but a
little parched corn to eat this evening.

This morning Capt. C. and party




[Clark, August 26, 1805]
August 26th Monday 1805
a fine morning Despatched three men a head to hunt, our horses missing
Sent out my guide and four men to hunt them, which detained me untill 9
oClock a.m. at which time I Set out and proceeded on by the way of the
forks to the Indian Camps at the first were not one mouthfull to eate
untill night as our hunters could kill nothing and I could See & catch
no fish except a few Small ones. The Indians gave us 2 Sammon boiled
which I gave to the men, one of my men Shot a Sammon in the river about
Sunset those fish gave us a Supper. all the Camp flocked about me
untill I went to Sleep--and I beleve if they had a Sufficency to eate
themselves and any to Spare they would be liberal of it I derected the
men to mend their Mockessons to night and turn out in the morning early
to hunt Deer fish birds &c. &c. Saw great numbers of the large Black
grass hopper. Some bars which were verry wild, but few Birds. a number
of ground Lizards; Some fiew Pigions




[Clark, August 27, 1805]
August 27th Tuesday 1805
Some frost this morning every Man except one, out hunting, a young man
Came from the upper Village & informed me that Capt Lewis would join me
abt. 12 oClock to day. one man killed a Small Sammon, and the Indians
gave me another which afforded us a Sleight brackfast. Those Pore
people are here depending on what fish They Can Catch, without anything
else to depend on; and appere Contented, my party hourly Complaining of
their retched Situation and doubts of Starveing in a Countrey where no
game of any kind except a fiew fish can be found, an Indian brough in
to the Camp 5 Sammon, two of which I purchased which afforded us a
Supper.




[Clark, August 28, 1805]
August 28th Wednesday 1805
a frost this morning. The Inds. Cought out of their traps Several
Sammon and gave us two, I purchased two others which we made last us to
day. Several a Camp of about 40 Indians came from the West fork and
passed up to day, nothing killed by my party with every exertion in all
places where game probably might be found. I dispatched one man to the
upper camps to enquire if Cap. Lewis was comeing &c. he returned after
night with a letter from Capt. Lewis informing me of his Situation at
the upper Village, and had precured 22 horses for our rout through by
land on the plan which I had preposed in which he agreed with me in;
and requsted me to ride up and get the horses the Indian informed him
they had reserved for me &c. I purchased Some fish roe of those pore
but kind people with whome I am Encamped for which I gave three Small
fish hooks, the use of which they readily proseved, one Indian out all
day & killed only one Sammon with his gig; my hunters killed nothing, I
had three pack Saddles made to day for our horses which I expected Capt
Lewis would purchase &c. Those Sammon which I live on at present are
pleasent eateing, not with standing they weaken me verry fast and my
flesh I find is declineing




[Clark, August 29, 1805]
August 29th Thursday 1805
a Cold morning Some frost. the Wind from the South, I left our baggage
in possession of 2 men and proceeded on up to join Capt Lewis at the
upper Village of Snake Indians where I arrived at 1 oClock found him
much engaged in Counceling and attempting to purchase a fiew more
horses. I Spoke to the Indians on various Subjects endeavoring to
impress on theire minds the advantaje it would be to them for to Sell
us horses and expedite the our journey the nearest and best way
possibly that we might return as Soon as possible and winter with them
at Some place where there was plenty of buffalow,--our wish is to get a
horse for each man to Carry our baggage and for Some of the men to ride
occasionally, The horses are handsom and much acustomed to be changed
as to their Parsture; we cannot Calculate on their carrying large loads
& feed on the Grass which we may Calculate on finding in the Mountain
Thro which we may expect to pass on our rout made Some Selestial
observations, the Lard. of this Part the Columbia River is ____ North.
Longtd. ____ W

I purchased a horse for which I gave my Pistol 100 Balls Powder & a
Knife. our hunters Killed 2 Deer near their Camp to day. 2 yesterday &
3 The Day before, this meet was a great treat to me as I had eate none
for 8 days past




[Clark, August 30, 1805]
August 30th Friday 1805
a fine Morning, finding that we Could purchase no more horse than we
had for our goods &c. (and those not a Sufficint number for each of our
Party to have one which is our wish) I Gave my Fuzee to one of the men
& Sold his musket for a horse which Completed us to 29 total horses, we
Purchased pack Cords Made Saddles & Set out on our rout down the river
by land guided by my old guide one other who joined him, the old gude's
3 Sons followed him before we Set out our hunters killed three Deer
proceded on 12 miles and encamped on the river South Side--at the time
we Set out from the Indian Camps the greater Part of the Band Set out
over to the waters of the Missouri. we had great attention paid to the
horses, as they were nearly all Sore Backs and Several pore, & young
Those horses are indifferent, maney Sore backs and others not acustomed
to pack, and as we Cannot put large loads on them are Compelled to
purchase as maney as we Can to take our Small propotion of baggage of
the Parties. (& Eate if necessary) Proceeded on 12 miles to day




[Clark, August 31, 1805]
August 31st 1805 Satturday
A fine morning Set out before Sun rise, as we passed the lodges at
which place I had encamped for thre nights and left 2 men, Those 2 men
joined us and we proceeded on in the Same rout I decended the 21st
Instant, halted 3 hours on Sammon Creek to Let our horses graze the
wind hard from the S. W. I met an Indian on horse back who fled with
great Speed to Some lodges below & informed them that the Enemis were
Coming down, armd with guns &c. the inhabitents of the Lodges
indisceved him, we proceeded on the road on which I had decended as far
as the 1st run below & left the road & Proceeded up the Run in a
tolerable road 4 miles & Encamped in Some old lodjes at the place the
road leaves the Creek and assends the high Countrey Six Indians
followed us four of them the Sons of our guide; our hunters killed one
Deer a goose & Prarie fowl. This day warm and Sultrey, Praries or open
Valies on fire in Several places--The Countrey is Set on fire for the
purpose of Collecting the different bands, and a Band of the Flatheads
to go to the Missouri where They intend passing the winter near the
Buffalow Proceeded on 22 miles to Day, 4 miles of which up a run




[Clark, September 1, 1805]
September 1st Sunday 1805
a fine morning Set out early and proceeded on over high ruged hills
passing the heads of the Small runs which fall into the river on our
left to a large Creek which falls into the river 6 miles to our left
and encamped in the bottom, Some rain to day at 12 and in the evening
which obliges us to Continu all night despatched 2 men to the mouth of
the Creek to purchase fish of the Indians at that place, They returned
with Some dried, we giged 4 Sammon & killed one Deer to Day. the
Countrey which we passed to day is well watered & broken Pore Stoney
hilly country except the bottoms of the Creek which is narrow, all the
Indians leave us except our Guide, one man Shot two bear this evining
unfortunately we Could git neither of them




[Clark, September 2, 1805]
September 2nd Monday 1805
a Cloudy Mornin, raind Some last night we Set out early and proceeded
on up the Creek, Crossed a large fork from the right and one from the
left; and at 8 miles left the roade on which we were pursuing and which
leads over to the Missouri; and proceeded up a West fork without a
roade proceded on thro thickets in which we were obliged to Cut a road,
over rockey hill Sides where our horses were in pitial danger of
Slipping to Ther certain distruction & up & Down Steep hills, where
Several horses fell, Some turned over, and others Sliped down Steep
hill Sides, one horse Crippeled & 2 gave out. with the greatest
dificuelty risque &c. we made five miles & Encamped on The left Side of
the Creek in a Small Stoney bottom after night Some time before the
rear Came up, one Load left, about 2 miles back, the horse on which it
was Carried Crippled. Some rain at night




[Clark, September 3, 1805]
September 3rd Tuesday 1805
A Cloudy morning, horses verry Stiff Sent 2 men back with the horse on
which Capt Lewis rode for the load left back last night which detained
us until) 8 oClock at which time we Set out. The Country is timbered
with Pine Generally the bottoms have a variety of Srubs & the fur trees
in Great abundance. hills high & rockey on each Side, in the after part
of the day the high mountains closed the Creek on each Side and obliged
us to take on the Steep Sides of those Mountains, So Steep that the
horses Could Screcly keep from Slipping down, Several Sliped & Injured
themselves verry much, with great dificuelty we made ____ miles &
Encamped on a branh of the Creek we assended after Crossing Several
Steep points & one mountain, but little to eate I killed 5 Pheasents &
The huntes 4 with a little Corn afforded us a kind of Supper, at dusk
it began to Snow at 3 oClock Some rain. The mountains to the East
Covered with Snow. we met with a great misfortune, in haveing our last
Thmometer broken by accident, This day we passed over emence hils and
Some of the worst roade that ever horses passed our horses frequently
fell Snow about 2 inches deep when it began to rain which termonated in
a Sleet our genl. Courses nearly North from the R




[Clark, September 4, 1805]
September 4th Wednesday 1805
a verry cold morning every thing wet and frosed, we detained untill 8
oClock to thaw the covering for the baggage &c. &c. groun covered with
Snow, we assended a mountain & took a Divideing ridge which we kept for
Several Miles & fell on the head of a Creek which appeared to run the
Course we wished to go, I was in front, & Saw Several of the Argalia or
Ibex decended the mountain by verry Steep decent takeing the advantage
of the points and best places to the Creek, where our hunter killed a
Deer which we made use of and prosued our Course down the Creek to the
forks about 5 miles where we met a part of the Flat head nation of 33
Lodges about 80 men 400 Total and at least 500 horses, those people
recved us friendly, threw white robes over our Sholders & Smoked in the
pipes of peace, we Encamped with them & found them friendly but nothing
but berries to eate a part of which they gave us, those Indians are
well dressed with Skin Shirts & robes, they Stout & light complected
more So than Common for Indians, The Chiefs harangued untill late at
night, Smoked our pipe and appeared Satisfied. I was the first white
man who ever wer on the waters of this river.




[Clark, September 5, 1805]
September 5th Thursday 1805
a Cloudy morning we assembled the Chiefs & warriers and Spoke to them
(with much dificuely as what we Said had to pass through Several
languajes before it got in to theirs, which is a gugling kind of
languaje Spoken much thro the fhrought) we informed them who we were,
where we Came from, where bound and for what purpose &c. &c. and
requsted to purchase & exchange a fiew horses with them, in the Course
of the day I purchased 11 horses & exchanged 7 for which we gave a fiew
articles of merchendize. those people possess ellegant horses.--we made
4 Chiefs whome we gave meadels & a few Small articles with Tobacco; the
women brought us a few berries & roots to eate and the Principal Chief
a Dressed Brarow, otter & two Goat & antilope Skins

Those people wore their hair the men Cewed with otter Skin on each Side
falling over the Sholrs forward, the women loose promisquisly over ther
Sholdrs & face long Shirts which Coms to the anckles & tied with a belt
about their waste with a roabe over, the have but fiew ornaments and
what they do were are Similar to the Snake Indians, They Call
themselves Eoote-lash-Schute and consist of 450 Lodges in all and
divided into Several bands on the heads of Columbia river & Missouri,
Some low down the Columbia River




[Clark, September 6, 1805]
September 6th Friday 1805
Some little rain, purchased two fine horses & took a Vocabiliary of the
language litened our loads & packed up, rained contd. Untill 12 oClock
we Set out at 2 oClock at the Same time all the Indians Set out on Ther
way to meet the Snake Indians at the 3 forks of the Missouri. Crossed a
Small river from the right we call ____ Soon after Setting out, also a
Small Creek from the North all three forks Comeing together below our
Camp at which place the Mountains Close on each Side of the river, We
proceeded on N 30 W. Crossed a Mountain and Struck the river Several
miles down, at which place the Indians had Encamped two days before, we
Proceeded on Down the River which is 30 yds. wide Shallow & Stoney.
Crossing it Several times & Encamped in a Small bottom on the right
side. rained this evening nothing to eate but berries, our flour out,
and but little Corn, the hunters killed 2 pheasents only--all our
horses purchased of the oote lash Shutes we Secured well for fear of
their leaveing of us, and watched them all night for fear of their
leaving us or the Indians prosuing & Steeling them.




[Clark, September 7, 1805]
September 7th Satturday 1805
A Cloudy & rainie Day the greater Part of the Day dark & Drisley we
proceedd on down the river thro a Vallie passed Several Small Runs on
the right & 3 creeks on the left The Vallie from 1 to 2 miles wide the
Snow top mountains to our left, open hilley Countrey on the right. Saw
2 horses left by the Indians Those horses were as wild a Elk. One of
our hunters Came up this morning without his horse, in the course of
the night the horse broke loose & Cleared out--we did not make Camp
untill dark, for the want of a good place, one of our hunters did not
join us this evening. he haveing killed an elk packed his horses &
could not overtake us




[Clark, September 8, 1805]
September 8th Sunday 1805
a Cloudy morning Set out early and proceeded on through an open vallie
for 23 miles passed 4 Creeks on the right Some runs on the left, The
bottoms as also the hills Stoney bad land. Some pine on the Creeks and
mountains, an partial on the hills to the right hand Side. two of our
hunters came up with us at 12 oClock with an Elk, & Buck--the wind from
the N. W. & Cold. The foot of the Snow mountains approach the River on
the left Side. Some Snow on The mountain to the right also proceeded on
down the Vallie which is pore Stoney land and encamped on the right
Side of the river a hard rain all the evening we are all Cold and wet.
on this part of the river on the head of Clarks River I observe great
quantities of a peculiar Sort of Prickly peare grow in Clusters ovel &
about the Size of a Pigions egge with Strong Thorns which is So birded
as to draw the Pear from the Cluster after penetrateing our feet.
Drewyer killed a Deer. I killed a prarie fowl we found 2 mears and a
Colt the mears were lame, we ventered to let our late purchase of
horses loose to night




[Lewis, September 9, 1805]
Monday September 9th 1805.
Set out at 7 A M. this morning and proceeded down the Flathead river
leaving it on our left, the country in the valley of this river is
generally a prarie and from five to 6 miles wide the growth is almost
altogether pine principally of the longleafed kind, with some spruce
and a kind of furr resembleing the scotch furr. near the wartercourses
we find a small proportion of the narrow leafed cottonwood some redwood
honeysuckle and rosebushes form the scant proportion of underbrush to
be seen. at 12 we halted on a small branch which falls in to the river
on the E. side, where we breakfasted on a scant proportion of meat
which we had reserved from the hunt of yesterday added to three geese
which one of our hunters killed this morning. two of our hunters have
arrived, one of them brought with him a redheaded woodpecker of the
large kind common to the U States. this is the first of the kind I have
seen since I left the Illinois. just as we were seting out Drewyer
arrived with two deer. we continued our rout down the valley about 4
miles and crossed the river; it is hear a handsome stream about 100
yards wide and affords a considerable quantity of very clear water, the
banks are low and it's bed entirely gravel. the stream appears
navigable, but from the circumstance of their being no sammon in it I
believe that there must be a considerable fall in it below. our guide
could not inform us where this river discharged itself into the
columbia river, he informed us that it continues it's course along the
mountains to the N. as far as he knew it and that not very distant from
where we then were it formed a junction with a stream nearly as large
as itself which took it's rise in the mountains near the Missouri to
the East of us and passed through an extensive valley generally open
prarie which forms an excellent pass to the Missouri. the point of the
Missouri where this Indian pass intersects it, is about 30 miles above
the gates of the rocky mountain, or the place where the valley of the
Missouri first widens into an extensive plain after entering the rockey
mountains. the guide informed us that a man might pass to the missouri
from hence by that rout in four days. we continued our rout down the W.
side of the river about 5 miles further and encamped on a large creek
which falls in on the West as our guide informes that we should leave
the river at this place and the weather appearing settled and fair I
determined to halt the next day rest our horses and take some
scelestial Observations. we called this Creek Travellers rest. it is
about 20 yards wide a fine bould clear runing stream the land through
which we passed is but indifferent a could white gravley soil. we
estimate our journey of this day at 19 M.




[Clark, September 9, 1805]
September 9th Monday 1805
a fair morning Set out early and proceeded on thro a plain as yesterday
down the valley Crossed a large Scattering Creek on which Cotton trees
grew at 11/2 miles, a Small one at 10 miles, both from the right, the
main river at 15 miles & Encamped on a large Creek from the left which
we call Travelers rest Creek. killed 4 deer & 4 Ducks & 3 prarie fowls.
day fair Wind N. W. See Suplement




[Lewis, September 10, 1805]
Tuesday September 10th 1805.
The morning being fair I sent out all the hunters, and directed two of
them to procede down the river as far as it's junction with the Eastern
fork which heads near the missouri, and return this evening. this fork
of the river we determined to name the Valley plain river. I think it
most probable that this river continues it's course along the rocky
Mts. Northwardly as far or perhaps beyond the scources of Medecine
river and then turning to the West falls into the Tacootchetessee. The
Minetares informed us that there was a large river west of, and at no
great distance from the sources of Medecine river, which passed along
the Rocky Mountains from S. to N.this evening one of our hunters
returned accompanyed by three men of the Flathead nation whom he had
met in his excurtion up travellers rest Creek. on first meeting him the
Indians were allarmed and prepared for battle with their bows and
arrows, but he soon relieved their fears by laying down his gun and
advancing towards them. the Indians were mounted on very fine horses of
which the Flatheads have a great abundance; that is, each man in the
nation possesses from 20 to a hundred head. our guide could not speake
the language of these people but soon engaged them in conversation by
signs or jesticulation, the common language of all the Aborigines of
North America, it is one understood by all of them and appears to be
sufficiently copious to convey with a degree of certainty the outlines
of what they wish to communicate. in this manner we learnt from these
people that two men which they supposed to be of the Snake nation had
stolen 23 horses from them and that they were in pursuit of the
theaves. they told us they were in great hast, we gave them some boiled
venison, of which the eat sparingly. the sun was now set, two of them
departed after receiving a few small articles which we gave them, and
the third remained, having agreed to continue with us as a guide, and
to introduce us to his relations whom he informed us were numerous and
resided in the plain below the mountains on the columbia river, from
whence he said the water was good and capable of being navigated to the
sea; that some of his relation were at the sea last fall and saw an old
whiteman who resided there by himself and who had given them some
handkerchiefs such as he saw in our possession.--he said it would
require five sleeps wich is six days travel, to reach his relations.
the Flatheads are a very light coloured people of large stature and
comely form.




[Clark, September 10, 1805]
September 10th Tuesday 1805
A fair morning Concluded to Delay to day and make Some observations, as
at this place the rout which we are to prosue will pass up the
Travelers rest Creek, The day proved fair and we took equal altitudes &
Some Inner observations. The Latd. 46 deg. 48' 28" as the guide report that
no game is to be found on our rout for a long ways, ads an addition to
the cause of our delay to precure Some meat, despatched all our hunters
in different directions, to hunt the Deer which is the only large game
to be found they killed 4 deer a Beaver & 3 Grouse which was divided,
one of the hunters Colter, met with 3 Tushapaw Indians who were in
pursuit of 2 Snake Indians that bade taken from ther Camps on the head
of Kooskooske River 21 horses, Those Indians came with Colter to our
Camp & informed by Signs of their misfortune & the rout to ther
villages &c. &c. one of them Concluded to return with us. we gave them
a ring fish hook & tied a pece of ribin in the hare of each which
appeared to please them verry much, Cap Lewis gave them a Steel & a
little Powder to make fire, after eating 2 of them proceeded on in
pursute of their horses. men all much engaged preparing mockersons &c.
&c. The Countrey about this place is already described in that above.




[Clark, September 11, 1805]
September 11th Wednesday 1805
A fair morning wind from the N W we Set out at 3 oClock and proceeded
on up the Travelers rest Creek, accompanied by the flat head or
Tushapaws Indians about 7 miles below this Creek a large fork comes in
from the right and heads up against the waters of the Missouri below
the Three forks, this river has extensive Vallies of open leavel land,
"and passes in its Whole Course thro a Valie" they call it our Guide
tels us a fine large roade passes up this river to the Missouri--The
loss of 2 of our horses detained us util. 3 oClock. P.M. our Flathead
Indian being restless thought proper to leave us and proceed on alone,
Sent out the hunters to hunt in advance as usial. (we have Selected 4
of the best hunters to go in advance to hunt for the party. This
arrangement has been made long sinc) we Proceeded on up the Creek on
the right Side thro a narrow valie and good road for 7 miles and
Encamped at Some old Indian Lodges, nothing killed this evening hills
on the right high & ruged, the mountains on the left high & Covered
with Snow. The day Verry worm




[Clark, September 12, 1805]
September 12th Thursday 1805
a white frost Set out at 7 oClock & proceeded on up the Creek, passed a
Fork on the right on which I saw near an old Indian encampment a Swet
house Covered wthh earth, at 2 miles assended a high hill & proceeded
through a hilley and thickly timbered Countrey for 9 miles & on the
Right of the Creek, passing Several branches from the right of fine
clear water and Struck at a fork at which place the road forks, one
passing up each fork. The Timber is Short & long leaf Pine Spruce Pine
& fur. The road through this hilley Countrey is verry bad passing over
hills & thro Steep hollows, over falling timber &c. &c. continued on &
passed Some most intolerable road on the Sides of the Steep Stoney
mountains, which might be avoided by keeping up the Creek which is
thickly covered with under groth & falling timber Crossed a mountain 8
miles with out water & encamped on a hill Side on the Creek after
Decending a long Steep mountain, Some of our Party did not git up
untill 10 oClock P M. I mad camp at 8 on this roade & particularly on
this Creek the Indians have pealed a number of Pine for the under bark
which they eate at certain Seasons of the year, I am told in the Spring
they make use of this bark our hunters Killed only one Pheasent this
after noon. Party and horses much fatigued.




[Clark, September 13, 1805]
September 13th Wednesday 1805 a cloudy morning Capt Lewis and one of
our guides lost their horses, Capt Lewis & 4 men detained to hunt the
horses, I proceeded on with the partey up the Creek at 2 miles passed
Several Springs which I observed the Deer Elk &c. had made roads to,
and below one of the Indians had made a whole to bathe, I tasted this
water and found it hot & not bad tasted The last ____ in further
examonation I found this water nearly boiling hot at the places it
Spouted from the rocks (which a hard Corse Grit, and of great size the
rocks on the Side of the Mountain of the Same texture) I put my finger
in the water, at first could not bare it in a Second-as Several roads
led from these Springs in different derections, my Guide took a wrong
road and took us out of our rout 3 miles through intolerable rout,
after falling into the right road I proceeded on thro tolerabl rout for
abt. 4 or 5 miles and halted to let our horses graze as well as waite
for Capt Lewis who has not yet Come up, The pine Countrey falling
timber &c. &c. Continue. This Creek is verry much darned up with the
beaver, but we can See none, dispatched two men back to hunt Capt Lewis
horse, after he came up, and we proceeded over a mountain to the head
of the Creek which we left to our left and at 6 miles from the place I
nooned it, we fell on a Small Creek from the left which Passed through
open glades Some of which 1/2 a mile wide, we proceeded down this Creek
about 2 miles to where the mountains Closed on either Side crossing the
Creek Several times & Encamped.

One Deer & Some Pheasants killed this morning, I shot 4 Pheasents of
the Common Kind except the taile was black. The road over the last
mountain was thick Steep & Stoney as usial, after passing the head of
Travelers rest Creek, the road was verry fine leavel open & firm Some
mountains in view to the S E & S W. Covered with Snow.




[Clark, September 14, 1805]
September 14th Thursday 1805
a Cloudy day in the Valies it rained and hailed, on the top of the
mountains Some Snow fell we Set out early and Crossed a high mountn on
the right of the Creek for 6 miles to the forks of the Glade Creek the
right hand fork which falls in is about the Size of the other, we
Crossed to the left Side at the foks, and Crossd a verry high Steep
mountain for 9 miles to a large fork from the left which appears to
head in the Snow toped mountains Southerley and S. E. we Crossd. Glade
Creek above its mouth, at a place the Tushepaws or Flat head Indians
have made 2 wears across to Catch Sammon and have but latterly left the
place I could see no fish, and the grass entirely eaten out by the
horses, we proceeded on 2 miles & Encamped opposit a Small Island at
the mouth of a branch on the right side of the river which is at this
place 80 yards wide, Swift and Stoney, here we wer compelled to kill a
Colt for our men & Selves to eat for the want of meat & we named the
South fork Colt killed Creek, and this river we Call Flathead River-
The Mountains which we passed today much worst than yesterday the last
excessively bad & Thickly Strowed with falling timber & Pine Spruc fur
Hackmatak & Tamerack, Steep & Stoney our men and horses much fatigued,
The rain ____




[Clark, September 15, 1805]
Wednesday Septr. 15th 1805
We set out early. the morning Cloudy and proceeded on Down the right
Side of River over Steep points rockey & buschey as usial for 4 miles
to an old Indian fishing place, here the road leaves the river to the
left and assends a mountain winding in every direction to get up the
Steep assents & to pass the emence quantity of falling timber which had
falling from dift. causes i e. fire & wind and has deprived the Greater
part of the Southerley Sides of this mountain of its gren timber, 4
miles up the mountain I found a Spring and halted for the rear to come
up and to let our horses rest & feed, about 2 hours the rear of the
party came up much fatigued & horses more So, Several horses Sliped and
roled down Steep hills which hurt them verry much The one which Carried
my desk & Small trunk Turned over & roled down a mountain for 40 yards
& lodged against a tree, broke the Desk the horse escaped and appeared
but little hurt Some others verry much hurt, from this point I observed
a range of high mountains Covered with Snow from S E. to S W with Their
top bald or void of timber. after two hours delay we proceeded on up
the mountain Steep & ruged as usial, more timber near the top, when we
arrived at the top As we Conceved we could find no water and Concluded
to Camp and make use of the Snow we found on the top to cook the remnt.
of our Colt & make our Supe, evening verry Cold and Cloudy. Two of our
horses gave out, pore and too much hurt to proceed on and left in the
rear--nothing killed to day except 2 Phests.

From this mountain I could observe high ruged mountains in every
direction as far as I could See. with the greatest exertion we Could
only make 12 miles up this mountain and encamped on the top of the
mountain near a Bank of old Snow about 3 feet deep lying on the
Northern Side of the mountain and in Small banks on the top & leavel
parts of the mountain, we melted the Snow to drink, and Cook our horse
flesh to eat.




[Clark, September 16, 1805]
Saturday Septr. 16th 1805
began to Snow about 3 hours before Day and Continud all day the Snow in
The morning 4 Inches deep on The old Snow, and by night we found it
from 6 to 8 Inches deep I walked in front to keep the road and found
great dificuelty in keeping it as in maney places the Snow had entirely
filled up the track, and obliged me to hunt Several minits for the
track at 12 oClock we halted on the top of the mountain to worm & dry
our Selves a little as well as to let our horses rest and graze a
little on Some long grass which I observed, (on) The South Steep hills
Side & falling timber Continue to day, and a thickly timbered Countrey
of 8 different kinds of pine, which are So covered with Snow, that in
passing thro them we are continually covered with Snow, I have been wet
and as cold in every part as I ever was in my life, indeed I was at one
time fearfull my feet would freeze in the thin mockersons which I wore,
after a Short delay in the middle of the Day, I took one man and
proceeded on as fast as I could about 6 miles to a Small branch passing
to the right, halted and built fires for the party agains their arrival
which was at Dusk verry cold and much fatigued we Encamped at this
Branch in a thickly timbered bottom which was Scercely large enough for
us to lie leavil, men all wet cold and hungary. Killed a Second Colt
which we all Suped hartily on and thought it fine meat.

I saw 4 Black tail Deer to day before we Set out which came up the
mountain and what is Singular Snaped 7 tims at a large buck. it is
Singular as my gun has a Steel frisen and never Snaped 7 times before
in examining her found the flint loose to describe the road of this day
would be a repitition of yesterday excpt the Snow which made it much
wors to proseed as we had in maney places to derect our Selves by the
appearence of the rubbings of the Packs against the trees which have
limbs quiet low and bending downwards




[Clark, September 17, 1805]
Sunday 17th Septr. 1805
Cloudy morning our horses much Scattered which detained us untill one
oClock P.M. at which time we Set out the falling Snow & Snow from the
trees which kept us wet all the after noon passed over Several high
ruged Knobs and Several dreans & Springs passing to the right, &
passing on the ridge devideing the waters of two Small rivers. road
excessively bad Snow on the Knobs, no Snow in the vallies Killed a fiew
Pheasents which was not Sufficient for our Supper which compelled us to
kill Something. a coalt being the most useless part of our Stock he
fell a Prey to our appetites. The after part of the day fare, we made
only 10 miles to day two horses fell & hurt themselves very much. we
Encamped on the top of a high Knob of the mountain at a run passing to
the left. we proceed on as yesterday, & with dificulty found the road




[Lewis, September 18, 1805]
Wednesday September 18th 1805.
Cap Clark set out this morning to go a head with six hunters. there
being no game in these mountains we concluded it would be better for
one of us to take the hunters and hurry on to the leavel country a head
and there hunt and provide some provision while the other remained with
and brought on the party the latter of these was my part; accordingly I
directed the horses to be gotten up early being determined to force my
march as much as the abilities of our horses would permit. the
negligence of one of the party Willard who had a spare horse not
attending to him and bringing him up last evening was the cause of our
detention this morning untill 1/2 after 8 A M when we set out. I sent
willard back to serch for his horse, and proceeded on with the party at
four in the evening he overtook us without the horse, we marched 18
miles this day and encamped on the side of a steep mountain; we
suffered for water this day passing one rivulet only; we wer fortunate
in finding water in a steep raviene about 1/2 maile from our camp. this
morning we finished the remainder of our last coult. we dined & suped
on a skant proportion of portable soupe, a few canesters of which, a
little bears oil and about 20 lbs. of candles form our stock of
provision, the only recources being our guns & packhorses. the first is
but a poor dependance in our present situation where there is nothing
upon earth exept ourselves and a few small pheasants, small grey
Squirrels, and a blue bird of the vulter kind about the size of a
turtle dove or jay bird. our rout lay along the ridge of a high
mountain course S. 20 W. 18 in. used the snow for cooking.




[Clark, September 18, 1805]
Monday 18th Septr. 1805
a fair morning cold I proceded on in advance with Six hunters to try
and find deer or Something to kill we passed over a countrey Similar to
the one of yesterday more falling timber passed Several runs & Springs
passing to the right from the top of a high part of the mountain at 20
miles I had a view of an emence Plain and leavel Countrey to the S W. &
West at a great distance a high mountain in advance beyond the Plain,
Saw but little Sign of deer and nothing else, much falling timber, made
32 miles and Encamped on a bold running Creek passing to the left which
I call Hungery Creek as at that place we had nothing to eate. I halted
only one hour to day to let our horses feed on Grass and rest




[Lewis, September 19, 1805]
Thursday September 19th 1805.
Set out this morning a little after sun rise and continued our rout
about the same course of yesterday or S. 20 W. for 6 miles when the
ridge terminated and we to our inexpressable joy discovered a large
tract of Prairie country lying to the S. W. and widening as it appeared
to extend to the W. through that plain the Indian informed us that the
Columbia river, in which we were in surch run. this plain appeared to
be about 60 Miles distant, but our guide assured us that we should
reach it's borders tomorrow the appearance of this country, our only
hope for subsistance greately revived the sperits of the party already
reduced and much weakened for the want of food. the country is thickly
covered with a very heavy growth of pine of which I have ennumerated 8
distinct species. after leaving the ridge we asscended and decended
several steep mountains in the distance of 6 miles further when we
struck a Creek about 15 yards wide our course being S. 35 W. we
continued our rout 6 miles along the side of this creek upwards passing
2 of it's branches which flowed in from the N. 1st at the place we
struck the creek and the other 3 miles further. the road was
excessively dangerous along this creek being a narrow rockey path
generally on the side of steep precipice, from which in many places if
ether man or horse were precipitated they would inevitably be dashed in
pieces. Fraziers horse fell from this road in the evening, and roled
with his load near a hundred yards into the Creek. we all expected that
the horse was killed but to our astonishment when the load was taken
off him he arose to his feet & appeared to be but little injured, in 20
minutes he proceeded with his load. this was the most wonderfull escape
I ever witnessed, the hill down which he roled was almost perpendicular
and broken by large irregular and broken rocks. the course of this
Creek upwards due W. we encamped on the Stard. side of it in a little
raviene, having traveled 18 miles over a very bad road. we took a small
quantity of portable soup, and retired to rest much fatiegued. several
of the men are unwell of the disentary. brakings out, or irruptions of
the Skin, have also been common with us for some time.




[Clark, September 19, 1805]
Tuesday 19th Septr. 1805
Set out early proceeded on up the Creek passing through a Small glade
at 6 miles at which place we found a horse. I derected him killed and
hung up for the party after takeing a brackfast off for our Selves
which we thought fine after Brackfast proceed on up the Creek two miles
& left it to our right passed over a mountain, and the heads of branch
of hungary Creek, two high mountains, ridges and through much falling
timber (which caused our road of to day to be double the derect
distance on the Course) Struck a large Creek passing to our left which
I Kept down for 4 miles and left it to our left & passed over a
mountain bad falling timber to a Small Creek passing to our left and
Encamped. I killed 2 Pheasents, but fiew birds Blue jay, Small white
headed hawk, Some Crows & ravins & large hawks. road bad.




[Lewis, September 20, 1805]
Friday September 20th 1805.
This morning my attention was called to a species of bird which I had
never seen before. It was reather larger than a robbin, tho much it's
form and action. the colours were a blueish brown on the back the wings
and tale black, as wass a stripe above the croop 3/4 of an inch wide in
front of the neck, and two others of the same colour passed from it's
eyes back along the sides of the head. the top of the head, neck brest
and belley and butts of the wing were of a fine yellowish brick reed.
it was feeding on the buries of a species of shoemake or ash which
grows common in country & which I first observed on 2d of this month. I
have also observed two birds of a blue colour both of which I believe
to be of the haulk or vulter kind. the one of a blue shining colour
with a very high tuft of feathers on the head a long tale, it feeds on
flesh the beak and feet black. it's note is cha-ah, cha-ah. it is about
the size of a pigeon; and in shape and action resembles the jay bird.-
another bird of very similar genus, the note resembling the mewing of
the cat, with a white head and a light blue colour is also common, as
are a black species of woodpecker about the size of the lark woodpecker
Three species of Pheasants, a large black species, with some white
feathers irregularly scattered on the brest neck and belley a smaller
kind of a dark uniform colour with a red stripe above the eye, and a
brown and yellow species that a good deel resembles the phesant common
to the Atlantic States. we were detained this morning untill ten oclock
in consequence of not being enabled to collect our horses. we had
proceeded about 2 miles when we found the greater part of a horse which
Capt Clark had met with and killed for us. he informed me by note that
he should proceed as fast as possible to the leavel country which lay
to the S. W. of us, which we discovered from the hights of the
mountains on the 19th there he intended to hunt untill our arrival. at
one oclock we halted and made a hearty meal on our horse beef much to
the comfort of our hungry stomachs. here I larnt that one of the
Packhorses with his load was missing and immediately dispatched
Baptiest Lapage who had charge of him, to surch for him. he returned at
;3 OC. without the horse. The load of the horse was of considerable
value consisting of merchandize and all my stock of winter cloathing. I
therefore dispatched two of my best woodsmen in surch of him, and
proceeded with the party. Our rout lay through a thick forrest of large
pine the general course being S. 25 W. and distance about 15 miles. our
road was much obstructed by fallen timber particularly in the evening
we encamped on a ridge where ther was but little grass for our horses,
and at a distance from water. however we obtained as much as served our
culinary purposes and suped on our beef. the soil as you leave the
hights of the mountains becomes gradually more fertile. the land
through which we passed this evening is of an excellent quality tho
very broken, it is a dark grey soil. a grey free stone appearing in
large masses above the earth in many places. saw the hucklebury,
honeysuckle, and alder common to the Atlantic states, also a kind of
honeysuckle which bears a white bury and rises about 4 feet high not
common but to the western side of the rockey mountains. a growth which
resembles the choke cherry bears a black bury with a single stone of a
sweetish taste, it rises to the hight of 8 or 10 feet and grows in
thick clumps. the Arborvita is also common and grows to an immence
size, being from 2 to 6 feet in diameter.




[Clark, September 20, 1805]
Wednesday 20th September 1805
I Set out early and proceeded on through a Countrey as ruged as usial
passed over a low mountain into the forks of a large Creek which I kept
down 2 miles and assended a Steep mountain leaveing the Creek to our
left hand passed the head of Several dreans on a divideing ridge, and
at 12 miles decended the mountain to a leavel pine Countrey proceeded
on through a butifull Countrey for three miles to a Small Plain in
which I found maney Indian lodges, at the distance of 1 mile from the
lodges I met 3 boys, when they Saw me ran and hid themselves searched
found gave them Small pieces of ribin & Sent them forward to the
village a man Came out to meet me with;great Caution & Conducted us to
a large Spacious Lodge which he told me (by Signs) was the Lodge of his
great Chief who had Set out 3 days previous with all the Warriers of
the nation to war on a South West derection & would return in 15 or 18
days. the fiew men that were left in the Village aged, great numbers of
women geathered around me with much apparent Signs of fear, and apr.
pleased they gave us a Small piece of Buffalow meat, Some dried Salmon
beries & roots in different States, Some round and much like an onion
which they call quamash the Bread or Cake is called Passhe-co Sweet, of
this they make bread & Supe they also gave us the bread made of this
root all of which we eate hartily, I gave them a fiew Small articles as
preasents, and proceeded on with a Chief to his Village 2 miles in the
Same Plain, where we were treated kindly in their way and continued
with them all night Those two Villages consist of about 30 double
lodges, but fiew men a number of women & children; They call themselves
Cho pun-nish or Pierced Noses; " their dialect appears verry different
from the Tushapaws altho origneally the Same people" They are darker
than the Tushapaws Their dress Similar, with more beads white & blue
principally, brass & Copper in different forms, Shells and ware their
haire in the Same way. they are large Portley men Small women & handsom
fetued Emence quantity of the quawmash or Pas-shi-co root gathered & in
piles about the plains, those roots grow much an onion in marshey
places the seed are in triangular Shell on the Stalk. they Sweat them
in the following manner i. e. dig a large hole 3 feet deep Cover the
bottom with Split wood on the top of which they lay Small Stones of
about 3 or 4 Inches thick, a Second layer of Splited wood & Set the
whole on fire which heats the Stones, after the fire is extinguished
they lay grass & mud mixed on the Stones, on that dry grass which
Supports the Pash-Shi-co root a thin Coat of the Same grass is laid on
the top, a Small fire is kept when necessary in the Center of the kite
&c.

I find myself verry unwell all the evening from eateing the fish &
roots too freely. Sent out the hunters they killed nothing Saw Some
Signs of deer.




[Lewis, September 21, 1805]
Saturday September 21st 1805.
We were detained this morning untill 11 OCk. in consequence of not
being able to collect our horses. we then set out and proceeded along
the ridge on which we had encamped, leaving which at 11/2 we passed a
large creek runing to the left just above it's junction with another
which run parrallel with and on the left of our road before we struck
the creek; through the level wide and heavy timbered bottom of this
creek we proceeded about 21/2 miles when bearing to the right we passed
a broken country heavily timbered great quantities of which had fallen
and so obstructed our road that it was almost impracticable to proceed
in many places. though these hills we proceeded about 5 Ms. when we
passed a small creek on which Capt Clark encamped on the 19th passing
this creek we continued our rout 5 Ms thro a similar country when we
struck a large creek at the forks, passed the Northen branch and
continued down it on the West side 1 mile and encamped in a small open
bottom where there was tolerable food for our horses. I directed the
horses to be hubbled to prevent delay in the morning being determined
to make a forced march tomorrow in order to reach if possible the open
country. we killed a few Pheasants, and I killd a prarie woolf which
together with the ballance of our horse beef and some crawfish which we
obtained in the creek enabled us to make one more hearty meal, not
knowing where the next was to be found. the Arborvita increases in
quantity and size. I saw several sticks today large enough to form
eligant perogues of at least 45 feet in length.--I find myself growing
weak for the want of food and most of the men complain of a similar
deficiency and have fallen off very much. the general course of this
day S 30 W 15M.




[Clark, September 21, 1805]
Septr. 21st Saturday 1805
a fine morning Sent out all the hunters early in different directions
to Kill Something and delayed with the Indians to prevent Suspicion &
to acquire as much information as possible. one of them Drew me a Chart
of the river & nations below informed of one falls below which the
white men lived from whome they got white beeds cloth &c. &c. The day
proved warm, 2 Chifs of Bands visited me to day--the hunters all
returned without any thing, I collected a horse load of roots & 3
Sammon & Sent R Fields with one Indian to meet Capt Lewis at 4 oClock
Set out with the other men to the river, passed thro a fine Pine
Country decended a Steep ruged hill verry long to a Small river which
comes from our left and I suppose it to be ____ River passed down the
river 2 miles on a Steep hill side at r r oClock P.M. arrived at a camp
of 5 Squars a boy & 2 Children those people were glad to See us & gave
us drid Sammon one had formerly been taken by the Minitarries of the
north & Seen white men, our guide called the Chief who was fishing on
the other Side of the river, whome I found a Cherfull man of about 65 I
gave him a Medal.




[Clark, September 21, 1805]
Thursday 21st Septr. 1805
A fine morning Sent out all the hunters in different directions to hunt
deer, I myself delayd with the Chief to prevent Suspission and to
Collect by Signs as much information as possible about the river and
Countrey in advance. The Cheif drew me a kind of chart of the river,
and informed me that a greater Cheif than himself was fishing at the
river half a days march from his village called the twisted hare, and
that the river forked a little below his Camp and at a long distance
below & below 2 large forks one from the left & the other from the
right the river passed thro'gh the mountains at which place was a great
fall of the water passing through the rocks, at those falls white
people lived from whome they preceured the white Beeds & Brass &c.
which the womin wore; a Chief of another band visit me to day and
Smoked a pipe, I gave my handkerchief & a Silver Cord with a little
Tobacco to those Chiefs, The hunters all return without any thing, I
purchased as much Provisions as I could with what fiew things I chaned
to have in my Pockets, Such a Salmon Bread roots & berries, & Sent one
man R. Fields with an Indian to meet Capt. Lewis, and at 4 oClock P M.
Set out to the river, met a man at dark on his way from the river to
the village, whome I hired and gave the neck handkerchief of one of the
men, to polit me to the Camp of the twisted hare we did not arrive at
the Camp of the Twisted hare but oppost, untill half past 11 oClock P
M. found at this Camp five Squars & 3 Children. my guide called to the
Chief who was Encamped with 2 others on a Small Island in the river, he
Soon joind me, I found him a Chearfull man with apparant Siencerity, I
gave him a medal &c. and Smoked untill 1 oClock a.m. and went to Sleep.
The Countrey from the mountains to the river hills is a leavel rich
butifull Pine Countrey badly watered, thinly timbered & covered with
grass--The weather verry worm after decending into the low Countrey,-
the river hills are verry high & Steep, Small bottoms to this little
river which is Flat head & is 160 yards wide and Sholey This river is
the one we killed the first Coalt on near a fishing were I am verry
Sick to day and puke which relive me.




[Lewis, September 22, 1805]
Sunday September 22cd 1805.
Notwithstanding my positive directions to hubble the horses last
evening one of the men neglected to comply. he plead ignorance of the
order. this neglect however detained us untill 1/2 after eleven OCk at
which time we renewed our march, our course being about west. we had
proceeded about two and a half miles when we met Reubin Fields one of
oure hunters, whom Capt. Clark had dispatched to meet us with some
dryed fish and roots that he had procured from a band of Indians, whose
lodges were about eight miles in advance. I ordered the party to halt
for the purpose of taking some refreshment. I divided the fish roots
and buries, and was happy to find a sufficiency to satisfy compleatly
all our appetites. Fields also killed a crow after refreshing ourselves
we proceeded to the village due West 71/2 Miles where we arrived at 5
OCk. in the afternoon our rout was through lands heavily timbered, the
larger wood entirely pine. the country except the last 3 miles was
broken and decending the pleasure I now felt in having tryumphed over
the rocky Mountains and decending once more to a level and fertile
country where there was every rational hope of finding a comfortable
subsistence for myself and party can be more readily conceived than
expressed, nor was the flattering prospect of the final success of the
expedition less pleasing. on our approach to the village which
consisted of eighteen lodges most of the women fled to the neighbouring
woods on horseback with their children, a circumstance I did not expect
as Capt. Clark had previously been with them and informed them of our
pacific intentions towards them and also the time at which we should
most probably arrive. the men seemed but little concerned, and several
of them came to meet us at a short distance from their lodges unarmed.




[Clark, September 22, 1805]
September 22nd Sunday 1805
a fine morning, I proceed on down the little river to about 11/2 a mile
& found the Chif in a Canoe Comeing to meet me I got into his Canoe &
Crossed over to his Camp on a Small Island at a rapid Sent out the
hunters leaving one to take care of the baggage, & after eating a part
of a Samn. I Set out on my return to meet Capt. Lewis with the Chief &
his Son at 2 miles met Shields with 3 Deer, I took a Small peice &
Changed for his horse which was fresh & proced on this horse threw me 3
times which hurt me Some. at Dark met Capt Lewis Encamped at the first
Village men much fatigued & reduced, the Supply which I sent by R Flds.
was timely, they all eate hartily of roots & fish, 2 horses lost 1 Days
journey back




[Clark, September 22, 1805]
Friday 22nd Septr. 1805
a verry worm day the hunters Shild killed 3 Deer this morning. I left
them on the Island and Set out with the Chief & his Son on a young
horse for the Village at which place I expected to meet Capt Lewis this
young horse in fright threw himself & me 3 times on the Side of a Steep
hill & hurt my hip much, Cought a Coalt which we found on the roade & I
rode it for Several miles untill we saw the Chiefs horses, he cought
one & we arrived at his Village at Sunset, & himself and myslf walked
up to the 2d Village where I found Capt Lewis & the party Encamped,
much fatigued, & hungery, much rejoiced to find something to eate of
which They appeared to partake plentifully. I cautioned them of the
Consequences of eateing too much &c.

The planes appeared covered with Spectators viewing the White men and
the articles which we had, our party weacke and much reduced in flesh
as well as Strength, The horse I left hung up they receved at a time
they were in great want, and the Supply I Sent by R. Fields proved
timely and gave great encouragement to the party with Captn. Lewis. he
lost 3 horses one of which belonged to our guide. Those Indians Stole
out of R. F. Shot pouch his knife wipers Compas & Steel, which we Could
not precure from them, we attempted to have Some talk with those people
but Could not for the want of an Interpreter thro which we Could
Speake, we were Compelled to converse Altogether by Signs--I got the
Twisted hare to draw the river from his Camp down which he did with
great cherfullness on a white Elk Skin, from the 1s fork which is a few
seven miles below, to the large fork on which the So So ne or Snake
Indians fish, is South 2 Sleeps; to a large river which falls in on the
N W. Side and into which The Clarks river empties itself is 5 Sleeps
from the mouth of that river to the falls is 5 Sleeps at the falls he
places Establishments of white people &c. and informs that great
numbers of Indians reside on all those foks as well as the main river;
one other Indian gave me a like account of the Countrey, Some few drops
of rain this evening. I precured maps of the Country & river with the
Situation of Indians, To come from Several men of note Seperately which
varied verey little.




[Clark, September 23, 1805]
Septr. 23rd Sunday
Traded with the Indians, made 3 Chiefs and gave them meadels & Tobacco
& Handkerchif & knives, and a flag & left a Flag & hand kerches for the
great Chief when he returns from war, in the evening proceeded to the
2d Vilg 2 miles, a hard wind and rain at dark, traded for Some root
Bread & Skins to make Shirts. hot day




[Clark, September 23, 1805]
Saturday 23rd Septr 1805.
We assembled the principal Men as well as the Chiefs and by Signs
informed them where we came from where bound our wish to inculcate
peace and good understanding between all the red people &c. which
appeared to Satisfy them much, we then gave 2 other Medals to other
Chefs of bands, a flag to the twisted hare, left a flag & Handkerchief
to the grand Chief gave, a Shirt to the Twisted hare & a knife &
Handkerchif with a Small pece of Tobacco to each. Finding that those
people gave no provisions to day we deturmined to purchase with our
Small articles of merchindize, accord we purchased all we could, Such
as roots dried, in bread, & in ther raw State, Berris of red Haws &
Fish and in the evening Set out and proceeded on to the 2d Village 2
miles dist. where we also purchased a few articles all amounting to as
much as our weak horses Could Carry to the river Capt. Lewis & 2 men
verry Sick this evening, my hip verry Painfull, the men trade a few old
tin Canisters for dressed Elk Skin to make themselves Shirts, at dark a
hard wind from The S W accompaned with rain which lasted half an hour.
The twisted hare envited Capt Lewis & myself to his lodge which was
nothin more than Pine bushes & bark, and gave us Some broiled dried
Salmon to eate, great numbers about us all night at this village the
women were busily employed in gathering and drying the Pas-she co root
of which they had great quantites dug in piles




[Clark, September 24, 1805]
Septr. 24th Monday 1805
Set out early for the river and proceeded on the Same road I had
prevsly gorn to the Island at which place I had found the Chief &
formed a Camp several 8 or 9 men Sick, Capt Lewis Sick all Complain of
a Lax & heaviness at the Stomack, I gave rushes Pills to Several hot
day maney Indians & thier gangues of horses follow us hot day Hunter
had 5 Deer




[Clark, September 24, 1805]
Sunday 24th Septr. 1805
a fine morning collected our horses despatched J. Colter back to hunt
the horses lost in the mountains & bring up Some Shot left behind, and
at 10 oClock we all Set out for the river and proceeded on by the Same
rout I had previously traveled, and at Sunset We arrived at the Island
on which I found the Twisted hare and formed a Camp on a large Island a
littl below, Capt Lewis Scercely able to ride on a jentle horse which
was furnishd by the Chief, Several men So unwell that they were
Compelled to lie on the Side of the road for Some time others obliged
to be put on horses. I gave rushes Pills to the Sick this evening.
Several Indians follow us.




[Clark, September 25, 1805]
Septr. 25th I with th Chief & 2 young men went down to hunt timber for
Canoes--proceeded on down to the forks 4 miles N 70 deg. W 2 miles S. 75 deg.W 2
miles, halted young men Cought 6 Sammon, the forks nearly the Same
Size, Crossed the South fork & found Timber large Pine in a bottom
Proceeded up the South Side 3 parts of Party Sick Capt Lewis verry Sick
hot day




[Clark, September 25, 1805]
Monday 25th of September 1805
a verry hot day most of the Party Complaining and 2 of our hunters left
here on the 22nd verry Sick they had killed only two Bucks in my
absence. I Set out early with the Chief and 2 young men to hunt Some
trees Calculated to build Canoes, as we had previously deturmined to
proceed on by water, I was furnished with a horse and we proceeded on
down the river Crossed a Creek at 1 mile from the right verry rockey
which I call rock dam Creek & Passed down on the N side of the river to
a fork from the North which is about the Same Size and affords about
the Same quantity of water with the other forks we halted about an
hour, one of the young men took his guilt and killed 6 fine Salmon two
of them were roasted and we eate, two Canoes Came up loaded with the
furnitur & provisions of 2 families, those Canoes are long Stedy and
without much rake I crossed the South fork and proceeded up on the
South Side, the most of the way thro a narrow Pine bottom in which I
Saw fine timber for Canoes one of the Indian Canoes with 2 men with
Poles Set out from the forks at the Same time I did and arrived at our
Camp on the Island within 15 minits of the Same time I did, not
withstanding 3 rapids which they had to draw the Canoe thro in the
distance, when I arrived at Camp found Capt Lewis verry Sick, Several
men also verry Sick, I gave Some Salts & Tarter emetic, we deturmined
to go to where the best timbr was and there form a Camp




[Clark, September 26, 1805]
Septr. 26th Set out early and proceeded down the river to the bottom on
the S Side opposit the forks & formed a Camp had ax handled ground &c.
our axes all too Small, Indians caught Sammon & Sold us, 2 Chiefs &
thir families came & camped near us, Several men bad, Capt Lewis Sick I
gave Pukes Salts &c. to Several, I am a little unwell. hot day




[Clark, September 26, 1805]
Tuesday 26th Septr. 1805
Set out early and proceeded on down the river to a bottom opposit the
forks of the river on the South Side and formed a Camp. Soon after our
arrival a raft Came down the N. fork on which was two men, they came
too, I had the axes distributed and handled and men apotned. ready to
commence building canoes on tomorrow, our axes are Small & badly
Calculated to build Canoes of the large Pine, Capt Lewis Still very
unwell, Several men taken Sick on the way down, I administered Salts
Pils Galip, Tarter emetic &c. I feel unwell this evening, two Chiefs &
their families follow us and encamp near us, they have great numbers of
horses. This day proved verry hot, we purchase fresh Salmon of the
Indians




[Clark, September 27, 1805]
Septr. 27th Thursday 1805
Set all the men able to work abt. building Canoes, Colter returned and
found one horse & the Canister of Shot left in the mountains he also
killed a Deer 1/2 of which he brought hot day--men Sick




[Clark, September 27, 1805]
27th Septr. Wednesday 1805
