*END THE SMALL PRINT! FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN ETEXTS*Ver.10/04/01*END*





This etext was produced by David Widger  <widger@cecomet.net>





VITTORIA


By George Meredith



CONTENTS:

BOOK 7.
XXXIII.   EPISODES OF THE REVOLT AND THE WAR--COUNT KARL LENKENSTEIN--
          THE STORY OF THE GUIDASCARPI--THE VICTORY OF THE VOLUNTEERS
XXXIV.    EPISODES OF THE REVOLT AND THE WAR--THE DEEDS OF BARTO RIZZO--
          THE MEETING AT ROVEREDO
XXXV.     CLOSE OF THE LOMBARD CAMPAIGN--VITTORIA'S PERPLEXITY
XXXVI.    A FRESH ENTANGLEMENT
XXXVII.   ON LAGO MAGGIORE
XXXVIII.  VIOLETTA D'ISORELLA
XXXIX.    ANNA OF LENKENSTEIN



CHAPTER XXXIII

EPISODES OF THE REVOLT AND THE WAR

COUNT KARL LENKENSTEIN--THE STORY OF THE GUIDASCARPI--THE VICTORY OF THE
VOLUNTEERS

The smoke of a pistol-shot thinned away while there was yet silence.

"It is a saving of six charges of Austrian ammunition," said Pericles.

Vittoria stared at the scene, losing faith in her eyesight.  She could in
fact see no distinct thing beyond what appeared as an illuminated copper
medallion, held at a great distance from her, with a dead man and a
towering female figure stamped on it.

The events following were like a rush of water on her senses.  There was
fighting up the street of the village, and a struggle in the space where
Rinaldo had fallen; successive yellowish shots under the rising
moonlight, cries from Italian lips, quick words of command from German in
Italian, and one sturdy bull's roar of a voice that called across the
tumult to the Austro-Italian soldiery, "Venite fratelli!--come, brothers,
come under our banner!"  She heard "Rinaldo!"  called.

This was a second attack of the volunteers for the rescue of their
captured comrades.  They fought more desperately than on the hill outside
the village: they fought with steel.  Shot enfiladed them; yet they bore
forward in a scattered body up to that spot where Rinaldo lay, shouting
for him.  There they turned,--they fled.

Then there was a perfect stillness, succeeding the strife as quickly,
Vittoria thought, as a breath yielded succeeds a breath taken.

She accused the heavens of injustice.

Pericles, prostrate on the floor, moaned that he was wounded.  She said,
"Bleed to death!"

"It is my soul, it is my soul is wounded for you, Sandra."

"Dreadful craven man!" she muttered.

"When my soul is shaking for your safety, Sandra Belloni!" Pericles
turned his ear up.  "For myself--not; it is for you, for you."

Assured of the cessation of arms by delicious silence he jumped to his
feet.

"Ah! brutes to fight.  It is 'immonde;' it is unnatural!"

He tapped his finger on the walls for marks of shot, and discovered a
shot-hole in the wood-work, that had passed an arm's length above her
head, into which he thrust his finger in an intense speculative
meditation, shifting eyes from it to her, and throwing them aloft.

He was summoned to the presence of Count Karl, with whom he found Captain
Weisspriess, Wilfrid, and officers of jagers and the Italian battalion.
Barto Rizzo's wife was in a corner of the room.  Weisspriess met him with
a very civil greeting, and introduced him to Count Karl, who begged him
to thank Vittoria for the aid she had afforded to General Schoneck's
emissary in crossing the Piedmontese lines.  He spoke in Italian.  He
agreed to conduct Pericles to a point on the route of his march, where
Pericles and his precious prima donna--"our very good friend," he said,
jovially--could escape the risk of unpleasant mishaps, and arrive at
Trent and cities of peace by easy stages.  He was marching for the
neighbourhood of Vicenza.

A little before dawn Vittoria came down to the carriage.  Count Karl
stood at the door to hand her in.  He was young and handsome, with a soft
flowing blonde moustache and pleasant eyes, a contrast to his brother
Count Lenkenstein.  He repeated his thanks to her, which Pericles had not
delivered; he informed her that she was by no means a prisoner, and was
simply under the guardianship of friends--"though perhaps, signorina, you
will not esteem this gentleman to be one of your friends."  He pointed to
Weisspriess.  The officer bowed, but kept aloof.  Vittoria perceived a
singular change in him: he had become pale and sedate.  "Poor fellow!  he
has had his dose," Count Karl said.  "He is, I beg to assure you, one of
your most vehement admirers."

A piece of her property that flushed her with recollections, yet made her
grateful, was presently handed to her, though not in her old enemy's
presence, by a soldier.  It was the silver-hilted dagger, Carlo's
precious gift, of which Weisspriess had taken possession in the mountain-
pass over the vale of Meran, when he fought the duel with Angelo.
Whether intended as a peace-offering, or as a simple restitution, it
helped Vittoria to believe that Weisspriess was no longer the man he had
been.

The march was ready, but Barto Rizzo's wife refused to move a foot.  The
officers consulted.  She, was brought before them.  The soldiers swore
with jesting oaths that she had been carefully searched for weapons, and
only wanted a whipping.  "She must have it," said Weisspriess.  Vittoria
entreated that she might have a place beside her in the carriage.  "It is
more than I would have asked of you; but if you are not afraid of her,"
said Count Karl, with an apologetic shrug.

Her heart beat fast when she found herself alone with the terrible woman.

Till then she had never seen a tragic face.  Compared with this tawny
colourlessness, this evil brow, this shut mouth, Laura, even on the
battle-field, looked harmless.  It was like the face of a dead savage.
The eyeballs were full on Vittoria, as if they dashed at an obstacle, not
embraced an image.  In proportion as they seemed to widen about her,
Vittoria shrank.  The whole woman was blood to her gaze.

When she was capable of speaking, she said entreatingly:

"I knew his brother."

Not a sign of life was given in reply.

Companionship with this ghost of broad daylight made the flattering
Tyrolese feathers at both windows a welcome sight.

Precautions had been taken to bind the woman's arms.  Vittoria offered to
loosen the cords, but she dared not touch her without a mark of assent.

"I know Angelo Guidascarpi, Rinaldo's brother," she spoke again.

The woman's nostrils bent inward, as when the breath we draw is keen as a
sword to the heart.  Vittoria was compelled to look away from her.

At the mid-day halt Count Karl deigned to justify to her his intended
execution of Rinaldo--the accomplice in the slaying of his brother Count
Paula.  He was evidently eager to obtain her good opinion of the Austrian
military.  "But for this miserable spirit of hatred against us," he said,
"I should have espoused an Italian lady;" and he asked, "Why not?  For
that matter, in all but blood we Lenkensteins are half Italian, except
when Italy menaces the empire.  Can you blame us for then drawing the
sword in earnest?"

He proffered his version of the death of Count Paul.  She kept her own
silent in her bosom.

Clelia Guidascarpi, according to his statement, had first been slain by
her brothers.  Vittoria believed that Clelia had voluntarily submitted to
death and died by her own hand.  She was betrothed to an Italian nobleman
of Bologna, the friend of the brothers.  They had arranged the marriage;
she accepted the betrothal.  "She loved my brother, poor thing!"  said
Count Karl.  "She concealed it, and naturally.  How could she take a
couple of wolves into her confidence?  If she had told the pair of
ruffians that she was plighted to an Austrian, they would have quieted
her at an earlier period.  A woman! a girl--signorina!  The intolerable
cowardice amazes me.  It amazes me that you or anyone can uphold the
character of such brutes.  And when she was dead they lured my brother to
the house and slew him; fell upon him with daggers, stretched him at the
foot of her coffin, and then--what then?--ran! ran for their lives.  One
has gone to his account.  We shall come across the other.  He is among
that volunteer party which attacked us yesterday.  The body was carried
off by them; it is sufficient testimony that Angelo Guidascarpi is in the
neighbourhood.  I should be hunting him now but that I am under orders to
march South-east."

The story, as Vittoria knew it, had a different, though yet a dreadful,
colour.

"I could have hanged Rinaldo," Count Karl said further.  "I suppose the
rascals feared I should use my right, and that is why they sent their mad
baggage of a woman to spare any damage to the family pride.  If I had
been a man to enjoy vengeance, the rope would have swung for him.  In
spite of provocation, I shall simply shoot the other; I pledge my word to
it.  They shall be paid in coin.  I demand no interest."

Weisspriess prudently avoided her.  Wilfrid held aloof.  She sat in
garden shade till the bugle sounded.  Tyrolese and Italian soldiers were
gibing at her haggard companion when she entered the carriage.  Fronting
this dumb creature once more, Vittoria thought of the story of the
brothers.  She felt herself reading it from the very page.  The woman
looked that evil star incarnate which Laura said they were born under.

This is in brief the story of the Guidascarpi.

They were the offspring of a Bolognese noble house, neither wealthy nor
poor.  In her early womanhood, Clelia was left to the care of her
brothers.  She declined the guardianship of Countess Ammiani because of
her love for them; and the three, with their passion of hatred to the
Austrians inherited from father and mother, schemed in concert to throw
off the Austrian yoke.  Clelia had soft features of no great mark; by her
colouring she was beautiful, being dark along the eyebrows, with dark
eyes, and a surpassing richness of Venetian hair.  Bologna and Venice
were married in her aspect.  Her brothers conceived her to possess such
force of mind that they held no secrets from her.  They did not know that
the heart of their sister was struggling with an image of Power when she
uttered hatred of it.  She was in truth a woman of a soft heart, with a
most impressionable imagination.

There were many suitors for the hand of Clelia Guidascarpi, though her
dowry was not the portion of a fat estate.  Her old nurse counselled the
brothers that they should consent to her taking a husband.  They
fulfilled this duty as one that must be done, and she became sorrowfully
the betrothed of a nobleman of Bologna; from which hour she had no
cheerfulness.  The brothers quitted Bologna for Venice, where there was
the bed of a conspiracy.  On their return they were shaken by rumours of
their sister's misconduct.  An Austrian name was allied to hers in busy
mouths.  A lady, their distant relative, whose fame was light, had
withdrawn her from the silent house, and made display of her.  Since she
had seen more than an Italian girl should see, the brothers proposed to
the nobleman her betrothed to break the treaty; but he was of a mind to
hurry on the marriage, and recollecting now that she was but a woman, the
brothers fixed a day for her espousals, tenderly, without reproach.  She
had the choice of taking the vows or surrendering her hand.  Her old
nurse prayed for the day of her espousals to come with a quicker step.

One night she surprised Count Paul Lenkenstein at Clelia's window.
Rinaldo was in the garden below.  He moved to the shadow of a cypress,
and was seen moving by the old nurse.  The lover took the single kiss he
had come for, was led through the chamber, and passed unchallenged into
the street.  Clelia sat between locked doors and darkened windows,
feeling colder to the brothers she had been reared with than to all other
men upon the earth.  They sent for her after a lapse of hours.  Her old
nurse was kneeling at their feet.  Rinaldo asked for the name of her
lover.  She answered with it.  Angelo said, "It will be better for you to
die: but if you cannot do so easy a thing as that, prepare widow's
garments."  They forced her to write three words to Count Paul, calling
him to her window at midnight.  Rinaldo fetched a priest: Angelo laid out
two swords.  An hour before the midnight, Clelia's old nurse raised the
house with her cries.  Clelia was stretched dead in her chamber.  The
brothers kissed her in turn, and sat, one at her head, one at her feet.
At midnight her lover stood among them.  He was gravely saluted, and
bidden to look upon the dead body.  Angelo said to him, "Had she lived
you should have wedded her hand.  She is gone of her own free choice, and
one of us follows her."  With the sweat of anguish on his forehead, Count
Paul drew sword.  The window was barred; six male domestics of the
household held high lights in the chamber; the priest knelt beside one
corpse, awaiting the other.

Vittoria's imagination could not go beyond that scene, but she looked out
on the brother of the slain youth with great pity, and with a strange
curiosity.  The example given by Clelia of the possible love of an
Italian girl for the white uniform, set her thinking whether so monstrous
a fact could ever be doubled in this world.  "Could it happen to me?"
she asked herself, and smiled, as she half-fashioned the words on her
lips, "It is a pretty uniform."

Her reverie was broken by a hiss of "Traitress!" from the woman opposite.

She coloured guiltily, tried to speak, and sat trembling.  A divination
of intense hatred had perhaps read the thought within her breast: or it
was a mere outburst of hate.  The woman's face was like the wearing away
of smoke from a spot whence shot has issued.  Vittoria walked for the
remainder of the day.  That fearful companion oppressed her.  She felt
that one who followed armies should be cast in such a frame, and now
desired with all her heart to render full obedience to Carlo, and abide
in Brescia, or even in Milan--a city she thought of shyly.

The march was hurried to the slopes of the Vicentino, for enemies were
thick in this district.  Pericles refused to quit the soldiers, though
Count Karl used persuasion.  The young nobleman said to Vittoria, "Be on
your guard when you meet my sister Anna.  I tell you, we can be as
revengeful as any of you: but you will exonerate me.  I do my duty; I
seek to do no more."

At an inn that they reached toward evening she saw the innkeeper shoot a
little ball of paper at an Italian corporal, who put his foot on it and
picked it up.  The soldier subsequently passed through the ranks of his
comrades, gathering winks and grins.  They were to have rested at the
inn, but Count Karl was warned by scouts, which was sufficient to make
Pericles cling to him in avoidance of the volunteers, of whom mainly he
was in terror.  He looked ague-stricken.  He would not listen to her, or
to reason in any shape.  "I am on the sea--shall I trust a boat?  I stick
to a ship," he said.  The soldiers marched till midnight.  It was
arranged that the carriage should strike off for Schio at dawn.  The
soldiers bivouacked on the slope of one of the low undulations falling to
the Vicentino plain.  Vittoria spread her cloak, and lay under bare sky,
not suffering the woman to be ejected from the carriage.  Hitherto Luigi
had avoided her.  Under pretence of doubling Count Karl's cloak as a
pillow for her head, he whispered, "If the signorina hears shots let her
lie on the ground flat as a sheet."  The peacefulness surrounding her
precluded alarm.  There was brilliant moonlight, and the host of stars,
all dim; and first they beckoned her up to come away from trouble, and
then, through long gazing, she had the fancy that they bent and swam
about her, making her feel that she lay in the hollows of a warm hushed
sea.  She wished for her lover.

Men and officers were lying at a stone's-throw distant.  The Tyrolese had
lit a fire for cooking purposes, by which four of them stood, and,
lifting hands, sang one of their mountain songs, that seemed to her to
spring like clear water into air, and fall wavering as a feather falls,
or the light about a stone in water.  It lulled her to a half-sleep,
during which she fancied hearing a broad imitation of a cat's-call from
the mountains, that was answered out of the camp, and a talk of officers
arose in connection with the response, and subsided.  The carriage was in
the shadows of the fire.  In a little while Luigi and the driver began
putting the horses to, and she saw Count Karl and Weisspriess go up to
Luigi, who declared loudly that it was time.  The woman inside was
aroused.  Weisspriess helped to drag her out.  Luigi kept making much
noise, and apologized for it by saying that he desired to awaken his
master, who was stretched in a secure circle among the Tyrolese.
Presently Vittoria beheld the woman's arms thrown out free; the next
minute they were around the body of Weisspriess, and a shrewd cry issued
from Count Karl.  Shots rang from the outposts; the Tyrolese sprang to
arms; "Sandra!" was shouted by Pericles; and once more she heard the
'Venite fratelli!' of the bull's voice, and a stream of volunteers dashed
at the Tyrolese with sword and dagger and bayonet.  The Austro-Italians
stood in a crescent line--the ominous form of incipient military
insubordination.  Their officers stormed at them, and called for Count
Karl and for Weisspriess.  The latter replied like a man stifling, but
Count Karl's voice was silent.

"Weisspriess! here, to me!"  the captain sang out in Italian.

"Ammiani! here, to me!"  was replied.

Vittoria struck her hands together in electrical gladness at her lover's
voice and name.  It rang most cheerfully.  Her home was in the conflict
where her lover fought, and she muttered with ecstasy, "We have met! we
have met!"  The sound of the keen steel, so exciting to dream of,
paralyzed her nerves in a way that powder, more terrible for a woman's
imagination, would not have done, and she could only feebly advance.  It
was a spacious moonlight, but the moonlight appeared to have got of a
brassy hue to her eyes, though the sparkle of the steel was white; and
she felt too, and wondered at it, that the cries and the noise went to
her throat, as if threatening to choke her.  Very soon she found herself
