of value."

"Humph!" Captain Putnam's brow contracted.  "This looks very
suspicious."

At that moment one of the smaller cadets came in with a note in
his hand.

"I just met Baxter running down the road!" exclaimed the little
fellow.  "He gave me this for you, Captain Putnam."

At once the proprietor of the Hall tore open the communication and
read it half aloud:

"Good-by to Putnam Hall forever.  It is full of fellows who are no
good and run by a man I never liked.  No use of following me, for
I am going to join my father, and I don't mean to come back.

"DAN BAXTER

"P. S.--Tell the Rover boys I shan't forget them, and some day I
shall take pains to square accounts.

                  "D. B."

"The foolish boy," was the captain's comment.  "But perhaps he has
done what is best, for it might have been necessary to dismiss
him."  For a long while those at the Hall wondered how Baxter had
escaped.  Only Mumps knew and he kept the secret to himself.  A
duplicate key to the door of the guardroom had done the trick.

As Baxter was not followed, nothing more was spoken of him for the
time being, and after several days the cadets settled down to
their regular work as though nothing out of the ordinary had
occurred.  A hunt was instituted by Dick for Arnold Baxter and
Buddy the thief, but no trace of the pair came to light.

The Christmas holidays were now at hand and the closing days at
Putnam Hall were given over to several entertainments.  One of
these consisted of a stage performance of a play called "A
Christmas in a Tenement," given by twelve of the boys.  Three of
the lads, including Tom, took female parts, and the audience
laughed itself sore over the antics that were cut up.

Many living in the vicinity came to the entertainment; including
all of the Lanings and also Dora Stanhope and her mother; who was
now almost as well as ever.

"It was fine!" said Nellie Laning to Tom.  "But, oh, Tom, what a
girl you did make!"

"Wouldn't you like me for a sister?" queried Tom.

"A sister!  Oh, dear!" cried Nellie, and began to laugh again.

"You looked like a female giraffe!" put in Grace Laning.  "Sam
acted a little boy splendidly.  Sam, don't you want a stick of
candy?"

"Yes, mammy, please," squeaked Sam, just as he had on the stage,
and another laugh went around.

In the meantime Dick had drawn Dora to one side.  "What is the
news?" he asked anxiously.

"Nothing new," sighed Dora.  "Josiah Crabtree has gone to Boston
on business.  I am afraid I cannot keep that marriage off much
longer.  He seems bound to marry mother, and even if she feels
like drawing back she hasn't the courage to tell him so."

"It's a shame," murmured Dick.  "Well, remember what I said, Dora,
if I can ever help you I will."  And he squeezed her hand.  Before
they separated he gave her a silk handkerchief he had purchased at
Cedarville, one with her initial in the corner, and she blushingly
handed over a scarf made by herself.  Dick was very proud of that
scarf, although Tom and Sam teased him about it unmercifully.

Of course the boys had received letters from their uncle and aunt
regularly, yet they watched eagerly for the hour that should bring
them within sight of the farm with its well-known buildings.  The
journey to Oak Run proved uneventful, and here Jack, the hired
man, met them with the carriage.

"Glad to see you, lads," he said--with a grin.

"Seems quite natural like."

"So it does, Jack!" cried Tom.  "Let 'em out, for we want to get
home!"

The snow was falling, and by the time the farmhouse was reached it
was several inches deep.  "We're in for a sleigh ride before we go
back," said Sam.

Their uncle and aunt stood at the door to receive them.  "Welcome
home!  Merry Christmas!" came from both, and each of the boys gave
a warm handshake to Randolph Rover and hearty kiss to their Aunt
Martha.  Past troubles were all forgotten.

This was Christmas Eve, and the boys stayed up late, cracking nuts
by the blazing log fire and having a good time generally.

In the morning Dick was the first one awake.

"For gracious' sake!" he ejaculated, staring at the chimney piece.
"There hung his own stocking and also one each belonging to Tom
and Sam.  Each was filled with goodies such as he knew only his
Aunt Martha could make.

"Sam and Dick, wake up, we've struck a bonanza!" he cried, and
hauled both from under the covers.  All laughed heartily, and
marched down to the dining room with the stockings over their
shoulders.

"A merry Christmas to Uncle Randolph from all of us," said Tom,
handing over a much coveted volume on agriculture.  "And a merry
Christmas to Aunt Martha from three bad boys," added Sam, and
turned over a fancy work-basket, both presents having been
purchased at Ithaca on the journey home.

"Ha!  Just what I desired!" said Randolph Rover, adjusting his
spectacles.  "I am very much obliged, boys--I am, indeed!"

"Such a pretty basket!" murmured Mrs. Rover.  "It was very good of
you!" and she, hugged each lad in his turn.  Then came more
presents--neckties, collars, and gloves for the boys, besides a
book for each written by a favorite juvenile writer.

"The snow is two feet deep!" said Dick, after an inspection, when
breakfast had come to an end.  "We're booked for the house today!"

"We'll wait until afternoon," said Mr. Rover.

It was a happy time, even if they were snowed in.  Soon the warm
sun came out and brought the snow down a little.  "Best kind of
sleighing now," said the hired man, and drove around the biggest
sleigh on the place.  All tumbled in, and the party did not return
until after midnight.




CHAPTER XXI

SOMETHING ABOUT THE PAST


During holiday week the boys took occasion to tell their uncle all
of the particulars concerning the tramp called Buddy, Arnold
Baxter, and his son the bully.  It is needless to state that
Randolph Rover listened to their story with interest.

"I would like to meet this man with a scar on his chin," he said.
"Speaking of him reminds me of something that happened years ago."

"What was it, Uncle Randolph?" questioned Tom.

"Your father had an enemy who had a scar on his chin."

"What!" cried Sam.  "Could it have been this Arnold Baxter?"

"Hardly, although such a thing is possible.  This man was a
Westerner, and laid claim to some property owned by your father.
They had a quarrel, and the fellow shot your father in the arm and
then ran away.  I never learned any of the particulars."

"Arnold Baxter and this Buddy spoke about a mining claim, and
about some papers," burst out Tom.  "I'd like to wager he is the
same chap!"

"If he is, you want to beware of him," responded Randolph Rover
gravely.  "He is your father's deadliest enemy."

"I'll remember that," said Dick, and his brothers nodded.  The
matter was talked over for several hours, but brought little
satisfaction.

On New Year's Day came another fall of snow, and the lads spent
the afternoon in a regular snowballing match among themselves and
with the hired man.  Poor Jack caught it on all sides, and after
quarter of an hour's bombardment was glad enough to run to the
barn, for shelter.  "But it's great sport," he grinned, as he
almost stood on his head trying to get from the back of his neck a
soft snowball which Tom had planted there.

The following day they started back for Putnam Hall, and on the
way met Larry, Frank, Fred, and a number of others.  When Ithaca
was reached a surprise awaited the crowd.  The weather was so cold
that the ice impeded transportation, and the Golden Star was not
making her usual trips to Cedarville and other points.

"Here's a state of things!" cried, Tom.  "What's to do--walk to
Putnam Hall?"

"Well, hardly, seeing that it is a good number of miles and the
weather is bitterly cold."

"Well, if we can't walk and can't ride, how are we to get there?"
came from Sam.

"That's the conundrum, Brudder Bones," laughed Larry, imitating a
negro minstrel.  "I'se gib it up, sah!"

"It's no laughing matter," said Dick.  "We might stay in Ithaca
over night, but traveling may be no better in the morning."

"Let us send a telegram to Captain Putnam for instructions,"
suggested Fred, and soon the following message was prepared and
sent to the Hall by way of Cedarville:

"Six of us are held up at Ithaca by the cold.  How shall we come
on?"

This message was forwarded without delay, and while awaiting an
answer Dick and his brothers took a walk through the town.

They were passing down the main street when Sam uttered a short
cry.

"Hullo, there is Josiah Crabtree!"

"Where?" questioned Dick with deep interest.

"Across the way.  He has just entered the jewelry store on the
corner."

"Say, perhaps he's buying a wedding ring," blurted out Tom before
he stopped to think.

"Tom, that matter is no joke," came from Dick, as his face grew
red.  "I sincerely hope, for Dora Stanhope's sake, that he never
marries, Dora's mother."

"Oh, so do I," answered Tom readily.

"Why, he isn't fit to be stepfather to a dog!"

"Let us look into the window and see what he is doing," suggested
Dick uneasily, for he could not get it out of his head but that
his brother's guess might be correct.

The window was broad and clear, and they looked through it into
the shop with ease.  Josiah Crabtree stood at the counter, talking
to a clerk, who presently brought forth a tray of plain rings.

"It is a wedding ring, as sure as you are born!" cried Tom.

"I'm going in," said Dick in a low tone.  "Wait for me here," and
he entered the establishment.  There were counters an both sides,
and he walked to a position directly opposite to that occupied by
the ex-schoolmaster.

"I wish to see some cheap scarf pins," he said to the clerk who
came to wait on him, and the man hurried off to bring on the
articles mentioned.

"And is this the latest style of wedding ring?" Dick heard Josiah
Crabtree say in a low voice.

"Yes, sir, the very latest--and very tasty," answered the clerk
who was waiting on him.

"I wish two, one for the lady and one for--ahem--myself."

"Yes, sir--quite the style now for a gentleman to have a ring.
Want them engraved, of course."

"Yes.  Here is a paper with the sizes and what is to be engraved
upon each.  How much will they be with the engraving?"

"Six dollars each, sir."

"Six dollars!  Don't you make a reduction on taking two?" asked
Crabtree, who was a good deal of a miser.

"We can throw off a dollar on the pair," answered the clerk, after
consulting the proprietor of the shop.

"I didn't expect to pay over ten dollars."

"We can give you this style for ten dollars."

"No, I want the latest--to please the lady."

"Humph!" muttered Dick.  "You'll never please Mrs. Stanhope with
any ring."

"Eleven dollars is the lowest we can take."

"And when will the rings be ready for me?"

"Day after tomorrow.  We might do them quicker, but we have a
great deal of engraving ahead."

"Day after tomorrow will do, for I do not wish them until next
week," answered Josiah.  "Here is my card.  I am stopping at the
American House in this city."

"Yes, sir.  Do you want the rings sent?"

"No, I will call for them," concluded the ex-teacher, and hurried
from the place.  Sam and Tom saw him coming, and dodged out of
sight around the corner.

Dick had taken in all that was said and had in the meantime picked
out a cheap scarf pin which cost but ten cents.  As soon as
Crabtree was gone he paid for the pin, shoved it into his pocket,
and rejoined his brothers, to whom he told the particulars of what
had occurred.

"He intends to marry Mrs. Stanhope next week," he declared
bitterly.  "I would give almost all I'm worth to stop that
wedding."

"Gracious, but you do think a heap of Dora!" said Tom slyly.
"Well, I don't blame you.  She is a splendid girl--eh, Sam?"

"That's right," answered Sam.

"But, Dick, why not put up a job on old Crabtree?"

"What kind of a job?"

"Find out just when he wants to get married and then send him a
letter from Yale or some other college, requesting him to come on
at once if he wants a certain position.  That will cause another
delay, and maybe Mrs. Stanhope will get sick of him."

"Oh, if only we could do something like that!" cried his elder
brother quickly. "I wish I could send him away out West."

"We'll manage it somehow--" put in Tom.

"Sam, what wonderful ideas you have for your years!"

"Oh; I take after my big brothers," answered the youngest Rover
modestly.

Late in the evening a telegram was received from Captain Putnam:

"Remain in Ithaca over night, at the American House.  Will send
word how to get here in the morning."

"The American House!" ejaculated Dick.  "That is where old
Crabtree is stopping."

"If only we can have some fun with the old chap!" sighed Tom.

The six boys marched to the hotel in a body, told their story, and
showed the telegram to the clerk.

"All right," said the clerk.  "We've had cadets stop here before.
I have a big room on the second floor, with two large beds in it.
Will that do?"

"That suits me," said Larry.

"Is Mr. Josiah Crabtree stopping here?" questioned Tom.

"Yes.  He has the room next to the one I mentioned--his is No.
13, and yours will be No. 14."

"All right; thanks," answered Tom dryly, and immediately began to
lay plans for playing a joke on the old teacher.

"We don't want to let Mr. Crabtree know we are stopping here," he
said to the clerk later on.  "He is no longer a teacher at the
Hall, and we would rather not meet."

"Shall I put you in another room?"

"Oh, no; only don't tell him we are here."

"I'll remember that, sir."

As soon as the boys had been shown to the big room, Tom turned to
his fellows.  "I want each of you to chip in ten cents," he said.

"What for?" came in a chorus.

"For the purpose of getting square with old Crabby."

"I don't see the connection," said Larry.  "Kindly be a little
more definite."

"You'll see, or hear, the connection a little later on," answered
Tom.  "Quick, shell out and I'll promise you your money's worth,
or return the amount with legal interest."

The fifty cents was quickly collected, and, adding ten cents of
his own, Tom ran from the hotel.  "No fish market open at this
time of night," he said to himself.

