    cutting off a branch, the growing tissue of the tree cannot cover it
    and the stub eventually decays, falls out and leaves a hole (see
    Fig. 114), which serves to carry disease and insects to the heart of
    the tree. This idea of close cutting cannot be over-emphasized.

    Where large branches have to be removed, the splitting and ripping
    of the bark along the trunk is prevented by making one cut beneath
    the branch, about a foot or two away from the trunk, and then
    another above, close to the trunk.

[Illustration: FIG. 113.--Branches Properly Cut Close to the Trunk.]

Too severe pruning: In pruning trees, many people have a tendency to cut
    them back so severely as to remove everything but the bare trunk and
    a few of the main branches. This process is known as "heading
    back." It is a method, however, which should not be resorted to
    except in trees that are very old and failing, and even there only
    with certain species, like the silver maple, sycamore, linden and
    elm. Trees like the sugar maple will not stand this treatment at
    all. The willow is a tree that will stand the process very readily
    and the Carolina poplar must be cut back every few years, in order
    to keep its crown from becoming too tall, scraggy and unsafe.

[Illustration: FIG. 114.--A Limb Improperly Cut. Note how the stub is
decaying and the resulting cavity is becoming diseased.]

Covering wounds: The importance of immediately covering all wounds with
    coal tar cannot be overstated. If the wound is not tarred, the
    exposed wood cracks, as in Fig. 115, providing suitable quarters for
    disease germs that will eventually destroy the body of the tree.
    Coal tar is by far preferable to paint and other substances for
    covering the wound. The tar penetrates the exposed wood, producing
    an antiseptic as well as a protective effect. Paint only forms a
    covering, which may peel off in course of time and which will later
    protrude from the cut, thus forming, between the paint and the wood,
    a suitable breeding place for the development of destructive fungi
    or disease. The application of tin covers, burlap, or other bandages
    to the wound is equally futile and in most cases even injurious.

[Illustration: FIG. 115.--Result of a Wound not Covered with Coal Tar.
The exposed wood cracked and decay set in.]


SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS

Pruning shade trees: Here, the object is to produce a symmetrical crown
    and to have the lowest branches raised from the ground sufficiently
    high to enable pedestrians to pass under with raised umbrellas. Such
    pruning should, therefore, necessarily be light and confined to the
    low limbs and dead branches.

Pruning lawn trees: Here the charm of the tree lies in the low reach of
    the branches and the compactness of the crown. The pruning should,
    therefore, be limited to the removal of dead and diseased branches
    only.

Pruning forest trees: Forest trees have a greater commercial value when
    their straight trunks are free from branches. In the forest, nature
    generally accomplishes this result and artificial pruning seldom has
    to be resorted to. Trees in the forest grow so closely together that
    they shut out the sunlight from their lower limbs, thus causing the
    latter to die and fall off. This is known as natural pruning. In
    some European forests, nature is assisted in its pruning by workmen,
    who saw off the side branches before they fall of their own accord;
    but in this country such practice would be considered too expensive,
    hence it is seldom adopted.


TOOLS USED IN PRUNING

Good tools are essential for quick and effective work in pruning. Two or
three good saws, a pair of pole-shears, a pole-saw, a 16-foot single
ladder, a 40-foot extension ladder of light spruce or pine with hickory
rungs, a good pruning knife, plenty of coal tar, a fire-can to heat the
tar, a pole-brush, a small hand brush and plenty of good rope comprise
the principal equipment of the pruner.


SUGGESTIONS FOR THE SAFETY OF TREE CLIMBERS

1. Before climbing a tree, judge its general condition. The trunk of a
tree that shows age, disease, or wood-destroying insects generally has
its branches in an equally unhealthy condition.

2. The different kinds of wood naturally differ in their strength and
elasticity. The soft and brash woods need greater precautions than the
strong and pliable ones. The wood of all the poplars, the ailanthus, the
silver maple and the chestnut, catalpa and willow is either too soft or
too brittle to be depended upon without special care. The elm, hickory
and oak have strong, flexible woods and are, therefore, safer than
others. The red oak is weaker than the other oaks. The sycamore and
beech have a tough, cross-grained wood which is fairly strong. The
linden has a soft wood, while the ash and gum, though strong and
flexible, are apt to split.

3. Look out for a limb that shows fungous growths. Every fungus sends
fibers into the main body of the limb which draw out its sap. The
interior of the branch then loses its strength and becomes like a
powder. Outside appearances sometimes do not show the interior
condition, but one should regard a fungus as a danger sign.

4. When a limb is full of holes or knots, it generally indicates that
borers have been working all kinds of galleries through it, making it
unsafe. The silver maple and sycamore maple are especially subject to
borers which, in many cases, work on the under side of the branch so
that the man in the tree looking down cannot see its dangerous
condition.

5. A dead limb with the bark falling off indicates that it died at least
three months before and is, therefore, less safe than one with its bark
tightly adhering to it.

6. Branches are more apt to snap on a frosty day when they are covered
with an icy coating than on a warm summer day.

7. Always use the pole-saw and pole-shears on the tips of long branches,
and use the pole-hook in removing dead branches of the ailanthus and
other brittle trees where it would be too dangerous to reach them
otherwise.

8. Be sure of the strength of a branch before tying an extension ladder
to it.



STUDY IV. TREE REPAIR

Where trees have been properly cared for from their early start, wounds
and cavities and their subsequent elaborate treatment have no place. But
where trees have been neglected or improperly cared for, wounds and
cavities are bound to occur and early treatment becomes a necessity.

There are two kinds of wounds on trees: (1) surface wounds, which do not
extend beyond the inner bark, and (2) deep wounds or cavities, which may
range from a small hole in a crotch to the hollow of an entire trunk.

Surface wounds: Surface wounds (Fig. 116) are due to bruised bark, and a
    tree thus injured can no longer produce the proper amount of foliage
    or remain healthy very long. The reason for this becomes very
    apparent when one looks into the nature of the living or active
    tissue of a tree and notes how this tissue becomes affected by such
    injuries.

[Illustration: FIG. 116.--A Surface Wound Properly Freed from Decayed
Wood and Covered with Coal Tar.]

    This living or active tissue is known as the "cambium layer," and is
    a thin tissue situated immediately under the bark. It must
    completely envelop the stem, root and branches of the trees. The
    outer bark is a protective covering to this living layer, while the
    entire interior wood tissue chiefly serves as a skeleton or support
    for the tree. The cambium layer is the real, active part of the
    tree. It is the part which transmits the sap from the base of the
    tree to its crown; it is the part which causes the tree to grow by
    the formation of new cells, piled up in the form of rings around the
    heart of the tree; and it is also the part which prevents the
    entrance of insects and disease to the inner wood. From this it is
    quite evident that any injury to the bark, and consequently to this
    cambium layer alongside of it, will not only cut off a portion of
    the sap supply and hinder the growth of the tree to an extent
    proportional to the size of the wound, but will also expose the
    inner wood to the action of decay. The wound may, at first, appear
    insignificant, but, if neglected, it will soon commence to decay
    and thus to carry disease and insects into the tree. The tree then
    becomes hollow and dangerous and its life is doomed.

    Injury to the cambium layer, resulting in surface wounds, may be due
    to the improper cutting of a branch, to the bite of a horse, to the
    cut of a knife or the careless wielding of an axe, to the boring of
    an insect, or to the decay of a fungous disease. (See Fig. 117.)
    Whatever the cause, _the remedy lies in cleaning out all decayed
    wood, removing the loose bark and covering the exposed wood with
    coal tar_.

    In cutting off the loose bark, the edges should be made smooth
    before the coal tar is applied. Loose bark, put back against a tree,
    will never grow and will only tend to harbor insects and disease.
    Bandages, too, are hurtful because, underneath the bandage, disease
    will develop more rapidly than where the wound is exposed to the sun
    and wind. The application of tin or manure to wounds is often
    indulged in and is equally injurious to the tree. The secret of all
    wound treatment is to keep the wound _smooth, clean_ to the live
    tissue, _and well covered_ with coal tar.

    The chisel or gouge is the best tool to employ in this work. A sharp
    hawk-billed knife will be useful in cutting off the loose bark. Coal
    tar is the best material for covering wounds because it has both an
    antiseptic and a protective effect on the wood tissue. Paint, which
    is very often used as a substitute for coal tar, is not as
    effective, because the paint is apt to peel in time, thus allowing
    moisture and disease to enter the crevice between the paint and the
    wood.

[Illustration: FIG. 117.--A Neglected Surface Wound. Note the rough
surface of the wound, the want of a coal tar covering and the fungous
growth that followed.]

Cavities: Deep wounds and cavities are generally the result of stubs
    that have been permitted to rot and fall out. Surface wounds allowed
    to decay will deepen in course of time and produce cavities.
    Cavities in trees are especially susceptible to the attack of
    disease because, in a cavity, there is bound to exist an
    accumulation of moisture. With this, there is also considerable
    darkness and protection from wind and cold, and these are all ideal
    conditions for the development of disease.

    The successful application of a remedy, in all cavity treatment,
    hinges on this principal condition--_that all traces of disease
    shall be entirely eliminated before treatment is commenced_.

    Fungous diseases attacking a cavity produce a mass of fibers, known
    as the "mycelium," that penetrate the body of the tree or limb on
    which the cavity is located. In eliminating disease from a cavity,
    it is, therefore, essential to go _beyond_ the mere decaying surface
    and to cut out all fungous fibers that radiate into the interior of
    the tree. Where these fibers have penetrated so deeply that it
    becomes impossible to remove every one of them, the tree or limb
    thus affected had better be cut down. (Fig. 118.) The presence of
    the mycelium in wood tissue can readily be told by the discolored
    and disintegrated appearance of the wood.

    The filling in a cavity, moreover, should serve to prevent the
    accumulation of water and, where a cavity is perpendicular and so
    located that the water can be drained off without the filling, the
    latter should be avoided and the cavity should merely be cleaned out
    and tarred. (Fig. 116.) Where the disease can be entirely
    eliminated, where the cavity is not too large, and where a filling
    will serve the practical purpose of preventing the accumulation of
    moisture, the work of filling should be resorted to.

[Illustration: FIG. 118.--A Cavity Filled in a Tree that Should Have
Been Cut Down. Note how the entire interior is decayed and how the tree
fell apart soon after treatment.]

    Filling should be done in the following manner: First, the interior
    should be thoroughly freed from diseased wood and insects. The
    chisel, gouge, mall and knife are the tools, and it is better to
    cut deep and remove every trace of decayed wood than it is to leave
    a smaller hole in an unhealthy state. The inner surface of the
    cavity should then be covered with a coat of white lead paint, which
    acts as a disinfectant and helps to hold the filling. Corrosive
    sublimate or Bordeaux mixture may be used as a substitute for the
    white lead paint. A coat of coal tar over the paint is the next
    step. The cavity is then solidly packed with bricks, stones and
    mortar as in Fig. 119, and finished with a layer of cement at the
    mouth of the orifice. This surface layer of cement should not be
    brought out to the same plane with the outer bark of the tree, but
    should rather recede a little beyond the growing tissue (cambium
    layer) which is situated immediately below the bark, Fig. 120. In
    this way the growing tissue will be enabled to roll over the cement
    and to cover the whole cavity if it be a small one, or else to grow
    out sufficiently to overlap the filling and hold it as a frame holds
    a picture. The cement is used in mixture with sand in the proportion
    of one-third of cement to two-thirds of sand. When dry, the outer
    layer of cement should be covered with coal tar to prevent cracking.

[Illustration: FIG. 119.--A Cavity in the Process of being Filled.]

[Illustration: FIG. 120--The Same Cavity Properly Filled.]

Trees that tend to split: Certain species of trees, like the linden and
    elm, often tend to split, generally in the crotch of several limbs
    and sometimes in a fissure along the trunk of the tree. Midwinter is
    the period when this usually occurs and timely action will save the
    tree. The remedy lies in fastening together the various parts of the
    tree by means of bolts or chains.

    A very injurious method of accomplishing this end is frequently
    resorted to, where each of the branches is bound by an iron band and
    the bands are then joined by a bar. The branches eventually outgrow
    the diameter of the bands, causing the latter to cut through the
    bark of the limbs and to destroy them.

    Another method of bracing limbs together consists in running a
    single bolt through them and fastening each end of the bolt with a
    washer and nut. This method is preferable to the first because it
    allows for the growth of the limbs in thickness.

[Illustration: FIG. 121.--Diagram Showing the Triple-bar Method of
Fastening Limbs.]

    A still better method, however, consists in using a bar composed of
    three parts as shown in Fig. 121. Each of the two branches has a
    short bolt passed through it horizontally, and the two short bolts
    are then connected by a third bar. This arrangement will shift all
    the pressure caused by the swaying of the limbs to the middle
    connecting-bar. In case of a windstorm, the middle bar will be the
    one to bend, while the bolts which pass through the limbs will
    remain intact. The outer ends of the short bolts should have their
    washers and nuts slightly embedded in the wood of the tree, so that
    the living tissue of the tree may eventually grow over them in such
    a way as to hold the bars firmly in place and to exclude moisture
    and disease. The washers and nuts on the inner side of the limbs
    should also be embedded.

    A chain is sometimes advantageously substituted for the middle
    section of the bar and, in some cases, where more than two branches
    have to be joined together, a ring might take the place of the
    middle bar or chain.

    Bolts on a tree detract considerably from its natural beauty and
    should, therefore, be used only where they are absolutely necessary
    for the safety of the tree. They should be placed as high up in the
    tree as possible without weakening the limbs.




CHAPTER VII

FORESTRY



STUDY I. WHAT FORESTRY IS AND WHAT IT DOES

Although Forestry is not a new idea but, as a science and an art, has
been applied for nearly two thousand years, there are many persons who
still need an explanation of its aims and principles.

Forestry deals with the establishment, protection and utilization of
forests.

