
"Well, I must be going," he broke off somewhat hastily, for he saw
a group coming down the garden path towards the house.

It consisted of Bertha and two other ladies, Carthew and another
man.

"What other evening would suit you, Frank?" Lady Greendale asked as
he rose.

"I am afraid I am engaged all through the week, Lady Greendale."

"I am sorry," she said, quietly, "but perhaps it is for the best,
Frank."

The door closed behind him just as the party from the garden
entered through the French windows.

The next morning George Lechmere went ashore with the steward, when
the latter landed to do his marketing. The street up the hill was
crowded, and numbers of yachts' sailors were ashore. Stewards with
the flat rush baskets, universally used by them, were going from
shop to shop; groups of sailors were chatting over the events of
the day; and carriages were standing before the fishmongers',
poulterers', and fruit and flower shops, while the owners were
laying in supplies for their guests. People had driven in from all
parts of the island to see the races, and light country carts with
eggs, butter, fowls, and fruit were making their way down the steep
hill.

George had learnt from a casual remark of Frank's where the house
taken by Lord Haverley was situated, and going up the hill turned
to the right and kept on until he came to a large house embowered
in trees. Breakfast was just over when a servant told Bertha that a
gentleman who said his name was George Lechmere wished to speak to
her. She went out to him in the hall.

"Well, George," she said, holding out her hand to him frankly, for
he was a great favourite of hers; "I suppose you have brought me up
a message from Major Mallett?"

"No, Miss Greendale, the Major does not know that I have come to
you. It is on my own account that I am here. Could you spare me a
quarter of an hour?"

"Certainly, George," she said, in some surprise. "I will come out
into the garden. We are likely to have it to ourselves at this
hour."

She fetched her hat, and they went out into the garden together.
George did not attempt to speak until they reached the other end,
where there was a seat in a shady corner.

"Sit down, George," she said.

"Thank you, Miss Greendale, I would rather stand," and he took his
place in front of her.

"I have a story to tell you," he said. "It is very painful for me
to have to tell it, and it will be painful for you to hear it; but
I am sure that you ought to know."

Bertha did not say anything, but looked at him with eyes wide open
with surprise.

"I am sure, Miss Greendale," George went on, "that the Major never
told you that the bad wound he received at Delhi that all but
killed him, was my doing--that he was wounded by a ball from my
musket."

"No, George, he certainly never said so. I suppose he was in front
of you, and your musket went off accidentally?"

"No, Miss Greendale, I took deliberate aim at him, and it was only
the mercy of God that saved his life."

Bertha was too surprised and shocked to speak, and he went on:

"He himself thought that he had been hit by a Sepoy bullet, and it
was only when I sent for him, believing that I had received my
death wound, that he knew that it was I who had hit him."

"But for what?" she asked. "What made you do this terrible thing? I
thought he was liked by his men."

"There was no one liked better, Miss Greendale; he was the most
popular officer in the regiment, and if the soldiers had known it,
and I had escaped being hung for it, I should have been shot the
first time I went into action afterwards. It had nothing to do with
the army. I enlisted in his company on purpose to shoot him."

Bertha could hardly believe her ears. She looked at the man
earnestly. Surely he could not have been drinking at that time of
the morning, and she would have doubted his sanity had it not been
for the calm and earnest look in his face. He went on:

"I came here to tell you why I shot at him."

"I don't want to hear," she said, hurriedly. "It is no business of
mine. I know that whatever it was Major Mallett must have forgiven
you. Besides, you saved his life afterwards."

"Excuse me, Miss Greendale, but it is a matter that concerns you,
and I pray you to listen to me. You have heard of Martha Bennett,
the poor girl who disappeared four years ago, and who was thought
to have been murdered."

"Yes, I remember the talk about it. It was never known who had done
it."

"She was not murdered," he said. "She returned some months
afterwards, but only to die. It was about the time that Sir John
was ill, and naturally you would have heard nothing of it.

"Well, Miss Greendale, I was at one time engaged to Martha. I was
of a jealous, passionate disposition, and I did not make enough
allowance for her being young and naturally fond of admiration. I
quarrelled with her and the engagement was broken off, but I still
loved her with all my heart and soul."

Then he went on to tell of how maddened he had been when he had
seen her talking to Major Mallett, and of the conversation he had
overheard in her father's garden, on the evening before she was
missing.

"I jumped at the conclusion at once, Miss Greendale, that it was
Captain Mallett, as he was then. He had been round saying goodbye
to the tenants that afternoon, and I knew that he was going abroad.
What could I suppose but that he had ruined my poor girl, and had
persuaded her to go out to join him in India? I waited for a time,
while they searched for the body I knew they would never find. My
own father and mother, in their hearts, thought that I had murdered
her in a fit of jealous rage. At last I made up my mind to enlist
in his regiment, to follow him to India, kill him, find her, and
bring her home."

"How dreadful!" the girl murmured.

"It was dreadful, Miss Greendale. I believe now that I must have
been mad at the time. However, I did it, but at the end failed.
Mercifully I was saved from being a murderer. As I told you, I was
badly wounded. I thought I was going to die, and the doctor thought
so, too. So I sent for Captain Mallett that I might have the
satisfaction of letting him know that it was I who fired the shot,
and that it was in revenge for the wrong that he had done Martha.

"When I told him I saw by his face, even before he spoke, that I
had been wrong. He knew nothing whatever of it. Well, miss, he
forgave me--forgave me wholly. He told me that he should never
mention it to a soul, and as he has never mentioned it even to you,
you may see how well he has kept his word. I wanted to leave the
regiment. I felt that I could never mix with my comrades, knowing
as I did that I had tried to murder their favourite officer. But
the Major would not hear of it. He insisted that I should stay,
and, even more, he promised that as soon as I was out of hospital I
should be his servant, saying that as the son of an old tenant, he
would rather have me than anyone else. You can well imagine, then,
Miss Greendale, how willingly I would have given my life for him,
and that when the chance came I gladly faced odds to save him.

"Before that I had come to learn who the man was. It was a letter
from my father that first gave me the clue; he mentioned that
another gentleman had left the neighbourhood and gone abroad, just
at the time that Major Mallett did. He was a man who had once made
me madly jealous by his attentions to Martha at a fete given to his
tenants.

"The Major had the same thought, and he told me that he knew the
man was a bad fellow, though he did not say why he thought so. Then
I heard that Martha had returned to die, and I learned that she had
told her mother the name of her destroyer, who deserted her three
months after he had taken her away. When he came back from abroad
her father and mine and some others met him at Chippenham market.
They attacked him, and I believe would have killed him, had he not
ridden off. The next day he went up to London, and a fortnight
later his estate was in the market, and he never came into that
part of the country again.

"I have told you all this, Miss Greendale, because I have heard
that you know the man, and I thought you ought to know what sort of
a man he is. His name is Carthew."

Bertha had grown paler and paler as the story went on, and when he
ended, she sat still and silent for two or three minutes. Then she
said in a low tone:

"Thank you, George. You have done right in telling me this story;
it is one that I ought to know. I wonder--" and she stopped.

"You wonder that the Major did not tell you, Miss Greendale. I
asked him, myself. When you think it over, you will understand why
he could not tell you; for he had no actual proof, save the dying
girl's words and what I had seen and heard; and his motive in
telling it might have been misunderstood. But he told me that, even
at the risk of that, he should feel it his duty, if you became
engaged to that villain, to tell the story to Lady Greendale.

"But if he found it hard to speak, there seemed to me no reason why
I shouldn't. Except my father and mother and he, no one knows that
I was well nigh a murderer. And though he has so generously
forgiven me, and I have in a small way tried to show my gratitude
to him, it was still painful to me to have to tell the story to
anyone else. But I felt that I ought to do it--not for his sake,
because he has told me that what I had looked for and what he had
so hoped for is not to be--but because I thought that you ought not
to be allowed to sacrifice your life to such a man; and partly,
too, because I wished to spare my dear master the pain of telling
the story, and of perhaps being misunderstood."

"Thank you, George," she said, quietly. "You have done quite right
in telling--"

At this moment some voices were heard at the other end of the
garden.

"I will be going at once," George said, seizing the opportunity of
getting away; and turning, he walked down the garden and left the
house.

"Who is your friend, Bertha?" Miss Haverley said, laughingly, as
she met Bertha coming slowly down the garden.

"Why--is anything the matter?" she exclaimed, as she caught sight
of her face.

"I have become suddenly faint, Hannah," Bertha replied. "I suppose
it was the heat yesterday; and it is very warm this morning, too. I
am better now, and it will soon pass over. I will go indoors for
half an hour, and then I shall be quite right again.

"My friend is no one particular. He is Major Mallett's factotum. He
only brought me up a message, but as I know all the men on the
Osprey, and have not been on board this season, of course there was
a good deal to ask about."

"Well, you must get well as soon as you can," Miss Haverley said.
"You know we shall leave in half an hour for the yacht, so as to
get under way in time for the start."

At the appointed time, Bertha joined the party below. Her eyes
looked heavy and her cheeks were flushed, but she assured Miss
Haverley that she felt quite herself now, and that she was sure
that the sea air would set her up altogether. The schooner was
under way a quarter of an hour before the gun was fired, and sailed
east, as the course was twice round the Nab and back.

Yachts were flitting about in all directions, for a light air had
only sprung up during the last half hour.

"There is the Phantom," Lord Haverley said. "She has been cruising
about the last two days to get her sails stretched, and they look
uncommonly well. Carthew told me yesterday that she would be across
early this morning, and that he should go round with the race to
see how she did. I think you young ladies will have a very good
chance of being able to boast that you have sailed in the yacht
that won the Queen's Cup. I fancy it lies between her and the
Osprey. Mallett is getting up sail, too, I see, but as the Phantom
is going with the race, I don't suppose he will. She is a fine
craft, though I own I like the cutter rig better. The Phantom will
have to allow her time, but not a great deal, for the yawl is the
heaviest tonnage.

"There is the starting gun. They are all close together at the
line.

"That is a pretty sight, Lady Greendale. Talk about the start of
race horses, it is no more to be compared with it than light to
dark."

After cruising about for three or four hours, their schooner
dropped anchor near the Osprey, which had come in half an hour
before.

"Have you ever been on board the Osprey, Lord Haverley?" Bertha
asked.

"No, my dear, I don't know that I have ever before been in any port
with your friend Major Mallett."

"Well, what do you say to our going on board for a few minutes, on
our way to shore? Mamma and I are very fond of her, and I am her
godmother, having christened her."

"Godmother and curate coupled in one, eh, Bertha? We will go by all
means; that is to say, we cannot invade him in a body, but those of
us who know Mallett can go on board, and the gig can come back and
take the rest ashore and then come to fetch us."

Accordingly, Lord Haverley and his daughter, Lady Greendale and
Bertha, and two others of the party were rowed to the Osprey. Frank
saw them coming and met them at the gangway.

"We are taking you by storm, Major," Lord Haverley said, "but Lady
Greendale and her daughter claim an almost proprietary interest in
the Osprey, because the latter is her godmother. Indeed, we are all
naturally interested in her, too, as being one of our cracks. She
is a very smart-looking craft, though I think it is a pity that she
is not cutter rigged."

"She would look prettier, no doubt," Frank said; "but, you see,
though she was built as a racer, and I like a race occasionally,
that was not my primary object. I wanted her for cruising, and
there is no doubt that a yawl is more handy, and you can work her
with fewer hands than you can a cutter of the same size."

They went round the vessel, and then returning on deck, sat down
and chatted while waiting for the boat's return.

"I sincerely hope that you will win, Frank, on Friday," Lady
Greendale said. "Our sympathies are rather divided, but I hope the
Osprey will win."

"Thank you, Lady Greendale, but I am by no means sanguine about it.

"I fancy, Miss Haverley, that you and Miss Greendale will see the
winning flag flying overhead when the race is over."

"Why do you think so, Major?" Lord Haverley asked. "The general
opinion is that your record is better than that of the Phantom. She
has done well in the two or three races she has sailed, but she
certainly did not beat the Lesbia or the Mermaid by as much as you
did."

"That may be," Frank agreed, "but I regard Carthew as having been
born under a lucky star; and though my own opinion is that if the
Phantom were in other hands we should beat her, I fancy his luck
will pull her through."

Haverley laughed. "I should not have given you credit for being
superstitious, Major."

"I don't think that I have many superstitions, but I own to
something like it in this case."

Bertha looked earnestly at him. Just before the gig returned from
the shore, she and Frank were standing together.

"I am sorry that I shall not have your good wishes tomorrow," he
said.

"I have not said that anyone will have my good wishes," she
replied. "I shall be on board the Phantom because I was invited
there before you asked me, but my hope is that the best yacht will
win. I want to speak to you for a minute or two. When can I see
you?"

"I can come up tomorrow morning early," he replied. "What time will
best suit you?"

"Ten o'clock; please ask for mamma."

The next morning, Lady Greendale and Bertha came together into the
sitting room into which Frank had been shown on calling at Lord
Haverley's.

"You are early, Frank."

"Yes, Lady Greendale. I am going for a run round the island. It
makes me fidgety to sit all day with nothing to do, and I am always
contented when I am under sail. As I shan't have time to come in
tomorrow morning, for you know we start at nine, I thought that I
would drop in this morning, even if the hour was an early one."

After chatting for a few minutes, Lady Greendale made some excuse
to leave the room.

"She knew that you were coming, and that I wanted to speak to you,"
said Bertha.

"Well, what is it--anything of importance?" he asked with a smile.

She hesitated and then went on.

"Some words you spoke yesterday recalled to me something you said
nearly four years ago. Do you remember when we sat next to each
other in the twilight, the day before you went to India? We were
talking about superstitions then, and you told me that you had only
one, and said what it was--you remember?"

"I remember," he said, gravely.

"About someone who had beaten you always, and who you thought
always would beat you, if you came in contact again. You would not
tell me his name. Was it Mr. Carthew?"

"I would not answer the question then, Bertha, and you surely
cannot expect me to answer it now."

"I do expect you to answer it."

"Then I must most emphatically decline to do so," he said. "What!
do you think that if it were he, I would be so base as to discredit
him now? For you must remember that I said that only one of my
defeats was due to foul play, that most of the others were simply
due to the fact that he was a better man than I was. The matter has
long since been forgotten, and, whoever it is, I would not
prejudice him in the opinion of anyone by raising up that old
story. I have no shadow of proof that it was he who damaged my
boat. It might have been the act of some boatman about the place
who had laid his money against my winning."

"That is enough," she said quietly. "I did not think that you would
tell me whether it was Mr. Carthew, but I was sure that if it were
not he you would not hesitate to say so. Thank you, that is all I
wanted to see you for. What you said yesterday brought that talk we
had so vividly into my mind that I could not resist asking you. It
explained what seemed to me at the time to be strange; how it was
that you, who are generally so cordial in your manner, were so cold
to him when you first met him at our house. I thought that there
might be something more serious--" and she looked him full in the
face.

"Perhaps I am a prejudiced beggar," he said, with an attempt to
smile, and then added somewhat bitterly; "You see things since have
