



HOTEL DE VILLE, ST. QUENTIN.


This charming building has an uncommonly well-designed facade,
picturesque in the extreme, rich in detail, and thoroughly dignified. We
are indebted to M. Levy, of Paris, for the loan of M. Garen's spirited
etching, from which our illustration is taken. The arcaded piazza on the
ground story, the niche-spaced tier of traceried windows on the first
floor, the flamboyant paneled cornice stage, and the three crowning
gables over it unite in one harmonious conception, the whole elevation
being finished by a central tower, while at either end of the facade two
massively treated buttresses furnish a satisfactory inclosing line, and
give more than a suggestion of massiveness, so necessary to render an
arcaded front like this quite complete within itself; otherwise it must
more or less appear to be only part of a larger building. The style is
Late Gothic, designed when the first influence of the Early Renaissance
was beginning to be felt through France as well as Belgium, and in
several respects the design has a Flemish character about it.

[Illustration: HOTEL DE VILLE, ST. QUENTIN.]

St. Quentin is situated on the Goy, in the department of Cotes du Nord,
and the town is seated in a picturesque valley some ten miles S.S.W. of
the capital, St Brieuc, which is a bishop's see, and has a small harbor
near the English Channel, and about thirty miles from St.
Malo.--_Building News_.

       *       *       *       *       *




FIRE DOORS IN MILLS.

[Footnote: From a lecture before the Franklin Institute by C. John
Hexamer.]


There are few parts in fire construction which are of so much importance,
and generally so little understood, as fire doors. Instances of the
faulty construction of these, even by good builders and architects, may
daily be seen. Iron doors over wooden sills, with the flooring boards
extending through from one building to the other, are common occurrences.
We frequently find otherwise good doors hung on wooden jambs by ordinary
screws. Sliding doors are frequently hung on to woodwork, and all
attachments are frequently so arranged that they would be in a very short
time destroyed by fire, and cause the door to fall. In case of fire, a
solid iron door offers no resistance to warping. In an iron lined door,
on the contrary, the tendency of the sheet iron to warp is resisted by
the interior wood, and when this burns into charcoal, it still resists
all warping tendencies. I have seen heavily braced solid iron doors
warped and turned after a fire, having proved themselves utterly
worthless. It is needless to say that when wooden doors are lined, they
should be lined on both sides; but frequently we find so-called fireproof
doors lined on one side only.

Good doors are frequently blocked up with stock and other material, so
that in case of fire they could not be closed without great exertion; or
they have been allowed to get out of order, so that in case of fire they
are useless. This has been so common that it has given rise to the
jocular expression of insurance men, when they are told that a fire door
exists between the two buildings, "Warranted to be open in case of fire."
The strictest regulations should exist in regard to closing the fire
doors nightly. Frequently we find that although the fire door, and its
different parts, are correctly made, there are openings in the wall which
would allow the fire to travel from one building to the other, such as
unprotected belt and shaft holes. That a fire door may be effective, it
must be hung to the only opening in the wall.

The greatest care must be exercised to keep joists from extending too far
into the wall, so as not to touch the joists of the adjacent building,
which would transmit the flames from one building to the other in case of
fire. A good stone sill should be placed under the door, and the floor
thereby entirely cut. Sills should be raised about one and a half inches
above the level of the floor, in order to accomplish the necessary
flooding of the same. If stock must be wheeled from one building to the
other, the sill can be readily beveled on both sides of the wall,
allowing the wheels to pass readily over it. Lintels should consist of
good brick arches. When swing doors are used, they should be hung on good
iron staples, well walled into the masonry, and the staples so arranged
that the door will have a tendency to close by its own weight. The door
should consist of two layers of good one and a quarter inch boards,
nailed crosswise, well nailed together and braced, and then covered with
sheet iron nailed on, or if of sheet tin, flanged, soldered, and nailed.
Particular care should be taken to insert plenty of nails, not only along
the edge of the door, but crosswise in all directions. I have seen cases,
where the entire covering had been ripped off through the warping
tendencies of the sheet iron.

The hinges on these doors should be good strap hinges, tightly fastened
to the door by bolts extending through it, and secured by nuts on the
other side. Good latches which keep the door in position when closed
should always be provided. In no case should the door be provided with a
spring lock which cannot be freely opened, as employes might thereby be
confined in a burning room.

Sliding doors should be hung on wrought iron runways, fastened tightly to
the wall. Wooden runways iron lined, which we frequently see, are not
good, as the charring of the wood in the interior causes them to weaken
and the doors to drop. Runways should be on an incline, so that the door
when not held open will close itself. Care must be taken to have a stop
provided in the runway, so that the doors may not, as I have frequently
seen them, overrun the opening which it is to protect. Doors should
overlap the edges of the openings on all sides. Large projecting jambs
should never be used.

All doors contained in "fire walls" should have springs or weights
attached to them, so as to be at all times closed. Fire doors can be shut
automatically by a weight, which is released by the melting of a piece of
very fusible solder employed for this purpose. So sensitive is this
solder that a fire door has been made to shut by holding a lamp some
distance beneath the soldered link and holding an open handkerchief
between the lamp and link. Though the handkerchief was not charred, hot
air enough had reached the metal to fuse the solder and allow the
apparatus to start into operation.

These solders are alloys more fusible than the most fusible of their
component metals. A few of them are: Wood's alloy, consisting of:
cadmium, 1 to 2 parts; tin, 2 parts; lead, 4 parts; bismuth, 7 to 8
parts.

This alloy is fusible between 150 deg. and 159 deg. Fahr. The fusible metal of
D'Arcet is composed of: bismuth, 8 parts; lead, 5 parts; tin, 3 parts. It
melts at 173.3 deg.. We can, therefore, by proper mixture, form a solder
which will melt at any desirable temperature. Numerous devices for
closing doors automatically have been constructed, all depending upon the
use of the fusible solder catch.

       *       *       *       *       *




STEEL STRUCTURES.


At a recent meeting of the Engineers' Club of Philadelphia, Mr. James
Christie presented a paper upon "The Adaptation of Steel to Structural
Work." The price of steel has now fallen so low, as compared with iron,
that its increased use will be actively stimulated as the building
industries revive. The grades and properties of the steels are so
distinct and various that opinions differ much as to the adaptability of
each grade for a special purpose. Hitherto, engineers have favored open
hearth steel on account of uniformity, but recent results obtained from
Bessemer steel tend to place either make on equality. The seeming
tendency is to specify what the physical properties shall be, and not how
the steel shall be made.

For boiler and ship plates, the mildest and most ductile steel is
favored. For ships' frames and beams, a harder steel, up to 75,000 pounds
tenacity, is frequently used. For tension members of bridges, steel of
65,000 to 75,000 pounds tenacity is usually specified; and for
compression members, 80,000 to 90,000 pounds. In the Forth Bridge,
compression steel is limited to 75,000 to 82,000 pounds. Such a marked
advantage occurs from the use of high tension steel in compression
members, and the danger of sudden failure of a properly made strut is so
little, that future practice will favor the use of hard steel in
compression, unless the material should prove untrustworthy. In columns,
even as long as forty diameters, steel of 90,000 pounds tenacity will
exceed the mildest steel 35 per cent., or iron 50 per cent., in
compressive resistance.

The present uncertainty consists largely as to how high-tension steel
will endure the manipulation usual with iron without injury. A few
experiments were recently made by the writer on riveted struts of both
mild and hard steel, which had been punched, straightened, and riveted,
as usual with iron, but no indication of deterioration was found.

Steel castings are now made entirely trustworthy for tensile working
stresses of 10,000 to 15,000 pounds per square inch. In some portable
machinery, an intermittent tensile stress is applied of 15,000 pounds,
sometimes rising to 20,000 pounds per square inch of section, without any
evidence of weakness.

       *       *       *       *       *

Equal volumes of amyl alcohol (rectified fusel oil) and pure concentrated
hydrochloric acid, shaken together in a test tube, unite to form a single
colorless liquid; if one volume of benzine (from petroleum) be added to
this, and the tube well shaken, the contents will soon separate into
_three_ distinct colorless fluids, the planes of demarkation being
clearly discernible by transmitted light. Drop into the tube a particle
of "acid magenta;" after again shaking the liquids together, the lower
two zones will present different shades of red, while the supernatant
hydrocarbon will remain without color.

       *       *       *       *       *




A METHOD OF MEASURING THE ABSOLUTE SENSITIVENESS OF PHOTOGRAPHIC DRY
PLATES.

[Footnote: From the Proceedings of the Academy of Arts and
Sciences.--_Amer. Jour._]

By WILLIAM H. PICKERING.


Within the last few years the subject of dry plate photography has
Increased very rapidly, not only in general popularity, but also in
importance in regard to its applications to other departments of science.
Numerous plate manufacturers have sprung up in this country as well as
abroad, and each naturally claims all the good qualities for his own
plates. It therefore seemed desirable that some tests should be made
which would determine definitely the validity of these claims, and that
they should be made in such a manner that other persons using instruments
similarly constructed would be able to obtain the same results.

Perhaps the most important tests needed are in regard to the
sensitiveness of the plates. Most plate makers use the wet plates as
their standard, giving the sensitiveness of the dry plates at from two to
sixty times greater; but as wet plates vary quite as much as dry ones,
depending on the collodion, condition of the bath, etc., this system is
very unsatisfactory. Another method, employed largely in England, depends
on the use of the Warnerke sensitometer. In this instrument the light
from a tablet coated with luminous paint just after being exposed to a
magnesium light is permitted to shine through a colored transparent film
of graduated density upon the plate to be tested. Each degree on the film
has a number, and, after a given exposure, the last number photographed
on the plate represents the sensitiveness on an empirical scale. There
are two or three objections to this instrument. In the first place, the
light-giving power of the luminous tablet is liable to variations, and,
if left in a warm, moist place, it rapidly deteriorates. Again, it has
been shown by Captain Abney that plates sensitized by iodides, bromides,
and chlorides, which may be equally sensitive to white light, are not
equally affected by the light emitted by the paint; the bromides being
the most rapidly darkened, the chlorides next, and the iodides least of
all. The instrument is therefore applicable only to testing plates
sensitized with the same salts.

In this investigation it was first shown that the plates most sensitive
for one colored light were not necessarily the most so for light of
another color. Therefore it was evident that the sun must be used as the
ultimate source of light, and it was concluded to employ the light
reflected from the sky near the zenith as the direct source. But as this
would vary in brilliancy from day to day, it was necessary to use some
method which would avoid the employment of an absolute standard of light.
It is evident that we may escape the use of this troublesome standard, if
we can obtain some material which has a perfectly uniform sensitiveness;
for we may then state the sensitiveness of our plates in terms of this
substance, regardless of the brilliancy of our source. The first material
tried was white filter paper, salted and sensitized in a standard
solution of silver nitrate. This was afterward replaced by powdered
silver chloride, chemically pure, which was found to be much more
sensitive than that made from the commercial chemicals. This powder is
spread out in a thin layer, in a long paper cell, on a strip of glass.
The cell measures one centimeter broad by ten in length. Over this is
laid a sheet of tissue paper, and above that a narrow strip of black
paper, so arranged so as to cover the chloride for its full length and
half its breadth. These two pieces of paper are pasted on to the under
side of a narrow strip of glass which is placed on top of the paper cell.
The apparatus in which the exposures are made consists of a box a little
over a meter in length, closed at the top by a board, in which is a
circular aperture 15'8 cm. in diameter. Over this board may be placed a
cover, in the center of which is a hole 0.05 cm. in diameter, which
therefore lets through 0.00001 as much light as the full aperture. The
silver chloride is placed a distance of just one meter from the larger
aperture, and over it is placed the photographic scale, which might be
made of tinted gelatines, or, as in the present case, constructed of long
strips of tissue paper, of varying widths, and arranged like a flight of
steps; so that the light passing through one side of the scale traverses
nine strips of paper, while that through the other side traverses only
one strip. Each strip cuts off about one-sixth of the light passing
through it, so that, taking the middle strip as unity, the strips on
either side taken in order will transmit approximately--

 1    2    3    4    5    6    7    8    9
2.0  1.65 1.4  1.2  1.0  0.85 0.7  0.6  0.5

The instrument is now pointed toward the zenith for about eight minutes,
on a day when there is a bright blue sky. On taking the apparatus into
the dark room and viewing the impression by gaslight, it will be found
that the markings, which are quite clear at one end, have entirely faded
out by the time the middle division is reached. The last division clearly
marked is noted. Five strips cut from sensitized glass plates, ten
centimeters long and two and a half in width, are now placed side by side
under the scale, in the place of the chloride. By this means we can test,
if we wish, five different kinds of plates at once. The cover of the
sensitometer containing the 0.05cm. hole is put on, and the plates
exposed to sky light for a time varying anywhere between twenty seconds
and three minutes, depending on the sensitiveness of the plates. The
instrument is then removed to the dark room, and the plates developed by
immersing them all at once in a solution consisting of four parts
potassium oxalate and one part ferrous sulphate. After ten minutes they
are removed, fixed, and dried. Their readings are then noted, and
compared with those obtained with the silver chloride. The chloride
experiment is again performed as soon as the plates have been removed,
and the first result confirmed. With some plates it is necessary to make
two or three trials before the right exposure can be found; but if the
image disappears anywhere between the second and eighth divisions, a
satisfactory result may be obtained.

The plates were also tested using gaslight instead of daylight. In this
case an Argand burner was employed burning five cubic feet of gas per
hour. A diaphragm 1 cm. in diameter was placed close to the glass
chimney, and the chloride was placed at 10 cm. distance, and exposed to
the light coming from the brightest part of the flame, for ten hours.
This produced an impression as far as the third division of the scale.
The plates were exposed in the sensitometer as usual, except that it was
found convenient in several cases to use a larger stop, measuring 0.316
cm. in diameter.

The following table gives the absolute sensitiveness of several of the
best known kinds of American and foreign plates, when developed with
oxalate, in terms of pure silver chloride taken as a standard. As the
numbers would be very large, however, if the chloride were taken as a
unit, it was thought better to give them in even hundred thousands.

SENSITIVENESS OF PLATES.

Plates.                    Daylight.    Gaslight.
Carbutt transparency         0.7          ..
Allen and Rowell             1.3         150
Richardson standard          1.3          10
Marshall and Blair           2.7         140
Blair instantaneous          3.0         140
Carbutt special              4.0          20
Monroe                       4.0          25
Wratten and Wainwright       4.0          10
Eastman special              5.3          30
Richardson instantaneous     5.3          20
Walker Reid and Inglis      11.0         600
Edwards                     11.0          20
Monckhoven                  16.0         120
Beebe                       16.0          20
Cramer                      16.0         120

It will be noted that the plates most sensitive to gaslight are by no
means necessarily the most sensitive to daylight; in several instances,
in fact, the reverse seems to be true.

It should be said that the above figures cannot be considered final until
each plate has been tested separately with its own developer, as this
would undoubtedly have some influence on the final result.

Meanwhile, two or three interesting investigations naturally suggest
themselves; to determine, for instance, the relative actinism of blue
sky, haze, and clouds; also, the relative exposures proper to give at
different hours of the day, at different seasons of the year, and in
different countries. A somewhat prolonged research would indicate what
effect the presence of sunspots had on solar radiation--whether it was
increased or diminished.

       *       *       *       *       *




NATURAL GAS FUEL AND ITS APPLICATION TO MANUFACTURING
PURPOSES.

[Footnote: Read before the Iron and Steel Institute of London, May 8,
1885.]

By Mr. ANDREW CARNEGIE, New York.


In these days of depression in manufacturing, the world over, it is
specially cheering to be able to dwell upon something of a pleasant
character. Listen, therefore, while I tell you about the natural gas fuel
which we have recently discovered in the Pittsburg district. That
Pittsburg should have been still further favored in the matter of fuel
seems rather unfair, for she has long been noted for the cheapest fuel in
the world. The actual cost of coal, to such as mine their own, has been
between 4s. and 5s. per ton; while slack, which has always been very
largely used for making gas in Siemens furnaces and under boilers, has
ranged from 2s. to 2s. 6d. per ton. Some mills situated near the mines or
upon the rivers for many years received slack coal at a cost not
exceeding 1s. 6d. per ton. It is this cheap fuel which natural gas has
come to supplant. It is now many years since the pumping engines at oil
wells were first run by gas, obtained in small quantities from many of
the holes which failed to yield oil. In several cases immense gas wells
were found near the oil district; but some years elapsed before there
occurred to any one the idea of piping it to the nearest manufacturing
establishments, which were those about Pittsburg. Several years ago the
product of several gas wells in the Butler region was piped to two mills
at Sharpsburg, five miles from the city of Pittsburg, and there used as
fuel, but not with such triumphant success as to attract much attention
to the experiment. Failures of supply, faults in the tubing, and
imperfect appliances for use at the mills combined to make the new fuel
troublesome. Seven years ago a company drilled for oil at Murraysville,
about eighteen miles from Pittsburg. A depth of 1,320 feet had been
reached when the drills were thrown high in the air, and the derrick
broken to pieces and scattered around by a tremendous explosion of gas.
The roar of escaping gas was heard in Munroville, five miles distant.
After four pipes, each two inches in diameter, had been laid from the
mouth of the well and the flow directed through them, the gas was
ignited, and the whole district for miles round was lighted up. This
valuable fuel, although within nine miles of our steel-rail mills at
Pittsburg, was permitted to waste for five years. It may well be asked
why we did not at once secure the property and utilize this fuel; but the
business of conducting it to the mills and there using it was not well
understood until recently. Besides this, the cost of a line was then more
than double what it is now; we then estimated that L140,000 would be
required to introduce the new fuel. The cost to-day does not exceed
L1,500 per mile. As our coal was not costing us more than 3s. per ton of
finished rails, the inducement was not in our opinion great enough to
justify the expenditure of so much capital and taking the risk of failure
of the supply. Two years ago men who had more knowledge of the oil-wells
than ourselves had sufficient faith in the continuity of the gas supply
to offer to furnish us with gas for a sum per year equal to that hitherto
