though not in bonds. And [Decebalus sending an envoy to Trajan, asked that
he might get back the territory as far as the Ister and receive indemnity
for all the money he had spent on the war,] in recompense for restoring
Longinus to him. An ambiguous answer was returned, of a kind that would
not make Decebalus think that the emperor regarded Longinus as of either
great value or small, the object being to prevent his being destroyed on
the one hand, or being preserved on excessive terms, on the other. So
Decebalus delayed, still considering what he should do.

Meanwhile Longinus, having [through his freedman] secured a poison [--he
had promised Decebalus that he would reconcile Trajan to the proposition,
in order that the Dacian should be as far as possible from suspecting what
was to happen, and so not keep an especially careful watch over him. Also,
to enable his servant to attain safety, he wrote a letter containing a
supplication, and gave it to the freedman to carry to Trajan. Then, when
he had gone, at night he took the poison,] drank it and died. [After this
event Decebalus asked Trajan to give him back his freedman, promising to
give him in return the body of Longinus and ten captives. He sent at once
the centurion who had been captured with the dead general, assuming that
this man would arrange the matter for him; and it was from the centurion
that the whole story of Longinus was learned. However, Trajan neither sent
him back, nor surrendered the freedman, deeming his safety more valuable
for establishing the dignity of the empire than the of Longinus.]

[Sidenote:--13--] Now, Trajan constructed over the Ister a stone bridge,
for which I cannot sufficiently admire him. His other works are most
brilliant, but this surpasses them. There are twenty square pieces of
stone, the height of which is one hundred and fifty feet above the
foundations and the breadth sixty, and these, standing at a distance of
one hundred and seventy feet from one to another, are connected by arches.
How then could one fail to be astonished at the expenditure made upon
them? Or the manner in which each of them was placed in a river so deep,
in water so full of eddies, on ground so slimy? It was impossible, you
note, to divert the course of the river in any direction. I have spoken of
the breadth of the river; but the stream is not uniformly so limited,
since it covers in some places twice and elsewhere thrice as much ground,
but the narrowest point, and the one in that region most adapted to
bridge-building, has just those dimensions. Yet the very fact that the
river here shrinks from a great flood to such a narrow channel and is here
confined, though it again expands into a greater flood, makes it all the
more violent and deep; and this feature must be considered in estimating
the difficulty of preparing a bridge. This achievement, then, shows the
greatness of Trajan's designs, though the bridge is of no particular use
to us. Merely the piers are standing, affording no means of crossing, as
if they were erected for the sole purpose of demonstrating that there is
nothing which human energy can not accomplish. Trajan's reason for
constructing the bridge was his fear that, some time when the Ister was
frozen, war might be made on the Romans across the water, and his desire
to enjoy the easy access to them that this work would permit. Hadrian, on
the contrary, was afraid that the barbarians might overpower the guard at
the bridge and cross into Moesia, and so he removed the surface work.

[Sidenote: A.D. 105 (a.u. 858)] [Sidenote:--14--] Trajan, having crossed
the Ister on this bridge, conducted the war with prudence, rather than
with haste, and eventually, after a hard struggle, vanquished the Dacians.
In the course of these encounters he personally performed many deeds of
good generalship and bravery, and his soldiers ran many risks and
displayed great prowess on his behalf. It was here that a certain
horseman, dangerously wounded, was carried from the battle on the
supposition that he could be healed; but, when he found that he could not
recover, he rushed from his quarters (since his hurt had not incapacitated
him) and stationing himself in the line again he perished, after having
displayed great valor. [Sidenote: A.D. 106 (a.u. 859)] Decebalus, when his
capital and all his territory had been occupied and he was himself in
danger of being captured, committed suicide, and his head was brought to
Rome.

In this way Dacia became subject to Rome and Trajan founded cities there.
The treasures of Decebalus were also discovered, though hidden beneath the
Sargetia river, which ran past his palace. He had made some captives
divert the course of the river and had then excavated its bed. There he
had placed a large amount of silver and of gold and other objects of great
value, that could endure some moisture, had heaped stones over them and
piled on earth. After that he had let the river flow over them. The same
captives were compelled to deposit his robes and other similar objects in
neighboring caves; and when he had effected this, he made away with them
to prevent their talking. But Bicilis, a comrade of his, who knew what had
been done, was seized and gave this information.--About this same time,
Palma, who was governor of Syria, subdued the portion of Arabia, near
Petra, and made it subservient to the Romans.

[Sidenote:--15--] [The ambassadors who came from the kings were given
seats by Trajan in the senatorial row at spectacles.]

[Sidenote: A.D. 107 (a.u. 860)] Upon Trajan's return to
Rome the greatest imaginable number of embassies came to him from the
barbarians, even the Indi being represented. And he gave spectacles on one
hundred and twenty-three days. At these affairs thousands, yes, possibly
tens of thousands of animals, both wild and tame, were slaughtered, and
fully ten thousand gladiators fought in combat.

About the same period he made the Pontine marshes traversable by means of
a stone foundation, and built roads alongside, which he furnished with
most magnificent bridges.--All the obsolete money he had melted down.


[He had sworn not to commit bloodshed and he confirmed
his promise by his actions in spite of plots. He was by nature not at all
given to duplicity or guile or harshness. He loved and greeted and honored
the good, and the rest he neglected. His age made him still more inclined
to mildness.] When Licinius Sura died, he bestowed upon
him a public funeral and a statue. This man had attained such a degree of
wealth and pride that he built a gymnasium for the Romans. So great was
the friendship and confidence [which Sura showed toward Trajan and Trajan
toward him that although the man was often slandered,--as naturally
happens in the case of all those who possess any influence with the
emperors,--Trajan never felt a moment's suspicion or hatred. On the
contrary, when those who envied him became insistent, Trajan] went
[uninvited to his house] to dinner. And having dismissed his whole
body-guard he first called Sura's physician and had him anoint his eyes
and then his barber shave his chin. Anciently the emperors themselves as
well as all other people used to do this. It was Hadrian who first set the
fashion of wearing a beard. When he had done this, he next took a bath and
had dinner. So the next day he said to his friends who were always in the
habit of making statements detrimental to Sura: "If Sura had wanted to
kill me, he would have killed me yesterday." [Sidenote:--16--] Now he did
a great thing in running this risk in the case of a man who had been
calumniated, but a still greater thing in believing that he would never be
harmed by him.

So it was that the confidence of his mind was strengthened by his own
knowledge of his dealings with Sura instead of being influenced by the
fancies of others.

Indeed, when he first handed to him [Footnote: Saburanus. (?)] who was to
be prefect of the Pretorians the sword which the latter required to wear
by his side, he bared the blade, holding it up said: "Take this sword, to
the end that if I rule well, you may use it for me, but if ill, against
me."

He also set up images of Sosia and Palma and Celsus, [Footnote: _L.
Publilius Celsus_.]--so greatly did he esteem them above others. Those,
however, who conspired against him (among whom was Crassus) he brought
before the senate and caused to be punished.

[Sidenote: A.D. 114 (a.u. 867)] Again he gathered collections of books.
And he set up in the Forum an enormous column, to serve at once as a
sepulchral monument to himself and as a reminder of his work in the Forum.
The whole region there was hilly and he dug it down for a distance
equaling the height of the column, thus making the Forum level.

[Sidenote:--17--] Next he made a campaign against the Armenians and
Parthians on the pretext that the Armenian king [Footnote:
_Exedares_.] had obtained his diadem not at his hands but from the
Parthian king. [Footnote: _Osrhoes_.] His real reason, however, was a
desire to win fame. [On his campaign against the Parthians, when he had
reached Athens, an embassy from Osrhoes met him asking for peace and
proffering gifts. This king had learned of his advance and was terrified
because Trajan was wont to make good his threats by deeds. Therefore he
humbled his pride and sent a supplication that war be not made against
him: he asked Armenia for Parthomasiris, who was likewise a son of
Pacorus, and requested that the diadem be sent to him. He had put a stop,
he said, to the reign of Exedares, who was beneficial neither to the
Romans nor to the Parthians.

The emperor neither received the gifts, nor sent any answer or command,
save that friendship is determined by deeds and not by words; and that
accordingly when he should reach Syria he would do what was proper.

And being of this mind he proceeded through Asia, Syria, and adjoining
provinces to Seleucia. Upon his coming to Antioch, Abgarus the Osrhoenian
did not appear in person, but sent gifts and a friendly communication.
For, as he dreaded both him and the Parthians, he was trying to play a
double game and for that reason would not come to confer with him.]

[Sidenote:--19--] Parthomasiris behaved in rather violent fashion. In his
first letter to Trajan he had signed himself as king, but when no answer
came to his epistle, he wrote again, omitting this title, and asked that
Marcus Junius, the governor of Cappadocia, be sent to him, implying that
he wanted to prefer some request through him. Trajan, accordingly, sent
him the son of Junius, and himself went ahead to Arsamosata, of which he
took possession without a struggle. Then he came to Satala and rewarded
with gifts Anchialus, the king of the Heniochi and Machelones. At Elegeia
in Armenia he awaited Parthomasiris. He was seated upon a platform in the
trenches. The prince greeted him, took off his diadem from his head, and
laid it at his feet. Then he stood there in silence, expecting to receive
it back. At this the soldiers shouted aloud, and hailed Trajan imperator
as if on account of some victory. (They termed it an uncrowned, [Footnote:
Reading [Greek: haselinon] (Bekker) = "without the parsley crown" (such as
was bestowed upon victors in some of the Greek games).] bloodless victory
to see the king, a descendant of Arsaces, a son of Pacorus, and a nephew
of Osrhoes, standing beside Trajan without a diadem, like a captive). The
shout terrified the prince, who thought that it heralded insult and
destruction for him. He turned about as if to flee, but, seeing that he
was hemmed in on all sides, begged as a favor not to be obliged to speak
before the crowd. Accordingly, he was escorted into the tent, where he had
none of his wishes granted. [Sidenote:--20--] So out he rushed in a rage,
and from there out of the camp, but Trajan sent for him, and again
ascending the platform bade him speak in the hearing of all everything
that he desired. This was to prevent any person from spreading a false
report through ignorance of what had been said in private conference. On
hearing this exhortation Parthomasiris no longer kept silence, but with
great frankness made many statements, some of them being to the effect
that he had not been defeated or captured, but had come there voluntarily,
believing that he should not be wronged and should receive back the
kingdom, as Tiridates had received it from Nero. Trajan made appropriate
replies to all his remarks and said that he should abandon Armenia to no
one. It belonged to the Romans and should have a Roman governor. He would,
however, allow Parthomasiris to depart to any place he pleased. So he sent
the prince away together with his Parthian companions and gave them an
escort of cavalry to ensure their meeting no one and adopting no
rebellious tactics. All the Armenians who had come with him he commanded
to remain where they were, on the ground that they were already his
subjects.

[Sidenote:--21--] [Leaving garrisons at opportune points Trajan came to
Edessa, and there for the first time he set eyes upon Abgarus. Previously
this person had sent envoys and gifts to the prince frequently, but he
himself for different reasons at different times failed to put in an
appearance. The same was true also of Mannus, the phylarch of adjoining
Arabia, and Sporaces, phylarch of Anthemusia. On this occasion, however,
he was persuaded partly by his son Arvandes, who was beautiful and in the
prime of youth and therefore on good terms with Trajan, and partly by the
fear of the latter's presence near by; consequently he met him on the
road, made his apologies, and obtained pardon. He had a powerful
intercessor in the boy. Accordingly, he became a friend of Trajan's and
entertained him with a banquet. At the dinner in question he presented his
boy in some kind of barbaric dance.]

[Sidenote:--22--] [When Trajan came into Mesopotamia, Mannus sent a herald
to him, and Manisarus despatched envoys in regard to peace, because, he
said, Osrhoes was making a campaign against him, and he was ready to
withdraw from Armenia and Mesopotamia so far as captured. Thereupon the
emperor replied that he would not believe him until he should come to him
and confirm his offers by deeds, as he was promising. He was also
suspicious of Mannus, especially because the latter had sent an auxiliary
force to Mebarsapes, king of Adiabene, and then had lost it all at the
hands of the Romans. Therefore Mannus never waited for the Romans to draw
near but took his course to Adiabene to find shelter with the other two
princes. Thus were Singara and some other points occupied by Lusius,
without a battle.]

When he had captured the whole country of Armenia and
had won over also many of the kings, some of whom, since they submitted,
he treated as his friends, and others, though disobedient, he subdued
without resort to arms, [Sidenote:--23--] the senate voted to him many
honors of various descriptions, and they bestowed upon him the title of
Optimus, i.e., Excellent.--He was always accustomed to trudge on foot with
his entire army and he had the ordering and arrangement of the troops
throughout the entire expedition, leading them sometimes in one order and
sometimes in another; and he forded as many rivers as they did. Sometimes
he even had his scouts circulate false reports, in order that the soldiers
might at the same time practice military manoeuvres and be so impervious
to alarm as to be ready for anything. After he had captured Nisibis and
Batnae he was given the title of Parthicus. But he took greater pride in
the name of Optimus than in all the rest, inasmuch as it belonged rather
to his character than to his arms.

[Sidenote: A.D. 115 (a.u. 868)] [Sidenote:--24--] While he was staying in
Antioch, a dreadful earthquake occurred. Many cities were damaged, but
Antioch was most of all unfortunate. Since Trajan was wintering there and
many soldiers and many private persons had flocked thither from all
directions for lawsuits, embassies, business, or sightseeing, there was no
nation nor people that went unscathed. Thus in Antioch the whole world
under Roman sway suffered disaster.

There were many thunderstorms to start with and portentous winds, but no
one could have expected that so many evils would result from them. First
came, on a sudden, a great bellowing roar, and there followed it a
tremendous shock. The whole earth was up-heaved and buildings leaped into
the air. Those that were lifted up collapsed and were smashed to pieces,
[Sidenote: A.D. 115 (a.u. 868)] while others were beaten this way and that
as if by the surges and were turned about. The wrecks were strewn a long
distance over the countryside. The crash of grinding and breaking timbers,
tiles, and stones together became most frightful, and an inconceivable
mass of dust arose, so that no one could see any person nor say or hear
anything. Many persons were hurt even outside the houses, being picked up
and tossed violently about, and then with a momentum as in a fall from a
cliff dashed to the earth. Some were maimed, others killed. Not a few
trees leaped into the air, roots and all.

The number of those found in the houses who perished was beyond discovery.
Multitudes were destroyed by the very force of the collapse and crowds
were suffocated in the debris. Those who lay with a part of their bodies
buried under the stones or timbers suffered fearful agony, being able
neither to live nor to find an immediate death.

[Sidenote:--25--] Nevertheless many even of these were saved, as was
natural in such overwhelming numbers of people. And those outside did not
all get off safe and sound. Numbers lost their legs or their shoulders and
some [Lacuna] their [Lacuna] heads. Others vomited blood. One of these was
Pedo the consul, and he died at once. In brief, there was no form of
violent experience that those people did not undergo at that time. And as
Heaven continued the earthquake for several days and nights, the people
were dismayed and helpless, some crushed and perishing under the weight of
the buildings pressing upon them, and others dying of hunger in case it
chanced that by the inclination of the timbers they were left alive in a
clear space, it might be in a kind of arch-shaped colonnade. When at last
the trouble had subsided, some one who ventured to mount the ruins caught
sight of a live woman. She was not alone but had also an infant, and had
endured by feeding both herself and her child with her milk. They dug her
out and resuscitated her together with her offspring, and after that they
searched the other heaps but were no longer able to find in them any
living creature save a child sucking at the breasts of its mother, who was
dead. As they drew out the corpses they no longer felt any pleasure at
their own escape.

So great were the disasters that had overwhelmed Antioch at this time.
Trajan made his way out through a window of the room where he was. Some
being of more than human stature had approached him and led him forth, so
that he survived with only a few small bruises. As the shocks extended
over a number of days, he lived out of doors in the hippodrome. Casium
itself, too, was so shaken that its peaks seemed to bend and break and to
be falling upon the city. Other hills settled, and quantities of water not
previously in existence came to light, while quantities more escaped by
flowing away.

[Sidenote:--26--] Trajan about spring time proceeded into the enemy's
country. Now since the region near the Tigris is barren of timbers fit for
shipbuilding, he brought the boats which had been constructed in the
forests surrounding Nisibis on wagons to the river. The vessels had been
arranged in such a way that they could be taken apart and put together. He
had very hard work in bridging the stream opposite Mount Carduenum, for
the opposing barbarians tried to hinder him. Trajan, however, had a great
abundance of both ships and soldiers, and so some boats were fastened
together with great speed while others lay motionless in front of them,
carrying heavy infantry and archers. Still others kept making dashes this
way and that, as if they intended to cross. As a result of these tactics
and from their very astonishment at seeing so many ships at once appear
_en masse_ from a land devoid of trees the barbarians gave way and
the Romans crossed over. They won possession of the whole of Adiabene.
(This is a portion of Assyria in the vicinity of Ninus; and Arbela and
Gaugamela, close to which Alexander conquered Darius, are also in this
same territory. The country has also been called Atyria in the language of
