
"You are bold to say so, Shirley."

"Not more bold than faithful. It was his cook that he saw; or it was
Mrs. Gill, as I have seen her, making custards, in the heat of summer,
in the cool dairy, with rose-trees and nasturtiums about the latticed
window, preparing a cold collation for the rectors--preserves and
'dulcet creams;' puzzled 'what choice to choose for delicacy best; what
order so contrived as not to mix tastes, not well-joined, inelegant, but
bring taste after taste, upheld with kindliest change.'"

"All very well too, Shirley."

"I would beg to remind him that the first men of the earth were Titans,
and that Eve was their mother; from her sprang Saturn, Hyperion,
Oceanus; she bore Prometheus----"

"Pagan that you are! what does that signify?"

"I say, there were giants on the earth in those days--giants that strove
to scale heaven. The first woman's breast that heaved with life on this
world yielded the daring which could contend with Omnipotence, the
strength which could bear a thousand years of bondage, the vitality
which could feed that vulture death through uncounted ages, the
unexhausted life and uncorrupted excellence, sisters to immortality,
which, after millenniums of crimes, struggles, and woes, could conceive
and bring forth a Messiah. The first woman was heaven-born. Vast was the
heart whence gushed the well-spring of the blood of nations, and grand
the undegenerate head where rested the consort-crown of creation."

"She coveted an apple, and was cheated by a snake; but you have got such
a hash of Scripture and mythology into your head that there is no making
any sense of you. You have not yet told me what you saw kneeling on
those hills."

"I saw--I now see--a woman-Titan. Her robe of blue air spreads to the
outskirts of the heath, where yonder flock is grazing; a veil white as
an avalanche sweeps from her head to her feet, and arabesques of
lightning flame on its borders. Under her breast I see her zone, purple
like that horizon; through its blush shines the star of evening. Her
steady eyes I cannot picture. They are clear, they are deep as lakes,
they are lifted and full of worship, they tremble with the softness of
love and the lustre of prayer. Her forehead has the expanse of a cloud,
and is paler than the early moon, risen long before dark gathers. She
reclines her bosom on the ridge of Stilbro' Moor; her mighty hands are
joined beneath it. So kneeling, face to face she speaks with God. That
Eve is Jehovah's daughter, as Adam was His son."

"She is very vague and visionary. Come, Shirley, we ought to go into
church."

"Caroline, I will not; I will stay out here with my mother Eve, in these
days called Nature. I love her--undying, mighty being! Heaven may have
faded from her brow when she fell in paradise, but all that is glorious
on earth shines there still. She is taking me to her bosom, and showing
me her heart. Hush, Caroline! You will see her and feel as I do, if we
are both silent."

"I will humour your whim; but you will begin talking again ere ten
minutes are over."

Miss Keeldar, on whom the soft excitement of the warm summer evening
seemed working with unwonted power, leaned against an upright headstone;
she fixed her eyes on the deep-burning west, and sank into a pleasurable
trance. Caroline, going a little apart, paced to and fro beneath the
rectory garden wall, dreaming too in her way. Shirley had mentioned the
word "mother." That word suggested to Caroline's imagination not the
mighty and mystical parent of Shirley's visions, but a gentle human
form--the form she ascribed to her own mother, unknown, unloved, but not
unlonged for.

"Oh that the day would come when she would remember her child! Oh that I
might know her, and knowing, love her!"

Such was her aspiration.

The longing of her childhood filled her soul again. The desire which
many a night had kept her awake in her crib, and which fear of its
fallacy had of late years almost extinguished, relit suddenly, and
glowed warm in her heart, that her mother might come some happy day,
and send for her to her presence, look upon her fondly with loving eyes,
and say to her tenderly, in a sweet voice, "Caroline, my child, I have a
home for you; you shall live with me. All the love you have needed, and
not tasted, from infancy, I have saved for you carefully. Come; it shall
cherish you now."

A noise on the road roused Caroline from her filial hopes, and Shirley
from her Titan visions. They listened, and heard the tramp of horses.
They looked, and saw a glitter through the trees. They caught through
the foliage glimpses of martial scarlet; helm shone, plume waved. Silent
and orderly, six soldiers rode softly by.

"The same we saw this afternoon," whispered Shirley. "They have been
halting somewhere till now. They wish to be as little noticed as
possible, and are seeking their rendezvous at this quiet hour, while the
people are at church. Did I not say we should see unusual things ere
long?"

Scarcely were sight and sound of the soldiers lost, when another and
somewhat different disturbance broke the night-hush--a child's impatient
scream. They looked. A man issued from the church, carrying in his arms
an infant--a robust, ruddy little boy of some two years old--roaring
with all the power of his lungs. He had probably just awaked from a
church-sleep. Two little girls, of nine and ten, followed. The influence
of the fresh air, and the attraction of some flowers gathered from a
grave, soon quieted the child. The man sat down with him, dandling him
on his knee as tenderly as any woman; the two little girls took their
places one on each side.

"Good-evening, William," said Shirley, after due scrutiny of the man. He
had seen her before, and apparently was waiting to be recognized. He now
took off his hat, and grinned a smile of pleasure. He was a
rough-headed, hard-featured personage, not old, but very weather-beaten.
His attire was decent and clean; that of his children singularly neat.
It was our old friend Farren. The young ladies approached him.

"You are not going into the church?" he inquired, gazing at them
complacently, yet with a mixture of bashfulness in his look--a sentiment
not by any means the result of awe of their station, but only of
appreciation of their elegance and youth. Before gentlemen--such as
Moore or Helstone, for instance--William was often a little dogged;
with proud or insolent ladies, too, he was quite unmanageable, sometimes
very resentful; but he was most sensible of, most tractable to,
good-humour and civility. His nature--a stubborn one--was repelled by
inflexibility in other natures; for which reason he had never been able
to like his former master, Moore; and unconscious of that gentleman's
good opinion of himself, and of the service he had secretly rendered him
in recommending him as gardener to Mr. Yorke, and by this means to other
families in the neighbourhood, he continued to harbour a grudge against
his austerity. Latterly he had often worked at Fieldhead. Miss Keeldar's
frank, hospitable manners were perfectly charming to him. Caroline he
had known from her childhood; unconsciously she was his ideal of a lady.
Her gentle mien, step, gestures, her grace of person and attire, moved
some artist-fibres about his peasant heart. He had a pleasure in looking
at her, as he had in examining rare flowers or in seeing pleasant
landscapes. Both the ladies liked William; it was their delight to lend
him books, to give him plants; and they preferred his conversation far
before that of many coarse, hard, pretentious people immeasurably higher
in station.

"Who was speaking, William, when you came out?" asked Shirley.

"A gentleman ye set a deal of store on, Miss Shirley--Mr. Donne."

"You look knowing, William. How did you find out my regard for Mr.
Donne?"

"Ay, Miss Shirley, there's a gleg light i' your een sometimes which
betrays you. You look raight down scornful sometimes when Mr. Donne is
by."

"Do you like him yourself, William?"

"Me? I'm stalled o' t' curates, and so is t' wife. They've no manners.
They talk to poor folk fair as if they thought they were beneath them.
They're allus magnifying their office. It is a pity but their office
could magnify them; but it does nought o' t' soart. I fair hate pride."

"But you are proud in your own way yourself," interposed Caroline. "You
are what you call house-proud: you like to have everything handsome
about you. Sometimes you look as if you were almost too proud to take
your wages. When you were out of work, you were too proud to get
anything on credit. But for your children, I believe you would rather
have starved than gone to the shops without money; and when I wanted to
give you something, what a difficulty I had in making you take it!"

"It is partly true, Miss Caroline. Ony day I'd rather give than take,
especially from sich as ye. Look at t' difference between us. Ye're a
little, young, slender lass, and I'm a great strong man; I'm rather more
nor twice your age. It is not _my_ part, then, I think, to tak fro'
_ye_--to be under obligations (as they say) to _ye_. And that day ye
came to our house, and called me to t' door, and offered me five
shillings, which I doubt ye could ill spare--for ye've no fortin', I
know--that day I war fair a rebel, a radical, an insurrectionist; and
_ye_ made me so. I thought it shameful that, willing and able as I was
to work, I suld be i' such a condition that a young cratur about the age
o' my own eldest lass suld think it needful to come and offer me her bit
o' brass."

"I suppose you were angry with me, William?"

"I almost was, in a way. But I forgave ye varry soon. Ye meant well. Ay,
_I am_ proud, and so are _ye_; but your pride and mine is t' raight
mak--what we call i' Yorkshire clean pride--such as Mr. Malone and Mr.
Donne knows nought about. Theirs is mucky pride. Now, I shall teach my
lasses to be as proud as Miss Shirley there, and my lads to be as proud
as myseln; but I dare ony o' 'em to be like t' curates. I'd lick little
Michael if I seed him show any signs o' that feeling."

"What is the difference, William?"

"Ye know t' difference weel enow, but ye want me to get a gate o'
talking. Mr. Malone and Mr. Donne is almost too proud to do aught for
theirseln; _we_ are almost too proud to let anybody do aught for us. T'
curates can hardly bide to speak a civil word to them they think beneath
them; _we_ can hardly bide to tak an uncivil word fro' them that thinks
themseln aboon us."

"Now, William, be humble enough to tell me truly how you are getting on
in the world. Are you well off?"

"Miss Shirley, I am varry well off. Since I got into t' gardening line,
wi' Mr. Yorke's help, and since Mr. Hall (another o' t' raight sort)
helped my wife to set up a bit of a shop, I've nought to complain of. My
family has plenty to eat and plenty to wear. My pride makes me find
means to have an odd pound now and then against rainy days; for I think
I'd die afore I'd come to t' parish; and me and mine is content. But t'
neighbours is poor yet. I see a great deal of distress."

"And, consequently, there is still discontent, I suppose?" inquired Miss
Keeldar.

"_Consequently_--ye say right--_consequently_. In course, starving folk
cannot be satisfied or settled folk. The country's not in a safe
condition--I'll say so mich!"

"But what can be done? What more can I do, for instance?"

"Do? Ye can do not mich, poor young lass! Ye've gi'en your brass; ye've
done well. If ye could transport your tenant, Mr. Moore, to Botany Bay,
ye'd happen do better. Folks hate him."

"William, for shame!" exclaimed Caroline warmly. "If folks _do_ hate
him, it is to their disgrace, not his. Mr. Moore himself hates nobody.
He only wants to do his duty, and maintain his rights. You are wrong to
talk so."

"I talk as I think. He has a cold, unfeeling heart, yond' Moore."

"But," interposed Shirley, "supposing Moore was driven from the country,
and his mill razed to the ground, would people have more work?"

"They'd have less. I know that, and they know that; and there is many an
honest lad driven desperate by the certainty that whichever way he turns
he cannot better himself; and there is dishonest men plenty to guide
them to the devil, scoundrels that reckons to be the 'people's friends,'
and that knows nought about the people, and is as insincere as Lucifer.
I've lived aboon forty year in the world, and I believe that 'the
people' will never have any true friends but theirseln and them two or
three good folk i' different stations that is friends to all the world.
Human natur', taking it i' th' lump, is nought but selfishness. It is
but excessive few, it is but just an exception here and there, now and
then, sich as ye two young uns and me, that, being in a different
sphere, can understand t' one t' other, and be friends wi'out
slavishness o' one hand or pride o' t' other. Them that reckons to be
friends to a lower class than their own fro' political motives is never
to be trusted; they always try to make their inferiors tools. For my own
part, I will neither be patronized nor misled for no man's pleasure.
I've had overtures made to me lately that I saw were treacherous, and I
flung 'em back i' the faces o' them that offered 'em."

"You won't tell us what overtures?"

"I will not. It would do no good. It would mak no difference. Them they
concerned can look after theirseln."

"Ay, we'se look after werseln," said another voice. Joe Scott had
sauntered forth from the church to get a breath of fresh air, and there
he stood.

"I'll warrant _ye_, Joe," observed William, smiling.

"And I'll warrant my maister," was the answer.--"Young ladies,"
continued Joe, assuming a lordly air, "ye'd better go into th' house."

"I wonder what for?" inquired Shirley, to whom the overlooker's somewhat
pragmatical manners were familiar, and who was often at war with him;
for Joe, holding supercilious theories about women in general, resented
greatly, in his secret soul, the fact of his master and his master's
mill being, in a manner, under petticoat government, and had felt as
wormwood and gall certain business visits of the heiress to the Hollow's
counting-house.

"Because there is nought agate that fits women to be consarned in."

"Indeed! There is prayer and preaching agate in that church. Are we not
concerned in that?"

"Ye have been present neither at the prayer nor preaching, ma'am, if I
have observed aright. What I alluded to was politics. William Farren
here was touching on that subject, if I'm not mista'en."

"Well, what then? Politics are our habitual study, Joe. Do you know I
see a newspaper every day, and two of a Sunday?"

"I should think you'll read the marriages, probably, miss, and the
murders, and the accidents, and sich like?"

"I read the leading articles, Joe, and the foreign intelligence, and I
look over the market prices. In short, I read just what gentlemen read."

Joe looked as if he thought this talk was like the chattering of a pie.
He replied to it by a disdainful silence.

"Joe," continued Miss Keeldar, "I never yet could ascertain properly
whether you are a Whig or a Tory. Pray, which party has the honour of
your alliance?"

"It is rayther difficult to explain where you are sure not to be
understood," was Joe's haughty response; "but as to being a Tory, I'd as
soon be an old woman, or a young one, which is a more flimsier article
still. It is the Tories that carries on the war and ruins trade; and if
I be of any party--though political parties is all nonsense--I'm of
that which is most favourable to peace, and, by consequence, to the
mercantile interests of this here land."

"So am I, Joe," replied Shirley, who had rather a pleasure in teasing
the overlooker, by persisting in talking on subjects with which he
opined she, as a woman, had no right to meddle--"partly, at least. I
have rather a leaning to the agricultural interest, too; as good reason
is, seeing that I don't desire England to be under the feet of France,
and that if a share of my income comes from Hollow's Mill, a larger
share comes from the landed estate around it. It would not do to take
any measures injurious to the farmers, Joe, I think?"

"The dews at this hour is unwholesome for females," observed Joe.

"If you make that remark out of interest in me, I have merely to assure
you that I am impervious to cold. I should not mind taking my turn to
watch the mill one of these summer nights, armed with your musket, Joe."

Joe Scott's chin was always rather prominent. He poked it out, at this
speech, some inches farther than usual.

"But--to go back to my sheep," she proceeded--"clothier and mill-owner
as I am, besides farmer, I cannot get out of my head a certain idea that
we manufacturers and persons of business are sometimes a little--a _very
little_--selfish and short-sighted in our views, and rather _too_
regardless of human suffering, rather heartless in our pursuit of gain.
Don't you agree with me, Joe?"

"I cannot argue where I cannot be comprehended," was again the answer.

"Man of mystery! Your master will argue with me sometimes, Joe. He is
not so stiff as you are."

"Maybe not. We've all our own ways."

"Joe, do you seriously think all the wisdom in the world is lodged in
male skulls?"

"I think that women are a kittle and a froward generation; and I've a
great respect for the doctrines delivered in the second chapter of St.
Paul's first Epistle to Timothy."

"What doctrines, Joe?"

"'Let the woman learn in silence, with all subjection. I suffer not a
woman to teach, nor to usurp authority over the man, but to be in
silence. For Adam was first formed, then Eve.'"

"What has that to do with the business?" interjected Shirley. "That
smacks of rights of primogeniture. I'll bring it up to Mr. Yorke the
first time he inveighs against those rights."

"And," continued Joe Scott, "Adam was not deceived, but the woman being
deceived was in the transgression."

"More shame to Adam to sin with his eyes open!" cried Miss Keeldar. "To
confess the honest truth, Joe, I never was easy in my mind concerning
that chapter. It puzzles me."

"It is very plain, miss. He that runs may read."

"He may read it in his own fashion," remarked Caroline, now joining in
the dialogue for the first time. "You allow the right of private
judgment, I suppose, Joe?"

"My certy, that I do! I allow and claim it for every line of the holy
Book."

"Women may exercise it as well as men?"

"Nay. Women is to take their husbands' opinion, both in politics and
religion. It's wholesomest for them."

"Oh! oh!" exclaimed both Shirley and Caroline.

"To be sure; no doubt on't," persisted the stubborn overlooker.

"Consider yourself groaned down, and cried shame over, for such a stupid
observation," said Miss Keeldar. "You might as well say men are to take
the opinions of their priests without examination. Of what value would a
religion so adopted be? It would be mere blind, besotted superstition."

"And what is _your_ reading, Miss Helstone, o' these words o' St.
Paul's?"

"Hem! I--I account for them in this way. He wrote that chapter for a
particular congregation of Christians, under peculiar circumstances; and
besides, I dare say, if I could read the original Greek, I should find
that many of the words have been wrongly translated, perhaps
misapprehended altogether. It would be possible, I doubt not, with a
little ingenuity, to give the passage quite a contrary turn--to make it
say, 'Let the woman speak out whenever she sees fit to make an
objection.' 'It is permitted to a woman to teach and to exercise
authority as much as may be. Man, meantime, cannot do better than hold
his peace;' and so on."

"That willn't wash, miss."

"I dare say it will. My notions are dyed in faster colours than yours,
Joe. Mr. Scott, you are a thoroughly dogmatical person, and always
were. I like William better than you."

"Joe is well enough in his own house," said Shirley. "I have seen him as
quiet as a lamb at home. There is not a better nor a kinder husband in
Briarfield. He does not dogmatize to his wife."

"My wife is a hard-working, plain woman; time and trouble has ta'en all
the conceit out of her. But that is not the case with you, young misses.
And then you reckon to have so much knowledge; and i' my thoughts it's
only superficial sort o' vanities you're acquainted with. I can
tell--happen a year sin'--one day Miss Caroline coming into our
counting-house when I war packing up summat behind t' great desk, and
she didn't see me, and she brought a slate wi' a sum on it to t'
maister. It war only a bit of a sum in practice, that our Harry would
have settled i' two minutes. She couldn't do it. Mr. Moore had to show
her how. And when he did show her, she couldn't understand him."

"Nonsense, Joe!"

"Nay, it's no nonsense. And Miss Shirley there reckons to hearken to t'
maister when he's talking ower trade, so attentive like, as if she
followed him word for word, and all war as clear as a lady's
looking-glass to her een; and all t' while she's peeping and peeping out
o' t' window to see if t' mare stands quiet; and then looking at a bit
of a splash on her riding-skirt; and then glancing glegly round at wer
counting-house cobwebs and dust, and thinking what mucky folk we are,
and what a grand ride she'll have just i' now ower Nunnely Common. She
hears no more o' Mr. Moore's talk nor if he spake Hebrew."

"Joe, you are a real slanderer. I would give you your answer, only the
people are coming out of church. We must leave you. Man of prejudice,
good-bye.--William, good-bye.--Children, come up to Fieldhead to-morrow,
and you shall choose what you like best out of Mrs. Gill's store-room."




CHAPTER XIX.

A SUMMER NIGHT.


The hour was now that of dusk. A clear air favoured the kindling of the
stars.

"There will be just light enough to show me the way home," said Miss
Keeldar, as she prepared to take leave of Caroline at the rectory garden
door.

"You must not go alone, Shirley; Fanny shall accompany you."

"That she shall not. Of what need I be afraid in my own parish? I would
walk from Fieldhead to the church any fine midsummer night, three hours
later than this, for the mere pleasure of seeing the stars and the
chance of meeting a fairy."

"But just wait till the crowd is cleared away."

"Agreed. There are the five Misses Armitage streaming by. Here comes
Mrs. Sykes's phaeton, Mr. Wynne's close carriage, Mrs. Birtwhistle's
car. I don't wish to go through the ceremony of bidding them all
good-bye, so we will step into the garden and take shelter amongst the
laburnums for an instant."

The rectors, their curates, and their churchwardens now issued from the
church porch. There was a great confabulation, shaking of hands,
congratulation on speeches, recommendation to be careful of the night
air, etc. By degrees the throng dispersed, the carriages drove off. Miss
Keeldar was just emerging from her flowery refuge when Mr. Helstone
entered the garden and met her.

"Oh, I want you!" he said. "I was afraid you were already
gone.--Caroline, come here."

Caroline came, expecting, as Shirley did, a lecture on not having been
visible at church. Other subjects, however, occupied the rector's mind.

"I shall not sleep at home to-night," he continued. "I have just met
with an old friend, and promised to accompany him. I shall return
probably about noon to-morrow. Thomas, the clerk, is engaged, and I
cannot get him to sleep in the house, as I usually do when I am absent
for a night. Now----"

"Now," interrupted Shirley, "you want me as a gentleman--the first
gentleman in Briarfield, in short--to supply your place, be master of
the rectory and guardian of your niece and maids while you are away?"

"Exactly, captain. I thought the post would suit you. Will you favour
Caroline so far as to be her guest for one night? Will you stay here
instead of going back to Fieldhead?"

"And what will Mrs. Pryor do? she expects me home."

"I will send her word. Come, make up your mind to stay. It grows late;
the dew falls heavily. You and Caroline will enjoy each other's society,
I doubt not."

"I promise you, then, to stay with Caroline," replied Shirley. "As you
say, we shall enjoy each other's society. We will not be separated
to-night. Now, rejoin your old friend, and fear nothing for us."

"If there should chance to be any disturbance in the night, captain; if
you should hear the picking of a lock, the cutting out of a pane of
glass, a stealthy tread of steps about the house (and I need not fear to
tell _you_, who bear a well-tempered, mettlesome heart under your girl's
ribbon sash, that such little incidents are very possible in the present
time), what would you do?"

"Don't know; faint, perhaps--fall down, and have to be picked up again.
But, doctor, if you assign me the post of honour, you must give me arms.
What weapons are there in your stronghold?"

"You could not wield a sword?"

"No; I could manage the carving-knife better."

"You will find a good one in the dining-room sideboard--a lady's knife,
light to handle, and as sharp-pointed as a poniard."

"It will suit Caroline. But you must give me a brace of pistols. I know
you have pistols."

"I have two pairs. One pair I can place at your disposal. You will find
them suspended over the mantelpiece of my study in cloth cases."

"Loaded?"

"Yes, but not on the cock. Cock them before you go to bed. It is paying
you a great compliment, captain, to lend you these. Were you one of the
awkward squad you should not have them."

"I will take care. You need delay no longer, Mr. Helstone. You may go
now.--He is gracious to me to lend me his pistols," she remarked, as the
rector passed out at the garden gate. "But come, Lina," she continued,
"let us go in and have some supper. I was too much vexed at tea with the
vicinage of Mr. Sam Wynne to be able to eat, and now I am really
hungry."

Entering the house, they repaired to the darkened dining-room, through
the open windows of which apartment stole the evening air, bearing the
perfume of flowers from the garden, the very distant sound of
far-retreating steps from the road, and a soft, vague murmur whose
origin Caroline explained by the remark, uttered as she stood listening
at the casement, "Shirley, I hear the beck in the Hollow."

Then she rang the bell, asked for a candle and some bread and milk--Miss
Keeldar's usual supper and her own. Fanny, when she brought in the tray,
would have closed the windows and the shutters, but was requested to
desist for the present. The twilight was too calm, its breath too balmy
to be yet excluded. They took their meal in silence. Caroline rose once
to remove to the window-sill a glass of flowers which stood on the
sideboard, the exhalation from the blossoms being somewhat too powerful
for the sultry room. In returning she half opened a drawer, and took
from it something that glittered clear and keen in her hand.

"You assigned this to me, then, Shirley, did you? It is bright,
keen-edged, finely tapered; it is dangerous-looking. I never yet felt
the impulse which could move me to direct this against a
fellow-creature. It is difficult to fancy that circumstances could nerve
my arm to strike home with this long knife."

"I should hate to do it," replied Shirley, "but I think I could do it,
if goaded by certain exigencies which I can imagine." And Miss Keeldar
quietly sipped her glass of new milk, looking somewhat thoughtful and a
little pale; though, indeed, when did she not look pale? She was never
florid.

The milk sipped and the bread eaten, Fanny was again summoned. She and
Eliza were recommended to go to bed, which they were quite willing to
do, being weary of the day's exertions, of much cutting of currant-buns,
and filling of urns and teapots, and running backwards and forwards
with trays. Ere long the maids' chamber door was heard to close.
Caroline took a candle and went quietly all over the house, seeing that
every window was fast and every door barred. She did not even evade the
haunted back kitchen nor the vault-like cellars. These visited, she
returned.

"There is neither spirit nor flesh in the house at present," she said,
"which should not be there. It is now near eleven o'clock, fully
bedtime; yet I would rather sit up a little longer, if you do not
object, Shirley. Here," she continued, "I have brought the brace of
pistols from my uncle's study. You may examine them at your leisure."

She placed them on the table before her friend.

"Why would you rather sit up longer?" asked Miss Keeldar, taking up the
firearms, examining them, and again laying them down.

"Because I have a strange, excited feeling in my heart."

"So have I."

"Is this state of sleeplessness and restlessness caused by something
electrical in the air, I wonder?"

"No; the sky is clear, the stars numberless. It is a fine night."

"But very still. I hear the water fret over its stony bed in Hollow's
Copse as distinctly as if it ran below the churchyard wall."

"I am glad it is so still a night. A moaning wind or rushing rain would
vex me to fever just now."

"Why, Shirley?"

"Because it would baffle my efforts to listen."

"Do you listen towards the Hollow?"

"Yes; it is the only quarter whence we can hear a sound just now."

"The only one, Shirley."

They both sat near the window, and both leaned their arms on the sill,
and both inclined their heads towards the open lattice. They saw each
other's young faces by the starlight and that dim June twilight which
does not wholly fade from the west till dawn begins to break in the
east.

"Mr. Helstone thinks we have no idea which way he is gone," murmured
Miss Keeldar, "nor on what errand, nor with what expectations, nor how
prepared. But I guess much; do not you?"

"I guess something."

"All those gentlemen--your cousin Moore included--think that you and I
are now asleep in our beds, unconscious."

"Caring nothing about them--hoping and fearing nothing for them," added
Caroline.

Both kept silent for full half an hour. The night was silent too; only
the church clock measured its course by quarters. Some words were
interchanged about the chill of the air. They wrapped their scarves
closer round them, resumed their bonnets, which they had removed, and
again watched.

Towards midnight the teasing, monotonous bark of the house-dog disturbed
the quietude of their vigil. Caroline rose, and made her way noiselessly
through the dark passages to the kitchen, intending to appease him with
a piece of bread. She succeeded. On returning to the dining-room she
found it all dark, Miss Keeldar having extinguished the candle. The
outline of her shape was visible near the still open window, leaning
out. Miss Helstone asked no questions; she stole to her side. The dog
recommenced barking furiously. Suddenly he stopped, and seemed to
listen. The occupants of the dining-room listened too, and not merely
now to the flow of the mill-stream. There was a nearer, though a
muffled, sound on the road below the churchyard--a measured, beating,
approaching sound--a dull tramp of marching feet.

It drew near. Those who listened by degrees comprehended its extent. It
was not the tread of two, nor of a dozen, nor of a score of men; it was
the tread of hundreds. They could see nothing; the high shrubs of the
garden formed a leafy screen between them and the road. To hear,
however, was not enough, and this they felt as the troop trod forwards,
and seemed actually passing the rectory. They felt it more when a human
voice--though that voice spoke but one word--broke the hush of the
night.

"Halt!"

A halt followed. The march was arrested. Then came a low conference, of
which no word was distinguishable from the dining-room.

"We _must_ hear this," said Shirley.

She turned, took her pistols from the table, silently passed out through
the middle window of the dining-room, which was, in fact, a glass door,
stole down the walk to the garden wall, and stood listening under the
lilacs. Caroline would not have quitted the house had she been alone,
but where Shirley went she would go. She glanced at the weapon on the
sideboard, but left it behind her, and presently stood at her friend's
side. They dared not look over the wall, for fear of being seen; they
were obliged to crouch behind it. They heard these words,--

"It looks a rambling old building. Who lives in it besides the damned
parson?"

"Only three women--his niece and two servants."

"Do you know where they sleep?"

"The lasses behind; the niece in a front room."

"And Helstone?"

"Yonder is his chamber. He was burning a light, but I see none now."

"Where would you get in?"

"If I were ordered to do his job--and he desarves it--I'd try yond' long
window; it opens to the dining-room. I could grope my way upstairs, and
I know his chamber."

"How would you manage about the women folk?"

"Let 'em alone except they shrieked, and then I'd soon quieten 'em. I
could wish to find the old chap asleep. If he waked, he'd be dangerous."

"Has he arms?"

"Firearms, allus--and allus loadened."

"Then you're a fool to stop us here. A shot would give the alarm. Moore
would be on us before we could turn round. We should miss our main
object."

"You might go on, I tell you. I'd engage Helstone alone."

A pause. One of the party dropped some weapon, which rang on the stone
causeway. At this sound the rectory dog barked again
furiously--fiercely.

"That spoils all!" said the voice. "He'll awake. A noise like that might
rouse the dead. You did not say there was a dog. Damn you! Forward!"

Forward they went--tramp, tramp--with mustering, manifold, slow-filing
tread. They were gone.

Shirley stood erect, looked over the wall, along the road.

"Not a soul remains," she said.

She stood and mused. "Thank God!" was the next observation.

Caroline repeated the ejaculation--not in so steady a tone. She was
trembling much. Her heart was beating fast and thick; her face was cold,
her forehead damp.

"Thank God for us!" she reiterated. "But what will happen elsewhere?
They have passed us by that they may make sure of others."

"They have done well," returned Shirley, with composure. "The others
will defend themselves. They can do it. They are prepared for them. With
us it is otherwise. My finger was on the trigger of this pistol. I was
quite ready to give that man, if he had entered, such a greeting as he
little calculated on; but behind him followed three hundred. I had
neither three hundred hands nor three hundred weapons. I could not have
effectually protected either you, myself, or the two poor women asleep
under that roof. Therefore I again earnestly thank God for insult and
peril escaped."

After a second pause she continued: "What is it my duty and wisdom to do
next? Not to stay here inactive, I am glad to say, but, of course, to
walk over to the Hollow."

"To the Hollow, Shirley?"

"To the Hollow. Will you go with me?"

"Where those men are gone?"

"They have taken the highway; we should not encounter them. The road
over the fields is as safe, silent, and solitary as a path through the
air would be. Will you go?"

"Yes," was the answer, given mechanically, not because the speaker
wished or was prepared to go, or, indeed, was otherwise than scared at
the prospect of going, but because she felt she could not abandon
Shirley.

"Then we must fasten up these windows, and leave all as secure as we can
behind us. Do you know what we are going for, Cary?"

"Yes--no--because you wish it."

"Is that all? And are you so obedient to a mere caprice of mine? What a
docile wife you would make to a stern husband! The moon's face is not
whiter than yours at this moment, and the aspen at the gate does not
tremble more than your busy fingers; and so, tractable and
terror-struck, and dismayed and devoted, you would follow me into the
thick of real danger! Cary, let me give your fidelity a motive. We are
going for Moore's sake--to see if we can be of use to him, to make an
effort to warn him of what is coming."

"To be sure! I am a blind, weak fool, and you are acute and sensible,
Shirley. I will go with you; I will gladly go with you!"

"I do not doubt it. You would die blindly and meekly for me, but you
would intelligently and gladly die for Moore. But, in truth, there is no
question of death to-night; we run no risk at all."

Caroline rapidly closed shutter and lattice. "Do not fear that I shall
not have breath to run as fast as you can possibly run, Shirley. Take my
hand. Let us go straight across the fields."

"But you cannot climb walls?"

"To-night I can."

"You are afraid of hedges, and the beck which we shall be forced to
cross?"

"I can cross it."

They started; they ran. Many a wall checked but did not baffle them.
Shirley was surefooted and agile; she could spring like a deer when she
chose. Caroline, more timid and less dexterous, fell once or twice, and
bruised herself; but she rose again directly, saying she was not hurt. A
quickset hedge bounded the last field; they lost time in seeking a gap
in it. The aperture, when found, was narrow, but they worked their way
through. The long hair, the tender skin, the silks and the muslins
suffered; but what was chiefly regretted was the impediment this
difficulty had caused to speed. On the other side they met the beck,
flowing deep in a rough bed. At this point a narrow plank formed the
only bridge across it. Shirley had trodden the plank successfully and
fearlessly many a time before; Caroline had never yet dared to risk the
transit.

"I will carry you across," said Miss Keeldar. "You are light, and I am
not weak. Let me try."

"If I fall in, you may fish me out," was the answer, as a grateful
squeeze compressed her hand. Caroline, without pausing, trod forward on
the trembling plank as if it were a continuation of the firm turf.
Shirley, who followed, did not cross it more resolutely or safely. In
their present humour, on their present errand, a strong and foaming
channel would have been a barrier to neither. At the moment they were
above the control either of fire or water. All Stilbro' Moor, alight and
aglow with bonfires, would not have stopped them, nor would Calder or
Aire thundering in flood. Yet one sound made them pause. Scarce had
they set foot on the solid opposite bank when a shot split the air from
the north. One second elapsed. Further off burst a like note in the
south. Within the space of three minutes similar signals boomed in the
east and west.

"I thought we were dead at the first explosion," observed Shirley,
drawing a long breath. "I felt myself hit in the temples, and I
concluded your heart was pierced; but the reiterated voice was an
explanation. Those are signals--it is their way--the attack must be
near. We should have had wings. Our feet have not borne us swiftly
enough."

A portion of the copse was now to clear. When they emerged from it the
mill lay just below them. They could look down upon the buildings, the
yard; they could see the road beyond. And the first glance in that
direction told Shirley she was right in her conjecture. They were
already too late to give warning. It had taken more time than they
calculated on to overcome the various obstacles which embarrassed the
short cut across the fields.

The road, which should have been white, was dark with a moving mass. The
rioters were assembled in front of the closed yard gates, and a single
figure stood within, apparently addressing them. The mill itself was
perfectly black and still. There was neither life, light, nor motion
around it.

"Surely he is prepared. Surely that is not Moore meeting them alone?"
whispered Shirley.

"It is. We must go to him. I _will_ go to him."

"_That_ you will not."

"Why did I come, then? I came only for him. I shall join him."

"Fortunately it is out of your power. There is no entrance to the yard."

"There _is_ a small entrance at the back, besides the gates in front. It
opens by a secret method which I know. I will try it."

