Vaisampayana said, "Having issued forth from the city, the dauntless son
of Virata addressed his charioteer, saying, 'Proceed whither the Kurus
are. Defeating the assembled Kurus who have come hither from desire of
victory, and quickly rescuing my kine from them, I will return to the
capital.' At these words of the prince, the son of Pandu urged those
excellent steeds. And endued with the speed of the wind and decked with
necklaces of gold, those steeds, urged by that lion among men, seemed to
fly through the air. And they had not proceeded far when those smiters
of foes, Dhananjaya and the son of Matsya, sighted the army of the
powerful Kurus. And proceeding towards the cemetery, they came upon the
Kurus and beheld their army arrayed in order of battle.[40] And that
large army of theirs looked like the vast sea or a forest of innumerable
trees moving through the sky. And then was seen, O best among the Kurus,
the dust raised by that moving army which reached the sky and obstructed
the sight of all creatures. And beholding that mighty host abounding in
elephants, horses and chariots, and protected by Karna and Duryodhana
and Kripa and Santanu's son, and that intelligent and great bowman
Drona, with his son (Aswatthaman), the son of Virata, agitated with fear
and the bristles on his body standing on their ends, thus spake unto
Partha, 'I dare not fight with the Kurus. See, the bristles on my body
have stood on their ends. I am incapable of battling with this countless
host of the Kurus, abounding in the heroic warriors, that are extremely
fierce and difficult of being vanquished even by the celestials. I do
not venture to penetrate into the army of the Bharatas consisting of
terrible bowmen and abounding in horses and elephants and cars and
footsoldiers and banners. My mind is too much perturbed by the very
sight of the foe on the field of battle on which stand Drona and
Bhishma, and Kripa, and Karna, and Vivingsati, and Aswatthaman and
Vikarna, and Saumadatti, and Vahlika, and the heroic king Duryodhana
also--that foremost of car-warriors, and many other splendid bowmen, all
skilled in battle. My hairs have stood on their ends, and I am fainting
with fear at the very sight of these smiters, the Kurus arrayed in order
of battle.'"

    [40] This sloka is not correctly printed in any of the texts
    that I have seen. The Burdwan Pandits read _tat-samim_. This I
    think, is correct, but then _asasada_ in the singular when the
    other verbs are all dual seems to be correct. The poet must have
    used some other verb in the dual for _asasada_.

Vaisampayana continued, "And the low-minded and foolish Uttara out of
folly alone, began to bewail (his fate) in the presence of the
high-spirited (Arjuna) disguised (as his charioteer) in these words, 'My
father hath gone out to meet the Trigartas taking with him his whole
army, leaving me in the empty city. There are no troops to assist me.
Alone and a mere boy who has not undergone much exercise in arms, I am
unable to encounter these innumerable warriors and all skilled in
weapons. Do thou, therefore, O Vrihannala, cease to advance!'

"Vrihannala said, 'Why dost thou look so pale through fear and enhance
the joy of thy foes? As yet thou hast done nothing on the field of
battle with the enemy. It was thou that hadst ordered me, saying, _Take
me towards the Kauravas_. I will, therefore, take thee, thither where
those innumerable flags are. I will certainly take thee, O mighty-armed
one, into the midst of the hostile Kurus, prepared to fight as they are
for the kine like hawks for meat. I would do this, even if I regarded
them to have come hither for battling for a much higher stake such as
the sovereignty of the earth. Having, at the time of setting out, talked
before both men and women so highly of thy manliness, why wouldst thou
desist from the fight? If thou shouldst return home without recapturing
the kine, brave men and even women, when they meet together, will laugh
at thee (in derision). As regards myself, I cannot return to the city
without having rescued the kine, applauded as I have been so highly by
the _Sairindhri_ in respect of my skill in driving cars. It is for those
praises by the _Sairindhri_ and for those words of thine also (that I
have come). Why should I not, therefore, give battle to the Kurus? (As
regards thyself), be thou still.'

"Uttara said, 'Let the Kurus rob the Matsyas of all their wealth. Let
men and women, O Vrihannala, laugh at me. Let my kine perish, let the
city be a desert. Let me stand exposed before my father. Still there is
no need of battle.'"

Vaisampayana continued, "Saying this, that much affrighted prince decked
in ear-ring jumped down from his car, and throwing down his bow and
arrows began to flee, sacrificing honour and pride. Vrihannala, however,
exclaimed, 'This is not the practice of the brave, this flight of a
Kshatriya from the field of battle. Even death in battle is better than
flight from fear.' Having said this, Dhananjaya, the son of Kunti,
coming down from that excellent car ran after that prince thus running
away, his own long braid and pure red garments fluttering in the air.
And some soldiers, not knowing that it was Arjuna who was thus running
with his braid fluttering in the air, burst out into laughter at the
sight. And beholding him thus running, the Kurus began to argue, 'Who is
this person, thus disguised like fire concealed in ashes? He is partly a
man and partly a woman. Although bearing a neuter form, he yet
resembleth Arjuna. His are the same head and neck, and his the same arms
like unto a couple of maces. And this one's gait also is like unto his.
He can be none else than Dhananjaya. As _Indra_ is among the celestials,
so Dhananjaya is among men. Who else in this world than Dhananjaya,
would alone come against us? Virata left a single son of his in the
empty city. He hath come out from childishness and not from true
heroism. It is Uttara who must have come out of the city, having,
without doubt, made as a charioteer Arjuna, the son of Pritha, now
living in disguise. It seems that he is now flying away in panic at
sight of our army. And without doubt Dhananjaya runneth after him to
bring him back.'"

Vaisampayana continued, "Beholding the disguised son of Pandu, the
Kauravas, O Bharata, began to indulge in these surmises, but they could
not come to any definite conclusion. Meanwhile, Dhananjaya, hastily
pursuing the retreating Uttara, seized him by the hair within a hundred
steps. And seized by Arjuna, the son of Virata began to lament most
woefully like one in great affliction, and said, 'Listen, O good
Vrihannala, O thou of handsome waist. Turn thou quickly the course of
the car. He that liveth meeteth with prosperity. I will give thee a
hundred coins of pure gold and eight _lapis lazuli_ of great brightness
set with gold, and one chariot furnished with a golden flag-staff and
drawn by excellent steeds, and also ten elephants of infuriate prowess.
Do thou, O Vrihannala, set me free.'"

Vaisampayana continued, "Thus addressed, that tiger among men laughingly
dragged Uttara who was almost deprived of his senses and who was
uttering these words of lamentation towards the car. And the son of
Pritha then addressed the affrighted prince who had nearly lost his
senses, saying, 'If, O chastiser of foes, thou dost not venture to fight
with enemy, come thou and hold the reins of the steeds as I fight with
the foe. Protected by the might of my arms, penetrate thou yon
formidable and invincible array of cars guarded by heroic and mighty
warriors. Fear not, O chastiser of foes, thou art a _Kshatriya_ and the
foremost of royal princes. Why dost thou, O tiger among men, succumb in
the midst of the foe? I shall surely fight with the Kurus and recover
the kine, penetrating into this formidable and inaccessible array of
cars. Be thou my charioteer, O best of men, I will fight with the
Kurus.' Thus speaking unto Uttara, the son of Virata, Vibhatsu,
heretofore unconquered in battle, for a while comforted him. And then
the son of Pritha, that foremost of smiters, raised on the car that
fainting and reluctant prince stricken with fear!"


SECTION XXXIX

Vaisampayana said, "Beholding that bull among men seated on the car in
the habit of a person of the third sex, driving toward the _Sami_ tree,
having taken (the flying) Uttara up, all the great car-warriors of the
Kurus with Bhishma and Drona at their head, became affrighted at heart,
suspecting the comer to be Dhananjaya. And seeing them so dispirited and
marking also the many wonderful portents, that foremost of all wielders
of arms, the preceptor Drona, son of Bharadwaja, said, 'Violent and hot
are the winds that below, showering gravels in profusion. The sky also
is overcast with a gloom of ashy hue. The clouds present the strange
sight of being dry and waterless. Our weapons also of various kinds are
coming out of their cases. The jackals are yelling hideously affrighted
at the conflagrations on all sides.[41] The horses too are shedding
tears, and our banners are trembling though moved by none. Such being
the inauspicious indications seen, a great danger is at hand. Stay ye
with vigilance. Protect ye your own selves and array the troops in order
of battle. Stand ye, expecting a terrible slaughter, and guard ye well
the kine. This mighty bowman, this foremost of all wielders of weapons,
this hero that hath come in the habit of a person of the third sex, is
the son of Pritha. There is no doubt of this.' Then addressing Bhishma,
the preceptor continued, 'O offspring of the Ganges, apparelled as a
woman, this is _Kiriti_ called after a tree, the son of the enemy of the
mountains, and having on his banner the sign of devastator of the
gardens of Lanka's lord. Vanquishing us he will surely take away the
kine today![42] This chastiser of foes is the valiant son of Pritha
surnamed _Savyasachin_. He doth not desist from conflict even with the
gods and demons combined. Put to great hardship in the forest he cometh
in wrath. Taught by even Indra himself, he is like unto Indra in battle.
Therefore, ye Kauravas, I do not see any hero who can withstand him. It
is said that the lord _Mahadeva_ himself, disguised in the attire of a
hunter, was gratified by this son of Pritha in battle on the mountains
of Himavat.' Hearing these words, Karna said, 'You always censure us by
speaking on the virtues of _Phalguna_. Arjuna, however, is not equal to
even a full sixteenth part of myself or Duryodhana!' And Duryodhana
said, 'If this be Partha, O Radheya, then my purpose hath already been
fulfilled, for then, O king, if traced out, the Pandavas shall have to
wander for twelve years again. Or, if this one be any other person in a
eunuch's garb, I will soon prostrate him on the earth with keen-edged
arrows.'"

    [41] Some texts read _Diptasya_ for _Diptayam_.

    [42] This sloka does not occur in every text. This is a typical
    illustration of the round about way, frequently adopted by
    Sanskrit writers, of expressing a simple truth. The excuse in
    the present instance consists in Drona's unwillingness to
    identify the solitary hero with Arjuna, in the midst of all his
    hearers. Nadiji is an exclamation referring to Bhishma, the son
    of the river Ganga. _Lankesa-vanari-ketu_ is simply
    'ape-bannered,' or as rendered in the text, having the
    devastator of the gardens of Lanka's lord for the sign of his
    banner. Nagahvaya is 'named after tree' for Arjuna is the name
    of an Indian tree. Nagri-sunu is 'Indra's son',--Indra being the
    foe of mountain, for formerly it was he who cut off the wings of
    all mountains and compelled them to be stationary. He failed
    only in the case of Mainaka, the son of Himavat.

Vaisampayana continued, "The son of Dhritarashtra, O chastiser of foes,
having said this, Bhishma and Drona and Kripa and Drona's son all
applauded his manliness!"


SECTION XL

Vaisampayana said, "Having reached that _Sami_ tree, and having
ascertained Virata's son to be exceedingly delicate and inexperienced in
battle, Partha addressed him, saying, 'Enjoined by me, O Uttara, quickly
take down (from this tree) some bows that are there. For these bows of
thine are unable to bear my strength, my heavy weight when I shall grind
down horses and elephants, and the stretch of my arms when I seek to
vanquish the foe. Therefore, O Bhuminjaya, climb thou up this tree of
thick foliage, for in this tree are tied the bows and arrows and banners
and excellent coats of mail of the heroic sons of Pandu, viz.,
Yudhishthira and Bhima and Vibhatsu and the twins. There also is that
bow of great energy, the _Gandiva_ of Arjuna, which singly is equal to
many thousands of other bows and which is capable of extending the
limits of a kingdom. Large like a palmyra tree, able to bear the
greatest stress, the largest of all weapons, capable of obstructing the
foe, handsome, and smooth, and broad, without a knot, and adorned with
gold, it is stiff and beautiful in make and beareth the heaviest weight.
And the other bows also that are there, of Yudhishthira and Bhima and
Vibhatsu and the twins, are equally mighty and tough.'"


SECTION XLI

"Uttara said, 'It hath been heard by us that a corpse is tied in this
tree. How can I, therefore, being a prince by birth, touch it with my
hands? Born in the _Kshatriya_ order, and the son of a great king, and
always observant of _mantras_ and vows, it is not becoming of me to
touch it. Why shouldst thou, O Vrihannala, make me a polluted and
unclean bearer of corpses, by compelling me to come in contact with a
corpse?'

"Vrihannala said, 'Thou shalt, O king of kings, remain clean and
unpolluted. Do not fear, there are only bows in this tree and not
corpses. Heir to the king of the Matsyas, and born in a noble family,
why should I, O prince, make thee do such a reproachable deed?'"

Vaisampayana said, "Thus addressed by Partha, Virata's son, decked in
ear-rings, alighted from the car, and climbed up that _Sami_ tree
reluctantly. And staying on the car, Dhananjaya, that slayer of enemies,
said unto him, 'Speedily bring thou down those bows from the top of the
tree.' And cutting off their wrappings first and then the ropes with
which they were tied, the prince beheld the _Gandiva_ there along with
four other bows. And as they were untied, the splendour of those bows
radiant as the sun, began to shine with great effulgence like unto that
of the planets about the time of their rising. And beholding the forms
of those bows, so like unto sighing snakes, he become afflicted with
fear and in a moment the bristles of his body stood on their ends. And
touching those large bows of great splendour, Virata's son, O king, thus
spake unto Arjuna!"


SECTION XLII

"Uttara said, 'To what warrior of fame doth this excellent bow belong,
on which are a hundred golden bosses and which hath such radiant ends?
Whose is this excellent bow of good sides and easy hold, on the staff of
which shine golden elephants of such brightness? Whose is this excellent
bow, adorned with three scores of _Indragopakas_[43] of pure gold,
placed on the back of the staff at proper intervals? Whose is this
excellent bow, furnished with three golden suns of great effulgence,
blazing forth with such brilliancy? Whose is this beautiful bow which is
variegated with gold and gems, and on which are golden insects set with
beautiful stones? Whose are these arrows furnished with wing around,
numbering a thousand, having golden heads, and cased in golden quivers?
Who owneth these large shafts, so thick, furnished with vulturine wings
whetted on stone, yellowish in hue, sharp-pointed, well-tempered, and
entirely made of iron? Whose is this sable quiver,[44] bearing five
images of tigers, which holdeth shafts intermined with boar-eared arrows
altogether numbering ten? Whose are these seven hundred arrows, long and
thick, capable of drinking (the enemy's) blood, and looking like the
crescent-shaped moon?[45] Whose are these gold-crested arrows whetted on
stones, the lower halves of which are well-furnished with wings of the
hue of parrots' feather and the upper halves, of well-tempered
steels?[46] Whose is this excellent sword irresistible, and terrible to
adversaries, with the mark of a toad on it, and pointed like a toad's
head?[47] Cased in variegated sheath of tiger-skin, whose is this large
sword of excellent blade and variegated with gold and furnished with
tinkling bells? Whose is this handsome scimitar of polished blade and
golden hilt? Manufactured in the country of the _Nishadas_,
irresistible, incapable of being broken, whose is this sword of polished
blade in a scabbard of cow-skin? Whose is this beautiful and long sword,
sable in hue as the sky, mounted with gold, well-tempered, and cased in
a sheath of goat-skin? Who owneth this heavy, well-tempered, and broad
sword, just longer than the breadth of thirty fingers, polished by
constant clash with other's weapons and kept in a case of gold, bright
as fire? Whose is this beautiful scimitar of sable blade covered with
golden bosses, capable of cutting through the bodies of adversaries,
whose touch is as fatal as that of a venomous snake which is
irresistible and exciteth the terror of foes? Asked by me, O Vrihannala,
do thou answer me truly. Great is my wonder at the sight of all these
excellent objects.'"

    [43] Indian insects of a particular kind.

    [44] Most editions read _chapas_ which is evidently wrong. The
    correct reading is _avapas_, meaning quiver. The Burdwan Pandits
    give this latter reading.

    [45] Some read _chandrargha-darsanas_. The correct reading is
    _chandrardha-darsanas_.

    [46] Most editions read _hema-punkha_ and _silasita_ in the
    instrumental plural; the correct reading is their nominative
    plural forms.

    [47] _Sayaka_ means here, as explained by Nilakantha, a sword,
    and not a shaft.


SECTION XLIII

"Vrihannala said, 'That about which thou hath first enquired is Arjuna's
bow, of world-wide fame, called _Gandiva_, capable of devastating
hostile hosts. Embellished with gold, this _Gandiva_, the highest and
largest of all weapons belonged to Arjuna. Alone equal unto a hundred
thousand weapons, and always capable of extending the confines of
kingdoms, it is with this that Partha vanquisheth in battle both men and
celestials. Worshipped ever by the gods, the _Danavas_ and the
_Gandharvas_ and variegated with excellent colours, this large and
smooth bow is without a knot or stain anywhere. Shiva held it first for
a thousand years. Afterwards Prajapati held it for five hundred and
three years. After that Sakra, for five and eighty years. And then Soma
held it for five hundred years. And after that _Varuna_ held it for a
hundred years. And finally Partha, surnamed _Swetavahana,_[48] hath held
