
The Mutazilites expelled from power in Baghdad, still flourished at Basra
where one day the following incident occurred. Abu 'Ali Al-Jubbai, a
Mutazilite doctor, was lecturing to his students when Al-Ash'ari propounded
the following case to his master: "There were three brothers, one of whom
was a true believer, virtuous and pious; the second an infidel, a debauchee
and a reprobate; and the third an infant; they all died. What became of
them?" Al-Jubbai answered: "The virtuous brother holds a high station in
Paradise, the infidel is in the depths of hell, and the child is among
those who have obtained salvation." {129} "Suppose now," said Al-Ash'ari,
"that the child should wish to ascend to the place occupied by his virtuous
brother, would he be allowed to do so?" "No," replied Al-Jubbai, "it would
be said to him: 'thy brother arrived at this place through His numerous
works of obedience to God, and thou hast no such works to set forward.'"
"Suppose then," said Al-Ash'ari, "that the child should say: 'this is not
my fault, you did not let me live long enough, neither did you give me the
means of proving my obedience.'" "In that case," said Al-Jubbai, "the
Almighty would say: 'I knew that if I allowed thee to live, thou wouldest
have been disobedient and have incurred the punishment of hell: I acted,
therefore, for thy advantage.'" "Well," said Al-Ash'ari, "and suppose the
infidel brother were here to say: 'O God of the Universe! since Thou
knowest what awaited him, Thou must have known what awaited me; why then
didst Thou act for his advantage and not for mine?'"[115] Al-Jubbai was
silent, though very angry with his pupil, who was now convinced that the
Mutazilite dogma of man's free-will was false, and that God elects some for
mercy and some for punishment without any motive whatever. Disagreeing with
his teacher on this point, he soon began to find other points of
difference, and soon announced his belief that the Quran was not created.
This occurred on a Friday in the Great Mosque at Basra. Seated in his chair
he cried out in a loud voice: "They who know me know who I am; as for those
who do not know me I shall tell them; I am 'Ali Ibn Isma'il Al-Ash'ari, and
I used to hold that the Quran was created, that the eyes (of men) shall not
see God, and that we ourselves are the authors of our evil deeds; now, I
have returned to the truth: I renounce these opinions, and I take the
engagement to refute the Mutazilites and expose their infamy and
turpitude."[116]

He then, adopting scholastic methods, started a school of {130} thought of
his own, which was in the main a return to orthodoxy. The Ash'arian
doctrines differ slightly from the tenets of the Sifatians of which sect
Al-Ash'ari's disciples form a branch. The Ash'arians hold--

(i.) That the attributes of God are distinct from His essence, yet in such
a way as to forbid any comparison being made between God and His creatures.
They say they are not "_'ain_ nor _ghair_:" not of His essence, nor
distinct from it: _i.e.,_ they cannot be compared with any other things.

(ii.) That God has one eternal will from which proceed all things, the good
and the evil, the useful and the hurtful. The destiny of man was written on
the eternal table before the world was created. So far they go with the
Sifatians, but in order to preserve the moral responsibility of man they
say that he has power to convert will into action. But this power cannot
create anything new for then God's sovereignty would be impaired; so they
say that God in His providence so orders matters that whenever "a man
desires to do a certain thing, good or bad, the action corresponding to the
desire is, there and then, created by God, and, as it were, fitted on to
the desire." Thus it seems as if it came naturally from the will of the
man, whereas it does not. This action is called Kasb (acquisition) because
it is acquired by a special creative act of God. It is an act directed to
the obtaining of profit, or the removing of injury: the term is, therefore,
inapplicable to the Deity. Abu Bakr-al-Bakillani, a disciple of Al-Ash'ari,
says: "The essence or substance of the action is the effect of the power of
God, but its being an action of obedience, such as prayer, or an action of
disobedience, such as fornication, are qualities of the action, which
proceed from the power of man." The Imam Al-Haramain (419-478 A.H.) held
"that the actions of men were effected by the power which God has created
in man." Abu Ishaq al Isfarayain says: "That which maketh impression, or
hath influence on action, is a compound of the power of God and the power
of man." {131}

(iii.) They say that the word of God is eternal, though they acknowledge
that the vocal sounds used in the Quran, which is the manifestation of that
word, are created. They say, in short, that the Quran contains (1) the
eternal word which existed in the essence of God before time was; and (2)
the word which consists of sounds and combinations of letters. This last
they call the created word.

Thus Al-Ash'ari traversed the main positions of the Mutazilites, denying
that man can by the aid of his reason alone rise to the knowledge of good
and evil. He must exercise no judgment but accept all that is revealed. He
has no right to apply the moral laws which affect men to the actions of
God. It cannot be asserted by the human reason that the good will be
rewarded, or the bad punished in a future world. Man must always approach
God as a slave, in whom there is no light or knowledge to judge of the
actions of the Supreme. Whether God will accept the penitent sinner or not
cannot be asserted, for He is an absolute Sovereign, above all law.[117]

The opinions of the more irrational sub-divisions of the Sifatians need not
be entered into at any length.

The Mushabihites (or Assimilators), interpreting some of the mutashabih
verses literally, held that there is a resemblance between God and His
creatures; and that the Deity is capable of local motion, of ascending,
descending, &c. These they called "declarative attributes." The
Mujassimians (or Corporealists) declared God to be corporeal, by which some
of them meant, a self-subsisting body, whilst others declared the Deity to
be finite. They are acknowledged to be heretics.

{132}

The Jabrians gave great prominence to the denial of free agency in man, and
thus opposed the Mutazilites, who in this respect are Kadrians, that is,
they deny "Al-Kadr," God's absolute sovereignty, and recognize free will in
man.

These and various other sub-divisions are not now of much importance. The
Sunnis follow the teaching of Al-Ash'ari, whilst the Shi'ahs incline to
that of the Mutazilites.

Connected with the subject of the attributes of God is that of the names to
be used when speaking of Him. All sects agree in this, that the names "The
Living, the Wise, the Powerful, the Hearer, the Seer, the Speaker," &c.,
are to be applied to God; but the orthodox belief is that all such names
must be "tauqifi," that is dependent on some revelation. Thus it is not
lawful to apply a name to God expressive of one of His attributes, unless
there is some statement made, or order given by Muhammad to legalize it.
God is rightly called Shafi (Healer), but He cannot be called Tabib which
means much the same thing, for the simple reason that the word Tabib is
never applied in the Quran or the Traditions to God. In like manner the
term 'Alim (Knower) is lawful, but not so the expression 'Aqil (Wise). The
Mutazilites say that if, in the Quran or Traditions, there is any praise of
an attribute, then the adjective formed from the name of that attribute can
be applied to God even though the actual word does not occur in any
revelation. Al-Ghazzali (A.H. 450-505), who gave in the East the death-blow
to the Muslim philosophers, says: "The names of God not given in the Law,
if expressive of His glory, may be used of Him, but only as expressive of
His attributes, not of His nature." On the ground that it does not occur in
the Law, the Persian word "Khuda" has been objected to, an objection which
also holds good with regard to the use of such terms as God, Dieu, Gott,
&c. To this it is answered, that as "Khuda" means "one who comes by
himself" it is equivalent to the term Wajib-ul-Wajud, {133} "one who has
necessary existence," and therefore so long as it is not considered as the
"Ism-i-Zat (name of His nature) it may with propriety be used."[118]

The current belief now seems to be that the proper name equal to the term
Allah, current in a language, can be used, provided always that such a name
is not taken from the language of the Infidels; so God, Dieu, &c, still
remain unlawful. The names of God authorised by the Quran and Traditions
are, exclusive of the term Allah, ninety-nine in number. They are called
the Asma-i-Husna[119] (noble names); but in addition to these there are
many synonyms used on the authority of Ijma'. Such are Hanan, equal to
Rahim (Merciful) and Manan, "one who puts another under an obligation." In
the Tafsir-i-Bahr it is stated that there are three thousand names of God;
one thousand of which are known to angels; one thousand to prophets; whilst
one thousand are thus distributed, _viz._, in the Pentateuch there are
three hundred, in the Psalms three hundred, in the Gospels three hundred,
in the Quran ninety-nine, and one still hidden.

The following texts of the Quran are adduced to prove the nature of the
divine attributes:--

(1). Life. "There is no God but He, the Living, the Eternal." (Sura ii.
256). "Put thy trust in Him that liveth and dieth not." (Sura xxv. 60).

(2). Knowledge. "Dost thou not see that God knoweth all that is in the
heavens, and all that is in the earth." (Sura lviii. 8). "With Him are the
keys of the secret things; none knoweth them but He: He knoweth whatever is
on the land and in the sea; and no leaf falleth but He knoweth it; neither
is there a grain in the darknesses of the earth, nor a thing green or sere,
but it is noted in a distinct writing." (Sura vi. 59).

{134}

(3). Power. "If God pleased, of their ears and of their eyes would He
surely deprive them. Verily God is Almighty." (Sura ii. 19). "Is He not
powerful enough to quicken the dead." (Sura lxxv. 40). "God hath power over
all things." (Sura iii. 159.)

(4). Will. "God is worker of that He willeth." (Sura lxxxv. 16). "But if
God pleased, He would surely bring them, one and all, to the guidance."
(Sura vi. 35). "God misleadeth whom He will, and whom He will He
guideth--God doeth His pleasure." (Sura xiv. 4, 32).

As this attribute is closely connected with the article of the Creed which
refers to Predestination, the different opinions regarding it will be
stated under that head.

There has never been any difference of opinion as to the existence of these
four attributes so clearly described in the Quran: the difference is with
regard to the mode of their existence and their operation. There is, first,
the ancient Sifatian doctrine that the attributes are eternal and of the
essence of God: secondly, the Mutazilite theory that they are not eternal;
and, thirdly, the Ash'arian dogma that they are eternal, but distinct from
His essence.

There is also great difference of opinion with regard to the next three
attributes--hearing, sight, speech. For the existence of the two first of
these the following verses are quoted, "He truly heareth and knoweth all
things." (Sura xliv. 5). "No vision taketh in Him, but He taketh in all
vision." (Sura vi. 103).

The use of the terms sitting, rising, &c., hands, face, eyes, and so on,
gave rise as I have shown to several sub-divisions of the Sifatians.
Al-Ghazzali says: "He sits upon His throne after that manner which He has
Himself described and in that sense which He Himself means, which is a
sitting far remote from any notion of contact or resting upon, or local
situation." This is the Ash'arian idea, but between the Ash'arians and
those who fell into the error of the {135} Mujassimians,[120] there was
another school. The followers of Imam Ibn Hanbal say that such words
represent the attributes existing in God. The words "God sits on His
throne" mean that He has the power of sitting. Thus, they say, "We keep the
literal meaning of the words, we allow no figurative interpretation. To do
so is to introduce a dangerous principle of interpretation, for the
negation of the apparent sense of a passage may tend to weaken the
authority of revelation. At the same time we do not pretend to explain the
act, for it is written: 'There is none like unto Him.' (Sura cxii.) 'Nought
is there like Him.' (Sura xlii. 9.) 'Unworthy the estimate they form of
God.'" (Sura xxii. 73.) To prove that God occupies a place they produce the
following Tradition: "Ibn-al-Hakim wished to give liberty to a female slave
Saouda and consulted the Prophet about it. Muhammad said to her, 'Where is
God?' 'In heaven,' she replied. 'Set her at liberty, she is a true
believer.'" Not, say the Commentators, because she believed that God
occupied a place but because she took the words in their literal
signification. The Shi'ahs consider it wrong to attribute to God movement,
quiescence, &c, for these imply the possession of a body. They hold, too,
in opposition to the orthodox that God will never be seen, for that which
is seen is limited by space.

The seventh attribute--speech--has been fruitful of a very long and
important controversy connected with the nature of the Quran, for the word
"Kalam" means not mere speech, but revelation and every other mode of
communicating intelligence. Al-Ghazzali says:--

    "He doth speak, command, forbid, promise, and threaten by an eternal
    ancient word, subsisting in His essence. Neither is it like to the word
    of the creatures, nor doth it consist in a voice arising from the
    commotion of the air and the collision of bodies, nor letters {136}
    which are separated by the joining together of the lips or the motion
    of the tongue. The Quran, the Law, the Gospel and the Psalter are books
    sent down by Him to His Apostles, and the Quran, indeed, is read with
    tongues written in books, and is kept in hearts; yet, as subsisting in
    the essence of God, it doth not become liable to separation and
    division whilst it is transferred into the hearts and on to paper. Thus
    Moses also heard the word of God without voice or letter, even as the
    saints behold the essence of God without substance or accident."

The orthodox believe that God is really a speaker: the Mutazilites deny
this, and say that He is only called a speaker because He is the originator
of words and sounds.

They also bring the following objections to bear against the doctrine of
the eternity of the Quran. (1) It is written in Arabic, it descended, is
read, is heard, and is written. It was the subject of a miracle. It is
divided into parts and some verses are abrogated by others. (2) Events are
described in the past tense, but if the Quran had been eternal the future
tense would have been used. (3) The Quran contains commands and
prohibitions; if it is eternal who were commanded and who were admonished?
(4) If it has existed from eternity it must exist to eternity, and so even
in the last day, and in the next world, men will be under the obligation of
performing the same religious duties as they do now, and of keeping all the
outward precepts of the law. (5) If the Quran is eternal, then there are
two eternals.

The position thus assailed was not at first a hard and fast dogma of Islam.
It was more a speculative opinion than anything else, but the opposition of
the Mutazilites soon led all who wished to be considered orthodox to become
not only stout assertors of the eternity of the Quran, but to give up their
lives in defence of what they believed to be true. The Mutazilites by
asserting the subjective nature of the Quranic inspiration brought the book
itself within the reach of criticism. This was too much for orthodox Islam
to bear even though the Khalif Mamun in the {137} year 212 A.H. issued a
fatva declaring that all who asserted the eternity of the Quran were guilty
of heresy. Some six years after this, the Imam Ahmad Ibn Hanbal was
severely beaten, and then imprisoned because he refused to assent to the
truth of the decree issued by the Khalif. Al Buwaiti, a famous disciple of
As-Shafa'i, used an ingenious argument to fortify his own mind when being
punished by the order of the Khalif. He was taken all the way from Cairo to
Baghdad and told to confess that the Quran was created. On his refusal, he
was imprisoned at Baghdad and there remained in chains till the day of his
death. As Ar-Rabi Ibn Sulaiman says: "I saw Al Buwaiti mounted on a mule:
round his neck was a wooden collar, on his legs were fetters, from these to
the collar extended an iron chain to which was attached a clog weighing
fifty pounds. Whilst they led him on he continued repeating these words,
'Almighty God created the world by means of the word _Be!_ Now, if that
word was created, one created thing would have created another.'"[121] Al
Buwaiti here refers to the verse, "Verily our speech unto a thing when we
will the same, is that we only say to it, 'Be,' and it is,--Kun fayakuna."
(Sura xxxvi. 82). This, in the way Al Buwaiti applied it, is a standing
argument of the orthodox to prove the eternity of the Quran.

When times changed men were put to death for holding the opposite opinion.
The Imam As-Shafa'i held a public disputation in Baghdad with Hafs, a
Mutazilite preacher, on this very point. Shafa'i quoted the verse, "God
said _be, and it was_," and asked, "Did not God create all things by the
word _be?_" Hafs assented. "If then the Quran was created, must not the
word _be_ have been created with it?" Hafs could not deny so plain a
proposition. "Then," said Shafa'i, "All things, according to you, were
created by a created being, which is a gross inconsistency and manifest
{138} impiety." Hafs was reduced to silence, and such an effect had
Shafa'i's logic on the audience that they put Hafs to death as a pestilent
heretic. Thus did the Ash'arian opinions on the subject of the Divine
attributes again gain the mastery.[122]

The Mutazilites failed, and the reason why is plain. They were, as a rule,
influenced by no high spiritual motives; often they were mere quibblers.
They sought no light in an external revelation. Driven to a reaction by the
rigid system they combated, they would have made reason alone their chief
guide. The nobler spirits among them were impotent to regenerate the faith
they professed to follow. It was, however, a great movement, and at one
time, it threatened to change the whole nature of Islam. This period of
Muslim history, famed as that in which the effort was made to cast off the
fetters of the rigid system which Islam was gradually tightening by the
increased authority given to traditionalism, and to the refinements of the
four Imams, was undoubtedly a period of, comparatively speaking, high
civilization. Baghdad, the capital of the Khalifate, was a busy, populous,
well-governed city. This it mainly owed to the influence of the Persian
family of the Barmecides, one of whom was Vizier to the Khalif
Harun-ur-Rashid. Harun's fame as a good man is quite undeserved. It is true
that he was a patron of learning, that his Empire was extensive, that he
gained many victories, that his reign was the culminating point of Arab
grandeur. But for all that, he was a morose despot, a cruel man, thoroughly
given up to pleasures of a very questionable nature. Drunkenness and
debauchery were common at court. Plots and intrigues were ever at work.
Such was the state of one of the greatest, if not the greatest, periods
{139} of Muslim rule. This, too, was at a time most favourable for the
development of any good which Islam might have possessed. It should be
remembered that whatever glory is rightly attached to this period is
connected with an epoch when heresy was specially prevalent, when orthodoxy
was weak in Baghdad. The culture of the time was in spite of, not on
account of, the influence of orthodox Islam.

2. ANGELS.--Of this article of the creed Muhammad Al-Berkevi says:--

    "We must confess that God has angels who act according to His order and
    who do not rebel against Him. They neither eat nor drink, nor is there
    amongst them any difference of sex. Some are near the throne of God;
    those are His messengers. Each one has his particular work. Some are on
    earth, some in heaven, some are always standing, some always prostrate
    themselves and some laud and praise God. Others have charge of men and
    record all their actions. Some angels are high in stature and are
    possessed of great power. Such an one is Gabriel (Jibra,il) who in the
    space of one hour can descend from heaven to earth, and who with one
    wing can lift up a mountain.

    We must believe in 'Izra,il who receives the souls of men when they
    die, and in Israfil into whose charge is committed the trumpet. This
    trumpet he has actually in his hand, and placed to his mouth ready to
    blow when God gives the order. When he receives that order he will blow
    such a terrible blast that all living things will die.[123] This is the
    commencement of the last day. The world will remain in this state of
