
"You, Haljan?"

Prince shouted, "I have made him yield. He will obey you if you stop
that torture."

I think that poor Snap must have fainted. He was silent. I called,
"Stop! I will do what you command."

Miko jeered, "That is good. A bargain, if you and Dean obey me. Disarm
him, Prince, and bring him out."

       *       *       *       *       *

Miko moved back into the helio-room. On the deck Coniston was advancing,
but cautiously, mistrustful of me.

"Gregg."

George Prince flung a leg over the casement and leaped lightly into the
dim chart-room. His small slender figure stood beside me, clung to me.

"Gregg."

A moment, while we stood there together. No ray was upon us. Coniston
could not see us, nor could he hear our whispers.

"Gregg."

A different voice; its throaty, husky quality gone. A soft pleading.
"Gregg--

"Gregg, don't you know me? Gregg, dear...."

Why, what was this? Not George Prince? A masquerader, yet so like George
Prince.

"Gregg, don't you know me?"

Clinging to me. A soft touch upon my arm. Fingers, clinging. A surge of
warm, tingling current was flowing between us.

My sweep of instant thoughts. A speck of human Earth-dust, falling free.
That was George Prince, who had been killed. George Prince's body,
disguised by the scheming Carter and Dr. Frank, buried in the guise of
his sister. And this black-robed figure who was trying to help us--

"Anita! Dear God! Anita, darling! Anita!"

"Gregg, dear one!"

"Anita! Dear God!"

       *       *       *       *       *

My arms went around her, my lips pressed hers, and felt her tremulous,
eager answer.

"Gregg, dear."

"Anita, you!"

The form of Coniston showed at our window. She cast me off. She said,
with her throaty swagger of assumed masculinity:

"I have him, Sir Arthur. He will obey us."

I sensed her warning glance. She shoved me toward the window. She said
ironically, "Have no fear, Haljan. You will not be tortured, you and
Dean, if you obey our commands."

Coniston gripped me. "You fool! You caused us a lot of trouble, didn't
you? Move along there!"

He jerked me roughly through the window. Marched me the length of the
deck. Out to the stern-space; opened the door of my cubby; flung me in
and sealed the door upon me.

"Miko will come presently."

I stood in the darkness of my tiny room, listening to his retreating
footsteps. But my mind was not on him....

All the Universe in that instant had changed for me. Anita was alive!

(_To be continued_)


FOOTNOTES:

  [1] As early as 1910 it was discovered that an object magnetized under
      certain conditions was subject to a loss of weight, its gravity
      partially nullified. The Martel discovery undoubtedly followed
      that method.

  [2] "United States of the World," which came into being in 2057 upon the
      centenary of the Yellow War.

  [3] Trinight Hour, i.e., 3 A. M.

  [4] Pressure sickness. Caused by the difficulty of maintaining a
      constantly normal air pressure within the vessel owing to the
      sudden, extreme changes from heat to cold.

  [5] "Set and Setta," the Martian equivalent of Mr. and Miss.

  [6] A Venus form of jocular, intimate greeting.

       *       *       *       *       *

  _REMEMBER_
  ASTOUNDING STORIES
  _Appears on Newsstands_
  THE FIRST THURSDAY IN EACH MONTH

       *       *       *       *       *

_In the Next Issue_

  MONSTERS of MOYEN

  _A Complete Novelet of a Half-God Half-Beast's Extraordinary Attempt
  to Dominate the Earth_
  _By_ Arthur J. Burks


  _A Large Instalment of_

  BRIGANDS of the MOON

  _The Splendid Interplanetary Novel_
  _By_ Ray Cummings


  The RAY of MADNESS

  _The Account of Another of Dr. Bird's Amazing Exploits_
  _By_ Captain S. P. Meek

  --_And Many Other Stories by Your Favorite Authors!_

       *       *       *       *       *




The Soul Master

_By Will Smith and R. J. Robbins_

    Desperately O'Hara plunged into Prof. Kell's mysterious mansion.
    For his friend Skip was the victim of the eccentric scientist's
    de-astralizing experiment, and faced a fate more hideous than
    death.

[Illustration: _A terrific force was emanating from that devilish globe
above._]


The train was slowing down for Keegan. A whistle from the locomotive
ahead had warned the two alert young men in the smoker to that effect,
and they arose to leave the train. Both were neatly and quietly dressed.
One carried a medium-sized camera with the necessary tripod and
accessory satchel. The other carried no impediments of any sort. Both
were smoking cigars, evidently not of expensive variety, judging by the
unaromatic atmosphere thereabouts.

"Can't see what Bland shipped us up to this one-horse dump for,"
grumbled Skip Handlon, the one who carried the camera. He was the
slighter of the two and perhaps half a head shorter than the other. "Do
you know anything about it?"

"Not much," confessed the other as they alighted from the smoker. "All I
can tell you is that Bland sent for me early this morning, told me to
get a story out of this Professor Kell and to drag you along. After we
get there you are to do as judgment dictates. But I remember that the
Chief was specific as regards one thing. You are to get the proff's mug.
Don't forget. The old fellow may growl and show fight, but it's up to
you to deliver the goods--or, in this case, get them. Don't depend on me
for help. I expect to have troubles of my own." Thus gloomed Horace
Perry, star reporter for the Journal.

"This Keegan place"--Handlon was using his eyes swiftly and
comprehensively--"isn't worth much. Can't see how it manages to even
rate a name. Some dump, all right!"

"You said a couple mouthfuls."

"How's the train service, if any?"

"Rotten. Two trains a day." The other was anything but enthusiastic.
"We've a nice long wait for the next one, you can bet. Now, just add to
that a rough reception after we reach the old lion's lair and you get a
nice idea of what Bland expects from his men."

       *       *       *       *       *

Handlon made a wry face at this. "The bird who first applied the words
'Hard Boiled' to the Chief's monniker knew something."

"You don't know the half of it," retorted Perry encouragingly. "Just
wait and see what a beaut of a fit he can throw for _your_ benefit if
you fail to do your stuff--and I don't mean maybe."

Old Man Bland owned the Journal, hired and fired his crew and did his
own editing, with the help of as capable an office gang as could be
gotten together. It is quite possible that "Hard Boiled" Bland demanded
more from his men than any other editor ever has before or since.
Nevertheless he got results, and none of his experienced underlings ever
kicked, for the pay was right. If a hapless scribe had the temerity to
enter the editorial sanctum with a negative report, the almost
invariable reply had been a glare and a peremptory order, "Get the
copy."

And get it they did. If a person refused an interview these clever
fellows generally succeeded in getting their information from the next
most reliable source, and it arrived in print just the same.

Of such a breed was Perry. Handlon, being a more recent acquisition to
the staff, was not yet especially aggressive in his work. On this
account the former took keen zest in scaring him into displaying a bit
more sand.

       *       *       *       *       *

The train had disappeared around a bend and the two reporters felt
themselves marooned. Keegan, without question, was a most forlorn
looking spot. A dismal shanty, much the worse for weather, stood beside
the track. In front, a few rotting planks proclaimed that once upon a
time the place had boasted a real freight platform. Probably, back in
some long-forgotten age, a station agent had also held forth in the
rickety shanty. A sign hung on each end of the crumbling structure on
which could still be deciphered the legend "KEEGAN." On the opposite
side of the track was an old, disused siding. The only other feature of
interest thereabouts was a well traveled country road which crossed the
tracks near the shanty, wound sinuously over a rock-strewn hill and
became lost in the mazes of an upland forest.

There being no signboard of any kind to indicate their destination, the
two, after a moment's hesitation, started off briskly in a chance
direction. The air was hot and sultry, and in the open spaces the sun
beat down mercilessly upon the two hapless ones. As they proceeded into
the depths of the forest they were shielded somewhat from the worst of
the heat. Gradually upon their city-bred nostrils there stole the odor
of conifers, accompanied by a myriad of other forest odors. Both sniffed
the air appreciatively.

"This is sure the life," remarked Perry. "If I weren't so darn thirsty
now...." He became lost in mournful thought.

       *       *       *       *       *

A considerable time passed. The newspaper men trudged wearily along
until finally another bend brought them to the beginning of a steep
descent. The forest had thinned out to nothing.

"Seems to me I smell smoke," blurted out Handlon suddenly. "Must be that
we are approaching the old party's lair. Remember? Bland said that
he--"

"Uh huh!" the other grunted, almost inaudibly. Now that they seemed to
be arriving at their destination something had occurred to him. He had
fished from his pocket a sheaf of clippings and was perusing them
intently. "Bland said, 'Get the copy'," he muttered irrelevantly and
half to himself.

The clippings all related directly to Professor Kell or to happenings
local to Keegan. Some were of peculiar interest. The first one was
headlined thus:

    MYSTERIOUS DISAPPEARANCE OF ROBERT MANION AND DAUGHTER STILL
    UNSOLVED

The piece contained a description of the missing man, a fairly
prosperous banker who had been seen four days previously driving through
Keegan in a small roadster, and one of the girl, who was in the car with
him. It told that the banker and his daughter were last seen by a farmer
named Willetts who lived in a shack on the East Keegan road, fleeing
before a bad thunder storm. He believed the pair were trying to make the
Kell mansion ahead of the rain. Nothing more of the Manions or their car
had been seen, and their personal effects remained at their hotel in a
nearby village unclaimed. The heavy rain had of course effectually
obliterated all wheel tracks.

Another clipping was fairly lengthy, but Perry glanced only at the
headlines:

    KELL STILL CARRYING ON HIS STRANGE EXPERIMENTS

    Has Long Been Known to Have Fantastic Theories. Refuses to
    Divulge Exact Methods Employed, or Nature of Results

Still another appeared to be an excerpt from an article in an
agricultural paper. It read:

    A prize bull belonging to Alton Shepard, a Keegan cattle
    breeder, has created considerable sensation by running amuck in
    a most peculiar manner. While seemingly more intelligent than
    heretofore, it has developed characteristics known to be utterly
    alien to this type of animal.

    Perhaps the most noteworthy feature of the case is the refusal
    of the animal to eat its accustomed food. Instead it now
    consumes enormous quantities of meat. The terrific bellow of
    the animal's voice has also undergone a marked change, now
    resembling nothing earthly, although some have remarked that it
    could be likened to the bay of an enormous hound. Some of its
    later actions have seemingly added further canine attributes,
    which make the matter all the more mystifying. Veterinaries are
    asking why this animal should chase automobiles, and why it
    should carry bones in its mouth and try to bury them!

The last one read in part:

    Professor Kell has been questioned by authorities at Keegan
    relative to the disappearance there last Tuesday of Robert
    Manion and his daughter. Kell seemed unable to furnish clues of
    any value, but officials are not entirely satisfied with the
    man's attitude toward the questions.

Somewhat bewildered by these apparently unrelated items, the reporter
remained lost in thought for quite a space, the while he endeavored to
map out his course of action when he should meet the redoubtable
Professor. That many of the weird occurrences could be traced in some
way to the latter's door had evidently occurred to Bland. Furthermore,
the Old Man relied implicitly upon Perry to get results.

It must be said that for once the star reporter was not overly
enthusiastic with the assignment. Certain rumors aside from the
clippings in his hand had produced in his mind a feeling of uneasiness.
So far as his personal preference was concerned he would have been well
satisfied if some cub reporter had been given the job. Try as he would,
however, he could offer no tangible reason for the sudden wariness.

He was aroused from his absorption by his companion.

"Thought I smelled smoke a while back, and I was right. That's the
house up in the edge of the pines. Deep grounds in front and all gone to
seed; fits the description exactly. Thank Heaven we struck off from the
