spiders and tarantulas.

But the thing that dominated the laboratory was the machine on the
long table against the wall. Its chamber, the most striking feature,
was a cube of roughly six feet, built of dull material resembling
bakelite. Wires trailed through it from the glittering plate, which
was the chamber's floor, and a curved spray-shaped projector overhead,
to an intricately constructed apparatus studded with vacuum tubes. A
small switchboard stood beside the chamber, and from it thick cables
led to the generator in the rear of the room.

"Let us return her to normal," Hagendorff rumbled after a moment or
two devoted to prodding and examining the diminutive cat. "Then for
the final experiment."

One whole wall of the cubical chamber was a hinged door, with a tier
of several peep-holes. Garth Howard swung the door open, placed the
tiny, struggling cat inside and quickly closed it again. "Right," he
said briefly, and pressed his eyes to the bottom peep-hole.

       *       *       *       *       *

A switch was pulled over, and the dynamo's drone pulsed through the
room. Hagendorff's fingers rested on a large lever that jutted from
the switchboard. Slowly, he pulled it to one side.

The imprisoned cat, small as a rat, had been nervously whipping its
tail from side to side and meowing plaintively; but, as the lever
swung over, there came a change. The vacuum tubes behind the
switchboard glowed green; a bright white ray poured from the spray in
the chamber, making the metal plate below a shimmering, almost molten
thing. The animal's legs suddenly braced on it; its narrowed eyes
widened, glazing weirdly, while the tail became a stiff, bristling
ramrod. And, as a balloon swells from a strong breath, the cat's body
increased in size. It grew not in spurts, but with a smooth, flowing
rhythm: grew as easily as a flower unfolding beneath the sun.

In only a few seconds its original size was attained. Howard raised
his hand; the lever shot back and the white beam faded into
nothingness. A full sized and very angry cat tore around the inside of
the chamber.

"Normal?" Hagendorff questioned. The other nodded and prepared to open
the door.

"Wait! She always was a little undersized; I give her a few inches
more as a reward."

"Not too much," warned Garth. "She's got a nasty temper; we don't
want a wildcat prowling round here!"

The white beam flashed, the tubes glowed and almost instantly
flickered off again. When the chamber's door was opened, an indignant
and slightly oversized cat bounded through, leaped from the table with
a squawled oath of hatred and streaked into the front room of the
cabin.

       *       *       *       *       *

Garth turned and faced Hagendorff, a smile on his lips and a gleam in
his eyes. He ran his fingers through his black hair.

"Well," he said, "now it's time for the final experiment. Who shall it
be?"

Hagendorff did not answer at once, and the American went on:

"I think it'd better be me. There's a slight risk, of course, and I,
as the inventor, could never ask an assistant to do anything I
wouldn't. Is it all right with you?"

Hagendorff nodded quickly in answer. Garth stood reflecting for a
moment.

"Guinea pigs, rabbits and insects have survived reduction to
one-twentieth normal size," he said slowly. "It should be safe for the
human body to descend just as far. But stop me at about two feet this
first time. I'm not taking any chances; I want to be alive and kicking
when I announce the success of my experiments to the scientific
world."

His assistant said nothing.

"Well, here goes," Garth added. "I'd better take off my clothes if I
don't want to be buried in them. They're not affected by the process.
Must be because of the lack of organic connection between their fibers
and the human body."

A few minutes later, nude, he jumped onto the laboratory table. He
presented a perfect specimen of well-developed manhood as he stood
before the door of the chamber. His smooth skin, under which the
rounded muscles rolled easily, gleamed white beneath the glare of the
floodlight. His gray eyes glanced at the stolid assistant, who already
had one hand on the switchboard's lever. Garth saw that the hand was
trembling slightly, and smiled as he realized Hagendorff was as
excited as he. He said:

"I'll leave the door ajar, so you can more easily watch every phase of
the reduction. If it's painful--well, I guess I can stand anything a
cat can!"

Then, stooping slightly, Garth stepped in and drew the door almost
shut.

       *       *       *       *       *

He relaxed as much as possible from the tremendous excitement that
filled him, and nodded at Hagendorff.

"I'm ready," he said. "Go ahead!"

The ray came to his body as the crash of thunder comes to the ear. His
nerves leaped as it struck and enveloped him. He felt as if he were
entombed in ice, and yet his veins were aflame. Fiery shafts fanged
him all through and resolved, presently, into a measured, tingling
beat.

His thoughts raced. He knew that those minute particles of matter, the
atoms of his body, were being compacted; he sensed that his legs were
rigid, his body stiff, his eyes clamped ahead in a glazed stare. He
was only half-conscious of the objects outside, but the dim sight of
them was fantastic and nauseous.

There was Hagendorff's face peering in at him--growing! Swelling as
the cat's body had swollen; and yet receding and rising until Garth,
momentarily forgetting that he was the one whose size was changing,
thought that the man's titanic body would fill the room. But the room
was growing, too: the stools were becoming leviathans of wood, the
walls were like cliffs, the compact switchboard was a large surface
of black, and the chamber in which he stood grew into a high-roofed
vault, its sides shooting up and retreating as if shoved by invisible
hands.

And still he sank, and still the terrible light devoured him.

Suddenly a delirious sensation engulfed him; his senses went reeling
away, and he staggered. Then with a wrench he came to. As he regained
control of his mind he knew the lever had been switched off and the
process completed.

He found that he was gasping. He passed a hand over his sweat-studded
face and looked around.

       *       *       *       *       *

Outside was the room of a giant. And in a moment a giant became
visible. His vast bulk filled the chamber's doorway; his mammoth face
peered in. Garth's eardrums quivered from a deep bass rumble, sounding
like thunder on a distant horizon.

"Are you all right, Howard?"

A finger half the length of his own arm reached forward and prodded
him. For a second Garth could do nothing but stare at it. It brought
home to him starkly the puny size of his body, only two feet in
height. He felt suddenly afraid. But that was foolish, he thought; and
he laughed, his voice ludicrously high and shrill.

"I'm all right," he cried. "But I can hardly understand you. If I were
much smaller, I probably couldn't--your voice'd seem so deep. Gangway,
Hagendorff, I'm coming out!"

His eyes were just below the level of the giant's shoulders. He
stepped from the black chamber and stared amazedly at the room, at the
chairs, the objects in it--at the laboratory table on which he was
standing, along which he might have sprinted thirty yards. A surge of
exultant animal spirits flowed through him. His dream had become a
reality; the machine had passed its last test! His body was sound and
whole; he felt perfectly natural; he had not changed, save in size;
and in size he was like Gulliver, confronted with a Brobdingnagian
room!

He hurdled a five-inch-high box of tools, ran down the creaking table
and stood laughing in front of a rack of test tubes half as high as he
was. Three strides took Hagendorff opposite him; and from above the
thunderous voice rumbled:

"What were your sensations?"

"Probably as close as man'll ever get to the feelings of a spark of
electricity!" the midget replied. "But bearable, though I was freezing
and burning at the same time. My body was rigid, paralyzed--just like
the animals we used. I couldn't move."

"You're sure you couldn't move? You were helpless?"

       *       *       *       *       *

The booming voice throbbed with sudden interest. Garth looked up
curiously. "No," he repeated. "I couldn't move. But lift me down,
Hagendorff. I want to take a walk on the floor."

A hand wrapped around his body, tensed and strained upwards. The
two-foot-high man was not quite pulled off the table. Then Hagendorff
grunted and relaxed his grasp.

"I had forgotten," he rumbled. "Your weight remains the same. You are
one-third my size, yet you weigh almost as much as I do. Weight, which
is the sum of the mass of all the atoms in you, is not, naturally,
affected by compacting those atoms."

It was only by a great effort that he was able to deposit the manikin
on the floor.

For a while Garth strolled around, savoring to their full the
fantastic sensations his diminished stature gave him, at once amused
and somehow frightened by the overwhelming size of the laboratory. To
his eyes, the tables were like bridges; Hagendorff's broad figure
loomed monstrously over him, and the guinea pigs and rabbits in their
cages seemed as big as fair-sized dogs. With a grin, he looked up at
the giant who was his assistant.

"Think I'll make the return trip, and give you a chance," he said.
"I've had my share, and the process has been proven. It's weird, being
down in this new world all alone. I'd hate to think what would happen
if a rat came along!"

Silently, Hagendorff stooped and grasped him again. But Garth, when he
stood once more inside the chamber, regarded his huge, rough-moulded
face curiously.

"Say," he said, puzzled, "your hands are trembling like the devil!
What's wrong? You're more nervous than I am!"

Hagendorff did not answer. He advanced to the switchboard. His
narrowed, deep-set eyes shot a quick glance at the small, nude man
inside the chamber, and for a second one hand hovered over the lever
on the panel.

       *       *       *       *       *

In that tense second a flash of intuition, of deadly fear, came to
Garth Howard, and he leaped wildly forward. But his rear foot did not
leave the floor of the chamber, and his shout of alarm was choked
midway. Again the fierce ray paralyzed every muscle in him, and he was
locked motionless where he was.

Helplessly, his glazed eyes stared at Hagendorff, while every moment
his rigid little body melted downwards. He was becoming rapidly
smaller, not larger!

Through the agony of the stabbing electrical waves, in vain Garth
tried to wrench his legs free. The few inches that separated him from
the door were an impassable barrier. Sheer panic clutched him. He was
trapped. But why? Why had Hagendorff tricked him?

As if reading the question, the giant outside came close to the
chamber's door and regarded his captive with eyes that were lit by a
peculiar flame. He grunted, then reached backward and returned the
switchboard lever almost to the neutral point, reducing the speed of
the decreasing process.

"Yes, that is better," the German gloated, in a deep, satisfied tone.
"It will be slower, now. Slower--and more interesting to watch!... I
fancy your eyes are reproachful, my friend. Why have I done it, you
wonder? _Ach!_ This machine, it will startle the world of science; it
will make its inventor famous--not? Yes; and did you think I was going
to stand by and see all the credit go to you? No! To me it shall
go--me alone! And you--" He chuckled and rubbed his hands before going
on.

"You shall be what the newspapers call a martyr to science. You shall
sink to a foot, to six inches--to one inch--even less, I think!
Eventually the reduction will kill you, of course; and your body shall
be proof of how you died--in an experiment--and shall also prove the
machine's power and my genius!"

       *       *       *       *       *

He laughed thunderously, a blond and malevolent titan. He did not
notice that, with the lessening of the reduction's speed, a slight
trace of control over his muscles had returned to the midget inside.
His tiny body was slowly diminishing, and complete, hopeless paralysis
and death was not far away. But Garth was fighting every second,
fighting desperately with the trace of strength he possessed to slide
to the door, break the contact and get out from under the ray's
remorseless influence. Almost imperceptibly, the effort lacerating
him with pain, he slid his feet forward. Hagendorff talked on. He
seemed to be blinded by the vision of the fame his treachery would
bring him.

"We shall have an experiment, my Professor; and then you will have an
interesting death! The ray will suck you down; you will crumple and
crumple till you're not much bigger than my thumbnail! And then I
shall--_ah!_"

Garth had torn loose. Calling on every ounce of strength and will, the
midget, now no more than one foot high, had reached the edge of the
floor plate and pitched out onto the long laboratory table.

Giant and dwarf faced each other. For a moment neither spoke or moved.
A breathless tensity hung over the laboratory. The machine droned on,
forgotten. From outside, startlingly near, came the eery hoot of an
owl.

A tight smile broke through the angry surprise on Hagendorff's face.
"Well, well!" he said, with gargantuan, macabre humor. "We object! It
was foolish, eh, to reduce the power? Next time, it shall not be so.
We--_object!_"

With the word, he lunged, and his bulky arms lashed down in a wide,
grasping sweep.

But Garth's taut muscles, retaining all the strength and vigor of
their normal size had been awaiting just such a move, and his tiny
body described the arc of a tremendous leap that neatly vaulted one
huge arm and started him sprinting swiftly down the table.

       *       *       *       *       *

At the end he wheeled, and before the other overcame his surprise at
such a nimble retreat, burst out indignantly:

"For God's sake, Hagendorff, what's come over you? Be sensible! You
can't do this; you can't really mean it! Why--"

"So!" roared the assistant, and his rush cut short the midget's
shrill, frantic words. But his grasp this time was better judged;
Garth felt the great fingers slip over his body. Remembering his
strength, he lashed out at one with all his might. Hagendorff grunted
with pain; but instead of continuing the attack, he suddenly turned
and strode to the door leading into the other room, and closed it with
a bang.

"You cannot escape," he growled, advancing again; "you merely delay."

Panting, Garth glanced around the room. He was, in truth, trapped.
There was but the one door; and even if he could reach it, he could
not get it open, for the handle would be far above him. The room was a
sealed arena. For a little while it would go on--a wild leaping and
dodging on the table, a hopeless evading of mammoth hands ... and
then, inevitably, would come a crushing grip on his body, followed by
experimentation and the agony of death in the black chamber.

Fearful, he waited, a perfect, living statuette, twelve inches
high....

A grunt preluded the giant's vicious charge. The American staggered
from the brush of a sweeping hand; then, twisting mightily, he dove
under it, like a mouse slipping under the paw of a cat. In doing so he
fell sprawling; and though he was up in a moment, his arm was held. A
hoarse, exultant rumble came to his ears.

"Caught, my friend!"

But Hagendorff spoke too soon. With a great wrench, Garth broke free,
