The Project Gutenberg EBook of Disturbing Sun, by Robert Shirley Richardson

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Disturbing Sun

Author: Robert Shirley Richardson

Release Date: January 3, 2008 [EBook #24150]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DISTURBING SUN ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Bruce Albrecht, Mary Meehan and
the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net









                            DISTURBING SUN

                           By PHILIP LATHAM

                         Illustrated by Freas

[Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced from Astounding Science
Fiction May 1959. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that
the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]




     _This, be it understood, is fiction--nothing but fiction--and not,
     under any circumstances, to be considered as having any truth
     whatever to it. It's obviously utterly impossible ... isn't it?_


_An interview with Dr. I. M. Niemand, Director of the Psychophysical
Institute of Solar and Terrestrial Relations, Camarillo, California._

_In the closing days of December, 1957, at the meeting of the American
Association for the Advancement of Science in New York, Dr. Niemand
delivered a paper entitled simply, "On the Nature of the Solar
S-Regions." Owing to its unassuming title the startling implications
contained in the paper were completely overlooked by the press. These
implications are discussed here in an exclusive interview with Dr.
Niemand by Philip Latham._

LATHAM. Dr. Niemand, what would you say is your main job?

NIEMAND. I suppose you might say my main job today is to find out all I
can between activity on the Sun and various forms of activity on the
Earth.

LATHAM. What do you mean by activity on the Sun?

NIEMAND. Well, a sunspot is a form of solar activity.

LATHAM. Just what is a sunspot?

NIEMAND. I'm afraid I can't say just what a sunspot is. I can only
describe it. A sunspot is a region on the Sun that is cooler than its
surroundings. That's why it looks dark. It isn't so hot. Therefore not
so bright.

LATHAM. Isn't it true that the number of spots on the Sun rises and
falls in a cycle of eleven years?

NIEMAND. The number of spots on the Sun rises and falls in a cycle of
_about_ eleven years. That word _about_ makes quite a difference.

LATHAM. In what way?

NIEMAND. It means you can only approximately predict the future course
of sunspot activity. Sunspots are mighty treacherous things.

