Project Gutenberg's Retrospection and Introspection, by Mary Baker Eddy

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Retrospection and Introspection

Author: Mary Baker Eddy

Release Date: September 23, 2005 [EBook #16734]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK RETROSPECTION AND INTROSPECTION ***




Produced by Justin Gillbank, Josephine Paolucci and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net










RETROSPECTION

AND

INTROSPECTION


BY

MARY BAKER EDDY

AUTHOR OF SCIENCE AND HEALTH WITH KEY TO THE SCRIPTURES

    Registered
    U.S. Patent Office

    Published by The
    Trustees under the Will of Mary Baker G. Eddy
    BOSTON, U.S.A.

    Authorized Literature of
    THE FIRST CHURCH OF CHRIST, SCIENTIST
    in Boston, Massachusetts

    _Copyright, 1891, 1892_
    BY MARY BAKER G. EDDY
    Copyright renewed 1919 and 1920

_All rights reserved_

PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA




CONTENTS


ANCESTRAL SHADOWS

AUTOBIOGRAPHIC REMINISCENCES

VOICES NOT OUR OWN

EARLY STUDIES

GIRLHOOD COMPOSITION

THEOLOGICAL REMINISCENCE

THE COUNTRY-SEAT (POEM)

MARRIAGE AND PARENTAGE

EMERGENCE INTO LIGHT

THE GREAT DISCOVERY

FOUNDATION WORK

MEDICAL EXPERIMENTS

FIRST PUBLICATION

THE PRECIOUS VOLUME

RECUPERATIVE INCIDENT

A TRUE MAN

COLLEGE AND CHURCH

"FEED MY SHEEP" (POEM)

COLLEGE CLOSED

GENERAL ASSOCIATIONS AND OUR MAGAZINE

FAITH-CURE

FOUNDATION-STONES

THE GREAT REVELATION

SIN, SINNER, AND ECCLESIASTICISM

THE HUMAN CONCEPT

PERSONALITY

PLAGIARISM

ADMONITION

EXEMPLIFICATION

WAYMARKS




RETROSPECTION AND INTROSPECTION




ANCESTRAL SHADOWS


My ancestors, according to the flesh, were from both Scotland and England,
my great-grandfather, on my father's side, being John McNeil of Edinburgh.

His wife, my great-grandmother, was Marion Moor, and her family is said to
have been in some way related to Hannah More, the pious and popular English
authoress of a century ago.

I remember reading, in my childhood, certain manuscripts containing
Scriptural sonnets, besides other verses and enigmas which my grandmother
said were written by my great-grandmother. But because my great-grandmother
wrote a stray sonnet and an occasional riddle, it was no sign that she
inherited a spark from Hannah More, or was her relative.

John and Marion Moor McNeil had a daughter, who perpetuated her mother's
name. This second Marion McNeil in due time was married to an Englishman,
named Joseph Baker, and so became my paternal grandmother, the Scotch and
English elements thus mingling in her children.

Mrs. Marion McNeil Baker was reared among the Scotch Covenanters, and had
in her character that sturdy Calvinistic devotion to Protestant liberty
which gave those religionists the poetic daring and pious picturesqueness
which we find so graphically set forth in the pages of Sir Walter Scott and
in John Wilson's sketches.

Joseph Baker and his wife, Marion McNeil, came to America seeking "freedom
to worship God;" though they could hardly have crossed the Atlantic more
than a score of years prior to the Revolutionary period.

With them they brought to New England a heavy sword, encased in a brass
scabbard, on which was inscribed the name of a kinsman upon whom the weapon
had been bestowed by Sir William Wallace, from whose patriotism and bravery
comes that heart-stirring air, "Scots wha hae wi' Wallace bled."

My childhood was also gladdened by one of my Grandmother Baker's books,
printed in olden type and replete with the phraseology current in the
seventeenth and eighteenth centuries.

Among grandmother's treasures were some newspapers, yellow with age. Some
of these, however, were not very ancient, nor had they crossed the ocean;
for they were American newspapers, one of which contained a full account of
the death and burial of George Washington.

A relative of my Grandfather Baker was General Henry Knox of Revolutionary
fame. I was fond of listening, when a child, to grandmother's stories about
General Knox, for whom she cherished a high regard.

In the line of my Grandmother Baker's family was the late Sir John
Macneill, a Scotch knight, who was prominent in British politics, and at
one time held the position of ambassador to Persia.

My grandparents were likewise connected with Capt. John Lovewell of
Dunstable, New Hampshire, whose gallant leadership and death, in the Indian
troubles of 1722-1725, caused that prolonged contest to be known
historically as Lovewell's War.

A cousin of my grandmother was John Macneil, the New Hampshire general who
fought at Lundy's Lane, and won distinction in 1814 at the neighboring
battle of Chippewa, towards the close of the War of 1812.




AUTOBIOGRAPHIC REMINISCENCES


This venerable grandmother had thirteen children, the youngest of whom was
my father, Mark Baker, who inherited the homestead, and with his brother,
James Baker, he inherited my grandfather's farm of about five hundred
acres, lying in the adjoining towns of Concord and Bow, in the State of New
Hampshire.

One hundred acres of the old farm are still cultivated and owned by Uncle
James Baker's grandson, brother of the Hon. Henry Moore Baker of
Washington, D.C.

The farm-house, situated on the summit of a hill, commanded a broad
picturesque view of the Merrimac River and the undulating lands of three
townships. But change has been busy. Where once stretched broad fields of
bending grain waving gracefully in the sunlight, and orchards of apples,
peaches, pears, and cherries shone richly in the mellow hues of
autumn,--now the lone night-bird cries, the crow caws cautiously, and
wandering winds sigh low requiems through dark pine groves. Where green
pastures bright with berries, singing brooklets, beautiful wild flowers,
and flecked with large flocks and herds, covered areas of rich acres,--now
the scrub-oak, poplar, and fern flourish.

The wife of Mark Baker was Abigail Barnard Ambrose, daughter of Deacon
Nathaniel Ambrose of Pembroke, a small town situated near Concord, just
across the bridge, on the left bank of the Merrimac River.

Grandfather Ambrose was a very religious man, and gave the money for
erecting the first Congregational Church in Pembroke.

In the Baker homestead at Bow I was born, the youngest of my parents' six
children and the object of their tender solicitude.

During my childhood my parents removed to Tilton, eighteen miles from
Concord, and there the family remained until the names of both father and
mother were inscribed on the stone memorials in the Park Cemetery of that
beautiful village.

My father possessed a strong intellect and an iron will. Of my mother I
cannot speak as I would, for memory recalls qualities to which the pen can
never do justice. The following is a brief extract from the eulogy of the
Rev. Richard S. Rust, D.D., who for many years had resided in Tilton and
knew my sainted mother in all the walks of life.

    The character of Mrs. Abigail Ambrose Baker was distinguished for
    numerous excellences. She possessed a strong intellect, a
    sympathizing heart, and a placid spirit. Her presence, like the
    gentle dew and cheerful light, was felt by all around her. She
    gave an elevated character to the tone of conversation in the
    circles in which she moved, and directed attention to themes at
    once pleasing and profitable.

    As a mother, she was untiring in her efforts to secure the
    happiness of her family. She ever entertained a lively sense of
    the parental obligation, especially in regard to the education of
    her children. The oft-repeated impressions of that sainted spirit,
    on the hearts of those especially entrusted to her watch-care, can
    never be effaced, and can hardly fail to induce them to follow her
    to the brighter world. Her life was a living illustration of
    Christian faith.

My childhood's home I remember as one with the open hand. The needy were
ever welcome, and to the clergy were accorded special household privileges.

Among the treasured reminiscences of my much respected parents, brothers,
and sisters, is the memory of my second brother, Albert Baker, who was,
next to my mother, the very dearest of my kindred. To speak of his
beautiful character as I cherish it, would require more space than this
little book can afford.

My brother Albert was graduated at Dartmouth College in 1834, and was
reputed one of the most talented, close, and thorough scholars ever
