party forty-eight years before. He was an able but not brilliant man,
had served through the Civil War, and was afterwards elected senator
from Indiana, to which state he had removed from Ohio at an early age.
The platform on which he was elected pledged the party to the protective
tariff principle, and a high tariff measure, known as the McKinley Bill,
was passed, raising duties to a point higher than had ever before been
known in the history of the United States.

The Dependent Pension Bill, which Cleveland had vetoed, and which gave a
pension to every Union soldier who was from any cause unable to earn a
living, was also passed. But these policies did not appeal to the
public; besides which, Harrison, although a man of integrity and
ability, was popular with neither the rank nor file of his party,
through a total lack of personal magnetism, and though he received the
nomination, Cleveland easily defeated him. The remainder of his life
was passed quietly at his Indiana home.

       *       *       *       *       *

We have seen how Cleveland's independence and want of tact estranged him
from his party, and the party itself was soon to run upon virtual
shipwreck, under the guidance of strange leaders. A word must be said,
in this place, of the extraordinary man who led it three times to
defeat.

When the Democratic national convention met in Chicago in 1896, one of
the delegates from Nebraska was a brilliant and eloquent lawyer named
William Jennings Bryan. He had gained some prominence in his state, and
had served in Congress for four years, but he was practically unknown
when he arose before the convention and made a free-silver speech which
fairly carried the delegates off their feet. Good oratory is rare at any
time; its power can hardly be overestimated, especially in swaying a
crowd; and Bryan was one of the greatest orators that ever addressed a
convention.

His nomination for the Presidency followed, and the result was the
practical dismemberment of the Democratic party. For Bryan was a
Populist, as far as possible removed from the fundamental principles of
Democracy, advocating strange socialistic measures; and the conservative
element of the party regarded him and his theories with such distrust
that it put another ticket in the field, and he was badly beaten. Twice
more he led the party in presidential campaigns, each time being
defeated more decisively than the last. His engaging personality, his
ready oratory, and his supreme gifts as a politician won for him a vast
number of devoted friends, who believed, and who still believe, in him
absolutely; but the country at large, apparently, will have none of him.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Republican nominee in 1896 was William McKinley, of Ohio, best known
as the framer of the McKinley tariff bill. Born in Ohio in 1843, he had
served through the Civil War, had been a member of Congress and twice
governor of Ohio. He was a thorough party man, and modified his former
views on the silver question to conform with the platform on which he
was nominated; his campaign manager, Mark Hanna, was one of the most
astute politicians the country had ever produced, and raised a campaign
fund of unprecedented magnitude; all of which, combined with the
disintegration of the Democratic party, gave McKinley a notable victory.

The great event of his first administration was the war with Spain,
undertaken to free Cuba, into which McKinley, be it said to his credit,
was driven unwillingly by public clamor, cunningly fostered by a portion
of the press. Its close saw the purchase of the Philippines, and the
entrance of the United States upon a colonial policy believed by many to
be wholly contrary to the spirit of its founders.

There was never any question of McKinley's renomination, for his
prestige and personal popularity were immense, and his victory was
again decisive. He had broadened rapidly, had gained in statesmanship,
had acquired a truer insight into the country's needs, and was now
freed, to a great extent, from party obligations. Great hopes were built
upon his second administration, and they would no doubt have been
fulfilled, in part at least; but a few months after his inauguration, he
was shot through the body by an irresponsible anarchist while holding a
public reception at Buffalo, and died within the week. The years which
have elapsed since his death enable us to view him more calmly than was
possible while he lived, and the country has come to recognize in him an
honest and well-meaning man, of more than ordinary ability, who might
have risen to true statesmanship and won for himself a high place in the
country's history had he been spared.

On the ticket with McKinley, a young New Yorker named Theodore Roosevelt
had been elected Vice-President. Roosevelt had long been prominent in
his native state as an enthusiastic reformer, had made a sensational
record in the war with Spain, and, on his return home, had been elected
governor by popular clamor, rather than by the will of the politicians,
to whom his rough-and-ready methods were extremely repugnant. So when
the national convention was about to be held, they conceived the great
idea of removing him from state politics and putting him on the shelf,
so to speak, by electing him Vice-President, and the plan was carried
out in spite of Roosevelt's protests. Alas for the politicians! It was
with a sort of poetic justice that he took the oath as President on the
day of McKinley's death, September 14, 1901, while they were still
rubbing their eyes and wondering what had happened.

His evident honesty of purpose, combined with an impulsive and energetic
temperament, which led him into various indiscretions, soon made him a
popular hero. He was a sort of Andrew Jackson over again, and in 1904,
he was sent back to the presidency by an overwhelming majority. For a
time he was, indeed, the central figure of the republic. His energy was
remarkable; he had a hand in everything; but many people, after a time,
grew weary of so tumultuous and strenuous a life, and drew away from
him, while still more were estranged by the undignified and violent
controversies in which he became entangled. It is too soon, however, to
attempt to give a true estimate of him. Indeed, he is as yet only in
mid-career; and what his years to come will accomplish cannot be even
guessed.

Despite his controversies with the leaders of his party, he retained
sufficient power to dictate the nomination of his successor, William
Howard Taft, an experienced jurist and administrator, who is but just
entering upon his work as these lines are written, but to whom the
American people are looking hopefully for a wise and moderate
administration.

       *       *       *       *       *

So stands the history of the rulers of the nation. As one looks back at
them, one perceives a certain rhythmical rise and fall of merit and
attainment, which may roughly be represented thus:

[Illustration]

Washington freed us from the power of England; Lincoln freed us from the
power of slavery; the third man in this great trio will be he who will
solve the vast economic problems which are the overshadowing issues of
our day. Will he be a Democrat or Republican--or of some new party yet
to be born? In any event, let us hope that Fate will not long withhold
him!




SUMMARY


LINCOLN, ABRAHAM. Born in Hardin County, Kentucky, February 12, 1809;
served in Black Hawk war, 1832; admitted to the bar, 1836; began
practice of law at Springfield, Illinois, 1837; Whig member Illinois
legislature, 1834-42; member of Congress, 1847-49; Republican candidate
for United States senator and held series of debates with Stephen A.
Douglas, 1858; elected President, 1860; inaugurated, March 4, 1861;
re-elected President, 1864; began second term, March 4, 1865; entered
Richmond with Federal army, April 4, 1865; shot by John Wilkes Booth, at
Ford's Theatre, Washington, April 14, 1865, and died the following day.

JOHNSON, ANDREW. Born at Raleigh, North Carolina, December 29, 1808;
member of Congress from Tennessee, 1843-53; governor of Tennessee,
1853-57; United States senator, 1857-62; military governor of Tennessee,
1862-64; inaugurated Vice-President, March 4, 1865; succeeded Lincoln as
President, April 15, 1865; impeached by Congress for high crimes and
misdemeanors, but acquitted after a trial lasting from March 23 to May
26, 1868; United States senator from Tennessee, 1875; died in Carter
County, Tennessee, July 31, 1875.

GRANT, ULYSSES SIMPSON. Born at Point Pleasant, Clermont County, Ohio,
April 27, 1822; graduated at West Point, 1843; served through Mexican
war, 1846-48; left the army in 1854, and settled in St. Louis; removed
to Galena, Illinois, 1860; appointed colonel, June 17, 1861;
brigadier-general, August 7, 1861; captured Fort Donelson, February 16,
1862; promoted to major-general of volunteers and made commander of the
Army of the District of West Tennessee, March, 1862; gained battle of
Shiloh, April 6-7, 1862; captured Vicksburg, July 4, 1863, and made
major-general in the regular army; won battle of Chattanooga, November
23-25, 1863; made lieutenant-general and commander-in-chief of American
armies, March, 1864; took up his headquarters with the Army of the
Potomac, fought battles of Wilderness, and received Lee's surrender at
Appomattox Court House, April 9, 1865; made general, July 25, 1866;
elected President, 1868, and re-elected, 1872; made tour of the world,
1877-79; unsuccessful candidate for nomination for presidency, 1880;
made general on the retired list, March 4, 1885; died at Mount McGregor,
New York, July 23, 1885.

HAYES, RUTHERFORD BIRCHARD. Born at Delaware, Ohio, October 4, 1822;
served in the Union army during the Civil War, being brevetted
major-general of volunteers in 1864; member of Congress from Ohio,
1865-67; governor of Ohio, 1868-72 and 1876; Republican candidate for
President, 1876; declared elected by the Electoral Commission, March 2,
1877, and served, 1877-81; died at Fremont, Ohio, January 17, 1893.

GARFIELD, JAMES ABRAM. Born at Orange, Cuyahoga County, Ohio, November
19, 1831; instructor in and later president of Hiram College, Ohio,
1856-61; joined the Union army as lieutenant-colonel of volunteers,
1861; defeated General Humphrey Marshall at the battle of Middle Creek,
January 10, 1862; promoted brigadier-general, 1862; promoted
major-general, 1863; member of Congress, 1863-80; elected United States
senator, 1880; elected President, 1880; inaugurated, March 4, 1881; shot
in Washington by Guiteau, July 2, 1881; died at Elberon, New Jersey,
September 19, 1881.

ARTHUR, CHESTER ALAN. Born at Fairfield, Vermont, October 5, 1830;
graduated at Union College, 1848; taught school and practiced law in New
York City; inspector-general of New York troops, 1862; collector of the
port of New York, 1871-78; elected Vice-President, 1880; succeeded
Garfield as President, September 20, 1881, serving to March 4, 1885;
defeated for Republican nomination, 1884; died at New York, November
18, 1886.

CLEVELAND, GROVER. Born at Caldwell, Essex County, New Jersey, March 18,
1837; studied law at Buffalo, New York, and admitted to the bar, 1859;
assistant district attorney of Erie County, 1863-66; sheriff of Erie
County, 1871-74; Democratic mayor of Buffalo, 1882; governor of New
York, 1883-84; elected President, 1884; served as President, 1885-89;
advocated a reduction of the tariff in his message to Congress in
December, 1887; defeated for re-election, 1888; re-elected President,
1892; served, 1893-97; died at Princeton, New Jersey, June 24, 1908.

HARRISON, BENJAMIN. Born at North Bend, Ohio, August 20, 1833; graduated
at Miami University, 1852; studied law and practiced at Indianapolis;
served in Civil War and was brevetted brigadier-general; United States
senator, 1881-87; elected President, 1888; defeated for re-election,
1892; died at Indianapolis, March 13, 1901.

MCKINLEY, WILLIAM. Born at Niles, Trumbull County, Ohio, January 29,
1844; served in the Civil War, attaining the rank of major; member of
Congress, 1877-91; elected governor of Ohio, 1891; re-elected, 1893;
elected President, 1896; re-elected, 1900; shot by an assassin at
Buffalo, New York, and died there, September 14, 1901.

ROOSEVELT, THEODORE. Born at New York City, October 27, 1858; graduated
at Harvard, 1880; New York state assemblyman, 1882-84; resided on North
Dakota ranch, 1884-86; national Civil Service Commissioner, 1889-95;
president New York Police Board, 1895-97; assistant secretary of the
navy, 1897-98; resigned to organize regiment of Rough Riders and served
through war with Spain; governor of New York, 1899-1900; elected
Vice-President, 1900; succeeded to presidency on death of McKinley,
September 14, 1901; elected President, 1904; retired from presidency,
March 4, 1909.

TAFT, WILLIAM HOWARD. Born at Cincinnati, Ohio, September 15, 1857;
graduated at Yale, 1878; admitted to bar, 1880; judge Superior Court,
1887-90; solicitor-general of the United States, 1890-92; United States
circuit judge, 1892-1900; President Philippine Commission, 1900-04;
secretary of war, 1904-08; elected President, 1908; inaugurated, March
4, 1909.


       *       *       *       *       *




CHAPTER V

STATESMEN


If one were asked to name the most remarkable all-around genius this
country has produced, the answer would be Benjamin Franklin--whose life
was perhaps the fullest, happiest and most useful ever lived in America.
There are half a dozen chapters of this series in which he might
rightfully find a place, and in which, indeed, it will be necessary to
refer to him, for he was an inventor, a scientist, a man of letters, a
philanthropist, a man of affairs, a reformer, and a great many other
things besides. But first and greatest of all, he was a benign,
humorous, kind-hearted philosopher, who devoted the greater portion of
his life to the service of his country and of humanity.

Benjamin Franklin was born at Boston in 1706, the fifteenth of a family
of seventeen children. His father was a soap-boiler, and was kept pretty
busy providing for his family, none of whom, with the exception of
Benjamin, ever attained any especial distinction; this being one of
those mysteries of nature, which no one has ever been able to explain,
and yet which happens so often--the production of an eagle in a brood of
common barnyard fowls--a miracle, however, which never happens except
when the barnyard fowls are of the human species. Benjamin himself, at
first, was only an ugly duckling in no way remarkable.

At the age of ten, he was apprenticed to his brother, who was a printer,
and needed a boy to do the dirty work around the office, and thought
there was no need of paying good money to an outsider, when it might
just as well be kept in the family. So Benjamin went to work sweeping
out, and washing up the dirty presses, and making himself generally
useful during the day; but--and here is the first gleam of the eagle's
feather--instead of going to bed with the sun as most boys did, he sat
up most of the night reading such books and papers as he was able to get
hold of at the office, or himself writing short articles for the paper
which his brother published. These he slipped unsigned under the front
door of the office, so that his brother would not suspect they came from
him; for no man is a prophet to his own family, and these contributions
would have promptly gone into the waste basket had his brother suspected
their source. As it was, however, they were printed, and not until
Benjamin revealed their authorship did his brother discover how bad they
were.

After he had served in the printing office for seven years, Benjamin
came to the conclusion that his family would never appreciate him at his
real worth. He was like most boys in this, differing from them only in
being right. So he sold some of his books, and without saying anything
to his father or brother, who would probably have reasoned him out of
his purpose with a cowhide whip, he hid himself on board a boat bound
for New York. Arrived there, he soon discovered that printers and
budding geniuses were in no great demand, and so proceeded on to
Philadelphia, partly on foot and partly by water.

Everyone knows the story of how he landed there, with only a few pennies
in his pocket, but with a sublime confidence in his ability to make
more; how he proceeded to the nearest bakeshop, asked for three pennies'
worth of bread, and when he was given three loaves, took them rather
than reveal his ignorance by confessing that he really wanted only one
loaf, and walked up Market street, with a loaf under each arm, and
eating the third. He has told the story in his inimitable way in his
autobiography, a work which gives him high place among American men of
letters. Small wonder that red-cheeked Deborah Reed smiled at him from
the door of her father's house--but Franklin saw the smile and
remembered it, and though it brought them both distress enough at first,
he asked Deborah to be his wife, six years later, and she consented, and
a good wife she made him. Years afterward, when he was Ambassador to
France and the pet of the French court, the centre of perhaps the most
brilliant and witty circle in Europe, the talk, one day, chanced to turn
upon tailors, of whom the company expressed the utmost detestation.
Franklin listened with a quiet smile, which some one at last observed.

"Don't you agree," he was asked, "that tailors are a conscienceless and
extortionate class?"

"No," he answered, still smiling; "how could I? You see, I'm in love
with mine."

And he told proudly and with shining eyes how the clothes he wore had
been spun into thread and woven into cloth and cut out and fitted and
sewed together by his wife's own hands; and it was no doubt Deborah he
had in mind when he said: "God bless all good women who help men to do
their work."

The young adventurer had no difficulty in finding employment as a
printer, for printers were in demand in that Quaker city. He prospered
from the first, and at the age of twenty-four, had a little business of
his own, and was editing the _Pennsylvania Gazette_. Two years later, he
began the publication of an almanac purporting to be written by one
Richard Saunders, and which soon won an immense reputation as "Poor
Richard's Almanac." As an almanac, it did not differ much from others,
but, in addition to the usual information about the tides and changes of
the moon and seasons of the year, it contained a wealth of wise and
witty sayings, many of which have passed into proverbs and are in common
use to-day. Here are a few of them:

    Virtue and a trade are a child's best portions.

    Write injuries in dust, benefits in marble.

    The way to be safe is never to be secure.

    When you are good to others, you are best to yourself.

    Well done is better than well said.

    God helps them that help themselves.

    Wish not so much to live long as to live well.

