   [Footnote 378: Scribonius Largus, Compos. Med. cc. "Neque
   chirurgia sine diaetetica, neque haec sine chirurgia, id est, sine
   ea parte quae medicamentorum utilium usum habeat, perfici possunt;
   sed aliae ab aliis adjuvantur, et quasi consumantur." Where John
   Rhodius well observes: "Antiquos chirurgos Homerus Chironis
   exemplo herbarum succis vulnera sanasse memorat. Hunc et
   sectiones adhibuisse notat Pindarus Pyth. Od. iii. Neque
   ingeniorum fons [Greek: Il. L. to ektamein] omisit." Cf. Celsus, Pref.
   with the notes of Almeloveen, and lib. vii. praef., where the
   chirurgical part of ancient medicine is amusingly discussed.]

Thus he spoke, nor did the Gerenian knight Nestor disobey. Forthwith he
ascended his chariot, and Machaon, the son of AEsculapius, blameless
physician, mounted beside him; but he lashed on the steeds, and they
flew not unwillingly towards the hollow ships, for there it was
agreeable to their inclination [to go].

But Cebriones, sitting beside Hector, perceived the Trojans in
confusion, and addressed him in [these] words: "Hector, we two are
mingling here with the Greeks in the outskirt of evil-sounding battle,
whilst the other Trojans are thrown into confusion in crowds, both their
horses and themselves. Telamonian Ajax is routing them, for I know him
well, for around his shoulders he bears a broad shield. But let us also
direct our horses and chariot thither, where cavalry and infantry,
having engaged in the evil strife, are slaughtering each other, and
inextinguishable tumult hath arisen."

Thus then having spoken, he lashed on the fair-maned steeds with his
shrill-cracking lash. But they, sensible of the stroke, speedily bore
the swift chariot through Trojans and Greeks, trampling on both corses
and shields. With blood the whole axletree was stained beneath, and the
rims around the chariot-seat, which the drops from the horses' hoofs,
and from the wheel-tires, spattered. But he longed to enter the crowd of
heroes, and to break through, springing upon them. And he sent
destructive tumult upon the Greeks, and abstained very little from the
spear. Among the ranks of other men indeed he ranged with his spear, his
sword, and with huge stones; but he shunned the conflict of Telamonian
Ajax.

But lofty-throned Jove excited fear within Ajax, and he stood
confounded, and cast behind him his shield of seven bulls' hides.
Panic-struck he retired, gazing on all sides like a wild beast, turning
to and fro, slowly moving knee after knee. As when dogs and rustic men
drive a ravening lion from the stall of oxen, who, keeping watch all
night, do not allow him to carry off the fat of their cattle, but he,
eager for their flesh, rushes on, but profits nought, for numerous
javelins fly against him from daring hands, and blazing torches, at
which he trembles, although furious; but in the morning he stalks away
with saddened mind: so Ajax, sad at heart, then retired, much against
his will, from the Trojans; for he feared for the ships of the Greeks.
And as when a stubborn ass, upon whose sides[379] many sticks have
already been broken, entering in, browses on the tall crop, but the boys
still beat him with sticks, although their strength is but feeble, and
with difficulty drive him out, when he is satiated with food, so then at
length the magnanimous Trojans and far-summoned allies continually
followed Ajax, the mighty son of Telamon, striking the middle of his
shield with missile weapons. And Ajax, sometimes wheeling about, was
mindful of impetuous might, and checked the phalanxes of the
horse-breaking Trojans, but again he would turn himself to fly. But he
prevented all from advancing to the swift ships, whilst standing himself
between the Trojans and Greeks he raged impetuously. And spears hurled
against him from daring hands, stuck, some indeed in his ample shield,
and many, though eager to glut themselves with his flesh, stood fixed in
the ground between, before they could reach his fair skin.

   [Footnote 379: Such seems to be the force of [Greek: auphis].]

Whom when Eurypylus, the illustrious son of Evaemon, perceived pressed
hard with many darts, advancing he stood beside him, and took aim with
his shining spear; and smote Apisaon, son of Phausias, shepherd of the
people, in the liver, under the diaphragm; and immediately relaxed his
limbs. And when godlike Alexander observed him stripping off the armour
of Apisaon, he instantly bent his bow against Eurypylus, and smote him
with an arrow upon the right thigh; and the reed was broken, and pained
his thigh. Then he fell back into the column of his companions, avoiding
fate, and shouting, he cried with a loud voice to the Greeks:

"O friends, leaders, and rulers over the Greeks, rallying, stand firm,
and ward off the merciless day from Ajax, who is hard pressed with
darts; nor do I think that he will escape from the dread-resounding
battle. But by all means stand firm round mighty Ajax, the son of
Telamon."

So spake the wounded Eurypylus, and they stood very near him, resting
their shields upon their shoulders, and lifting up their spears. But
Ajax came to meet them, and turning about, stood firm, when he reached
the body of his comrades. Thus they indeed combated like blazing fire.

In the meantime the Neleian steeds, sweating, bore Nestor from the
battle, and conveyed Machaon, the shepherd of the people. And noble
Achilles, swift of foot, looking forth, beheld him; for he stood upon
the prow of his great ship, gazing at the severe labour and lamentable
rout. Straightway he addressed Patroclus, his companion, calling [to
him] from the ship; and he, hearing him within the tent, came forth,
like unto Mars: but it was the beginning of misfortune to him. Him first
the gallant son of Menoetius addressed: "Why dost thou call me, Achilles,
and what need hast thou of me?"

But him swift-footed Achilles answering, addressed: "Noble son of
Menoetius, most dear to my soul, soon I think that the Greeks will stand
round my knees entreating, for a necessity no longer tolerable invades
them. But go now, Patroclus, dear to Jove, ask Nestor what man this is
whom he is carrying wounded from the battle. Behind, indeed, he wholly
resembles Machaon, the son of AEsculapius, but I have not beheld the
countenance of the man: for the horses passed by me, hastening onward."

Thus he spoke, and Patroclus was obedient to his dear comrade, and
hastened to run to the tents and ships of the Greeks.

But when they came to the tent of the son of Neleus, they themselves
descended to the fertile earth, and Eurymedon, the attendant of the old
man, unyoked the mares from the chariot; whilst they refreshed
themselves from the sweat upon their tunics,[380] standing towards the
breeze beside the shore of the sea, and afterwards, entering the tent,
they sat down upon couches. But for them fair-curled Hecamede prepared a
mixture, she whom the old man had brought from Tenedos, when Achilles
laid it waste, the daughter of magnanimous Arsinoues, whom the Greeks
selected for him, because he surpassed all in counsel. First she set
forward for them a handsome, cyanus-footed, well-polished table; then
upon it a brazen tray, and on it an onion, a relish[381] for the
draught, as well as new honey, and beside it the fruit of sacred corn.
Likewise a splendid cup[382] near them, which the old man had brought
from home, studded with golden nails. Its handles were four, and around
each were two golden pigeons feeding, and under it were two bottoms.
Another indeed would have removed it with difficulty from the table,
being full; but aged Nestor raised it without difficulty. In it the
woman, like unto the goddesses, had mixed for them Pramnian wine, and
grated over it a goat's-milk cheese with a brazen rasp, and sprinkled
white flour upon it: then bade them drink, as soon as she had prepared
the potion. But when drinking they had removed parching thirst, they
amused themselves, addressing each other in conversation. And Patroclus
stood at the doors, a godlike hero.

   [Footnote 380: "Construe [Greek: apeps. kata ton idroxit]. _I.e._
   refreshed--cooled--themselves, by standing in front of the breeze
   and drying off the perspiration with which their garments were
   saturated."--Kennedy.]

   [Footnote 381: Probably the onion acted as a stimulant to
   drinking, as anchovies and olives are now used.]

   [Footnote 382: It was an [Greek: amphikypellon]. Cf. i. 584, and
   Buttm. Lexil. p. 93. There were two doves round each handle,
   making eight in all.]

But the old man, perceiving him, rose from his splendid seat, and taking
him by the hand, led him, in, and bade him be seated. But Patroclus, on
the other side, declined, and uttered [this] reply:

"No seat [for me], O Jove-nurtured sage, nor wilt thou persuade me.
Revered and irascible[383] is he who sent me forth to inquire who this
man is whom thou leadest wounded; but even I myself know, for I perceive
Machaon, the shepherd of the people. Now, however, in order to deliver
my message, I will return again an ambassador to Achilles; for well dost
thou know, O Jove-nurtured sage, what a terrible man he is; soon would
he blame even the blameless."

   [Footnote 383: Or "respected," as the Oxford translator renders
   it.]

But him the Gerenian knight Nestor then answered: "But why indeed does
Achilles thus compassionate the sons of the Greeks, as many as have been
wounded with weapons? Nor knows he how great sorrow hath arisen
throughout the army; for the bravest lie in the ships, smitten in the
distant or the close fight.[384] Stricken is brave Diomede, the son of
Tydeus, and wounded is spear-renowned Ulysses, as well as Agamemnon.
Eurypylus also has been wounded in the thigh with an arrow; and this
other have I lately brought from battle, smitten with an arrow from the
bowstring: yet Achilles, being brave, regards not the Greeks, nor pities
them. Does he wait until the swift ships near the sea, contrary to the
will of the Greeks, be consumed with the hostile fire, and we ourselves
be slain one after the other? For my strength is not as it formerly was
in my active members. Would that I were thus young, and my might was
firm, as when a contest took place between the Eleans and us, about the
driving away some oxen, when, driving away in reprisal, I slew
Itymoneus, the valiant son of Hypeirochus, who dwelt in Elis: for he,
defending his cattle, was smitten among the first by a javelin from my
hand, and there fell; and his rustic troops fled on every side. And we
drove from the plain a very great booty, fifty droves of oxen, as many
flocks of sheep, as many herds of swine, and as many broad herds of
goats, one hundred and fifty yellow steeds, all mares, and beneath many
there were colts. And these we drove within Neleian Pylus, at night
towards the city; but Neleus was delighted in his mind, because many
things had fallen to my lot, going as a young man to the war. But with
the appearing morn, heralds cried aloud for those to approach to whom a
debt was due in rich Elis; and the leading heroes of the Pylians
assembling, divided [the spoil], (because the Epeans owed a debt to
many); for we in Pylus, [being] few, were overwhelmed with evil. For the
Herculean might, coming in former years, did us mischief, and as many as
were bravest were slain. For we, the sons of illustrious Neleus, were
twelve; of whom I alone am left, but all the rest have perished. Elated
at these things, the brazen-mailed Epeans, insulting us, devised wicked
deeds. But the old man chose for himself a herd of cattle and a large
flock of sheep, selecting three hundred and their shepherds; for even
to him a great debt was due in rich Elis: four horses, victorious in the
race, with their chariots, which had gone for the prizes; for they were
about to run for a tripod; but Augeas, king of men, detained them there,
and dismissed the charioteer, grieved on account of his steeds. At which
words and deeds the old man, being wroth, chose out for himself mighty
numbers, and gave the rest to the people to divide, that no one might go
away defrauded by him of his just proportion. We indeed accomplished
each of these things, and were performing sacrifices to the gods through
the city, when on the third day they all came at once, both the citizens
themselves and their solid-hoofed steeds, in full force: and with them
were armed the two Molions, being still youths, nor as yet very skilled
in impetuous might. There is a certain city, a lofty hill, Thryoessa,
far away at the Alpheus, the last of sandy Pylus; this they invested,
eager to overthrow it. But when they had crossed the whole plain,
Minerva, hastening from Olympus, came to us by night as a messenger,
that we should be armed; nor did she assemble an unwilling people at
Pylus, but one very eager to fight. Still Neieus would not allow me to
be armed, but concealed my horses, for he said that I was not at all
acquainted with warlike deeds. Yet even thus was I conspicuous amongst
our cavalry, even although being on foot; for thus did Minerva conduct
me to battle. There is a certain river, Minyeius, emptying itself into
the sea near Arena, where we, the Pylian horsemen, awaited divine Morn,
whilst the swarms of infantry poured in. Thence in full force, equipped
in armour, we came at mid-day to the sacred stream of Alpheus. There
having offered fair victims to almighty Jove, a bull to the Alpheus, and
a bull to Neptune, but an untrained heifer to blue-eyed Minerva, we then
took supper through the army by troops; and we each slept in our arms
along the river's stream. In the meantime the magnanimous Epeans stood
around, desirous to lay waste the city; but a mighty work of Mars first
appeared to them: for as soon as the splendid sun was elevated above the
earth, we were engaged in the battle, praying to Jove and to Minerva.
But when now the battle of the Pylians and Eleans began, I first slew a
man, the warrior Molion, and bore away his solid-hoofed steeds: he was
the son-in-law of Augeas, and possessed his eldest daughter,
yellow-haired Agamede, who well understood as many drugs as the wide
earth nourishes. Him advancing against [me], I smote with my brazen
spear. He fell in the dust, and springing into his chariot, I then stood
among the foremost combatants; but the magnanimous Epeans fled
terrified in different directions when they beheld the hero fallen, the
leader of their cavalry, he who was the best to fight. But I rushed upon
them like unto a black whirlwind; and I took fifty chariots, and in each
two men bit the ground with their teeth, vanquished by my spear. And now
indeed I should have slain the youthful Molions, the sons[385] of Actor,
had not their sire, wide-ruling Neptune, covering them with a thick
haze, preserved them from the war. Then Jove delivered into the hands of
the Pylians great strength, for so long did we follow them through the
long[386] plain, both slaying them, and gathering up rich armour, until
he had driven our horses to Buprasium, fertile in wheat, to the rock
Olenia and Alesium, where it is called Colone: whence Minerva turned
back the people. Then having killed the last man, I left him; but the
Greeks guided back their swift steeds from Buprasium to Pylus; and all
gave glory to Jove, of the gods, and to Nestor, of men. Thus was I, as
sure as ever I existed, among men: but Achilles will enjoy his valour
alone: surely I think that he will hereafter greatly lament, when the
people have bitterly perished. O my friend, Menoetius did assuredly thus
command thee on that day when he sent thee from Phthia to Agamemnon. For
we being both within, I and noble Ulysses, distinctly heard all things
in the halls, as he charged you: but we were come to the well-inhabited
palace of Peleus, collecting an army through fertile Greece. There then
we found the hero Menoetius within, as well as thee, and Achilles
besides; but the aged horseman, Peleus, was burning the fat thighs of an
ox to thunder-rejoicing Jove, within the enclosure[387] of his palace,
and held a golden cup, pouring the dark wine over the blazing sacrifice.
Both of you were then employed about the flesh of the ox, whilst we
stood in the vestibule; but Achilles, astonished, leaped up, and led us
in, taking us by the hand, and bade us be seated: and he set in order
before us the offerings of hospitality which are proper for guests. But
when we were satiated with eating and drinking, I began discourse,
exhorting you to follow along with us. Ye were both very willing, and
they both commanded you many things. Aged Peleus in the first place
directed his son Achilles ever to be the bravest, and to be conspicuous
above others; but to thee again Menoetius, the son of Actor, thus gave
charge: 'My son, Achilles indeed ia superior in birth; but thou art the
elder. And he is much superior in strength: but still do thou frequently
suggest to him proper advice, and admonish and direct him, and he will
surely be obedient in what is for [his own] good.' Thus did the old man
command thee; but thou art forgetful: but even now do thou mention
these things to warlike Achilles, if perchance he may be obedient. Who
knows if, advising him, thou mayest, with the gods' assistance, arouse
his mind? For the admonition of a friend is good. But if within his mind
he avoid some prophecy, and his venerable mother has told him anything
from Jove, let him at least send thee forth; and with thee let the other
forces of the Myrmidons follow, if indeed thou mayest be some aid to the
Greeks. Let him likewise give his beautiful armour to thee, to be borne
into battle, if perchance the Trojans, assimilating thee to him, may
abstain from the conflict, and the warlike sons of the Greeks, already
afflicted, may respire; and there be a little respite from
fighting.[388] But you, [who are] fresh, will, with fighting, easily
drive back men wearied, towards the city, from the ships and tents."

   [Footnote 384: Cf iv. 540, for the distinction between [Greek:
   beylemenoi] and [Greek: outamenoi].]

   [Footnote 385: _I. e._ the reputed sons.]

   [Footnote 386: See Schol. Etym. M. s.v., and Alberti on Hesych.
   t, ii. p. 1247]

   [Footnote 387: Properly, the fence or barrier of the enclosure.]

   [Footnote 388: There are several different interpretations for
   this line: 1. Schneider explains it: "They have but short time to
   respire; for if not at once assisted, they will be destroyed." 2.
   "Short will be the cessation from war." 3. "A cessation, or
   breathing-time, from war, although short, will be agreeable." 4.
   "Supply '_may be_', and translate, 'and that there _may be_ a
   short breathing-time from the battle;' although this last
   involves some tautology with the preceding line."--Ed. Dubl.]

Thus he spake, and he aroused the spirit within his breast; and he
hastened to run to the ships to Achilles, the grandson of AEacus. But
when now Patroclus, running, arrived at the ships of godlike Ulysses,
where were their forum and seat of justice, and there the altars of
their gods also were erected, there Eurypylus, the noble son of Evaemon,
wounded with an arrow in the thigh, limping from the battle, met him.
Down his back ran the copious sweat from his shoulders and head, and
from the grievous wound oozed the black blood; nevertheless his mind was
firm. Seeing him, the gallant son of Menoetius pitied him, and, grieving,
spoke winged words:

"Alas! unhappy men, leaders and rulers over the Greeks, are ye then thus
destined, far away from your friends and native land, to satiate the
swift dogs at Troy with your white fat? But come, tell me this, O
Jove-nurtured hero, Eurypylus, will the Greeks still at all sustain
mighty Hector, or will they now be destroyed, subdued by his spear?"

But him prudent Eurypylus in turn addressed: "No longer, Jove-nurtured
Patroclus, will there be aid for the Greeks, but they will fall back
upon the black ships. For already all, as many as were once bravest, lie
at the ships, stricken or wounded by the hands of the Trojans, whose
strength ever increases. But do thou now, indeed, save me, leading me to
my black ship; and cut out the arrow from my thigh, and wash the black
blood[389] from it with warm water; then sprinkle upon it mild drugs,
salubrious, which they say thou wert taught by Achilles, whom Chiron
instructed, the most just of the Centaurs. For the physicians,
Podalirius and Machaon, the one, I think, having a wound, lies at the
tents, and himself in want of a faultless physician, and the other
awaits the sharp battle of the Trojans upon the plain."

   [Footnote 389: Cf. Virg. AEn. x. 834: "Vulnera siccabat lymphis."
   The manner in which this was done is described by Celsus, v. 26:
   "Si profusionem timemus, siccis lineamentis vulnus implendum est,
   supraque imponenda gpongia ex aqua frigida expressa, ac manu
   super comprimenda." Cf. Athen. ii. 4.]

But him again the brave son of Menoetius addressed: "How then will these
things turn out? What shall we do, O hero Eurypylus? I go that I may
deliver a message to warlike Achilles, with which venerable Nestor,
guardian of the Greeks, has intrusted me: but even thus I cannot neglect
thee, afflicted."

He said, and having laid hold of the shepherd of the people under his
breast, bore him to the tent, and his attendant, when he saw him, spread
under him bulls' hides. There [Patroclus] laying him at length, cut out
with a knife the bitter, sharp arrow from his thigh, and washed the
black blood from it with warm water. Then he applied a bitter,
pain-assuaging root, rubbing it in his hands, which checked all his
pangs: the wound, indeed, was dried up, and the bleeding ceased.




                          BOOK THE TWELFTH.


                              ARGUMENT.

The Trojans assail the rampart, and Hector, despite an omen, which
Polydamas interprets unfavourably, attacks and forces the gate, and
opens a way to the ships.


Thus then at the tents the valiant son of Menoetius was healing the
wounded Eurypylus: but the Greeks and Trojans kept fighting in masses;
nor was the ditch of the Greeks destined to prove a barrier any longer,
and the wide wall from above, which they had erected in defence of the
ships; but they had drawn a foss around (nor had they given splendid
hecatombs to the gods); that it enclosing within, might defend the swift
ships and the great booty. But it was built against the will of the
immortal gods, therefore it remained not perfect for any long
period.[390] As long as Hector was alive, and Achilles indignant, and
the city of king Priam unravaged, so long was the mighty wall of the
Greeks firm. But when all the bravest of the Trojans were dead, and many
of the Greeks were subdued, but others left surviving, when in the tenth
year the city of Priam was sacked, and the Greeks went in their ships to
their dear fatherland; then at length Neptune and Apollo took counsel to
demolish the wall, introducing the strength of rivers, as many as flow
into the sea from the Idaean mountains, both the Rhesus and the
Heptaporus, the Caresus and the Rhodius, the Granicus and the AEsepus,
the divine Scamander and the Simois, where many shields and helmets fell
in the dust, and the race of demigod men. The mouths of all these Phoebus
Apollo turned to the same spot, and for nine days he directed their
streams against the wall; and Jove in the meantime rained continually,
that he might the sooner render the walls overwhelmed by the sea. But
the Earth-shaker [Neptune] himself, holding the trident in his hands,
led them on; and then dispersed among the billows all the foundations of
beams and stones which the Greeks had laid with toil. And he made [all]
level along the rapid Hellespont, and again covered the vast shore with
sands, having demolished the wall: but then he turned the rivers to go
back into their own channels, in which they had formerly poured their
sweet-flowing water.[391]

   [Footnote 390: Cf. Pseudo-Socrat. Epist. i. [Greek: Pollois de
   polla kai ton allon eiretai poieton peri theon' kai oti ta men
   kata ten auton boulesin prattomena epi to loion ekthainei, ta de
   para theon alusitele yparchei tois praxasi], where Duport, p. 72,
   thinks there is a reference to the present passage.]

   [Footnote 391: On the present state of the Troad, which appears,
   from physical facts, to justify the mythical description of
   Homer,--see Heyne and Kennedy. Compare Virg. AEn. ii. 610, sqq.;
   Tryphiodor. 566, sqq. and 680, sqq.]

Thus were Neptune and Apollo about to act hereafter; but then the battle
and clamour burned around the well-built wall, and the stricken joists
of the towers resounded: but the Greeks, subdued by the scourge[392] of
Jove, were detained, hemmed in at the hollow ships, dreading Hector, the
furious cause of flight; for he fought, as formerly, equal to a
whirlwind. And as when a boar or lion is occupied amongst the dogs and
huntsmen, looking dreadfully with strength, and they, drawing themselves
up in a square form,[393] stand against him, and hurl frequent javelins
from their hands; but never is his noble heart alarmed, nor is he put to
flight; but his courage proves his death. And frequently he turns round,
trying the ranks of men; and wheresoever he has directed his attack,
there the ranks of men give way: so Hector, going through the crowd,
rolled along, inciting his companions to cross the trench. Nor did the
swift-footed horses dare [it];[394] but they loudly neighed, standing
upon the precipitous brink; for the wide ditch affrighted [them], nor
was it easy to leap across, [by standing] near,[395] or to pass it, for
overhanging brinks stood round it on both sides, and beneath it was
fortified with sharp palisades, which the sons of the Greeks had fixed,
close-set and large, as a defence against hostile men. There a horse,
drawing a swift-rolling chariot, could not readily enter, but the
infantry eagerly desired it, if they could accomplish it. Then indeed
Polydamas, standing near, addressed daring Hector:

   [Footnote 392: Heyne compares Il. xiii. 812; Pseud.--Eur. Rhes.
   37; Find. Pyth. iv. 390; Tryphiod. 596. The Scholiast on both
   passages, Hesychius, t. i. p. 1006, and the Schol. on Oppian.
   Hal. v. 282, suppose that the lightning is meant; but it is far
   better to understand, with Heyne, "terrore divinitus immisso."]

   [Footnote 393: See Heyne, and Alberti on Hesych. t. ii. p. 1083.]

   [Footnote 394: Cf. Statius, Theb. x. 517:--

       "----ut patulas saltu transmittere fossas
       Horror equis; haerent trepidi, atque immane paventes
       Abruptum mirantur agi."]

   [Footnote 395: Understand [Greek: ek tou schedon], "adstando
   prope ad fossae oram, ut saltu facilius transilias."--Heyne.]

"Hector, and ye other leaders of the Trojans, and allies, unwisely do we
drive our fleet steeds through the trench, which is very difficult to
pass; since sharp palisades stand in it, and near them is the wall of
the Greeks. Wherefore it is by no means possible for the cavalry to
descend, or to fight, for it is a narrow place, where I think they would
be wounded. For if indeed lofty-thundering Jove, designing evil,
destroys the Greeks, but wishes to assist the Trojans, certainly I would
wish this to take place even immediately, that the Greeks perish here
inglorious, away from Argos. If, however, they rally, and a repulse from
the ships take place, and we be entangled in the dug trench, I do not
suppose that then even a messenger will return back to the city from the
Greeks. But come, let us all be persuaded as I shall advise. Let the
servants keep our horses at the trench, and let us, all on foot, clad in
armour, follow Hector in a close body; but the Greeks will not withstand
us, if indeed the end of destruction hang over them."

Thus spake Polydamas; but the safe counsel pleased Hector; and
immediately he leaped with his armour from his chariot on the ground.
Nor did the other Trojans assemble on horseback, but dismounting, they
rushed on, when they beheld noble Hector. Then each commanded his own
charioteer to rein his steeds in good order there at the trench, and
they, separating, drawing themselves up, and being arranged in five
columns, followed along with their leaders. Some then went with Hector
and illustrious Polydamas, who were most numerous and brave, and who
were most resolutely desirous, having broken down the wall, to fight at
the hollow ships. And Cebriones followed as a third; for Hector left
another, inferior to Cebriones, with his chariot. Others Paris
commanded, and Alcathous, and Agenor. The third band Helenus and godlike
Deiphobus, two sons of Priam; but the third [commander] was the hero
Asius, Asius son of Hyrtacus, whom fiery, tall steeds brought from
Arisba, from the river Selleis. But the fourth, AEneas, the brave son of
Anchises, led; along with him were the two sons of Antenor, Archilochus
and Acamas, well skilled in every kind of fight. But Sarpedon commanded
the illustrious allies, and chose to himself Glaucus and warlike
Asteropaeus; for they appeared to him, next to himself decidedly the
bravest of the rest: for he, indeed, excelled among all. When they then
had fitted each other together[396] with interlaced ox-hide bucklers,
they advanced, full of courage, direct against the Greeks, nor expected
that they would sustain them, but that they would fall in flight into
their black ships.

Then the other Trojans and far-summoned allies obeyed the counsel of
blameless Polydamas; but Asius, son of Hyrtacus, leader of heroes, was
unwilling to relinquish his horses and attendant charioteer, but with
them advanced to the swift ships,--foolish! Nor was he destined to
return again, borne on his steeds and chariot from the ships to
wind-swept Ilium, having avoided evil destiny. For him unlucky fate
first encircled from the spear of Idomeneus, the illustrious son of
Deucalion. For he rushed towards the left of the ships, by the way in
which the Greeks were returning from the plain with their horses and
chariots. Thither he drove his horses and his chariot, nor did he find
the gates closed[397] in the portal, or the long bar up, but the men
held them wide open, that they might safely receive at the ships any of
their companions flying from the battle. He designedly guided his steeds
right onward in that way, and [his troops], shrilly shouting, followed
along with him; for they supposed that the Greeks could no longer
sustain them, but would fall in flight into the black ships--fools! for
at the gates they found two very brave heroes, the magnanimous sons of
the warlike Lapithae, the one the son of Pirithous, gallant Polypoetes,
the other Leonteus, equal to man-slaughtering Mars. These two then stood
before the lofty gates, as tall oaks on the mountains, which abide the
wind and rain at all seasons, remaining firmly fixed by their great and
wide-spreading roots; so they too, trusting to their hands and strength,
awaited mighty Asius coming on, nor fled. But the troops, lifting high
their well-seasoned bucklers, advanced with loud shouting directly
towards the well-built wall, round their king Asius, and Iaemenus, and
Orestes, Acamas, the son of Asius, Thoon, and oenomaeus. Hitherto indeed
these, remaining within, were exhorting the well-armed Greeks to fight
for the ships; but when they perceived the Trojans rushing against the
wall, and confusion and flight of the Greeks arose, both darting out,
fought before the gates, like unto wild boars, which await the
approaching tumult of men and dogs in the mountains, and, advancing
obliquely to the attack, break down the wood around them, cutting it to
the root; and a gnashing of teeth arises from beneath, till some one,
having taken aim, deprive them of life. So resounded the shining brass
upon their breasts, smitten in front, for very valiantly they fought,
trusting to the troops above, and to their own valour. But they hurled
stones down from the well-built towers, defending themselves, their
tents, and the swift-voyaging ships. And as snow-flakes fall upon the
earth, which the violent wind, having disturbed the shady clouds, pours
down thick upon the fertile soil; thus poured the weapons from the hands
as well of the Greeks as of the Trojans; and the helmets and bossy
shields, smitten with large stones, sounded drily around. Then indeed
Asius, son of Hyrtacus, groaned, and smote both his thighs, and
indignant exclaimed:

"Father Jove, surely now at least thou also hast become utterly
deceitful; for I did not expect that the Grecian heroes would abide our
strength and invincible hands. But they, as wasps flexible[398] in the
middle, and bees, [which] make their dwellings in a rugged path, nor
quit their hollow mansion; but awaiting the huntsmen, fight for their
offspring; so are these unwilling to retire from the gates, though being
only two, until they be either killed or taken."

   [Footnote 396: "Put for [Greek: araron tas apidas allelon ep'
   allalois], _clipeos consertos_ manibus ante se tenebant, [Greek:
   synaspismo] facto."--Heyne. Kennedy well observes that "we may
   trace here the rude outline of the celebrated phalanx, which
   formed so prominent a feature of the Macedonian tactics."]

   [Footnote 397: From this passage, Heyne observes that the gates
   must have opened inwards, being secured from within by a double
   bolt (cf. ver. 455, sqq.). See D'Orville on Chariton, i. xii. p.
   274, ed. Lips. On the [Greek: ocheis], on bars, cf. Pollux, x.
   4.]

   [Footnote 398: Or "streaked." See Porphyr. Quaest. iii. But
   Buttmann, Lexil. p. 64, dwells much upon the force of [Greek:
   meson], observing, "in no insect is _flexibility_ more evident
   than in the wasp, where the lower part of its body is joined as
   it were by a point with the upper."]

Thus he spake, nor did he persuade the mind of Jove, saying these
things: for his soul designed to bestow glory upon Hector. In the
meantime others were waging the battle at other gates; but difficult
would it be for me, as if I were a god, to enumerate all these things;
for around the wall in every direction a furiously-raging fire of stones
was aroused,[399] and the Greeks, although grieving, fought from
necessity for their ships; and all the gods were sorrowful in their
minds; as many as were allies to the Greeks in battle.

   [Footnote 399:

   "Through the long walls the stony showers were heard,
   The blaze of flames, the flash of arms appeared."--Pope.]

But the Lapithae began the battle and contest. Then the son of Pirithous,
brave Polypoetes, smote Damasus with his spear, through his
brazen-cheeked helmet; nor did the brazen casque withstand, but the
brazen blade burst quite through the bone, and all the brain within was
shattered. Thus he subdued him, rushing on, and afterwards he slew Pylon
and Ormenus. And Leonteus, a branch of Mars, wounded Hippomachus, the
son of Antimachus, with his spear, striking him at the belt. Next,
drawing his sharp sword from the sheath, he, rushing through the crowd,
smote Antiphates first, hand to hand, and he was dashed on his back to
the ground; then Menon and Iaemenus, and Orestes, all one over another he
brought to the fertile earth.

Whilst they were stripping off their glittering armour, those youths,
meantime, who were most numerous and most brave, and who were most eager
to break down the wall, and burn the ships with fire, followed Polydamas
and Hector, and they anxiously deliberated, standing at the trench. For
an augury had appeared on the left to them while eager to cross, a
high-flying eagle dividing the people,[400] bearing in his talons a
monstrous blood-stained serpent, alive, still panting; nor was it yet
forgetful of fighting; for, while holding it, writhing backwards, it
wounded him upon the breast near the neck; but he let it drop from him
to the ground, afflicted with anguish, and threw it into the midst of
the crowd, and, flapping his wings, he fled away with the breeze of the
wind. And the Trojans shuddered as they beheld the spotted serpent lying
in the midst, a prodigy of aegis-bearing Jove. Then Polydamas, standing
near, addressed gallant Hector:

"Hector, somehow or other thou art ever chiding me in the assemblies,
although proposing good counsels; because it is by no means becoming for
a man, being a citizen, to harangue contrary to thee, either in council
or at any time in war; but ever to increase thy authority. Yet will I
again speak as appears to me to be best. Let us not go about to fight
with the Greeks for their ships; for thus do I think it will end, as
sure as this augury has come to the Trojans desiring to cross, the
high-flying eagle upon the left dividing the army, bearing in its talons
a huge blood-stained serpent, [still] living; but presently it dropped
it, before it reached its dear home, nor succeeded in carrying it to
give it to its young: so we, if even we shall with great force break
through the gates and wall of the Greeks, and the Greeks shall give
way,--not in order shall we return by the same way from the ships: for
we shall leave many Trojans, whom the Greeks, fighting for the ships,
will subdue with the brass. Thus indeed would the diviner, who truly
kens omens in his mind, interpret, and the people would obey him."

   [Footnote 400: Either flying between the ranks of the Trojans, or
   between the two opposing armies. Compare Cicero's translation, de
   Divin. i. 47, and Virg. AEn. xi. 751, sqq. (with Macrob. Sat. v.
   13), and xii. 247, sqq. The event of the Trojan war proved that
   Polydamas was right in his interpretation.]

But him sternly regarding, crest-tossing Hector thus addressed: "O
Polydamas, thou dost not say things agreeable to me: besides, thou
knowest how to devise other counsel better than this. If, however, thou
really speakest this with seriousness, then truly have the gods
destroyed thy judgment from thee, who advisest me to be forgetful of the
counsels of lofty-thundering Jove, which he hath himself undertaken for
me, and confirmed. And thou exhortest me to obey the wing-expanding
birds; which I very little regard, nor do I care for them, whether they
fly to the right towards the Morn and the Sun, or to the left towards
the darkening west; but let us obey the will of mighty Jove, who rules
over all mortals and immortals. There is one augury, the best, to fight
for our country.[401] Why dost thou dread the war and conflict? For
although all the rest of us should perish round the ships of the Greeks,
there is no fear that thou wilt perish, for thy heart is not persevering
in the fight, nor warlike. But if thou darest to abstain from the
combat, or dissuading, dost avert another from the battle, immediately
stricken by my spear, shalt thou lose thy life."
