The man laughed shortly, only saying:

"Is darkness like daylight?"

"Then he is not like Jarl Halfden."

Now the honest man was going to ask in great wonder how I knew of
him, when there came the quick trot of horses to the door, and a
stern voice, which had in its tones somewhat familiar to me, called
him:

"Raud, come forth!"

My host started up, and saying, "It is Jarl Ingvar," went to the
door, while I too rose and followed him, for I would not seem to
avoid meeting the son of Lodbrok, my friend.

"Where is this stranger?" said the jarl's voice; "bring him forth."

Raud turned to beckon me, but I was close to him, and came out of
the hut unbidden.

There sat a great man, clad in light chain mail and helmed, with
his double-headed axe slung to his saddle bow, but seeming to have
come from hunting, for he carried a short, broad-pointed boar
spear, and on the wrist of his bridle hand sat a hooded hawk like
Lodbrok's. His face had in it a look both of his father and of
Halfden, but it was hard and stern; and whereas they had brown
hair, his was jet black as a raven's wing. Maybe he was ten years
older than Halfden.

There were five or six other men, seemingly of rank, and on
horseback also, behind him, but they wore no armour, and were in
hunting gear only, and again there were footmen, leading hounds
like the great one that stood by Raud and me. And two men there
were who led between them Beorn, holding him lest he should fall,
either from weakness or terror, close to the jarl.

So I stood before Ingvar the Jarl, and wondered how things would
go, and what Beorn had said, though I had no fear of him. And as
the jarl gazed at me I raised my hand, saying in the viking's
greeting:

"Skoal to Jarl Ingvar!"

At that he half raised hand in answer, but checked himself, saying
shortly:

"Who are you, and how come you by my father's boat?"

I was about to answer, but at that word it seemed that for the
first time Beorn learnt into whose hands he had fallen, and he fell
on his knees between his two guards, crying for mercy. I think that
he was distraught with terror, for his words were thick and broken,
and he had forgotten that none but I knew of his ill deed.

That made the jarl think that somewhat was amiss, and he bade his
men bind us both.

"Bind them fast, and find my brother Hubba," he said, and men rode
away into the forest. But I spoke to him boldly.

"Will you bind a man who bears these tokens, Jarl?"

And I held out my hand to him, showing him the rings that Lodbrok
and Halfden had given me.

"My father's ring--and Halfden's!" he said, gripping my hand, as he
looked closely at the runes upon them, so tightly that it was pain
to me. "By Odin's beard, this grows yet stranger! Who are you, and
whence, and how came you by these things?"

"I am Wulfric, son of Elfric, the Thane of Reedham, 'the merchant'
as men call him. I have been Jarl Lodbrok's friend, and have fought
by the side of Halfden, his son, as these tokens may tell you. As
for the rest, that is for yourself alone, Jarl. For I have no good
tidings, as I fear."

"Who is this man, then, and why cries he thus in terror?"

"Beorn, falconer to Eadmund, King of the East Angles," I said.

But I would not answer at once to the other question, and Ingvar
seemed not to notice it.

Then there was silence while the great jarl sat on his horse very
still, and looked hard at me and at Beorn; but when the men would
have bound us he signed them back, letting Beorn go free. Whereupon
his knees gave way, and he sank down against the house wall, while
I leant against it and looked at the mighty Dane, somewhat dreading
what I had to tell him, but meaning to go through all plainly.

Now the ring of men closed round us, staring at us, but in silence,
save for the ringing of the horns that were blowing in the woods to
call Hubba from his sport. And Jarl Ingvar sat still, as if carved
in oak, and seemed to ponder, frowning heavily at us, though the
look in his eyes went past me as it were.

Glad was I when a horseman or two rode up and reined in alongside
Ingvar. I think that the foremost rider was the most goodly warrior
to look on that I had ever seen, and one might know well that he
was Lodbrok's son.

"Ho, brother!" he cried; "I thought you had harboured the greatest
bear in all Jutland in Raud's hut. And it is naught but two
strangers. What is the trouble with them?"

"Look at yon man's hand," said Ingvar.

I held out my hand, and Hubba looked at the rings, whereupon his
face lit up as Halfden's had lighted, and he said:

"News of our father and brother! That is well; tell us, friend, all
that you know."

"Stay," said Ingvar; "I took yon man from the boat we made for our
father; he was half dead therein, and his wrists have the marks of
cords on them; also when he heard my name he began to cry for
mercy, and I like it not."

"This friend of our folk will tell us all," said Hubba.

"Aye," said I, "I will tell you, Jarls. But I would speak to you
alone."

"Tell me," said Ingvar shortly; "came my father to your shores in
yon boat alive?"

"Aye," I answered.

"And he died thereafter?"

"He died, Jarl," I said; and I said it sadly.

Then said Hubba:

"Almost had I a hope that he yet lived, as you live. But it was a
poor hope. We have held him as dead for many a long day."

But Ingvar looked at Beorn fixedly, and the man shrank away from
his gaze.

"How did he die, is what I would know?" he said sternly.

"Let the man to whom Halfden and Lodbrok gave these gifts tell us
presently. We have enough ill news for the time. Surely we knew
that the jarl was dead, and it is ours but to learn how;" said
Hubba.

"How know you that these men slew not both?"

"Jarl Ingvar," I said; "I will tell you all you will, but I would
do so in some less hurried way than this. For I have much to tell."

"Take the men home, brother," said Hubba; "then we can talk."

"Bind the men," said Ingvar again.

"Nay, brother, not the man who wears those rings," said Hubba
quickly.

"Maybe, and it is likely, that they are ill come by, and he will
make up some lie about them," answered Ingvar.

"It will be easily seen if he does," answered his brother; "wait
till you know."

Ingvar reined his horse round and rode away without another word.
Then Hubba bade the man Raud and his brother, a tall man who had
come with the Jarl Ingvar, take charge of us until word should come
from him, and then rode after Ingvar with the rest of the folk.

"Come into the house," said Raud to me. "I fear you have ill news
enough, though only what we have expected."

So we went inside, and I sat in my old place beside the fire. Rolf,
the brother, helped Beorn to rise, and set him on a seat in a
corner where he could rest, and then we were all silent. The great
dog came and sat by me, so that I stroked him and spoke to him,
while he beat his tail on the floor in response.

"See you that," said one brother to the other.

"Aye; Vig says true, mostly."

"One may trust him," said Raud; telling of how Vig the dog had made
friends with me at first, and he nodded in friendly wise to me, so
that I would not seem to hold aloof, and spoke to him.

"That is Jarl Hubba, surely?"

"Aye, and the best warrior in all Denmark," said Raud. "We fear
Ingvar, and we love Halfden; but Hubba is such a hero as was Ragnar
himself."

And once set on that matter, the two honest men were unwearied in
telling tales of the valour and skill of their master, so that I
had no room for my own thoughts, which was as well.

Then came a man, riding swiftly, to say that the jarls had left
their hunting, and that we were to be taken to the great house.
Moreover, that Rolf and Raud were to be held answerable for our
safe keeping. When I heard that I laughed.

"I will go willingly," I said, rising up.

"What of this man who sits silent here?" asked Rolf.

"Little trouble will be with him," said his brother.

And indeed Beorn almost needed carrying forth.



CHAPTER VIII. HOW WE FARED WITH INGVAR THE DANE.


We came to the shores of a haven at a river mouth, and there we saw
the town clustering round a large hall that rose in the midst of
the lesser houses, which were mostly low roofed and clay walled,
like that of Raud, though some were better, and built of logs set
upon stone foundations. The hall stood on higher ground than the
rest of the houses, so that from the gate of the heavy timber
stockade that went all round it one could see all the windings of
the haven channel and the sea that lay some half mile or more away
at its mouth. And all the town had a deep ditch and mound round it,
as if there was ever fear of foes from shoreward, for these came
down to the haven banks, and the only break they had was where a
wharf and the ship garth were. There were several ships housed in
their long sheds, as I could see.

All round the great hall and the buildings that belonged to it was
a stockade of pointed logs, so that it stood in a wide courtyard on
all four sides, and the great gate of the stockade was opposite the
timber porch of the hall itself. There were other doors in the side
of the hall, but they were high up, and reached by ladders; and
there seemed to be only one more gate in the stockade, leading
landward, and both were such as might not easily be broken down,
when once they were closed and barred with the square logs that
stood beside the entrances ready. And all the windows of the hall
were very high up and narrow, and the roof was timbered, not
thatched.

This was the strongest house that I had ever seen, and I said to
Raud as I looked at it:

"This place is built to stand some fierce fighting. What need have
you of such strength?"

He laughed, and answered:

"Why, much need indeed! For when the ships are gone a-viking we are
weak in men, so needs must have strong walls to keep out all comers
from over seas. And we have an ill neighbour or two, who would fain
share in our booty. However, men know in Sweden, and Finmark, and
Norway also, that it is ill meddling with Jarl Ingvar and his
brothers."

We passed through the stockade gate, and went straight to the
porch; all the woodwork of which was carved and gaily painted, and
so were eaves and rafter ends and tie beams.

Two sturdy axemen stood at the doorway, and they spoke freely to
the brothers, asking questions of us and of our tale.

Then roared the voice of Jarl Ingvar from within, bidding the men
cease prating and bring us in, and so we entered.

A great fire burnt in the centre of the hall, and the smoke rose up
and found its way out under the eaves; and there were skins and
heads of wild beasts on the wall, amid which arms and armour hung
everywhere, bright in the firelight. Yet the hall, though it was
carved on wall, and rafter, and doorway, was not so bright as ours
at Reedham, nor so pleasant.

Ingvar and Hubba sat on one side of the fire, where the smoke was
driven away from them, and before them was set a long bench where
we should be placed. There Hubba bade us sit down, telling the two
men to go without and wait.

So we were left face to face with those two, and I saw that
Ingvar's face was dark with doubt, but that Hubba seemed less
troubled. Yet both looked long and sternly at us.

"Tell us this tale of yours," said Ingvar at last; "and lie not."

Now it seemed to me that it were well to get the worst over at once
without beating about beforehand. And now that the jarls knew that
Lodbrok was dead, the hardest was to tell them how he died, and why
I was here thus.

"Well loved I Lodbrok the Jarl, and well do I love Halfden his
son," I said. "Have patience with me while I tell all from the
first."

"Go on," said Ingvar, knitting his brows.

"Safely came Jarl Lodbrok to the English shores," I went on;
"steering his boat through the storm as I think no other man might.
And my father and I, lying at anchor for tide in our coasting ship,
took him from the breakers. Some of his craft taught he me, else
had I not been here today. So he bided with us until I went to sea,
and there I met Halfden, and went on a raid with him, coming back
from the South Saxon shores to wait at our place for his coming to
take Lodbrok home. But he came not last winter, and so we waited
till this spring should bring him. For my ship was lost, and no
other came."

"What!" said Ingvar; "he died not of stress of storm, but lived so
long! Then he has been slain!" and he half started from his seat in
rage.

But Hubba, though his teeth were set, drew him back.

"Hear all," he said.

I went on without bidding, not seeming to note these things.

"The jarl and I hunted together, and the chance of the day parted
us, and he was slain; nor can I say by whom. But this man and I,
being found with his body, were accused of the deed. And because
there was no proof, our great earl, who loves even-handed justice,
would have us cast adrift, even as was Lodbrok; that the guilty
might suffer, and the innocent escape."

Then Ingvar rose up, white and shaking with wrath, and drew out his
sword. Whereon Beorn yelled and fell on the floor, grovelling with
uplifted hands and crying for mercy.

But the great jarl paid no heed to him, and hove up the sword with
both hands over my head, saying in a hoarse voice:

"Say that you lie--he is not dead--or you slew him!"

Now I think the long struggle with the sea, or my full trust in the
earl's words, or both, had taken away my fear of death, for I spoke
