    The spices yield a rich perfume,
      The lilies grow and thrive,
      The lilies grow and thrive.
    Refreshing showers of grace divine
    From Jesus flow to every vine,
      Which makes the dead revive,
      Which makes the dead revive.


"THE CHARIOT! THE CHARIOT!"

Henry Hart Milman, generally known as Dean Milman, was born in 1791, and
was educated at Oxford. In 1821 he was installed as university professor
of poetry at Oxford, and it was while filling this position that he
wrote this celebrated hymn, under the title of "The Last Day." It is not
only a hymn, but a poem--a sublime ode that recalls, in a different
movement, the tones of the "Dies Irae."

Dean Milman (of St Paul's), besides his many striking poems and learned
historical works, wrote at least twelve hymns, among which are--

    Ride on, ride on in majesty,

    O help us Lord; each hour of need
      Thy heavenly succor give,

    When our heads are bowed with woe,

--which last may have been written soon after he laid three of his
children in one grave, in the north aisle of Westminster Abbey. He
lived a laborious and useful life of seventy-seven years, dying Sept.
24, 1868.

There were times in the old revivals when the silver clarion of the
"Chariot Hymn" must needs replace the ruder blast of Occum in old
"Ganges" and sinners unmoved by the invisible God of Horeb be made to
behold Him--in a vision of the "Last Day."

    The Chariot! the Chariot! its wheels roll in fire
    When the Lord cometh down in the pomp of His ire,
    Lo, self-moving, it drives on its pathway of cloud,
    And the heavens with the burden of Godhead are bowed.

       *       *       *       *       *

    The Judgment! the Judgment! the thrones are all set,
    Where the Lamb and the white-vested elders are met;
    There all flesh is at once in the sight of the Lord,
    And the doom of eternity hangs on His word.

The name "Williams" or "J. Williams" is attached to various editions of
the trumpet-like tune, but so far no guide book gives us location, date
or sketch of the composer.


"COME, MY BRETHREN."

Another of the "unstudied" revival hymns of invitation.

    Come, my brethren, let us try
      For a little season
    Every burden to lay by,
      Come and let us reason.

    What is this that casts you down.
      What is this that grieves you?
    Speak and let your wants be known;
      Speaking may relieve you.

This colloquial rhyme was apt to be started by some good brother or
sister in one of the chilly pauses of a prayer-meeting. The air (there
was never anything more to it) with a range of only a fifth, slurred the
last syllable of every second line, giving the quaint effect of a bent
note, and altogether the music was as homely as the verse. Both are
anonymous. But the little chant sometimes served its purpose wonderfully
well.


"BRETHREN, WHILE WE SOJOURN HERE."

This hymn was always welcome in the cottage meetings as well as in the
larger greenwood assemblies. It was written by Rev. Joseph Swain, about
1783.

    Brethren, while we sojourn here
    Fight we must, but should not fear.
    Foes we have, but we've a Friend,
    One who loves us to the end;
    Forward then with courage go;
    Long we shall not dwell below,
    Soon the joyful news will come,
   "Child, your Father calls, 'Come home.'"

The tune was sometimes "Pleyel's Hymn," but oftener it was sung to a
melody now generally forgotten of much the same movement but slurred in
peculiarly sweet and tender turns. The cadence of the last tune gave
the refrain line a melting effect:

    Child, your Father calls, "Come home."

Some of the spirit of this old tune (in the few hymnals where the hymn
is now printed) is preserved in Geo. Kingsley's "Messiah" which
accompanies the words, but the modulations are wanting.

Joseph Swain was born in Birmingham, Eng. in 1761. Bred among mechanics,
he was early apprenticed to the engraver's trade, but he was a boy of
poetic temperament and fond of writing verses. After the spiritual
change which brought a new purpose into his life, he was baptized by Dr.
Rippon and studied for the ministry. At the age of about twenty-five, he
was settled over the Baptist church in Walworth, where he remained till
his death, April 16, 1796.

For more than a century his hymns have lived and been loved in all the
English-speaking world. Among those still in use are--

    How sweet, how heavenly is the sight,

    Pilgrims we are to Canaan bound,

    O Thou in whose presence my soul takes delight.


"HAPPY DAY."

    O happy day that fixed my choice.
                                 --_Doddridge_.
    O how happy are they who the Saviour obey.
                                 --_Charles Wesley_.

These were voices as sure to be heard in converts' meetings as the
leader's prayer or text, the former sung inevitably to Rimbault's tune,
"Happy Day," and the latter to a "Western Melody" quite as closely akin
to Wesley's words.

Edward Francis Rimbault, born at Soho, Eng., June 13, 1816, was at
sixteen years of age organist at the Soho Swiss Church, and became a
skilled though not a prolific composer. He once received--and
declined--the offer of an appointment as professor of music in Harvard
College. Died of a lingering illness Sept, 26, 1876.


"COME, HOLY SPIRIT, HEAVENLY DOVE."
                               --_Watts_.

This was the immortal song-litany that fitted almost anywhere into every
service. The Presbyterians and Congregationalists sang it in Tansur's
"St. Martins," the Baptists in William Jones' "Stephens" and the
Methodists in Maxim's "Turner" (which had the most music), but the hymn
went about as well with one as with another.

The Rev. William Jones (1726-1800) an English rector, and Abraham Maxim
of Buckfield, Me., (1773-1829) contributed quite a liberal share of the
"continental" tunes popular in the latter part of the 18th century.
Maxim was eccentric, but the tradition that an unfortunate affair of the
heart once drove him into the woods to make away with himself, but a
bird on the roof of a logger's hut, making plaintive sounds,
interrupted him, and he sat down and wrote the tune "Hallowell," on a
strip of white birch bark, is more likely legendary. The following
words, said to have inspired his minor tune, are still set to it in the
old collections:

    As on some lonely building's top
      The sparrow makes her moan,
    Far from the tents of joy and hope
      I sit and grieve alone.[25]

[Footnote 25: Versified by Nahum Tate from Ps. 102:7.]

Maxim was fond of the minor mode, but his minors, like "Hallowell," "New
Durham," etc., are things of the past. His major chorals and fugues,
such as "Portland," "Buckfield," and "Turner" had in them the spirit of
healthier melody and longer life. He published at least two collections,
_The Oriental Harmony_, in 1802, and _The Northern Harmony_, in 1805.

William Tansur (Tans-ur), author of "St. Martins" (1669-1783), was an
organist, composer, compiler, and theoretical writer. He was born at
Barnes, Surrey, Eng., (according to one account,) and died at St.
Neot's.


"COME, THOU FOUNT OF EVERY BLESSING."

This hymn of Rev. Robert Robinson was almost always heard in the tune of
"Nettleton," composed by John Wyeth, about 1812. The more wavy melody of
"Sicily" (or "Sicilian Hymn") sometimes carried the verses, but never
with the same sympathetic unction. The sing-song movement and accent of
old "Nettleton" made it the country favorite.

Robert Robinson, born in Norfolk, Eng., Sept. 27, 1735, was a poor boy,
left fatherless at eight years of age, and apprenticed to a barber, but
was converted by the preaching of Whitefield and studied till he
obtained a good education, and was ordained to the Methodist ministry.
He is supposed to have written his well-known hymn in 1758. A certain
unsteadiness of mind, however, caused him to revise his religious
beliefs too often for his spiritual health or enjoyment, and after
preaching as a Methodist, a Baptist, and an Independent, he finally
became a Socinian. On a stage-coach journey, when a lady
fellow-passenger began singing "Come, Thou Fount of Every Blessing," to
relieve the monotony of the ride, he said to her, "Madam, I am the
unhappy man who wrote that hymn many years ago; and I would give a
thousand worlds, if I had them, if I could feel as I felt then."

Robinson died June 9, 1790.

John Wyeth was born in Cambridge, Mass., 1792, and died at Harrisburg,
Pa., 1858. He was a musician and publisher, and issued a Music Book,
_Wyeth's Repository of Sacred Music_.


"A POOR WAYFARING MAN OF GRIEF,"

Written by James Montgomery, Dec., 1826, was a hymn of tide and headway
in George Coles' tune of "Duane St.," with a step that made every heart
beat time. The four picturesque eight-line stanzas made a practical
sermon in verse and song from Matt. 25:35, telling how--

    A poor wayfaring man of grief
      Hath often crossed me on my way,
    Who sued so humbly for relief
      That I could never answer nay.
    I had no power to ask his name,
      Whither he went or whence he came,
    Yet there was something in his eye
      That won my love, I knew not why;

--and in the second and third stanzas the narrator relates how he
entertained him, and this was the sequel--

    Then in a moment to my view
      The stranger started from disguise
    The token in His hand I knew;
      My Saviour stood before my eyes.

When once that song was started, every tongue took it up, (and it was
strange if every foot did not count the measure,) and the coldest
kindled with gospel warmth as the story swept on.[26]

[Footnote 26: Montgomery's poem, "The Stranger," has seven stanzas. The
full dramatic effect of their connection could only be produced by a set
piece.]


"WHEN FOR ETERNAL WORLDS I STEER."

It was no solitary experience for hearers in a house of prayer where the
famous Elder Swan held the pulpit, to feel a climactic thrill at the
sudden breaking out of the eccentric orator with this song in the very
middle of his sermon--

    When for eternal worlds I steer,
    And seas are calm and skies are clear,
    And faith in lively exercise,
    And distant hills of Canaan rise,
    My soul for joy then claps her wings,
    And loud her lovely sonnet sings,
     "Vain world, adieu!"

    With cheerful hope her eyes explore
    Each landmark on the distant shore,
    The trees of life, the pastures green,
    The golden streets, the crystal stream,
    Again for joy, she claps her wings,
    And loud her lovely sonnet sings,
     "Vain world, adieu!"

Elder Jabez Swan was born in Stonington, Ct., Feb. 23, 1800, and died
1884. He was a tireless worker as a pastor (long in New London, Ct.,)
and a still harder toiler in the field as an evangelist and as a helper
eagerly called for in revivals; and, through all, he was as happy as a
boy in vacation. He was unlearned in the technics of the schools, but
always eloquent and armed with ready wit; unpolished, but poetical as a
Hebrew prophet and as terrible in his treatment of sin. Scoffers and
"hoodlums" who interrupted him in his meetings never interrupted him but
once.

[Illustration: James Montgomery]

The more important and canonical hymnals and praise-books had no place
for "Sonnet," as the bugle-like air to this hymn was called. Rev.
Jonathan Aldrich, about 1860, harmonized it in his _Sacred Lyre_, but
this, and the few other old vestry and field manuals that contain it,
were compiled before it became the fashion to date and authenticate
hymns and tunes. In this case both are anonymous. Another (and probably
earlier) tune sung to the same words is credited to "S. Arnold," and
appears to have been composed about 1790.


"I'M A PILGRIM, AND I'M A STRANGER."

This hymn still lives--and is likely to live, at least in collections
that print revival music. Mrs. Mary Stanley (Bunce) Dana, born in
Beaufort, S.C., Feb. 15, 1810, wrote it while living in a northern
state, where her husband died. By the name Dana she is known in
hymnology, though she afterwards became Mrs. Shindler. The tune
identified with the hymn, "I'm a Pilgrim," is untraced, save that it is
said to be an "Italian Air," and that its original title was "Buono
Notte" (good night).

No other hymn better expresses the outreaching of ardent faith. Its very
repetitions emphasize and sweeten the vision of longed-for fruition.

    I can tarry, I can tarry but a night,
    Do not detain me, for I am going.

       *       *       *       *       *

    There the sunbeams are ever shining,
    O my longing heart, my longing heart is there.

       *       *       *       *       *

    Of that country to which I'm going,
    My Redeemer, my Redeemer is the light.
    There is no sorrow, nor any sighing,
    Nor any sin there, nor any dying,
      I'm a pilgrim, etc.

The same devout poetess also wrote (1840) the once popular consolatory
hymn,--

    O sing to me of heaven
    When I'm about to die,

--sung to the familiar tune by Rev. E.W. Dunbar; also to a melody
composed 1854 by Dr. William Miller.

The line was first written--

    When _I am called_ to die,

--in the author's copy. The hymn (occasioned by the death of a pious
friend) was written Jan. 15, 1840.

Mrs. Dana (Shindler) died in Texas, Feb. 8, 1883.


"JOYFULLY, JOYFULLY ONWARD I MOVE."

The maker of this hymn has been confounded with the maker of its
tune--partly, perhaps, from the fact that the real composer of the tune
also wrote hymns. The author of the words was the Rev. William Hunter,
D.D., an Irish-American, and a Methodist minister. He was born near
Ballymoney, County Antrim, Ire., May, 1811, and was brought to America
when a child six years old. He received his education in the common
schools and at Madison College, Hamilton, N.Y., (now Madison
University), and was successively a pastor, editor and Hebrew professor.
Besides his work in these different callings, he wrote many helpful
hymns--in all one hundred and twenty-five--of which "Joyfully,
Joyfully," dated 1842, is the best. It began originally with the line--

    Friends fondly cherished have passed on before,

--and the line,--

    Home to the land of delight I will go.

--was written,--

    Home to the land of bright spirits I'll go.

Dr. Hunter died in Ohio, 1877.


_THE TUNE._

Rev. Abraham Dow Merrill, the author of the music to this triumphal
death-song, was born in Salem, N.H., 1796, and died April 29, 1878. He
also was a Methodist minister, and is still everywhere remembered by the
denomination to which he belonged in New Hampshire and Vermont. He rode
over these states mingling in revival scenes many years. His picture
bears a close resemblance to that of Washington, and he was somewhat
famous for this resemblance. His work was everywhere blessed, and he
left an imperishable influence in New England. The tune, linked with Dr.
Hunter's hymn, formed the favorite melody which has been the dying song
of many who learned to sing it amid the old revival scenes:

    Death, with thy weapons of war lay me low;
    Strike, king of terrors; I fear not the blow.
    Jesus has broken the bars of the tomb,
    Joyfully, joyfully haste to thy home.


"TIS THE OLD SHIP OF ZION, HALLELUJAH!"

This may be found, vocalized with full harmony, in the _American
Vocalist_. With all the parts together (more or less) it must have made
a vociferous song-service, but the hymn was oftener sung simply in
soprano unison; and there was sound enough in the single melody to
satisfy the most zealous.

    All her passengers will land on the bright eternal shore,
        O, glory hallelujah!
    She has landed many thousands, and will land as many more,
        O, glory hallelujah!

Both hymn and tune have lost their creators' names, and, like many
another "voice crying in the wilderness," they have left no record of
their beginning of days.


"MY BROTHER, I WISH YOU WELL."

    My brother, I wish you well,
    My brother, I wish you well;
    When my Lord calls I trust you will
    Be mentioned in the Promised Land.

Echoes that remain to us of those fervid and affectionate, as well as
resolute and vehement, expressions of religious life as sung in the
early revivals of New England, in parts of the South, and especially in
the Middle West, are suggestive of spontaneous melody forest-born, and
as unconscious of scale, clef or tempo as the song of a bird. The above
"hand-shaking" ditty at the altar gatherings apparently took its tune
self-made, inspired in its first singer's soul by the feeling of the
moment--and the strain was so simple that the convert could join in at
once and chant--

    When my Lord comes I trust _I shall_

--through all the loving rotations of the crude hymn-tune. Such
song-births of spiritual enthusiasm are beyond enumeration--and it is
useless to hunt for author or composer. Under the momentum of a
wrestling hour or a common rapture of experience, counterpoint was
unthought of, and the same notes for every voice lifted pleading and
praise in monophonic impromptu. The refrains--

    O how I love Jesus,

    O the Lamb, the Lamb, the loving Lamb,

    I'm going home to die no more,

    Pilgrims we are to Canaan's land,

    O turn ye, O turn ye, for why will you die,

    Come to Jesus, come to Jesus, just now,

--each at the sound of its first syllable brought its own music to every
singer's tongue, and all--male and female--were sopranos together. This
habit in singing those rude liturgies of faith and fellowship was
recognized by the editors of the _Revivalist_, and to a multitude of
them space was given only for the printed melody, and of this sometimes
only the three or four initial bars. The tunes were the church's rural
field-tones that everybody knew.

Culture smiles at this unclassic hymnody of long ago, but its history
should disarm criticism. To wanderers its quaint music and "pedestrian"
verse were threshold call and door-way welcome into the church of the
living God. Even in the flaming days of the Second Advent following, in
1842-3, they awoke in many hardened hearts the spiritual glow that never
dies. The delusion passed away, but the grace remained.

The church--and the world--owe a long debt to the old evangelistic
refrains that rang through the sixty years before the Civil War, some of
them flavored with tuneful piety of a remoter time. They preached
righteousness, and won souls that sermons could not reach. They opened
heaven to thousands who are now rejoicing there.




CHAPTER VIII.

SUNDAY-SCHOOL HYMNS.


_SHEPHERD OF TENDER YOUTH._

[Greek: Stomion polon adaon]

We are assured by repeated references in the patristic writings that the
primitive years of the Christian Church were not only years of suffering
but years of song. That the despised and often persecuted "Nazarenes,"
scattered in little colonies throughout the Roman Empire, did not forget
to mingle tones of praise and rejoicing with their prayers could readily
be believed from the much-quoted letter of a pagan lawyer, written about
as long after Jesus' death, as from now back to the death of John Quincy
Adams--the letter of Pliny the younger to the Emperor Trajan, in which
he reports the Christians at their meetings singing "hymns to Christ as
to a god."

Those disciples who spoke Greek seem to have been especially tuneful,
and their land of poets was doubtless the cradle of Christian hymnody.
Believers taught their songs to their children, and it is as certain
that the oldest Sunday-school hymn was written somewhere in the classic
East as that the Book of Revelation was written on the Isle of Patmos.
The one above indicated was found in an appendix to the _Tutor_, a book
composed by Titus Flavius Clemens of Alexandria, a Christian philosopher
and instructor whose active life began late in the second century. It
follows a treatise on Jesus as the Great Teacher, and, though his own
words elsewhere imply a more ancient origin of the poem, it is always
called "Clement's Hymn." The line quoted above is the first of an
English version by the late Rev. Henry Martyn Dexter, D.D. It does not
profess to be a translation, but aims to transfer to our common tongue
the spirit and leading thoughts of the original.

    Shepherd of tender youth,
    Guiding in love and truth
      Through devious ways;
    Christ, our triumphant King,
    We come Thy name to sing,
    Hither our children bring
      To shout Thy praise.

The last stanza of Dr. Dexter's version represents the sacred song
spirit of both the earliest and the latest Christian centuries:

    So now, and till we die
    Sound we Thy praises high,
      And joyful sing;
    Infants, and the glad throng
    Who to Thy church belong
    Unite to swell the song
      To Christ our King.

While they give us the sentiment and the religious tone of the old hymn,
these verses, however, recognize the extreme difficulty of anything like
verbal fidelity in translating a Greek hymn, and in this instance there
are metaphors to avoid as being strange to modern taste. The first
stanza, literally rendered and construed, is as follows:

    Bridle of untaught foals,
    Wing of unwandering birds,
    Helm and Girdle of babes,
    Shepherd of royal lambs!
    Assemble Thy simple children
    To praise holily,
    To hymn guilelessly
    With innocent mouths
    Christ, the Guide of children.

Figures like--

    Catching the chaste fishes,

    Heavenly milk, etc.

--are necessarily avoided in making good English of the lines, and the
profusion of adoring epithets in the ancient poem (no less than
twenty-one different titles of Christ) would embarrass a modern song.

Dr. Dexter might have chosen an easier metre for his version, if (which
is improbable) he intended it to be sung, since a tune written to sixes
and fours takes naturally a more decided lyrical movement and emphasis
than the hymn reveals in his stanzas, though the second and fifth
possess much of the hymn quality and would sound well in Giardini's
"Italian Hymn."

More nearly a translation, and more in the cantabile style, is the
version of a Scotch Presbyterian minister, Rev. Hamilton M. Macgill,
D.D., two of whose stanzas are these:

    Thyself, Lord, be the Bridle
      These wayward wills to stay;
    Be Thine the Wing unwand'ring,
      To speed their upward way.

       *       *       *       *       *

    Let them with songs adoring
      Their artless homage bring
    To Christ the Lord, and crown Him
      The children's Guide and King.

The Dexter version is set to Monk's slow harmony of "St. Ambrose" in the
_Plymouth Hymnal_ (Ed. Dr. Lyman Abbott, 1894) without the writer's
name--which is curious, inasmuch as the hymn was published in the
_Congregationalist_ in 1849, in _Hedge and Huntington's_ (Unitarian)
_Hymn-book_ in 1853, in the _Hymnal of the Presbyterian Church_ in 1866,
and in Dr. Schaff's _Christ in Song_ in 1869.

Clement died about A.D. 220.


Rev. Henry Martyn Dexter, D.D., for twenty-three years the editor of the
_Congregationalist_, was born in Plymouth, Mass., Aug. 13, 1821. He was
a graduate of Yale (1840) and Andover Divinity School (1844), a
well-known antiquarian writer and church historian. Died Nov. 13, 1890.


"HOW HAPPY IS THE CHILD WHO HEARS."

This hymn was quite commonly heard in Sunday-schools during the
eighteen-thirties and forties, and, though retained in few modern
collections, its Sabbath echo lingers in the memory of the living
generation. It was written by Michael Bruce, born at Kinneswood,
Kinross-shire, Scotland, March 27, 1746. He was the son of a weaver, but
obtained a good education, taught school, and studied for the ministry.
He died, however, while in preparation for his expected work, July 5,
1767, at the age of twenty-one years, three months and eight days.

Young Bruce wrote hymns, and several poems, but another person wore the
honors of his work. John Logan, who was his literary executor,
appropriated the youthful poet's Mss. verses, and the hymn above
indicated--as well as the beautiful poem, "To the Cuckoo,"[27] still a
classic in English literature,--bore the name of Logan for more than a
hundred years. In _Julian's Dictionary of Hymnology_ is told at length
the story of the inquiry and discussion which finally exposed the long
fraud upon the fame of the rising genius who sank, like Henry Kirke
White, in his morning of promise.

[Footnote 27:
    Hail, beauteous stranger of the wood,
      Attendant on the Spring;
    Now Heaven repairs thy rural seat,
      And woods thy welcome ring.]


_THE TUNE._

Old "Balerma" was so long the musical mouth-piece of the pious
boy-schoolmaster's verses that the two became one expression, and one
could not be named without suggesting the other.

"Balerma" (Palermo) was ages away in style and sound from the later type
of Sunday-school tunes, resembling rather one of Palestrina's chorals
than the tripping melodies that took its place; but in its day juvenile
voices enjoyed it, and it suited very well the grave but winning words.

    How happy is the child who hears
      Instruction's warning voice,
    And who celestial Wisdom makes
      His early, only choice!

    For she hath treasures greater far
      Than East and West unfold,
    And her rewards more precious are
      Than all their stores of gold.

    She guides the young with innocence
