plain, but, although it might give momentary protection from the bullets
he was afraid to gallop into it, lest he be swept from his horse's back
by the boughs or bushes. But his direct course would run close to the
left side of it, and once more he sought to urge Old Jack to greater
speed.

The horse was still running without a jar. Ned could not feel a single
rough movement in the perfect machinery beneath him. Unless wounded Old
Jack would not fail him. He stole another of those fleeting glances
backward.

Several of the Mexicans, their ponies spent, were dropping out of the
race, but enough were left to make the odds far too great. Ned now
skimmed along the edge of the grove, and when he passed it he turned his
horse a little, so the trees were between him and his nearest pursuers.
Then he urged Old Jack to his last ounce of speed. The plain raced
behind him, and fortunate clouds, too, now came, veiling the moon and
turning the dusk into deeper darkness. Ned heard one disappointed cry
behind him, and then no sound but the flying beat of his own horse's
hoofs.

When he pulled rein and brought Old Jack to a walk he could see or hear
nothing of the Mexicans. The great horse was a lather of foam, his sides
heaving and panting, and Ned sprang to the ground. He reloaded his rifle
and pistol and then walked toward the west, leading Old Jack by the
bridle. He reckoned that the Mexicans would go toward the north,
thinking that he would naturally ride for San Antonio, and hence he
chose the opposite direction.

He walked a long time and presently he felt the horse rubbing his nose
gently against his arm. Ned stroked the soft muzzle.

"You've saved my life. Old Jack," he said, "and not for the first time.
You responded to every call."

The horse whinnied ever so softly, and Ned felt that he was not alone.
Now he threw the bridle reins back over the horse's head, and then the
two walked on, side by side, man and beast.

They stopped at times, and it may be that the horse as well as the boy
then looked and listened for a foe. But the Mexicans had melted away
completely in the night. It was likely now that they were going in the
opposite direction, and assured that he was safe from them for the time
Ned collapsed, both physically and mentally. Such tremendous exertions
and such terrible excitement were bound to bring reaction. He began to
tremble violently, and he became so weak that he could scarcely stand.
The horse seemed to be affected in much the same way and walked slowly
and painfully.

Ned saw another little grove, and he and the horse walked straight
toward it. It was fairly dense, and when he was in the center of it he
wrapped his rifle and himself in his serape and lay down. The horse sank
on his side near him. He did not care for anything now except to secure
rest. Mexicans or Comanches or Lipans might be on the plain only a few
hundred yards away. It did not matter to him. He responded to no emotion
save the desire for rest, and in five minutes he was in a deep sleep.

Ned slept until long after daylight. He was so much exhausted that he
scarcely moved during all that time. Nor did the horse. Old Jack had run
his good race and won the victory, and he, too, cared for nothing but to
rest.

Before morning some Lipan buffalo hunters passed, but they took no
notice of the grove and soon disappeared in the west. After the dawn a
detachment of Mexican lancers riding to the east to join the force of
Santa Anna also passed the clump of trees, but the horse and man lay in
the densest part of it, and no pair of Mexican eyes was keen enough to
see them there. They were answering the call of Santa Anna, and they
rode on at a trot, the grove soon sinking out of sight behind them.

Ned was awakened at last by the sun shining in his face. He stirred,
recalled in a vague sort of way where he was and why he was there, and
then rose slowly to his feet. His joints were stiff like those of an old
man, and he rubbed them to acquire ease. A great bay horse, saddle on
his back, was searching here and there for the young stems of grass. Ned
rubbed his eyes. It seemed to him that he knew that horse. And a fine
big horse he was, too, worth knowing and owning. Yes, it was Old Jack,
the horse that had carried him to safety.

His little store of provisions was still tied to the saddle and he ate
hungrily. At the end of the grove was a small pool formed by the
winter's rains, and though the water was far from clear he drank his
fill. He flexed and tensed his muscles again until all the stiffness and
soreness were gone. Then he made ready for his departure.

He could direct his course by the sun, and he intended to go straight to
San Antonio. He only hoped that he might get there before the arrival of
Santa Anna and his army. He could not spare the time to seek his
comrades, and he felt much apprehension for them, but he yet had the
utmost confidence in the skill of the Panther and Obed White.

It was about two hours before noon when Ned set out across the plain.
Usually in this region antelope were to be seen on the horizon, but
they were all gone now. The boy considered it a sure sign that Mexican
detachments had passed that way. It was altogether likely, too, so he
calculated, that the Mexican army was now nearer than he to San Antonio.
His flight had taken him to the west while Santa Anna was moving
straight toward the Texan outworks. But he believed that by steady
riding he could reach San Antonio within twenty-four hours.

The afternoon passed without event. Ned saw neither human beings nor
game on the vast prairie. He had hoped that by some chance he might meet
with his comrades, but there was no sign of them, and he fell back on
his belief that their skill and great courage had saved them. Seeking to
dismiss them from his thoughts for the time in order that he might
concentrate all his energies on San Antonio, he rode on. The horse had
recovered completely from his great efforts of the preceding night, and
once more that magnificent piece of machinery worked without a jar. Old
Jack moved over the prairie with long, easy strides. It seemed to Ned
that he could never grow weary. He patted the sinewy and powerful neck.

"Gallant comrade," he said, "you have done your duty and more. You, at
least, will never fail."

Twilight came down, but Ned kept on. By and by he saw in the east, and
for the third time, that fatal red glow extending far along the dusky
horizon. All that he had feared of Santa Anna was true. The dictator was
marching fast, whipping his army forward with the fierce energy that was
a part of his nature. It was likely, too, that squadrons of his cavalry
were much further on. A daring leader like Urrea would certainly be
miles ahead of the main army, and it was more than probable that bands
of Mexican horsemen were now directly between him and San Antonio.

Ned knew that he would need all his strength and courage to finish his
task. So he gave Old Jack a little rest, although he did not seem to
need it, and drew once more upon his rations.

When he remounted he was conscious that the air had grown much colder. A
chill wind began to cut him across the cheek. Snow, rain and wind have
played a great part in the fate of armies, and they had much to do with
the struggle between Texas and Mexico in that fateful February. Ned's
experience told him that another Norther was about to begin, and he was
glad of it. One horseman could make much greater progress through it
than an army.

The wind rose fast and then came hail and snow on its edge. The red glow
in the east disappeared. But Ned knew that it was still there. The
Norther had merely drawn an icy veil between. He shivered, and the horse
under him shivered, too. Once more he wrapped around his body the
grateful folds of the serape and he drew on a pair of buckskin gloves, a
part of his winter equipment.

Then he rode on straight toward San Antonio as nearly as he could
calculate. The Norther increased in ferocity. It brought rain, hail and
snow, and the night darkened greatly. Ned began to fear that he would
get lost. It was almost impossible to keep the true direction in such a
driving storm. He had no moon and stars to guide him, and he was
compelled to rely wholly upon instinct. Sometimes he was in woods,
sometimes upon the plain, and once or twice he crossed creeks, the
waters of which were swollen and muddy.

The Norther was not such a blessing after all. He might be going
directly away from San Antonio, while Santa Anna, with innumerable
guides, would easily reach there the next day. He longed for those
faithful comrades of his. The four of them together could surely find a
way out of this.

He prayed now that the Norther would cease, but his prayer was of no
avail. It whistled and moaned about him, and snow and hail were
continually driven in his face. Fortunately the brim of the sombrero
protected his eyes. He floundered on until midnight. The Norther was
blowing as fiercely as ever, and he and Old Jack were brought up by a
thicket too dense for them to penetrate.

Ned understood now that he was lost. Instinct had failed absolutely.
Brave and resourceful as he was he uttered a groan of despair. It was
torture to be so near the end of his task and then to fail. But the
despair lasted only a moment. The courage of a nature containing genuine
greatness brought back hope.

He dismounted and led his horse around the thicket. Then they came to a
part of the woods which seemed thinner, and not knowing anything else to
do he went straight ahead. But he stopped abruptly when his feet sank in
soft mud. He saw directly before him a stream yellow, swollen and
flowing faster than usual.

Ned knew that it was the San Antonio River, and now he had a clue. By
following its banks he would reach the town. The way might be long, but
it must inevitably lead him to San Antonio, and he would take it.

He remounted and rode forward as fast as he could. The river curved and
twisted, but he was far more cheerful now. The San Antonio was like a
great coiling rope, but if he followed it long enough he would certainly
come to the end that he wished. The Norther continued to blow. He and
his horse were a huge moving shape of white. Now and then the snow,
coating too thickly upon his serape, fell in lumps to the ground, but it
was soon coated anew and as thick as ever. But whatever happened he
never let the San Antonio get out of his sight.

He was compelled to stop at last under a thick cluster of oaks, where he
was somewhat sheltered from the wind and snow. Here he dismounted again,
stamped his feet vigorously for warmth and also brushed the snow from
his faithful horse. Old Jack, as usual, rubbed his nose against the
boy's arm.

The horse was a source of great comfort and strength to Ned. He always
believed that he would have collapsed without him. As nearly as he could
guess the time it was about halfway between midnight and morning, and in
order to preserve his strength he forced himself to eat a little more.

A half hour's rest, and remounting he resumed his slow progress by the
river. The rest had been good for both his horse and himself, and the
blood felt warmer in his veins. He moved for some time among trees and
thickets that lined the banks, and after a while he recognized familiar
ground. He had been in some of these places in the course of the siege
of San Antonio, and the town could not be far away.

It was probably two hours before daylight when he heard a sound which
was not that of the Norther, a sound which he knew instantly. It was the
dull clank of bronze against bronze. It could be made only by one cannon
striking against another. Then Santa Anna, or one of his generals,
despite the storm and the night, was advancing with his army, or a part
of it. Ned shivered, and now not from the cold.

The Texans did not understand the fiery energy of this man. They would
learn of it too late, unless he told them, and it might be too late even
then. He pressed on with as much increase of speed as the nature of the
ground would allow. In another hour the snow and hail ceased, but the
wind still blew fiercely, and it remained very cold.

The dawn began to show dimly through drifting clouds. Ned did not recall
until long afterward that it was the birthday of the great Washington.
By a singular coincidence Santa Anna appeared before Taylor with a
vastly superior force on the same birthday eleven years later.

It was a hidden sun, and the day was bleak with clouds and driving
winds. Nevertheless the snow that had fallen began to disappear. Ned and
Old Jack still made their way forward, somewhat slowly now, as they were
stiff and sore from the long night's fight with darkness and cold. On
his right, only a few feet away, was the swollen current of the San
Antonio. The stream looked deep to Ned, and it bore fragments of timber
upon its muddy bosom. It seemed to him that the waters rippled angrily
against the bank. His excited imagination--and full cause there
was--gave a sinister meaning to everything.

A heavy fog began to rise from the river and wet earth. He could not see
far in front of him, but he believed that the town was now only a mile
or two away. Soon a low, heavy sound, a measured stroke, came out of the
fog. It was the tolling of the church bell in San Antonio, and for some
reason its impact upon Ned's ear was like the stroke of death. A strange
chilly sensation ran down his spine.

He rode to the very edge of the stream and began to examine it for a
possible ford. San Antonio was on the other side, and he must cross.
But everywhere the dark, swollen waters threatened, and he continued his
course along the bank.

A thick growth of bushes and a high portion of the bank caused him
presently to turn away from the river until he could make a curve about
the obstacles. The tolling of the bell had now ceased, and the fog was
lifting a little. Out of it came only the low, angry murmur of the
river's current.

As Ned turned the curve the wind grew much stronger. The bank of fog was
split asunder and then floated swiftly away in patches and streamers. On
his left beyond the river Ned saw the roofs of the town, now glistening
in the clear morning air, and on his right, only four or five hundred
yards away, he saw a numerous troop of Mexican cavalry. In the figure at
the head of the horsemen he was sure that he recognized Urrea.

Ned's first emotion was a terrible sinking of the heart. After all that
he had done, after all his great journeys, hardships and dangers, he was
to fail with the towers and roofs of San Antonio in sight. It was the
triumphant cry of the Mexicans that startled him into life again. They
had seen the lone horseman by the river and they galloped at once toward
him. Ned had made no mistake. It was Urrea, pressing forward ahead of
the army, who led the troop, and it may be that he recognized the boy
also.

With the cry of the Mexicans ringing in his ears, the boy shouted to Old
Jack. The good horse, as always, made instant response, and began to
race along the side of the river. But even his mighty frame had been
weakened by so much strain. Ned noticed at once that the machinery
jarred. The great horse was laboring hard and the Mexican cavalry,
comparatively fresh, was coming on fast. It was evident that he would
soon be overtaken, and so sure were the Mexicans of it that they did not
fire.

There were deep reserves of courage and fortitude in this boy, deeper
than even he himself suspected. When he saw that he could not escape by
speed, the way out flashed upon him. To think was to do. He turned his
horse without hesitation and urged him forward with a mighty cry.

Never had Old Jack made a more magnificent response. Ned felt the mighty
mass of bone and muscle gather in a bunch beneath him. Then, ready to
expand again with violent energy, it was released as if by the touch of
a spring. The horse sprang from the high bank far out into the deep
river.

Ned felt his serape fly from him and his rifle dropped from his hand.
Then the yellow waters closed over both him and Old Jack. They came up
again, Ned still on the horse's back, but with an icy chill through all
his veins. He could not see for a moment or two, as the water was in his
eyes, but he heard dimly the shouts of the Mexicans and several shots.
Two or three bullets splashed the water around him and another struck
his sombrero, which was floating away on the surface of the stream.

The horse, turning somewhat, swam powerfully in a diagonal course across
the stream. Ned, dazed for the moment by the shock of the plunge from a
height into the water, clung tightly to his back. He sat erect at first,
and then remembering that he must evade the bullets leaned forward with
the horse's neck between him and the Mexicans.

More shots were fired, but again he was untouched, and then the horse
was feeling with his forefeet in the muddy bank for a hold. The next
instant, with a powerful effort, he pulled himself upon the shore. The
violent shock nearly threw Ned from his back, but the boy seized his
mane and hung on.

The Mexicans shouted and fired anew, but Ned, now sitting erect, raced
for San Antonio, only a mile away.




CHAPTER VIII

IN THE ALAMO


Most of the people in San Antonio were asleep when the dripping figure
of a half unconscious boy on a great horse galloped toward them in that
momentous dawn. He was without hat or serape. He was bareheaded and his
rifle was gone. He was shouting "Up! Up! Santa Anna and the Mexican army
are at hand!" But his voice was so choked and hoarse that he could not
be heard a hundred feet away.

Davy Crockett, James Bowie and a third man were standing in the Main
Plaza. The third man, like the other two, was of commanding proportions.
He was a full six feet in height, very erect and muscular, and with full
face and red hair. He was younger than the others, not more than
twenty-eight, but he was Colonel William Barrett Travis, a North
Carolina lawyer, who was now in command of the few Texans in San
Antonio.

The three men were talking very anxiously. Crockett had brought word
that the army of Santa Anna was on the Texan side of the Rio Grande, but
it had seemed impossible to rouse the Texans to a full sense of the
impending danger. Many remained at their homes following their usu
vocations. Mr. Austin was away in the states trying to raise money.
Dissensions were numerous in the councils of the new government, and the
leaders could agree upon nothing.

Travis, Bowie and Crockett were aware of the great danger, but even
they did not believe it was so near. Nevertheless they were full of
anxiety. Crockett, just come to Texas, took no command and sought to
keep in the background, but he was too famous and experienced a man not
to be taken at once by Travis and Bowie into their councils. They were
discussing now the possibility of getting help.

"We might send messengers to the towns further east," said Travis, "and
at least get a few men here in time."

"We need a good many," said Bowie. "According to Mr. Crockett the
Mexican army is large, and the population here is unfriendly."

"That is so," said Travis, "and we have women and children of our own to
protect."

It was when he spoke the last words that they heard the clatter of hoofs
and saw Ned dashing down the narrow street toward the Main Plaza. They
heard him trying to shout, but his voice was now so hoarse that he could
not be understood.

But Ned, though growing weaker fast, knew two of the men. He could never
forget the fair-haired Bowie nor the swarthy Crockett, and he galloped
straight toward them. Then he pulled up his horse and half fell, half
leaped to the ground. Holding by Old Jack's mane he pulled himself into
an erect position. He was a singular sight The water still fell from his
wet hair and dripped from his clothing. His face was plastered with mud.

"Santa Anna's army, five thousand strong, is not two miles away!" he
said. "I tell you because I have seen it!"

"Good God!" cried Bowie. "It's the boy, Ned Fulton. I know him well.
What he says must be truth."

"It is every word truth!" croaked Ned. "I was pursued by their vanguard!
My horse swam the river with me! Up! Up! for Texas!"

Then he fainted dead away. Bowie seized him in his powerful arms and
carried him into one of the houses occupied by the Texans, where men
stripped him of his wet clothing and gave him restoratives. But Bowie
himself hurried out into the Main Plaza. He had the most unlimited
confidence in Ned's word and so had Crockett. They and Travis at once
began to arrange the little garrison for defence.

Many of the Texans even yet would not believe. So great had been their
confidence that they had sent out no scouting parties. Only a day or two
before they had been enjoying themselves at a great dance. The boy who
had come with the news that Santa Anna was at hand must be distraught.
Certainly he had looked like a maniac.

A loud cry suddenly came from the roof of the church of San Fernando.
Two sentinels posted there had seen the edge of a great army appear upon
the plain and then spread rapidly over it. Santa Anna's army had come.
The mad boy was right. Two horsemen sent out to reconnoiter had to race
back for their lives. The flooded stream was now subsiding and only the
depth of the water in the night had kept the Mexicans from taking cannon
across and attacking.

Ned's faint was short. He remembered putting on clothing, securing a
