large-eyed damsel was possessed of great beauty like that of Sree
herself. And neither among celestials, nor among Yakshas, nor among men
was anybody possessed of such beauty, seen or heard of before. And the
beautiful maiden filled with gladness the hearts of even the gods. And
that tiger among men, Nala also had not his peer in the (three) worlds:
for in beauty he was like _Kandarpa_ himself in his embodied form. And
moved by admiration, the heralds again and again celebrated the praises
of Nala before Damayanti and those of Damayanti before the ruler of the
Nishadhas. And repeatedly hearing of each other's virtues they conceived
an attachment towards each other not begot of sight, and that
attachment, O son of Kunti began to grow in strength. And then Nala was
unable to control the love that was in his bosom. And he began to pass
much of his time in solitude in the gardens adjoining the inner
apartment (of his palace). And there he saw a number of swans furnished
with golden wings, wandering in those woods. And from among them he
caught one with his hands. And thereupon the sky-ranging one said unto
Nala. "Deserve I not to be slain by thee, O king. I will do something
that is agreeable to thee, O king of the Nishadhas. I will speak of thee
before Damayanti in such a way that she will not ever desire to have any
other person (for her lord)." Thus addressed, the king liberated that
swan. And those swans then rose on their wings and went to the country
of the Vidarbhas. And on arriving at the city of the Vidarbhas the birds
alighted before Damayanti, who beheld them all. And Damayanti in the
midst of her maids, beholding those birds of extraordinary appearance
was filled with delight, and strove without loss of time to catch those
coursers of the skies. And the swans at this, before that bevy of
beauties, fled in all directions. And those maidens there pursued the
birds, each (running) after one. And the swan after which Damayanti ran,
having led her to a secluded spot, addressed her in human speech,
saying, O Damayanti, there is a king amongst the Nishadhas named Nala.
He is equal unto the Aswins in beauty, not having his peer among men.
Indeed, in comeliness, he is like _Kandarpa_ himself in his embodied
form. O fair-complexioned one, O thou of slender waist, if thou becomest
his wife, thy existence and this thy beauty may be of purpose. We have,
indeed, beheld celestials and Gandharvas, and Nagas, and Rakshasas, and
men, but never saw we before any one like Nala. Thou also art a jewel
among thy sex, as Nala is the prince among men. The union of the best
with the best is happy." Thus addressed by the swan, Damayanti, O
monarch, replied unto him there, saying, "Do thou speak thus unto Nala
also." Saying _So be it_, to the daughter of Vidarbha, the oviparous
one, O king, returned to the country of the Nishadhas, and related
everything unto Nala.'"


SECTION LIV

"Vrihadaswa said, 'O Bharata, hearing those words of the swan, Damayanti
thenceforth lost all peace of mind on account of Nala. And heaving
frequent sighs she was filled with anxiety, and became melancholy and
pale-faced and lean. And with her heart possessed by the god of love,
she soon lost colour, and with her upturned gaze and modes of
abstraction, looked like one demented. And she lost all inclination for
beds and seats and object of enjoyment. And she ceased to lie down by
day or night, always weeping with exclamation of _Oh!_ and _Alas!_ And
beholding her uneasy and fallen into that condition, her hand-maids
represented, O king, the matter of her illness unto the ruler of
Vidarbha by indirect hints. And king Bhima, hearing of this from the
handmaids of Damayanti, regarded the affair of his daughter to be
serious. And he asked himself, "Why is it that my daughter seemeth to be
so ill now?" And the king, reflecting by himself that his daughter had
attained to puberty, concluded that Damayanti's _Swayamvara_ should take
place. And the monarch, O exalted one, (invited) all the rulers of the
earth, saying, _Ye heroes, know that Damayanti's Swayamvara is at hand_.
And all the kings, hearing of Damayanti's _Swayamvara_, came unto Bhima,
agreeable to his message, filling the earth with the clatter of their
cars, the roar of their elephants, and the neighing of their horses, and
accompanied with their fine-looking battalions decked in ornaments and
graceful garlands. And the mighty-armed Bhima paid due reverence unto
those illustrious monarchs. And duly honoured by him they took up their
quarters there.

"'And at the juncture, those foremost of celestial Rishis possessed of
great splendour, of great wisdom and great vows--namely, Narada and
Parvata--having arrived in course of their wandering at the regions of
Indra entered the mansion of the lord of the immortals, receiving proper
worship. And Maghavat having worshipped them reverentially, inquired
after their undisturbed peace and welfare as regards all respects. And
Narada said, "O lord, O divine one, peace attendeth us in every respect.
And, O Maghavat, peace attendeth also O exalted one, the kings of the
whole world."'

"Vrihadaswa continued. 'Hearing the words of Narada the slaver of Vala
and Vritra said, "Those righteous rulers of the earth who fight
renouncing all desire of life, and who meet death when their time is
come by means of weapons, without flying from the field,--theirs is this
region, everlasting unto them and granting all desires, even as it is to
me. Where be those Kshatriya heroes? I do not see those kings approach
(now). Where are my favourite guests?" Thus addressed by Sakra, Narada
replied, "Listen, O Mahaval, why seest not thou the kings (now)? The
ruler of the Vidarbhas hath a daughter--the celebrated Damayanti. In
beauty she transcendeth all the women of the earth. Her _Swayamvara_, O
Sakra, will take place shortly. Thither are going all the kings and
Princes from all directions. And all the lords of the earth desire to
have that pearl of the earth,--desire to have her eagerly, O slaver of
Vala and Vritra." And while they were talking thus, those foremost of
the immortals, the _Lokapalas_ with Agni among them, appeared before the
lord of the celestials. And all of them heard the words of Narada
fraught with grave import. And as soon as they heard them, they
exclaimed in rapture, _We also will go there_. And, O mighty monarch,
accompanied by their attendants and mounted on their (respective)
vehicles, they set out for the country of Vidarbhas, whither (had gone)
all the kings. And, O son of Kunti, the high-souled king Nala also
hearing of that concourse of kings, set out with a cheerful heart, full
of Damayanti's love. And (it came to pass) that the gods saw Nala on the
way treading on the earth. And his form owing to its beauty was like
that of the god of love himself. And beholding him resplendent as the
sun, the _Lokapalas_ were filled with astonishment at his wealth of
beauty, and abandoned their intention. And, O king, leaving their cars
in the sky the dwellers of heaven alighted from the welkin and spake
unto the ruler of the Nishadhas, saying, "O foremost of monarchs ruling
the Nishadhas, O Nala, thou art devoted to truth. Do thou help us. O
best of men, be thou our messenger."'"


SECTION LV

"Vrihadaswa continued, 'O Bharata, Nala pledged his word to the
celestials saying, "_I will do it_." And then approaching these, he
asked with folded hands, "Who are ye? And who also is he that desireth
me to be his messenger? And what, further, shall I have to do for you? O
tell me truly!"--When the king of the Nishadhas spoke thus, Maghavat
replied, saying, "Know us as the immortals come hither for Damayanti's
sake. I am Indra, this one is Agni, this the lord of waters, and this, O
king, is even Yama the destroyer of the bodies of men. Do thou inform
Damayanti of our arrival, saying, 'The guardians of the world,
(consisting of) the great Indra and the others, are coming to the
assembly, desirous of beholding (the Swayamvara). The gods, Sakra and
Agni and Varuna and Yama, desire to obtain thee. Do thou, therefore,
choose one of them for thy lord.'" Thus addressed by Sakra, Nala said
with joined hands, "I have come here with the self same object. It
behoveth thee not to send me (on this errand). How can a person who is
himself under the influence of love bring himself to speak thus unto a
lady on behalf of others? Therefore, spare me, ye gods." The gods,
however, said, "O ruler of the Nishadhas, having promised first, saying,
_I will!_ why wilt thou not act accordingly now? O ruler of the
Nishadhas, tell us this without delay."'

"Vrihadaswa continued, 'Thus addressed by those celestials, the ruler of
Nishadhas spake again, saying, "Those mansions are well-guarded. How can
I hope to enter them?" Indra replied, "Thou shalt be able to enter."
And, saying, _So be it_, Nala thereupon went to the palace of Damayanti.
And having arrived there, he beheld the daughter of the king of Vidarbha
surrounded by her hand-maids, blazing in beauty and excelling in
symmetry of form, of limbs exceedingly delicate, of slender waist and
fair eyes. And she seemed to rebuke the light of the moon by her own
splendour. And as he gazed on that lady of sweet smiles, Nala's love
increased, but desirous of keeping his truth, he suppressed his passion.
And at the sight of Naishadha, overpowered by his effulgence, those
first of women sprang up from their seats in amazement. And filled with
wonder (at his sight), they praised Nala in gladness of heart. And
without saying anything, they mentally paid him homage, "Oh, what
comeliness! Oh, what gentleness belongeth to this high-souled one! Who
is he? Is he some god or Yaksha or Gandharva?" And those foremost of
women, confounded by Nala's splendour and bashfulness would not accost
him at all in speech. And Damayanti although herself struck with
amazement, smilingly addressed the warlike Nala who also gently smiled
at her, saying, "What art thou, O thou of faultless features, that hast
come here awakening my love? O sinless one, O hero of celestial form, I
am anxious to know who thou art that hast come hither. And why hast thou
come hither? And how is it that thou hast not been discovered by any
one, considering that my apartments are well-guarded and the king's
mandates are stern." Thus addressed by the daughter of the king of the
Vidarbhas, Nala replied, "O beauteous lady, know that my name is Nala. I
come here as the messenger of the gods. The celestials, Sakra, Agni,
Varuna and Yama, desire to have thee. O beautiful lady, do thou choose
one of them for thy lord. It is through their power that I have entered
here unperceived, and it is for this reason that none saw me on my way
or obstructed my entrance. O gentle one, I have been sent by the
foremost of the celestials even for this object. Hearing this, O
fortunate one, do what thou pleasest."'"


SECTION LVI

"Vrihadaswa said, 'Damayanti, having bowed down unto the gods, thus
addressed Nala with a smile, "O king, love me with proper regard, and
command me what I shall do for thee. Myself and what else of wealth is
mine are thine. Grant me, O exalted one, thy love in full trust. O king,
the language of the swans is burning me. It is for thy sake, O hero,
that I have caused the kings to meet. O giver of proper honour, if thou
forsake me who adore thee, for thy sake will I resort to poison, or
fire, or water or the rope." Thus addressed by the daughter of the king
of the Vidarbhas, Nala answered her saying, "With the _Lokapalas_
present, choosest thou a man? Do thou turn thy heart to those
high-souled lords, the creators of the worlds, unto the dust of whose
feet I am not equal. Displeasing the gods, a mortal cometh by death.
Save me, O thou of faultless limbs! Choose thou the all-excelling
celestials. By accepting the gods, do thou enjoy spotless robes, and
celestial garlands of variegated hues, and excellent ornaments. What
woman would not choose as her lord Hutasana--the chief of the
celestials, who encompassing the earth swalloweth it? What woman would
not choose him as her lord the dread of whose mace induceth all
creatures to tread the path of virtue? And what woman would not choose
as her lord the virtuous and high-souled Mahendra, the lord of the
celestials, the chastiser of Daityas and Danavas? Or, if thou couldst
choose in thy heart Varuna amongst the _Lokapalas_, do so
unhesitatingly. O accept this friendly advice." Thus addressed by
Naishadha, Damayanti, with eyes bathed in tears of grief spake thus unto
Nala, "O lord of the earth, bowing to all the gods, I choose thee for my
lord. Truly do I tell thee this." The king, who had come as the
messenger of the gods, replied unto the trembling Damayanti standing
with folded hands, "O amiable one, do as thou pleasest. Having given my
pledge, O blessed one, unto the gods in especial, how can I, having come
on other's mission, dare seek my own interest? If seeking my own
interest consists with virtue, I will seek it, and do thou also, O
beauteous one, act accordingly." Then Damayanti of luminous smiles
slowly spake unto king Nala, in words choked with tears, "O lord of men
I see a blameless way, by which no sin whatever will attach unto thee. O
king, do thou, O foremost of men, come to the _Swayamvara_ in company
with all the gods headed by Indra. There, O Monarch, in the presence of
the _Lokapalas_ I will, O tiger among men, choose thee--at which no
blame will be thine." Thus addressed, O monarch, by the daughter of
Vidarbha, king Nala returned to where the gods were staying together.
And beholding him approach those great gods, the _Lokapalas_, eagerly
asked him about all that had happened saying, "Hast thou, O king, seen
Damayanti of sweet smiles? What hath she said unto us all? O sinless
monarch, tell us everything." Nala answered, "Commanded by you I entered
Damayanti's palace furnished with lofty portals guarded by veteran
warders bearing wands. And as I entered, no one perceived me, by virtue
of your power, except the princess. And I saw her hand-maids, and they
also saw me. And, O exalted celestials, seeing me, they were filled with
wonder. And as I spake unto her of you, the fair-faced maiden, her will
fixed on me, O ye best of the gods, chose me (for her spouse). And the
maiden said, 'Let the gods, O tiger among men, come with thee to the
_Swayamvara_, I will in their presence, choose thee. At this, O thou of
mighty arms, no blame will attach to thee.' This is all, ye gods, that
took place, as I have said. Finally, everything rests with you, ye
foremost of celestials."'"


SECTION LVII

"Vrihadaswa continued, 'Then at the sacred hour of the holy lunar day of
the auspicious season, king Bhima summoned the kings to the
_Swayamvara_. And hearing of it, all the lords of earth smit with love
speedily came thither, desirous of (possessing) Damayanti. And the
monarchs entered the amphitheatre decorated with golden pillars and a
lofty portal arch, like mighty lions entering the mountain wilds. And
those lords of earth decked with fragrant garlands and polished
ear-rings hung with jewels seated themselves on their several seats. And
that sacred assembly of Kings, graced by those tigers among men,
resembled the _Bhogavati_ swarming with the Nagas, or a mountain cavern
with tigers. And their arms were robust, and resembling iron maces, and
well-shaped, and graceful, and looking like five-headed snakes. And
graced with beautiful locks and fine noses and eyes and brows, the
countenance of the kings shone like stars in the firmament. And (when
the time came), Damayanti of beauteous face, stealing the eyes and
hearts of the princes by her dazzling light, entered the hall. And the
glances of those illustrious kings were rivetted to those parts of her
person where they had chanced to fall first, without moving at all. And
when, O Bharata, the names of the monarchs were proclaimed, the daughter
of Bhima saw five persons all alike in appearance. And beholding them
seated there, without difference of any kind in form, doubt filled her
mind, and she could not ascertain which of them was king Nala. And at
whomsoever (among them) she looked, she regarded him to be the king of
the Nishadhas. And filled with anxiety, the beautious one thought within
herself, "Oh, how shall I distinguish the celestials, and how discern
the royal Nala?" And thinking thus, the daughter of Vidarbha became
filled with grief. And, O Bharata, recollecting the marks belonging to
the celestials, of which she had heard, she thought, "Those attributes
of the celestials, of which I have heard from the aged, do not pertain
to any of these deities present here upon the earth." And revolving the
matter long in her mind, and reflecting upon it repeatedly, she decided
upon seeking the protection of the gods themselves. And bowing down unto
them with mind and speech, with folded hands, she addressed them
trembling, "Since I heard the speech of the swans, I chose the king of
the Nishadhas as my lord. For the sake of truth, O, let the gods reveal
him to me. And as in thought or word I have never swerved from him, O,
let the gods, for the sake of that truth, reveal him to me. And as the
gods themselves have destined the ruler of the Nishadhas to be my lord,
O, let them, for the sake of that truth, reveal him to me. And as it is
for paying homage unto Nala that I have adopted this vow, for the sake
of that truth, O, let the gods reveal him unto me. O, let the exalted
guardians of the worlds assume their own proper forms, so that I may
know the righteous king." Hearing these piteous words of Damayanti, and
ascertaining her fixed resolve, and fervent love for the king of
Nishadhas, the purity of her heart and her inclination and regard and
affection for Nala, the gods did as they had been adjured, and assumed
their respective attributes as best they could. And thereupon she beheld
the celestials unmoistened with perspiration, with winkless eyes, and
unfading garlands, unstained with dust, and staying without touching the
ground. And Naishadha stood revealed to his shadow, his fading garlands,
himself stained with dust and sweat, resting on the ground with winking
eyes. And, O Bharata, discerning the gods and the virtuous Nala the
daughter of Bhima chose Naishadha according to her truth. And the
large-eyed damsel then bashfully caught the hem of his garment and
placed round his neck a floral wreath of exceeding grace. And when that
fair-complexioned maiden had thus chosen Nala for her husband, the kings
suddenly broke out into exclamations of _Oh!_ and _Alas!_ And, O
Bharata, the gods and the great Rishis in wonder cried _Excellent!
Excellent!_, applauding the king the while. And, O Kauravya, the royal
son of Virasena, with heart filled with gladness, comforted the
beauteous Damayanti, saying, "Since thou, O blessed one, hast chosen a
mortal in the presence of the celestials, know me for a husband even
obedient to thy command. And, O thou of sweet smiles, truly do I tell
thee this that as long as life continueth in this body of mine, I will
remain thine and thine alone." Damayanti also, with folded hands paid
homage unto Nala in words of like import. And the happy pair beholding
Agni and the other gods mentally sought their protection. And after the
daughter of Bhima had chosen Naishadha as her husband, the _Lokapalas_
of exceeding effulgence with pleased hearts, bestowed on Nala eight
boons. And Sakra, the lord of Sachi, bestowed on Nala the boon that he
should be able to behold his godship in sacrifices and that he should
attain to blessed regions thereafter, and Hutasana bestowed on him the
boon of his own presence whenever Naishadha wished, and regions also
bright as himself. And Yama granted him subtle taste in food as well as
pre-eminence in virtue. And the lord of waters granted Nala his own
presence whenever he desired, and also garlands of celestial fragrance.
And thus each of them bestowed upon him a couple of boons. And having
bestowed these the gods went to heaven. And the kings also, having
witnessed with wonder Damayanti's selection of Nala, returned delighted
whence they had come. And on the departure of those mighty monarchs, the
high-souled Bhima, well pleased, celebrated the wedding of Nala and
Damayanti. And having stayed there for a time according to his desire,
Naishadha, the best of men, returned to his own city with the permission
of Bhima. And having attained that pearl of a woman, the virtuous king,
O monarch, began to pass his days in joy, like the slayer of Vala and
Vritra in the company of Sachi. And resembling the sun in glory, the
king, full of gladness, began to rule his subjects righteously, and give
them great satisfaction. And like unto Yayati, the son of Nahusha, that
intelligent monarch celebrated the horse sacrifice and many other
sacrifices with abundant gifts to Brahmanas. And like unto a very god,
Nala sported with Damayanti in romantic woods and groves. And the
high-minded king begat upon Damayanti a son named Indrasena, and a
daughter named Indrasena. And celebrating sacrifice, and sporting (with
Damayanti) thus, the king ruled the earth abounding in wealth.'"


SECTION LVIII

"Vrihadaswa said, 'When the blazing guardians of the worlds were
returning after the daughter of Bhima had chosen Naishadha, on their way
they met Dwapara with Kali approaching towards them. And seeing Kali,
Sakra the slayer of Vala and Vritra, said, "O Kali, say whither thou art
going with Dwapara." And thereupon Kali replied unto Sakra, "Going to
Damayanti's _Swayamvara_, will I obtain her (for my wife), as my heart
is fixed upon that damsel." Hearing this, Indra said with a smile, "That
_Swayamvara_ is already ended. In our sight she hath chosen Nala for her
husband." Thus answered by Sakra, Kali, that vilest of the celestials,
filled with wrath, addressing all those gods spake, "Since in the
presence of the celestials she hath chosen a mortal for her lord, it is
meet that she should undergo a heavy doom." Upon hearing these words of
Kali, the celestials answered, "It is with our sanction that Damayanti
hath chosen Nala. What damsel is there that would not choose king Nala
endued with every virtue? Well-versed in all duties, always conducting
himself with rectitude, he hath studied the four Vedas together with the
Puranas that are regarded as the fifth. Leading a life of harmlessness
unto all creatures, he is truth-telling and firm in his vows, and in his
house the gods are ever gratified by sacrifices held according to the
ordinance. In that tiger among men--that king resembling a _Lokapala_
in truth, and forbearance, and knowledge, and asceticism, and purity and
self-control, and perfect tranquillity of soul. O Kali, the fool that
wisheth to curse Nala bearing such a character, curseth himself, and
destroyeth himself by his own act. And, O Kali, he that seeketh to curse
Nala crowned with such virtues, sinketh into the wide bottomless pit of
hell rife with torments." Having said this to Kali and Dwapara, the gods
went to heaven. And when the gods had gone away, Kali said unto Dwapara,
"I am ill able, O Dwapara, to suppress my anger. I shall possess Nala,
deprive him of his kingdom, and he shall no more sport with Bhima's
daughter. Entering the dice, it behoveth thee to help me."'"


SECTION LIX

"Vrihadaswa said, 'Having made this compact with Dwapara, Kali came to
the place where the king of the Nishadhas was. And always watching for a
hole, he continued to dwell in the country of the Nishadhas for a long
time. And it was in the twelfth year that Kali saw a hole. For one day
after answering the call of nature, Naishadha touching water said his
twilight prayers, without having previously washed his feet. And it was
through this (omission) that Kali entered his person. And having
possessed Nala, he appeared before Pushkara, and addressed him, saying,
"Come and play at dice with Nala. Through my assistance thou wilt surely
win at the play. And defeating king Nala and acquiring his kingdom, do
thou rule the Nishadhas." Thus exhorted by Kali, Pushkara went to Nala.
And Dwapara also approached Pushkara, becoming the principal die called
_Vrisha_. And appearing before the warlike Nala, that slayer of hostile
heroes, Pushkara, repeatedly said, "Let us play together with dice."
Thus challenged in the presence of Damayanti, the lofty-minded king
could not long decline it. And he accordingly fixed the time for the
play. And possessed by Kali, Nala began to lose, in the game, his stakes
in gold, and silver, and cars with the teams thereof, and robes. And
maddened at dice, no one amongst his friends could succeed in dissuading
that represser of foes from the play that went on. And thereupon, O
Bharata, the citizens in a body, with the chief councillors, came
thither to behold the distressed monarch and make him desist. And the
charioteer coming to Damayanti spake to her of this, saying, "O lady,
the citizens and officers of the state wait at the gate. Do thou inform
the king of the Nishadhas that the citizens have come here, unable to
bear the calamity that hath befallen their king conversant with virtue
and wealth." Thereupon Bhima's daughter, overwhelmed with grief and
almost deprived of reason by it, spake unto Nala in choked accents, "O
king, the citizens with the councillors of state, urged by loyalty, stay
at the gate desirous of beholding thee. It behoveth thee to grant them
an interview." But the king, possessed by Kali, uttered not a word in
reply unto his queen of graceful glances, uttering thus her
lamentations. And at this, those councillors of state as also the
citizens, afflicted with grief and shame, returned to their homes,
saying, "_He liveth not_." And, O Yudhishthira, it was thus that Nala
and Pushkara gambled together for many months, the virtuous Nala being
always worsted.'"


SECTION LX

"Vrihadaswa said, 'Bhima's daughter, the cool-headed Damayanti, seeing
the righteous king maddened and deprived of his senses at dice, was
filled, O king, with alarm and grief. And she thought the affair to be a
serious one with the king. And apprehensive of the calamity that
threatened Nala, yet seeking his welfare and at last understanding that
her lord had lost everything, she said unto her nurse and maid-servant
Vrihatsena of high fame, intent upon her good, dexterous in all duties,
faithful and sweet-speeched, these words, "O Vrihatsena, go thou and
summon the councillors in the name of Nala, and tell them also what of
wealth and other things hath been lost and what remaineth." The
councillors then, hearing of Nala's summons, said, "This is fortunate
for us" and approached the king. And when the subjects in a body had
(thus) come a second time, the daughter of Bhima informed Nala of it.
But the king regarded her not. Finding her husband disregarding her
words, Damayanti, filled with shame, returned to her apartments. And
hearing that the dice were uniformly unfavourable to the virtuous Nala,
and that he had lost everything, she again spake unto her nurse, saying,
"O Vrihatsena, go thou again in Nala's name to bring hither, O blessed
one, the charioteer, Varshneya. The matter at hand is very serious." And
Vrihatsena, hearing those words of Damayanti caused Varshneya to be
summoned by trusty servants. And the blameless daughter of Bhima,
acquainted with conduct suitable to time and place, addressing soft
words said according to the occasion, "Thou knowest how the king hath
always behaved towards thee. He is now in difficulty, and it behoveth
thee to assist him. The more the king loseth to Pushkara, the greater
becometh his ardour for the play. And as the dice fall obedient to
Pushkara, it is seen that they are adverse to Nala in the matter of the
play. And absorbed in the play, he heedeth not the words of his friends
and relatives, nor even those of mine. I do not think, however, that in
this the high-souled Naishadha is to blame, in as much as the king
regarded not my words, being absorbed in play. O Charioteer, I seek thy
protection. Do my behest. My mind misgiveth me. The king may come to
grief. Yoking Nala's favourite horses endued with the fleetness of the
mind, do thou take these twins (my son and daughter) on the car and hie
thou to Kundina. Leaving the children there with my kindred as also the
car and the horses, either stay thou there, or go to any other place as
it listeth thee." Varshneya, the charioteer of Nala, then reported in
detail these words of Damayanti unto the chief officers of the king. And
having settled (the matter) in consultation with them, and obtaining
their assent, O mighty monarch, the charioteer started for Vidarbha,
taking the children on that car. And leaving there the boy Indrasena and
the girl Indrasena, as also that best of cars and those steeds, the
charioteer, with a sad heart grieving for Nala, bade farewell unto
Bhima. And wandering for some time, he arrived at the city of Ayodhya.
And there he appeared with a sorrowful heart before king Rituparna, and
entered the service of that monarch as charioteer.'"


SECTION LXI

"Vrihadaswa said, 'After Varshneya had gone away, Pushkara won from the
righteous Nala that latter's kingdom and what else of wealth he had. And
unto Nala, O king, who had lost his kingdom, Pushkara laughingly said,
"Let the play go on. But what stake hast thou now? Damayanti only
remaineth; all else of thine hath been won by me. Well, if thou likest,
that Damayanti be our stake now." Hearing these words of Pushkara the
virtuous king felt as if his heart would burst in rage, but he spake not
a word. And gazing at Pushkara in anguish, king Nala of great fame took
all the ornaments off every part of his body. And attired in a single
piece of cloth, his body uncovered, renouncing all his wealth, and
enhancing the grief of friends, the king set out. And Damayanti, clad in
one piece of cloth, followed him behind as he was leaving the city. And
coming to the outskirts of the city, Nala stayed there for three nights
with his wife. But Pushkara, O king, proclaimed through the city that
_he that should show any attention to Nala, would be doomed to death_.
