brandished our knives, and prepared, though not without some heart
throbbings, once more to enter the panther's den.

13. With light and cautious steps, lest we might be as unpleasantly
surprised as we had been when we made our hasty retreat, we advanced,
holding our torches before us, to the spot where we had dropped our
guns, and without meeting with any hinderance from our enemy. Once more
in possession of our trusty weapons, we reloaded them, and stepped
forward with lighter hearts, yet still with great caution, when Konwell
exclaimed, as he raised the flaming pine high above his head, and
pointed with it in a certain direction, "_See! there he is!_"

14. This was the first word that had been spoken since we reentered the
cavern. I looked in the indicated direction, and there, indeed, lay the
panther, stretched out at full length, but no longer dangerous. His eyes
were set, his limbs were rigid,--the last agony was over. We skinned and
cut him up as he lay. All three bullets had struck him, and both knives
penetrated his body; and it must have been in the death-struggle that he
leaped upon us.

15. When our work was ended, and we again came to the open air, the sun
was low in the horizon, and all haste was necessary that we should set
out on our forest-path without further delay. Our wounds smarted not a
little, and, although we took time once more to wash them, they became
so stiff that our progress was both toilsome and tedious. We soon became
convinced that we should not succeed in reaching our companions while
daylight remained, and we determined to bivouac for the night, at the
foot of a rocky declivity, which promised a good shelter from the
cutting wind.

16. To add to our discomfort, hunger began to make itself painfully
felt; but this was soon overpowered by weariness, and, having gathered
up the dry pine branches, we kindled up a good fire, and, without
troubling ourselves to prepare any thing for supper, we stretched
ourselves on the grass before it, and found the warmth most grateful.

17. Worn out by the toils of the day, in a few minutes Konwell was fast
asleep; but, although much inclined to follow his example, I was
prevented by the restlessness of my dog, which seemed to wish to warn me
of the presence of danger. The faithful animal, cringing closely to me,
laid his nose on my shoulder, raising his head from time to time, and
whined, as though he wished to communicate something, and then, for a
few moments, would remain quiet. Then, suddenly, he would rise up as in
the attitude of listening, occasionally uttering a low growl.

18. Completely awakened by this strange behavior on the part of my
faithful dog, it seemed to me as if I heard a slight rustling among the
dry bushes; and, rising up to a half-sitting posture, I looked toward
the rock behind me, and, to my great astonishment, became aware of a
pair of glaring eyes fastened upon me. As my head was between the fire
and those fearful eyes, I could plainly distinguish the fiery balls as,
reflected on by the red light, they peered above the naked rocks.

19. It was a panther, and evidently, from the position in which I saw
it, was ready for a spring. Happily on this, as on every other night, my
trusty gun lay close beside me. I seized it, and, half-rising, so that
the fire behind me afforded light for a steady aim, I leveled it exactly
between the eyes. I fired, the bullet sped on its deadly errand, and the
crack of the noble rifle, thundering against the steep rocks, returned
with loud and prolonged echo.

20. Konwell, to whom the report of a gun was ever the sweetest music,
now started up, as if roused by an electric shock, and grasped his gun.
The dog continued his barking, smelling all around, and looking in my
face as if to inquire in what direction he should go. There was no
rustling movement on the rock, and the bullet must have taken effect.

21. Konwell shook his head as he inquired, "Why I had shot?" Without
answering, I began to reload my gun: this finished, I took up a blazing
pine brand from the fire, and proceeded to climb the steep wall of rock,
that raised itself like a barrier, about twenty steps distant from the
spot upon which we rested. Here I found an old panther, the largest I
had ever seen, lying dead--my well-directed bullet had finished him. I
flung the body over the rock, and my old comrade dragged him to the
fire.

22. The ball had struck him directly in the right eye, passing through
the brain. He was a fearful-looking animal, with terrible teeth and
claws, and the more to be dreaded, as, when we cut him up, his stomach
was found entirely empty. I believed that hunger had driven him so close
to the fire; but Konwell thought he had scented the fresh venison we had
with us. Be that as it may, there was little doubt but that he would
have made a leap, as soon as the intervening fire had burned down; to
its friendly presence, therefore, on this occasion, as a means of
Providence, we owed our lives.

QUESTIONS.--1. What had Konwell driven into a den? 2. What preparation
did he make, before entering into the cavern? 3. How far had the men
proceeded before they saw the panther? 4. Describe the appearance of the
panther, as they came near him after the first shot? 5. What did the
panther do after the men both fired at him? 6. Did they finally succeed
in killing the panther? 7. Describe the manner in which they killed
another panther.

       *       *       *       *       *

LESSON XL.

   RAP' IDs, part of a river where the current is swift.
   TUR' BU LENCE, violent agitation.
   HELM, instrument for steering a vessel.
   EX CUR' SION, tour; ramble.
   A HOY', sea term used in hailing a vessel.
   QUAFF, drink largely.
   HOIST, raise; lift up.
   BLAS PHEM' ING, uttering impious language.
   SHRIEK' ING, screaming; crying out.


THE POWER OF HABIT.

JOHN B. GOUGH.

1. I remember once riding from Buffalo to the Niagara Palls. I said to a
gentleman, "What river is that, sir?" "That," said he, "is Niagara
river."

2. "Well, it is a beautiful stream," said I; "bright, and fair, and
glassy. How far off are the rapids?" "Only a mile or two," was the
reply.

3. "Is it _possible_ that only a mile from us, we shall find the water
in the turbulence which it must show near the Falls'?"

"You will find it so, sir." And so I found it; and the first sight of
Niagara I shall never forget.

4. Now, launch your bark on that Niagara river; it is bright, smooth,
beautiful, and glassy. There is a ripple at the bow; the silver wake you
leave behind, adds to your enjoyment. Down the stream you glide, oars,
sails, and helm in proper trim, and you set out on your pleasure
excursion.

5. Suddenly, some one cries out from the bank, "_Young men, ahoy!_"

"What is it?"

"_The rapids are below you!_"

6. "Ha! ha! we have heard of the rapids; but we are not such fools as to
get there. If we go too fast, then we shall up with the helm, and steer
to the shore; we will set the mast in the socket, hoist the sail, and
speed to the land. Then on, boys; don't be alarmed,--there is no
danger."

7. "Young men, ahoy there!"

"What is it?"

"_The rapids are below you!_"

8. "Ha! ha! we will laugh and quaff; all things delight us. What care we
for the future! No man ever saw it. Sufficient for the day is the evil
thereof. We will enjoy life while we may,--will catch pleasure as it
flies. This is enjoyment; time enough to steer out of danger when we are
sailing swiftly with the current."

9 (_ff._) "YOUNG MEN, AHOY!"

"What is it?"

"BEWARE! BEWARE! THE RAPIDS ARE BELOW YOU!"

10. "Now you see the water foaming all around. See how fast you pass
that point! Up with the helm! Now turn! Pull hard! (=) Quick! quick!
quick! pull for your lives! pull till the blood starts from your
nostrils, and the veins stand like whip-cords upon your brow! Set the
mast in the socket! hoist the sail! (_sl._) Ah! ah! it is too late!
Shrieking, howling, blaspheming; over they go."

11. Thousands go over the rapids of intemperance every year, through
_the power of habit_, crying all the while, "_When I find out that it_
[Footnote: Temperate drinking.] _is injuring me, I will give it up!_"

QUESTIONS.--1. Where are the Niagara Falls? 2. How does the water appear
just above the Falls? 3. How does it appear farther up? 4. What reply
are the young men represented as making, when first told the rapids were
below them? 5. What, when told the second time? 6. What must they do, to
escape destruction? 7. What is said of _the power of habit?_

       *       *       *       *       *

LESSON XLI.

   BE SOT' TED, stupefied.
   BUR LESQU' ED, mocked; derided.
   DE FI' ED, set at defiance.
   CHER' ISH ED, fostered; encouraged.
   STREW' ED, scattered; spread.
   LIV' ID, discolored; black and blue.
   MIR' ROR ED, reflected, as in a glass.
   RE VEAL' INGS, disclosures.
   PLIGHT' ED, pledged.
   FOR SWORN', perjured.
   STAMP' ED, impressed; fixed deeply.
   BLIGHT, blasting disease.
   A TONE', make reparation.
   PRO CLAIM' ED, openly declared.
   LOATHE, detest; abhor.
   BEV' ER AGE, drink.

These verses should be read in a firm, half-indignant, yet imploring
tone of voice,--except the last verse, which should be expressed in a
very decided and impassioned manner.


THE DRUNKARD'S DAUGHTER.

[Footnote: These beautiful and touching verses were written by a young
lady, in reply to a friend who had called her a monomaniac on the
subject of temperance.]

1. Go, feel what I have felt,
     Go, bear what I have borne;
   Sink 'neath a blow a father dealt,
     And the cold, proud world's scorn;
   Thus struggle on from year to year,
   Thy sole relief,--the scalding tear.

2. Go, weep as I have wept,
     O'er a loved father's fall,
   See every cherished promise swept,--
     Youth's sweetness turned to gall;
   Hope's faded flowers strewed all the way
   That led me up to woman's day.

3. Go, kneel as I have knelt;
     Implore, beseech, and pray,
   Strive the besotted heart to melt,
     The downward course to stay;
   Be cast with bitter curse aside,--
   Thy prayers burlesqued, thy tears defied.

4. Go, stand where I have stood,
     And see the strong man bow;
   With gnashing teeth, lips bathed in blood,
     And cold and livid brow;
   Go, catch his wandering glance, and see
   There mirrored, his soul's misery.

5. Go, hear what I have heard,--
     The sobs of sad despair,
   As memory's feeling fount hath stirred,
     And its revealings there
   Have told him what he might have been,
   Had he the drunkard's fate foreseen.

6. Go to my mother's side,
     And her crushed spirit cheer;
   Thine own deep anguish hide,
     Wipe from her cheek the tear;
   Mark her dimmed eye,--her furrowed brow,
   The gray that streaks her dark hair now;
   Her toil-worn frame, her trembling limb,
   And trace the ruin back to him
   Whose plighted faith, in early youth,
   Promised eternal love and truth;
   But who, forsworn, hath yielded up
   That promise to the deadly cup,
   And led her down from love and light,
   From all that made her pathway bright,
   And chained her there 'mid want and strife,
   That lowly thing,--_a drunkard's wife!_
   And stamped on childhood's brow so mild,
   That withering blight, _a drunkard's child!_

7. Go, hear, and see, and feel, and know,
     All that _my soul_ hath felt and known,
   Then look upon the wine-cup's glow;
     See if its brightness can atone;
   Think if its flavor you will try,
   If all proclaimed, "_'Tis drink and die!_"

8.   Tell me I _hate_ the bowl;
       _Hate_ is a feeble word:
(f.) _I loathe_, ABHOR,--_my very soul_
       _With strong disgust is stirred_,
     Whene'er I see, or hear, or tell,
     Of the DARK BEVERAGE OF HELL!!

QUESTIONS.--1. By whom was this poetry written? 2. What circumstance
induced her to write it? 3. What is the meaning of _monomaniac?_ Ans.
One who is deranged in a single faculty of the mind, or with regard to a
particular subject, the other faculties being in regular exercise. 4.
What reasons does she assign for her hatred of alcoholic drink? 5. What
does she say of her mother? 6. With what tone of voice should the last
verse be read? See page 40, Rule 4. 7. Why are some words and sentences
printed in Italics and Capitals? See page 22, Note III.

       *       *       *       *       *

LESSON XLII.

   REC' ORDS, accounts; minutes.
   AD VENT' URES, doings; strange occurences.
   EN CUM' BER, load; clog.
   GRAT I FI CA' TION, indulgence.
   SCHEME, plan; progress.
   DE LIB ER A' TION, thought; consideration.
   LUX U RI OUS, pleasure-loving.
   EX PE DI' TION, tour; enterprise.
   MO ROSE', sour; ill-humored.
   RE VOLT' ING, disgusting; abhorrent.
   CON TEM' PLATE, consider; think upon.
   REL' IC, remains.
   IN VES' TI GATE, examine; look into.
   AC COM' PLISH ED, effected.
   PIC TUR ESQUE', (_pikt yur esk'_)grand; beautiful; picture-like.


THE TWO YOUNG TRAVELERS.

MERRY'S MUSEUM.

1. Horace and Herman, two young men who were friends, set out to travel
in distant countries. Before they departed, each had formed a _plan_ of
proceeding. Horace determined to give himself up entirely to
_pleasure,_--to go wherever his humor might dictate,--and to keep no
records of his adventures. In short, he resolved to _enjoy himself_ as
much as possible, and, by no means, to encumber his mind with cares,
duties, or troubles of any kind.

2. Herman was as fond of amusement as Horace; but the _mode_ he adopted
for the gratification of his wishes, was quite different. In the first
place, he made out a scheme of his travels: he procured maps, read
books, and, after mature deliberation, adopted a certain route, as most
likely to afford him pleasure as well as instruction.

3. In the formation of this plan, he spent several weeks; and, in this
occupation, he found quite as much satisfaction as he afterwards did in
traveling. Thus he obtained one great advantage over his idle and
luxurious friend, who foolishly thought that the essence of enjoyment
lay in freedom from thought, restraint, and toil. Even before they set
out on their journey, Herman had actually found nearly as _much_
pleasure as Horace received in the whole course of his expedition.

4. The two young men started together; and, as there were then no canals
or railroads, they both set out on foot. They had not proceeded far
before they separated,--Horace taking one road and Herman another.

5. After the lapse of three years, they both returned; but what a
difference between them! Horace was morose and dissatisfied; he had seen
a good deal of the world, but, as he had traveled with no other design
than to _gratify himself_ from hour to hour, he had soon exhausted the
cup of pleasure, and found nothing at the bottom but the bitter dregs of
discontent.

6. He pursued pleasure, till, at last, he found the pursuit to be
distasteful and revolting. He grew tired even of amusement. He indulged
his tastes, humors, and passions, until indulgence itself was
disgusting. When he returned to his friends, he had laid up nothing in
his memory, by the relation of which he could amuse them; he had kept no
record of things he had seen; he brought back no store of pleasing and
useful recollections for himself, or others. Such was the result of
three years' travel for pleasure.

7. It was quite otherwise with Herman. Adhering to his plans, he visited
a great many places, and, each day, he recorded in his journal what he
had seen. Whenever he met with an interesting object, he stopped to
contemplate it. If it was some aged relic, famous in history, he took
pains to investigate its story, and to write it down. If it was an
object of interest to the eye, he made a sketch of it in a book which he
kept for that purpose.

8. In this way, Herman accomplished three good objects. In the first
place, by taking pleasure in a moderate way, and mixing with it a little
toil and industry, he prevented that cloying surfeit which, at last,
sickened and disgusted Horace.

9. In the second place, he greatly increased his enjoyments by the plan
he adopted. Merely executing a plan is agreeable, and a source of great
pleasure. It is natural to derive happiness from following out a
design,--from seeing, hour by hour, day by day, how results come about,
in conformity to our intentions.

10. But _this_ was not the _only_ advantage which Herman received from
his system. The very toil he bestowed; the investigations he made; the
pleasant thoughts and curious knowledge that were unfolded to his mind;
the excitement he found in his exertions; the pleasure he took in
drawing picturesque scenes; _all_ constituted a rich harvest of
pleasure, which was wholly denied to Horace.

11. Thus it was that labor and industry, exerted in carrying out a plan,
afforded the young traveler a vast deal of gratification. The very
things that Horace looked upon as hateful, were, in fact, the sources of
his friend's most permanent enjoyment.

12. In the third place, Herman had come back laden with rich stores of
knowledge, observation, and experience. Not only was his journal rich in
tales, legends, scenes, incidents, and historical records, but in
putting these things down on paper, his memory had been improved, and he
had acquired the habit of observing and remembering. His mind was full
of pleasant things, and nothing could be more interesting than to hear
him tell of his travels, and of what he had seen.

13. While Horace was dull, silent, and sour, Herman was full of
conversation, life, and interest. The one was happy', the other
unhappy`; one was agreeable', the other disagreeable`; one had exhausted
the cup of pleasure', the other seemed always to have the cup full and
sparkling before him`. It was agreed on all hands that Horace was a
disagreeable person, and everybody shunned him; while Herman was
considered by all a most agreeable companion, and everybody sought his
society.

14. So much for the two travelers; _one_, a luxurious lover of pleasure,
who thought only of the passing moment, and, in his folly, abused and
threw away his powers of enjoyment; the _other_, a lover of pleasure
also; but who pursued it moderately, with a wise regard to the future,
and careful attention, every day, to the rules of duty; and who thus
secured his true happiness.

QUESTIONS.--1. What plan had Horace determined to pursue while
traveling? 2. What was Herman's plan? 3. What is said of Horace, after
his return? 4. How was it with Herman? 5. What is said of the two in
contrast? 6. What effect has the emphasis on the place of the accent in
the words _unhappy_ and _disagreeable_, 13th paragraph? See page 22,
note V.

       *       *       *       *       *

LESSON XLIII.

   IM' PORT, meaning.
   GROV' EL ING, mean; creeping.
   A CHIEVE' MENT, performance.
   AS PI RA' TION, wish; ardent desire.
   SAN' GUINE, ardent; hopeful.
   RE' AL IZ ED, attained.
   IN SPI RA' TION, natural impulse.
   STATE' LI NESS, dignity: majesty.
   AD VENT' TUR OUS, daring; enterprising.
   EX UL TA' TION, (_x_ like _gz_,) triumph.
   RI' VALS, competitors.
   DIG' NI TY, elevation; majesty.
   OR' A CLES, wise words or sentences.
   A' PEX, hight; summit.
   TEN' E MENT, dwelling; _here means_, the body.
   AD MON' ISH. warn.
   RAPT' UR OUS, joyous; ecstatic.
   AN TIC I PA' TION, foretaste.

   PHI LOS' O PHY, (PHILO, _love_; SOPHY, _wisdom_,) love of wisdom;
   reason of things. See SANDERS & McELLIGOTT'S ANALYSIS, page 236,
   Ex. 334


HIGHER!

1. HIGHER! It is a word of noble import. It lifts the soul of man from
low and groveling pursuits, to the achievement of great and noble deeds,
and ever keeps the object of his aspiration in view, till his most
sanguine expectations are fully realized.

2. HIGHER! lisps the infant that clasps its parent's knee, and makes its
feeble effort to rise from the floor. It is the first inspiration of
childhood to burst the narrow confines of the cradle, and to exercise
those feeble, tottering limbs, which are to walk forth in the
stateliness of manhood.

3. HIGHER! echoes the proud school-boy in his swing; or, as he climbs
the tallest tree of the forest, that he may look down upon his less
adventurous comrades with a flush of exultation,--and abroad over the
fields, the meadows, and his native village.

4. HIGHER! earnestly breathes the student of philosophy and nature. He
has a host of rivals; but he must excel them all. The midnight oil burns
dim; but he finds light and knowledge in the lamps of heaven, and his
soul is never weary, when the last of them is hid by the splendors of
the morning.

5. And HIGHER! his voice thunders forth, when the dignity of manhood has
mantled his form, and the multitude is listening with delight to his
oracles, burning with eloquence, and ringing like true steel in the
cause of _Freedom_ and _Right_. And when time has changed his locks to
silver,--when the young and the old unite to do him honor, he still
breathes forth from his generous heart fond wishes for their welfare.

6. HIGHER YET! He has reached the apex of earthly honor; yet his spirit
burns as warm as in youth, though with a steadier and purer light. And
even now, while his frail tenement begins to admonish him, that "the
time of his departure is at hand," he looks forward, with rapturous
anticipation, to the never-fading glory, attainable only in the presence
of the Most High.

QUESTIONS.--1. What is said of the word _Higher_, first paragraph? 2.
When does the school-boy say Higher? 3. What is said of the student? 4.
What, when he arrives at manhood? 5. What, when he becomes old? 6. Where
is the passage within the quotation to be found? Ans. 2 Timothy, 4th
chapter, 6th verse.

       *       *       *       *       *

LESSON XLIV.

   IN TENS' ER, more fervent.
   STUB' BORN, unyielding; rugged.
   DEEM, think; imagine.
   OLD' EN, old; ancient.
   CLINGS, sticks; adheres closely.
   GAL' LANT, fine; noble.
   YAWN' ING, wide-opening.
   FU' RY, rage; madness.
   RAVE, rage; become furious.
   HEC' TIC, habitual; continuous.
   MEN' TAL, intellectual.
   WIELD, sway; exert.
   PRIV' I LEGE, right; opportunity.
   DOW' ER, gift; portion.


LABOR.

[Footnote:  These  lines were suggested by the simple incident of an
industrious wood-sawyer's reply to a man who told him that _his was a
hard work_. "Yes, it is hard, to be sure; but _it is harder to do
nothing_," was his answer.]

CAROLINE F. ORNE.

1. Ho, ye who at the anvil toil, And strike the sounding blow, Where,
from the burning iron's breast, The sparks fly to and fro, While
answering to the hammer's ring, And fire's intenser glow!--Oh, while ye
feel 'tis hard to toil And sweat the long day through, Remember, it is
harder still _To have no work to do!_

2. Ho, ye who till the stubborn soil, Whose hard hands guide the plow,
Who bend beneath the summer sun, With burning cheek and brow!--Ye deem
the curse still clings to earth From olden time till now; But, while ye
feel 'tis hard to toil And labor all day through, Remember, it is harder
still _To have no work to do_!

3. Ho, ye who plow the sea's blue field, Who ride the restless wave,
Beneath whose gallant vessel's keel There lies a yawning grave, Around
whose bark the wint'ry winds Like fiends of fury rave!--Oh, while ye
feel 'tis hard to toil And labor long hours through, Remember, it is
harder still _To have no work to do!_ 4 Ho, ye upon whose fevered cheeks
The hectic glow is bright, Whose mental toil wears out the day, And half
the weary night, Who labor for the souls of men, Champions of truth and
right!--Although ye feel your toil is hard, Even with this glorious
view, Remember, it is harder still _To have no work to do!_ 5. Ho, all
who labor,--all who strive Ye wield a lofty power; Do with your might,
do with your strength, Fill every golden hour! The glorious privilege
_to do_ Is man's most noble dower. Oh, to your birthright and yourselves
To your own souls be true! A weary, wretched life is theirs, _Who have
no work to do!_

QUESTIONS.--1. What incident suggested these thoughts to the writer? 2.
Who toil at the anvil? 3. Who till the stubborn soil? 4. Who plow the
sea's blue wave? 5. Who toil mentally? 6. Who labor for the souls of
men? 7. What is man's most noble dower? 8. What is said to all these
different laborers? 9. What is the meaning of the suffix _less_ in the
word _restless?_ See SANDERS & McELLIGOTT'S ANALYSIS, page 140, Ex. 187.

       *       *       *       *       *

