
This last remark caused Howard to start off at once, fully resolved not
to pause again in the search until compelled to do so.

Terror was constantly commanded to hunt for the trail of the boy, and
the dog appeared to understand what was expected of him, for he was
running constantly hither and thither, but never gave sign that he had
found anything positive.

This fact led Howard to doubt whether Elwood had preceded them in this
place. If he had really been here, he must have passed directly over the
spot upon which they were standing, and it seemed hardly possible that
the dog could miss the scent. So strong was he impressed with this that
he proposed to Tim O'Rooney to turn back and resume their search outside
the hills; but he was so sure that Elwood Brandon could never have
passed unentered such an inviting opening that he would not consent to
withdraw until they examined further.

Looking around they saw several paths by which they could enter the
wild, desolate-looking scene before them. Of course, it was all a matter
of chance whether they took the one which had been followed by their
lost friend. Tim affirmed that the one that looked the most dangerous
and uninviting was surely the right one; but Howard was hardly prepared
to admit this. Selecting the most accessible, they carefully followed it
for over an hour. In and out among the rocks, sometimes over their tops,
then between or around them, down through ravines, and then along their
edges, up the stony, earthy sides of the gorges, until at length they
halted as they believed in the very heart of this wild looking place.

"Here we are!" said Howard. "I don't see how we can advance much further
without going out to the other side."

"It's the qua'rest sight I iver looked upon," said Tim, turning round
and round, meaning the wild scenery.

"But there is nothing learned of Elwood."

"Niver a sign do I saa of the youngster," rejoined Tim. "I graive to
think we cannot be near him."

"We have gone on the wrong track."

"I'm a feared so."

"Too bad, too bad," wailed Howard, "what is to come of the poor fellow?"

"But we can't till," hastily added Tim, "do yees put your fingers in
your mouth and give that jolly little whistle."

Howard Lawrence was in the very act of doing so when his arm was
suddenly arrested by his companion, who, with an exclamation of surprise
pointed to a ledge of rocks above them.




CHAPTER XL.

THE END OF THE SEARCH.


About a hundred and fifty feet above them, almost perpendicularly
upward, stood an antelope, its small neck outstretched, and its dark,
beautiful eyes fixed upon them with a wondering expression. It was on
the very edge of a projecting rock where one step more would bring it
over.

"It is jist the jintleman we wants," whispered Tim, fearful that he
would alarm the timid animal. "We've ate but once in twenty-four hours,
and I've jist learned from me stomach that it would have no objection to
breaking the same fast; so do yez jist kape still till I pops him over."

"Can you hit him?" asked Howard, scarcely less excited than his
companion.

"Be aisy now till ye see the scientific manner I takes to doot."

"Well, be quick, for he is likely to vanish any moment."

Tim O'Rooney carefully sighted his rifle, took a quick, steady aim, and
pulled the trigger. Howard, who was keenly watching the antelope, saw it
spring up, and as it came down it missed the cliff and fell almost at
their very feet with a violence and crash which must have broken half
the bones in its body.

"Arrah now, an' wasn't that done nicely?" exclaimed Tim, in great
exultation, as he ran up to the animal with his knife.

"Are you going to dress it?"

"Yis; an' do yez gather what sticks an' stuff ye can, an' we'll have him
cooked in a jiffy."

Howard set about it, for he understood the wisdom of providing
themselves with food in the prosecution of this hunt, which in all
probability would employ them for some time to come.

"Now, I will give the signal," said he, when his work was completed. "If
he is within hearing he will answer it."

"Yis; do your bist, while I pays my respects to this gintleman, an' do
ye do the listenin' while ye are about it, for I'm so taken up with this
job that I haven't the time to attend to that aither."

Howard strained his cheeks nearly to bursting, and completely exhausted
himself in giving forth those ringing screeches which seem to come
natural to all school-boys, and are made by uniting the ends of two
fingers, inserting them between the lips, and blowing with all the
might.

He listened--listened--listened--and then repeated the signal with a
desperate fierceness that left him no strength at all; but all in
vain--the echoes died away among the rocks and hills, but no answer came
back.

"It's no use," remarked Tim O'Rooney, who despite what he had said was
listening as earnestly as his young friend.

"The youngster don't hear us. We've got to make a hunt through this old
place, and afore we begins it we'll take something for the stomach's
sake."

The fire was kindled in the usual manner, and the dinner was not
unskillfully prepared by the Irishman. They ate all they could hold. The
dog did the same. Tim lit his pipe, and then declared that he was ready
for any duty that might be required of him.

As they rose to their feet they were somewhat alarmed at the appearance
of the sky. It was overspread with dark, threatening clouds, from which
issued rumbling peals of thunder and arrowy lines of lightning. They
became darker and more tumultuous each moment, until semi-darkness
shrouded them.

"We are going to have a storm," remarked Howard.

"Yis; and a good-sized one, too."

"We shall have to find shelter for ourselves. If much rain falls, this
gorge looks to me as if it will be filled with water."

"Worrah, now, but yez are a smart child!" exclaimed Tim O'Rooney,
looking admiringly at the boy. "Scarcely mesilf would have thought of
the same, and what a credit, therefore, that it should have come into
your own."

"I see nothing so wonderful about that. Almost any one would see the
danger we are in if we remain here when there is much rain falling. It
is just the place for a stream of water."

"So it is--so it is; and yez can saa that there has wather been running
over the stones upon which we are standing."

The storm which was so near at hand admonished them to lose no time in
seeking shelter. This was a matter of small difficulty, as in such a
wild, rugged place there were any number of retreats. They clambered up
the path and over the rocks until they reached a point higher yet than
where the antelope had stood when pierced by the bullet that had tumbled
him over the cliff. They had brought a goodly portion of his meat with
them, for there was no telling when they would dare fire a gun again.

A gaping, overhanging ledge, which fortunately was turned from the
direction of the storm, was selected as their house, and here they and
the dog nestled and waited for the storm to burst. A few large drops
that cracked smartly upon the rocks and stones, was the herald of the
coming deluge; and then, at the same moment, with a terrific flash and
report, came the rain in torrents.

They stood and watched the storm as it raged, and when there was a
momentary cessation Howard threw his blanket over his head and said:

"I will run out to the edge of that rock and see whether there is any
water in the place where we took our dinner."

"Be careful yez don't tumble over," admonished Tim, feeling it his duty
to say something.

"Never fear."

Howard stepped hastily to the spot and looked carefully over. A tiny
stream was just beginning to run through the path they had occupied,
which was increasing each moment, and would speedily reach the
proportions of a torrent. But, although he saw this, there was something
which interested him still more, and that was a party of five Indians
attentively examining the remains of the antelope, and the signs around
it, as if they were seeking their explanation. They looked down to the
ground, and two of them pointed precisely in the direction which Tim and
Howard had taken in leaving the place.

The rain began falling again more copiously than ever, but Howard would
not have heeded it had he not been shrouded in the water-proof blanket.
Those Indians had found their camp-fire and were at that moment
discussing the best method of capturing him and Tim; but the rain came
down so furiously that they finally darted away to seek shelter, and
Howard thereupon hurried back to his friend and told him all that he had
seen.

"That settles the matter," he added. "Elwood is in their hands, and if
we aint careful we shall be with him, for they are searching for us."

"But they can't find us--that they can't."

"Why not?"

"This rain will wipe out our tracks as aisy as if yees had taken a cloth
and done it yourself."

"That is true."

Howard was greatly relieved when he reflected that this was true, and
that he and Tim were in no danger of capture from being pursued.

The storm lasted several hours, and when it was finished they came
cautiously forth and made their way stealthily back to where they had
left the canoe. They had deliberated long and earnestly regarding Elwood
Brandon, and neither of them had any doubt but what he was in the hands
of Indians. They had little fear of his being put to death, but believed
he would be held a prisoner until either rescued by Shasta, or a party
could be sent from the nearest post to ransom him. They had concluded to
make all haste homeward and adopt this method of rescue.

And now, as they had given him up for a while, it is high time we took
him in hand.




CHAPTER XLI.

A BOY LOST.


When Elwood Brandon separated from Howard Lawrence on the afternoon of
their ramble in the woods, it was with the firm intention of making all
haste around the range of hills, and there to unite with him in their
hunt for Tim.

But, like too many boys, he suffered himself to be led from the sure
path by the allurements of the false one. His example furnished a
striking moral lesson, which he will doubtless remember to the day of
his death.

When we are following the course which conscience tells us is the true
one, although it may be rough and stony, and at times most difficult to
keep, yet the knowledge of what awaits us at the end should be proof
against temptations to turn aside. Woe to him who chides the voice of
conscience and listens to that of the charmer!

Elwood had gone some distance, and was walking very rapidly, when he
came abruptly upon the opening in the rocks which has been mentioned in
another place.

"Ah! here is a shorter cut across," was his reflection as he saw it, and
not stopping to think further, he turned and walked rapidly through it.
"I will beat Howard," and he smiled at the thought. "What will he think
when he gets around to see me waiting for him? I know he will run so as
to be there first."

Thus hopeful, Elwood hurried forward, thinking only of the surprise he
would give his cousin when they met again. As he found the path taking a
most sinuous course, a dim idea came through his head that perhaps after
all he had not gained so much by "cutting across." He would have turned
back as it was but for the rapidly increasing darkness and the belief
that he must speedily emerge from the eastern side of the hills.

While walking through a narrow part of the path, he was alarmed by the
rattling of some dirt, stones and debris over his head, and before he
could retreat or advance he was stricken on the head by several pieces
with such violence that he staggered and fell to the ground.

He was not senseless, but somewhat stunned, and placed his hand on his
head to see whether it was cut. Finding no blood, he arose to his feet
and replied to the whistle of Howard, which had been ringing in his ears
for the last ten minutes.

Immediately after, he was taken with a sickness at the stomach, the
result, doubtless, of the mental shock received. Such was his faintness
and nausea that he lay down upon the ground for relief. When a boy feels
so sick--as shown also by older persons in seasickness--he generally
becomes perfectly indifferent to everything else in the world. Elwood
concluded that Howard might whistle as long as he chose, and he would
reply when he felt able. As for the gathering darkness, wild animals and
savages, what did he care for them? They could exist and get along
without his taking any trouble to think about them.

And so he lay still until his sickness diminished and was gradually
succeeded by drowsiness, which was not long in merging into slumber.

Whoever yet remembered the moment he went to sleep? Whoever lay still to
gain a few moments of slumber without obtaining far more than he
expected, and regretting it when his intellect became sharp and clear?

It was near midnight when Elwood awoke, and all was blank darkness. He
called to Howard and Tim, and not until he had felt around with his
hands, did he remember his situation. Then it all came to him.

"This is a pretty piece of business," he thought, as he arose to his
feet. "Poor Howard is half-frightened to death, and I suppose is still
hunting for me. But I don't hear him."

He listened, but all was still.

"It may be that he has grown tired, but will hear me if I call to him."

Whereupon he whistled again and again, and shouted and listened and then
repeated his signals, but there was no response. But for the intervening
hills his cry would have reached the two watchers by the river shore,
but with twice the penetrating power he still would have failed to reach
them.

"Well, the best thing I can do is to wait here until morning, and then I
can make my way back again."

His sickness was gone, but he felt somewhat chilled from lying upon the
ground with no extra covering, although the night was quite moderate, if
not really warm. The contact with the ground had made a portion of his
body cold, and the sluggish circulation prompted him to exercise.

"I hardly know whether to stay here or to go back to the woods and take
refuge in a tree. Some animals may find me here, while I shall be safe
if I am only twenty feet above ground."

The vivid recollection of the wolverines gave him this fear and finally
induced him to leave the place and seek shelter.

But at the moment of starting he was confronted by an alarming
difficulty. He found it impossible to decide upon the proper course to
follow, and could not tell with certainty which way led in or out. This
resulted from his having turned around several times in his effort to
restore warmth and circulation on awaking from his sleep. Had he not
done this the position in which he lay during slumber would have told
him the truth.

"How strange!" he reflected, vainly seeking to recover from his
bewilderment. "If I only had a little light I think I could tell, but
this is rather delicate business when I don't know whether I may go over
the rocks or not."

He leaned against the wall of the path and thought. At last he believed
he knew which way to turn, and facing backward he began to pick his way
out. This, we may say, was the right course, and had he only persevered
in it would have brought him out of the hills into the woods, restored
him to Tim and Howard a few hours later and saved him one of the most
momentous experiences of his life.

He had retreated but a few rods when he became sure he had made a
mistake and was going wrong. It seemed from his contact with the rocks
and the curious windings it made, that he had never passed over the
ground, but was advancing further into the hills.

"This will not do," he said aloud, as he paused. "I am astray and must
change about."

He did so at once, and believing, of a surety, that he was now upon the
right path he walked much faster than was prudent. The truth was, the
associations of the plate were such as to make him in a hurry to get
away from it. He knew he would feel relieved when he could get once more
into the open air of the woods. A strange fear that the overhanging rock
would fall or imprison him caused him to hasten still more. After
walking some time further he slackened his steps.

"I must be pretty near the opening, judging by the distance I have come;
and if such be the case--"

Further words were checked, for at that instant Elwood stepped off the
path and went down--down!




CHAPTER XLII.

A DREARY NIGHT.


Elwood fell about twenty feet, striking the solid earth, without losing
his own perpendicular position. He was considerably pained, but not
seriously hurt. His rifle had fallen from his hand, and was not found
again until daybreak, as not knowing where he stood, whether upon the
edge of some precipice or ravine, he scarcely dared move a limb.

Ah! if the night was so weary to the watchers by the river shore, it was
much more so to him for whom they thus lay awake. Utter midnight
blackness all around, the profound and impressive stillness made more
profound and impressive by the trickling of some current near, the
occasional glimpse of some tiny star twinkling among the dark,
straggling clouds overhead; such was Elwood Brandon's situation and
surroundings.

His only resource was thought, and the direction which this took for a
time was anything but a relief. He saw that he himself was to blame for
the disaster of the day. It was he who proposed this ramble, and he who
insisted so strenuously upon separating from Howard in the journey
around the hills. And then his present situation resulted wholly from
his own foolishness--to call it no milder term--in entering an unknown
path with the simple hope of reaching a designated point a few minutes
in advance of his friend, whom he knew well enough had carried out to
the letter their agreement, and was waiting his coming.

Had Howard found Tim O'Rooney? That was the next question. Or was he
still lingering on the other side of the hills, waiting for the morning
to renew his hunt for himself before he sought out his companion? The
latter seemed the most probable supposition to Elwood, and the odd whim
took him that his cousin was close at hand and listening for the
familiar signal. So he placed his fingers to his mouth and repeated the
whistle which they had used so many times between them.

He did this again and again, but there was no response, and he finally
concluded that it was rather a monotonous manner of passing the time and
ceased, and again gave himself up to thought.

If he ever lived to see his friends at home what an experience would be
his to tell! The burning steamer, the hours spent in drifting ashore,
the wanderings through the wilds of California, this adventure among the
hills--surely they were enough to last a life-time.

Now and then a cold draft of wind swept by him, as though the
temperature of the air was changing. It was in fact the premonition of
the gathering storm to which we have referred in another place.

Elwood had been in his constrained position a couple of hours when he
was subjected to a terrible fright. Suddenly some dirt and stones
commenced moving near him and he felt it strike his feet. He was fearful
that a landslide was about to take place, but did not dare attempt to
get out of the way. He could only shrink closer against the rocks, pray
to Heaven for protection, and await the issue.

