he would have torn himself in half, knowing while he struggled that
perhaps the wildcat had been _malika_ after all, or not caring if he
were less, only fighting to pull himself away from the pain, realizing
that blood had begun to seep from beneath the log again, just a tiny
trickle.

Then the shadows overtook him, the dreams, the wisps of forgetfulness
gauzing his eyes.

       *       *       *       *       *

Tloto nearly had to drag Quorl halfway up the mountain before the giant
got the idea. When he did, he began to run. Quorl found the boy; just
before sunset. He was breathing in short gasps, his fists clenched, his
eyes closed. The blood on the dirt had dried black.

The great brown hands went around the log, locked, and started to shift
it; the boy let out a high sound from between his teeth.

The hands, roped with vein and ridged with ligament, strained the log
upward; the sound became a howl.

The giant's feet braced against the dirt, slid into the dirt, and the
hands that had snapped tiny necks and bound sticks together with gut
string, pulled; the howl turned into a scream. He screamed again. Then
again.

The log coming loose tore away nearly a square foot of flesh from the
boy's leg. Then, Quorl went over and picked him up.

This is the best dream, the boy thought, from that dark place he had
retreated to behind the pain, because Quorl is here. The hands were
lifting him now, he was held close, warm, somehow safe. His cheek was
against the hard shoulder muscle, and he could smell Quorl too. So he
stopped screaming and turned his head a little to make the pain go away.
But it wouldn't go. It wouldn't. Then the boy cried.

The first tears through all that pain came salty in his eyes, and he
cried until he went to sleep.

       *       *       *       *       *

Quorl had medicine for him the next day ("From the priest," he said.)
which helped the pain and made the healing start. Quorl also had made
the boy a pair of wooden crutches that morning. Although muscle and
ligament had been bruised and crushed and the skin torn away, no bone
had broken.

That evening there was a drizzle and they ate under the canopy. Tloto
did not come, and this time it was Quorl who saved the extra meat and
kept looking off into the wet gray trees. Quorl had told the boy how
Tloto had led him to him; when they finished eating, Quorl took the meat
and ducked into the drizzle.

The boy lay down to sleep. He thought the meat was a reward for Tloto.
Only Quorl had seemed that night full of more than usual gravity. The
last thing he wondered before sleep flooded his eyes and ears was how
blind, deaf Tloto had known where he was anyway.

       *       *       *       *       *

When he woke it had stopped raining. The air was damp and chill. Quorl
had not come back.

The sound of the blown shell came again. The boy sat up and flinched at
the twinge in his leg. To his left the moon was flickering through the
trees. The sound came a third time, distant, sharp, yet clear and
marine. The boy reached for his crutches and hoisted himself to his
feet. He waited till the count of ten, hoping that Quorl might suddenly
return to go with him.

A last he took a deep breath and started haltingly forward. The faint
moonlight made the last hundred yards easy going. Finally he reached a
vantage where he could look down through the wet leaves onto the arena
of stone.

The sky was sheeted with mist and the moon was an indistinct pearl in
the haze. The sea was misty. People were already gathered at the edge.
The boy looked at the priest and then ran his eye around the circle of
people. One of them was Quorl!

He leaned forward as far as he could. The priest sounded the shell again
and the prisoners came out of the temple: first three boys, then an
older girl, then a man. The next one ... Tloto! It was marble-white
under the blurred moon. Its clubbed feet shuffled on the rock. Its blind
head ducked right and left with bewilderment.

As the priest raised the long three-pronged knife, the boy's hands went
tight around the crutches. He passed from one prisoner to the next.
Tloto cringed, and the boy sucked in a breath as the knife went down,
feeling his own flesh part under the blades. Then the murmur died, the
prisoners were unbound, and the people filed from the rock back into the
forest.

The boy waited to see which way Quorl headed before he started through
moon-dusted bushes as fast as his crutches would let him. There were
many people on the webbing of paths that came from the temple rock.
There was Quorl!

When he caught up, Quorl saw him and slowed down. Quorl didn't look at
him, though. Finally the giant said, "You don't understand. I had to
catch him. I had to give him to the old one to be marked. But you don't
understand." The boy hardly looked at all where they were going, but
stared up at the giant.

"You don't understand," Quorl said again. Then he looked at the boy and
was quiet for a minute. "No, you don't," he repeated. "Come." They
turned off the main path now, going slower. "It's a ... custom. An
important custom. Yes, I know it hurt him. I know he was afraid. But it
had to be. Tloto is one of those who--." (The word was some inflection
of the verb to know.) Quorl was silent for a moment. "Let me try to tell
you why I had to hurt your friend. Yes, I know he is your friend, now.
But once I said that Tloto was _malika_. I was wrong. Tloto is more than
_malika_--he and the others that were marked. Somehow these people know
things. That was how Tloto survived. That's how he knew where you were,
when you were hurt. He knew inside your head, he heard inside your head.
Many are born like that, more of them each year. As soon as we find out,
we mark them. Many try to hide it, and some succeed for a long time. Can
you understand? Do you? When Tloto showed me where you were, he knew
that I would know, that he would be caught and marked. Do you
understand?"

Again he paused and looked at the boy. The eyes still showed puzzled
hurt. "You want to know why. I ... we.... Long ago we killed them when
we found out. We don't any more. The mark reminds them that they are
different, and yet the same as we. Perhaps it is wrong. It doesn't hurt
that much, and it heals. Anyway, we don't kill them any more. We know
they're important...." Suddenly, having gone all through it with this
strange boy, it seemed twisted to the giant, incorrect. Then he gave the
boy what the boy had been sent to the forest to get, what the Duchess
had found and knew was necessary. "I was wrong," Quorl said. "I'm sorry.
I will speak to the priest tomorrow."

They walked until the dawn lightened the sky behind the trees. Once
Quorl looked around and said, "I want to show you something. We are very
near, and the weather is right."

They walked a few minutes more till Quorl pointed to a wall of leaves,
and said, "Go through there."

As they pressed through the dripping foliage, bright light burnished
their faces. They were standing on a small cliff that looked down the
mountain. Fog the color of pale gold, the same gold the boy had seen so
rarely in the sunset, rolled across the entire sky. The center flamed
with the misty sun, and way below them through the fog was the shattered
traces of water, the color of magnesium flame on copper foil, without
edge or definition.

"That's a lake that lies between this mountain and the next," Quorl
said, pointing to the water.

"I thought...." the boy started softly, his tongue rough against the new
language. "I thought it was the sea."

Beside them appeared the crouching figure of Tloto. Drops from the wet
leaves burned on his neck and back, over the drying blood. He turned his
blank face left and right in the golden light, and with all his knowing
could communicate no awe.




CHAPTER IX


Clea Koshar had been installed in her government office for three days.
The notebook in which she had been doing her own work in inverse
sub-trigonometric functions had been put away in her desk for exactly
fifty-four seconds when she made the first discovery that gave her a
permanent place in the history of Toromon's wars as its first military
hero. Suddenly she pounded her fist on the computer keys, flung her
pencil across the room, muttered, "What the hell is this!" and dialed
the military ministry.

It took ten minutes to get Tomar. His red-haired face came in on the
visiphone, recognized her, and smiled. "Hi," he said.

"Hi, yourself," she said. "I just got out those figures you people sent
us about the data from the radiation barrier, and those old readings
from the time Telphar was destroyed. Tomar, I didn't even have to feed
them to the computer. I just looked at them. That radiation was
artificially created. Its increment is completely steady. At least on
the second derivative. Its build-up pattern is such that there couldn't
be more than two simple generators, or one complexed on ..."

"Slow down," Tomar said. "What do you mean, generators?"

"The radiation barrier, or at least most of it, is artificially
maintained. And there are not more than two generators, and possibly
one, maintaining it."

"How do you generate radiation?" Tomar asked.

"I don't know," Clea said. "But somebody has been doing it."

"I don't want to knock your genius, but how come nobody else figured it
out?"

"I just guess nobody thought it was a possibility, or thought of
gratuitously taking the second derivative, or bothered to look at them
before they fed them into the computers. In twenty minutes I can figure
out the location for you."

"You do that," he said, "and I'll get the information to whomever it's
supposed to get to. You know, this is the first piece of information of
import that we've gotten from this whole battery of slide-rule slippers
up there. I should have figured it would have probably come from you.
Thanks, if we can use it."

She blew him a kiss as his face winked out. Then she got out her
notebook again. Then minutes later the visiphone crackled at her. She
turned to it and tried to get the operator. The operator was not to be
gotten. She reached into her desk and got out a small pocket tool kit
and was about to attack the housing of the frequency-filterer when the
crackling increased and she heard a voice. She put the screw driver down
and put the instrument back on the desk. A face flickered onto the
screen and then flickered off. The face had dark hair, seemed perhaps
familiar. But it was gone before she was sure she had made it out.

Crossed signals from another line, she figured. Maybe a short in the
dialing mechanism. She glanced down at her notebook and took up her
pencil when the picture flashed onto the screen again. This time it was
clear and there was no static. The familiarity, she did not realize, was
the familiarity of her own face on a man.

"Hello," he said. "Hello, Hello, Clea?"

"Who is this?" she asked.

"Clea, this is Jon."

She sat very still, trying to pull two halves of something back together
(as in a forest, a prince had felt the same things disengage). Clea
succeeded. "You're supposed to be ... dead. I mean I thought you were.
Where are you, Jon?"

"Clea," he said. "Clea--I have to talk to you."

There was a five-second silence.

"Jon, Jon, how are you?"

"Fine," he said. "I really am. I'm not in prison any more. I've been
out a long time, and I've done a lot of things. But Clea, I need your
help."

"Of course," she said. "Tell me how? What do you want me to do?"

"Do you want to know where I am?" he said. "What I've been doing? I'm in
Telphar, and I'm trying to stop the war."

"In Telphar?"

"There's something behind that famed radiation barrier, and it's a more
or less civilized race. I'm about to break through the rest of the
barrier and see what can be done. But I need some help at home. I've
been monitoring phone calls in Toron. There's an awful lot of equipment
here that's more or less mine if I can figure out how to use it. And
I've got a friend here who knows more in that line than I gave him
credit for. I've overheard some closed circuit conference calls, and I'm
talking to you by the same method. I know you've got the ear of Major
Tomar and I know he's one of the few trustworthy people in that whole
military hodge-podge. Clea, there is something hostile to Toromon behind
that radiation barrier, but a war is not the answer. The thing that's
making the war is the unrest in Toromon. And the war isn't going to
remedy that. The emigration situation, the food situation, the excess
man power, the deflation: that's what's causing your war. If that can be
stopped, then the thing behind the barrier can be dealt with quickly and
peacefully. There in Toron you don't even know what the enemy is. They
wouldn't let you know even if they knew themselves."

"Do you know?" Clea asked.

Jon paused. Then he said, "No, but whatever it is, it's people with
something wrong among them. And warring on them won't exorcise it."

"Can you exorcise it?" Clea asked.

Jon paused again. "Yes. I can't tell you how; but let's say what's
troubling them is a lot simpler than what's troubling us in Toromon."

"Jon," Clea asked suddenly, "what's it like in Telphar? You know I'll
help you if I can, but tell me."

The face on the visiphone was still. Then it drew a deep breath. "Clea,
it's like an open air tomb. The city is very unlike Toron. It was
planned, all the streets are regular, there's no Devil's Pot, nor could
there ever be one. Roadways wind above ground among the taller
buildings. I'm in the Palace of the Stars right now. It was a
magnificent building." The face looked right and left. "It still is.
They had amazing laboratories, lots of equipment, great silvered meeting
halls under an immense ceiling that reproduced the stars on the ceiling.
The electric plants still work. Most houses you can walk right in and
turn on a light switch. Half the plumbing in the city is out, though.
But everything in the palace still works. It must have been a beautiful
place to live in. When they were evacuating during the radiation rise,
very little marauding took place...."

"The radiation ..." began Clea.

Jon laughed, "Oh, that doesn't bother us. It's too complicated to
explain now, but it doesn't."

"That's not what I meant," Clea said. "I figured if you were alive, then
it obviously wasn't bothering you. But Jon, and this isn't government
propaganda, because I made the discovery myself: whatever is behind the
barrier caused the radiation rise that destroyed Telphar. Some place
near Telphar is a projector that caused the rise, and it's still
functioning. This hasn't been released to the public yet, but if you
want to stop your war, you'll never do it if the government can
correctly blame the destruction of Telphar on the enemy. That's all they
need."

"Clea, I haven't finished telling you about Telphar. I told you that the
electricity still worked. Well, most houses you go into, you turn on the
light and find a couple of sixty-year-old corpses on the floor. On the
roads you can find a wreck every hundred feet or so. There're almost ten
thousand corpses in the Stadium of the Stars. It isn't very pretty.
Arkor and I are the only two humans who have any idea of what the
destruction of Telphar really amounted to. And we still believe we're in
the right."

"Jon, I can't hold back information...."

