
The men chuckled a good deal at Jim's confusion, while he in vain
attempted to explain that the two ideas were not parallel by any means.
At this juncture, Phil Briant came to the rescue.

"Ah now, git out," said he.  "I agree with Jim intirely; an' Tim Rokens
isn't quite so cliver as he thinks.  Now look here, lads, here's how it
stands, 'xactly.  Jim says he never seed his own mind--very good; and he
says as how nobody else niver seed it nother; well, and wot then?  Don't
you observe it's 'cause he han't got none at all to see?  He han't got
even the ghost of one, so how could ye expect anybody to see it?"

"Oh, hold yer noise, Paddy," exclaimed Dick Barnes, "an' let's have a
ghost story from Tim Rokens.  He b'lieves in ghosts, anyhow, an' could
give us a yarn about 'em, I knows, if he likes.  Come along now, Tim,
like a good fellow."

"Ay, that's it," cried Briant; "give us a stiff 'un now.  Don't be
afeard to skear us, old boy."

"Oh, I can give ye a yarn about ghosts, cer'nly," said Tim Rokens,
looking into the bowl of his pipe in order to make sure that it was
sufficiently charged to last out the story.  "I'll tell ye of a ghost I
once seed and knocked down."

"Knocked down!" cried Nikel Sling in surprise; "why, I allers thought as
how ghosts was spirits, an' couldn't be knocked down or cotched
neither."

"Not at all," replied Rokens; "ghosts is made of all sorts o' things--
brass, and iron, and linen, and buntin', and timber; it wos a brass
ghost the feller that I'm goin' to tell ye about--"

"I say, Sling," interrupted Briant, "av ghosts wos spirits, as you
thought they wos, would they be allowed into the State of Maine?"

"Oh, Phil, shut up, do!  Now then, Tim, fire away."

"Well, then," began Rokens, with great deliberation, "it was on a
Vednesday night as it happened.  I had bin out at supper with a friend
that night, and we'd had a glass or two o' grog; for ye see, lads, it
was some years ago, afore I tuk to temp'rance.  I had a long way to go
over a great dark moor afore I could git to the place where I lodged, so
I clapped on all sail to git over the moor, seein' the moon would go
down soon; but it wouldn't do: the moon set when I wos in the very
middle of the moor, and as the road wasn't over good, I wos in a state
o' confumble lest I should lose it altogether.  I looks round in all
directions, but I couldn't see nothin'--cause why? there wasn't nothin'
to be seen.  It was 'orrid dark, I can tell ye.  Jist one or two stars
a-shinin', like half-a-dozen farden dips in a great church; they only
made darkness wisible.  I began to feel all over a cur'ous sort o'
peculiar unaccountableness, which it ain't easy to explain, but is most
oncommon disagreeable to feel.  It wos very still, too--desperate still.
The beatin' o' my own heart sounded quite loud, and I heer'd the
tickin' o' my watch goin' like the click of a church clock.  Oh, it was
awful!"

At this point in the story the men crept closer together, and listened
with intense earnestness.

"Suddently," continued Rokens--"for things in sich circumstances always
comes suddently--suddently I seed somethin' black jump up right ahead o'
me."

Here Rokens paused.

"Wot was it?" inquired Gurney, in a solemn whisper.

"It was," resumed Rokens slowly, "the stump of a old tree."

"Oh, I thought it had been the ghost," said Gurney, somewhat relieved,
for that fat little Jack-tar fully believed in apparitions, and always
listened to a ghost story in fear and trembling.

"No it wasn't the ghost; it was the stump of a tree.  Well, I set sail
again, an' presently I sees a great white thing risin' up ahead o' me."

"Hah! _that_ was it," whispered Gurney.

"No, that wasn't it," retorted Rokens; "that was a hinn, a white-painted
hinn, as stood by the roadside, and right glad wos I to see it, I can
tell ye, shipmates, for I wos gittin' tired as well as frightened.  I
soon roused the landlord by kickin' at the door till it nearly comed off
its hinges; and arter gettin' another glass o' grog, I axed the landlord
to show me my bunk, as I wanted to turn in.

"It was a queer old house that hinn wos.  A great ramblin' place, with
no end o' staircases and passages.  A dreadful gloomy sort o' place.  No
one lived in it except the landlord, a dark-faced surly fellow as one
would like to kick out of his own door, and his wife, who wos little
better than his-self.  They also had a hostler, but he slept with the
cattle in a hout-house.

"`Ye won't be fear'd,' says the landlord, as he hove ahead through the
long passages holdin' the candle high above his head to show the way,
`to sleep in the far end o' the house.  It's the old bit; the new bit's
undergoin' repairs.  You'll find it comfortable enough, though it's
raither gusty, bein' old, ye see; but the weather ain't cold, so ye
won't mind it.'

"`Oh! niver a bit,' says I, quite bold like; `I don't care a rap for
nothin'.  There ain't no ghosts, is there?'

"`Well, I'm not sure; many travellers wot has stayed here has said to me
they've seed 'em, particklerly in the old part o' the buildin', but they
seems to be quite harmless, and never hurts any one as lets 'em alone.
I never seed 'em myself, an' there's cer'nly not more nor half-a-dozen
on 'em--hallo!--'

"At that moment, shipmates, a strong gust o' cold air came rushin' down
the passage we was in, and blow'd out the candle.  `Ah! it's gone out,'
said the landlord; `just wait here a moment, and I'll light it;' and
with that he shuffled off, and left me in the blackest and most thickest
darkness I ever wos in in all my life.  I didn't dare to move, for I
didn't know the channels, d'ye see, and might ha' run myself aground or
against the rocks in no time.  The wind came moanin' down the passage;
as if all the six ghosts the landlord mentioned, and a dozen or two o'
their friends besides, was a-dyin' of stommick-complaint.  I'm not easy
frightened, lads, but my knees did feel as if the bones in 'em had
turned to water, and my hair began to git up on end, for I felt it
risin'.  Suddenly I saw somethin' comin' along the passage towards me--"

"That's the ghost, _now_," interrupted Gurney, in a tremulous whisper.

Rokens paused, and regarded his fat shipmate with a look of contemptuous
pity; then turning to the others, he said--

"It wos _the landlord_, a-comin' back with the candle.  He begged pardon
for leavin' me in the dark so long, and led the way to a room at the far
end o' the passage.  It was a big, old-fashioned room, with a
treemendius high ceiling, and no furniture, 'cept one chair, one small
table, and a low camp-bed in a corner.  `Here's your room,' says the
landlord; `it's well-aired.  I may as well mention that the latch of the
door ain't just the thing.  It sometimes blows open with a bang, but
when you know it may happen, you can be on the look-out for it, you
know, and so you'll not be taken by surprise.  Good-night.'  With that
the fellow set the candle down on the small table at the bedside, and
left me to my cogitations.  I heerd his footsteps echoin' as he went
clankin' along the passages; then they died away, an' I was alone.

"Now, I tell ye wot it is, shipmates; I've bin in miny a fix, but I
niver wos in sich a fix as that.  The room was empty and big; so big
that the candle could only light up about a quarter of it, leavin' the
rest in gloom.  There was one or two old picturs on the walls; one on
'em a portrait of a old admiral, with a blue coat and brass buttons and
white veskit.  It hung just opposite the fut o' my bunk, an' I could
hardly make it out, but I saw that the admiral kep his eye on me
wheriver I turned or moved about the room, an' twice or thrice, if not
more, I saw him wink with his weather eye.  Yes, he winked as plain as I
do myself.  Says I to myself, says I, `Tim Rokens, you're a British tar,
an' a whaler, an' a harpooner; so, Tim, my boy, don't you go for to be a
babby.'

"With that I smoked a pipe, and took off my clo's, and tumbled in, and
feeling a little bolder by this time, I blew out the candle.  In gittin'
into bed I knocked over the snuffers, w'ich fell with an awful clatter,
and my heart lep' into my mouth as I lep' under the blankets, and
kivered up my head.  Howsever, I was uncommon tired, so before my head
was well on the pillow, I went off to sleep.

"How long I slep' I can't go for to say, but w'en I wakened it wos
pitch-dark.  I could only just make out the winder by the pale starlight
that shone through it, but the moment I set my two eyes on it, wot does
I see?  I seed a sight that made the hair on my head stand on end, and
my flesh creep up like a muffin.  It was a--"

"A ghost!" whispered Gurney, while his eyes almost started out of his
head.

Before Tim Rokens could reply, something fell with a heavy flop from the
yard over their heads right in among the men, and vanished with a
shriek.  It was Jacko, who, in his nocturnal rambles in the rigging, had
been shaken off the yard on which he was perched, by a sudden lurch of
the vessel as the tide began to move her about.  At any time such an
event would have been startling, but at such a time as this it was
horrifying.  The men recoiled with sharp cries of terror, and then burst
into laughter as they observed what it was that had fallen amongst them.
But the laughter was subdued, and by no means hearty.

"I'll be the death o' that brute yet," said Gurney, wiping the
perspiration from his forehead; "but go on, Rokens; what was it you
saw?"

"It _was_ the ghost," replied Rokens, as the men gathered round him
again--"a long, thin ghost, standin' at my bedside.  The light was so
dim that I couldn't well make it out, but I saw that it was white, or
pale-like, and that it had on a pointed cap, like the cap o' an old
witch.  I thought I should ha' died outright, and I lay for full five
minits tremblin' like a leaf and starin' full in its face.  At last I
started up in despair, not knowin' well wot to do; and the moment I did
so the ghost disappeared.

"I thought this was very odd, but you may be sure I didn't find fault
with it; so after lookin' all round very careful to make quite sure that
it was gone, I lay down again on my back.  Well, would ye b'lieve it,
shipmates, at that same moment up starts the ghost again as bold as
iver?  And up starts I in a fright; but the moment I was up the ghost
was gone.  `Now, Tim Rokens,' says I to myself, always keepin' my eye on
the spot where I'd last seed the ghost, `this _is_ queer; this is quite
remarkable.  You're dreamin', my lad, an' the sooner ye put a stop to
that 'ere sort o' dreamin' the better.'

"Havin' said this, I tried to feel reckless, and lay down again, and up
started the ghost again with its long thin white body, an' the pointed
cap on its head.  I noticed, too, that it wore its cap a little on one
side quite jaunty like.  So, wheniver I sot up that 'ere ghost
disappeared, and wheniver I lay down it bolted up again close beside me.
At last I lost my temper, and I shouts out quite loud, `Shiver my
timbers,' says I, `ghost or no ghost, I'll knock in your daylights if ye
carry on like that any longer;' and with that I up fist and let drive
straight out at the spot where its bread-basket should ha' bin.  Down it
went, that ghost did, with a clatter that made the old room echo like an
empty church.  I guv it a rap, I did, sich as it hadn't had since it was
born--if ghosts be born at all--an' my knuckles paid for it, too, for
they was skinned all up; then I lay down tremblin', and then, I dun know
how it was, I went to sleep.

"Next mornin' I got up to look for the ghost, and, sure enough, I found
his _remains_!  His pale body lay in a far corner o' the room doubled up
and smashed to bits, and his pointed cap lay in another corner almost
flat.  That ghost," concluded Rokens, with slow emphasis--"that ghost
was the _candle_, it wos!"

"The candle!" exclaimed several of the men in surprise.

"Yes, the candle, and brass candlestick with the stinguisher a-top o't.
Ye see, lads, the candle stood close to the side o' my bed on the table,
an' when I woke up and I saw it there, it seemed to me like a big thing
in the middle o' the room, instead o' a little thing close to my nose;
an' when I sot up in my bed, of coorse I looked right over the top of it
and saw nothin'; an' when I lay down, of coorse it rose up in the very
same place.  An', let me tell you, shipmates," added Tim, in conclusion,
with the air of a philosopher, "_all_ ghosts is o' the same sort.
They're most of 'em made o' wood or brass, or some sich stuff, as I've
good cause to remimber, for I had to pay the price o' that 'ere ghost
before I left that there hinn on the lonesome moor, and for the washin'
of the blankets, too, as wos all kivered with blood nixt mornin' from my
smashed knuckles.  There's a morial contained in most things, lads, if
ye only try for to find it out; an' the morial of my story is this--
don't ye go for to b'lieve that everything ye don't 'xactly understand
is a ghost until ye've got to know more about it."

While Tim Rokens was thus recounting his ghostly experiences, and
moralising thereon, for the benefit of his comrades, the silent tide was
stealthily creeping up the sides of the _Red Eric_, and placing her
gradually on an even keel.  At the same time a British man-of-war was
creeping down upon that innocent vessel with the murderous intention of
blowing her out of the water, if possible.

In order to explain this latter fact, we must remind the reader of the
boat and crew of the Portuguese slaver which was encountered by the
party of excursionists on their trip down the river.  The vessel to
which that boat belonged had been for several weeks previous creeping
about off the coast, watching her opportunity to ship a cargo of slaves,
and at the same time to avoid falling into the hands of a British
cruiser which was stationed on the African coast to prevent the
villainous traffic.  The Portuguese ship, which was very similar in size
and shape to the _Red Eric_, had hitherto managed to elude the cruiser,
and had succeeded in taking a number of slaves on board ere she was
discovered.  The cruiser gave chase to her on the same afternoon as that
on which the _Red Eric_ grounded on the mud-bank off the mouth of the
river.  Darkness, however, favoured the slaver, and when the land breeze
failed, she was lost sight of in the intricacies of the navigation at
that part of the coast.

Towards morning, while it was yet dark, the _Red Eric_ floated, and
Captain Dunning, who had paced the deck all night with a somewhat
impatient tread, called to the mate--"Now, Mr Millons, man the boats,
and let some of the hands stand-by to trim the sails to the first puff
of wind."

"Ay, ay, sir," answered the mate, as he sprang to obey.

Now it is a curious fact, that at that identical moment the captain of
the cruiser addressed his first lieutenant in precisely the same words,
for he had caught a glimpse of the whaler's topmasts against the dark
sky, and mistook them, very naturally, for those of the slaver.  In a
few seconds the man-of-war was in full pursuit.

"I say, Dr Hopley," remarked Captain Dunning, as he gazed intently into
the gloom astern, "did you not hear voices? and, as I live, there's a
large ship bearing right down on us!"

"It must be a slaver," replied the doctor; "probably the one that owned
the boat we saw up the river."

"Ship on the larboard bow!" shouted the look-out on the forecastle.

"Hallo! ships ahead and astern!" remarked the captain, in surprise.
"There seems to be a `school' of 'em in these waters."

At this moment the oars of the boats belonging to the ship astern were
heard distinctly, and a light puff of wind at the same time bulged out
the sails of the _Red Eric_, which instantly forged ahead.

"Ship ahoy!" shouted a voice from the boats astern in a tone of
authority; "heave-to, you rascal, or I'll sink you!"

Captain Dunning turned to the doctor with a look of intense surprise.

"Why, doctor, that's the usual hail of a pirate, or something like it.
What it can be doing here is past my comprehension.  I would as soon
expect to find a whale in a wash-tub as a black flag in these waters!
Port, port a little" (turning to the steersman)--"steady--so.  We must
run for it, anyhow, for we're in no fightin' trim.  The best answer to
give to such a hail is silence."

Contrary to expectation the boats did not again hail, but in a few
minutes the dark hull of the British cruiser became indistinctly visible
as it slipped swiftly through the water before the freshening breeze,
and neared the comparatively slow-going whaler rapidly.  Soon it came
within easy range, and while Captain Dunning looked over the taffrail
with a troubled countenance, trying to make her out, the same voice came
hoarsely down on the night breeze issuing the same peremptory command.

"Turn up the hands, Mr Millons, and serve out pistols and cutlasses.
Get the carronades on the forecastle and quarterdeck loaded, Mr
Markham, and look alive; we must show the enemy a bold front, whoever he
is."

As the captain issued these orders, the darkness was for an instant
illuminated by a bright flash; the roar of a cannon reverberated over
the sea; a round-shot whistled through the rigging of the _Red Eric_,
and the next instant the foretopsail-yard came rattling down upon the
deck.

Immediately after, the cruiser ranged up alongside, and the order to
heave-to was repeated with a threat that was calculated to cause the
hair of a man of peace to stand on end.  The effect on Captain Dunning
was to induce him to give the order--

"Point the guns there, lads, and aim high; I don't like to draw first
blood--even of a pirate."

"Ship ahoy!  Who are you, and where from?" inquired Captain Dunning,
through the speaking-trumpet.

"Her British Majesty's frigate _Firebrand_.  If you don't heave-to, sir,
instantly, I'll give you a broadside.  Who are you, and where bound?"

"Whew!" whistled Captain Dunning, to vent his feelings of surprise ere
he replied, "The _Red Eric_, South Sea whaler, outward bound."

Having given this piece of information, he ordered the topsails to be
backed, and the ship was hove-to.  Meanwhile a boat was lowered from the
cruiser, and the captain thereof speedily leaped upon the whaler's
quarterdeck.

The explanation that followed was not by any means calculated to allay
the irritation of the British captain.  He had made quite sure that the
_Red Eric_ was the slaver of which he was in search, and the discovery
of his mistake induced him to make several rather severe remarks in
reference to the crew of the _Red Eric_ generally and her commander in
particular.

"Why didn't you heave-to when I ordered you," he said, "and so save all
this trouble and worry?"

"Because," replied Captain Dunning drily, "I'm not in the habit of
obeying orders until I know that he who gives 'em has a right to do so.
But 'tis a pity to waste time talking about such trifles when the craft
you are in search of is not very far away at this moment."

"What mean you, sir?" inquired the captain of the cruiser quickly.

"I mean that yonder vessel, scarcely visible now on the lee bow, is the
slaver, in all likelihood."

The captain gave but one hasty glance in the direction pointed to by
Captain Dunning, and next moment he was over the side of the ship, and
the boat was flying swiftly towards his vessel.  The rapid orders given
