The Project Gutenberg EBook of Hymns of the Greek Church, by John Brownlie

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Hymns of the Greek Church
       Translated with Introduction and Notes

Author: John Brownlie

Release Date: January 20, 2009 [EBook #27848]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HYMNS OF THE GREEK CHURCH ***




Produced by Stephen Hutcheson, Charles Coulston, and Ken
Jentsch, with help from Distributed Proofreaders










                        HYMNS OF THE GREEK CHURCH




                                HYMNS OF
                            THE GREEK CHURCH


                               TRANSLATED
                       WITH INTRODUCTION AND NOTES
                                   BY
                           JOHN BROWNLIE, D.D.
                                AUTHOR OF
             'HYMNS AND HYMN-WRITERS OF THE CHURCH HYMNARY'

                          EDINBURGH AND LONDON
                      OLIPHANT, ANDERSON & FERRIER
                                 _1900_




                           SOME PRESS NOTICES


"This work at its best reaches the level of absolute excellence, and the
book is entitled to a warm and grateful welcome."--_Record_.

"Mr Brownlie has taste and a poetic gift, and his verses are easy and
natural, rarely, if ever, betraying the fact that they are the work of a
translator."--_Church Times_.

"This dainty volume will certainly enhance his reputation."--_Glasgow
Herald_.

"It brings into dignified Church-English some sixty simple and powerful
hymns. The book should prove welcome to men generally interested in
hymnody, and particularly to those who are ignorant of the richness of
the Greek liturgy."--_Scotsman_.

"Mr Brownlie has the knack of hymn-writing, and the translations from the
Greek which he has published in this book will be a welcome addition to
English hymnology."--_Athenaeum_.

"Mr Brownlie has done eminent service as a hymnologist and translator of
hymns. These translations are in smooth and flowing English verse, and
the hymns are interesting both on their intrinsic merits and as
representing the religious thought and emotion of an important section of
the Church."--_Aberdeen Free Press_.




                             PREFATORY NOTE


After ten years this, the first of five series of hymns of the Greek
Church, is issued in cheap form in the hope that those who regard the
unity of Christian praise, and wish to realise it, and who seek its
enrichment from the Church of the Apostles, may be induced to give the
subject that consideration which it deserves, and which has been too long
neglected.

The past ten years have seen much activity in the department of Church
hymnody,--all sections of the Church have had their hymnals under
revision with varied results; but in this particular we are bound to feel
satisfaction that the praise literature of the Early and Mediaeval Church
has been more fully drawn upon than at any former period, and the Greek
Church no longer stands in the background. From this volume alone no
fewer than ten renderings have been utilised by hymnal compilers, and
they make together twenty appearances. This fact is mentioned to indicate
an appreciation of Greek hymnody which, it is hoped, may grow.

                                                               J. B.

                         FRATRES . CARISSIMOS .
                              HYMNOLOGOS .
                  AMICORUM . FELICIUM . AMANTISSIMOS .
                               PROSEQUOR .

A . D . V . ID . MAI .




                               GREEK INDEX




                                                                     PAGE
      {tes patroas doxes sou}--(Contakion),                            23
      {basileu ouranie, paraklete},                                    24
      {ten achranton eikona sou proskynoumen},                         25
      {deute agalliasometha to kyrio}--(Stichera Idiomela),            26
      {Christos gennatai},                                             28
      {ti soi prosenenkomen, Christe},                                 30
      {ho ouranos kai he ge semeron prophetikos
          euphrainesthosan}--(Stichera Idiomela),                      32
      {doxa en hypsistois theo},                                       33
      {semeron ho Hades stenon boa}--(Stichera Idiomela),              35
      {kai ten phloginen rhomphaian}--(Contakion),                     37
      {ho monogenes Hyios kai Logos tou theou},                        38
      {kyrie, anabainontos sou en to stauro},                          39
      {dia Lazarou ten egersin Kyrie}--(Antiphon),                     40
      {semeron gregorei ho Ioudas}--(Antiphon),                        42
      {ho anaballomenos phos hos himation}--(Antiphon),                44
      {anti agathon hon epoiesas, Christe}--(Antiphon),                45
      {kyrie, ho ton lesten}--(Antiphon),                              46
      {tas hesperinas hemon euchas}--(Stichera),                       47
      {phos hilaron hagias doxes},                                     49
      {anastasin Christou theasamenoi},                                50
      {ei kai en tapho katelthes athanate}--(Contakion),               52
      {idou ho Nymphios erchetai en to meso tes nyktos}--(Troparia),   54
      {ergo, hos palai tois mathetais epengeilo}--(Troparia),          56
      {tacheian kai statheran didou paramythian tois doulois sou},     57
      {deute proskynesomen kai prospesomen auto}--(Contakion),         58
      {deute laoi, ten trisypostaton theoteta proskynesomen},          60
      {hotan elthes ho theos epi ges}--(Contakion),                    62
  John of Damascus (Canon for Easter Day)--                            66
      {anastaseos hemera},                                             67
      {deute poma piomen kainon},                                      69
      {epi tes theias phylakes},                                       70
      {orthrisomen orthroi batheos},                                   72
      {katelthes en tois katotatois},                                  73
      {ho paidas ek kaminou rhysamenos},                               74
      {haute he klete kai hagia hemera},                               76
      {photizou photizou, he nea Hierousalem},                         78
  The Great Collect--                                                  80
      {hyper tes anothen eirenes},                                     81
  The Litany of the Deacon--
      {kyrie eleeson},                                                 84
  Hymns from the Early Greek Poets--                                   87
    St. Methodius,                                                     88
      {anothen, parthenoi, boes egersinekros echos},                   89
    St. Gregory,                                                       92
      {ater arches, aperanton},                                        93
      {tauta soi hemeteroio thalysia, Christe},                        95
      {se kai nyn eulogoumen}--(Evening Hymn),                         97
      {orthrios didomi to theo mou dexias}--(Morning Hymn),            98
      {epseusamen se ten aletheian, loge}--(Evening Hymn),             99
    Synesius,                                                         102
      {soi nyx me pherei ton aoidon, anax},                           103
      {lypais d' astiptos psycha},                                    104
      {age moi psycha},                                               105
      {autos phos ei pagaion},                                        106




                              INTRODUCTION


I. Thirty-eight years ago, Dr. John Mason Neale published his _Hymns of
the Eastern Church_ , and for the first time English readers were
introduced to the priceless gems of Greek hymnody. At the close of his
preface he throws out a challenge which, as far as the present writer is
aware, has not yet been taken up. He says: 'And while fully sensible of
their imperfections, I may yet, by way of excuse rather than of boast,
say, almost in Bishop Hall's words--

      "I first adventure: follow me who list,
      And be the second Eastern Melodist."'

It would be presumptuous to believe that the translations which follow
are in any particular a worthy answer to that challenge; but the
translator can honestly say that they are a very earnest attempt to
acquaint English readers still further with the valuable praise
literature which lies buried in the service-books of the Greek Church,
and they constitute the first real attempt in that direction since Dr.
Neale issued his collection in 1862.

II. The renderings contained in this volume are the product of many happy
hours during the past five years. No method was adopted in the work. As
the translator waded through the closely printed pages of the Greek
offices, what appeared at first sight to be lines worthy of translation
were taken up and examined, sometimes to be cast aside again because of
some unremovable blemish, at other times to be moulded to the form which
they now bear. Of the forty-seven pieces, thirty-five appear for the
first time in English verse.

For the original, the translator has gone to the service-books, and for
the most part has confined himself to the hymns which are to be found in
the Triodion, containing the Lenten services; and in the Pentecostarion,
in which are found the hymns for the services of Easter and Pentecost. A
few specimens are also given from other offices, particularly that for
Christmas.

Renderings from the work of the earlier Greek hymn-writers are added at
the end of this volume; but, unlike the hymns of the Church
service-books, these hymns originally are in the classical measures, and
illustrate the work of the best Christian poets, who in some cases wrote
extensively.

III. It is a very remarkable fact, and certainly not to our credit, that,
with the exception of a very few who have made the study a specialty, our
educated men show a most unaccountable ignorance of the most attractive
and valuable material for praise and prayer contained in the Greek Church
service-books. We have learning more than enough, and zeal enough for the
pursuit of study in other departments, but this unworked field lies
fallow, and no one thinks it worth his while to cultivate it. That the
study will reward the student, although not in a material sense--for the
meaningless prejudice of the great mass of our people for what is local
and against the thought of the stranger, no matter how beautiful it may
be, is still to be reckoned with--yet in the highest sense as conferring
upon him a new delight, there can be no doubt; for, after the necessary
expenditure of patient application, and the passing of the initiatory
stages which in every department of study are somewhat trying, the
attraction will begin, and the subject become positively fascinating. To
any one having the lyrical gift and the necessary qualifications for the
study of Greek, those service-books might prove a mine of treasure
inexhaustible. In the seventeen quarto volumes which contain the Greek
Church offices, there must be material of one kind or another for many
thousands of hymns; yet, when hymnal compilers ask for hymns from the
Greek for their collections, they are not to be had, save in the few
renderings made by Dr. Neale. In the most recently compiled collection
for church use--_The Church Hymnary_--only five pieces from the Greek
find a place. What a humbling confession! They are the best available
from the very small number of translations in our possession, which,
perhaps, does not exceed one hundred and fifty pieces in all.

We have not treated the Latin Church after that fashion. There is not a
hymn of real merit in the Latin which has not been translated, and in not
a few cases oftener than once; with the result that the gems of Latin
hymnody are the valued possession of the Church in all English-speaking
lands.

IV. One does not proceed far before making some discoveries which may
account, to a certain extent, for the neglect of Greek hymnody by men who
are best qualified to pursue the study of it. The writers are not poets,
in the true sense, and their language is not Greek as we have known it.

(1) None of the hymn-writers in the service-books or out of them is a
poet of more than ordinary merit; although, when John of Damascus forgets
his adversaries, and dispenses with his rhythmical peculiarities and
gives forth the utterance of his deep emotional nature, he proves himself
to be worthy of the title--the greatest of Greek Christian poets.

