corpses.

Who are those bright immortals near the throne, their faces partly
turned toward each other as though about to sing? Oh, they are the
Bethlehem chanters of the first Christmas night! Who are this other
group standing so near the throne? They are the Saviour's especial
bodyguard, which hovered over Him in the wilderness and administered
to Him in the hour of martyrdom, and heaved away the rock of His
sarcophagus, and escorted Him upward on Ascension Day, now
appropriately escorting Him down. Divine glory flanked on both sides
by angelic radiance.

But now lower your eye from the divine and angelic to the human. The
entire human race is present. All nations, says my text. Before that
time the American Republic, the English Government, the French
Republic, all modern modes of government may be obliterated for
something better; but all nations, whether dead or alive, will be
brought up into that assembly. Thebes and Tyre and Babylon and Greece
and Rome as wide awake in that assembly as though they had never
slumbered amid the dead nations. Europe, Asia, Africa, North and South
America, and all the nineteenth century, the eighteenth century, the
twelfth century, the tenth century, the fourth century--all centuries
present. Not one being that ever drew the breath of life but will be
in that assembly.

No other audience a thousandth part as large. No other audience a
millionth part as large. No human eye could look across it. Wing of
albatross and falcon and eagle not strong enough to fly over it. A
congregation, I verily believe, not assembled on any continent,
because no continent would be large enough to hold it. But, as the
Bible intimates, in the air. The law of gravitation unanchored, the
world moved out of its place. As now sometimes on earth a great tent
is spread for some great convention, so over that great audience of
the judgment shall be lifted the blue canopy of the sky, and
underneath it for floor the air made buoyant by the hand of Almighty
God. An architecture of atmospheric galleries strong enough to hold up
worlds. Surely the two arms of God's almightiness are two pillars
strong enough to hold up any auditorium.

But that audience is not to remain in session long. Most audiences on
earth after an hour or two adjourn. Sometimes in court-rooms an
audience will tarry four or five hours, but then it adjourns. So this
audience spoken of in the text will adjourn. My text says, "He will
separate them one from another as a shepherd divideth the sheep from
the goats."

"No," says my Universalist friend, "let them all stay together." But
the text says, "He shall separate them." "No," say the kings of this
world, "let men have their choice, and if they prefer monarchical
institutions, let them go together, and if they prefer republican
institutions, let them go together." "No," say the conventionalities
of this world, "let all those who moved in what are called high
circles go together, and all those who on earth moved in low circles
go together. The rich together, the poor together, the wise together,
the ignorant together." Ah! no. Do you not notice in that assembly the
king is without his scepter, and the soldier without his uniform, and
the bishop without his pontifical ring, and the millionaire without
his certificates of stock, and the convict without his chain, and the
beggar without his rags, and the illiterate without his bad
orthography, and all of us without any distinction of earthly
inequality? So I take it from that as well as from my text that the
mere accident of position in this world will do nothing toward
deciding the questions of that very great day.

"He will separate them as a shepherd divideth the sheep from the
goats." The sheep, the cleanliest of creatures, here made a symbol of
those who have all their sins washed away in the fountain of redeeming
mercy. The goat, one of the filthiest of creatures, here a type of
those who in the last judgment will be found never to have had any
divine ablution. Division according to character. Not only character
outside, but character inside. Character of heart, character of
choice, character of allegiance, character of affection, character
inside as well as character outside.

In many cases it will be a complete and immediate reversal of all
earthly conditions. Some who in this world wore patched apparel will
take on raiment lustrous as a summer noon. Some who occupied a palace
will take a dungeon. Division regardless of all earthly caste, and
some who were down will be up, and some who were up will be down. Oh,
what a shattering of conventionalities! What an upheaval of all social
rigidities, what a turning of the wheel of earthly condition, a
thousand revolutions in a second! Division of all nations, of all
ages, not by the figure 9, nor the figure 8, nor the figure 7, nor the
figure 6, nor the figure 5, nor the figure 4; but by the figure 2.

Two! Two characters, two destinies, two estates, two dominions, two
eternities, a tremendous, an all-comprehensive, an all-decisive, and
everlasting two!

I sometimes think that the figure of the book that shall be opened
allows us to forget the thing signified by the symbol. Where is the
book-binder that could make a volume large enough to contain the names
of all the people who have ever lived? Besides that, the calling of
such a roll would take more than fifty years, more than a hundred
years, and the judgment is to be consummated in less time than passes
between sunrise and sunset. Ah! my friends, the leaves of that book of
judgment are not made out of paper, but of memory. One leaf in every
human heart. You have known persons who were near drowning, but they
were afterward resuscitated, and they have told you that in the two or
three minutes between the accident and the resuscitation, all their
past life flashed before them--all they had ever thought, all they had
ever done, all they had ever seen, in an instant came to them. The
memory never loses anything. It is only a folded leaf. It is only a
closed book.

Though you be an octogenarian, though you be a nonagenarian, all the
thoughts and acts of your life are in your mind, whether you recall
them now or not, just as Macaulay's history is in two volumes,
although the volumes may be closed, and you can not see a word of
them, and will not until they are opened. As in the case of the
drowning man, the volume of memory was partly open, or the leaf partly
unrolled; in the case of the judgment the entire book will be opened,
so that everything will be displayed from preface to appendix.

You have seen self-registering instruments which recorded how many
revolutions they had made and what work they had done, so the
manufacturer could come days after and look at the instrument and find
just how many revolutions had been made, or how much work had been
accomplished. So the human mind is a self-registering instrument, and
it records all its past movements. Now that leaf, that
all-comprehensive leaf in your mind and mine this moment, the leaf of
judgment, brought out under the flash of the judgment throne, you can
easily see how all the past of our lives in an instant will be seen.
And so great and so resplendent will be the light of that throne that
not only this leaf in my heart and that leaf in your heart will be
revealed at a flash, but all the leaves will be opened, and you will
read not only your own character and your own history, but the
character and history of others.

In a military encampment the bugle sounded in one way means one thing,
and sounded in another way it means another thing. Bugle sounded in
one way means, "Prepare for sudden attack." Bugle sounded in another
way means, "To your tents, and let all the lights be put out." I have
to tell you, my brother, that the trumpet of the Old Testament, the
trumpet that was carried in the armies of olden times, and the trumpet
on the walls in olden times, in the last great day will give
significant reverberation. Old, worn-out, and exhausted Time, having
marched across decades and centuries and ages, will halt, and the sun
and the moon and the stars will halt with it. The trumpet! the
trumpet!

Peal the first: Under its power the sea will stretch itself out dead,
the white foam on the lip, in its crystal sarcophagus, and the
mountains will stagger and reel and stumble, and fall into the valleys
never to rise. Under one puff of that last cyclone all the candles of
the sky will be blown out. The trumpet! the trumpet!

Peal the second: The alabaster halls of the air will be filled with
those who will throng up from all the cemeteries of all the ages--from
Greyfriar's Churchyard and Roman Catacomb, from Westminster Abbey and
from the coral crypts of oceanic cave, and some will rend off the
bandage of Egyptian mummy, and others will remove from their brow the
garland of green sea-weed. From the north and the south and the east
and the west they come. The dead! The trumpet! the trumpet!

Peal the third: Amid surging clouds and the roar of attendant armies
of heaven, the Lord comes through, and there are lightnings and
thunder-bolts, and an earthquake, and a hallelujah, and a wailing. The
trumpet! the trumpet!

Peal the fourth: All the records of human life will be revealed. The
leaf containing the pardoned sin, the leaf containing the unpardoned
sin. Some clapping hands with joy, some grinding their teeth with
rage, and all the forgotten past becomes a vivid present. The trumpet!
the trumpet!

Peal the last: The audience breaks up. The great trial is ended. The
high court of heaven adjourns. The audience hie themselves to their
two termini. They rise, they rise! They sink, they sink! Then the blue
tent of the sky will be lifted and folded up and put away. Then the
auditorium of atmospheric galleries will be melted. Then the folded
wings of attendant angels will be spread for upward flight. The fiery
throne of judgment will become a dim and a vanishing cloud. The
conflagration of divine and angelic magnificence will roll back and
off. The day for which all other days are made has closed, and the
world has burned down, and the last cinder has gone out, and an angel
flying on errand from world to world will poise long enough over the
dead earth to chant the funeral litany as he cries, "Ashes to ashes!"

That judgment leaf in your heart I seize hold of this moment for
cancellation. In your city halls the great book of mortgages has a
large margin, so that when the mortgagor has paid the full amount to
the mortgagee, the officer of the law comes, and he puts down on that
margin the payment and the cancellation; and though that mortgage
demanded vast thousands before, now it is null and void. So I have to
tell you that that leaf in my heart and in your heart, that leaf of
judgment, that all-comprehensive leaf, has a wide margin for
cancellation.

There is only one hand in all the universe that can touch that margin.
That hand this moment lifted to make the record null and void forever.
It may be a trembling hand, for it is a wounded hand, the nerves were
cut and the muscles were lacerated. That record on that leaf was made
in the black ink of condemnation; but if cancellation take place, it
will be made in the red ink of sacrifice. O judgment-bound brother and
sister! let Christ this moment bring to that record complete and
glorious cancellation. This moment, in an outburst of impassioned
prayer, ask for it. You think it is the fluttering of your heart. Oh,
no! it is the fluttering of that leaf, that judgment leaf.

I ask you not to take from your iron safe your last will and
testament, but I ask for something of more importance than that. I ask
you not to take from your private papers that letter so sacred that
you have put it away from all human eyesight, but I ask you for
something of more meaning than that. That leaf, that judgment leaf in
my heart, that judgment leaf in your heart, which will decide our
condition after this world shall have five thousand million years been
swept out the heavens, an extinct planet, and time itself will be so
long past that on the ocean of eternity it will seem only as now seems
a ripple on the Atlantic.

When the goats in vile herd start for the barren mountains of death,
and the sheep in fleeces of snowy whiteness and bleating with joy move
up the terraced hills to join the lambs already playing in the high
pastures of celestial altitude, oh, may you and I be close by the
Shepherd's crook! "When the Son of Man shall come in His glory, and
all the holy angels with Him, then shall He sit upon the throne of His
glory; and before Him shall be gathered all nations; and He shall
separate them one from another, as a shepherd divideth the sheep from
the goats."

Oh, that leaf, that one leaf in my heart, that one leaf in your heart!
That leaf of judgment! Oh, those two tremendous words at the last,
"Come!" "Go!" As though the overhanging heavens were the cup of a
great bell, and all the stars were welded into a silvery tongue and
swung from side to side until it struck, "Come!" As though all the
great guns of eternal disaster were discharged at once, and they
boomed forth in one resounding cannonade of "Go!" Arithmetical sum in
simple division. Eternity the dividend. The figure two the divisor.
Your unalterable destiny the quotient.




THE ROAD TO THE CITY.

    "And an highway shall be there, and a way, and it shall be
    called the way of holiness; the unclean shall not pass over
    it; but it shall be for those: the wayfaring men, though
    fools, shall not err therein. No lion shall be there, nor any
    ravenous beast shall go up thereon, it shall not be found
    there; but the redeemed shall walk there; and the ransomed of
    the Lord shall return, and come to Zion with songs and
    everlasting joy upon their heads: they shall obtain joy and
    gladness, and sorrow and sighing shall flee away."--ISAIAH
    xxxv: 8-10.


There are hundreds of people in this house this morning who want to
find the right road. You sometimes see a person halting at cross
roads, and you can tell by his looks that he wishes to ask a question
as to what direction he had better take. And I stand in your presence
this morning conscious of the fact that there are many of you here who
realize that there are a thousand wrong roads, but only one right one;
and I take it for granted that you have come in to ask which one it
is. Here is one road that opens widely, but I have not much faith in
it. There are a great many expensive toll-gates scattered all along
that way. Indeed at every road you must pay in tears, or pay in
genuflexions, or pay in flagellations. On that road, if you get
through it at all, you have to pay your own way; and since this
differs so much from what I have heard in regard to the right way, I
believe it is the wrong way.

Here is another road. On either side of it are houses of sinful
entertainment, and invitations to come in, and dine and rest; but,
from the looks of the people who stand on the piazza I am very certain
that it is the wrong house and the wrong way. Here is another road. It
is very beautiful and macadamized. The horses' hoofs clatter and ring,
and they who ride over it spin along the highway, until suddenly they
find that the road breaks over an embankment, and they try to halt,
and they saw the bit in the mouth of the fiery steed, and cry "Ho!
ho!" But it is too late, and--crash!--they go over the embankment. We
shall turn, this morning, and see if we can not find a different kind
of a road.

You have heard of the Appian Way. It was three hundred and fifty miles
long. It was twenty-four feet wide, and on either side the road was a
path for foot passengers. It was made out of rocks cut in hexagonal
shape and fitted together. What a road it must have been! Made of
smooth, hard rock, three hundred and fifty miles long. No wonder that
in the construction of it the treasures of a whole empire were
exhausted. Because of invaders, and the elements, and time--the old
conqueror who tears up a road as he goes over it--there is nothing
left of that structure excepting a ruin. But I have this morning to
tell you of a road built before the Appian Way, and yet it is as good
as when first constructed. Millions of souls have gone over it.
Millions more will come.

    "The prophets and apostles, too,
      Pursued this road while here below;
    We therefore will, without dismay
      Still walk in Christ, the good old way."

"An highway shall be there, and a way, and it shall be called the way
of holiness; the unclean shall not pass over it; but it shall be for
those: the wayfaring men, though fools, shall not err therein. No lion
shall be there, nor any ravenous beast shall go up thereon, it shall
not be found there; but the redeemed shall walk there; and the
ransomed of the Lord shall return, and come to Zion with songs and
everlasting joy upon their heads; they shall obtain joy and gladness,
and sorrow and sighing shall flee away!"

I. First, this road of the text is the King's highway. In the
diligence you dash over the Bernard pass of the Alps, mile after mile,
and there is not so much as a pebble to jar the wheels. You go over
bridges which cross chasms that make you hold your breath; under
projecting rock; along by dangerous precipices; through tunnels adrip
with the meltings of the glaciers; and, perhaps for the first time,
learn the majesty of a road built and supported by government
authority. Well, my Lord the King decided to build a highway from
earth to heaven. It should span all the chasms of human wretchedness;
it should tunnel all the mountains of earthly difficulty; it should be
wide enough and strong enough to hold fifty thousand millions of the
human race, if so many of them should ever be born. It should be
blasted out of the "Rock of Ages," and cemented with the blood of the
Cross, and be lifted amid the shouting of angels and the execration of
devils.
