
"Oh, let him go," said his mother. "He won't come to any harm."

"Is this your first appearance as a magician?" asked the professor.

"Yes, sir," answered Tom, with a grin.

"Very good. I will get you to help me, but you mustn't tell anybody how
the tricks are done."

"No, sir, I won't."

"As I am going trust you with a little money, I want to ask you whether
you are strictly honest."

"Yes, sir."

"I am glad to hear it. Do you see this piece of gold?"

"Yes, sir."

"What is its value?"

"Ten dollars," answered Tom, inspecting it.

"Very good. I want you hold it for me. I give you warning that I mean to
make it pass out of you hand."

"I don't think you can do it, sir."

"Well, perhaps not. You look like a pretty sharp customer. It won't be
easy to fool you."

"You bet."

"Nancy," whispered the old lady to her daughter. "I hope you don't allow
Tom to talk so."

"Look, mother, see want he's going to do."

"What I propose to do," said the professor, "is to make that coin pass
into the box on the table. I may not be able to do it, as the young
gentleman is on his guard. However, I will try. Presto, change!"

"It didn't go," said Tom. "I've got it here."

"Have you? Suppose you open your hand."

Tom opened his hand.

"Well, what have you got? Is it the gold piece?"

"No sir," said Tom, astonished; "it's a cent."

"Then, sir, all I can say is, you have treated me badly. In order to
prevent my getting the gold piece into the box, you changed it into a
cent."

"No, I didn't," said Tom.

"Then perhaps I have succeeded, after all. The fact is, I took out the
gold piece and put a penny in its place, so that you might not know the
difference. Now here is the key of that box. Will you unlock it?"

Tom unlocked it, only to find another box inside. In fact, it was a
perfect nest of boxes. In the very last of all was found the gold coin.

"It's very strange you didn't feel it go out of your hand," said the
professor.

"I am afraid you are not quick enough to make a magician. Can you fire a
pistol?"

"Yes, sir," said Tom.

"Will any lady lend me a ring?" asked the professor.

One was soon found

"I will load the pistol," said the professor, "and put the ring in with
the rest of the charge. It appears to be rather too large. I shall have
to hammer it down."

He brought down a hammer heavily upon the ring and soon bent it
sufficiently to get it into the pistol.

"Now, sir," he said, "take the pistol, and stand off there. All right,
sir. When I give the word, I want you to fire. One, two, three!"

Tom fired, his grandmother uttering a half suppressed shriek at the
report. When the smoke cleared away, the professor was holding the ring
between his thumb and finger, quite uninjured.

Professor Henderson's attention had been drawn to his companion of the
morning. He observed that she had taken off her bonnet. He went up to
her, and said, politely, "Madam, will you kindly lend me your bonnet?"

"Massy sakes, what do you want of it?"

"I won't injure it, I assure you."

"You may take it, ef you want to," said the old lady; "but be keerful
and don't bend it."

"I will be very careful; but, madam," he said, in seeming surprise,
"what have you got in it?"

"Nothing, sir."

"You are mistaken. See there, and there, and there"; and he rapidly drew
out three onions, four turnips, and a couple of potatoes. "Really, you
must have thought you were going to market."

"They ain't mine," gasped the old lady.

"Then it's very strange how they got into your bonnet. And--let me
see--here's an egg, too."

"I never see sich doin's."

"Granny, I guess a hen made her nest in your bonnet," whispered Tom.

The old lady shook her head in helpless amazement.





CHAPTER XXVII. AN UNEXPECTED PAYMENT


A week later Harry reached a brisk manufacturing place which I will call
Centreville. He assisted the professor during the afternoon to get ready
the hall for his evening performance and, at half past five, took his
seat at the supper table in the village hotel.

Just as Harry began to eat, he lifted his eyes, and started in surprise
as he recognized, in his opposite neighbor, Luke Harrison, whose abrupt
departure without paying his debts the reader will remember. Under the
circumstances, it will not be wondered at that our hero's look was not
exactly cordial. As for Luke, he was disagreeably startled at Harry's
sudden appearance. Not knowing his connection with Professor Henderson,
he fancied that our hero was in quest of him and not being skilled in
the law, felt a little apprehension as to what course he might take. It
was best, he concluded to conciliate him.

"How are you, Walton?" he said.

"I am well," said Harry, coldly.

"How do you happen to be in this neighborhood?"

"On business," said Harry, briefly.

Luke jumped to the conclusion that the business related to him and,
conscious of wrong-doing, felt disturbed.

"I'm glad to see you," he said. "It seems pleasant to see an old
acquaintance"--he intended to say "friend."

"You left us rather suddenly," said Harry.

"Why, yes," said Luke, hesitating. "I had reasons. I'll tell you about
it after supper."

As Harry rose from the table, Luke joined him.

"Come upstairs to my room, Walton," he said, "and have a cigar."

"I'll go upstairs with you; but I don't smoke."

"You'd better learn. It's a great comfort."

"Do you board here?"

"Yes. I found I shouldn't have to pay any more than at a boarding house
and the grub's better. Here's my room. Walk in."

He led the way into a small apartment on the top floor.

"This is my den," he said. "There isn't but one chair; but I'll sit on
the bed. When did you reach town?"

"About noon."

"Are you going to stop long?" asked Luke.

"I shall stay here till I get through with my errand," answered Harry,
shrewdly; for he saw what Luke thought, and it occurred to him that he
might turn it to advantage.

Luke looked a little uneasy.

"By the way, Walton," he said, "I believe I owe you a little money."

"Yes. I believe so."

"I'm sorry I can't pay you the whole of it. It costs considerable to
live, you know; but I'll pay part."

"Here are five dollars," he said. "I'll pay you the rest as soon as I
can--in a week or two."

Harry took the bank note with secret self-congratulation, for he had
given up the debt as bad, and never expected to realize a cent of it.

"I am glad to get it," he said. "I have a use for all my money. Are you
working in this town?"

"Yes. The shoe business is carried on here considerably. Are you still
working for Mr. Leavitt?"

"No; I've left him."

"What are you doing, then?"

"I'm traveling with Professor Henderson."

"What, the magician?"

"Yes."

"And is that what brought you to Centreville?"

"Yes."

Luke whistled.

"I thought--" he began.

"What did you think?"

"I thought," answered Luke, evasively, "that you might be looking for
work in some of the shoe shops here."

"Is there any chance, do you think?"

"No, I don't think there is," said Luke; for he was by no means anxious
to have Harry in the same town.

"Then I shall probably stay with the professor."

"What do you do?"

"Take tickets at the door and help him beforehand with his apparatus."

"You'll let me in free, to-night, won't you?"

"That isn't for me to decide."

"I should think the professor would let your friends go in free."

"I'll make you an offer, Luke," said he.

"What is it?"

"Just pay me the rest of; that money to-night and I'll let you in free
at my own expense."

"I can't do it. I haven't got the money. If 'you'll give it back, I'll
call it a dollar more and pay you the whole at the end of next week."

"I'm afraid your calling it a dollar more wouldn't do much good," said
Harry, shrewdly.

"Do you doubt my word?" blustered Luke, who had regained courage now
that he had ascertained the real object of Harry's visit and that it had
no connection with him.

"I won't express any opinion on that subject," answered Harry; "but
there's an old saying that a 'bird in the hand's worth two in the
bush.'"

"I hate old sayings."

"Some of them contain a great deal of truth."

"What a fool I was to pay him that five dollars!" thought Luke,
regretfully. "If I hadn't been such a simpleton, I should have found out
what brought him here, before throwing away nearly all I had."

This was the view Luke took of paying his debts. He regarded it as money
thrown away. Apparently, a good many young men are of a similar opinion.
This was not, however, according to Harry's code, and was never likely
to be. He believed in honesty and integrity. If he hadn't, I should feel
far less confidence in his ultimate success.

"I think I must leave you," said Harry, rising. "The professor may need
me."

"Do you like him? Have you got a good place?"

"Yes, I like him. He is a very pleasant man."

"How does it pay?"

"Pretty well."

"I wouldn't mind trying it myself. Do you handle all the money?"

"I take the money at the door."

"I suppose you might keep back a dollar or so, every night, and he'd
never know the difference."

"I don't know. I never thought about that," said Harry, dryly.

"Oh, I remember, you're one of the pious boys."

"I'm too pious to take money that doesn't belong to me, if that's what
you mean," said Harry.

This was a very innocent remark; but Luke, remembering how he had kept
Harry's pocketbook, chose to interpret it as a fling to himself.

"Do you mean that for me?" he demanded, angrily.

"Mean what for you?"

"That about keeping other people's money."

"I wasn't talking about you at all. I was talking about myself."

"You'd better not insult me," said Luke, still suspicious.

"I'm not in the habit of insulting anybody."

"I don't believe in people that set themselves up to be so much better
than everybody else."

"Do you mean that for me?" asked Harry, smiling.

"Yes, I do. What are you going to do about it?"

"Nothing, except to deny that I make any such claims. Shall you come
round to the hall, to-night?"

"Perhaps so."

"Then I shall see you. I must be going now."

He went out, leaving Luke vainly deploring the loss of the five dollars
which he had so foolishly squandered in paying his debt.





CHAPTER XXIX. IN THE PRINTING OFFICE


"Harry," said the professor, after breakfast the next morning, "I find
we must get some more bills printed. You may go round to the office
of the Centreville Gazette, and ask them how soon they can print me a
hundred large bills and a thousand small ones."

"All right, sir. Suppose they can't have them done by the ready to
start?"

"They can send them to me by express."

Harry had never been in a printing office; but he had a great curiosity
to see one ever since he had read the "Life of Benjamin Franklin." If
there was anyone in whose steps he thought he should like to follow, it
was Franklin, and Franklin was a printer.

He had no difficulty in finding the office. It was in the second story
of a building, just at the junction of two roads near the center of the
town, the post office being just underneath. He ascended a staircase,
and saw on the door, at the head of the stairs:


"CENTREVILLE GAZETTE"


He opened the door and entered. He saw a large room, containing a press
at the end, while two young men, with paper caps on their heads, were
standing in their shirt sleeves at upright cases setting type. On one
side there was a very small office partitioned off. Within, a man was
seen seated at a desk, with a pile of exchange papers on the floor,
writing busily. This was Mr. Jotham Anderson publisher and editor of the
Gazette.

"I want to get some printing done," said Harry, looking toward the
journeymen.

"Go to Mr. Anderson," said one, pointing to the office.

Harry went in. The editor looked up as he entered.

"What can I do for you?" he asked.

"I want to get some printing done."

"For yourself?"

