"Have you wings? Can you fly?"

"Oh dear, no, ma'am; I should not think of such thing," said cunning
little Tom.

"Then I shall have great pleasure in talking to you, my dear. It is
quite refreshing nowadays to see anything without wings. They must all
have wings, forsooth, now, every new upstart sort of bird, and fly. What
can they want with flying, and raising themselves above their proper
station in life? In the days of my ancestors no birds ever thought of
having wings, and did very well without; and now they all laugh at me
because I keep to the good old fashion. Why, the very marrocks and
dovekies have got wings, the vulgar creatures, and poor little ones
enough they are; and my own cousins too, the razor-bills, who are
gentlefolk born, and ought to know better than to ape their inferiors."

And so she was running on, while Tom tried to get in a word edgeways;
and at last he did, when the old lady got out of breath, and began
fanning herself again; and then he asked if she knew the way to Shiny
Wall.

"Shiny Wall? Who should know better than I? We all came from Shiny Wall,
thousands of years ago, when it was decently cold, and the climate was
fit for gentlefolk; but now, what with the heat, and what with these
vulgar-winged things who fly up and down and eat everything, so that
gentlepeople's hunting is all spoilt, and one really cannot get one's
living, or hardly venture off the rock for fear of being flown against
by some creature that would not have dared to come within a mile of one
a thousand years ago--what was I saying? Why, we have quite gone down in
the world, my dear, and have nothing left but our honour. And I am the
last of my family. A friend of mine and I came and settled on this rock
when we were young, to be out of the way of low people. Once we were a
great nation, and spread over all the Northern Isles. But men shot us
so, and knocked us on the head, and took our eggs--why, if you will
believe it, they say that on the coast of Labrador the sailors used to
lay a plank from the rock on board the thing called their ship, and
drive us along the plank by hundreds, till we tumbled down into the
ship's waist in heaps; and then, I suppose, they ate us, the nasty
fellows! Well--but--what was I saying? At last, there were none of us
left, except on the old Gairfowlskerry, just off the Iceland coast, up
which no man could climb. Even there we had no peace; for one day, when
I was quite a young girl, the land rocked, and the sea boiled, and the
sky grew dark, and all the air was filled with smoke and dust, and down
tumbled the old Gairfowlskerry into the sea. The dovekies and marrocks,
of course, all flew away; but we were too proud to do that. Some of us
were dashed to pieces, and some drowned; and those who were left got
away to Eldey, and the dovekies tell me they are all dead now, and that
another Gairfowlskerry has risen out of the sea close to the old one,
but that it is such a poor flat place that it is not safe to live on:
and so here I am left alone."

This was the Gairfowl's story, and, strange as it may seem, it is every
word of it true.

"If you only had had wings!" said Tom; "then you might all have flown
away too."

"Yes, young gentleman: and if people are not gentlemen and ladies, and
forget that _noblesse oblige_, they will find it as easy to get on in
the world as other people who don't care what they do. Why, if I had not
recollected that _noblesse oblige_, I should not have been all alone
now." And the poor old lady sighed.

"How was that, ma'am?"

"Why, my dear, a gentleman came hither with me, and after we had been
here some time, he wanted to marry--in fact, he actually proposed to me.
Well, I can't blame him; I was young, and very handsome then, I don't
deny: but you see, I could not hear of such a thing, because he was my
deceased sister's husband, you see?"

"Of course not, ma'am," said Tom; though, of course, he knew nothing
about it. "She was very much diseased, I suppose?"

"You do not understand me, my dear. I mean, that being a lady, and with
right and honourable feelings, as our house always has had, I felt it my
duty to snub him, and howk him, and peck him continually, to keep him at
his proper distance; and, to tell the truth, I once pecked him a little
too hard, poor fellow, and he tumbled backwards off the rock,
and--really, it was very unfortunate, but it was not my fault--a shark
coming by saw him flapping, and snapped him up. And since then I have
lived all alone--

          _'With a fal-lal-la-lady.'_

And soon I shall be gone, my little dear, and nobody will miss me; and
then the poor stone will be left all alone."

"But, please, which is the way to Shiny Wall?" said Tom.

"Oh, you must go, my little dear--you must go. Let me see--I am
sure--that is--really, my poor old brains are getting quite puzzled. Do
you know, my little dear, I am afraid, if you want to know, you must
ask some of these vulgar birds about, for I have quite forgotten."

And the poor old Gairfowl began to cry tears of pure oil; and Tom was
quite sorry for her; and for himself too, for he was at his wit's end
whom to ask.

But by there came a flock of petrels, who are Mother Carey's own
chickens; and Tom thought them much prettier than Lady Gairfowl, and so
perhaps they were; for Mother Carey had had a great deal of fresh
experience between the time that she invented the Gairfowl and the time
that she invented them. They flitted along like a flock of black
swallows, and hopped and skipped from wave to wave, lifting up their
little feet behind them so daintily, and whistling to each other so
tenderly, that Tom fell in love with them at once, and called them to
know the way to Shiny Wall.

"Shiny Wall? Do you want Shiny Wall? Then come with us, and we will show
you. We are Mother Carey's own chickens, and she sends us out over all
the seas, to show the good birds the way home."

Tom was delighted, and swam off to them, after he had made his bow to
the Gairfowl. But she would not return his bow: but held herself bolt
upright, and wept tears of oil as she sang:

          "_And so the poor stone was left all alone;
                With a fal-lal-la-lady._"

But she was wrong there; for the stone was not left all alone: and the
next time that Tom goes by it, he will see a sight worth seeing.

The old Gairfowl is gone already: but there are better things come in
her place; and when Tom comes he will see the fishing-smacks anchored
there in hundreds, from Scotland, and from Ireland, and from the
Orkneys, and the Shetlands, and from all the Northern ports, full of the
children of the old Norse Vikings, the masters of the sea. And the men
will be hauling in the great cod by thousands, till their hands are sore
from the lines; and they will be making cod-liver oil and guano, and
salting down the fish; and there will be a man-of-war steamer there to
protect them, and a lighthouse to show them the way; and you and I,
perhaps, shall go some day to the Allalonestone to the great summer
sea-fair, and dredge strange creatures such as man never saw before; and
we shall hear the sailors boast that it is not the worst jewel in Queen
Victoria's crown, for there are eighty miles of codbank, and food for
all the poor folk in the land. That is what Tom will see, and perhaps
you and I shall see it too. And then we shall not be sorry because we
cannot get a Gairfowl to stuff, much less find gairfowl enough to drive
them into stone pens and slaughter them, as the old Norsemen did, or
drive them on board along a plank till the ship was victualled with
them, as the old English and French rovers used to do, of whom dear old
Hakluyt tells: but we shall remember what Mr. Tennyson says: how

          "_The old order changeth, giving place to the new,
            And God fulfils himself in many ways._"

And now Tom was all agog to start for Shiny Wall; but the petrels said
no. They must go first to Allfowlsness, and wait there for the great
gathering of all the sea-birds, before they start for their summer
breeding-places far away in the Northern Isles; and there they would be
sure to find some birds which were going to Shiny Wall: but where
Allfowlsness was, he must promise never to tell, lest men should go
there and shoot the birds, and stuff them, and put them into stupid
museums, instead of leaving them to play and breed and work in Mother
Carey's water-garden, where they ought to be.

So where Allfowlsness is nobody must know; and all that is to be said
about it is, that Tom waited there many days; and as he waited, he saw a
very curious sight. On the rabbit burrows on the shore there gathered
hundreds and hundreds of hoodie-crows, such as you see in
Cambridgeshire. And they made such a noise, that Tom came on shore and
went up to see what was the matter.

And there he found them holding their great caucus, which they hold
every year in the North; and all their stump-orators were speechifying;
and for a tribune, the speaker stood on an old sheep's skull.

And they cawed and cawed, and boasted of all the clever things they had
done; how many lambs' eyes they had picked out, and how many dead
bullocks they had eaten, and how many young grouse they had swallowed
whole, and how many grouse-eggs they had flown away with, stuck on the
point of their bills, which is the hoodie-crow's particularly clever
feat, of which he is as proud as a gipsy is of doing the hokanybaro; and
what that is, I won't tell you.

And at last they brought out the prettiest, neatest young lady-crow that
ever was seen, and set her in the middle, and all began abusing and
vilifying, and rating, and bullyragging at her, because she had stolen
no grouse-eggs, and had actually dared to say that she would not steal
any. So she was to be tried publicly by their laws (for the hoodies
always try some offenders in their great yearly parliament). And there
she stood in the middle, in her black gown and grey hood, looking as
meek and as neat as a Quakeress, and they all bawled at her at once--

And it was in vain that she pleaded--

          _That she did not like grouse-eggs;_

          _That she could get her living very well without
          them;_

          _That she was afraid to eat them, for fear of the
          gamekeepers;_

          _That she had not the heart to eat them, because
          the grouse were such pretty, kind, jolly birds;_

          _And a dozen reasons more._

For all the other scaul-crows set upon her, and pecked her to death
there and then, before Tom could come to help her; and then flew away,
very proud of what they had done.

[Illustration: "The most beautiful bird of paradise."--_P. 210._]

Now, was not this a scandalous transaction?

But they are true republicans, these hoodies, who do every one just what
he likes, and make other people do so too; so that, for any freedom of
speech, thought, or action, which is allowed among them, they might as
well be American citizens of the new school.

But the fairies took the good crow, and gave her nine new sets of
feathers running, and turned her at last into the most beautiful bird of
paradise with a green velvet suit and a long tail, and sent her to eat
fruit in the Spice Islands, where cloves and nutmegs grow.

And Mrs. Bedonebyasyoudid settled her account with the wicked hoodies.
For, as they flew away, what should they find but a nasty dead dog?--on
which they all set to work, pecking and gobbling and cawing and
quarrelling to their hearts' content. But the moment afterwards, they
all threw up their bills into the air, and gave one screech; and then
turned head over heels backward, and fell down dead, one hundred and
twenty-three of them at once. For why? The fairy had told the gamekeeper
in a dream, to fill the dead dog full of strychnine; and so he did.

And after a while the birds began to gather at Allfowlsness, in
thousands and tens of thousands, blackening all the air; swans and brant
geese, harlequins and eiders, harolds and garganeys, smews and
goosanders, divers and loons, grebes and dovekies, auks and
razor-bills, gannets and petrels, skuas and terns, with gulls beyond all
naming or numbering; and they paddled and washed and splashed and combed
and brushed themselves on the sand, till the shore was white with
feathers; and they quacked and clucked and gabbled and chattered and
screamed and whooped as they talked over matters with their friends, and
settled where they were to go and breed that summer, till you might have
heard them ten miles off; and lucky it was for them that there was no
one to hear them but the old keeper, who lived all alone upon the Ness,
in a turf hut thatched with heather and fringed round with great stones
slung across the roof by bent-ropes, lest the winter gales should blow
the hut right away. But he never minded the birds nor hurt them, because
they were not in season; indeed, he minded but two things in the whole
world, and those were, his Bible and his grouse; for he was as good an
old Scotchman as ever knit stockings on a winter's night: only, when all
the birds were going, he toddled out, and took off his cap to them, and
wished them a merry journey and a safe return; and then gathered up all
the feathers which they had left, and cleaned them to sell down south,
and make feather-beds for stuffy people to lie on.

Then the petrels asked this bird and that whether they would take Tom to
Shiny Wall: but one set was going to Sutherland, and one to the
Shetlands, and one to Norway, and one to Spitzbergen, and one to
Iceland, and one to Greenland: but none would go to Shiny Wall. So the
good-natured petrels said that they would show him part of the way
themselves, but they were only going as far as Jan Mayen's Land; and
after that he must shift for himself.

And then all the birds rose up, and streamed away in long black lines,
north, and north-east, and north-west, across the bright blue summer
sky; and their cry was like ten thousand packs of hounds, and ten
thousand peals of bells. Only the puffins stayed behind, and killed the
young rabbits, and laid their eggs in the rabbit-burrows; which was
rough practice, certainly; but a man must see to his own family.

And, as Tom and the petrels went north-eastward, it began to blow right
hard; for the old gentleman in the grey great-coat, who looks after the
big copper boiler, in the gulf of Mexico, had got behindhand with his
work; so Mother Carey had sent an electric message to him for more
steam; and now the steam was coming, as much in an hour as ought to have
come in a week, puffing and roaring and swishing and swirling, till you
could not see where the sky ended and the sea began. But Tom and the
petrels never cared, for the gale was right abaft, and away they went
over the crests of the billows, as merry as so many flying-fish.

And at last they saw an ugly sight--the black side of a great ship,
water-logged in the trough of the sea. Her funnel and her masts were
overboard, and swayed and surged under her lee; her decks were swept as
clean as a barn floor, and there was no living soul on board.

The petrels flew up to her, and wailed round her; for they were very
sorry indeed, and also they expected to find some salt pork; and Tom
scrambled on board of her and looked round, frightened and sad.

And there, in a little cot, lashed tight under the bulwark, lay a baby
fast asleep; the very same baby, Tom saw at once, which he had seen in
the singing lady's arms.

He went up to it, and wanted to wake it; but behold, from under the cot
out jumped a little black and tan terrier dog, and began barking and
snapping at Tom, and would not let him touch the cot.

Tom knew the dog's teeth could not hurt him: but at least it could shove
him away, and did; and he and the dog fought and struggled, for he
wanted to help the baby, and did not want to throw the poor dog
overboard: but as they were struggling, there came a tall green sea, and
walked in over the weather side of the ship, and swept them all into the
waves.

"Oh, the baby, the baby!" screamed Tom: but the next moment he did not
scream at all; for he saw the cot settling down through the green water,
with the baby, smiling in it, fast asleep; and he saw the fairies come
up from below, and carry baby and cradle gently down in their soft arms;
and then he knew it was all right, and that there would be a new
water-baby in St. Brandan's Isle.

And the poor little dog?

Why, after he had kicked and coughed a little, he sneezed so hard, that
he sneezed himself clean out of his skin, and turned into a water-dog,
and jumped and danced round Tom, and ran over the crests of the waves,
and snapped at the jelly-fish and the mackerel, and followed Tom the
whole way to the Other-end-of-Nowhere.

Then they went on again, till they began to see the peak of Jan Mayen's
Land, standing up like a white sugar-loaf, two miles above the clouds.

And there they fell in with a whole flock of mollymocks, who were
feeding on a dead whale.

"These are the fellows to show you the way," said Mother Carey's
chickens; "we cannot help you farther north. We don't like to get among
the ice pack, for fear it should nip our toes: but the mollys dare fly
anywhere."

So the petrels called to the mollys: but they were so busy and greedy,
gobbling and pecking and spluttering and fighting over the blubber, that
they did not take the least notice.

"Come, come," said the petrels, "you lazy greedy lubbers, this young
gentleman is going to Mother Carey, and if you don't attend on him, you
won't earn your discharge from her, you know."

"Greedy we are," says a great fat old molly, "but lazy we ain't; and, as
for lubbers, we're no more lubbers than you. Let's have a look at the
lad."

And he flapped right into Tom's face, and stared at him in the most
impudent way (for the mollys are audacious fellows, as all whalers
know), and then asked him where he hailed from, and what land he sighted
last.

And, when Tom told him, he seemed pleased, and said he was a good
plucked one to have got so far.

"Come along, lads," he said to the rest, "and give this little chap a
cast over the pack, for Mother Carey's sake. We've eaten blubber enough
for to-day, and we'll e'en work out a bit of our time by helping the
lad."

So the mollys took Tom up on their backs, and flew off with him,
laughing and joking--and oh, how they did smell of train oil!

"Who are you, you jolly birds?" asked Tom.

"We are the spirits of the old Greenland skippers (as every sailor
knows), who hunted here, right whales and horse-whales, full hundreds of
years agone. But, because we were saucy and greedy, we were all turned
into mollys, to eat whale's blubber all our days. But lubbers we are
none, and could sail a ship now against any man in the North seas,
though we don't hold with this new-fangled steam. And it's a shame of
those black imps of petrels to call us so; but because they're her
grace's pets, they think they may say anything they like."

"And who are you?" asked Tom of him, for he saw that he was the king of
all the birds.

"My name is Hendrick Hudson, and a right good skipper was I; and my
name will last to the world's end, in spite of all the wrong I did. For
I discovered Hudson River, and I named Hudson's Bay; and many have come
in my wake that dared not have shown me the way. But I was a hard man in
my time, that's truth, and stole the poor Indians off the coast of
Maine, and sold them for slaves down in Virginia; and at last I was so
cruel to my sailors, here in these very seas, that they set me adrift in
an open boat, and I never was heard of more. So now I'm the king of all
mollys, till I've worked out my time."

And now they came to the edge of the pack, and beyond it they could see
Shiny Wall looming, through mist, and snow, and storm. But the pack
rolled horribly upon the swell, and the ice giants fought and roared,
and leapt upon each other's backs, and ground each other to powder, so
that Tom was afraid to venture among them, lest he should be ground to
powder too. And he was the more afraid, when he saw lying among the ice
pack the wrecks of many a gallant ship; some with masts and yards all
standing, some with the seamen frozen fast on board. Alas, alas, for
them! They were all true English hearts; and they came to their end like
good knights-errant, in searching for the white gate that never was
opened yet.
