
'Well,' said I, 'it's a good fire, and a good set-out of clothes; and
what a valet, Mr. Rowley!  And there's one thing to be said for my
cousin--I mean for Mr. Powl's Viscount--he has a very fair figure.'

'Oh, don't you be took in, Mr. Anne,' quoth the faithless Rowley: 'he has
to be hyked into a pair of stays to get them things on!'

'Come, come, Mr. Rowley,' said I, 'this is telling tales out of school!
Do not you be deceived.  The greatest men of antiquity, including Caesar
and Hannibal and Pope Joan, may have been very glad, at my time of life
or Alain's, to follow his example.  'Tis a misfortune common to all; and
really,' said I, bowing to myself before the mirror like one who should
dance the minuet, 'when the result is so successful as this, who would do
anything but applaud?'

My toilet concluded, I marched on to fresh surprises.  My chamber, my new
valet and my new clothes had been beyond hope: the dinner, the soup, the
whole bill of fare was a revelation of the powers there are in man.  I
had not supposed it lay in the genius of any cook to create, out of
common beef and mutton, things so different and dainty.  The wine was of
a piece, the doctor a most agreeable companion; nor could I help
reflecting on the prospect that all this wealth, comfort and handsome
profusion might still very possibly become mine.  Here were a change
indeed, from the common soldier and the camp kettle, the prisoner and his
prison rations, the fugitive and the horrors of the covered cart!




CHAPTER XVII--THE DESPATCH-BOX


The doctor had scarce finished his meal before he hastened with an
apology to attend upon his patient; and almost immediately after I was
myself summoned and ushered up the great staircase and along interminable
corridors to the bedside of my great-uncle the Count.  You are to think
that up to the present moment I had not set eyes on this formidable
personage, only on the evidences of his wealth and kindness.  You are to
think besides that I had heard him miscalled and abused from my earliest
childhood up.  The first of the _emigres_ could never expect a good word
in the society in which my father moved.  Even yet the reports I received
were of a doubtful nature; even Romaine had drawn of him no very amiable
portrait; and as I was ushered into the room, it was a critical eye that
I cast on my great-uncle.  He lay propped on pillows in a little cot no
greater than a camp-bed, not visibly breathing.  He was about eighty
years of age, and looked it; not that his face was much lined, but all
the blood and colour seemed to have faded from his body, and even his
eyes, which last he kept usually closed as though the light distressed
him.  There was an unspeakable degree of slyness in his expression, which
kept me ill at ease; he seemed to lie there with his arms folded, like a
spider waiting for prey.  His speech was very deliberate and courteous,
but scarce louder than a sigh.

'I bid you welcome, _Monsieur le Vicomte Anne_,' said he, looking at me
hard with his pale eyes, but not moving on his pillows.  'I have sent for
you, and I thank you for the obliging expedition you have shown.  It is
my misfortune that I cannot rise to receive you.  I trust you have been
reasonably well entertained?'

'_Monsieur mon oncle_,' I said, bowing very low, 'I am come at the
summons of the head of my family.'

'It is well,' he said.  'Be seated.  I should be glad to hear some
news--if that can be called news that is already twenty years old--of how
I have the pleasure to see you here.'

By the coldness of his address, not more than by the nature of the times
that he bade me recall, I was plunged in melancholy.  I felt myself
surrounded as with deserts of friendlessness, and the delight of my
welcome was turned to ashes in my mouth.

'That is soon told, _monseigneur_,' said I.  'I understand that I need
tell you nothing of the end of my unhappy parents?  It is only the story
of the lost dog.'

'You are right.  I am sufficiently informed of that deplorable affair; it
is painful to me.  My nephew, your father, was a man who would not be
advised,' said he.  'Tell me, if you please, simply of yourself.'

'I am afraid I must run the risk of harrowing your sensibility in the
beginning,' said I, with a bitter smile, 'because my story begins at the
foot of the guillotine.  When the list came out that night, and her name
was there, I was already old enough, not in years but in sad experience,
to understand the extent of my misfortune.  She--'  I paused.  'Enough
that she arranged with a friend, Madame de Chasserades, that she should
take charge of me, and by the favour of our jailers I was suffered to
remain in the shelter of the _Abbaye_.  That was my only refuge; there
was no corner of France that I could rest the sole of my foot upon except
the prison.  Monsieur le Comte, you are as well aware as I can be what
kind of a life that was, and how swiftly death smote in that society.  I
did not wait long before the name of Madame de Chasserades succeeded to
that of my mother on the list.  She passed me on to Madame de Noytot;
she, in her turn, to Mademoiselle de Braye; and there were others.  I was
the one thing permanent; they were all transient as clouds; a day or two
of their care, and then came the last farewell and--somewhere far off in
that roaring Paris that surrounded us--the bloody scene.  I was the
cherished one, the last comfort, of these dying women.  I have been in
pitched fights, my lord, and I never knew such courage.  It was all done
smiling, in the tone of good society; _belle maman_ was the name I was
taught to give to each; and for a day or two the new "pretty mamma" would
make much of me, show me off, teach me the minuet, and to say my prayers;
and then, with a tender embrace, would go the way of her predecessors,
smiling.  There were some that wept too.  There was a childhood!  All the
time Monsieur de Culemberg kept his eye on me, and would have had me out
of the _Abbaye_ and in his own protection, but my "pretty mammas" one
after another resisted the idea.  Where could I be safer? they argued;
and what was to become of them without the darling of the prison?  Well,
it was soon shown how safe I was!  The dreadful day of the massacre came;
the prison was overrun; none paid attention to me, not even the last of
my "pretty mammas," for she had met another fate.  I was wandering
distracted, when I was found by some one in the interests of Monsieur de
Culemberg.  I understand he was sent on purpose; I believe, in order to
reach the interior of the prison, he had set his hand to nameless
barbarities: such was the price paid for my worthless, whimpering little
life!  He gave me his hand; it was wet, and mine was reddened; he led me
unresisting.  I remember but the one circumstance of my flight--it was my
last view of my last pretty mamma.  Shall I describe it to you?' I asked
the Count, with a sudden fierceness.

'Avoid unpleasant details,' observed my great-uncle gently.

At these words a sudden peace fell upon me.  I had been angry with the
man before; I had not sought to spare him; and now, in a moment, I saw
that there was nothing to spare.  Whether from natural heartlessness or
extreme old age, the soul was not at home; and my benefactor, who had
kept the fire lit in my room for a month past--my only relative except
Alain, whom I knew already to be a hired spy--had trodden out the last
sparks of hope and interest.

'Certainly,' said I; 'and, indeed, the day for them is nearly over.  I
was taken to Monsieur de Culemberg's,--I presume, sir, that you know the
Abbe de Culemberg?'

He indicated assent without opening his eyes.

'He was a very brave and a very learned man--'

'And a very holy one,' said my uncle civilly.

'And a very holy one, as you observe,' I continued.  'He did an infinity
of good, and through all the Terror kept himself from the guillotine.  He
brought me up, and gave me such education as I have.  It was in his house
in the country at Dammarie, near Melun, that I made the acquaintance of
your agent, Mr. Vicary, who lay there in hiding, only to fall a victim at
the last to a gang of _chauffeurs_.'

'That poor Mr. Vicary!' observed my uncle.  'He had been many times in my
interests to France, and this was his first failure.  _Quel charmant
homme_, _n'est-ce pas_?'

'Infinitely so,' said I.  'But I would not willingly detain you any
further with a story, the details of which it must naturally be more or
less unpleasant for you to hear.  Suffice it that, by M. de Culemberg's
own advice, I said farewell at eighteen to that kind preceptor and his
books, and entered the service of France; and have since then carried
arms in such a manner as not to disgrace my family.'

'You narrate well; _vous aves la voix chaude_,' said my uncle, turning on
his pillows as if to study me.  'I have a very good account of you by
Monsieur de Mauseant, whom you helped in Spain.  And you had some
education from the Abbe de Culemberg, a man of a good house?  Yes, you
will do very well.  You have a good manner and a handsome person, which
hurts nothing.  We are all handsome in the family; even I myself, I have
had my successes, the memories of which still charm me.  It is my
intention, my nephew, to make of you my heir.  I am not very well content
with my other nephew, Monsieur le Vicomte: he has not been respectful,
which is the flattery due to age.  And there are other matters.'

I was half tempted to throw back in his face that inheritance so coldly
offered.  At the same time I had to consider that he was an old man, and,
after all, my relation; and that I was a poor one, in considerable
straits, with a hope at heart which that inheritance might yet enable me
to realise.  Nor could I forget that, however icy his manners, he had
behaved to me from the first with the extreme of liberality and--I was
about to write, kindness, but the word, in that connection, would not
come.  I really owed the man some measure of gratitude, which it would be
an ill manner to repay if I were to insult him on his deathbed.

'Your will, monsieur, must ever be my rule,' said I, bowing.

'You have wit, _monsieur mon neveu_,' said he, 'the best wit--the wit of
silence.  Many might have deafened me with their gratitude.  Gratitude!'
he repeated, with a peculiar intonation, and lay and smiled to himself.
'But to approach what is more important.  As a prisoner of war, will it
be possible for you to be served heir to English estates?  I have no
idea: long as I have dwelt in England, I have never studied what they
call their laws.  On the other hand, how if Romaine should come too late?
I have two pieces of business to be transacted--to die, and to make my
will; and, however desirous I may be to serve you, I cannot postpone the
first in favour of the second beyond a very few hours.'

'Well, sir, I must then contrive to be doing as I did before,' said I.

'Not so,' said the Count.  'I have an alternative.  I have just drawn my
balance at my banker's, a considerable sum, and I am now to place it in
your hands.  It will be so much for you and so much less--' he paused,
and smiled with an air of malignity that surprised me.  'But it is
necessary it should be done before witnesses.  _Monsieur le Vicomte_ is
of a particular disposition, and an unwitnessed donation may very easily
be twisted into a theft.'

He touched a bell, which was answered by a man having the appearance of a
confidential valet.  To him he gave a key.

'Bring me the despatch-box that came yesterday, La Ferriere,' said he.
'You will at the same time present my compliments to Dr. Hunter and M.
l'Abbe, and request them to step for a few moments to my room.'

The despatch-box proved to be rather a bulky piece of baggage, covered
with Russia leather.  Before the doctor and an excellent old smiling
priest it was passed over into my hands with a very clear statement of
the disposer's wishes; immediately after which, though the witnesses
remained behind to draw up and sign a joint note of the transaction,
Monsieur de Keroual dismissed me to my own room, La Ferriere following
with the invaluable box.

At my chamber door I took it from him with thanks, and entered alone.
Everything had been already disposed for the night, the curtains drawn
and the fire trimmed; and Rowley was still busy with my bedclothes.  He
turned round as I entered with a look of welcome that did my heart good.
Indeed, I had never a much greater need of human sympathy, however
trivial, than at that moment when I held a fortune in my arms.  In my
uncle's room I had breathed the very atmosphere of disenchantment.  He
had gorged my pockets; he had starved every dignified or affectionate
sentiment of a man.  I had received so chilling an impression of age and
experience that the mere look of youth drew me to confide in Rowley: he
was only a boy, his heart must beat yet, he must still retain some
innocence and natural feelings, he could blurt out follies with his
mouth, he was not a machine to utter perfect speech!  At the same time, I
was beginning to outgrow the painful impressions of my interview; my
spirits were beginning to revive; and at the jolly, empty looks of Mr.
Rowley, as he ran forward to relieve me of the box, St. Ives became
himself again.

'Now, Rowley, don't be in a hurry,' said I.  'This is a momentous
juncture.  Man and boy, you have been in my service about three hours.
You must already have observed that I am a gentleman of a somewhat morose
disposition, and there is nothing that I more dislike than the smallest
appearance of familiarity.  Mr. Pole or Mr. Powl, probably in the spirit
of prophecy, warned you against this danger.'

'Yes, Mr. Anne,' said Rowley blankly.

'Now there has just arisen one of those rare cases, in which I am willing
to depart from my principles.  My uncle has given me a box--what you
would call a Christmas box.  I don't know what's in it, and no more do
you: perhaps I am an April fool, or perhaps I am already enormously
wealthy; there might be five hundred pounds in this apparently harmless
receptacle!'

'Lord, Mr. Anne!' cried Rowley.

'Now, Rowley, hold up your right hand and repeat the words of the oath
after me,' said I, laying the despatch-box on the table.  'Strike me blue
if I ever disclose to Mr. Powl, or Mr. Powl's Viscount, or anything that
is Mr. Powl's, not to mention Mr. Dawson and the doctor, the treasures of
the following despatch-box; and strike me sky-blue scarlet if I do not
continually maintain, uphold, love, honour and obey, serve, and follow to
the four corners of the earth and the waters that are under the earth,
the hereinafter before-mentioned (only that I find I have neglected to
mention him) Viscount Anne de Keroual de St.-Yves, commonly known as Mr.
Rowley's Viscount.  So be it.  Amen.'

He took the oath with the same exaggerated seriousness as I gave it to
him.

'Now,' said I.  'Here is the key for you; I will hold the lid with both
hands in the meanwhile.'  He turned the key.  'Bring up all the candles
in the room, and range them along-side.  What is it to be?  A live
gorgon, a Jack-in-the-box, or a spring that fires a pistol?  On your
knees, sir, before the prodigy!'

So saying, I turned the despatch-box upside down upon the table.  At
sight of the heap of bank paper and gold that lay in front of us, between
the candles, or rolled upon the floor alongside, I stood astonished.

'O Lord!' cried Mr. Rowley; 'oh Lordy, Lordy, Lord!' and he scrambled
after the fallen guineas.  'O my, Mr. Anne! what a sight o' money!  Why,
it's like a blessed story-book.  It's like the Forty Thieves.'

'Now Rowley, let's be cool, let's be businesslike,' said I.  'Riches are
deceitful, particularly when you haven't counted them; and the first
thing we have to do is to arrive at the amount of my--let me say, modest
competency.  If I'm not mistaken, I have enough here to keep you in gold
buttons all the rest of your life.  You collect the gold, and I'll take
the paper.'

Accordingly, down we sat together on the hearthrug, and for some time
there was no sound but the creasing of bills and the jingling of guineas,
broken occasionally by the exulting exclamations of Rowley.  The
arithmetical operation on which we were embarked took long, and it might
have been tedious to others; not to me nor to my helper.

'Ten thousand pounds!' I announced at last.

'Ten thousand!' echoed Mr. Rowley.

And we gazed upon each other.

The greatness of this fortune took my breath away.  With that sum in my
hands, I need fear no enemies.  People are arrested, in nine cases out of
ten, not because the police are astute, but because they themselves run
short of money; and I had here before me in the despatch-box a succession
of devices and disguises that insured my liberty.  Not only so; but, as I
felt with a sudden and overpowering thrill, with ten thousand pounds in
my hands I was become an eligible suitor.  What advances I had made in
the past, as a private soldier in a military prison, or a fugitive by the
wayside, could only be qualified or, indeed, excused as acts of
desperation.  And now, I might come in by the front door; I might
approach the dragon with a lawyer at my elbow, and rich settlements to
offer.  The poor French prisoner, Champdivers, might be in a perpetual
danger of arrest; but the rich travelling Englishman, St.-Ives, in his
post-chaise, with his despatch-box by his side, could smile at fate and
laugh at locksmiths.  I repeated the proverb, exulting, _Love laughs at
locksmiths_!  In a moment, by the mere coming of this money, my love had
become possible--it had come near, it was under my hand--and it may be by
one of the curiosities of human nature, but it burned that instant
brighter.

'Rowley,' said I, 'your Viscount is a made man.'

'Why, we both are, sir,' said Rowley.

'Yes, both,' said I; 'and you shall dance at the wedding;' and I flung at
his head a bundle of bank notes, and had just followed it up with a
handful of guineas, when the door opened, and Mr. Romaine appeared upon
the threshold.




CHAPTER XVIII--MR. ROMAINE CALLS ME NAMES


Feeling very much of a fool to be thus taken by surprise, I scrambled to
my feet and hastened to make my visitor welcome.  He did not refuse me
his hand; but he gave it with a coldness and distance for which I was
quite unprepared, and his countenance, as he looked on me, was marked in
a strong degree with concern and severity.

'So, sir, I find you here?' said he, in tones of little encouragement.
'Is that you, George?  You can run away; I have business with your
master.'

He showed Rowley out, and locked the door behind him.  Then he sat down
in an armchair on one side of the fire, and looked at me with
uncompromising sternness.

'I am hesitating how to begin,' said he.  'In this singular labyrinth of
blunders and difficulties that you have prepared for us, I am positively
hesitating where to begin.  It will perhaps be best that you should read,
first of all, this paragraph.'  And he handed over to me a newspaper.

The paragraph in question was brief.  It announced the recapture of one
of the prisoners recently escaped from Edinburgh Castle; gave his name,
Clausel, and added that he had entered into the particulars of the recent
revolting murder in the Castle, and denounced the murderer:--

    'It is a common soldier called Champdivers, who had himself escaped,
    and is in all probability involved in the common fate of his
    comrades.  In spite of the activity along all the Forth and the East
    Coast, nothing has yet been seen of the sloop which these desperadoes
    seized at Grangemouth, and it is now almost certain that they have
