ourselves, come death, pestilence, famine, war and those things we
call ills, and not from the Author of all good things except by
accident. For so God says of Himself:[472] "I am the God making good
and creating evil, making light and creating darkness." For when He
withdraws His spirit, evil follows the good; when He takes the light
away, darkness is created; as when one removes the pillars of a
building, the ruin of a house follows. If He takes the vital spark
away, death follows; nor can He be said to do evil[473] to anyone in
taking back what is His own.

[Footnote 470: Job 41 and 49. Isa. 54. Ezek. 31.]

[Footnote 471: Isa. 54.]

[Footnote 472: Isa. 45.]

[Footnote 473: Job 34.]

THEO. When the Legislator asked Him to disclose His face to his gaze,
why did the Architect of the universe and the Author of all things
reply: "My face is to be seen by no mortal man, but only my back?"

MYST. This fine allegory signifies that God cannot be known from
superior or antecedent causes but from behind His back, that is, from
results, for a little later He adds, "I will cover thine eyes with My
hand." Thus the hand signifies those works which He has placed before
anyone's eyes, and it indicates that He places man not in an obscure
corner but in the center of the universe so that He might better and
more easily than in heaven contemplate the universe and all His works
through the sight of which, as through spectacles, the Sun, that is,
God Himself, may be disclosed. And therefore we undertook this
disputation concerning nature and natural things, so that even if they
are but slightly explained, nevertheless we may attain from this
disquisition an imperfect knowledge of the Creator and may break forth
in His praises with all our might, that at length by degrees we may be
borne on high and be blessed by the Divine reward; for this is indeed
the supreme and final good for a man.

     Here endeth the Drama of Nature which Jean Bodin wrote while
     all France was aflame with civil war.

FINIS




APPENDIX D.

A TRANSLATION OF A LETTER BY THOMAS FEYENS

ON THE QUESTION: IS IT TRUE THAT THE HEAVENS ARE MOVED AND THE EARTH
IS AT REST? (FEBRUARY, 1619)

     (_Thomae Fieni Epistolica Quaestio_: An verum sit, coelum
     moveri et terram quiescere? Londini, 1655.)


To the eminent and noble scholars, Tobias Matthias and George Gays:

It is proved that the heavens are moved and the earth is stationary:
First; by authority; for besides the fact that this is asserted by
Aristotle and Ptolemy whom wellnigh all Philosophers and
Mathematicians have followed by unanimous consent, except for
Copernicus, Bernardus Patricius[474] and a very few others, the Holy
Scriptures plainly attest it in at least two places which I have seen.
In Joshua,[475] are the words: Steteruntque sol et luna donec
ulcisceretur gens de inimicis suis. And a little further on: Stetit
itaque sol in medio coeli, et non festinavit occumbere spatio unius
diei, et non fuit antea et postea tam longa dies. The Scriptures
obviously refer by these words to the motion of the _primum mobile_ by
which the sun and the moon are borne along in their diurnal course and
the day is defined; and it indicates that the heavens are moved as
well as the _primum mobile_. Then Ecclesiastes, chapter 1,[476] reads:
Generatio praeterit, et generatio advenit, terra autem semper stat,
oritur sol et occidit, et ad locum suum revertitur.

[Footnote 474: Feyens probably refers here to Francesco Patrizzi, who
was an enemy of the peripatetics and a great supporter of platonism.
He died in 1597 at Rome, where Clement VIII had conferred on him the
chair of philosophy.]

[Footnote 475: Joshua X: 13-14.]

[Footnote 476: Ecclesiastes I: 4.]

Secondly, it is proved by reason. All the heavens and stars were made
in man's behalf and, with other terrestrial bodies, are the servants
of man to warm, light, and vivify him.

This they could not do unless in moving they applied themselves by
turns to different parts of the world. And it is more likely that they
would apply themselves by their own movement to man and the place in
which man lives, than that man should come to them by the movement of
his own seat or habitation. For they are the servants of man; man is
not their servant; therefore it is more probable that the heavens are
moved and the earth is at rest than that the reverse is true.

Thirdly; no probable argument can be thought out from philosophy to
prove that the earth is moved and the heavens are at rest. Nor can it
be done by mathematics. By saying that the heavens are moved and the
earth is at rest, all phenomena of the heavenly bodies can be solved.
Just as in the same way in optics all can be solved by saying either
that sight comes from the thing to the eye, or that rays go from the
eye to the thing seen; so is it in astronomy. Therefore one ought
rather to abide in the ancient and general opinion than in one
received recently without justification.

Fourthly; the earth is the center of the universe; all the heavenly
bodies are observed to be moved around it; therefore it itself ought
to be motionless, for anything that moves, it seems, should move
around or above something that is motionless.

Fifthly; if the earth is moved in a circle, either it moves that way
naturally or by force, either by its own nature or by the nature of
another. It is not by its own nature, for straight motion from above
downward is natural to it; therefore circular motion could not be
natural to it. Further, the earth is a simple body; and a simple body
can not have two natural motions of distinct kinds or classes. Nor is
it moved by another body; for by what is it moved? One has to say it
is moved either by the sun or by some other celestial body; and this
cannot be said, since either the sun or that body is said to be at
rest or in motion. If it is said to be at rest, then it cannot impart
movement to another. If it is said to be in motion, then it can not
move the earth, because it ought to move either by a motion similar to
its own or the opposite of it. It is not similar, since thus it would
be observed to move neutrally as when two boats moving in the same
direction, appear not to move but to be at rest. It is not the
opposite motion, since nothing could give motion contrary to its own.
And because Galileo seems to say, in so far as I have learned from
your lordships, that the earth was moved by the sun; I prove anyway
that this is not true since the movement of the sun and of the earth
ought to be from contrary and distinct poles. The sun, however, can
not be the cause of the other's movement because it is moved above
different poles. Lastly, the earth follows the motion of no other
celestial body; since if it is moved, it moves in 24 hours, and all
the other celestial bodies require the space of many days, months and
years. Ergo. Finally, if the earth is moved by another, its motion
would be violent; but this is absurd, for no violence can be regular
and perpetual.

Sixthly; even so it is declared that the earth is moved. Nevertheless,
it must be admitted to this that either the planets themselves or
their spheres are moved, for in no other way can the diversities of
aspects among themselves be solved; nor can a reason be given why the
sun does not leave the Ecliptic and the moon does; and how a planet
can be stationary or retrograde, high or low,--and many other
phenomena. For this reason those who said the earth moved, as
Bernardus Patricius and the others said, claimed that the _primum
mobile_, forsooth, was stationary and that the earth was moved in its
place; yet they could not in the least deny that the planets
themselves were moved, but admitted it. That is the reason why both
ancient and modern mathematicians, aside from the motion of the
_primum mobile_, were forced to admit and consider the peculiar
movements of the planets themselves. If therefore it must be
acknowledged, and it is certain, that the stars and the celestial
bodies are moved; then it is more probable that all movement perceived
in the universe belongs rather to the heavenly bodies than to the
earth. For if movement were ascribed to all the rest, why for that
same reason is not diurnal rotation ascribed rather to the _primum
mobile_ than to the earth, particularly when our senses seem to decide
thus? Although one may well be mistaken, sometimes, concerning other
similar movements; yet it is not probable that all ages could be at
fault, or should be, about the movements of its most important
objects, of course the celestial luminaries.

Seventhly; it is proved by experience. For if the earth is moved, then
an arrow shot straight up on high could never fall back to the place
whence it was shot, but should fall somewhere many miles away. But
this is not so. Ergo.

This can be answered and is so customarily in this way: this does not
follow because the air is swept along with the earth, and so, since
the air which carries the arrow is turning in the same way with the
earth, the arrow also is borne along equally with it, and thus returns
to the same spot. This in truth is a pure evasion and a worthless
answer for many reasons.

It is falsely observed that the air is moved and by the same motion as
the earth. For what should move the earth? Truly, if the air is moved
by the same motion as the earth, either it ought to be moved by the
earth itself, or by that other which moves the earth, or by itself. It
is not moved by itself; since it has another motion, the straight one
of course natural to itself, and also since it has a nature, an
essence and qualities all different from the nature and the essence of
the earth; therefore it could not by its own nature have the same
motion as that other, but of necessity ought to have a different one.

Nor is it moved by any other that may move the earth; as that which
moves the earth could not at the same time and with like motion move
the air. For since the air is different from the earth in essence, in
both active and passive qualities, and in kind of substance, it can
not receive the impelling force of the acting body, or that force
applied in the same way as the earth, and so could not be moved in the
same way. The virtues [of bodies] acting and of moving diversely are
received by the recipients according to the diversity of their
dispositions. Also it can not be moved by the earth; since if it were
moved by the earth, it must be said to be moved by force, but such
motion appears to be impossible. Ergo. The minor premise is proved:
for if air is thus moved by the earth by force the air ought to be
moved more rapidly than the earth, because air is larger [than the
earth].

For what is outside is larger than what is inside. When, however, what
is larger and what is outside is driven around equally rapidly with
what is less, and what is inside, then the former is moved much more
rapidly. Thus it is true that the sphere of Saturn in its daily course
is moved far faster than the sphere of the moon. But it is impossible
that the one driven should move more rapidly than the one driving;
therefore the air is not moved by the earth's violence. Thus would it
be if the air were moved with the earth, or by itself, or by force.
Thus far, then, the force of the original argument remains; since of
its own motion, indeed, it could not be in every way conformable to
the motion of the earth as I have shown; and this because the air
differs from the earth in consistency of substance, in qualities and
in essence. But the air ought at all events to move more sluggishly
than the earth. It follows from this that an arrow shot straight up
could not return to its starting point; for the earth, moving like the
air, on account of the other's slower rate leaves it behind, and the
arrow also which is carried away from it.

Besides, if the air does not move so rapidly as the earth, a man
living in a very high tower, however quiet the air, ought then always
to feel the strongest wind and the greatest disturbance of the air.

Since mountains and towers are moved with the earth, and the air would
not be accompanying them at an equal speed, it would necessarily
follow that they would precede the air by cleaving and cutting and
ploughing through it which ought to make a great wind perceptible.

Eighthly; if a person stood in some very high tower or other high
place and aimed from that tower at some spot of earth perpendicularly
below his eye, and allowed a very heavy stone to fall following that
perpendicular line, it is absolutely certain that that stone would
land upon the spot aimed at perpendicularly underneath. But if the
earth is moved, it would be impossible for the stone to strike that
spot.

This I prove first: because either the air moves at an unequal rate
with the earth; or it moves equally rapidly. If not equally, then it
is certain the stone could not land at that spot, since the earth's
movement would outstrip the stone borne by the air. If equally
rapidly, then again the stone could not land at that spot, since
although the air was moving in itself at an equal speed, yet on that
account it could not carry the stone thus rapidly with itself and
carrying it downward falling by its own weight, for the stone tending
by gravity towards the center resists the carrying of the air.

You will say: if the earth is moved in a circle, so are all its parts;
wherefore that stone in falling not only moves in a circle by the
carrying of the air, but also in a circle because of its own nature as
being part of the earth and having the same motion with it.

Verily this answer is worthless. For although the stone is turned in a
circle by its own nature like the earth, yet its own natural gravity
impeded it so that it is borne along that much the less swiftly,
unlike the air or the earth, both of which are in their natural places
and which in consequence have no gravity as a stone falling from on
high has.

Lastly; because although the stone is moved in the world by its own
nature like the whole earth, yet it is not borne along as swiftly as
the whole earth. For as one stone by its own weight falls from the
heaven following its own direct motion straight to the center just as
a part of the earth, so also the whole earth itself would fall; and
yet it would not fall so swiftly as the whole earth, for although the
stone would be borne along in its sphere like the whole earth just as
a part of it, yet it would not be borne along as swiftly as the whole
earth; and so, in whatever way it is said, the motion of the earth
ought always to outstrip the stone and leave it a long distance
behind. Thus a stone could never fall at the point selected or a point
perpendicularly beneath it. This is false. Ergo.

Ninthly: If the earth is moved in a circular orbit, it ought to pass
from the west through the meridian to the east; consequently the air
ought to move by the same path. But if this were so, then if an archer
shot toward the east, his arrow ought to fly much farther than if he
shot toward the west. For when he shot toward the east, the arrow
would fly with the natural movement of the air and would have that
supporting it. But when he shot toward the west, he would have the
motion of the air against him and then the arrow would struggle
against it. But it is certain the arrow ought to go much farther and
faster when the movement of the air is favorable to it then when
against it, as is obvious in darts sent out with a favoring wind.
Ergo.

Similarly not a few other arguments can be worked out, but there are
none as valuable for proof as the foregoing ones. Though these were
written by me with a flying pen far from books and sick in bed with a
broken leg, yet they seem to me to have so much value that I do not
see any way by which they could rightly be refuted. These I have
written for your gracious lordships in gratitude for your goodwill on
the occasion of our conversation at your dinner four days ago; and I
ask for them that you meditate on them justly and well.




BIBLIOGRAPHY

(of references cited.)


I

GENERAL WORKS.

Addis and Arnold: _Catholic Dictionary_, 2nd edit. London, 1884.

Bailly: _Histoire de l'Astronomie Moderne depuis la Fondation de
l'Ecole d'Alexandrie, jusqu' a l'Epoque de 1730_. 3 vol. Paris, 1785.

Berry, Arthur: _Short History of Astronomy_. New York, 1912.

Cajori, Florian: _The Teaching and History of Mathematics in the
United States_. Washington, 1890. (Bureau of Education, No. 3.)

Delambre, J.B.J.: _Histoire de l'Astronomie Ancienne_. Paris, 1817.

----: _Histoire de l'Astronomie du Moyen Age_. Paris, 1819.

----: _Histoire de l'Astronomie Moderne_. Paris, 1821.

De Morgan, Augustus: _A Book of Paradoxes_. 2 vol. 2nd edit. ed. by
David Eugene Smith. Chicago, 1915.

Di Bruno, Joseph Faa: _Catholic Belief, or a short and simple
exposition of Catholic Doctrine_. Author's American edit. 375th
thousand. New York, [1912.]

Jacoby, Harold: _Astronomy, a Popular Handbook_. New York, 1913.

Janssen, J.: _History of the German People at the Close of the Middle
Ages_. Trans. by Mitchell and Christie. 2 vol. St. Louis, no date.

Lecky, Wm. E. Hartpole: _History of England in the 18th Century_. 8
vol. New edit. New York, 1892.

Libri, C.: _Histoire des Sciences Mathematiques en Italie depuis la
Renaissance des Lettres_. 2me edit. 4 vol. Halle, 1865.

Milman, Henry H.: _History of Latin Christianity_. 8 vol. in 4. New
York, 1899.

Owen, John: _The Skeptics of the Italian Renaissance_. 2nd edit. New
York, 1893.

