
The earthquake of 1906 caused considerable damage at Santa Ines, and it
has not yet been completely repaired, funds for the purpose not having
been forthcoming.



CHAPTER XXIX

SAN RAFAEL, ARCANGEL

The Mission of the Archangel, San Rafael, was founded to give a health
resort to a number of neophytes who were sick in San Francisco. The
native name for the site was _Nanaguani_. The date of founding was
December 14, 1817. There were about 140 neophytes transferred at first,
and by the end of 1820 the number had increased to 590. In 1818 a
composite building, including church, priest's house, and all the
apartments required, was erected. It was of adobe, 87 feet long, 42 feet
wide, and 18 feet high, and had a corridor of tules. In 1818, when
Presidente Payeras visited the Mission, he was not very pleased with the
site, and after making a somewhat careful survey of the country around
recommended several other sites as preferable.

In 1824 a determined effort was made to capture a renegade neophyte of
San Francisco, a native of the San Rafael region, named Pomponio, who
for several years had terrorized the country at intervals as far south
as Santa Cruz. He would rob, outrage, and murder, confining most of his
attacks, however, upon the Indians. He had slain one soldier, Manuel
Varela, and therefore a determined effort was made for his capture.
Lieutenant Martinez, a corporal, and two men found him in the Canyada de
Novato, above San Rafael. He was sent to Monterey, tried by a
court-martial on the 6th of February, and finally shot the following
September. This same Martinez also had some conflicts about the same
time with chieftains of hostile tribes, north of the bay, named Marin
and Quentin, both of whom have left names, one to a county and the other
to a point on the bay.

When San Francisco Solano was founded, 92 neophytes were sent there from
San Rafael. In spite of this, the population of San Rafael increased
until it numbered 1140 in 1828.

In 1824 Kotzebue visited the Mission and spoke enthusiastically of its
natural advantages, though he made but brief reference to its
improvements. On his way to Sonoma, Duhaut-Cilly did not deem it of
sufficient importance to more than mention. Yet it was a position of
great importance. Governor Echeandia became alarmed about the activity
of the Russians at Fort Ross, and accused them of bad faith, claiming
that they enticed neophytes away from San Rafael, etc. The Mexican
government, in replying to his fears, urged the foundation of a fort,
but nothing was done, owing to the political complications at the time,
which made no man's tenure of office certain.

The secularization decree ordered that San Rafael should become a
parish of the first class, which class paid its curates $1500, as
against $1000 to those of the second class.

In 1837 it was reported that the Indians were not using their liberty
well; so, owing to the political troubles at the time, General Vallejo
was authorized to collect everything and care for it under a promise to
redistribute when conditions were better. In 1840 the Indians insisted
upon this promise being kept, and in spite of the governor's opposition
Vallejo succeeded in obtaining an order for the distribution of the
live-stock.

In 1845 Pico's order, demanding the return within one month of the
Indians to the lands of San Rafael or they would be sold, was published,
and the inventory taken thereupon showed a value of $17,000 in
buildings, lands, and live-stock. In 1846 the sale was made to Antonio
Sunol and A.M. Pico for $8000. The purchasers did not obtain possession,
and their title was afterwards declared invalid.

In the distribution of the Mission stock Vallejo reserved a small band
of horses for the purposes of national defense, and it was this band
that was seized by the "Bear Flag" revolutionists at the opening of
hostilities between the Americans and Mexicans. This act was followed
almost immediately by the joining of the insurgents by Fremont, and the
latter's marching to meet the Mexican forces, which were supposed to be
at San Rafael. No force, however, was found there, so Fremont took
possession of the Mission on June 26, 1846, and remained there for about
a week, leaving there to chase up Torre, who had gone to join Castro.
When he finally left the region he took with him a number of cattle and
horses, went to Sonoma, and on the 5th of July assumed active command of
all the insurgent forces, which ultimated in the conquest of the State.

From this time the ex-Mission had no history. The buildings doubtless
suffered much from Fremont's occupancy, and never being very elaborate,
easily fell a prey to the elements.

There is not a remnant of them now left, and the site is occupied by a
modern, hideous, wooden building, used as an armory.



CHAPTER XXX

SAN FRANCISCO SOLANO

Fifty-four years after the founding of the first Franciscan Mission in
California, the site was chosen for the twenty-first and last, San
Francisco Solano. This Mission was established at Sonoma under
conditions already narrated. The first ceremonies took place July 4,
1823, and nine months later the Mission church was dedicated. This
structure was built of boards, but by the end of 1824 a large building
had been completed, made of adobe with tiled roof and corridor, also a
granary and eight houses for the use of the padres and soldiers. Thus in
a year and a half from the time the location was selected the necessary
Mission buildings had been erected, and a large number of fruit trees
and vines were already growing. The neophytes numbered 693, but many of
these were sent from San Francisco, San Jose and San Rafael. The Indians
at this Mission represented thirty-five different tribes, according to
the record, yet they worked together harmoniously, and in 1830 their
possessions included more than 8000 cattle, sheep, and horses. Their
crops averaged nearly 2000 bushels of grain per year.

The number of baptisms recorded during the twelve years before
secularization was over 1300. Ten years later only about 200 Indians
were left in that vicinity.

In 1834 the Mission was secularized by M.G. Vallejo, who appointed
Ortega as majordomo. Vallejo quarreled with Padre Quijas, who at once
left and went to reside at San Rafael. The movable property was
distributed to the Indians, and they were allowed to live on their old
rancherias, though there is no record that they were formally allotted
to them. By and by the gentile Indians so harassed the Mission Indians
that the latter placed all their stock under the charge of General
Vallejo, asking him to care for it on their behalf. The herds increased
under his control, the Indians had implicit confidence in him, and he
seems to have acted fairly and honestly by them.

The pueblo of Sonoma was organized as a part of the secularization of
San Francisco Solano, and also to afford homes for the colonists brought
to the country by Hijar and Padres. In this same year the soldiers of
the presidio of San Francisco de Asis were transferred to Sonoma, to act
as a protection of the frontier, to overawe the Russians, and check the
incoming of Americans. This meant the virtual abandonment of the post by
the shores of the bay. Vallejo supported the presidial company, mainly
at his own expense, and made friends with the native chief, Solano, who
aided him materially in keeping the Indians peaceful.

The general statistics of the Mission for the eleven years of its
existence, 1823-34, are as follows: baptisms 1315, marriages 278, deaths
651. The largest population was 996 in 1832. The largest number of
cattle was 4849 in 1833, 1148 horses and 7114 sheep in the same year.

In 1845, when Pico's plan for selling and renting the Missions was
formulated, Solano was declared without value, the secularization having
been completely carried out, although there is an imperfect inventory of
buildings, utensils, and church property. It was ignored in the final
order. Of the capture of Sonoma by the Bear Flag revolutionists and the
operations of Fremont, it is impossible here to treat. They are to be
found in every good history of California.

In 1880 Bishop Alemany sold the Mission and grounds of San Francisco
Solano to a German named Schocken for $3000. With that money a modern
church was erected for the parish, which is still being used. For six
months after the sale divine services were still held in the old
Mission, and then Schocken used it as a place for storing wine and hay.
In September, 1903, it was sold to the Hon. W.R. Hearst for $5000. The
ground plot was 166 by 150 feet. It is said that the tower was built by
General Vallejo in 1835 or thereabouts. The deeds have been transferred
to the State of California and accepted by the Legislature. The
intention is to preserve the Mission as a valuable historic landmark.



CHAPTER XXXI

THE MISSION CHAPELS OR ASISTENCIAS

The Mission padres were the first circuit riders or pastors. It is
generally supposed that the circuit rider is a device of the Methodist
church, but history clearly reveals that long prior to the time of the
sainted Wesley, and the denomination he founded, the padres were "riding
the circuit," or walking, visiting the various rancherias which had no
settled pastor.

Where buildings for worship were erected at these places they were
called chapels, or asistencias. Some of these chapels still remain in
use and the ruins of others are to be seen. The Mission of San Gabriel
had four such chapels, viz., Los Angeles, Puente, San Antonio de Santa
Ana, and San Bernardino. Of the first and the last we have
considerable history.

LOS ANGELES CHAPEL

As I have elsewhere shown, it was the plan of the Spanish Crown not only
to Christianize and civilize the Indians of California, but also to
colonize the country. In accordance with this plan the pueblo of San
Jose was founded on the 29th of November, 1776. The second was that of
Los Angeles in 1781. Rivera was sent to secure colonists in Sonora and
Sinaloa for the new pueblo, and also for the establishments it was
intended to found on the channel of Santa Barbara.

In due time colonists were secured, and a more mongrel lot it would be
hard to conceive: Indian, Spanish, Negro, Indian and Spanish, and Indian
and Negro bloods were represented, 42 souls in all. The blood which
makes the better Spanish classes in Los Angeles to-day so proud
represents those who came in much later.

There was nothing accidental in the founding of any Spanish colony.
Everything was planned beforehand. The colonist obeyed orders as rigidly
executed as if they were military commands. According to
Professor Guinn:

     "The area of a pueblo, under Spanish rule, was four square
     leagues, or about 17,770 acres. The pueblo lands were divided
     into _solares_ (house lots), _suertes_[5] (fields for
     planting), _dehesas_ (outside pasture lands), _ejidos_
     (commons), _propios_ (lands rented or leased), _realengas_
     (royal lands)."

[5] _Suerte_. This is colloquial, it really means "chance" or
"haphazard." In other words, it was the piece of ground that fell to the
settler by "lot."

On the arrival of the colonists in San Gabriel from Loreto on the 18th
of August, 1781, Governor Neve issued instructions for founding Los
Angeles on the 26th. The first requirement was to select a site for a
dam, to provide water for domestic and irrigation purposes. Then to
locate the plaza and the homes and fields of the colonists. Says
Professor Guinn:

     "The old plaza was a parallelogram too varas[6] in length by
     75 in breadth. It was laid out with its corners facing the
     cardinal points of the compass, and with its streets running
     at right angles to each of its four sides, so that no street
     would be swept by the wind. Two streets, each 10 varas wide,
     opened out on the longer sides, and three on each of the
     shorter sides. Upon three sides of the plaza were the house
     lots, 20 by 40 varas each, fronting on the square. One-half
     the remaining side was reserved for a guard-house, a
     town-house, and a public granary. Around the embryo town, a
     few years later, was built an adobe wall--not so much,
     perhaps, for protection from foreign invasion as from
     domestic intrusion. It was easier to wall in the town than to
     fence the cattle and goats that pastured outside."

[6] A vara is the Spanish yard of 33 inches.

The government supplied each colonist with a pair each of oxen, mules,
mares, sheep, goats, and cows, one calf, a burro, a horse, and the
branding-irons which distinguished his animals from those of the other
settlers. There were also certain tools furnished for the colony as
a whole.

On the 14th of September of the same year the plaza was solemnly
dedicated. A father from the San Gabriel Mission recited mass, a
procession circled the plaza, bearing the cross, the standard of Spain,
and an image of "Our Lady," after which salvos of musketry were fired
and general rejoicings indulged in. Of course the plaza was blessed, and
we are even told that Governor Neve made a speech.

As to when the first church was built in Los Angeles there seems to be
some doubt. In 1811 authority was gained for the erection of a new
chapel, but nowhere is there any account of a prior building. Doubtless
some temporary structure had been used. There was no regular priest
settled here, for in 1810 the citizens complained that the San Gabriel
padres did not pay enough attention to their sick. In August of 1814 the
corner-stone of the new chapel was laid by Padre Gil of San Gabriel, but
nothing more than laying the foundation was done for four years. Then
Governor Sola ordered that a higher site be chosen. The citizens
subscribed five hundred cattle towards the fund, and Prefect Payeras
made an appeal to the various friars which resulted in donations of
seven barrels of brandy, worth $575. With these funds the work was done,
Jose Antonio Ramirez being the architect, and his workers neophytes from
San Gabriel and San Luis Rey, who were paid a real (twelve and a half
cents) per day. Before 1821 the walls were raised to the window arches.
The citizens, however, showed so little interest in the matter that it
was not until Payeras made another appeal to his friars that _they_
contributed enough to complete the work. Governor Sola gave a little,
and the citizens a trifle. It is interesting to note what the
contributions of the friars were. San Miguel offered 500 cattle, San
Luis Obispo 200 cattle, Santa Barbara a barrel of brandy, San Diego two
barrels of white wine, Purisima six mules and 200 cattle, San Fernando
one barrel brandy, San Gabriel two barrels brandy, San Buenaventura said
it would try to make up deficits or supply church furniture, etc. Thus
Payeras's zeal and the willingness of the Los Angelenos to pay for wine
and brandy, which they doubtless drank "to the success of the church,"
completed the structure, and December 8, 1822, it was formally
dedicated. Auguste Wey writes:

     "The oldest church in Los Angeles is known in local American
     parlance as 'The Plaza Church,' 'Our Lady,' 'Our Lady of
     Angels,' 'Church of Our Lady,' 'Church of the Angels,'
     'Father Liebana's Church,' and 'The Adobe Church.' It is
     formally the church of Nuestra Senora, Reina de los
     Angeles--Our Lady, Queen of the Angels--from whom Los Angeles
     gets its name."

That is, the city gets its name from Our Lady, the Queen of the Angels,
not from the church, as the pueblo was named long before the church was
even suggested.

The plaza was formally moved to its present site in 1835, May 23, when
the government was changed from that of a pueblo to a city.

Concerning the name of the pueblo and river Rev. Joachin Adam, vicar
general of the diocese, in a paper read before the Historical Society of
Southern California several years ago, said:

     "The name Los Angeles is probably derived from the fact that
     the expedition by land, in search of the harbor of Monterey,
     passed through this place on the 2d of August, 1769, a day
     when the Franciscan missionaries celebrate the feast of
     Nuestra Senora de los Angeles--Our Lady of the Angels. This
     expedition left San Diego July 14, 1769, and reached here on
     the first of August, when they killed for the first time some
     _berrendos_, or antelope. On the second, they saw a large
     stream with much good land, which they called Porciuncula on
     account of commencing on that day the jubilee called
     Porciuncula, granted to St. Francis while praying in the
     little church of Our Lady of the Angels, near Assisi, in
     Italy, commonly called Della Porciuncula from a hamlet of
     that name near by. This was the original name of the Los
     Angeles River."

The last two recorded burials within the walls of the Los Angeles chapel
are those of the young wife of Nathaniel M. Pryor, "buried on the
left-hand side facing the altar," and of Dona Eustaquia, mother of the
Dons Andres, Jesus, and Pio Pico, all intimately connected with the
history of the later days of Mexican rule.



CHAPEL OF SAN BERNARDINO

It must not be forgotten that one of the early methods of reaching
California was inland. Travelers came from Mexico, by way of Sonora,
then crossed the Colorado River and reached San Gabriel and Monterey in
the north, over practically the same route as that followed to-day by
the Southern Pacific Railway, viz., crossing the river at Yuma, over the
Colorado Desert, by way of the San Gorgonio Pass, and through the San
Bernardino and San Gabriel valleys. It was in 1774 that Captain Juan
Bautista de Anza, of the presidio of Tubac in Arizona, was detailed by
the Viceroy of New Spain to open this road. He made quite an expedition
of it,--240 men, women, and Indian scouts, and 1050 animals. They named
the San Gorgonio Pass the Puerto de San Carlos, and the San Bernardino
Valley the Valle de San Jose. Cucamonga they called the Arroyo de los
Osos (Bear Ravine or Gulch).

As this road became frequented San Gabriel was the first stopping-place
where supplies could be obtained after crossing the desert. This was
soon found to be too far away, and for years it was desired that a
station nearer to the desert be established, but not until 1810 was the
decisive step taken. Then Padre Dumetz of San Gabriel, with a band of
soldiers and Indian neophytes, set out, early in May, to find a location
and establish such a station. They found a populous Indian rancheria,
in a region well watered and luxuriant, and which bore a name
significant of its desirability. The valley was _Guachama_, "the place
of abundance of food and water," and the Indians had the same name. A
station was established near the place now known as Bunker Hill, between
Urbita Springs and Colton, and a "capilla," built, dedicated to San
Bernardino, because it was on May 20, San Bernardino's feast-day, that
Padre Dumetz entered the valley. The trustworthiness of the Indians will
be understood when it is recalled that this chapel, station, and the
large quantity of supplies were left in their charge, under the command
of one of their number named Hipolito. Soon the station became known,
after this Indian, as Politana.

The destruction of Politana in 1810 by savage and hostile Indians, aided
by earthquakes, was a source of great distress to the padres at San
Gabriel, and they longed to rebuild. But the success of the attack of
the unconverted Indians had reawakened the never long dormant predatory
instincts of the desert Indians, and, for several years, these made
frequent incursions into the valley, killing not only the whites, but
such Indians as seemed to prefer the new faith to the old. But in 1819
the Guachamas sent a delegation to San Gabriel, requesting the padres to
come again, rebuild the Mission chapel, and re-establish the supply
station, and giving assurances of protection and good behavior. The
padres gladly acceded to the requests made, and in 1820 solemn chants
and earnest exhortations again resounded in the ears of the Guachamas in
a new and larger building of adobe erected some eight miles
from Politana.

There are a few ruined walls still standing of the chapel of San
Bernardino at this time, and had it not been for the care recently
bestowed upon them, there would soon have been no remnant of this once
prosperous and useful asistencia of the Mission of San Gabriel.



CHAPEL OF SAN MIGUEL

In 1803 a chapel was built at a rancheria called by the Indians
_Mescaltitlan_, and the Spaniards San Miguel, six miles from Santa
Barbara. It was of adobes, twenty-seven by sixty-six feet. In 1807
eighteen adobe dwellings were erected at the same place.

