
And so it is--a pair of bright eyes with a dozen glances suffice to
subdue a man; to enslave him, and inflame him; to make him even forget;
they dazzle him so that the past becomes straightway dim to him; and he
so prizes them that he would give all his life to possess 'em. What is
the fond love of dearest friends compared to this treasure? Is memory as
strong as expectancy? fruition, as hunger? gratitude, as desire? I have
looked at royal diamonds in the jewel-rooms in Europe, and thought how
wars have been made about 'em; Mogul sovereigns deposed and strangled
for them, or ransomed with them; millions expended to buy them; and
daring lives lost in digging out the little shining toys that I value
no more than the button in my hat. And so there are other glittering
baubles (of rare water too) for which men have been set to kill and
quarrel ever since mankind began; and which last but for a score of
years, when their sparkle is over. Where are those jewels now that
beamed under Cleopatra's forehead, or shone in the sockets of Helen?

The second day after Esmond's coming to Walcote, Tom Tusher had leave
to take a holiday, and went off in his very best gown and bands to court
the young woman whom his Reverence desired to marry, and who was not
a viscount's widow, as it turned out, but a brewer's relict at
Southampton, with a couple of thousand pounds to her fortune: for honest
Tom's heart was under such excellent control, that Venus herself without
a portion would never have caused it to flutter. So he rode away on his
heavy-paced gelding to pursue his jog-trot loves, leaving Esmond to the
society of his dear mistress and her daughter, and with his young lord
for a companion, who was charmed, not only to see an old friend, but to
have the tutor and his Latin books put out of the way.

The boy talked of things and people, and not a little about himself, in
his frank artless way. 'Twas easy to see that he and his sister had the
better of their fond mother, for the first place in whose affections,
though they fought constantly, and though the kind lady persisted that
she loved both equally, 'twas not difficult to understand that Frank was
his mother's darling and favorite. He ruled the whole household (always
excepting rebellious Beatrix) not less now than when he was a child
marshalling the village boys in playing at soldiers, and caning them
lustily too, like the sturdiest corporal. As for Tom Tusher, his
Reverence treated the young lord with that politeness and deference
which he always showed for a great man, whatever his age or his stature
was. Indeed, with respect to this young one, it was impossible not to
love him, so frank and winning were his manners, his beauty, his gayety,
the ring of his laughter, and the delightful tone of his voice. Wherever
he went, he charmed and domineered. I think his old grandfather the
Dean, and the grim old housekeeper, Mrs. Pincot, were as much his
slaves as his mother was: and as for Esmond, he found himself presently
submitting to a certain fascination the boy had, and slaving it like the
rest of the family. The pleasure which he had in Frank's mere company
and converse exceeded that which he ever enjoyed in the society of any
other man, however delightful in talk, or famous for wit. His presence
brought sunshine into a room, his laugh, his prattle, his noble beauty
and brightness of look cheered and charmed indescribably. At the least
tale of sorrow, his hands were in his purse, and he was eager with
sympathy and bounty. The way in which women loved and petted him, when,
a year or two afterwards, he came upon the world, yet a mere boy, and
the follies which they did for him (as indeed he for them), recalled
the career of Rochester, and outdid the successes of Grammont. His very
creditors loved him; and the hardest usurers, and some of the rigid
prudes of the other sex too, could deny him nothing. He was no more
witty than another man, but what he said, he said and looked as no
man else could say or look it. I have seen the women at the comedy at
Bruxelles crowd round him in the lobby: and as he sat on the stage more
people looked at him than at the actors, and watched him; and I remember
at Ramillies, when he was hit and fell, a great big red-haired Scotch
sergeant flung his halbert down, burst out a-crying like a woman,
seizing him up as if he had been an infant, and carrying him out of the
fire. This brother and sister were the most beautiful couple ever seen;
though after he winged away from the maternal nest this pair were seldom
together.

Sitting at dinner two days after Esmond's arrival (it was the last day
of the year), and so happy a one to Harry Esmond, that to enjoy it was
quite worth all the previous pain which he had endured and forgot, my
young lord, filling a bumper, and bidding Harry take another, drank to
his sister, saluting her under the title of "Marchioness."

"Marchioness!" says Harry, not without a pang of wonder, for he was
curious and jealous already.

"Nonsense, my lord," says Beatrix, with a toss of her head. My Lady
Viscountess looked up for a moment at Esmond, and cast her eyes down.

"The Marchioness of Blandford," says Frank. "Don't you know--hath not
Rouge Dragon told you?" (My lord used to call the Dowager of Chelsey by
this and other names.) "Blandford has a lock of her hair: the Duchess
found him on his knees to Mistress Trix, and boxed his ears, and said
Dr. Hare should whip him."

"I wish Mr. Tusher would whip you too," says Beatrix.

My lady only said: "I hope you will tell none of these silly stories
elsewhere than at home, Francis."

"'Tis true, on my word," continues Frank: "look at Harry scowling,
mother, and see how Beatrix blushes as red as the silver-clocked
stockings."

"I think we had best leave the gentlemen to their wine and their talk,"
says Mistress Beatrix, rising up with the air of a young queen, tossing
her rustling flowing draperies about her, and quitting the room,
followed by her mother.

Lady Castlewood again looked at Esmond, as she stooped down and kissed
Frank. "Do not tell those silly stories, child," she said: "do not drink
much wine, sir; Harry never loved to drink wine." And she went away,
too, in her black robes, looking back on the young man with her fair,
fond face.

"Egad! it's true," says Frank, sipping his wine with the air of a lord.
"What think you of this Lisbon--real Collares? 'Tis better than your
heady port: we got it out of one of the Spanish ships that came from
Vigo last year: my mother bought it at Southampton, as the ship was
lying there--the 'Rose,' Captain Hawkins."

"Why, I came home in that ship," says Harry.

"And it brought home a good fellow and good wine," says my lord. "I say,
Harry, I wish thou hadst not that cursed bar sinister."

"And why not the bar sinister?" asks the other.

"Suppose I go to the army and am killed--every gentleman goes to the
army--who is to take care of the women? Trix will never stop at home;
mother's in love with you,--yes, I think mother's in love with you. She
was always praising you, and always talking about you; and when she
went to Southampton, to see the ship, I found her out. But you see it is
impossible: we are of the oldest blood in England; we came in with the
Conqueror; we were only baronets,--but what then? we were forced into
that. James the First forced our great grandfather. We are above titles;
we old English gentry don't want 'em; the Queen can make a duke any day.
Look at Blandford's father, Duke Churchill, and Duchess Jennings, what
were they, Harry? Damn it, sir, what are they, to turn up their noses at
us? Where were they when our ancestor rode with King Henry at Agincourt,
and filled up the French King's cup after Poictiers? 'Fore George, sir,
why shouldn't Blandford marry Beatrix? By G--! he SHALL marry Beatrix,
or tell me the reason why. We'll marry with the best blood of England,
and none but the best blood of England. You are an Esmond, and you can't
help your birth, my boy. Let's have another bottle. What! no more? I've
drunk three parts of this myself. I had many a night with my father; you
stood to him like a man, Harry. You backed your blood; you can't help
your misfortune, you know,--no man can help that."

The elder said he would go in to his mistress's tea-table. The young
lad, with a heightened color and voice, began singing a snatch of a
song, and marched out of the room. Esmond heard him presently calling
his dogs about him, and cheering and talking to them; and by a hundred
of his looks and gestures, tricks of voice and gait, was reminded of the
dead lord, Frank's father.

And so, the sylvester night passed away; the family parted long before
midnight, Lady Castlewood remembering, no doubt, former New Years' Eves,
when healths were drunk, and laughter went round in the company of him,
to whom years, past, and present, and future, were to be as one; and so
cared not to sit with her children and hear the Cathedral bells ringing
the birth of the year 1703. Esmond heard the chimes as he sat in his own
chamber, ruminating by the blazing fire there, and listened to the last
notes of them, looking out from his window towards the city, and the
great gray towers of the Cathedral lying under the frosty sky, with the
keen stars shining above.

The sight of these brilliant orbs no doubt made him think of other
luminaries. "And so her eyes have already done execution," thought
Esmond--"on whom?--who can tell me?" Luckily his kinsman was by,
and Esmond knew he would have no difficulty in finding out Mistress
Beatrix's history from the simple talk of the boy.




CHAPTER VIII.

FAMILY TALK.


What Harry admired and submitted to in the pretty lad his kinsman was
(for why should he resist it?) the calmness of patronage which my young
lord assumed, as if to command was his undoubted right, and all the
world (below his degree) ought to bow down to Viscount Castlewood.

"I know my place, Harry," he said. "I'm not proud--the boys at
Winchester College say I'm proud: but I'm not proud. I am simply Francis
James Viscount Castlewood in the peerage of Ireland. I might have been
(do you know that?) Francis James Marquis and Earl of Esmond in that of
England. The late lord refused the title which was offered to him by
my godfather, his late Majesty. You should know that--you are of our
family, you know you cannot help your bar sinister, Harry, my dear
fellow; and you belong to one of the best families in England, in spite
of that; and you stood by my father, and by G--! I'll stand by you.
You shall never want a friend, Harry, while Francis James Viscount
Castlewood has a shilling. It's now 1703--I shall come of age in 1709.
I shall go back to Castlewood; I shall live at Castlewood; I shall build
up the house. My property will be pretty well restored by then. The late
viscount mismanaged my property, and left it in a very bad state.
My mother is living close, as you see, and keeps me in a way hardly
befitting a peer of these realms; for I have but a pair of horses, a
governor, and a man that is valet and groom. But when I am of age, these
things will be set right, Harry. Our house will be as it should be. You
will always come to Castlewood, won't you? You shall always have your
two rooms in the court kept for you; and if anybody slights you, d---
them! let them have a care of ME. I shall marry early--Trix will be a
duchess by that time, most likely; for a cannon ball may knock over his
grace any day, you know."

"How?" says Harry.

"Hush, my dear!" says my Lord Viscount. "You are of the family--you are
faithful to us, by George, and I tell you everything. Blandford will
marry her--or"--and here he put his little hand on his sword--"you
understand the rest. Blandford knows which of us two is the best weapon.
At small-sword, or back-sword, or sword and dagger if he likes; I can
beat him. I have tried him, Harry; and begad he knows I am a man not to
be trifled with."

"But you do not mean," says Harry, concealing his laughter, but not his
wonder, "that you can force my Lord Blandford, the son of the first man
of this kingdom, to marry your sister at sword's point?"

"I mean to say that we are cousins by the mother's side, though that's
nothing to boast of. I mean to say that an Esmond is as good as a
Churchill; and when the King comes back, the Marquis of Esmond's sister
may be a match for any nobleman's daughter in the kingdom. There are
but two marquises in all England, William Herbert Marquis of Powis, and
Francis James Marquis of Esmond; and hark you, Harry,--now swear you
will never mention this. Give me your honor as a gentleman, for you ARE
a gentleman, though you are a--"

"Well, well?" says Harry, a little impatient.

"Well, then, when after my late viscount's misfortune, my mother went
up with us to London, to ask for justice against you all (as for Mohun,
I'll have his blood, as sure as my name is Francis Viscount Esmond)--we
went to stay with our cousin my Lady Marlborough, with whom we had
quarrelled for ever so long. But when misfortune came, she stood by her
blood:--so did the Dowager Viscountess stand by her blood,--so did
you. Well, sir, whilst my mother was petitioning the late Prince of
Orange--for I will never call him king--and while you were in prison, we
lived at my Lord Marlborough's house, who was only a little there, being
away with the army in Holland. And then . . . I say, Harry, you won't
tell, now?"

Harry again made a vow of secrecy.

"Well, there used to be all sorts of fun, you know: my Lady Marlborough
was very fond of us, and she said I was to be her page; and she got Trix
to be a maid of honor, and while she was up in her room crying, we used
to be always having fun, you know; and the Duchess used to kiss me, and
so did her daughters, and Blandford fell tremendous in love with Trix,
and she liked him; and one day he--he kissed her behind a door--he did
though,--and the Duchess caught him, and she banged such a box of the
ear both at Trix and Blandford--you should have seen it! And then she
said that we must leave directly, and abused my mamma who was cognizant
of the business; but she wasn't--never thinking about anything but
father. And so we came down to Walcote. Blandford being locked up, and
not allowed to see Trix. But I got at him. I climbed along the gutter,
and in through the window, where he was crying.

"'Marquis,' says I, when he had opened it and helped me in, 'you know I
wear a sword,' for I had brought it.

"'Oh, viscount,' says he--'oh, my dearest Frank!' and he threw himself
into my arms and burst out a-crying. 'I do love Mistress Beatrix so,
that I shall die if I don't have her.'

"'My dear Blandford,' says I, 'you are young to think of marrying;' for
he was but fifteen, and a young fellow of that age can scarce do so, you
know.

"'But I'll wait twenty years, if she'll have me,' says he. 'I'll
never marry--no, never, never, never, marry anybody but her. No, not a
princess, though they would have me do it ever so. If Beatrix will wait
for me, her Blandford swears he will be faithful.' And he wrote a paper
(it wasn't spelt right, for he wrote 'I'm ready to SINE WITH MY BLODE,'
which, you know, Harry, isn't the way of spelling it), and vowing that
he would marry none other but the Honorable Mistress Gertrude Beatrix
Esmond, only sister of his dearest friend Francis James, fourth Viscount
Esmond. And so I gave him a locket of her hair."

"A locket of her hair?" cries Esmond.

"Yes. Trix gave me one after the fight with the Duchess that very day.
I am sure I didn't want it; and so I gave it him, and we kissed at
parting, and said--'Good-by, brother.' And I got back through the
gutter; and we set off home that very evening. And he went to King's
College, in Cambridge, and I'M going to Cambridge soon; and if he
doesn't stand to his promise (for he's only wrote once),--he knows I
wear a sword, Harry. Come along, and let's go see the cocking-match at
Winchester.

". . . . But I say," he added, laughing, after a pause, "I don't think
Trix will break her heart about him. La bless you! whenever she sees
a man, she makes eyes at him; and young Sir Wilmot Crawley of Queen's
Crawley, and Anthony Henley of Airesford, were at swords drawn about
her, at the Winchester Assembly, a month ago."

That night Mr. Harry's sleep was by no means so pleasant or sweet as it
had been on the first two evenings after his arrival at Walcote. "So the
bright eyes have been already shining on another," thought he, "and the
pretty lips, or the cheeks at any rate, have begun the work which they
were made for. Here's a girl not sixteen, and one young gentleman is
already whimpering over a lock of her hair, and two country squires
are ready to cut each other's throats that they may have the honor of a
dance with her. What a fool am I to be dallying about this passion, and
singeing my wings in this foolish flame. Wings!--why not say crutches?
'There is but eight years' difference between us, to be sure; but in
life I am thirty years older. How could I ever hope to please such a
sweet creature as that, with my rough ways and glum face? Say that I
have merit ever so much, and won myself a name, could she ever listen
to me? She must be my Lady Marchioness, and I remain a nameless bastard.
Oh! my master, my master!" (here he fell to thinking with a passionate
grief of the vow which he had made to his poor dying lord.) "Oh! my
mistress, dearest and kindest, will you be contented with the sacrifice
which the poor orphan makes for you, whom you love, and who so loves
you?"

And then came a fiercer pang of temptation. "A word from me," Harry
thought, "a syllable of explanation, and all this might be changed; but
no, I swore it over the dying bed of my benefactor. For the sake of him
and his; for the sacred love and kindness of old days; I gave my promise
to him, and may kind heaven enable me to keep my vow!"

The next day, although Esmond gave no sign of what was going on in his
mind, but strove to be more than ordinarily gay and cheerful when he met
his friends at the morning meal, his dear mistress, whose clear eyes it
seemed no emotion of his could escape, perceived that something troubled
him, for she looked anxiously towards him more than once during the
breakfast, and when he went up to his chamber afterwards she presently
followed him, and knocked at his door.

As she entered, no doubt the whole story was clear to her at once,
for she found our young gentleman packing his valise, pursuant to the
resolution which he had come to over-night of making a brisk retreat out
of this temptation.

She closed the door very carefully behind her, and then leant against
it, very pale, her hands folded before her, looking at the young man,
who was kneeling over his work of packing. "Are you going so soon?" she
said.

He rose up from his knees, blushing, perhaps, to be so discovered, in
the very act, as it were, and took one of her fair little hands--it was
that which had her marriage ring on--and kissed it.

"It is best that it should be so, dearest lady," he said.

"I knew you were going, at breakfast. I--I thought you might stay. What
has happened? Why can't you remain longer with us? What has Frank told
you--you were talking together late last night?"

"I had but three days' leave from Chelsey," Esmond said, as gayly as he
could. "My aunt--she lets me call her aunt--is my mistress now! I owe
her my lieutenancy and my laced coat. She has taken me into high favor;
and my new General is to dine at Chelsey to-morrow--General Lumley,
madam--who has appointed me his aide-de-camp, and on whom I must have
the honor of waiting. See, here is a letter from the Dowager; the
post brought it last night; and I would not speak of it, for fear of
disturbing our last merry meeting."

My lady glanced at the letter, and put it down with a smile that
was somewhat contemptuous. "I have no need to read the letter," says
she--(indeed, 'twas as well she did not; for the Chelsey missive, in the
poor Dowager's usual French jargon, permitted him a longer holiday
than he said. "Je vous donne," quoth her ladyship, "oui jour, pour vous
fatigay parfaictement de vos parens fatigans")--"I have no need to read
the letter," says she. "What was it Frank told you last night?"

"He told me little I did not know," Mr. Esmond answered. "But I have
thought of that little, and here's the result: I have no right to the
name I bear, dear lady; and it is only by your sufferance that I am
allowed to keep it. If I thought for an hour of what has perhaps crossed
your mind too--"

"Yes, I did, Harry," said she; "I thought of it; and think of it. I
would sooner call you my son than the greatest prince in Europe--yes,
than the greatest prince. For who is there so good and so brave, and who
would love her as you would? But there are reasons a mother can't tell."

"I know them," said Mr. Esmond, interrupting her with a smile. "I know
there's Sir Wilmot Crawley of Queen's Crawley, and Mr. Anthony Henley
of the Grange, and my Lord Marquis of Blandford, that seems to be the
favored suitor. You shall ask me to wear my Lady Marchioness's favors
and to dance at her ladyship's wedding."

"Oh! Harry, Harry, it is none of these follies that frighten me," cried
out Lady Castlewood. "Lord Churchill is but a child, his outbreak about
Beatrix was a mere boyish folly. His parents would rather see him buried
than married to one below him in rank. And do you think that I would
stoop to sue for a husband for Francis Esmond's daughter; or submit to
have my girl smuggled into that proud family to cause a quarrel between
son and parents, and to be treated only as an inferior? I would disdain
such a meanness. Beatrix would scorn it. Ah! Henry, 'tis not with you
the fault lies, 'tis with her. I know you both, and love you: need I
be ashamed of that love now? No, never, never, and 'tis not you, dear
Harry, that is unworthy. 'Tis for my poor Beatrix I tremble--whose
headstrong will frightens me; whose jealous temper (they say I was
jealous too, but, pray God, I am cured of that sin) and whose vanity no
words or prayers of mine can cure--only suffering, only experience, and
remorse afterwards. Oh! Henry, she will make no man happy who loves her.
Go away, my son: leave her: love us always, and think kindly of us: and
for me, my dear, you know that these walls contain all that I love in
the world."

In after life, did Esmond find the words true which his fond mistress
spoke from her sad heart? Warning he had: but I doubt others had warning
before his time, and since: and he benefited by it as most men do.

My young Lord Viscount was exceeding sorry when he heard that Harry
could not come to the cock-match with him, and must go to London, but no
doubt my lord consoled himself when the Hampshire cocks won the match;
and he saw every one of the battles, and crowed properly over the
conquered Sussex gentlemen.

As Esmond rode towards town his servant, coming up to him, informed him
with a grin, that Mistress Beatrix had brought out a new gown and blue
stockings for that day's dinner, in which she intended to appear, and
had flown into a rage and given her maid a slap on the face soon after
she heard he was going away. Mistress Beatrix's woman, the fellow said,
came down to the servants' hall crying, and with the mark of a blow
still on her cheek: but Esmond peremptorily ordered him to fall back
and be silent, and rode on with thoughts enough of his own to occupy
him--some sad ones, some inexpressibly dear and pleasant.

His mistress, from whom he had been a year separated, was his dearest
mistress again. The family from which he had been parted, and which he
loved with the fondest devotion, was his family once more. If Beatrix's
beauty shone upon him, it was with a friendly lustre, and he could
regard it with much such a delight as he brought away after seeing the
beautiful pictures of the smiling Madonnas in the convent at Cadiz, when
he was despatched thither with a flag; and as for his mistress, 'twas
difficult to say with what a feeling he regarded her. 'Twas happiness to
have seen her; 'twas no great pang to part; a filial tenderness, a love
that was at once respect and protection, filled his mind as he thought
of her; and near her or far from her, and from that day until now, and
from now till death is past and beyond it, he prays that sacred flame
may ever burn.




CHAPTER IX.

I MAKE THE CAMPAIGN OF 1704.


Mr. Esmond rode up to London then, where, if the Dowager had been angry
at the abrupt leave of absence he took, she was mightily pleased at his
speedy return.

He went immediately and paid his court to his new general, General
Lumley, who received him graciously, having known his father, and also,
he was pleased to say, having had the very best accounts of Mr. Esmond
from the officer whose aide-de-camp he had been at Vigo. During this
winter Mr. Esmond was gazetted to a lieutenancy in Brigadier Webb's
regiment of Fusileers, then with their colonel in Flanders; but being
now attached to the suite of Mr. Lumley, Esmond did not join his own
regiment until more than a year afterwards, and after his return from
the campaign of Blenheim, which was fought the next year. The campaign
began very early, our troops marching out of their quarters before the
winter was almost over, and investing the city of Bonn, on the Rhine,
under the Duke's command. His Grace joined the army in deep grief of
mind, with crape on his sleeve, and his household in mourning; and the
very same packet which brought the Commander-in-Chief over, brought
letters to the forces which preceded him, and one from his dear mistress
to Esmond, which interested him not a little.

The young Marquis of Blandford, his Grace's son, who had been entered in
King's College in Cambridge, (whither my Lord Viscount had also gone,
to Trinity, with Mr. Tusher as his governor,) had been seized with
small-pox, and was dead at sixteen years of age, and so poor Frank's
schemes for his sister's advancement were over, and that innocent
childish passion nipped in the birth.

Esmond's mistress would have had him return, at least her letters hinted
as much; but in the presence of the enemy this was impossible, and
our young man took his humble share in the siege, which need not be
described here, and had the good luck to escape without a wound of any
sort, and to drink his general's health after the surrender. He was
in constant military duty this year, and did not think of asking for a
leave of absence, as one or two of his less fortunate friends did, who
were cast away in that tremendous storm which happened towards the
close of November, that "which of late o'er pale Britannia past" (as
Mr. Addison sang of it), and in which scores of our greatest ships and
15,000 of our seamen went down.

They said that our Duke was quite heart-broken by the calamity which had
befallen his family; but his enemies found that he could subdue them,
as well as master his grief. Successful as had been this great General's
operations in the past year, they were far enhanced by the splendor of
his victory in the ensuing campaign. His Grace the Captain-General went
to England after Bonn, and our army fell back into Holland, where, in
April 1704, his Grace again found the troops, embarking from Harwich
and landing at Maesland Sluys: thence his Grace came immediately to the
Hague, where he received the foreign ministers, general officers, and
other people of quality. The greatest honors were paid to his Grace
everywhere--at the Hague, Utrecht, Ruremonde, and Maestricht; the civil
authorities coming to meet his coaches: salvos of cannon saluting him,
canopies of state being erected for him where he stopped, and feasts
prepared for the numerous gentlemen following in his suite. His Grace
reviewed the troops of the States-General between Liege and Maestricht,
and afterwards the English forces, under the command of General
Churchill, near Bois-le-Duc. Every preparation was made for a long
march; and the army heard, with no small elation, that it was the
Commander-in-Chief's intention to carry the war out of the Low
Countries, and to march on the Mozelle. Before leaving our camp at
Maestricht, we heard that the French, under the Marshal Villeroy, were
also bound towards the Mozelle.

Towards the end of May, the army reached Coblentz; and next day, his
Grace, and the generals accompanying him, went to visit the Elector of
Treves at his Castle of Ehrenbreitstein, the horse and dragoons passing
the Rhine whilst the Duke was entertained at a grand feast by the
Elector. All as yet was novelty, festivity, and splendor--a brilliant
march of a great and glorious army through a friendly country, and
sure through some of the most beautiful scenes of nature which I ever
witnessed.

The foot and artillery, following after the horse as quick as possible,
crossed the Rhine under Ehrenbreitstein, and so to Castel, over against
Mayntz, in which city his Grace, his generals, and his retinue were
received at the landing-place by the Elector's coaches, carried to
his Highness's palace amidst the thunder of cannon, and then once more
magnificently entertained. Gidlingen, in Bavaria, was appointed as the
general rendezvous of the army, and thither, by different routes, the
whole forces of English, Dutch, Danes, and German auxiliaries took their
way. The foot and artillery under General Churchill passed the Neckar,
at Heidelberg; and Esmond had an opportunity of seeing that city and
palace, once so famous and beautiful (though shattered and battered by
the French, under Turenne, in the late war), where his grandsire had
served the beautiful and unfortunate Electress-Palatine, the first King
Charles's sister.

At Mindelsheim, the famous Prince of Savoy came to visit our commander,
all of us crowding eagerly to get a sight of that brilliant and intrepid
warrior; and our troops were drawn up in battalia before the Prince,
who was pleased to express his admiration of this noble English army. At
length we came in sight of the enemy between Dillingen and Lawingen, the
Brentz lying between the two armies. The Elector, judging that Donauwort
would be the point of his Grace's attack, sent a strong detachment of
his best troops to Count Darcos, who was posted at Schellenberg, near
that place, where great intrenchments were thrown up, and thousands of
pioneers employed to strengthen the position.

On the 2nd of July his Grace stormed the post, with what success on our
part need scarce be told. His Grace advanced with six thousand foot,
English and Dutch, thirty squadrons, and three regiments of Imperial
Cuirassiers, the Duke crossing the river at the head of the cavalry.
Although our troops made the attack with unparalleled courage and
fury--rushing up to the very guns of the enemy, and being slaughtered
before their works--we were driven back many times, and should not have
carried them, but that the Imperialists came up under the Prince of
Baden, when the enemy could make no head against us: we pursued them
into the trenches, making a terrible slaughter there, and into the very
Danube, where a great part of his troops, following the example of their
generals, Count Darcos and the Elector himself, tried to save themselves
by swimming. Our army entered Donauwort, which the Bavarians evacuated;
and where 'twas said the Elector purposed to have given us a warm
reception, by burning us in our beds; the cellars of the houses, when we
took possession of them, being found stuffed with straw. But though the
links were there, the link-boys had run away. The townsmen saved their
houses, and our General took possession of the enemy's ammunition in the
arsenals, his stores, and magazines. Five days afterwards a great "Te
Deum" was sung in Prince Lewis's army, and a solemn day of thanksgiving
held in our own; the Prince of Savoy's compliments coming to his Grace
the Captain-General during the day's religious ceremony, and concluding,
as it were, with an Amen.

And now, having seen a great military march through a friendly country;
the pomps and festivities of more than one German court; the severe
struggle of a hotly contested battle, and the triumph of victory, Mr.
Esmond beheld another part of military duty: our troops entering the
enemy's territory, and putting all around them to fire and sword;
burning farms, wasted fields, shrieking women, slaughtered sons and
fathers, and drunken soldiery, cursing and carousing in the midst of
tears, terror, and murder. Why does the stately Muse of History, that
delights in describing the valor of heroes and the grandeur of conquest,
leave out these scenes, so brutal, mean, and degrading, that yet form by
far the greater part of the drama of war? You, gentlemen of England, who
live at home at ease, and compliment yourselves in the songs of triumph
with which our chieftains are bepraised--you pretty maidens, that come
tumbling down the stairs when the fife and drum call you, and huzzah for
the British Grenadiers--do you take account that these items go to make
up the amount of the triumph you admire, and form part of the duties of
the heroes you fondle? Our chief, whom England and all Europe, saving
only the Frenchmen, worshipped almost, had this of the godlike in him,
that he was impassible before victory, before danger, before defeat.
Before the greatest obstacle or the most trivial ceremony; before a
hundred thousand men drawn in battalia, or a peasant slaughtered at the
door of his burning hovel; before a carouse of drunken German lords, or
a monarch's court or a cottage table, where his plans were laid, or an
enemy's battery, vomiting flame and death, and strewing corpses round
about him;--he was always cold, calm, resolute, like fate. He performed
a treason or a court-bow, he told a falsehood as black as Styx, as
easily as he paid a compliment or spoke about the weather. He took a
mistress, and left her; he betrayed his benefactor, and supported him,
or would have murdered him, with the same calmness always, and having
no more remorse than Clotho when she weaves the thread, or Lachesis when
she cuts it. In the hour of battle I have heard the Prince of Savoy's
officers say, the Prince became possessed with a sort of warlike fury;
his eyes lighted up; he rushed hither and thither, raging; he shrieked
curses and encouragement, yelling and harking his bloody war-dogs on,
and himself always at the first of the hunt. Our duke was as calm at the
mouth of the cannon as at the door of a drawing-room. Perhaps he could
not have been the great man he was, had he had a heart either for
love or hatred, or pity or fear, or regret or remorse. He achieved
the highest deed of daring, or deepest calculation of thought, as he
performed the very meanest action of which a man is capable; told a lie,
or cheated a fond woman, or robbed a poor beggar of a halfpenny, with a
like awful serenity and equal capacity of the highest and lowest acts of
our nature.

His qualities were pretty well known in the army, where there were
parties of all politics, and of plenty of shrewdness and wit; but there
existed such a perfect confidence in him, as the first captain of the
world, and such a faith and admiration in his prodigious genius and
