cannot be cold, for the stove is hot; and you can put your head on your
bundle, and you will be as comfortable as if you were in your bed.

"And it is time for you three to go to bed, too. Off with you: make
haste!" So saying, he took the oil-lamp from the table, and went towards
the kitchen. The three boys clattered along after him.

When he reached the door, he turned again and said, "There, sleep
soundly. Must not think any more to-night, and it will be better for you
by and by," and he went out. Presently his wife came into the room with
an oil-lamp in her hand, and looked at the place where Wiseli was to
sleep. "Can you lie there?" she asked. "You will find it warm enough by
the stove. There are plenty of people who have neither bed nor a warm
place to be in. You won't suffer in that way, and ought to be thankful
that you are under a good roof. Good-night."

"Good-night," replied Wiseli, softly; but the woman could not have
heard her, for she was already away when she spoke, and had closed the
door behind her immediately. Now Wiseli sat alone in the dark room.
Every thing about her was suddenly silent,--not a sound to be heard. A
straggling moonbeam shone through the little window,--enough to show
the child where the bench by the stove was, upon which she must find
her bed. She crossed the room, and seated herself there. For the first
time that day since she had left her dear mother, she found herself
alone, and able to think over what had befallen her. She had been
constantly under excitement until this moment; for every thing that
had happened frightened her. All that she heard or saw since she left
her home had been so very unpleasant that she could not stop to think
at all, but went from one alarm to another. Now there she sat alone,
without her mother, and began to realize that it was all over,--that
they would never see nor hear each other again in this world. And such
a sense of loneliness, of utter desolation, took possession of Wiseli,
that she believed herself uncared for and forgotten by everybody, and
feared that she should be left there alone to die in the dark. The
poor child laid her head down upon her bundle, and began to cry,
bitterly and despairingly, "Mother, can you not hear me? Mother, do
not you hear me call?"

Now Wiseli's mother had often told her little girl, that when things
went very badly with us here below, then was the moment to lift up our
voices and cry to God for help; for he would hear us in our trouble when
all other's ears were deaf, and help us when no other help was possible.
At this moment the child remembered these words, and she sobbed aloud,
"Oh, you dear God in heaven! help me also, I am so unhappy, and my
mother cannot hear me when I call!"

And when she had prayed thus several times over, she felt calmer. It
comforted her poor little heart; for now she felt that God was really
there in heaven, and could help her, and that she was no longer alone.
And presently she recalled her mother's words,--almost the very last
that she spoke: "My child, when you cannot see your way clearly before
you, and every thing seems strange and difficult"--And now it was so;
and how little she thought that it ever would be so, when her mother was
talking to her. Her mother told her to remember the words of the hymn,--

  "Your road He'll also find,
  Nor let your footsteps stray."

Now Wiseli first rightly understood these words, and felt their full
meaning. Before she had repeated them mechanically, for not until now
did she need them. But it was just her present case. Was not she full of
perplexity? and what could she possibly have in her cousin Gotti's house
but fear and trouble? And so she repeated, again and again,--

  "Your road He'll also find,
  Nor let your footsteps stray."

The child had found her way to her heavenly Father, and knew that he was
sure to help her; and she felt comforted. Folding her little hands, she
began the hymn at the beginning, for it seemed like talking to a kind
friend; and she said each word from her very heart:--

  "To God you must confide
  Your sorrow and your pain;
  He will true care provide,
  And show you heaven again.

  "For clouds and air and wind
  He points the path and way;
  Your road He'll also find,
  Nor let your footsteps stray."

A quiet trust now took possession of the child's heart. She fell asleep
soon after, her head supported on her little bundle, still repeating the
last lines of the hymn. And a pleasant dream followed. She saw before
her a dry bright pathway in the full sunlight, and the road led between
beautiful red roses and lovely pinks that were so attractive that she
longed to run to gather them. And by her side stood her dear mother, and
held her hand tenderly in her own, as she always did; and her mother
pointed along the pathway in her dream, and said, "See, my Wiseli; did
not I tell you so? That is your way."

  "'Your road He'll also find,
  Nor let your footsteps stray.'"

And the child was happy in her dream, and slept as soundly on her little
bundle as if she were on a soft bed.




CHAPTER V.

HOW TIME WENT ON, AND SUMMER CAME.


When old Trine carried the news back to the heights, and told them
there that Wiseli's mother was dead, and the child taken at once to her
cousin Gotti's, the whole family became greatly agitated. Mrs. Ritter
could not cease bewailing her neglect in not visiting the sick woman
before, for she had been postponing it from day to day; but, of course,
had not in the least realized how near the end might be. She was sadly
cast down, and sorrowful. And Otto: he went raging up and down the room
with great strides, and kept calling out angrily, "It is an injustice!
It is a great injustice! But if he dares to lay a hand on her to harm
her, he may look to his own bones, how many of them will be left whole
in his skin!"

"Who do you mean, Otto? Who are you talking about in that way?" said his
mother, looking curiously at her excited boy.

"About that Cheppi," he replied. "I do not know what dreadful things he
will do to Wiseli when he has her there in his own house. It is not
right, but just let him try"--But now Otto was interrupted by a repeated
and heavy stamping that prevented his being heard. "Why do you make such
a deafening noise, you pussy cat, there behind the stove?" he cried,
turning his indignation towards another quarter. Pussy came out from
behind the stove, but stamped more violently than before; for she was
trying to force her feet into her wet boots, which it had taken the old
Trine ever so long to pull off a while before. It was dreadfully hard
work; and Pussy became as red as fire, while she said,--

"Don't you see that I have to do so? Nobody in the world could get these
boots on without stamping."

"And what in the world do you want to put those wet boots on again for?
I have just pulled them off, so that you should not have them on. I
should just like to know what this means?" said Trine, who stood looking
on all this time.

"I am going to the beech grove this very minute to fetch Wiseli to
our house. She can have my bed," said Pussy, decidedly. But quite as
decidedly old Trine stalked over to Pussy, at these words, lifted her
up, placed her firmly on a chair, while she pulled off the boot that
was half on; but said, in a pacifying tone, to the kicking and
excited child,--

"That is all right! that is all right! but I will take care of you
first. You must not get two pair of shoes and two pair of stockings wet
through in one day. You can give up your bed. You can go up into the
lumber-room, if you want to: there is room enough there."

But Pussy had a very different plan in her little head. She thought
that she could free herself, in this wise, of a great and daily
recurring trouble, that often gave her both inward and outward
annoyance; namely, the being ordered off to bed every evening, and
obliged to go, into the bargain, just as she was in the mood to enjoy
herself especially. She thought that, if she gave up her bed to Wiseli,
there would be none other at hand for her, and so she could stay up as
long as she wanted to.

She was so delighted at this prospect, that she did not, at first,
notice how the sly Trine had wisked off her wet boots, and that now
there was no chance to fetch Wiseli.

When she fairly understood how she had been tricked, she set up such an
outcry that Otto put his fingers in his ears, and her mother came in, a
good deal alarmed at the uproar. She promised Pussy to talk over the
matter with her father as soon as he came home; for he had gone away
that very morning, with their Uncle Max, to pay a long-promised visit to
an old friend. After a while peace and quiet were restored in the
household. The gentlemen did not return for two weeks, however; but Mrs.
Ritter kept her promise. The first thing that she mentioned to her
husband, on the very evening of his return, was the fact of Wiseli being
an orphan, and her new shelter; and the colonel promised to go to the
pastor the very next day, to see what better arrangement could be made
for the child; and, having visited the pastor, the colonel brought back
the sad news, that, on the Sunday just past, the parish had taken the
matter into consideration, and that it was now settled. Wiseli must be
housed somewhere; and, as her mother had not left any property whatever,
she must also be maintained at the expense of the parish until she could
support herself. Moreover, her cousin Gotti had offered, in the first
instance, to take the child for a very slight compensation. He wished to
do an act of charity as far as he could afford it. He was known to be a
well-conducted man; and, as he made so slight a demand, it was agreed
and settled that the child should henceforth find her home with him.

"It seems to me a very good arrangement," said the colonel to his wife.
"The child will be well cared for there; besides, what else could be
done? She is much too small to be placed anywhere in service, and
certainly you cannot take every orphan child in the neighborhood into
your own house. You might as well turn it into an asylum at once."

Mrs. Ritter was very much disturbed by the news that every thing had
been settled so soon. She had hoped to be able to have found a different
home for Wiseli, who was, she knew, much too sensitive and delicate a
child to be happy in a home where rudeness and roughness were the rule;
but she had not a definite plan in her mind, and now there was nothing
to be done but to try to look after the child's comfort a little, and to
protect her, if possible.

Otto and Pussy did not take the affair so quietly, however. They were in
great excitement when they heard it all on the following morning.

Otto declared Wiseli's lot to be the lot of Daniel in the lion's den,
and brought his fist down on the table with the evident wish that he
were pommelling Cheppi's head. Pussy screamed, and cried a little;
partly out of pity for Wiseli, and partly from disappointment that she
could not now carry out her little plan of being able to sit up later in
the evenings.

But this excitement was at last quieted down, like every other, by time;
and the days rolled on in their wonted manner.

In the meantime Wiseli has become somewhat accustomed to the life in her
cousin Gotti's house. For one thing, her bed had come; and she no longer
slept on the bench by the stove, but in a little place partitioned off
from the passage between her cousin's room and that of the boys. There
was just room enough in this little place for her bed, and a little
chest, in which she placed her clothes, and upon which she had to climb
when she wished to get into her bed; for there was no space between.

She was obliged to go to the well when she washed; and, if it was very
cold, then her cousin's wife said she could give up washing for that
day, and do it on another when it was warmer. Now Wiseli was not used to
this style of thing at all. Her mother had taught her that cleanliness
was absolutely necessary; and Wiseli would have frozen rather than to
look untidy, and, therefore, displease her mother. To be sure, every
thing was different for her at home; for she washed and dressed herself
in her mother's room always; and many a loving word they exchanged until
the coffee was on the table, and they sat down together, and ate their
breakfast happily, before Wiseli started off for school.

But what a difference for her now! All, all was changed,--her whole life
from morning till evening; and often, at the thought of her mother, the
tears started into the poor child's eyes, and her heart ached so sadly,
that she felt as if she could go no farther, but must drop down, and
die. But she held herself bravely, for it distressed her cousin Gotti to
see her cry, and his wife scolded more than ever; for she, too, disliked
to see her dull.

The happiest part of the twenty-four hours for Wiseli was when she
climbed into her little bed at night, and had a moment's time to think
about her dear mother in peace.

At this time she always obtained comfort. She thought about her
beautiful dream, and felt perfect confidence that the good God would
find a way for her out of her troubles, as her mother had told her; and
she hoped that her mother was also in heaven, and would pray to God not
to forget her poor little child left alone in the wide world. Then
Wiseli always repeated her hymn, and slept quietly.

So the winter slipped away, and the spring with its sunshine followed.
The trees were green again, and the meadows were gay with primroses and
white anemones, and in the wood the cuckoo sang lustily; and soft, warm
breezes were all abroad, making every heart beat more cheerily; and one
rejoiced that life was still possible.

Wiseli also rejoiced over the flowers and the sunshine, especially when
she went to and from school. Beyond this she had little time for
enjoyment, for she had so much work to do. Every moment out of school
she had to employ in some useful occupation; and, indeed, often was
obliged to stay away from school for a half-day at a time, there was so
much to be done that could not be neglected, as her cousin Gotti, and
particularly his wife, were forever telling her. The cultivation of the
fields had begun, and also the garden work; and when her cousin's wife
was in the garden, then Wiseli had to wash the cooking utensils, and had
the hogs' trough to cleanse and carry back to the barn; and then the
boys' stockings and shirts must be mended, and her cousin's wife always
said, "Oh, the child can do that, she has nothing else to do;" and yet
she never was idle a single moment, and felt almost giddy at times,
because she was called from one piece of work to another before she had
time to breathe. Moreover, she found that if, for example, she ran over
to the field with the seed-potatoes that her cousin Gotti was calling
for, then his wife would scold because she had not made the kitchen-fire
for the supper, as she was bidden to do; but if she stopped to make the
fire, then she was found fault with by Cheppi because she had not mended
the hole in his jacket-sleeve he had told her to long ago; and everybody
called out, "Why don't you do this, or why don't you do that? you have
nothing else to do." She was glad to go to school whenever she was
allowed to go, for she was quiet for a while then; and, moreover, in
that place the poor child heard a pleasant word now and again. For each
time that recess came, or they left school to go home, Otto would come
to her, and talk with her pleasantly for a while, or give her an
invitation from his mother to visit them on Sunday evening and play
games with the children. Poor Wiseli could never avail herself of these
charming invitations, because on Sunday she had always to make the
coffee for the family; and her cousin's wife said that she could not
think of letting the child go away to visit on the only day when she was
really of some use to her. But the child was glad that Otto always asked
her, though she could not go, and that he always spoke kindly to her;
for those were the only friendly acts or words that she knew of
nowadays. There was still another reason that made it pleasant for
Wiseli to go to school, and that was the passing by Andrew the
carpenter's pretty garden on her way there. She always paused and looked
over the low hedge, hoping that she might catch sight of the carpenter;
for she had her mother's message to deliver, and never ceased hoping to
find the opportunity. She was far too shy to go into the house for that
purpose. She felt that she did not know Andrew well enough to venture to
do that. She was particularly timid with him, because he was so very
quiet, and always looked at her kindly when they met, but never spoke;
or, at least, never said more than a kindly word in passing. And she had
never succeeded in catching even a glimpse of him, no matter how long
she stood by the hedge and looked over.

May passed, and June. The long days of summer came, with more and more
work to be done in the fields, and work that was ever hotter and hotter.
Wiseli felt this keenly when her cousin Gotti called her out to help
with the haymaking, and the heavy rake was so hard for her to lift; or,
worse still, to handle the clumsy wooden fork when the hay needed
spreading in the sun to dry.

She often was obliged to work in the fields, and in the evening was so
tired out that she could scarcely move her poor little arms. She never
fretted, however, for she thought it was necessary and right; but often,
when she was still for a moment in the evening, it hurt her sadly to
hear Cheppi call out, "You ought to do your examples in arithmetic now,
as I do. You are never doing any thing out of school, and in the classes
you are always behind the others."

She would have liked to study and get on at her lessons, if she could
only have gone regularly to school, and been able to keep up with the
class. She was well aware that she was far behind her schoolmates; but
what could she do, when she only got a little here and there, and all
was confused for her, and she never knew what lessons were given out for
the out-of-school studies. When she came quite unprepared to school, and
could not answer the questions put to the class, she was overwhelmed
with mortification, especially when the teacher would say, before all
the other children, "I did not expect to see you so behindhand,
Wiseli,--you of all others, who used to be so clever at your books."
Then she used to feel fit to sink through the floor for shame, and would
cry all the way as she walked home. But she did not dare to answer
Cheppi back when he taunted her, because then he would begin to cry and
scold, and make a noise, until his mother came in, when she, too, would
reproach her with being behind her classes, because Cheppi said she was.
So Wiseli often kept back her tears, and only gave way when she was
alone; and sometimes it did seem to her as if she were quite forgotten
by her heavenly Father and her mother, and as if nobody in the whole
world cared for her; and she was too sad at heart even to say her
comforting hymn for a long time; but she could not rest nor sleep until
she had done so, even though there was little satisfaction for her in
the words.

One beautiful evening in July Wiseli slept, after a sad time of weeping,
and could not obtain an answer, the next morning, to her question of
whether she might go to school with the boys.

Off scampered the boys. She looked sadly after them through the open
window as they sprang away gayly through the flower-besprinkled grass,
and chased a cloud of white butterflies along in front of them as they
ran through the brilliant sunshine.

Her cousin's wife had prepared the big wash,--this was the work laid out
for the whole week. Must Wiseli work there too?

Yes: already she heard a calling from the kitchen, and her cousin Gotti
called her by name,--he stood at the well, and saw her looking out of
the window.

"Make haste, make haste, Wiseli; it is time to be off: the boys are
half-way to school. All the hay is in: make haste and go too." She did
not wait till he told this twice. Like a flash she snatched her satchel
and was off.

"Tell the teacher that I have not sent him his money for a long time,
but he must not be vexed at that, we have had so much work with the hay
this summer."

