Lawrence telegraphs that he has suppressed it with the European troops
there, and has disarmed the mutineers. I believe that our regiment
will be faithful, but none can be trusted now. I should recommend your
preparing some fortified house to which all Europeans in station can
retreat in case of trouble. Now that they have taken to massacre as well
as mutiny, God knows how it will all end."

"Good Heavens! who could have dreamt of this?" the Major groaned.
"Massacred their officers, women, and children. All Europeans at Delhi
supposed to have been massacred, and there must be hundreds of them. Can
it be true?"

"The telegram as to Meerut is clearly an official one," Bathurst said.
"Delhi is as yet but a rumor, but it is too probable that if these
mutineers and jail birds, flushed with success, reached Delhi before the
whites were warned, they would have their own way in the place, as, with
the exception of a few artillerymen at the arsenal, there is not a white
soldier in the place."

"But there were white troops at Meerut," the Major said. "What could
they have been doing? However, that is not the question now. We must,
of course, return instantly. Ask the others to come in here, Bathurst.
Don't tell the girls what has taken place; it will be time enough for
that afterwards. All that is necessary to say is that you have brought
news of troubles at some stations unaffected before, and that I think it
best to return at once."

The men were standing in a group, wondering what the news could be which
was deemed of such importance that Bathurst should carry it out in the
middle of the night.

"The Major will be glad if you will all go in, gentlemen," Bathurst
said, as he joined them.

"Are we to go in, Mr. Bathurst?" Miss Hunter asked.

"No, I think not, Miss Hunter; the fact is there have been some troubles
at two or three other places, and the Major is going to hold a sort
of council of war as to whether the hunt had not better be given up. I
rather fancy that they will decide to go back at once. News flies very
fast in India. I think the Major would like that he and his officers
should be back before it is whispered among the Sepoys that the
discontent has not, as we hoped, everywhere ceased."

"It must be very serious," Isobel said, "or uncle would never decide to
go back, when all the preparations are made."

"It would never do, you see, Miss Hannay, for the Commandant and four of
the officers to be away, if the Sepoys should take it into their heads
to refuse to receive cartridges or anything of that sort."

"You can't give us any particulars, then, Mr. Bathurst?"

"The note was a very short one, and was partly made up of unconfirmed
rumors. As I only saw it in my capacity of a messenger, I don't think I
am at liberty to say more than that."

"What a trouble the Sepoys are," Mary Hunter said pettishly; "it is too
bad our losing a tiger hunt when we may never have another chance to see
one!"

"That is a very minor trouble, Mary."

"I don't think so," the girl said; "just at present it seems to me to be
very serious."

At this moment the Doctor put his head out of the tent.

"Will you come in, Bathurst?"

"We have settled, Bathurst," the Major said, when he entered, "that we
must, of course, go back at once. The Doctor, however, is of opinion
that if, after all the preparations were made, we were to put the tiger
hunt off altogether, it would set the natives talking, and the report
would go through the country like wildfire that some great disaster had
happened. We must go back at once, and Mr. Hunter, having a wife and
daughter there, is anxious to get back, too; but the Doctor urges that
he should go out and kill this tiger. As it is known that you have just
arrived, he says that if you are willing to go with him, it will be
thought that you had come here to join the hunt, and if that comes off,
and the tiger is killed, it does not matter whether two or sixty of us
went out."

"I shall be quite willing to do so," said Bathurst, "and I really think
that the Doctor's advice is good. If, now that you have all arrived upon
the ground, the preparations were canceled, there can be no doubt that
the natives would come to the conclusion that something very serious had
taken place, and it would be all over the place in no time."

"Thank you, Bathurst. Then we will consider that arranged. Now we will
get the horses in as soon as possible, and be off at once."

Ten minutes later the buggies were brought round, and the whole party,
with the exception of the Doctor and Bathurst, started for Deennugghur.



CHAPTER XII.


"Let us be off at once," Dr. Wade said to his companion; "we can talk as
we go along. I have got two rifles with me; I can lend you one."

"I shall take no rifle," Bathurst said decidedly, "or rather I will take
one of the shikaris' guns for the sake of appearance, and for use I will
borrow one of their spears."

"Very well; I will do the shooting, then," the Doctor agreed.

The two men then took their places on the elephants most used to the
work, and told the mahouts of the others to follow in case the elephants
should be required for driving the tiger out of the thick jungle, and
they then started side by side for the scene of action.

"This is awful news, Bathurst. I could not have believed it possible
that these fellows who have eaten our salt for years, fought our
battles, and have seemed the most docile and obedient of soldiers,
should have done this. That they should have been goaded into mutiny
by lies about their religion being in danger I could have imagined well
enough, but that they should go in for wholesale massacre, not only of
their officers, but of women and children, seems well nigh incredible.
You and I have always agreed that if they were once roused there was
no saying what they would do, but I don't think either of us dreamt of
anything as bad as this."

"I don't know," Bathurst said quietly; "one has watched this cloud
gathering, and felt that if it did break it would be something terrible.
No one can foresee now what it will be. The news that Delhi is in the
hands of the mutineers, and that these have massacred all Europeans, and
so placed themselves beyond all hope of pardon, will fly though India
like a flash of lightning, and there is no guessing how far the matter
will spread. There is no use disguising it from ourselves, Doctor,
before a week is over there may not be a white man left alive in
India, save the garrisons of strong places like Agra, and perhaps the
presidential towns, where there is always a strong European force."

"I can't deny that it is possible, Bathurst. If this revolt spreads
though the three Presidencies the work of conquering India will have to
be begun again, and worse than that, for we should have opposed to us a
vast army drilled and armed by ourselves, and led by the native officers
we have trained. It seems stupefying that an empire won piecemeal, and
after as hard fighting as the world has ever seen, should be lost in a
week."

The Doctor spoke as if the question was a purely impersonal one.

"Ugly, isn't it?" he went on; "and to think I have been doctoring up
these fellows for the last thirty years--saving their lives, sir, by
wholesale. If I had known what had been coming I would have dosed them
with arsenic with as little remorse as I should feel in shooting a
tiger's whelp. Well, there is one satisfaction, the Major has already
done something towards turning the courthouse into a fortress, and I
fancy a good many of the scoundrels will go down before they take it,
that is, if they don't fall on us unawares. I have been a noncombatant
all my life, but if I can shoot a tiger on the spring I fancy I can hit
a Sepoy. By Jove, Bathurst, that juggler's picture you told me of is
likely to come true after all!"

"I wish to Heaven it was!" Bathurst said gloomily; "I could look without
dread at whatever is coming as far as I am concerned, if I could believe
it possible that I should be fighting as I saw myself there."

"Pooh, nonsense, lad!" the Doctor said. "Knowing what I know of you, I
have no doubt that, though you may feel nervous at first, you will get
over it in time."

Bathurst shook his head. "I know myself too well, Doctor, to indulge in
any such hopes. Now you see we are going out tiger hunting. At present,
now, as far as I am concerned, I should feel much less nervous if I knew
I was going to enter the jungle on foot with only this spear, than I do
at the thought that you are going to fire that rifle a few paces from
me."

"You will scarcely notice it in the excitement," the Doctor said. "In
cold blood I admit you might feel it, but I don't think you will when
you see the tiger spring out from the jungle at us. But here we are.
That is the nullah in which they say the tiger retires at night. I
expect the beaters are lying all round in readiness, and as soon as we
have taken up our station at its mouth they will begin."

A shikari came up as they approached the spot.

"The tiger went out last night, sahib, and finished the cow; he came
back before daylight, and the beaters are all in readiness to begin."

The elephants were soon in position at the mouth of the ravine, which
was some thirty yards across. At about the same distance in front of
them the jungle of high, coarse grass and thick bush began.

"If you were going to shoot, Bathurst, we would take post one each side,
but as you are not going to I will place myself nearly in the center,
and if you are between me and the rocks the tiger is pretty certain to
go on the other side, as it will seem the most open to him. Now we are
ready," he said to the shikari.

The latter waved a white rag on the top of a long stick, and at the
signal a tremendous hubbub of gongs and tom toms, mingled with the
shouts of numbers of the men, arose. The Doctor looked across at
his companion. His face was white and set, his muscles twitched
convulsively; he was looking straight in front of him, his teeth set
hard.

"An interesting case," the Doctor muttered to himself, "if it had been
anyone else than Bathurst. I expect the tiger will be some little time
before it is down. Bathurst," he said, in a quiet voice. Three times
he repeated the observation, each time raising his voice higher, before
Bathurst heard him.

"The sooner it comes the better," Bathurst said, between his teeth. "I
would rather face a hundred tigers than this infernal din."

A quarter of an hour passed, and the Doctor, rifle in hand, was watching
the bushes in front when he saw a slight movement among the leaves on
his right, the side on which Bathurst was stationed.

"That's him, Bathurst; he has headed back; he caught sight of either
your elephant or mine; he will make a bolt in another minute now unless
he turns back on the beaters."

A minute later there was a gleam of tawny yellow among the long grass,
and quick as thought the Doctor fired. With a sharp snarl the tiger
leaped out, and with two short bounds sprang onto the head of the
elephant ridden by Bathurst. The mahout gave a cry of pain, for the
talons of one of the forepaws were fixed in his leg. Bathurst leaned
forward and thrust the spear he held deep into the animal's neck. At
the same moment the Doctor fired again, and the tiger, shot through the
head, fell dead, while, with a start, Bathurst lost his balance and fell
over the elephant's head onto the body of the tiger.

It was fortunate indeed for him that the ball had passed through the
tiger's skull from ear to ear, and that life was extinct before it
touched the ground. Bathurst sprang to his feet, shaken and bewildered,
but otherwise unhurt.

"He is as dead as a door nail!" the Doctor shouted, "and lucky for you
he was so; if he had had a kick left in him you would have been badly
torn."

"I should never have fallen off," Bathurst said angrily, "if you had not
fired. I could have finished him with the spear."

"You might or you might not; I could not wait to think about that; the
tiger had struck its claws into the mahout's leg, and would have had him
off the elephant in another moment. That is a first rate animal you were
riding on, or he would have turned and bolted; if he had done so you and
the mahout would have both been off to a certainty."

By this time the shouts of some natives, who had taken their posts in
trees near at hand, told the beaters that the shots they had heard had
been successful, and with shouts of satisfaction they came rushing
down. The Doctor at once dispatched one of them to bring up his trap and
Bathurst's horse, and then examined the tiger.

It was a very large one, and the skin was in good condition, which
showed that he had not taken to man eating long. The Doctor bound up the
wound on the mahout's leg, and then superintended the skinning of the
animal while waiting for the arrival of the trap.

When it came up he said, "You might as well take a seat by my side,
Bathurst; the syce will sit behind and lead your horse."

Having distributed money among the beaters, the Doctor took his place
in his trap, the tiger skin was rolled up and placed under the seat,
Bathurst mounted beside him, and they started.

"There, you see, Doctor," Bathurst, who had not opened his lips from the
time he had remonstrated with the Doctor for firing, said; "you see it
is of no use. I was not afraid of the tiger, for I knew that you were
not likely to miss, and that in any case it could not reach me on the
elephant. I can declare that I had not a shadow of fear of the beast,
and yet, directly that row began, my nerves gave way altogether. It was
hideous, and yet, the moment the tiger charged, I felt perfectly cool
again, for the row ceased as you fired your first shot. I struck it full
in the chest, and was about to thrust the spear right down, and should,
I believe, have killed it, if you had not fired again and startled me so
that I fell from the elephant."

"I saw that the shouting and noise unnerved you, Bathurst, but I saw too
that you were perfectly cool and steady when you planted your spear
into him. If it had not got hold of the mahout's leg I should not have
fired."

"Is there nothing to be done, Doctor? You know now what it is likely we
shall have to face with the Sepoys and what it will be with me if they
rise. Is there nothing you can do for me?"

The Doctor shook his head. "I don't believe in Dutch courage in any
case, Bathurst; certainly not in yours. There is no saying what the
effect of spirits might be. I should not recommend them, lad. Of course,
I can understand your feelings, but I still believe that, even if you do
badly to begin with, you will pull round in the end. I have no doubt you
will get a chance to show that it is only nerve and not courage in which
you are deficient."

Bathurst was silent, and scarce another word was spoken during the drive
back to Deennugghur.

The place had its accustomed appearance when they drove up. The Doctor,
as he drew up before his bungalow, said, "Thank God, they have not begun
yet! I was half afraid we might have found they had taken advantage of
most of us being away, and have broken out before we got back."

"So was I," Bathurst said. "I have been thinking of nothing else since
we started."

"Well, I will go to the Major at once and see what arrangements have
been made, and whether there is any further news."

"I shall go off on my rounds," Bathurst said. "I had arranged yesterday
to be at Nilpore this morning, and there will be time for me to get
there now. It is only eleven o'clock yet. I shall go about my work as
usual until matters come to a head."

The Doctor found that the Major was over at the tent which served as the
orderly office, and at once followed him there.

"Nothing fresh, Major?"

"No; we found everything going on as usual. It has been decided to put
the courthouse as far as we can in a state of defense. I shall have the
spare ammunition quietly taken over there, with stores of provisions.
The ladies have undertaken to sew up sacking and make gunny bags for
holding earth, and, of course, we shall get a store of water there.
Everything will be done quietly at present, and things will be sent in
there after dark by such servants as we can thoroughly rely upon. At the
first signs of trouble the residents will make straight for that point.
Of course we must be guided by circumstances. If the trouble begins in
the daytime--that is, if it does begin, for the native officers assure
us that we can trust implicitly in the loyalty of the men--there will
probably be time for everyone to gain the courthouse; if it is at night,
and without warning, as it was at Meerut, I can only say, Doctor, may
God help us all, for I fear that few, if any, of us would get there
alive. Certainly not enough to make any efficient defense."

"I do not see that there is anything else to do, Major. I trust with
you that the men will prove faithful; if not, it is a black lookout
whichever way we take it."

"Did you kill the tiger, Doctor?"

"Yes; at least Bathurst and I did it between us. I wounded him first. It
then sprang upon Bathurst's elephant, and he speared it, and I finished
it with a shot through the head."

"Speared it!" the Major repeated; "why didn't he shoot it. What was he
doing with his spear?"

"He was born, Major, with a constitutional horror of firearms, inherited
from his mother. I will tell you about it some day. In fact, he cannot
stand noise of any sort. It has been a source of great trouble to the
young fellow, who in all other respects has more than a fair share of
courage. However, we will talk about that when we have more time on our
hands. There is no special duty you can give me at present?"

"Yes, there is. You are in some respects the most disengaged man in
the station, and can come and go without attracting any attention. I
propose, therefore, that you shall take charge of the arrangement of
matters in the courthouse. I think that it will be an advantage if you
move from your tent in there at once. There is plenty of room for us
all: No one can say at what time there may be trouble with the Sepoys,
and it would be a great advantage to have someone in the courthouse
who could take the lead if the women, with the servants and so on, come
flocking in while we were still absent on the parade ground. Besides,
with your rifle, you could drive any small party off who attempted to
seize it by surprise. If you were there we would call it the hospital,
which would be an excuse for sending in stores, bedding, and so on.

"You might mention in the orderly room that it is getting so hot now
that you think it would be as well to have a room or two fitted up under
a roof, instead of having the sick in tents, in case there should be an
outbreak of cholera or anything of that sort this year. I will say that
I think the idea is a very good one, and that as the courthouse is
very little used, you had better establish yourself there. The native
officers who hear what we say will spread the news. I don't say it will
be believed, but at least it will serve as an explanation."

"Yes, I think that that will be a very good plan, Major. Two of the men
who act as hospital orderlies I can certainly depend upon, and they will
help to receive the things sent in from the bungalows, and will hold
their tongues as to what is being done; I shall leave my tent standing,
and use it occasionally as before, but will make the courthouse my
headquarters. How are we off for arms?"

"There are five cases of muskets and a considerable stock of ammunition
in that small magazine in the lines; one of the first things will be to
get them removed to the courthouse. We have already arranged to do that
tonight; it will give us four or five muskets apiece."

"Good, Major; I will load them all myself and keep them locked up in
a room upstairs facing the gateway, and should there be any trouble I
fancy I could give a good account of any small body of men who might
attempt to make an entrance. I am very well content with my position as
Commandant of the Hospital, as we may call it; the house has not been
much good to us hitherto, but I suppose when it was bought it was
intended to make this a more important station; it is fortunate they did
buy it now, for we can certainly turn it into a small fortress. Still,
of course, I cannot disguise from myself that though we might get on
successfully for a time against your Sepoys, there is no hope of holding
it long if the whole country rises."

"I quite see that, Doctor," the Major said gravely; "but I have really
no fear of that. With the assistance of the Rajah of Bithoor, Cawnpore
is safe. His example is almost certain to be followed by almost all the
other great landowners. No; it is quite bad enough that we have to face
a Sepoy mutiny; I cannot believe that we are likely to have a general
rising on our hands. If we do--" and he stopped.

"If we do it is all up with us, Major; there is no disguising that.
However, we need not look at the worst side of things. Well, I will go
with you to the orderly room, and will talk with you about the hospital
scheme, mention that there is a rumor of cholera, and so on, and ask
if I can't have a part of the courthouse; then we can walk across there
together, and see what arrangement had best be made."

The following day brought another dispatch from the Colonel, saying that
the rumors as to Delhi were confirmed. The regiments there had joined
the Meerut mutineers, had shot down their officers, and murdered
every European they could lay hands on; that three officers and six
noncommissioned officers, who were in charge of the arsenal, had
defended it desperately, and had finally blown up the magazine with
hundreds of its assailants. Three of the defenders had reached Meerut
with the news.

Day by day the gloom thickened. The native regiments in the Punjaub rose
as soon as the news from Meerut and Delhi reached them, but there were
white troops there, and they were used energetically and promptly. In
some places the mutineers were disarmed before they broke out into open
violence; in other cases mutinous regiments were promptly attacked and
scattered. Several of the leading chiefs had hastened to assure the
Government of their fidelity, and had placed their troops and resources
at its disposal.

But in the Punjaub alone the lookout appeared favorable. In the Daob
a mutiny had taken place at four of the stations, and the Sepoys had
marched away to Delhi, but without injuring the Europeans.

After this for a week there was quiet, and then at places widely
apart--at Hansid and Hissar, to the northwest of Delhi; at Nusserabad,
in the center of Rajpootana, at Bareilly, and other stations in
Rohilcund--the Sepoys rose, and in most places massacre was added
to mutiny. Then three regiments of the Gwalior contingent at Neemuch
revolted. Then two regiments broke out at Jhansi, and the whole of
the Europeans, after desperately defending themselves for four days,
surrendered on promise of their lives, but were instantly murdered.

But before the news of the Jhansi massacre reached Deennugghur they
heard of other risings nearer to them. On the 30th of May the three
native regiments at Lucknow rose, but were sharply repulsed by the 300
European troops under Sir Henry Lawrence. At Seetapoor the Sepoys rose
on the 3d of June and massacred all the Europeans. On the 4th the Sepoys
at Mohundee imitated the example of those at Seetapoor, while on the
8th two regiments rose at Fyzabad, in the southeastern division of the
province, and massacred all the Europeans.

Up to this time the news from Cawnpore had still been good. The Rajah of
Bithoor had offered Sir Hugh Wheeler a reinforcement of two guns and
300 men, and it was believed that, seeing this powerful and influential
chief had thrown his weight into the scale on the side of the British,
the four regiments of native troops would remain quiet.

Sir Hugh had but a handful of Europeans with him, but had just received
a reinforcement of fifty men of the 32d regiment from Lucknow, and he
had formed an intrenchment within which the Europeans of the station,
and the fugitives who had come in from the districts around, could take
refuge.

Several communications passed between Sir Hugh Wheeler and Major Hannay.
The latter had been offered the choice of moving into Cawnpore with his
wing of the regiment, or remaining at Deennugghur. He had chosen the
latter alternative, pointing out that he still believed in the fidelity
of the troops with him; but that if they went to Cawnpore they would
doubtless be carried away with other regiments, and would only swell the
force of mutineers there. He was assured, at any rate, they would not
rise unless their comrades at Cawnpore did so, but that it was best to
manifest confidence in them, as not improbably, did they hear that they
were ordered back to Cawnpore, they might take it as a slur on their
fidelity, and mutiny at once.

The month had been one of intense anxiety. Gradually stores of
provisions had been conveyed into the hospital, as it was now called;
the well inside the yard had been put into working order, and the
residents had sent in stores of bedding and such portable valuables as
could be removed.

In but few cases had the outbreaks taken place at night, the mutineers
almost always breaking out either upon being ordered to parade or upon
actually falling in; still, it was by no means certain when a crisis
might come, and the Europeans all lay down to rest in their clothes,
one person in each house remaining up all night on watch, so that at the
first alarm all might hurry to the shelter of the hospital.

Its position was a strong one--a lofty wall inclosing a courtyard and
garden surrounding it. This completely sheltered the lower floor from
fire; the windows of the upper floor were above the level of the wall,
and commanded a view over the country, while round the flat terraced
roof ran a parapet some two feet high.

During the day the ladies of the station generally gathered at Mr.
Hunter's, which was the bungalow nearest to the hospital. Here they
worked at the bags intended to hold earth, and kept up each other's
spirits as well as they could. Although all looked pale and worn
from anxiety and watching, there were, after the first few days, no
manifestations of fear. Occasionally a tear would drop over their work,
especially in the case of two of the wives of civilians, whose children
were in England; but as a whole their conversation was cheerful, each
trying her best to keep up the spirits of the others. Generally, as soon
as the meeting was complete, Mrs. Hunter read aloud one of the psalms
suited to their position and the prayers for those in danger, then the
work was got out and the needles applied briskly. Even Mrs. Rintoul
showed a fortitude and courage that would not have been expected from
her.

"One never knows people," Mrs. Doolan said to Isobel, as they walked
back from one of these meetings, "as long as one only sees them under
ordinary circumstances. I have never had any patience with Mrs. Rintoul,
with her constant complaining and imaginary ailments. Now that there is
really something to complain about, she is positively one of the calmest
and most cheerful among us. It is curious, is it not, how our talk
always turns upon home? India is hardly ever mentioned. We might be a
party of intimate friends, sitting in some quiet country place, talking
of our girlhood. Why, we have learnt more of each other and each other's
history in the last fortnight than we should have done if we had lived
here together for twenty years under ordinary circumstances. Except as
to your little brother, I think you are the only one, Isobel, who has
not talked much of home."

"I suppose it is because my home was not a very happy one," Isobel said.

"I notice that all the talk is about happy scenes, nothing is ever said
