wholly hidden from view.

Burl went to beat among the mushroom-thickets, in quest of the bodies of
his tribesfolk. They could have staggered out of the red dust and
collapsed beyond. He would have shouted, but the deep sense of
loneliness silenced him. His throat ached with grief. He searched on....

There was a noise. From a huge clump of toadstools--perhaps the very one
he had climbed over in the night--there came the sound of crashings and
the breaking of the spongy stuff. Twin tapering antennae appeared, and
then a monster beetle lurched into the open space, its ghastly mandibles
gaping sidewise.

It was all of eight feet long and supported by six crooked, saw-toothed
legs. Huge, multiple eyes stared with preoccupation at the world. It
advanced deliberately with clankings and clashings as of a hideous
machine. Burl fled on the instant, running directly away from it.

A little depression lay in the ground before him. He did not swerve, but
made to jump over it. As he leaped he saw the color of bare flesh, Saya,
limp and helpless, sinking slowly into the ground with tricklings of
dirt falling down to cover her. It seemed to Burl that she quivered a
little.

Instantly there was a terrific struggle within Burl. Behind him was the
giant meat-eating beetle; beneath him was Saya whom he loved. There was
certain death lurching toward him on evilly crooked legs--and the life
he had hoped for lay in a shallow pit. Of course he thought Saya dead.

Perhaps it was rage, or despair, or a simple human madness which made
him act otherwise than rationally. The things which raise humans above
brute creation, however, are only partly reasonable. Most human
emotions--especially the creditable ones--cannot be justified by reason,
and very few heroic actions are based upon logical thought.

Burl whirled as he landed, his puny spear held ready. In his left hand
he held the haunch of a creature much like the one which clanked and
rattled toward him. With a yell of insane defiance--completely beyond
justification by reason--Burl flung that meat-filled leg at the monster.

It hit. Undoubtedly, it hurt. The beetle seized it ferociously. It
crushed it. There was meat in it, sweet and juicy.

The beetle devoured it. It forgot the man standing there, waiting for
death. It crunched the leg-joint of a cousin or brother, confusing the
blow with the missile that had delivered it. When the tidbit was
finished it turned and lumbered off to investigate another mushroom
thicket. It seemed to consider then an enemy had been conquered and
devoured and that normal life could go on.

Then Burl stopped quickly, and dragged Saya from the grave the
sexton-beetles had labored so feverishly to provide for her. Crumbled
soil fell from her shoulders, from her face, and from her body. Three
little eight-inch beetles with black and red markings scurried for cover
in terrified haste. Burl carried Saya to a resting-place of soft mould
to mourn over her.

He was a completely ignorant savage, save that he knew more of the ways
of insects than anybody anywhere else--the Ecological Service, which had
stocked this planet, not being excepted. To Burl the unconsciousness of
Saya was as death itself. Dumb misery smote him, and he laid her down
gently and quite literally wept. He had been beautifully pleased with
himself for having slain one flying beetle. But for Saya's seeming
death, he would have been almost unbearable with pride over having put
another to flight. But now he was merely a broken-hearted, very human
young man.

But a long time later Saya opened her eyes and looked about
bewilderedly.

They were in considerable danger for some time after that, because they
were oblivious to everything but each other. Saya rested in
half-incredulous happiness against Burl's shoulder as he told her
jerkily of his attempt on a night-bound butterfly, which turned out to
be a flying beetle that took him aloft. He told of his search for the
tribe and then his discovery of her apparently lifeless body. When he
spoke of the monster which had lurched from the mushroom thicket, and of
the desperation with which he had faced it, Saya looked at him with
warm, proud eyes. But Burl was abruptly struck with the remarkable
convenience of that discovery. If his tribesmen could secure an ample
supply of meat, they might defend themselves against attack by throwing
it to their attackers. In fact, insects were so stupid that almost any
object thrown quickly enough and fast enough, might be made to serve as
sacrifices instead of themselves.

A timid, frightened whisper roused them from their absorption. They
looked up. The boy Dik stood some distance away, staring at them
wide-eyed, almost convinced that he looked upon the living dead. A
sudden movement on the part of either of them would have sent him
bolting away. Two or three other bobbing heads gazed affrightedly from
nearby hiding-places. Jon was poised for flight.

The tribe had come back to its former hiding-place simply as a way to
reassemble. They had believed both Burl and Saya dead, and they accepted
Burl's death as their own doom. But now they stared.

Burl spoke--fortunately without arrogance--and Dik and Tet came
timorously from their hiding-places. The others followed, the tribe
forming a frightened half-circle about the seated pair. Burl spoke again
and presently one of the bravest--Cori--dared to approach and touch him.
Instantly a babble of the crude labial language of the tribe broke out.
Awed exclamations and questions filled the air.

But Burl, for once, showed some common sense. Instead of a vainglorious
recital, he merely cast down the long tapering antennae of the
flying-beetle. They looked, and recognized their origin.

Then Burl curtly ordered Dor and Jak to make a chair of their hands for
Saya. She was weak from her fall and the loss of blood. The two men
humbly advanced and obeyed. Then Burl curtly ordered the march resumed.

They went on, more slowly than on previous days, but none-the-less
steadily. Burl led them across-country, marching in advance with a
matter-of-fact alertness for signs of danger. He felt more confidence
than ever before. It was not fully justified, of course. Jon now
retrieved the spear he had discarded. The small party fairly bristled
with weapons. But Burl knew that they were liable to be cast away as
impediments if flight seemed necessary.

As he led the way Burl began to think busily in the manner that only
leaders find necessary. He had taught his followers to kill ants for
food, though they were still uneasy about such adventures. He had led
them to attack great yellow grubs upon giant cabbages. But they had not
yet faced any actual danger, as he had done. He must drive them to face
something....

The opportunity came that same day, in late afternoon. To westward the
cloud-bank was barely beginning to show the colors that presage
nightfall, when a bumble-bee droned heavily overhead, making for its
home burrow. The little, straggling group of marching people looked up
and saw the scanty load of pollen packed in the stiff bristles of the
bee's hind-legs. It sped onward heavily, its almost transparent wings
mere blurs in the air.

It was barely fifty feet above the ground. Burl dropped his glance and
tensed. A slender-waisted wasp was shooting upward from an ambush among
the noisome fungi of this plain.

The bee swerved and tried to escape. The wasp over-hauled it. The bee
dodged frantically. It was a good four feet in length,--as large as the
wasp, certainly--but it was more heavily built and could not make the
speed of which the wasp was capable. It dodged with less agility. Twice,
in desperation, it did manage to evade the plunging dives of the wasp,
but the third time the two insects grappled in mid-air almost over the
heads of the humans.

They tumbled downward in a clawing, biting, tangle of bodies and legs.
They hit the ground and rolled over and over. The bee struggled to
insert her barbed sting in the more supple body of her adversary. She
writhed and twisted desperately.

But there came an instant of infinite confusion and the bee lay on her
back. The wasp suddenly moved with that ghastly skilled precision of a
creature performing an incredible feat instinctively, apparently unaware
that it is doing so. The dazed bee was swung upright in a peculiarly
artificial pose. The wasp's body curved, and its deadly, rapier-sharp
sting struck....

The bee was dead. Instantly. As if struck dead by lightning. The wasp
had stung in a certain place in the neck-parts where all the nerve-cords
pass. To sting there, the wasp had to bring its victim to a particular
pose. It was precisely the trick of a _desnucador_, the butcher who
kills cattle by severing the spinal cord. For the wasp's purposes the
bee had to be killed in this fashion and no other.

Burl began to give low-toned commands to his followers. He knew what was
coming next, and so did they. When the sequel of the murder began he
moved forward, his tribesmen wavering after him. This venture was
actually one of the least dangerous they could attempt, but merely to
attack a wasp was a hair-raising idea. Only Burl's prestige plus their
knowledge made them capable of it.

The second act of the murder-drama was gruesomeness itself. The
pirate-wasp was a carnivore, but this was the season when the wasps
raised young. Inevitably there was sweet honey in the half-filled crop
of the bee. Had she arrived safely at the hive, the sweet and sticky
liquid would have been disgorged for the benefit of bee-grubs. The wasp
avidly set to work to secure that honey. The bee-carcass itself was
destined for the pirate-wasp's own offspring, and that squirming
monstrosity is even more violently carnivorous than its mother. The
parent wasp set about abstracting the dead bee's honey, before taking
the carcass to its young one, because honey is poisonous to the
pirate-wasp's grub. Yet insects cannot act from solicitude or anything
but instinct. And instinct must be maintained by lavish rewards.

So the pirate-wasp sought its reward--an insane, insatiable, gluttonous
satisfaction in the honey that was poison to its young. The wasp foiled
its murdered victim upon its back again and feverishly pressed on the
limp body to force out the honey. And this was the reason for its
precise manner of murder. Only when killed by the destruction of all
nerve-currents would the bee's body be left limp like this. Only a bee
killed in this exact fashion would yield its honey to manipulation.

The honey appeared, flowing from the dead bee's mouth. The wasp, in
trembling, ghoulish ecstasy, devoured it as it appeared. It was lost to
all other sights or sensations but its feast.

And this was the moment when Burl signalled for the attack. The
tribesmen's prey was deaf and blind and raptured. It was aware of
nothing but the delight it savored. But the men wavered, nevertheless,
when they drew near. Burl was first to thrust his spear powerfully into
the trembling body.

When he was not instantly destroyed the others took courage. Dor's spear
penetrated the very vitals of the ghoul. Jak's club fell with terrific
force upon the wasp's slender waist. There was a crackling, and the
long, spidery limbs quivered and writhed. Then Burl struck again and the
creature fell into two writhing halves.

They butchered it rather messily, but Burl noticed that even as it died,
sundered and pierced with spears, its long tongue licked out in one last
rapturous taste of the honey that had been its undoing.

Some time later, burdened with the pollen laden legs of the great bee,
the tribe resumed its journey.

Now Burl had men behind him. They were still timid and prone to flee at
the least alarm, but they were vastly more dependable than they had
been. They had attacked and slain a wasp whose sting would have killed
any of them. They had done battle under the leadership of Burl, whose
spear had struck the first blow. They were sharers of his glory and,
therefore, much more nearly like the followers of a chieftain ought to
be.

Their new spirit was badly needed. The red puffballs were certainly no
less numerous in the new territory the tribe traversed than in the
territory they had left. And the season of their ripening' was further
advanced. More and more of the ground showed the deadly rime of settled
death-dust. To stay alive was increasingly difficult. When the full
spore-casting season arrived, it would be impossible. And that season
could not be far away.

The very next day after the killing of the wasp, survival despite the
red dust had begun to seem unimaginable. Where, earlier, one saw a
red-dust cloud bursting here and there at intervals, on this day there
was always a billowing mass of lethal vapor in the air. At no time was
the landscape free of a moving mist of death. Usually there were three
or four in sight at once. Often there were half a dozen. Once there were
eight. It could be guessed that in one day more they would ripen in such
monstrous numbers that anything which walked or flew or crawled must
breathe in the spores and perish.

And that day, just at sunset, the tribe came to the top of a small rise
in the ground. For an hour they had been marching and countermarching to
avoid the suddenly-billowing clouds of dust. Once they had been nearly
hemmed in when three of the dull-red mists seemed to flow together,
enclosing the three sides of a circle. They escaped then only by the
most desperate of sprinting.

But now they came to the little hillock and halted. Before them
stretched a plain, all of four miles wide, colored a brownish brick-red
by the red puffballs. The tribe had seen mushroom forests--they had
lived in them--and knew of the dangers that lurked there. But the plain
before them was not simply dangerous; it was fatal. To right and left it
stretched as far as the eye could see, but away on its farther edge Burl
caught a glimpse of flowing water.

Over the plain itself a thin red haze seemed to float. It was simply a
cloud of the deadly spores, dispersed and indefinite, but constantly
replenished by the freshly bursting puffballs. While the tribesfolk
stood and watched, thick columns of dust rose here and there and at the
other place, too many to count. They settled again but left behind
enough of the fine powder to keep a thin red haze over all the plain.
This was a mass of literally millions of the deadly growths. Here was
one place where no carnivorous beetles roamed and where no spiders
lurked. There were nothing here but the sullen columns of dust and the
haze that they left behind.

And of course it would be nothing less than suicide to try to go back.




_8. A FLIGHT CONTINUES_


Burl kept his people alive until darkness fell. He had assigned watchers
for each direction and when flight was necessary the adults helped the
children to avoid the red dust. Four times they changed direction after
shrill-voiced warnings. When night settled over the plain they were
forced to come to a halt.

But the puffballs were designed to burst by day. Stumbled into, they
could split at any time, and the humans did hear some few of the tearing
noises that denoted a spore-spout in the darkness. But after slow
nightly rain began they heard no more.

Burl led his people into the plain of red puffballs as soon as the rain
had lasted long enough to wash down the red haze still hanging in the
air and turn the fallen spores to mud.

It was an enterprise of such absolute desperation that very likely no
civilized man would have tried it. There were no stars, for guidance,
nor compasses to show the way. There were no lights to enable them to
dodge the deadly things they strove to escape, and there was no
possibility of their keeping a straight course in the darkness. They had
to trust to luck in perhaps the longest long-shot that humans every
accepted as a gamble.

Quaintly, they used the long antennae of a dead flying-beetle as
sense-organs for themselves. They entered the red plain in a long single
file, Burl leading the way with one of the two feathery whips extended
before him. Saya helped him check on what lay in the darkness ahead, but
made sure not to leave his side. Others trailed behind, hand in hand.

Progress was slow. The sky was utter blackness, of course, but nowhere
in the lowlands is there an absolute black. Where fox-fire doesn't burn
without consuming, there are mushrooms with glows of their own. Rusts
sometimes shone faintly. Naturally there were no fireflies or glow-worms
of any sort; but neither were there any living things to hunt the tiny
tribe as it moved half-blindly in single file through the plain of red
puffballs. Within half an hour even Burl did not believe he had kept to
his original line. An hour later they realized despairingly that they
were marching helpless through puffballs which would make the air
unbreathable at dawn. But they marched on.

Once they smelled the rank odor of cabbages. They followed the scent and
came upon them, glowing palely with parasitic moulds on their leaves.
And there were living things here: huge caterpillars eating and eating,
even in the dark, against the time of metamorphosis. Burl could have
cried out infuriatedly at them because they were--so he assumed--immune
to the death of the red dust. But the red dust was all about, and the
smell of cabbages was not the smell of life.

