The Project Gutenberg EBook of Lectures on Stellar Statistics, by
Carl Vilhelm Ludvig Charlier

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Lectures on Stellar Statistics

Author: Carl Vilhelm Ludvig Charlier

Release Date: July 27, 2007 [EBook #22157]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LECTURES ON STELLAR STATISTICS ***




Produced by Susan Skinner and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (The original
copy of this book was generously made available for scanning
by the Department of Mathematics at the University of
Glasgow.)





[Transcriber's Note: This text is intended for users whose text readers
cannot use the "real" (unicode/utf-8) version of the file. Characters in
the Greek alphabet are represented as follows: [alpha], [beta], [gamma],
etc.

In the original text, the units h and m, and ordinals th and st were
printed as superscripts. For readability, they have not been represented
as such in this file. Similarly for the + and - signs when used to
describe intermediate stellar colours.

Other superscripts are indicated by the carat symbol, ^, and subscripts
by an underline, _.]




LECTURES
ON STELLAR STATISTICS

BY

C. V. L. CHARLIER

SCIENTIA PUBLISHER
LUND 1921


HAMBURG 1921
PRINTED BY _LUeTCKE & WULFF_




CHAPTER I.

APPARENT ATTRIBUTES OF THE STARS.


1. Our knowledge of the stars is based on their _apparent_ attributes,
obtained from the astronomical observations. The object of astronomy is
to deduce herefrom the real or _absolute_ attributes of the stars, which
are their position in space, their movement, and their physical nature.

The apparent attributes of the stars are studied by the aid of their
_radiation_. The characteristics of this radiation may be described in
different ways, according as the nature of the light is defined.
(Undulatory theory, Emission theory.)

From the statistical point of view it will be convenient to consider the
radiation as consisting of an emanation of small particles from the
radiating body (the star). These particles are characterized by certain
attributes, which may differ in degree from one particle to another.
These attributes may be, for instance, the diameter and form of the
particles, their mode of rotation, &c. By these attributes the optical
and electrical properties of the radiation are to be explained. I shall
not here attempt any such explanation, but shall confine myself to the
property which the particles have of possessing a different mode of
deviating from the rectilinear path as they pass from one medium to
another. This deviation depends in some way on one or more attributes of
the particles. Let us suppose that it depends on a single attribute,
which, with a terminology derived from the undulatory theory of
HUYGHENS, may be called the _wave-length_ ([lambda]) of the particle.

The statistical characteristics of the radiation are then in the first
place:--

(1) the total number of particles or the _intensity_ of the radiation;

(2) the _mean wave-length_ ([lambda]_0) of the radiation, also called
(or nearly identical with) the _effective_ wave-length or the colour;

(3) _the dispersion of the wave-length_. This characteristic of the
radiation may be determined from the _spectrum_, which also gives the
variation of the radiation with [lambda], and hence may also determine
the mean wave-length of the radiation.

Moreover we may find from the radiation of a star its apparent place on
the sky.

The intensity, the mean wave-length, and the dispersion of the
wave-length are in a simple manner connected with the _temperature_
(_T_) of the star. According to the radiation laws of STEPHAN and WIEN
we find, indeed (compare L. M. 41[1]) that the intensity is proportional
to the fourth power of _T_, whereas the mean wave-length and the
dispersion of the wave-length are both inversely proportional to _T_. It
follows that with increasing temperature the mean wave-length
diminishes--the colour changing into violet--and simultaneously the
dispersion of the wave-length and also even the total length of the
spectrum are reduced (decrease).


2. _The apparent position of a star_ is generally denoted by its right
ascension ([alpha]) and its declination ([delta]). Taking into account
the apparent distribution of the stars in space, it is, however, more
practical to characterize the position of a star by its galactic
longitude (_l_) and its galactic latitude (_b_). Before defining these
coordinates, which will be generally used in the following pages, it
should be pointed out that we shall also generally give the coordinates
[alpha] and [delta] of the stars in a particular manner. We shall
therefore use an abridged notation, so that if for instance [alpha] =
17h 44m.7 and [delta] = +35 deg..84, we shall write

    ([alpha][delta]) = (174435).

If [delta] is negative, for instance [delta] = -35 deg..84, we write

    ([alpha][delta]) = (1744{35}),

so that the last two figures are in italics.

[Transcriber's Note: In this version of the text, the last two figures
are enclosed in braces to represent the italics.]

This notation has been introduced by PICKERING for variable stars and is
used by him everywhere in the Annals of the Harvard Observatory, but it
is also well suited to all stars. This notation gives, simultaneously,
the characteristic _numero_ of the stars. It is true that two or more
stars may in this manner obtain the same characteristic _numero_. They
are, however, easily distinguishable from each other through other
attributes.

The _galactic_ coordinates _l_ and _b_ are referred to the Milky Way
(the Galaxy) as plane of reference. The pole of the Milky Way has
according to HOUZEAU and GOULD the position ([alpha][delta]) = (124527).
From the distribution of the stars of the spectral type B I have in L.
M. II, 14[2] found a somewhat different position. But having ascertained
later that the real position of the galactic plane requires a greater
number of stars for an accurate determination of its value, I have
preferred to employ the position used by PICKERING in the Harvard
catalogues, namely ([alpha][delta]) = (124028), or

    [alpha] = 12h 40m = 190 deg., [delta] = +28 deg.,

which position is now exclusively used in the stellar statistical
investigations at the Observatory of Lund and is also used in these
lectures.

The galactic longitude (_l_) is reckoned from the ascending node of the
Milky Way on the equator, which is situated in the constellation
_Aquila_. The galactic latitude (_b_) gives the angular distance of the
star from the Galaxy. On plate I, at the end of these lectures, will be
found a fairly detailed diagram from which the conversion of [alpha] and
[delta] of a star into _l_ and _b_ may be easily performed. All stars
having an apparent magnitude brighter than 4m are directly drawn.

Instead of giving the galactic longitude and latitude of a star we may
content ourselves with giving the galactic _square_ in which the star is
situated. For this purpose we assume the sky to be divided into 48
squares, all having the same surface. Two of these squares lie at the
northern pole of the Galaxy and are designated GA_1 and GA_2. Twelve lie
north of the galactic plane, between 0 deg. and 30 deg. galactic latitude, and
are designated GC_1, GC_2, ..., GC_12. The corresponding squares south
of the galactic equator (the plane of the Galaxy) are called GD_1, GD_2,
..., GD_12. The two polar squares at the south pole are called GF_1 and
GF_2. Finally we have 10 B-squares, between the A- and C-squares and 10
corresponding E-squares in the southern hemisphere.

The distribution of the squares in the heavens is here graphically
represented in the projection of FLAMSTEED, which has the advantage of
giving areas proportional to the corresponding spherical areas, an
arrangement necessary, or at least highly desirable, for all stellar
statistical researches. It has also the advantage of affording a
continuous representation of the whole sky.

The correspondence between squares and stellar constellations is seen
from plate II. Arranging the constellations according to their galactic
longitude we find north of the galactic equator (in the C-squares) the
constellations:--

    Hercules, Cygnus, Cepheus, Cassiopaea, Auriga, Gemini, Canis Minor,
    Pyxis, Vela, Centaurus, Scorpius, Ophiuchus,

and south of this equator (in the D-squares):--

    Aquila, Cygnus, Lacerta, Andromeda, Perseus, Orion, Canis Major,
    Puppis, Carina, Circinus, Corona australis, Sagittarius,

mentioning only one constellation for each square.

At the north galactic pole (in the two A-squares) we have:--

    Canes Venatici and Coma Berenices,

and at the south galactic pole (in the two F-squares):--

    Cetus and Sculptor.


3. _Changes in the position of a star._ From the positions of a star on
two or more occasions we obtain its apparent motion, also called the
_proper motion_ of the star. We may distinguish between a _secular_ part
of this motion and a _periodical_ part. In both cases the motion may be
either a reflex of the motion of the observer, and is then called
_parallactic_ motion, or it may be caused by a real motion of the star.
From the parallactic motion of the star it is possible to deduce its
distance from the sun, or its parallax. The periodic parallactic proper
motion is caused by the motion of the earth around the sun, and gives
the _annual parallax_ ([pi]). In order to obtain available annual
parallaxes of a star it is usually necessary for the star to be nearer
to us than 5 siriometers, corresponding to a parallax greater than
0".04. More seldom we may in this manner obtain trustworthy values for a
distance amounting to 10 siriometers ([pi] = 0".02), or even still
greater values. For such large distances the _secular_ parallax, which
is caused by the progressive motion of the sun in space, may give better
results, especially if the mean distance of a group of stars is
simultaneously determined. Such a value of the secular parallax is also
called, by KAPTEYN, the _systematic_ parallax of the stars.

When we speak of the proper motion of a star, without further
specification, we mean always the secular proper motion.


4. Terrestrial distances are now, at least in scientific researches,
universally expressed in kilometres. A kilometre is, however, an
inappropriate unit for celestial distances. When dealing with distances
in our planetary system, the astronomers, since the time of NEWTON, have
always used the mean distance of the earth from the sun as universal
unit of distance. Regarding the distances in the stellar system the
astronomers have had a varying practice. German astronomers, SEELIGER
and others, have long used a stellar unit of distance corresponding to
an annual parallax of 0".2, which has been called a "Siriusweite". To
this name it may be justly objected that it has no international use, a
great desideratum in science. Against the theoretical definition of this
unit it may also be said that a distance is suitably to be defined
through another distance and not through an angle--an angle which
corresponds moreover, in this case, to the _harmonic_ mean distance of
the star and not to its arithmetic mean distance. The same objection may
be made to the unit "parsec." proposed in 1912 by TURNER.

For my part I have, since 1911, proposed a stellar unit which, both in
name and definition, nearly coincides with the proposition of SEELIGER,
and which will be exclusively used in these lectures. A _siriometer_ is
put equal to 10^6 times the planetary unit of distance, corresponding to
a parallax of 0".206265 (in practice sufficiently exactly 0".2).

In popular writings, another unit: a _light-year_, has for a very long
time been employed. The relation between these units is

    1 siriometer = 15.79   light-years,
    1 light-year =  0.0633 siriometers.


