low boughs of trees that overhang the water. The bite is very poisonous.


=Other Snakes=

There are many other snakes in the United States, but they are not
venomous. Here is one thing to remember: you need never fear a snake
found in this country which has _lengthwise stripes_, that is, stripes
running from head to tail. Daniel C. Beard tells me that he has learned
this from observation, and Raymond L. Ditmars, curator of reptiles in
the New York Zoological Park, agrees with him.

While the lengthwise-striped snakes are harmless, others not striped in
this way are harmless, too. The blacksnake, though he looks an ugly
customer and, when cornered, will sometimes show fight, is not venomous
and his bite is not deep. It is, therefore, wanton cruelty to kill every
snake that crosses your path simply because it happens to be a snake.
Kephart, in his book of "Camping and Woodcraft," says in regard to
identifying the poisonous snake:

"The rattlesnake, copperhead, and cottonmouth are easily distinguished
from all other snakes, as all three of them bear a peculiar mark, or
rather a pair of marks, that no other animal possesses. This mark is
the _pit_, which is a deep cavity on each side of the face between the
nostrils and the eye, sinking into the upper jaw-bone."

If, when one has been bitten and the snake killed, an examination is
made of its head, it can be ascertained immediately whether the snake
was venomous, and in this way unnecessary fright may be avoided.


=Beaded Lizard, Gila Monster=

The only other venomous reptile found in the United States is the beaded
lizard, called Gila monster (pronounced heela). Unless you visit the
desert regions of Arizona and New Mexico, you will not be apt to run
across this most interesting though poisonous reptile.

The Gila monster looks very much like a unique piece of Indian beadwork,
with its fat body and stubby legs covered with bright-colored, bead-like
tubercles, which form almost a Navajo pattern. Its length is about
nineteen inches, and its beads are colored salmon, flesh-pink, white or
yellow, and black. Though it has the appearance of being stuffed with
cotton, it is really formidable and very much alive. Its jaws are
strong; when it bites it holds on like a bulldog, and there is no way to
force it to open its mouth except to pry the powerful jaws apart. While
otherwise slow of movement, it will turn quickly from side to side,
snapping viciously. The inside of the Gila's mouth is black, and when
angry it opens it wide and hisses.


=Treatment for Snake-Bites=

If the unlikely should chance to happen and one of your party is bitten
by a poisonous snake, first aid should be given _immediately_, and if a
physician is within reach he should be summoned as quickly as possible.
Much depends, however, upon what is done first. Any one can administer
the following treatment, and it should be done without flinching, for it
may mean the saving of a life:

(1) As soon as the person is bitten twist a tourniquet very tightly
above the wound, that is, between the wound and the heart, to keep the
poison as far as possible from entering the entire system.

(2) Slash the wound or stab it with a _clean_ knife-blade and force it
to bleed copiously. If there is no break in the skin or membrane of your
mouth or lips and no cavity in any of your teeth, suck the wound to draw
out the poison.

(3) Give a stimulant in small doses at frequent intervals to stimulate
the heart and lungs and strengthen the nerves, but avoid overdoing this,
for the result will be harmful.

(4) If you have with you an antivenomous serum, inject it as directed by
the formula that accompanies it.

Tie a loose bandage around the affected member, a handkerchief, neck
scarf, or even a rope for a tourniquet, to check circulation, as
described in Chapter XII, on Accidents. Every little while loosen the
tourniquet, then tighten it again, for it will not do to stop the
circulation entirely.

All authorities do not advise sucking the wound, but it is generally
done, for with a perfectly sound and healthy mouth there is no danger,
as the poison enters the system only by contact with the blood.

Some writers advocate cauterizing the wound with a hot iron; but,
whatever is done, do quickly, and _do not be afraid_. Fear is contagious
and exceedingly harmful to the patient. Remember that a snake-bite is
seldom fatal, and that a swollen arm or leg does not mean that the case
is hopeless.


=Poisonous Plants=

There are two kinds of poisonous plants: those that are poison to the
touch and those that are harmless unless taken inwardly. Both may be
avoided when you learn to identify them.


=Poison-Ivy=

We are apt to think that every one knows the common poison-ivy, but that
some people are not familiar with it was shown when one beautiful autumn
day a young woman passed along our village street carrying a handful of
the sprays of the vine, gathered probably because of their beautiful
coloring. Noticing that she was a stranger, no doubt from the city, and
realizing the danger she was running of poisoning herself or some one
else, we hurriedly caught up with her and gave first aid to the ignorant
in a few forceful remarks. The result was that, without a word, the
young woman simply opened her hand, dropped her vines on the walk, and
hurried off as if to escape a pestilence. We were left to close the
incident by kicking the stuff into the street that some other equally
uninformed person might not be tempted to pick it up.

If you do not know the poison-ivy, remember this: It is the
_three-leaved ivy_. Its leaves always grow in triplets as shown in
illustration. The leaves are smooth, but not glossy; they have no teeth
but are occasionally notched. Sometimes the plant is bushy, standing a
foot or two high, again it is trailing or climbing. It loves fence
corners and big rocks to clamber over; it will also choose large trees
for support, climbing up to their tops. The flowers are whitish and the
fruit is a pretty, green-gray berry, round and smooth, which grows in
scant clusters.

Poison-ivy is found through the country from Maine to Texas and west to
South Dakota, Utah, and Arkansas.

Some people are immune to ivy poison and, happily, I belong to the
fortunate ones. Many persons are poisoned by it, however, and it may be
that fear makes them more susceptible. On some the painful, burning
eruption is difficult to cure.


=Poison-Oak=

The poison-oak closely resembles the poison-ivy, and is sometimes called
by that name, but its leaves are differently shaped, being oval in
outline with a few coarse, blunt teeth. They are also thicker and
smaller than the ivy leaf. The poison-oak is plentiful in cool uplands
and in ravines, and is general throughout the Pacific coast from Lower
California and Arizona to British America.


=Poison-Sumach, or Swamp-Sumach=

Another member of the same family is the poison-sumach. They are all
three equally poisonous and act by contact. The poison, or swamp, sumach
is a high, branching shrub closely resembling the harmless species which
grow on high, dry ground. The poison variety chooses low, wet places.
The leaves of the poison-sumach are compound, with from seven to
thirteen leaflets growing from one stem, as the leaves of the
walnut-tree grow; the stalks are often of a purplish color. The leaflets
are oval in shape and are pointed at the tip. The surface is smooth and
green on both sides and they have no teeth. The autumn coloring is very
brilliant. The flowers are whitish-green and grow in loose clusters from
a stiff middle stalk at the angles of the leaves. The fruit is a
gray-green berry growing in scant, drooping clusters. This _gray
drooping berry is the sumac poison sign_, for the fruit of the
harmless sumach is crimson and is held erect in close pyramidal
clusters.

Witch-hazel (Pond's Extract) is used as a remedy for all of these
poisons, but it is claimed that a paste made of _cooking-soda_ and water
is better. Alcohol will sometimes be effective, also a strong lye made
of wood-ashes. Salt and water will give relief to some. It seems to
depend upon the person whether the remedy, as well as the poison, will
have effect.

[Illustration: POISON IVY

POISON SUMAC

Plants poison to the touch.]


=Yellow Lady's-Slipper=

Growing in bogs and low woods from Maine to Minnesota and Washington,
southward to Georgia and Missouri, there is a sweet-scented, little
yellow-and-brown flower called the yellow lady's-slipper, the plant of
which is said to have the same effect when handled as poison-ivy. This
flower is an orchid. The stalk, from one to two feet high, bears a
single blossom at the top, and the leaves, shaped and veined like those
of the lily-of-the-valley, grow alternately down the stem. The plant
does not branch. Like the ivy, the yellow lady's-slipper does not poison
every one.

I know of no other wild plants that are poisonous to the touch; the
following will poison only if taken inwardly.


=Deadly Nightshade=

To the nightshade family belong plants that are poisonous and plants
that are not, but the thrilling name, deadly nightshade, carries with it
the certainty of poison.

The plant is an annual and you may often find it growing in a neglected
corner of the garden as well as in waste places. It is a tall plant; the
one I remember in our own garden reached to the top of a five-foot board
fence. Its leaves are rather triangular in shape, they are dark green
and the wavy edges are notched rather than toothed. The flowers are
white and grow in small clusters. The fruit is a berry, round, black,
and smooth, with calyx adhering to it. The berry clusters grow at the
end of drooping stems. This must not be mistaken for the high-bush
blueberry, for to eat the fruit would be most dangerous.

The antidotes for nightshade poison are emetics, cathartics, and
stimulants. The poison should be thrown off the stomach first, then
strong coffee be given as a stimulant.


=Pokeweed, Pigeonberry=

Pokeweed comes under the heading of poisonous plants though its berries
are eaten by birds, and its young shoots are said to be almost equal in
flavor, and quite as wholesome, as asparagus. It seems to be the large
perennial root that holds the poison, though some authorities claim that
the poison permeates the entire plant to a certain extent. The root is
sometimes mistaken for that of edible plants and the young leaves for
those of the marsh-marigold, which are edible when cooked. It is a tall
plant with a stout stem and emits a strong odor. You will find it
growing by the wayside and in rocky places. The leaves are oblong and
pointed at the tips and base. They have no teeth. The small white
flowers are in clusters. The fruit is a small, flat, dark-purple berry,
growing in long, upstanding clusters on a central stalk. The individual
stem of the berry is very short. The name inkberry was given to the
plant because of the strong stain of the berry juice which was sometimes
used for ink. Pokeweed is at home in various states, Maine to Minnesota,
Arkansas, and Florida.


=Poison-Hemlock=

The poison-hemlock is well known historically, being in use at the time
of Socrates, and believed to have been administered to him by the
Greeks. It is quite as poisonous now as in Socrates's day, and
accidental poisoning has come from people eating the seeds, mistaking
them for anise-seed, eating the leaves for parsley and the roots for
parsnips. The plant grows from two to seven feet high; its stem is
smooth and spotted or streaked with purplish-red. It has large,
parsley-like leaves and pretty clusters of small, white flowers which
grow, stiff-stemmed, from a common centre and blossom in July and
August. When the fresh leaves are bruised they give out a distinctly
mouse-like odor and they are very nauseating to the taste.
Poison-hemlock is common on waysides and waste places in New York, West
Virginia, Pennsylvania, New Jersey, and Ohio. It is also found in New
England and Michigan, Wisconsin, Illinois, Louisiana, and California.

The treatment recommended by professionals is emetics, warmth of hands
and feet, artificial respiration, and the subcutaneous injection of
atropine, administered by a physician.


=Water-Hemlock=

Water-hemlock is similar in appearance and in effect. It is found in wet
places and on the borders of swamps. The remedies are the same as for
poison-hemlock.

[Illustration: DEADLY NIGHTSHADE

POKEWEED

Plants poison to the taste.]


=Jimson-Weed=

The jimson-weed is very common in Kentucky. I have not seen so much of
it in the east and north, but it appears to grow pretty nearly over the
whole United States. It is from one to five feet in height, and an
ill-smelling weed, though first cousin to the beautiful, cultivated
datura, which is a highly prized garden plant. The stem is smooth,
green, stout, and branching. The flower is large, sometimes four inches
long, and trumpet-shaped. There are several varieties of this weed; on
some the flower is white, on others the five, flaring, sharp-pointed
lobes are stained with lavender and magenta. The calyx is long,
close-fitting, and light green. The leaves are rather large; they are
angularly oval in shape and are coarsely notched. The fruit is a
prickly, egg-shaped capsule which contains the seeds. It is these seeds
which are sometimes eaten with serious results, and children have been
poisoned by putting the flowers in their mouths.

Emetics should immediately be administered to throw the poison off the
stomach, then hot, strong coffee should be given. Sometimes artificial
respiration must be resorted to. In all cases of poisoning a physician
should be called if possible.

The habit of chewing leaves and stems without knowing what they are
should be suppressed when on the trail. It is something like going
through a drug store and sampling the jars of drugs as you pass, and the
danger of poisoning is almost as great.


=Toadstools=

Unless you are an expert in distinguishing non-poisonous mushrooms from
the poison toadstool, _leave them all alone_. Many deaths occur yearly
from eating toadstools which have been mistaken for the edible
mushrooms.




CHAPTER IX

ON THE TRAIL WITH YOUR CAMERA

=What to Photograph and How=


You cannot depend entirely upon your memory to recall the sights and
adventures of the trail, and will be only half-equipped if you go
without a camera and note-book. Several clicks of the camera will record
the principal events, while your note-book will fill in the detail.


=Selecting a Camera=

In selecting a camera remember that every ounce in weight counts as two
when on the long trail, and that to have to carry it in your hand is
most troublesome and inconvenient. The folding camera, which can be hung
over your shoulder with a strap, is therefore the best; and do not try
to carry plates, they are too heavy. It is of little use to consult the
clerk of a photographic supply shop about the style of camera you should
buy. As a rule he is not chosen for his knowledge of the goods, and his
advice may be worse than none. The better plan is to secure descriptive
catalogues from dealer or manufacturer before investing, and study them
well. The catalogues will tell you the price, the size, the weight, and
_what kind of work_ each variety of camera will do, and you will learn
the advantages and limitations of many before deciding upon one.


=How to Know Your Camera=

The camera once bought and in your hands, the next thing to do is to
become thoroughly acquainted with it. With your camera you are entitled
to a little book of instructions. Take your camera and the book, sit
down alone, and give them your entire attention. Read the book carefully
and, at the same time, carry out the instructions while the camera is
unloaded, that is, without the film. If the size of the diaphragm can be
changed, change it and look into the lens to see the effect; also try
adjusting the shutter and watch the lens for the effect of instantaneous
and time exposures. Try the focussing scale, locate some image in the
finder, and practise holding the camera pressed closely against your
body, pointing neither up nor down, tipping neither to one side nor the
other, but aimed directly at the object you are supposed to be
photographing. Then try turning the key which brings the film exposures
into position.


=Loading the Camera=

Learn how to load and to unload, first without unrolling your film.
Afterward adjust the roll in the camera and see that it is properly
placed and will turn easily, before you loosen the end of the film. If
you detach the gummed paper which keeps the film tightly wrapped before
placing the roll in the camera, the whole film will spring loose from
its spool and become light-struck before you can adjust it.


=Count the Turns of the Key=

With your first roll of films it is well to learn and remember the
number of turns you must give the key to bring a new exposure into
place. With my camera which takes a four-by-five picture, five turns of
the key are necessary between the exposures. Knowing this, I count, and
when the fifth turn is reached I complete it slowly, watching carefully
the while for the new number to appear in the little red celluloid
window. In this way, even when hurried or excited, I do not lose an
exposure by turning the key once too often. Always remember to place a
new exposure _directly after_ taking a picture, to make sure that you
will not take two on one film. In making ready for a new subject count
again, for there are four things one must be sure of with most cameras
before taking a photograph, and by counting you will know if any have
been omitted:

          (1) See that a fresh exposure is in place.

