The Project Gutenberg EBook of A Mixture of Genius, by Arnold Castle

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: A Mixture of Genius

Author: Arnold Castle

Illustrator: Paul Orban

Release Date: May 2, 2010 [EBook #32207]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A MIXTURE OF GENIUS ***




Produced by Sankar Viswanathan, Greg Weeks, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net







                         Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from If Worlds of Science Fiction June 1958.
    Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
    copyright on this publication was renewed.


                         A Mixture of Genius


                           BY ARNOLD CASTLE


                     _Illustrated by Paul Orban_


     _Who, but the imaginative young, shall inherit the stars?_

       *       *       *       *       *




The sleek transcontinental airliner settled onto one of the maze of
runways that was Stevenson Airport. With its turbojets fading into a
dense roar, it taxied across the field toward the central building.
Inside the plane a red light went off.

Senator Vance Duran unhooked the seat belt, reached for his briefcase,
and stepped into the crowded aisle. The other passengers were all
strangers, which had meant that for nearly an hour he had been able to
give his full attention to the several hundred pages of proposed
legislation and reports presented to the Committee on Extraterrestrial
Development, of which he was chairman. But now there would be
reporters, local political pleaders, the dinner at the Governor's, and
the inevitable unexpected interruptions which were a part of every
trip home.

As he strode through the door and onto the mobile escalator, he donned
his smile of tempered confidence in the economic future of the nation.
A television camera went into action at once and news-men formed a
small circle at the bottom of the ramp.

"That was a great little debate you put on with Ben Wickolm last
week," one of the reporters said. "You really tied him up."

"You can thank Senator Wickolm for arousing me," Duran answered,
observing to himself that perhaps _all_ of his efforts on the Hill did
not go unnoticed in his home state, if most of them seemed to.

"What do you think, Senator, of the FCC's modified ruling on the
integrated lunar relay station plan?" another asked.

"I haven't had time to get fully acquainted with it," the senator
evaded, stepping onto the ground and out of the way of the ramp.

"Say, Senator, what about the Mars colony project?" a third put in.
"How come it's bogged down?"

"No comment at present," the senator said. But he gave them an
ambiguous little grimace which was meant to suggest a minor but sticky
snarl behind the scenes. He hoped it would satisfy them for the
moment.

Making his escape as quickly as possible, he climbed onto the shuttle
car already loaded down with the other passengers. Finding an empty
seat, he folded himself into it, and was immediately joined by someone
else.

"Well, Senator, how does it feel to be home?" his companion asked with
sympathetic irony.

Duran turned, grinned, and reached for the man's hand.

"Great, Wayne," he answered, recognizing an old friend who had been of
no small aid during his earlier years in politics. "Say, I'd ask you
over for dinner if we weren't going to the Governor's tonight. Molly
would love to see you. Unfortunately I'm leaving for Washington again
in the morning."

"Why doesn't Molly move to D.C. with you, Vance?" the journalist
asked.

Duran hesitated. "Maybe in a year or so. After the boys are out of
highschool. _If_ I get the job again."

The smile on the younger man's face was heartening.

"Don't play coy with me, Vance. You know you've got this state sewed
