future development of world government and civilization. And they
needed it. The present automobiles, trains, and aircraft were all very
streamlined and marvelous when compared to the horse and buggy, but
they were still too limited, too cumbersome and too costly. There had
to be something for the average man, earning the average salary, that
would haul him--and extend his interests--to the far corners of the
world.

The mechanism would do that.

Mankind would need it to develop a sound, productive future.

But if it wasn't destroyed, there would be atomic war. There wouldn't
be any future!

       *       *       *       *       *

It was after midnight when he rose from his chair, pulled on a pair
of slacks and a sweater, and left the house. He locked the front door
and walked around to the garage. Swinging the door back, he felt his
way into the darkness, touched the familiar surfaces of his little
motor-bike, and rolled it out to the drive-way. Mounting, he kicked the
starter, and the little one-cylinder, 15 horsepower engine exploded
into a throaty chatter.

He rode down the dark, tree-lined streets, the cool air whipping over
his body. Swinging into Railroad Avenue, he pulled over to the curb and
stopped before the lighted windows of the telegraph office. He strode
in, scribbled off a telegram, and paid for it.

The office girl, counting the words, stopped and frowned. She shoved
it back across the counter to him. "Does that make sense?" she asked
dubiously.

Morrow glanced over it again and smiled. It read:

    WESTERTON, NEW JERSEY
    August 6, 1960

    D. P. SMITH
    ACME CROP DUSTERS INC.
    DENVER, COLORADO

    SCRAMBLE WESTERTON. WIRE E-T-A. MAY DAY.

    BILL MORROW

He shoved it back to her. "It makes sense, all right. And I'm expecting
a quick reply, so I'll be waiting across the street in Switzer's Cafe."

"It may take some time--"

"That reply will come as quickly as you people can handle it," Morrow
retorted. "A crop-dusting pilot is accustomed to getting telegrams in
the middle of the night--and answering them, before some other outfit
can grab the job being offered!"

The girl shrugged her thin shoulders. "All right, then. You'll be over
at Switzer's--"

"Right."

She scribbled a note on a memo pad. Morrow turned and strode out.

A feeling of elation tingled through him as he crossed the street.
Calling on D.P. Smith had been a natural reaction, once the plan had
begun forming in his mind. If he'd ever wanted anyone murdered, Smitty
was the one man he could trust!

But there was a more immediate cause for elation. It was after
midnight, and Gwyn went on shift at Switzer's Cafe at midnight. She'd
been on the dawn patrol for the past week, and the only time he'd seen
her was when he dropped in for a quick breakfast coffee every morning.

Gwyn Davidson was the only daughter of old Pat Davidson, the plant
superintendent at Western Electronics. Bill had worked under Pat as a
production engineer; he'd met Gwyn two months earlier when she returned
home from college. Gwyn's mother had died the year before from cancer,
after a lifetime of suffering and hospital bills. Old Pat was still
paying off those bills, and Gwyn had been working her own way through
school. Now, she was a waitress with an M.A. degree, helping out with
the expenses at home.

He saw her through the front window, leaning on the counter in the
deserted cafe, reading the comics in a newspaper. She was a small,
curvaceous girl in a blue waitress' uniform carefully chosen to fit to
her best advantage. Soft, dark hair tumbled back from a tanned, healthy
face that sported only a trace of lipstick.

Her wide, steady gaze flicked up as he strode in, then she smiled
warmly. "Hi, Bill. What're you doing up at this ungodly hour?" Pretty,
firm-fleshed, and bouncy.

_Even though her feet are killing her!_ Bill thought. "Hello, Gwyn," he
said. "I came down to send a telegram. Pour me some coffee, huh?" He
straddled a stool before her.

"I'll give you what we serve as coffee," she answered brightly, "but
you'll have to pay for it!"

"Fair warning. How's tricks?"

"Haven't seen her lately. What's with this telegram all of a sudden?"
She grabbed cup and saucer, turned, and drew a cupful from the chrome
coffee-maker.

"Invitation to an old friend," Bill replied half-truthfully. "All of a
sudden, I'm lonesome."

She swung back and slid the coffee before him. Her eyes were teasing.
"Wouldn't a wife do just as well?"

"A good question," he quipped back. "Come sit down and have coffee with
me, and we'll talk it over!"

"_What?_" She grinned brightly, wide-eyed. "Don't go 'way, now!"
She whirled, grabbed a cup and saucer, and filled it. "I'll be right
there!" She moved briskly around the end of the counter and perched
herself on the stool beside him. "Now! Tell me more!" She began ladling
spoon-fulls of sugar into her coffee.

It was a good comedy act, done with a natural flair for perfect timing.
Morrow leaned weakly on the counter, laughing silently.

Gwyn gave him a glare of feigned contempt. "Oh! Just another
fast-talker, huh? I might have known!" She stirred her coffee
furiously. "You engineers are all alike. If father warned me once--"

"Don't overdo it, honey," he cautioned her, lightly. "You know
perfectly well I've enjoyed those long goodnight kisses when I've
walked you home."

She sobered reflectively. "All right, Bill. But just what was this
mid-morning telegram about--or don't you want to tell me?"

It was a casually-spoken question, and the circumstances made it a
perfectly logical one. As a research engineer, Morrow worked on a
number of things which had top-secret classification, and Gwyn knew he
did.

_And I'd better classify this, too!_ Morrow thought slyly.

"Afraid I can't," he answered her, calmly.

She nodded and sipped her coffee in silence. Finally, she asked, "Will
you be glad when I'm back on a day-shift?"

Morrow took his turn sipping coffee and took his time forming an
answer. "I want to take you swimming out at the Lakeshore Lodge,
again," he said. "I still dream about the way you rolled up your
two-piece suit so it was a Bikini model--"

"Uh huh," she interrupted. Her tone was hardly enthusiastic. "If we do,
you'd better not try making the passes at me you did the last time!"

"You expect me to resist the temptation of all that beautiful skin?" he
retorted, grinning down at her.

She gave a pert shake of her head. "When I give in to a man, he'll be
my husband," she said firmly. "And he'll be my husband because he loves
me--not because he drools over my body!"

"Ummm," Morrow ummed, doubtfully. He decided it would be best to change
the subject. "Read the latest _Universe_?"

"Uh huh! What'd you think of Sturgeon's story?" She was at once bright,
smiling, interested. "Wasn't it wonderful? I mean, the way he so
perfectly defined an alien being's intelligence--"

       *       *       *       *       *

That was science-fiction. Gwyn read the science-fiction magazines
avidly, from cover to cover. Morrow read a few, along with his other
reading--the _Post_, _Harper's_, the _Digest_, and half a dozen
technical journals--and he'd even written and sold a science-fiction
story once. Nineteen editors rejected it, but the twentieth bought it
after having him revise it three times.

But that one mutual interest had gone a long way in winning his esteem
in Gwyn's mind, slight though it was. And she was cute as a bug, the
sort of female who set a man's blood a-tingle.

So they talked science-fiction. Alien creatures that inhabited other
planets, trips across space and out to the other stars, travels through
time and into other dimensions, civilizations which spread clear across
the galaxy....

It was over an hour before a young messenger boy came in with the
expected telegram. Morrow tipped the boy, excused himself to Gwyn, and
ripped open the envelope.

The message read:

    DENVER, COLORADO
    AUGUST 6 1960

    BILL MORROW
    WESTERTON, NEW JERSEY

    ROGER, WILCO. E-T-A NEWARK AIRPORT 3:10 A.M. SUNDAY AUG. 8TH. WHERE
    IN HELL IS WESTERTON?

    D.P. SMITH

Grinning, Morrow folded the yellow sheet and stuffed it into his pocket.

"Everything okay?" Gwyn asked, forcing all concern from her voice.

"Everything is okay," Morrow affirmed quietly. "How much do I owe you?"

"Four coffees? Forty-five cents."

He laid the change on the counter, then stooped and kissed her cheek
lightly. "I gotta go home and get some sleep," he murmured.

She smiled, a little wistfully. "Thanks for coming."

He went out into the cool darkness, then hurried down to the bar on the
corner and went in to use the men's room. Then he came out, crossed the
street, and climbed aboard his little motor-bike.

Thoughts drifted lazily through his mind as he chugged contentedly
homeward....

       *       *       *       *       *

Thoughts--and memories. They were cruising along peacefully at 40,000
feet. Morrow felt as if he were molded into the snug rear cockpit, an
integral part of the tons of sleek, deadly metal that was the old F-94
jet-fighter. But he'd experienced that feeling so often it no longer
mattered, then.

Before him was the familiar maze of instrument dials and signal
lights and switches crammed around a glowing, green-blotched radar
scope. Around him was the clear, transparent canopy, with the round
crash-helmet of Smitty's head poking up from the front cockpit ahead of
him. Below, off the edge of the razor-thin wing, was the criss-crossed
gray surface of the Arctic ice-pack. The sky was an intense blue-black
sprinkled with the hard, bright sparks of stars.

There were faint, rhythmic sounds around him. Familiar sounds. The
warm, dry air blowing through his flight suit, circulating over his
body. The air pushing into his face-mask. The rolling motion of the
seat-cushions, massaging his backside with mechanical dispassion.

Then the flat, metallic voice in his earphones. "_Forty-three degrees
left. Contact in five minutes!_"

"_Roger!_" Smitty's voice answered.

The ship tilted gently. Centrifugal force pressed Morrow against his
seat. The world turned slowly beneath them. Forty-three degrees.

Two minutes later, a bright spark appeared on his radar scope. "_Air
spotted!_" he spoke into his mike. "_Two degrees right!_"

"_Over to you!_" the metallic voice from ground radar answered. And the
jet shifted slightly. Two degrees.

"_Contact in two minutes_," Morrow chanted. "_One-thirty ... One ...
Thirty--_"

"_Contact!_" Smitty's voice cracked.

The F-94 whipped over into a turn. The force of two gravities shoved
Morrow down in his seat.

For a brief moment--a breathless, eternal moment, all of two
seconds--another F-94 exactly like theirs appeared directly before
them. Long enough for red lights to glow and camera guns to record a
direct hit. The practice mission was completed--almost.

Then Smitty snap-rolled the ship, missing the other ship almost by
inches. The g's piled up, cramming Morrow down in his seat, pulling at
his facial muscles. Then his vision cleared and he straightened up,
bruised and somewhat battered.

It was the old bomber-interceptor game. That other F-94 could have been
an enemy bomber, plowing toward American cities with a load of atomic
death--

Smitty turned his head and looked back. His eyes crinkled into a smile
under the green glaze of his goggles.

Smitty. Captain Daniel Purcell Smith, then--or "D.P." Smith, which
were also the initials for "Displaced Person." A cool, thoughtful, and
smart jet-fighter pilot in those days, and a darned good guy. They had
taken Seattle apart at the seams on their one furlough, preferring the
devilment of their own companionship to going home to Mom's apple pie.

Morrow's telegram had made sense, all right. The words _scramble_ and
_May Day_ were fighter-lingo; _scramble_ meant _let's go! we've a fight
on our hands_, and _May Day_ meant _I'm in trouble!_

He was in trouble, certainly. The mechanism he'd developed was, in
itself, plenty of trouble.

And it was a special kind of trouble--the kind in which the only person
he could dare trust had to be someone like Smitty. The Air Force
camaraderie which existed between them had never quite faded out. Even
after they'd been mustered back into civilian status, after Morrow had
signed a government engineering contract and Smitty had gone on to
commercial flying, they had kept in touch with each other. Diverging
interests hadn't pulled them apart; the old school ties, the old
trustworthiness was still there. An odd letter every few months or so,
a postcard at Christmas....

He was fortunate to know a man like Smitty, Morrow knew. He couldn't
have carried out his plan alone.

He reached home, stored his motor-bike in the garage, and walked into
the living room. He snapped on the light and stood there for a moment,
gazing across the room at his littered writing desk. If he were going
to carry out his plan, there was one thing he'd have to do himself.
People weren't going to like it. Good engineers were scarce.

He walked across the room, sat down at the desk, and crammed a sheet of
Western Electronics stationery into his portable typewriter. He paused,
lighted a cigarette, and then grimly proceeded to write his letter of
resignation.

       *       *       *       *       *

"It's a mechanism that floats in the Earth's field of gravity," Morrow
began--

They were seated in a secluded booth in the modernistic restaurant at
the Newark Airport. Through the wall-length observation window, they
could look down on the airfield; a giant stratoliner was rolling up
before the building, the bright spot-lights glistening off the silvery
arcs of its six big turbo-props. White-uniformed linemen were pushing
the steps up to the side of its fat hull as the door slid open and a
pert stewardess poked her head out. Beyond the gleaming sky-monster, in
the pitch darkness of early morning, the runway lights twinkled in rows
and patterns of red, yellow, blue and green sparks.

Morrow spoke quietly and succinctly, pausing only for a sip of
coffee or a pull on his cigarette, and gave a concise briefing of
his discovery and its implications. The dishes of an early breakfast
had been cleared away, so no waitress bothered them and the few other
patrons in the restaurant were out of ear-shot.

Across from him, ex-Captain D.P. Smith sprawled laconically on the
cushioned seat, listening. The expression on his lean, brown face was
thoughtful, intent. He sipped his coffee and flicked the ashes of his
cigarette into the saucer.

He was a small, slender man dressed in a conservative, pin-stripe
business suit. There was nothing dare-devil about his attitude, nor
were his movements deft or quick. He was slow, cautious; his attitude
was a reserved calmness.

It was immediately noticeable. His carefully groomed black hair and
his small, black mustache gave his features a mischievous look. There
was something satanic about his small stature, his long hands, and his
lean, handsome appearance. One would expect a bright, hand-painted tie
and a roving, speculative eye. His utter calmness and reserve seemed
incongruous.

Only the faint, white scar along his jawline might have indicated a
devil-may-care experience. Morrow had mentioned it, remembering that
Smitty had written about the crash last year--he was making a pass over
a field, spreading bug-killer spray over a farmer's potato crop, when
a sudden down-draft caught his plane and he couldn't pull up in time
to avoid the neighboring orchard. He'd crashed through the apple trees,
snapping them like kindling. The plane was completely demolished.

_When I woke up_, he'd written, _they had me spread out on a silver
tray with an apple in my mouth!_

Crop-dusting was a hard, dangerous job. The pilots did most of their
flying before dawn or in early afternoon, when the air was calm; but
they had to fly at other times, too, to make enough to meet expenses.
They'd take off in small, worn-out planes, loaded beyond safety flight
limits with bug-killer, and fly to some farmer's fields. Then they'd
make passes back and forth over the fields, flying below-treetop,
leap-frogging barbed-wire fences, zooming under telephone lines, and
dodging trees and farm buildings, their eyes stinging as the spray
billowed back into the cockpit.

The pay they received was small, mostly because there were so many
skilled pilots looking for work and so few civilian flying jobs. Smitty
could easily reenlist in the Air Force, of course, but they wouldn't
give him a flying job; at thirty-two, he was too old for military
flying. They took the eighteen-year-olds for that. And Smitty wouldn't
reenlist to sit behind a desk.

So he dusted crops. It was no job for a dare-devil, either. A pilot had
to know his limitations, the limitations of his plane, and what he was
doing every second.

       *       *       *       *       *

"--And that's the situation," Morrow concluded. "If the mechanism isn't
destroyed, it'll plunge the world into atomic war. If it is destroyed,
it'll be lost to mankind for the next several hundred years--until
somebody else stumbles across it."

"In short," Smitty resumed, "if we got it now, we have atomic war. If
we don't have it for the next few centuries, we _will_ have atomic war."

"I'm afraid so," Morrow affirmed. "Unless they manage to develop a
world civilization and government without it."

Smitty shook his head. "They need something like this gravity machine
to pull people closer together, to get them to know more about one
another. Otherwise, any world government scheme is likely to be a
fizz--unless it's established by force!"
