
"I shall not soon forget my obligations to her," said the sick man,
significantly.

"Now, Colonel Preston," said Mrs. Burke, "you are making too much of
what little I have done."

"That is impossible, Mrs. Burke. It is to your good nursing and the
doctor's skill that I owe my life, and I hardly know to which the
most."

"To the doctor, sir. I only followed out his directions."

"At the expense of your own health. You show the effects of your
long-continued care."

"It won't take long to pick up," said Mrs. Burke, cheerfully.

"Is the danger of contagion over, doctor?" asked the patient.

"Quite so."

"Then, would it not be well to write to Mrs. Preston? Not that I mean
to give up my good nurse just yet; that is, if she is willing to
stay."

"I will stay as long as you need me, sir."

"That is well; but Mrs. Preston may wish to return, now that there's
no further danger."

"I will write to her at once."

"Thank you."

The following letter was dispatched to Mrs. Preston:


    "MRS. PRESTON:--
    "Dear Madam: It gives me great pleasure to inform you that
    your husband is so far recovered that there is no danger now
    of infection. You can return with safety, and he will,
    doubtless, be glad to see you. He has been very ill,
    indeed--in danger of his life; but, thanks to the devotion of
    Mrs. Burke, who has proved an admirable nurse, he is now on
    the high road to recovery. Yours respectfully,
                                       "John Townley."


"I think that will bring her," said the doctor.

But he reckoned without his host.

The next day he received the following letter, on scented paper:


    "MY DEAR DOCTOR TOWNLEY: You cannot think how rejoiced I am
    to receive the tidings of my husband's convalescence. I have
    been so tortured with anxiety during the last four weeks! You
    cannot think how wretchedly anxious I have been. I could not
    have endured to stay away from his bedside but that my duty
    imperatively required it. I have lost flesh, and my anxiety
    has worn upon me. Now, how gladly will I resume my place at
    the bedside of my husband, restored by your skill. I am glad
    the nurse has proved faithful. It was a good chance for her,
    for she shall be liberally paid, and no doubt the money will
    be welcome. But don't you think it might be more prudent for
    me to defer my return until next week? It will be safer, I
    think, and I owe it to my boy to be very careful. You know,
    the contagion may still exist. It is hard for me to remain
    longer away, when I would fain fly to the bedside of Mr.
    Preston, but I feel that it is best. Say to him, with my
    love, that he may expect me next week. Accept my thanks for
    your attention to him. I shall never forget it; and believe
    me to be, my dear doctor, your obliged
                                       "Lucinda Preston."


Dr. Townley threw down this letter with deep disgust.

"Was ever any woman more disgustingly selfish?" he exclaimed. "Her
husband might have died, so far as she was concerned."

Of course, he had to show this letter to Colonel Preston.

The latter read it, with grave face, and the doctor thought he heard a
sigh.

"My wife is very prudent," he said, with a touch of bitterness in his
voice.

"She will be here next week," said the doctor, having nothing else to
answer.

"I think she will run no risk then," said the sick man, cynically.

But Mrs. Preston did not return in a week. It was a full week and a
half before she arrived at her own house.

The doctor was just coming out of the front door.

"How is my husband?" she asked.

"Not far from well. He is still weak, of course."

"And are you sure," she said, anxiously, "that there is no danger of
infection?"

"Not the slightest, madam," said Dr. Townley, coldly.

"I am so glad I can see him once more. You cannot imagine," she
exclaimed, clasping her hands, "how much I have suffered in my
suspense!"

The doctor remained cool and unmoved. He didn't feel that he could
respond fittingly, being absolutely incredulous.

Mrs. Preston saw it, and was nettled. She knew that she was a
hypocrite, but did not like to have the doctor, by his silence, imply
his own conviction of it.

"Mine has been a hard position," she continued.

"Your husband has not had an easy time," said the doctor,
significantly.

"But he has had good care--Mrs. Burke was a good nurse?"

"Admirable."

"She must be paid well."

"I offered her ten dollars a week."

"Humph!" said Mrs. Preston, doubtfully, in whose eyes five dollars
would have been liberal compensation. "It has been a good chance for
her."

"It is far from adequate," said the doctor, disgusted. "Money cannot
pay for such service as hers, not to speak of the risk she ran, for
cases have been known of persons being twice attacked by the disease."

"You don't think my husband will have a relapse?" asked Mrs. Preston,
with fresh alarm.

"Not if he has the same care for a short time longer."

"He shall have it. She must stay. Of course her duties are lighter
now, and six dollars a week for the remainder of the time will be
enough--don't you think so?"

"No, I don't," said the doctor, bluntly; "and, moreover, I am quite
sure your husband will not consent to reducing the wages of one whose
faithful care has saved his life."

"Oh, well, you know best," said Mrs. Preston, slowly. "I am quite
willing that she should be well paid."

Mrs. Preston went upstairs, and entered her husband's chamber.

"Oh, my dear husband!" she exclaimed, theatrically, hurrying across
the room, with affected emotion. "I am so glad to find you so much
better!"

"I am glad to see you back, Lucinda," said Colonel Preston; but he
spoke coldly, and without the slightest affectation of sentimental
joy. "I have passed through a good deal since you left me."

"And so have I!" exclaimed his wife. "Oh, how my heart has been rent
with anxiety, as I thought of you lying sick, while duty kept me from
your side."

"Is Godfrey well?" asked her husband, taking no notice of her last
speech.

"Yes, poor boy! He sends his love, and is so anxious to see you."

"Let him come next Friday afternoon," said the sick man, who doubted
this statement, yet wanted to believe it true.

"He shall. I will write to him at once."

So Mrs. Preston resumed her place in the house; but from that time
there was a something she could not understand in her husband's
manner. He was graver than formerly, and sometimes she saw him
watching her intently, and, after a little, turn away, with a sigh.

He had found her out in all her intense selfishness and want of
feeling, and he could never again regard her as formerly, even though
she tried hard at times, by a show of affection, to cover up her
heartless neglect.




CHAPTER XXIII
MRS. BURKE HAS GOOD FORTUNE


Mrs. Burke remained a week longer to nurse Colonel Preston. At the end
of this time Mr. Preston thought he was well enough to dispense with a
nurse, and accordingly she prepared to take leave.

"I shall always remember your kind service, Mrs. Burke," said the
colonel, warmly.

"It was only my duty, sir," said the widow, modestly.

"Not all would have done their duty so faithfully."

"I am glad to see you well again," said the widow.

"Not more than I am to get well, I assure you," said he. "Whenever you
are in any trouble, come to me."

With these words, he placed in her hands an envelope, which, as she
understood, contained the compensation for her services. She thanked
him, and took her departure.

Mrs. Preston was curious to know how much her husband paid the nurse,
and asked the question.

"A hundred dollars," he replied.

"A hundred dollars!" she repeated, in a tone which implied
disapproval. "I thought she agreed to come for ten dollars a week."

"So she did."

"She has not been here ten weeks; only about six."

"That is true, but she has richly earned all I gave her."

"Ten dollars a week I consider very handsome remuneration to one in
her position in life," said Mrs. Preston, pointedly.

"Lucinda, but for her attention I probably should not have lived
through this sickness. Do you think a hundred dollars so much to pay
for your husband's life?"

"You exaggerate the value of her services," said his wife.

"Dr. Townley says the same thing that I do."

"You are both infatuated with that woman," said Mrs. Preston,
impatiently.

"We only do her justice."

"Oh, well, have it your own way. But I should have only paid her what
I agreed to. It is a great windfall for her."

"She deserves it."

Mrs. Preston said no more at this time, for she found her husband too
"infatuated," as she termed it, to agree with her. She did, however,
open the subject to Godfrey when he came home, and he adopted her view
of the case.

"She and her low son are trying to get all they can out of father," he
said. "It's just like them."

"I wish I could make your father see it," said Mrs. Preston, "but he
seems prepossessed in her favor."

"If he can give a hundred dollars to her, he can give me a little
extra money; I'm going to ask him."

So he did the same evening.

"Will you give me ten dollars, father?" he asked.

"What for?"

"Oh, for various things. I need it."

"I give you an allowance of three dollars a week."

"I have a good many expenses."

"That will meet all your reasonable expenses. I was far from having as
much money as that when I was of your age."

"I don't see why you won't give me the money," said Godfrey,
discontentedly.

"I don't think you need it."

"You are generous enough to others."

"To whom do you refer?"

"You give plenty of money to that Irish boy and his mother."

"They have both rendered me great services. The boy saved me from
being robbed. The mother, in all probability, saved me from falling a
victim to smallpox. But that has nothing to do with your affairs. It
is scarcely proper for a boy like you to criticise his father's way of
disposing of his money."

"I confess I think Godfrey is right in commenting upon your
extraordinary liberality to the Burkes," observed Mrs. Preston.

"Lucinda," said her husband, gravely, "when my own wife deserted my
sick bed, leaving me to wrestle alone with a terrible and dangerous
disease, I was fortunate enough to find in Mrs. Burke a devoted nurse.
The money I have paid her is no adequate compensation, nor is it all
that I intend to do for her."

There was a part of this speech that startled Mrs. Preston. Never
before had her husband complained of her desertion of him in his
sickness, and she hoped that he had been imposed upon by the excuse
which she gave of saving herself for Godfrey. Now she saw that in this
she had not been altogether successful, and she regretted having
referred to Mrs. Burke, and so brought this reproach upon herself. She
felt it necessary to say something in extenuation.

"It was because I wanted to live for Godfrey," she said, with a
flushed face. "Nothing but that would have taken me away from you at
such a time. It was a great trial to me," she continued, putting up
her handkerchief to eyes that were perfectly dry.

"We will say no more about it," said Colonel Preston, gravely. "I
shall not refer to it, unless you undervalue my obligations to Mrs.
Burke."

Mrs. Preston thought it best not to reply, but on one thing that her
husband had said, she commented to Godfrey.

"Your father speaks of giving more money to Mrs. Burke. I suppose we
shall not know anything about it if he does."

"Perhaps he will leave her some money in his will," said Godfrey.

"Very likely. If he does, there is such a thing as contesting a
will--that is, if he gives her much."

Mrs. Preston was right. Her husband did intend to give his devoted
nurse something in his will, but of that more anon. There was one
thing which he did at once, and that was to buy the cottage which Mrs.
Burke occupied, from the heir, a non-resident. Mrs. Burke didn't learn
this until she went to pay her rent to the storekeeper, who had acted
as agent for the owner.

"I have nothing to do with the house any longer, Mrs. Burke," he said.

"Then who shall I pay rent to?" said Mrs. Burke.

"To Colonel Preston, who has recently bought the house."

Mrs. Burke, therefore, called at the house of the colonel.

Mr. and Mrs. Preston were sitting together when the servant announced
that she wished to speak to him.

"You seem to have a good deal of business with Mrs. Burke," said his
wife, in a very unpleasant tone.

"None that I care to conceal," he said, smiling. "Show Mrs. Burke in
here, Jane," he continued, addressing the servant.

"Good-morning, Mrs. Burke," he said, pleasantly.

"Good-morning," said Mrs. Preston, coldly.

"Good-morning, sir, I'm glad to see you looking so much better."

"Oh, yes, I am feeling pretty well now."

"I didn't find out till just now, Colonel Preston, that you were my
landlord."

Here Mrs. Preston pricked up her ears, for it was news to her also, as
her husband had not mentioned his recent purchase.

"Yes, I thought I would buy the house, as it was in the market."

"I have come to pay my rent. I have been in the habit of paying
fifteen dollars a quarter."

"I won't be a hard landlord," said Colonel Preston. "You are welcome
to live in the house, if it suits you, free of all rent."

"This is too much kindness," said Mrs. Burke, quite overwhelmed by the
unexpected liberality.

Mrs. Preston thought so, too, but could not well say anything.

"There's been kindness on both sides, Mrs. Burke. Put up your money, I
don't want it, but I have no doubt you will find use for it. Buy
yourself a new dress."

"Thank you, Colonel Preston. You are very generous, and I am very
grateful," said the widow.

"I have something to be grateful for also, Mrs. Burke. If you want any
repairs, just let me know, and they shall be attended to."

"Thank you, sir, but the house is very comfortable."

She soon took her leave.

"When did you buy that house, Colonel Preston?" asked his wife.

"A month since."

"You didn't say anything about it to me."

"Nor to anyone else, except those with whom I did the business."

Mrs. Preston would like to have said more, but she did not think it
expedient, remembering what she had brought upon herself before.




CHAPTER XXIV
ANDY'S JOURNEY


Toward the first of April of the succeeding year, Miss Sophia Grant
took a severe cold, not serious, indeed, but such as to make it
