a far different land, where faith and honour are not empty sounds; as,
alas! they seem but too surely to be here. Trust me, it is no girlish
terror which sends me out in this disguise of my country dress, which,
they say, finds respect at Constantinople: I go to let the chiefs of
the Crusade know the peril in which the noble lady stands, and trust to
their humanity, to their religion, to their love of honour, and fear of
disgrace, for assistance in this hour of need; and now that I have had
the blessing of meeting with thee, all besides will go well--all will
go well--and I will back to my mistress and report whom I have seen."

"Tarry yet another moment, my recovered treasure!" said Hereward, "and
let me balance this matter carefully. This Frankish lady holds the
Saxons like the very dust that thou brushest from the hem of her
garment. She treats--she regards--the Saxons as pagans and heretics.
She has dared to impose slavish tasks upon thee, born in freedom. Her
father's sword has been embrued to the hilt with Anglo-Saxon
blood--perhaps that of Waltheoff and Engelred has added death to the
stain! She has been, besides, a presumptuous fool, usurping for herself
the trophies and warlike character which belong to the other sex.
Lastly, it will be hard to find a champion to fight in her stead, since
all the crusaders have passed over to Asia, which is the land, they
say, in which they have come to war; and by orders of the Emperor, no
means of return to the hither shore will be permitted to any of them."

"Alas! alas!" said Bertha, "how does this world change us! The son of
Waltheoff I once knew brave, ready to assist distress, bold and
generous. Such was what I pictured him to myself during his absence. I
have met him again, and he is calculating, cold, and selfish!"

"Hush, damsel," said the Varangian, "and know him of whom thou
speakest, ere thou judgest him. The Countess of Paris is such as I have
said; yet let her appear boldly in the lists, and when the trumpet
shall sound thrice, another shall reply, which shall announce the
arrival of her own noble lord to do battle in her stead; or should he
fail to appear--I will requite her kindness to thee, Bertha, and be
ready in his place."

"Wilt thou? wilt thou indeed?" said the damsel; "that was spoken like
the son of Waltheoff--like the genuine stock! I will home, and comfort
my mistress; for surely if the judgment of God ever directed the issue
of a judicial combat, its influence will descend upon this. But you
hint that the Count is here--that he is at liberty--she will enquire
about that."

"She must be satisfied," replied Hereward, "to know that her husband is
under the guidance of a friend, who will endeavour to protect him from
his own extravagances and follies; or, at all events, of one who, if he
cannot properly be called a friend, has certainly not acted, and will
not act, towards him the part of an enemy.--And now, farewell, long
lost--long loved!"--Before he could say more, the Saxon maiden, after
two or three vain attempts to express her gratitude, threw herself into
her lover's arms, and despite the coyness which she had recently shown,
impressed upon his lips the thanks which she could not speak.

They parted, Bertha returning to her mistress at the lodge, which she
had left both with trouble and danger, and Hereward by the portal kept
by the negro-portress, who, complimenting the handsome Varangian on his
success among the fair, intimated, that she had been in some sort a
witness of his meeting with the Saxon damsel. A piece of gold, part of
a late largesse, amply served to bribe her tongue; and the soldier,
clear of the gardens of the philosopher, sped back as he might to the
barrack--judging that it was full time to carry some supply to Count
Robert, who had been left without food the whole day.

It is a common popular saying, that as the sensation of hunger is not
connected with any pleasing or gentle emotion, so it is particularly
remarkable for irritating those of anger and spleen. It is not,
therefore, very surprising that Count Robert, who had been so unusually
long without sustenance, should receive Hereward with a degree of
impatience beyond what the occasion merited, and injurious certainly to
the honest Varangian, who had repeatedly exposed his life that day for
the interest of the Countess and the Count himself.

"Soh, sir!" he said, in that accent of affected restraint by which a
superior modifies his displeasure against his inferior into a cold and
scornful expression--"You have played a liberal host to us!--Not that
it is of consequence; but methinks a Count of the most Christian
kingdom dines not every day with a mercenary soldier, and might expect,
if not the ostentatious, at least the needful part of hospitality."

"And methinks," replied the Varangian, "O most Christian Count, that
such of your high rank as, by choice or fate, become the guests of such
as I, may think themselves pleased, and blame not their host's
niggardliness, but the difficulty of his circumstances, if dinner
should not present itself oftener than once in four-and-twenty hours."
So saying, he clapt his hands together, and his domestic Edric entered.
His guest looked astonished at the entrance of this third party into
their retirement. "I will answer for this man," said Hereward, and
addressed him in the following words:--"What food hast thou, Edric, to
place before the honourable Count?"

"Nothing but the cold pasty," replied the attendant, "marvellously
damaged by your honour's encounter at breakfast."

The military domestic, as intimated, brought forward a large pasty, but
which had already that morning sustained a furious attack, insomuch,
that Count Robert of Paris, who, like all noble Normans, was somewhat
nice and delicate in his eating, was in some doubt whether his
scrupulousness should not prevail over his hunger; but on looking more
closely, sight, smell, and a fast of twenty hours, joined to convince
him that the pasty was an excellent one, and that the charger on which
it was presented possessed corners yet untouched. At length, having
suppressed his scruples, and made bold inroad upon the remains of the
dish, he paused to partake of a flask of strong red wine which stood
invitingly beside him, and a lusty draught increased the good-humour
which had begun to take place towards Hereward, in exchange for the
displeasure with which he had received him.

"Now, by heaven!" he said, "I myself ought to be ashamed to lack the
courtesy which I recommend to others! Here have I, with the manners of
a Flemish boor, been devouring the provisions of my gallant host,
without even asking him to sit down at his own table, and to partake of
his own good cheer!"

"I will not strain courtesies with you for that," said Hereward; and
thrusting his hand into the pasty, he proceeded with great speed and
dexterity to devour the miscellaneous contents, a handful of which was
enclosed in his grasp. The Count now withdrew from the table, partly in
disgust at the rustic proceedings of Hereward, who, however, by now
calling Edric to join him in his attack upon the pasty, showed that he
had, in fact, according to his manners, subjected himself previously to
some observance of respect towards his guest; while the assistance of
his attendant enabled him to make a clear cacaabulum of what was left.
Count Robert at length summoned up courage sufficient to put a
question, which had been trembling upon his lips ever since Hereward
had returned.

"Have thine enquiries, my gallant friend, learned more concerning my
unfortunate wife, my faithful Brenhilda?"

"Tidings I have," said the Anglo-Saxon, "but whether pleasing or not,
yourself must be the judge. This much I have learned;--she hath, as you
know, come under an engagement to meet the Caesar in arms in the lists,
but under conditions which you may perhaps think strange; these,
however, she hath entertained without scruple."

"Let me know these terms,", said the Count of Paris; "they will, I
think, appear less strange in my eyes than in thine."

But while he affected to speak with the utmost coolness, the husband's
sparkling eye and crimsoned cheek betrayed the alteration which had
taken place in his feelings. "The lady and the Caesar," said Hereward,
"as you partly heard yourself, are to meet in fight; if the Countess
wins, of course she remains the wife of the noble Count of Paris; if
she loses, she becomes the paramour of the Caesar Nicephorus Briennius."

"Saints and angels forbid!" said Count Robert; "were they to permit
such treason to triumph, we might be pardoned for doubting their
divinity!"

"Yet methinks," said the Anglo-Saxon, "it were no disgraceful
precaution that both you and I, with other friends, if we can obtain
such, should be seen under shield in the lists on the morning of the
conflict. To triumph, or to be defeated, is in the hand of fate; but
what we cannot fail to witness is, whether or not the lady receives
that fair play which is the due of an honourable combatant, and which,
as you have yourself seen, can be sometimes basely transgressed in this
Grecian empire."

"On that condition," said the Count, "and protesting, that not even the
extreme danger of my lady shall make me break through the rule of a
fair fight, I will surely attend the lists, if thou, brave Saxon, canst
find me any means of doing so.--Yet stay," he continued, after
reflecting for a moment, "thou shalt promise not to let her know that
her Count is on the field, far less to point him out to her eye among
the press of warriors. O, thou dost not know that the sight of the
beloved will sometimes steal from us our courage, even when it has most
to achieve!"

"We will endeavour," said the Varangian, "to arrange matters according
to thy pleasure, so that thou findest out no more fantastical
difficulties; for, by my word, an affair so complicated in itself,
requires not to be confused by the fine-spun whims of thy national
gallantry. Meantime, much must be done this night; and while I go about
it, thou, Sir Knight, hadst best remain here, with such disguise of
garments, and such food, as Edric may be able to procure for thee. Fear
nothing from intrusion on the part of thy neighbours. We Varangians
respect each other's secrets, of whatever nature they may chance to be."




CHAPTER THE TWENTY-FIRST.

     But for our trusty brother-in-law-and the Abbot,
     With all the rest of that consorted crew,--
     Destruction straight shall dog them at the heels:--
     Good uncle, help to order several powers
     To Oxford, or where'er these traitors are:
     They shall not live within this world, I swear.
                                             RICHARD II.


As Hereward spoke the last words narrated in the foregoing chapter, he
left the count in his apartment, and proceeded to the Blacquernal
Palace. We traced his first entrance into the court, but since then he
had frequently been summoned, not only by order of the Princess Anna
Comnena, who delighted in asking him questions concerning the customs
of his native country, and marking down the replies in her own inflated
language; but also by the direct command of the Emperor himself, who
had the humour of many princes, that of desiring to obtain direct
information from persons in a very inferior station in their Court. The
ring which the Princess had given to the Varangian, served as a
pass-token more than once, and was now so generally known by the slaves
of the palace, that Hereward had only to slip it into the hand of a
principal person among them, and was introduced into a small chamber,
not distant from the saloon already mentioned, dedicated to the Muses.
In this small apartment, the Emperor, his spouse Irene, and their
accomplished daughter Anna Comnena, were seated together, clad in very
ordinary apparel, as indeed the furniture of the room itself was of the
kind used by respectable citizens, saving that mattrasses, composed of
eiderdown, hung before each door to prevent the risk of eavesdropping.

"Our trusty Varangian," said the Empress.

"My guide and tutor respecting the manners of those steel-clad men,"
said the Princess Anna Comnena, "of whom it is so necessary that I
should form an accurate idea."

"Your Imperial Majesty," said the Empress, "will not, I trust, think
your consort and your muse-inspired daughter, are too many to share
with you the intelligence brought by this brave and loyal man?"

"Dearest wife and daughter," returned the Emperor, "I have hitherto
spared you the burden of a painful secret, which I have locked in my
own bosom, at whatever expense of solitary sorrow and unimparted
anxiety. Noble daughter, you in particular will feel this calamity,
learning, as you must learn, to think odiously of one, of whom it has
hitherto been your duty to hold a very different opinion."

"Holy Mary!" exclaimed the Princess.

"Rally yourself," said the Emperor; "remember you are a child of the
purple chamber, born, not to weep for your father's wrongs, but to
avenge them,--not to regard even him who has lain by your side as half
so important as the sacred Imperial grandeur, of which you are yourself
a partaker."

"What can such words preface?" said Anna Comnena, in great agitation.

"They say," answered the Emperor, "that the Caesar is an ungrateful man
to all my bounties, and even to that which annexed him to my own.
house, and made him by adoption my own son. He hath consorted himself
with a knot of traitors, whose very names are enough to raise the foul
fiend, as if to snatch his assured prey!"

"Could Nicephorus do this?" said the astonished and forlorn Princess;
"Nicephorus, who has so often called my eyes the lights by which he
steered his path? Could he do this to my father, to whose exploits he
has listened hour after hour, protesting that he knew not whether it
was the beauty of the language, or the heroism of the action, which
most enchanted him? Thinking with the same thought, seeing with the
same eye, loving with the same heart,--O, my father! it is impossible
that he could be so false. Think of the neighbouring Temple of the
Muses!"

"And if I did," murmured Alexius in his heart, "I should think of the
only apology which could be proposed for the traitor. A little is well
enough, but the full soul loatheth the honey-comb." Then speaking
aloud, "My daughter," he said, "be comforted; we ourselves were
unwilling to believe the shameful truth; but our guards have been
debauched; their commander, that ungrateful Achilles Tatius, with the
equal traitor, Agelastes, have been seduced to favour our imprisonment
or murder; and, alas for Greece in the very moment when she required
the fostering care of a parent, she was to be deprived of him by a
sudden and merciless blow!"

Here the Emperor wept, whether for the loss to be sustained by his
subjects, or of his own life, it is hard to say.

"Methinks," said Irene, "your Imperial Highness is slow in taking
measures against the danger."

"Under your gracious permission, mother," answered the Princess, "I
would rather say he was hasty in giving belief to it. Methinks the
evidence of a Varangian, granting him to be ever so stout a
man-at-arms, is but a frail guarantee against the honour of your
son-in-law--the approved bravery and fidelity of the captain of your
guards--the deep sense, virtue, and profound wisdom, of the greatest of
your philosophers"--

"And the conceit of an over-educated daughter," said the Emperor, "who
will not allow her parent to judge in what most concerns him. I will
tell thee, Anna, I know every one of them, and the trust which may be
reposed in them; the honour of your Nicephorus--the bravery and
fidelity of the Acolyte--and the virtue and wisdom of Agelastes--have I
not had them all in my purse? And had my purse continued well filled,
and my arm strong as it was of late, there they would have still
remained. But the butterflies went off as the weather became cold, and
I must meet the tempest without their assistance. You talk of want of
proof? I have proof sufficient when I see danger; this honest soldier
brought me indications which corresponded with my own private remarks,
made on purpose. Varangian he shall be of Varangians; Acolyte he shall
be named, in place of the present traitor; and who knows what may come
thereafter?"

"May it please your Highness," said the Varangian, who had been
hitherto silent, "many men in this empire rise to dignity by the fall
of their original patrons, but it is a road to greatness to which I
cannot reconcile my conscience; moreover, having recovered a friend,
from whom I was long ago separated, I shall require, in short space,
your Imperial license for going hence, where I shall leave thousands of
enemies behind me, and spending my life, like many of my countrymen,
under the banner of King William of Scotland"--

"Part with _thee_, most inimitable man!" cried the Emperor, with
emphasis; "where shall I get a soldier--a champion--a friend--so
faithful?"

"Noble sir," replied the Anglo-Saxon, "I am every way sensible to your
goodness and munificence; but let me entreat you to call me by my own
name, and to promise me nothing but your forgiveness, for my having
been the agent of such confusion among your Imperial servants. Not only
is the threatened fate of Achilles Tatius, my benefactor; of the
Caesar, whom I think my well-wisher; and even of Agelastes himself,
painful, so far as it is of my bringing round; but also I have known it
somehow happen, that those on whom your Imperial Majesty has lavished
the most valuable expressions of your favour one day, were the next day
food to fatten the chough and crow. And this, I acknowledge, is a
purpose, for which I would not willingly have it said I had brought my
English limbs to these Grecian shores."

"Call thee by thine own name, my Edward," said the Emperor, (while he
muttered aside--"by Heaven, I have again forgot the name of the
barbarian!")--"by thine own name certainly for the present, but only
until we shall devise one more fitted for the trust we repose in thee.
Meantime, look at this scroll, which contains, I think, all the
particulars which we have been able to learn of this plot, and give it
to these unbelieving women, who will not credit that an Emperor is in
danger, till the blades of the conspirators' poniards are clashing
within his ribs."

Hereward did as he was commanded, and having looked at the scroll, and
signified, by bending his head, his acquiescence in its contents, he
presented it to Irene, who had not read long, ere, with a countenance
so embittered that she had difficulty in pointing out the cause of her
displeasure to her daughter, she bade her, with animation, "Read
that--read that, and judge of the gratitude and affection of thy
Caesar!"

The Princess Anna Comnena awoke from a state of profound and
overpowering melancholy, and looked at the passage pointed out to her,
at first with an air of languid curiosity, which presently deepened
into the most intense interest. She clutched the scroll as a falcon
does his prey, her eye lightened with indignation; and it was with the
cry of the bird when in fury that she exclaimed, "Bloody-minded,
double-hearted traitor! what wouldst thou have? Yes, father," she said,
rising in fury, "it is no longer the voice of a deceived princess that
shall intercede to avert from the traitor Nicephorus the doom he has
deserved! Did he think that one born in the purple chamber could be
divorced--murdered, perhaps--with the petty formula of the Romans,
'Restore the keys---be no longer my domestic drudge?'[Footnote: The
laconic form of the Roman divorce.] Was a daughter of the blood of
Comnenus liable to such insults as the meanest of Quirites might bestow
on a family housekeeper!"

So saying, she dashed the tears from her eyes, and her countenance,
naturally that of beauty and gentleness, became animated with the
expression of a fury. Hereward looked at her with a mixture of fear,
dislike and compassion. She again burst forth, for nature having given
her considerable abilities, had lent her at the same time an energy of
passion, far superior in power to the cold ambition of Irene, or the
wily, ambidexter, shuffling policy of the Emperor.

"He shall abye it," said the Princess; "he shall dearly abye it! False,
smiling, cozening traitor!--and for that unfeminine barbarian!
Something of this I guessed, even at that old fool's banqueting-house;
and yet if this unworthy Caesar submits his body to the chance of arms,
he is less prudent than I have some reason to believe. Think you he
will have the madness to brand us with such open neglect, my father?
and will you not invent some mode of ensuring our revenge?"

"Soh!" thought the Emperor, "this difficulty is over; she will run down
hill to her revenge, and will need the snaffle and curb more than the
lash. If every jealous dame in Constantinople were to pursue her fury
as unrelentingly, our laws should be written, like Draco's, not in ink,
but in blood.--Attend to me now," he said aloud, "my wife, my daughter,
and thou, dear Edward, and you shall learn, and you three only, my mode
of navigating the vessel of the state through these shoals."

"Let us see distinctly," continued Alexius, "the means by which they
propose to act, and these shall instruct us how to meet them. A certain
number of the Varangians are unhappily seduced, under pretence of
wrongs, artfully stirred up by their villanous general. A part of them
are studiously to be arranged nigh our person--the traitor Ursel, some
of them suppose, is dead, but if it were so, his name is sufficient to
draw together his old factionaries--I have a means of satisfying them
on that point, on which I shall remain silent for the present.--A
considerable body of the Immortal Guards have also given way to
seduction; they are to be placed to support the handful of treacherous
Varangians, who are in the plot to attack our person.--Now. a slight
change in the stations of the soldiery, which thou, my faithful Edward
--or--a--a--whatever thou art named,--for which thou, I say, shalt have
full authority, will derange the plans of the traitors, and place the
true men in such position around them as to cut them to pieces with
little trouble."

"And the combat, my lord?" said the Saxon.

"Thou hadst been no true Varangian hadst thou not enquired after that,"
said the Emperor, nodding good-humouredly towards him. "As to the
combat, the Caesar has devised it, and it shall be my care that he
shall not retreat from the dangerous part of it. He cannot in honour
avoid fighting with this woman, strange as the combat is; and however
it ends, the conspiracy will break forth, and as assuredly as it comes
against persons prepared, and in arms, shall it be stifled in the blood
of the conspirators!"

"My revenge does not require this," said the Princess; "and your
Imperial honour is also interested that this Countess shall be
protected."

"It is little business of mine," said the Emperor. "She comes here with
her husband altogether uninvited. He behaves with insolence in my
presence, and deserves whatever may be the issue to himself or his lady
of their mad adventure. In sooth, I desired little more than to give
him a fright with those animals whom their ignorance judged enchanted,
and to give his wife a slight alarm about the impetuosity of a Grecian
lover, and there my vengeance should have ended. But it may be that his
wife may be taken under my protection, now that little revenge is over."

"And a paltry revenge it was," said the Empress, "that you, a man past
middle life, and with a wife who might command some attention, should
constitute yourself the object of alarm to such a handsome man as Count
Robert, and the Amazon his wife."

"By your favour, dame Irene, no," said the Emperor. "I left that part
of the proposed comedy to my son-in-law the Caesar."

But when the poor Emperor had in some measure stopt one floodgate, he
effectually opened another, and one which was more formidable. "The
more shame to your Imperial wisdom, my father!" exclaimed the Princess
Anna Comnena; "it is a shame, that with wisdom and a beard like yours,
you should be meddling in such indecent follies as admit disturbance
into private families, and that family your own daughter's! Who can say
that the Caesar Nicephorus Briennius ever looked astray towards another
woman than his wife, till the Emperor taught him to do so, and involved
him in a web of intrigue and treachery, in which he has endangered the
life of his father-in-law?"

"Daughter! daughter! daughter!"--said the Empress; "daughter of a
she-wolf, I think, to goad her parent at such an unhappy time, when all
the leisure he has is too little to defend his life!"

"Peace, I pray you, women both, with your senseless clamours," answered
Alexius, "and let me at least swim for my life undisturbed with your
folly. God knows if I am a man to encourage, I will not say the reality
of wrong, but even its mere appearance!"

These words he uttered, crossing himself, with a devout groan. His wife
Irene, in the meantime, stept before him, and said, with a bitterness
in her looks and accent, which only long-concealed nuptial hatred
breaking forth at once could convey,--"Alexius, terminate this affair
how it will, you have lived a hypocrite, and thou wilt not fail to die
one." So saying, with an air of noble indignation, and carrying her
daughter along with her, she swept out of the apartment.

The Emperor looked after her in some confusion. He soon, however,
recovered his self-possession, and turning to Hereward, with a look of
injured majesty, said, "Ah! my dear Edward,"---for the word had become
rooted in his mind, instead of the less euphonic name of
Hereward,--"thou seest how it is even with the greatest, and that the
Emperor, in moments of difficulty, is a subject of misconstruction, as
well as the meanest burgess of Constantinople; nevertheless, my trust
is so great in thee, Edward, that I would have thee believe, that my
daughter, Anna Comnena, is not of the temper of her mother, but rather
of my own; honouring, thou mayst see, with religious fidelity, the
unworthy ties which I hope soon to break, and assort her with other
fetters of Cupid, which shall be borne more lightly. Edward, my main
trust is in thee. Accident presents us with an opportunity, happy of
the happiest, so it be rightly improved, of having all the traitors
before us assembled on one fair field. Think, _then_, on that day, as
the Franks say at their tournaments, that fair eyes behold thee. Thou
canst not devise a gift within my power, but I will gladly load thee
with it."

"It needs not," said the Varangian, somewhat coldly; "my highest
ambition is to merit the epitaph upon my tomb, 'Hereward was faithful.'
I am about, however, to demand a proof of your imperial confidence,
which, perhaps, you may think a startling one."

"Indeed!" said the Emperor. "What, in one word, is thy demand?"

"Permission," replied Hereward, "to go to the Duke of Bouillon's
encampment, and entreat his presence in the lists, to witness this
extraordinary combat."

"That he may return with his crusading madmen," said the Emperor, "and
sack Constantinople, under pretence of doing justice to his
Confederates? This, Varangian, is at least speaking thy mind openly."

"No, by Heavens!" said Hereward suddenly; "the Duke of Bouillon shall
come with no more knights than may be a reasonable guard, should
treachery be offered to the Countess of Paris."

"Well, even in this," said the Emperor, "will I be conformable; and if
thou, Edward, betrayest my trust, think that thou forfeitest all that
my friendship has promised, and dost incur, besides, the damnation that
is due to the traitor who betrays with a kiss."

"For thy reward, noble sir," answered the Varangian, "I hereby renounce
all claim to it. When the diadem is once more firmly fixed upon thy
brow, and the sceptre in thy hand, if I am then alive, if my poor
services should deserve so much, I will petition thee for the means of
leaving this court, and returning to the distant island in which I was
born. Meanwhile, think me not unfaithful, because I have for a time the
means of being so with effect. Your Imperial Highness shall learn that
Hereward is as true as is your right hand to your left."--So saying, he
took his leave with a profound obeisance.

The Emperor gazed after him with a countenance in which doubt was
mingled with admiration.

"I have trusted him," he said, "with all he asked, and with the power
of ruining me entirely, if such be his purpose. He has but to breathe a
whisper, and the whole mad crew of crusaders, kept in humour at the
expense of so much current falsehood, and so much more gold, will
return with fire and sword to burn down Constantinople, and sow with
salt the place where it stood. I have done what I had resolved never to
do,--I have ventured kingdom and life on the faith of a man born of
woman. How often have I said, nay, sworn, that I would not hazard
myself on such peril, and yet, step by step, I have done so! I cannot
tell--there is in that man's looks and words a good faith which
overwhelms me; and, what is almost incredible, my belief in him has
increased in proportion to his showing me how slight my power was over
him. I threw, like the wily angler, every bait I could devise, and some
of them such as a king would scarcely have disdained; to none of these
would he rise; but yet he gorges, I may say, the bare hook, and enters
upon my service without a shadow of self-interest.--Can this be
double-distilled treachery?--or can it be what men call
disinterestedness?--If I thought him false, the moment is not yet
past--he has not yet crossed the bridge--he has not passed the guards
of the palace, who have no hesitation, and know no disobedience--But
no--I were then alone in the land, and without a friend or
confidant.--I hear the sound of the outer gate unclose, the sense of
danger certainly renders my ears more acute than usual.--It shuts
again--the die is cast. He is at liberty--and Alexius Comnenus must
stand or fall, according to the uncertain faith of a mercenary
Varangian." He clapt his hands; a slave appeared, of whom he demanded
wine. He drank, and his heart was cheered within him. "I am decided,"
he said, "and will abide with resolution the cast of the throw, for
good or for evil."

So saying, he retired to his apartment, and was not again seen during
that night.




CHAPTER THE TWENTY-SECOND.

     And aye, as if for death, some lonely trumpet peal'd.
                                                    CAMPBELL.


The Varangian, his head agitated with the weighty matters which imposed
on him, stopt from time to time as he journeyed through the moonlight
streets, to arrest passing ideas as they shot through his mind, and
consider them with accuracy in all their bearings. His thoughts were
such as animated or alarmed him alternately, each followed by a
confused throng of accompaniments which it suggested, and banished
again in its turn by reflections of another description. It was one of
those conjunctures when the minds of ordinary men feel themselves
unable to support a burden which is suddenly flung upon them, and when,
on the contrary, those of uncommon fortitude, and that best of Heaven's
gifts, good sense, founded on presence of mind, feel their talents
awakened and regulated for the occasion, like a good steed under the
management of a rider of courage and experience.

As he stood in one of those fits of reverie, which repeatedly during
that night arrested his stern military march, Hereward thought that his
ear caught the note of a distant trumpet. This surprised him; a trumpet
blown at that late hour, and in the streets of Constantinople, argued
something extraordinary; for as all military movements were the subject
of special ordinance, the etiquette of the night could hardly have been
transgressed without some great cause. The question was, what that
cause could be?

Had the insurrection broken out unexpectedly, and in a different manner
from what the conspirators proposed to themselves?--If so, his meeting
with his plighted bride, after so many years' absence, was but a
delusive preface to their separating for ever. Or had the crusaders, a
race of men upon whose motions it was difficult to calculate, suddenly
taken arms and returned from the opposite shore to surprise the city?
This might very possibly be the case; so numerous had been the
different causes of complaint afforded to the crusaders, that, when
they were now for the first time assembled into one body, and had heard
the stories which they could reciprocally tell concerning the perfidy
of the Greeks, nothing was so likely, so natural, even perhaps so
justifiable, as that they should study revenge.

But the sound rather resembled a point of war regularly blown, than the
tumultuous blare of bugle-horns and trumpets, the accompaniments at
once, and the annunciation, of a taken town, in which the horrid
circumstances of storm had not yet given place to such stern peace as
the victors' weariness of slaughter and rapine allows at length to the
wretched inhabitants. Whatever it was, it was necessary that Hereward
should learn its purport, and therefore he made his way into a broad
street near the barracks, from, which the sound seemed to come, to
which point, indeed, his way was directed for other reasons.

The inhabitants of that quarter of the town did not appear violently
startled by this military signal. The moonlight slept on the street,
crossed by the gigantic shadowy towers of Sancta Sophia. No human being
appeared in the streets, and such as for an instant looked from their
doors or from their lattices, seemed to have their curiosity quickly
satisfied, for they withdrew their heads, and secured the opening
through which they had peeped.

Hereward could not help remembering the traditions which were recounted
by the fathers of his tribe, in the deep woods, of Hampshire, and which
spoke of invisible huntsmen, who were heard to follow with viewless
horses and hounds the unseen chase through the depths of the forests of
Germany. Such it seemed were the sounds with which these haunted woods
were wont to ring while the wild chase was up; and with such apparent
terror did the hearers listen to their clamour.

"Fie!" he said, as he suppressed within him a tendency to the same
superstitious fears; "do such childish fancies belong to a man trusted
with so much, and from whom so much is expected?" He paced down the
street, therefore, with his battle-axe over his shoulder, and the first
person whom he saw venturing to look out of his door, he questioned
concerning the cause of this military music at such an unaccustomed
hour.

"I cannot tell, so please you, my lord," said the citizen, unwilling,
it appeared, to remain in the open air, or to enter into conversation,
and greatly disposed to decline further questioning. This was the
political citizen of Constantinople whom we met with at the beginning
of this history, and who, hastily stepping into his habitation,
eschewed all further conversation.

The wrestler Stephanos showed himself at the next door, which was
garlanded with oak and ivy leaves, in honour of some recent victory. He
stood unshrinking, partly encouraged by the consciousness of personal
strength, and partly by a rugged surliness of temper, which is often
mistaken among persons of this kind for real courage. His admirer and
flatterer, Lysimachus, kept himself ensconced behind his ample
shoulders.

As Hereward passed, he put the same question as he did to the former
citizen,--"Know you the meaning of these trumpets sounding so late?"

"You should know best yourself," answered Stephanos, doggedly; "for, to
judge by your axe and helmet, they are your trumpets, and not ours,
which disturb honest men in their first sleep."

"Varlet!" answered the Varangian, with an emphasis which made the
prizer start,--"but--when that trumpet sounds, it is no time for a
soldier to punish insolence as it deserves."

The Greek started back and bolted into his house, nearly overthrowing
in the speed of his retreat the artist Lysimachus, who was listening to
what passed.

Hereward passed on to the barracks, where the military music had seemed
to halt; but on the Varangian crossing the threshold of the ample
courtyard, it broke forth again with a tremendous burst, whose clangour
almost stunned him, though well accustomed to the sounds. "What is the
meaning of this, Engelbrecht?" he said to the Varangian sentinel, who
paced axe in hand before the entrance.

"The proclamation of a challenge and combat," answered Engelbrecht.
"Strange things towards, comrade; the frantic crusaders have bit the
Grecians, and infected them with their humour of tilting, as they say
dogs do each other with madness."

Hereward made no reply to the sentinel's speech, but pressed forward
into a knot of his fellow-soldiers who were assembled in the court,
half-armed, or, more properly, in total disarray, as just arisen from
their beds, and huddled around the trumpets of their corps, which were
drawn out in full pomp. He of the gigantic instrument, whose duty it
was to intimate the express commands of the Emperor, was not wanting in
his place, and the musicians were supported by a band of the Varangians
in arms, headed by Achilles Tatius himself. Hereward could also notice,
on approaching nearer, as his comrades made way for him, that six of
the Imperial heralds were on duty on this occasion; four of these (two
acting at the same time) had already made proclamation, which was to be
repeated for the third time by the two last, as was the usual fashion
in Constantinople with Imperial mandates of great consequence. Achilles
Tatius, the moment he saw his confidant, made him a sign, which
Hereward understood as conveying a desire to speak with him after the
proclamation was over. The herald, after the flourish of trumpets was
finished, commenced in. these words:

"By the authority of the resplendent and divine Prince Alexius
Comnenus, Emperor of the most holy Roman Empire, his Imperial Majesty
desires it to be made known to all and sundry the subjects of his
empire, whatever their race of blood may be, or at whatever shrine of
divinity they happen, to bend--Know ye, therefore, that upon the second
day after this is dated, our beloved son-in-law, the much esteemed
Caesar, hath taken upon, him to do battle with our sworn enemy, Robert,
Count of Paris, on account of his insolent conduct, by presuming
publicly to occupy our royal seat, and no less by breaking, in our
Imperial presence, those curious specimens of art, ornamenting our
throne, called by tradition the Lions of Solomon. And that there may
not remain a man in Europe who shall dare to say that the Grecians are
behind other parts of the world in any of the manly exercises which
Christian nations use, the said noble enemies, renouncing all
assistance from falsehood, from spells, or from magic, shall debate
this quarrel in three courses with grinded spears, and three passages
of arms with sharpened swords; the field to be at the judgment of the
honourable Emperor, and to be decided at his most gracious and unerring
pleasure. And so God show the right!"

Another formidable flourish of the trumpets concluded the ceremony.
Achilles then dismissed the attendant troops, as well as the heralds
and musicians, to their respective quarters; and having got Hereward
close to his side, enquired of him whether he had learned any thing of
the prisoner, Robert, Count of Paris.

"Nothing," said the Varangian, "save the tidings your proclamation
contains."

"You think, then," said Achilles, "that the Count has been a party to
it."

"He ought to have been so," answered the Varangian. "I know no one but
himself entitled to take burden for his appearance in the lists."

"Why, look you," said the Acolyte, "my most excellent, though
blunt-witted Hereward, this Caesar of ours hath had the extravagance to
venture his tender wit in comparison to that of Achilles Tatius. He
stands upon his honour, too, this ineffable fool, and is displeased
with the idea of being supposed either to challenge a woman, or to
receive a challenge at her hand. He has substituted, therefore, the
name of the lord instead of the lady. If the Count fail to appear, the
Caesar walks forward challenger and successful combatant at a cheap
rate, since no one has encountered him, and claims that the lady should
be delivered up to him as a captive of his dreaded bow and spear. This
will be the signal for a general tumult, in which, if the Emperor be
not slain on the spot, he will be conveyed to the dungeon of his own
Blacquernal, there to endure the doom which his cruelty has inflicted
upon so many others."

"But"---said the Varangian.

"But---but--but," said his officer; "but thou art a fool. Canst thou
not see that this gallant Caesar is willing to avoid the risk of
encountering with this lady, while he earnestly desires to be supposed
willing to meet her husband? It is our business to fix the combat in
such a shape as to bring all who are prepared for insurrection together
in arms to play their parts. Do thou only see that our trusty friends
are placed near to the Emperor's person, and in such a manner as to
keep from him the officious and meddling portion of guards, who may be
disposed to assist him; and whether the Caesar fights a combat with
lord or lady, or whether there be any combat at all or not, the
revolution shall be accomplished, and the Tatii shall replace the
Comneni upon the Imperial throne of Constantinople. Go, my trusty
Hereward. Thou wilt not forget that the signal word of the insurrection
is Ursel, who lives in the affections of the people, although his body,
it is said, has long lain a corpse in the dungeons of the Blacquernal."

"What was this Ursel," said Hereward, "of whom I hear men talk so
variously?"

"A competitor for the crown with Alexius Comnenus--good, brave, and
honest; but overpowered by the cunning, rather than the skill or
bravery of his foe. He died, as I believe, in the Blacquernal; though
when, or how, there are few that can say. But, up and be doing, my
Hereward! Speak encouragement to the Varangians--Interest whomsoever
thou canst to join us. Of the Immortals, as they are called, and of the
discontented citizens, enough are prepared to fill up the cry, and
follow in the wake of those on whom we must rely as the beginners of
the enterprise. No longer shall Alexius's cunning, in avoiding popular
assemblies, avail to protect him; he cannot, with regard to his honour,
avoid being present at a combat to be fought beneath his own eye; and
Mercury be praised for the eloquence which inspired him, after some
hesitation, to determine for the proclamation!"

"You have seen him, then, this evening?" said the Varangian.

"Seen him! Unquestionably," answered the Acolyte. "Had I ordered these
trumpets to be sounded without his knowledge, the blast had blown the
head from my shoulders."

"I had wellnigh met you at the palace," said Hereward; while his heart
throbbed almost as high as if he had actually had such a dangerous
encounter.

"I heard something of it," said Achilles; "that you came to take the
parting orders of him who now acts the sovereign. Surely, had I seen
you there, with that steadfast, open, seemingly honest countenance,
cheating the wily Greek by very dint of bluntness, I had not forborne
laughing at the contrast between that and the thoughts of thy heart."

"God alone," said Hereward, "knows the thoughts of our hearts; but I
take him to witness, that I am faithful to my promise, and will
discharge the task intrusted to me."

"Bravo! mine honest Anglo-Saxon," said Achilles. "I pray thee to call
my slaves to unarm me; and when thou thyself doffest those weapons of
an ordinary life-guardsman, tell them they never shall above twice more
enclose the limbs of one for whom fate has much more fitting garments
in store."

Hereward dared not intrust his voice with an answer to so critical a
speech; he bowed profoundly, and retired to his own quarters in the
building.

Upon entering the apartment, he was immediately saluted by the voice of
Count Robert, in joyful accents, not suppressed by the fear of making
himself heard, though prudence should have made that uppermost in his
mind.

"Hast thou heard it, my dear Hereward," he said--"hast thou heard the
proclamation, by which this Greek antelope hath defied me to tilting
with grinded spears, and fighting three passages of arms with sharpened
swords? Yet there is something strange, too, that he should not think
it safer to hold my lady to the encounter! He may think, perhaps, that
the crusaders would not permit such a battle to be fought. But, by our
Lady of the Broken Lances! he little knows that the men of the West
hold their ladies' character for courage as jealously as they do their
own. This whole night have I been considering in what armour I shall
clothe me; what shift I shall make for a steed; and whether I shall not
honour him sufficiently by using Tranchefer, as my only weapon, against
his whole armour, offensive and defensive."

"I shall take care, however," said Hereward, "that, thou art better
provided in case of need.--Thou knowest not the Greeks."




CHAPTER THE TWENTY-THIRD.


The Varangian did not leave the Count of Paris until the latter had in
his hands his signet-ring, _semee_, (as the heralds express it,) _with
lances splintered_, and bearing the proud motto, "Mine yet unscathed."
Provided with this symbol of confidence, it was now his business to
take order for communicating the approaching solemnity to the leader of
the crusading army, and demanding from him, in the name of Robert of
Paris, and the Lady Brenhilda, such a detachment of western cavaliers
as might ensure strict observance of honour and honesty in the
arrangement of the lists, and during the progress of the combat. The
duties imposed on Hereward were such as to render it impossible for him
to proceed personally to the camp of Godfrey: and though there were
many of the Varangians in whose fidelity he could have trusted, he knew
of none among those under his immediate command whose intelligence, on
so novel an occasion, might be entirely depended on. In this
perplexity, he strolled, perhaps without well knowing why, to the
gardens of Agelastes, where fortune once more produced him an interview
with Bertha.

No sooner had Hereward made her aware of his difficulty, than the
faithful bower-maiden's resolution was taken.

"I see," said she, "that the peril of this part of the adventure must
rest with me; and wherefore should it not? My mistress, in the bosom of
prosperity, offered herself to go forth into the wide world for my
sake; I will for hers go to the camp of this Frankish lord. He is an
honourable man, and a pious Christian, and his followers are faithful
pilgrims. A woman can have nothing to fear who goes to such men upon
such an errand."

The Varangian, however, was too well acquainted with the manners of
camps to permit the fair Bertha to go alone. He provided, therefore,
for her safe-guard a trusty old soldier, bound to his person by long
kindness and confidence, and having thoroughly possessed her of the
particulars of the message she was to deliver, and desired her to be in
readiness without the enclosure at peep of dawn, returned once more to
his barracks.

With the earliest light, Hereward was again at the spot where he had
parted overnight with Bertha, accompanied by the honest soldier to
whose care he meant to confide her. In a short time, he had seen them
safely on board of a ferry-boat lying in the harbour; the master of
which readily admitted them, after some examination of their license,
to pass to Scutari, which was forged in the name of the Acolyte, as
authorised by that foul conspirator, and which agreed with the
appearance of old Osmund and his young charge.

The morning was lovely; and erelong the town of Scutari opened on the
view of the travellers, glittering, as now, with a variety of
architecture, which, though it might be termed fantastical, could not
be denied the praise of beauty. These buildings rose boldly out of a
thick grove of cypresses, and other huge trees, the larger, probably,
as they were respected for filling the cemeteries, and being the
guardians of the dead.

At the period we mention, another circumstance, no less striking than
beautiful, rendered doubly interesting a scene which must have been at
all times greatly so. A large portion of that miscellaneous army which
came to regain the holy places of Palestine, and the blessed Sepulchre
itself, from the infidels, had established themselves in a camp within
a mile, or thereabouts, of Scutari. Although, therefore, the crusaders
were destitute in a great measure of the use of tents, the army
(excepting the pavilions of some leaders of high rank) had constructed
for themselves temporary huts, not unpleasing to the eye, being
decorated with leaves and flowers, while the tall pennons and banners
that floated over them with various devices, showed that the flower of
Europe were assembled at that place. A loud and varied murmur,
resembling that of a thronged hive, floated from the camp of the
crusaders to the neighbouring town of Scutari, and every now and then
the deep tone was broken by some shriller sound, the note of some
musical instrument, or the treble scream of some child or female, in
fear or in gaiety.

The party at length landed in safety; and as they approached one of the
gates of the camp, there sallied forth a brisk array of gallant
cavaliers, pages, and squires, exercising their masters' horses or
their own. From the noise they made, conversing at the very top of
their voices, galloping, curvetting, and prancing their palfreys, it
seemed as if their early discipline had called them to exercise ere the
fumes of last night's revel were thoroughly dissipated by repose. So
soon as they saw Bertha and her party, they approached them with cries
which marked their country was Italy--"Al'erta! al'erta!--Roba de
guadagno, cameradi!" [Footnote: That is--"Take heed! take heed! there
is booty, comrades!"]

They gathered round the Anglo-Saxon maiden and her companions,
repeating their cries in a manner which made Bertha tremble. Their
general demand was, "What was her business in their camp?"

"I would to the general-in-chief, cavaliers," answered Bertha, "having
a secret message to his ear."

"For whose ear?" said a leader of the party, a handsome youth of about
eighteen years of age, who seemed either to have a sounder brain than
his fellows, or to have overflowed it with less wine. "Which of our
leaders do you come hither to see?" he demanded.

"Godfrey of Bouillon."

"Indeed!" said the page who had spoken first; "can nothing of less
consequence serve thy turn? Take a look amongst us; young are we all,
and reasonably wealthy. My Lord of Bouillon is old, and if he has any
sequins, he is not like to lavish them in this way."

"Still I have a token to Godfrey of Bouillon," answered Bertha, "an
assured one; and he will little thank any who obstructs my free passage
to him;" and therewithal showing a little case, in which the signet of
the Count of Paris was enclosed, "I will trust it in your hands," she
said, "if you promise not to open it, but to give me free access to the
noble leader of the crusaders."

"I will," said the youth, "and if such be the Duke's pleasure, thou
