in the presence of Nern and his beautiful, petite sister.

With Zorn, Larner was supervising the construction of a big net of
strongly woven wire mesh, in which it was hoped to catch one of the
vampires. It was decided to bait the trap with a fat female lat.

Zorn, Larner and the Belas fared forth from the concentration camp
followed by a company of soldiers carrying the big net. Tula with her
own hand led the fat lat heifer. His eyes were filled with commiseration
for the poor animal.

Thousands of soldiers and citizenry, in fighting array, watched the
departure of the little group.

In a glade the trap was set and the net arranged to fall over the
monster once it attacked the calf. From a thicket, in utter darkness,
Zorn and Larner and the two Belas waited for the possible catch. The
whole nation stood awaiting the order to advance.

On the fourth night the vigil was rewarded in a manner frightful to
relate.

A clumsy flutter of giant wings broke the stillness.

The four waiting forms in the thicket rejoiced, believing the fat lat
was about to be attacked.

Onward came the approaching horror. The measured flap, flap of its
armored wings drawing nearer and nearer. Then, horror--horrors!

A feminine scream rent the air. Cries loud and shrill arose above a
hysterical feminine cry for help.

The monster had chosen Tula Bela for its prey!

       *       *       *       *       *

Zorn exploded an alarm bomb. A compressed air siren brought the army
forward on the run. Giant floodlights began to light up the scene. The
blood of Larner and Nern froze.

The monster had borne the girl to the ground. Its frightful lance and
cupper was upraised to strike. Larner was the nearest and the quickest
to act. He grabbed for his ray-gun, swung at his belt. It was gone! In
horror he remembered he had left it at the base. He seized a short knife
and threw himself forward, rolling his body between that of the girl and
the descending lance and cupper.

As the lance pierced his shoulder Larner, in one wild gesture of frenzy,
drove his knife through the soft, yielding flesh of the vampire's organ
of suction.

Protected by no bony structure the snout of the monster was amputated.

The terrible creature had been disarmed of his most formidable weapon,
but he continued to fight. Larner felt the spikes on the monster's legs
tear at his flesh.

"Don't kill the thing," he shouted. "Bring on the net. For the love of
God bring on the net!" Then he lost consciousness.

It was daylight when Larner, somewhat weakened from loss of blood,
regained consciousness.

The beautiful Tula Bela was leaning over him.

She whispered comforting words to him in a language he did not fully
understand. She whispered happy exclamations in words he did not know
the meaning of, but the tone was unmistakably those of a sweetheart
towards her lover.

Finally, in answer to a true scientist's question in his eyes, she said
in English:

"They caught the thing alive. They await your order to advance."

"Let us be on our way," said Larner, and he started to arise.

"You are hardly strong enough," said Tula.

"Believe me, I am all right," insisted Larner, and after several trials
he got to his feet. His constitution was naturally strong and his will
was stronger, so he fought back all feelings of weakness and soon
announced himself ready to go ahead with the project at hand. For speed
was all important, and the young professor found himself unable to
remain inactive.

       *       *       *       *       *

He rejoiced when Zorn told him that the big insect that had attacked
Tula Bela had been captured alive and had been kept well nourished by
lat's blood injected into its stomach.

With Zorn Larner went to inspect the hideous monstrosity and found it in
leash and straining. It was ready to be used to lead the way back to its
breeding place.

Its wings shackled, the lumbering insect floundered on its way straight
north. Ponderously and half blindly it crawled as the searchlights'
glare was kept far enough in advance to keep from blinding the monster.

True to instinct it finally brought up at early dawn under a high cliff
of smoky quartz. Here, in the great crevices, the drove of diabolical
vampires were hiding.

As the light struck their dens, they attempted clumsily to take wing,
but a interlacing network of devastating disintegrating rays from the
ray-guns shattered their bodies to dust, which was borne away by the
wind.

The next few months were spent in combing the quartz crags of Venus for
similar infested areas, but only the one breeding nest was found. The
scourge had been conquered in its first and only stronghold.

       *       *       *       *       *

So ended the greatest reign of terror in the history of Venus.

Leslie Larner was given a vote of thanks, and riches were showered upon
him by the good people of the sky's brightest star.

His modesty was characteristic, and he insisted that his part in saving
humanity on the planet had been small.

Passage back to earth was offered him, but Nern and Tula Bela urged him
to say and live his life on Venus. This he finally agreed to do.

"If I returned," he said, "I would always be tempted to tell my
experiences while away, and there is not a jury in the world which would
account me sane after I had once spoken."

       *       *       *       *       *

That the story of Larner's adventure reached earth dwellers at all is
due to the fact that Nern Bela on a subsequent visit to the earth
narrated it to a Colorado quartz miner. This miner, a bronzed and
bearded prospector for gold, stumbled on the targo in a mountain
fastness, and there was nought to do but make him welcome and pledge him
to secrecy.

The miner surveyed the crystal targo in rapt wonderment and said: "And
to think I am the only earth man who ever viewed such a craft!"

"No," answered Nern Bela, "there is one other." And then the stirring
story of Leslie Larner's life on Venus was told.




SAFE FLYING IN FOGS

The outstanding development in aviation recently, and one of the most
significant so far in aviation history was the "blind" flight of Lieut.
James H. Doolittle, daredevil of the Army Air Corps, at Mitchel Field,
L. I., which led Harry P. Guggenheim, President of the Daniel Guggenheim
Fund for the Promotion of Aeronautics, Inc. to announce that the problem
of fog-flying, one of aviation's greatest bugbears, had been solved at
last.

There has been "blind flying" done in the past but never before in the
history of aviation has any pilot taken off, circled, crossed,
re-crossed the field, then landed only a short distance away from his
starting point while flying under conditions resembling the densest fog,
as Lieut. "Jimmy" Doolittle has done, in his Wright-motored "Husky"
training-plane. It was something uncanny to contemplate.

The "dense fog" was produced artificially by the simple device of making
the cabin of the plane entirely light-proof. Once seated inside, the
flyer, with his co-pilot, Lieut. Benjamin Kelsey, also of Mitchel Field,
were completely shut off from any view of the world outside. All they
had to depend on were three new flying instruments, developed during the
past year in experiments conducted over the full-flight laboratory
established by the Fund at Mitchel Field.

The chief factors contributing to the solution of the problem of blind
flying consist of a new application of the visual radio beacon, the
development of an improved instrument for indicating the longitudinal
and lateral position of an airplane, a new directional gyroscope, and a
sensitive barometric altimeter, so delicate as to measure the altitude
of an airplane within a few feet of the ground.

Thus, instead of relying on the natural horizon for stability, Lieut.
Doolittle uses an "artificial horizon" on the small instrument which
indicates longitudinal and lateral position in relation to the ground at
all time. He was able to locate the landing field by means of the
direction-finding long-distance radio beacon. In addition, another
smaller radio beacon had been installed, casting a beam fifteen to
twenty miles in either direction, which governs the immediate approach
to the field.

To locate the landing field the pilot watches two vibrating reeds, tuned
to the radio beacon, on a virtual radio receiver on his instrument
board. If he turns to the right or left of his course the right or left
reed, respectively, begins doing a sort of St. Vitus dance. If the reeds
are in equilibrium the pilot knows it is clear sailing straight to his
field.

The sensitive altimeter showed Lieut. Doolittle his altitude and made it
possible for him to calculate his landing to a distance of within a few
feet from the ground.

Probably the strangest device of all that Lieut. Doolittle has been
called upon to test in Mr. Guggenheim's war against fog is a sort of
heat cannon that goes forth to combat like a fire-breathing dragon of
old. Like the enemies of the dragon, the fog is supposed to curl up and
die before the scorching breath of the "hot air artillery" although the
fundamental principle behind the device is a great deal more scientific
than such an explanation sounds. It is, in brief, based on the known
fact that fog forms only in a very narrow temperature zone which lies
between the saturation and precipitation points of the atmosphere. If
the air grows a little colder the fog turns into rain and falls; if it
is warmed very slightly the mist disappears and the air is once more
normally clear, although its humidity is very close to the maximum.




Brigands of the Moon

(The Book of Gregg Haljan)

PART TWO OF A FOUR-PART NOVEL

_By Ray Cummings_

[Illustration: _I turned back to look at the Planetara._]

  Out of awful space tumbled the Space-ship _Planetara_ towards the
  Moon, her officers _dead_, with bandits at her helm--and the
  controls out of order!


My name, Gregg Haljan. My age, twenty-five years. My occupation, at the
time my narrative begins, in 2075, was third officer of the
Interplanetary Space-ship _Planetara_.

Thus I introduce myself to you. For this is a continuation of the book
of Gregg Haljan, and of necessity I am the chief actor therein. I shall
recapitulate very briefly what has happened so far:

Unscrupulous Martian brigands were scheming for Johnny Grantline's
secret radium-ore treasure, dug out of the Moon and waiting there to be
picked up by the _Planetara_ on her return trip from Mars.

The _Planetara_ left, bound for Mars, some ten days away. Suspicious
interplanetary passengers were aboard: Miko and Moa, a brother and a
sister of Mars; Sir Arthur Coniston, a mysterious Englishman; Ob Hahn, a
Venus mystic. And small, effeminate George Prince and his sister, Anita.
Love, I think, was born instantly between Anita and me. I found all too
soon that Miko, the sinister giant from Mars, also desired her.

[Illustration]

As we neared the Moon we received Grantline's secret message: "Stop for
ore on your return voyage. Success beyond wildest hopes!" But I soon
discovered that an eavesdropper in an invisible cloak had overheard it!

Soon afterwards Miko accidentally murdered a person identified as Anita
Prince.

Then, in the confusion that resulted, Miko struck his great blow. The
crew of the _Planetara_, secretly in his pay, rose up and killed the
captain and all the officers but Snap Dean, the radio-helio operator,
and myself.

I was besieged in the chart-room. George Prince leaped in upon me--and
put his arms around me. I looked at him closer--only to discover it was
Anita, disguised as her brother! It was her brother, George, who had
been killed! George had been in the brigands' confidence--thus Anita was
able to spy for us.

Quickly we plotted. I would surrender to her, Anita Prince, whom the
brigands thought was George Prince. Together we might possibly be able,
with Snap's help, to turn the tide, and reclaim the _Planetara_.

I was taken to my stateroom and locked there until Miko the brigand
leader should come to dispose of me. But I cared not what had
happened--Anita was alive!




CHAPTER XIV

_The Brigand Leader_


The giant Miko stood confronting me. He slid my cubby door closed behind
him. He stood with his head towering close against my ceiling. His cloak
was discarded. In his leather clothes, and with his clanking
sword-ornament, his aspect carried the swagger of a brigand of old. He
was bareheaded; the light from one of my tubes fell upon his grinning,
leering gray face.

"So, Gregg Haljan? You have come to your senses at last. You do not wish
me to write my name upon your chest? I would not have done that to Dean;
he forced me. Sit back."

I had been on my bunk. I sank back at the gesture of his huge hairy arm.
His forearm was bare now; the sear of a burn on it was plain to be seen.
He remarked my gaze.

"True. You did that, Haljan, in Great-New York. But I bear you no
malice. I want to talk to you now."

He cast about for a seat, and took the little stool which stood by my
desk. His hand held a small cylinder of the Martian paralyzing ray; he
rested it beside him on the desk.

"Now we can talk."

I remained silent. Alert. Yet my thoughts were whirling. Anita was
alive. Masquerading now as her brother. And, with the joy of it, came a
shudder. Above everything, Miko must not know.

"A great adventure we are upon, Haljan."

       *       *       *       *       *

My thoughts came back. Miko was talking with an assumption of friendly
comradeship. "All is well--and we need you, as I have said before. I am
no fool. I have been aware of everything that went on aboard this ship.
You, of all the officers, are most clever at the routine mathematics. Is
that so?"

"Perhaps," I said.

"You are modest." He fumbled at a pocket of his jacket, produced a
scroll-sheaf. I recognized it: Blackstone's figures; the calculation
Blackstone roughly made of the elements of the asteroid we had passed.

"I am interested in these," Miko went on. "I want you to verify them.
And this." He held up another scroll. "This is the calculation of our
present position. And our course. Hahn claims he is a navigator. We have
set the ship's gravity plates--see, like this--"

He handed me the scrolls; he watched me keenly as I glanced over them.

