_I'll bet he trips all over himself when he walks, and when he rides he
drags his feet on the ground._

Raoul gestured to the seated Potawatomi. "You boys ever see Indians up
close before?"

"The way you've got them trussed up and guarded, Colonel," said the tall
man, "I'd say they must be pretty desperate characters."

Raoul heard the smile in the drawling voice and felt heat rising up the
back of his neck. He took a closer look at the man. He couldn't be much
over twenty, but he looked a well-worn twenty. A farmer's face,
darkened by the sun. The gray eyes, set in deep hollows under heavy
black brows, crinkled humorously. But Raoul saw cold judgment deeper in
those eyes.

Like most of the volunteers, the tall man wore civilian clothes. His
were gray trousers tucked into farmer's boots and a gray jacket over a
blue calico shirt printed with white flowers. An officer's saber hung
from a belt around his waist.

Raoul said, "Well, I reckon you signed up with the militia to fight
Indians, so take a good look at your enemy."

The tall man walked around to stand in front of Little Foot, hunkered
down and said, "Howdy."

Little Foot did not look back but gazed ahead with a blank face.

The lean man straightened up. "A mighty mean customer, sir."

Some of the other men in the ring around the Indians chuckled at this.
Even Justus Bennett snickered.

Raoul was feeling angrier and angrier. He had looked forward to
questioning Little Foot and the other Potawatomi, looked forward to
having them resist and to breaking their resistance down with fear and
pain. He'd even hoped they might give him reason to shoot them. These
strange militiamen were becoming a nuisance.

"You seem to think this is pretty funny. Who the hell are you?" Raoul
put a threat into his voice.

"I'm Captain Lincoln of the Sangamon County company, sir. We're with the
Second Battalion."

Raoul let his gaze travel over the other Sangamon County men.

"Any of the rest of you able to talk?"

One man laughed. "When Abe's around we mostly let him do the talking."

"That so? If you let somebody else do your talking for you, he may talk
you into a spot you won't like."

Abe said, "Oh, I always make sure I say what the men want said, sir."
That brought another laugh.

Raoul's anger at the Potawatomi found a new target in this bony
volunteer. The heat of the whiskey raced through his bloodstream.

There was one simple way to show this upstart who was master here, and
at the same time have his way with the redskins.

Raoul drew his pistol and hefted it in his hand.

The tall captain eyed Raoul warily and said nothing.

Raoul said, "I'm going to give this Potawatomi one more chance to tell
me now where Black Hawk went, and if he disobeys me again I'm going to
shoot him dead."

He stood before Little Foot and pointed the pistol at his head.

In Potawatomi he said, "Tell me what Black Hawk plans to do. Is he lying
in ambush farther up the trail? Does he have a secret camp for his
squaws and papooses? Tell me, or I will shoot you." Swinging the muzzle
of the pistol to the man in the blue turban beside Little Foot, he said,
"And then I will ask this man, and if he does not tell me, I will kill
him too."

The bony young man said, "With all due respect to your rank and
experience, sir, I must say that what you propose to do is wrong."

Raoul's rage threatened to boil over. Tension jerked his right arm. So
as not to risk wasting a shot, he took his finger off the trigger.

In a mild but somehow penetrating voice the Sangamon man said, "I'll
tell you why this is wrong, sir, if you'll allow me."

The man's politeness was infuriating. Raoul turned to him, letting the
pistol fall to his side.

"Go on, Captain. Preach to me."

"If you had a white prisoner at your mercy, you would not shoot him
because he refused to betray his comrades. You would think it honorable
in him to answer your questions with silence. But this red man is a
human being with the same God-given right to his life that you and I
have."

Raoul realized all at once that the lean captain's backwoods manner of
speaking had fallen away like an unneeded cloak. He sounded like a
lawyer or a minister.

"I was a prisoner of the Potawatomi for two years. I can tell you from
experience they're not human at all."

How angry Pierre had been when Raoul had said Indians were animals. But
it was true.

"They treated you badly? Made a slave of you?"

"Damned right."

The young captain looked calmly at Raoul. "If to hold slaves and treat
them badly marks a man as less than human, then you must so brand every
wealthy white man in the Southern states."

A few of the men standing around laughed. "That Abe! Got an answer for
everything."

Again Raoul's hand tightened convulsively on the pistol grip. He'd
wasted enough words on this walking skeleton from Sangamon County. He
was quivering with rage.

There was one quick way to put an end to the arguing.

He swung around and stepped close to Little Foot, holding his pistol
less than a foot from the red-turbaned head. With his left hand he
pulled the hammer back to half-cock, then full. The double click sounded
loud in a sudden, astonished silence.

And Little Foot's arms, unbound, shot up. Both his hands gripped the
barrel of the pistol and yanked it to one side. About to pull the
trigger, Raoul froze his finger as the muzzle was pulled aside from its
target.

--And knew with a sudden sinking of his heart what a deadly mistake he
had made in that instant.

The Potawatomi's powerful two-handed grip tore the pistol from his
fingers.

_I should have fired. Now I am a dead man._

Raoul saw a coil of rope lying on the ground beside Little Foot. The
Indian must have been working his wrists loose while everyone's
attention was on the argument.

Little Foot had already turned the loaded and cocked pistol around in
his hands and pointed it at Raoul's heart. Raoul stared into black eyes
that had no mercy for him.

A blurred figure seemed to fly across Raoul's vision.

The pistol went off with a boom.

Coughing, blinded, Raoul saw dimly through the gunsmoke that the skinny
captain had thrown himself at Little Foot and thrust the pistol aside.
Now Lincoln and Little Foot were wrestling, thrashing about like two
wild animals.

By the time the smoke had cleared, the lean man had full control. Little
Foot's ankles, Raoul saw, were still tied, and Lincoln's arms had snaked
up under the Indian's. The Sangamon County man's big hands were behind
Little Foot's head, pushing his chin down into his chest. His long legs
were wrapped around Little Foot's middle, holding him in a crushing
scissors grip.

Raoul stood shaking, his eyes watering from the faceful of powder smoke
he'd taken. His heart was pounding frantically against his breastbone.

"Nicely done, sir!" Justus Bennett said to Lincoln.

_And what the hell were you doing?_ Raoul thought, furious at Bennett.

With a trembling hand Raoul seized Bennett's pistol.

The four guards had their rifles pointed at Little Foot. Any one of them
could have saved Raoul's life by shooting, but none of them had reacted
quickly enough.

Only Lincoln had moved in time.

The lanky captain's comrades were cheering him. "Old Abe's the best
wrassler in this army, Colonel, and now you've seen it for yourself."

Raoul wiped his eyes and shouted, "Stand aside, Lincoln. Now I'm going
to blow this redskin's brains out." The quaver he heard in his own voice
made him even angrier.

From behind Little Foot came a calm response. "I'm going to ask you not
to do that, sir."

"He tried to kill me. Get up and stand aside, God damn you!"

"No, sir."

Lincoln did unwrap his arms from Little Foot's head and shoulders, but
still held him with his legs. The Indian sat motionless, as if his
effort to kill Raoul had taken the last of his strength. He muttered
under his breath. Probably his death song, Raoul thought.

Lincoln quickly retied the Indian, then stood up, placing himself
between Raoul and Little Foot. He held Raoul's empty pistol out to him,
butt first.

"Colonel, I believe you're a fair man, and you'll agree that I just
saved your life."

Raoul took his pistol and handed it to Armand, realizing that the tall
man was maneuvering him into a difficult position. Too many men had seen
what happened.

"Yes, you did save my life." The words hurt his throat, same as if that
pistol ball had hit him and lodged there. "And I thank you. You have my
most profound gratitude."

"That being so, and since I have done you what you might think a favor,
will you grant me a life for a life?"

For a moment Raoul could not think of anything to say or do.

All he had to do was shove this Lincoln aside, put the muzzle of his
pistol to Little Foot's head and pull the trigger.

He realized, too, that the longer he hesitated the more a fool he
looked.

What right did the skinny captain have to demand that he spare Little
Foot?

Raoul became aware that the crowd around them had grown to perhaps a
couple of hundred men. The ones he could see wore little half smiles.
Whoever came out the winner, they were having a fine old time watching.

Raoul was broader and maybe stronger than Lincoln. But how ridiculous he
would look if he had to fight the man to get past him to shoot Little
Foot.

And what if this bag of bones beat him?

_Old Abe's the best wrassler in this army, Colonel._

The truth was bitter as vinegar, but the only course that would preserve
his dignity would be to let Lincoln have his way.

"Ah, hell," he said loudly, and was pleased to hear that while he'd
stood silently thinking, his voice had regained its strength. "Sure,
I'll let the Indian live. He's nothing to me."

He noticed that his hand still shook a little as he gave Bennett's
pistol back to him. He took his own, reloaded, from Armand and holstered
it, hoping no one could see his tremor.

"My hand on it," he said, holding out his right hand, willing it to be
steady.

The grip that met his was crushing. Even though he'd seen the bony young
man immobilize Little Foot, Raoul was surprised.

He felt the men would expect him to do more to show his gratitude.

"Come and have a drink with me, Abe."

"My pleasure, sir."

Armand had finished putting Raoul's tent up. In the tent Armand uncorked
a jug and handed it to Raoul, who offered it to Lincoln. The young man
hooked his finger in the ring at the neck of the jug and raised it to
his mouth. Raoul watched the prominent Adam's apple rise and fall as he
took a long swallow.

"I normally don't touch whiskey, sir," Lincoln said, handing the jug
back to Raoul. "I've seen it ruin too many good men. But I do appreciate
this. It's not every day I grab a pistol as it goes off, wrestle an
Indian and disobey a colonel."

"Well, that's the best whiskey there is. Old Kaintuck--O.K."

"Three things Kentucky makes better than anyplace else," said Lincoln.
"Quilts, rifles and whiskey. I should know. That's where I hail from."

It was because of men like this, Raoul thought with some disdain, that
Illinoisians got their nickname, "Suckers." The weak shoots of the
tobacco plant that had to be stripped off and thrown away were called
suckers, and Illinois was said to be largely populated by ne'er-do-well
emigrants from tobacco-growing states like Kentucky.

"Then here's to Kentucky," said Raoul, loathing the tall, ugly man for
spoiling his revenge.

He lifted the jug to his lips and let the burning liquid roll over his
tongue and slide down his throat, grateful to it for the warmth that
would melt away the chill of death he still felt around his heart.

A few more swigs and Raoul found himself wanting to bring Lincoln around
to his way of thinking. The man, after all, _had_ saved his life.

"You know, you went to a whole lot of bother over that Indian now," he
said. "It's a waste of time. We're only going to have to kill them all
later anyway."

Lincoln winced, as if Raoul's words had hurt him. "Why do you say that,
sir?"

"I've got a big estate in Smith County, beside the Mississippi, miles
and miles of wonderful fertile land just begging for the plow. And too
much of it is growing nothing but prairie flowers, because I can't get
enough people to come and work it for me. They're afraid of Indians!"

"Treat the Indians fairly and there would be nothing to fear," said
Lincoln.

"Treat them fairly and they'll just continue to attack our settlements."

"I'd like to think you're wrong, Mr. de Marion."

"Why the hell did you volunteer for the militia, if you don't like
killing Indians?"

Lincoln smiled faintly. "Well, a war record won't hurt when I make a run
for the legislature."

Just another slimy politician. Same as Bennett.

A bluebelly, a blue-uniformed officer of the Federal army, pushed
through the tent flap. He doffed his tall, cylindrical shako.

"General Atkinson's compliments, Colonel de Marion. We're breaking camp
and moving on up the Rock River in pursuit of Black Hawk and his band.
And he asks you to once again take up the lead position."

"How does the general know where the Sauk are?" he asked irritably.

"A couple of Winnebago known to the general came into camp and offered
to guide us, sir. They say Black Hawk and the Winnebago Prophet are
leading their people upriver to try to persuade the Potawatomi to join
them. Black Hawk's whole band, except for the warriors, are on foot. The
general thinks that if we ride hard we can catch them."

Lincoln held out his hand and shook again with Raoul.

"Thank you for the whiskey, sir."

"Thank you for turning that pistol aside."

Lincoln grinned. "Colonel, thank _you_ for sparing that red man. I'll be
going now, or by the time we finish thanking each other, Black Hawk will
be in Checagou."

When Raoul emerged from his tent he saw that the Potawatomi prisoners
were gone. He felt a surge of fury that someone had turned them loose
without his permission. He still longed to put a ball into the skull of
that sneaking Little Foot.

_The next Indian who falls into my hands won't be so lucky._

By the time the men of his spy battalion had struck their tents and
mounted up, he had decided on half a loaf of revenge. Seated on Banner,
he held up a burning stick.

"All right, men, the Winnebago who lived here have joined up with Black
Hawk. They're running ahead of us. Let's not leave them anything to come
back to."

He drew his arm back and snapped it forward. The torch flew end over end
and landed on the bark roof of the nearest Winnebago lodge. A circle of
orange flame spread out quickly. It was still raining, but not enough to
slow the fire down much.

Raoul's men whooped. Eli and Armand led the way in hurling flaming
sticks into the dark brown Indian huts.

Armand, grinning, handed Raoul a long pole he'd pulled loose from the
wall of a lodge, afire at one end. Waving his broad-brimmed hat, Raoul
rode through the town touching the burning pole to the flimsy wall of
each lodge he passed. The men of the battalion scattered, setting fires
everywhere. Beyond the town the remaining militiamen stopped breaking
camp to watch.

Soon, the roar of the burning lodges thundered in Raoul's ears like a
big waterfall.

If they could catch Black Hawk, he thought, what glory that would be. No
matter how many fighting men Black Hawk had, Raoul felt sure his
battalion could crush them. The burning lodges, the whiskey in his
blood, the hatred in his heart, all ran together so that Raoul felt like
a prairie fire racing after the British Band.




14

First Blood


White Bear tried to think only about guiding his brown-spotted white
pony over the grasslands and watching his two companions. He tried to
put fear out of his mind.

_I did not even have a chance to say good-bye to Redbird._

Redbird was a day's ride up the Rock River from here, at the camp the
Potawatomi had allowed Black Hawk's people to set up. White Bear's body
went cold with the thought that he might be killed today, and she be
left alone and pursued by enemies.

_I should have asked Wolf Paw to be her protector if I die. He hates me,
but he cares for Redbird._

It was for Redbird and Eagle Feather, and for the baby growing inside
Redbird, that he was risking his life today. His family was going
hungry. It had been over six weeks, by pale eyes reckoning, since Black
Hawk had led them across the Great River into Illinois. White Bear and
Redbird, like other British Band families, could carry little food with
them, and most of that was gone. With the long knives pressing behind
them, White Bear had no time to hunt or fish, nor Redbird to gather food
from the woodlands.

She must not go without food, especially not while carrying their child.
The children of the British Band walked about hollow-eyed; the crying of
hungry babies rose from every part of the camp. Old people, looking
nearly dead, lay on the ground trying to husband their strength.

At a secret meeting last night the Potawatomi chiefs, despite Flying
Cloud's prophecy, had refused to join Black Hawk in fighting the long
knives or even to give his people supplies or let them remain long in
Potawatomi territory. Black Hawk himself had been forced to admit that
the only way to spare the band further hardship would be to go quietly
back across the Great River.

To do that, he had to make peace with the long knives. Frightened though
he was, White Bear, as the only member of the tribe who spoke fluent
English, felt he must go with Black Hawk's emissaries.

White Bear's shoulders slumped in discouragement as he thought how Black
Hawk and the rest of the band had been led astray. _No_ other tribes
were willing to ally themselves with the British Band. There had been
_no_ truth at all to the Winnebago Prophet's talk of aid from the
British in Canada.

A delegation headed by Broth, the tribe's best speaker, had gone to the
British fort at Malden, near Detroit, to ask for help. They had been
sent back with the advice that the Sauk had better learn to live in
peace with the Americans.

The people of Prophet's Town had left their homes with Black Hawk's band
more out of fear of the oncoming long knives than out of a desire to
help Black Hawk fight for Saukenuk. As Black Hawk's prospects worsened,
most of them drifted away, even though the Prophet himself remained at
Black Hawk's side.

Black Hawk had believed the Prophet because his promises gave the
British Band the courage to defy the long knives. To White Bear's
disgust, even now, when it was clear that Flying Cloud had simply made
it all up, Black Hawk had forgiven the Prophet.

White Bear burned with resentment.

_They mocked me when I told them the truth. That fat, posturing toad
lied to them and they still honor him. Surely a false shaman is the
worst kind of liar._

White Bear rode on Little Crow's right. As the oldest of the three men,
Little Crow carried the white flag. Torn from a sheet the braves had
found in a settler's hastily abandoned cabin, the flag was tied to a
spear shaft from which the head had been removed. On Little Crow's left
rode Three Horses.

Since they were not riding into battle, they had not taken any of the
saddles with stirrups from the band's supply but were mounted with only
blankets between themselves and the horses' backs. The three of them
had painted their faces black, because they might be going to their
deaths. But it was hard to believe that men might be killed on this
beautiful afternoon in the middle of the Moon of Buds. A warm breeze
blew over White Bear's bare chest and arms. Red, blue and yellow prairie
flowers scattered over the land, as uncountable as the stars, delighted
his eye in spite of his fear. All around him he heard red-winged
blackbirds singing their spring challenges.

White Bear had left with Owl Carver everything he valued: his medicine
stick, his Sauk medicine bag and his other bag of pale eyes' medical
instruments, his megis-shell necklace, his brass and silver ornaments,
his _Paradise Lost_, the deerhorn-handled knife his father had long ago
given him. He had nothing with him but the clothing he wore, fringed
buckskin leggings and a buckskin vest decorated with blue and green
quillwork in diamond patterns.

He looked back and saw five mounted braves an arrow flight behind him on
the prairie. Even from this distance he could tell that the tall one in
the middle was Iron Knife. They would watch from hiding and would report
back to Black Hawk how the long knives treated his peace messengers.
Black Hawk himself, with Owl Carver, the Winnebago Prophet, Wolf Paw and
about forty braves, waited a few miles farther up the Rock River at the
place where he had met with the Potawatomi chiefs.

White Bear saw a small stand of woods ahead. Scouts had reported that
beyond those woods, across Old Man's Creek, the long knives had set up
camp. Glowing from behind young green leaves, set aflutter by the
breeze, the setting sun dropped flecks of gold onto the blackened faces
of White Bear's two companions. It would be almost nightfall by the time
they encountered the long knives.

Three Horses said, "A man must be more brave, I think, to do this than
to ride up to an enemy in battle and strike the first blow at him." His
nose curved inward where the bridge should have been. White Bear had
learned that a Sioux war club had done that to him while Auguste was
studying Latin and geometry at St. George's School.

"I would much rather be fighting the long knives than trying to make
peace with them," said Little Crow. "I do not trust them."

White Bear tried to reassure them and himself. "We must do this. It is
the only way we can get our people safely back across the Great River."

Little Crow said, "It seems you were right and we who wanted to take up
the tomahawk were wrong."

In spite of his fear, White Bear felt a satisfied glow at Little Crow's
words. Little Crow had been the one who brought the woman's dress that
Wolf Paw had put on him that wretched night of the council.

_They did not listen to me that night. The Turtle told me I would not be
able to persuade the people not to cross the Great River, but I tried my
best._

They entered the wood by way of a narrow trail, riding single file.
Little Crow lowered the white flag to keep it from getting caught in the
branches.

As they rode among the trees, the tightness of fear in White Bear's
chest and stomach grew worse, until he had to struggle for breath. His
palms sweat so much, the reins were slippery in his hands.

He turned and waved farewell to Iron Knife and the four other braves
following them, who had halted their ponies at the edge of the woods and
dismounted. They waved back. A moment more and White Bear looked back
and could see them no more.

_At least if I die today Iron Knife can tell Redbird how it came about._

He tried to guess how the long knives would greet them. They might shoot
them down in spite of the white flag. He hoped they would be glad to
learn that Black Hawk wanted to surrender and return in peace to Ioway.
After all, that was what they were trying to force him to do, was it
not? But some of the long knives, undoubtedly, wanted to kill "Injuns."
Men like Raoul.

When they came out of the south edge of the woods, they found themselves
on a grassy rise sloping down to a winding stream called Old Man's
Creek. The sun was lower now and directly in White Bear's eyes. Across
the creek was a sight that made him want to jerk his pony's head around
and ride back into the trees as fast as he could go.

On high ground he saw the silhouettes of peaked tents and many men, some
on horseback and some on foot, rifles in hand. The smoke of campfires
drifted like gray feathers into the pale blue sky. He heard voices
calling to one another in English. One man shouted and pointed in their
direction.

White Bear said, "Don't wait here at the edge of the trees, or they will
think we are attackers. Ride forward slowly, waving the flag."

The men across the creek were yelling excitedly now. Rifle fire crackled
and smoke billowed. A ball whizzed past White Bear and cracked a tree
limb behind him. He held himself rigid.

Long knives rode toward them, urging their horses down the far side of
the creekbank. White Bear and his companions rode into the creek to meet
them.

In a moment bearded white faces, angry eyes, coonskin caps and straw
hats were whirling about the three emissaries in the middle of the
creek. Rifles and pistols were pointing at them from every side. Little
Crow, his face tight, held the white flag high with both hands.

"We surrender!" White Bear shouted. "We are not armed. We have come to
talk to General Atkinson."

"Listen to that, he's talking English," a blond boy exclaimed.

Another man yelled, "Shoot 'em. Then let 'em surrender."

White Bear's knees trembled against his horse's flanks. These were not
regular U.S. government soldiers, but the volunteers, the armed settlers
who had come out in answer to their governor's call. They would not wait
for orders from their commanders. They would do whatever they felt like
doing.

A red-bearded man stuck his face in White Bear's. "Get down off that
horse, Injun! Now!" His shout blew a stink of whiskey into White Bear's
face.

Others joined the outcry. "Get off them horses!"

"Ought to put a bullet in them right here in the creek."

"Look at them black faces. I thought they was niggers at first."

"Not even useful like niggers, damn redskins."

The man with the red beard grabbed White Bear's arm and jerked him half
out of his saddle. White Bear slid down from his horse.

He stood up to his knees in the cold, rushing water of Old Man's Creek.

"We want to surrender," he said again. "We want to talk to your
officers."

"Just shut up!" the red-bearded man roared, eyes rolling drunkenly.

White Bear felt a man grab him from behind. A rope scratched his wrists
and tightened around them till the bones were crushed together.

He turned to see whether Little Crow and Three Horses were all right.
The militiamen had bound them too. Both braves' black-painted faces were
expressionless, but White Bear read fear in their eyes and in the set of
their mouths--the same fear he felt, and tried not to show.

The red-bearded man leaned down from his saddle and grabbed a handful of
White Bear's long hair. He jerked on it, dragging White Bear toward the
bank. White Bear stumbled on the stony creekbed, bruising his feet
through his moccasins.

"You wanna see our officers? Then step along!"

What had happened to the white flag? Without it, what did they have to
show that they had come in peace?

"Will you bring our white flag?" he called desperately to a clean-shaven
man wearing spectacles, who looked a little calmer than the others.

The man's face twisted into a snarl, and White Bear's heart fell.

"You'll get your white flag up your ass, redskin!"

"You sound just like a white man," said another militiaman. "You sure
you ain't a white man in paint?"

"Listen to me," White Bear said hopelessly. He wanted to say, _If we
don't fight it will save your lives as well as ours._ But how could he
talk to these men, maddened by whiskey and war? His eyes met those of
Little Crow and Three Horses. Again the red-bearded man jerked his hair,
so hard White Bear thought he would pull it out of his scalp. He had to
bite his lip to keep from crying out. Worse than the pain was the
indignity.

Horses splashing water, mud and pebbles on them, long knives shouting
curses and threats, the three Sauk stumbled out of the creek and through
shoulder-high prairie grass into the militia camp.

The sun's last rays fell on flushed, sweating white faces, on glistening
rifle barrels. To White Bear, most of the men looked younger than he.

"Somebody get the colonel," said the man with the red beard. "Tell him
they claim they want to surrender. Might be we could catch old Black
Hawk himself."

The three Sauks' only hope, White Bear thought, was that the commanding
officer might be more willing to listen to them than his men were.

The Sauk and their captors stood in a circle where the grass had been
trampled flat. A short distance away stood supply wagons and tents. The
prairie surrounded them.

Some militiamen went to one wagon on which five kegs with spouts stood,
filled tin cups from the kegs and drank from them. Whiskey, White Bear
thought, seemed to be as important to these men as food.

The sun was down now, and the three stood in twilight, in the midst of
the shouting mob.

"Look alive, you men! It's the colonel!"

The crowd opened up, and two men came through.

One of them, short, skinny, wearing a coonskin cap and a blue officer's
coat, came up to White Bear and peered at him.

"I know you!"

Half his teeth were rotten and the rest were missing. White Bear knew
him too. Eli Greenglove.

"By God, Raoul! I'll be a son of a bitch if it ain't that half-breed
nephew of yours."

And there stood Raoul de Marion, gold epaulets glittering on his broad
shoulders.

At the sight of that broad face with the black mustache, last seen
looking at him over a pistol barrel, White Bear knew his life was about
to end.

_Could my luck be any worse?_

All hope vanished as light faded from the sky.

Raoul stood before White Bear with his thumbs hooked into the white
leather belt that cinched his blue uniform coat. His huge knife--the one
that had cut White Bear's face years ago--hung at his left side, a
pistol at his right. He grinned at White Bear.

"Well. I was hoping to meet you. I'd have liked it better on the field
of battle, but here you are, in my camp. What were you doing, spying on
us?"

White Bear sighed. Something crumbled inside him.

"Do you know this long knife?" Little Crow said in Sauk.

"Yes, he is my father's brother." A glimmer of hope appeared in Little
Crow's eyes, but vanished when White Bear added, "And he is my worst
enemy."

"Talk English around me!" Raoul shouted. "No Indian jabber."

"Black Hawk sent us," White Bear said. "He doesn't want to fight. We've
come to make peace."

"The hell with that!" one of Raoul's men yelled. "We come out to fight
Injuns."

"Well, hold on now!" cried another. "If they come peaceable, that means
we can all go home and nobody hurt."

Raoul turned on the man. "I'll be the one to decide why they're here."

White Bear realized that the men with Raoul were barely under his
control. There was no hope of talking to Raoul, but there might be
others in this crowd, like the man who had just spoken, who would
listen. He must keep trying.

Raising his voice White Bear said, "Chief Black Hawk knows you
militiamen outnumber his warriors. He doesn't want to fight you. All he
wants is to be allowed to go back down the Rock River and cross the
Mississippi. He will never come back."

"Where'd that black-faced redskin learn to speak English so good?" one
of the militiamen said.

"He's a renegade," said Raoul. "A part-white mongrel. He ought to be
hanged as a traitor. Don't believe a word he says."

"They did come with a white flag," one of the men said.

"White flag, hell!" Raoul shouted. "They're trying to put us off guard."
He swept a pointing finger across a group of men that included
brown-bearded Armand Perrault. Among them White Bear recognized Levi
Pope and Otto Wegner, the thick-mustached Prussian who worked at the
trading post. He remembered Wegner had not wanted to kill him when Raoul
offered a reward for his death, and he felt a little tremor of hope.

"Get on your horses," Raoul told his men. "Go out across the creek and
look. If you don't find Indians skulking about in those woods, I'll be
mighty surprised."

As Raoul's men rode off, White Bear was torn by indecision. Should he
tell Raoul that other braves had followed them here, to see how they
were treated? Or would that just endanger the lives of Iron Knife and
the others?

_He'll use everything I tell him against me._

Raoul's eyes stared death at White Bear. "Black Hawk's a damn liar. He's
broken every treaty we ever made with you people. There's only one way
to deal with your kind. If you can't be trusted to keep treaties, you
have to be exterminated." He drew his pistol.

"Starting here."

_Bear spirit, walk with me on the Trail of Souls._

Little Crow said, "What do they say, White Bear? Are they going to kill
us?"

"It is our fate to have fallen into the hands of a bad man," said White
Bear. Having to tell them hurt him all the more. It grieved him that
these two good men must die along with him, their lives thrown away
because of a bit of bad luck.

"We were fools to come here," said Three Horses.

"Not fools--braves," White Bear reassured him. "A man who gives his life
to protect his people is never a fool. Whether or not he succeeds."

"You _are_ a prophet, White Bear," said Little Crow.

Raoul was staring at White Bear's chest. White Bear wondered if his
heart was beating so hard that Raoul could see it hammering.

"Look at those scars. Looks like a bear tried to get you a long time
ago. Too bad he didn't finish you, would have saved me the trouble."

White Bear would not talk about anything sacred with Raoul. He looked
back at him silently.

"Guess you don't know all there is to know about your nephew," Eli
Greenglove laughed.

"Don't call him my nephew!" Raoul shouted.

White Bear saw some of Raoul's men exchange befuddled glances.

"Well, whatever he is, I kind of think we ought to send him and these
others back down the line. Let them palaver with the general. It ain't
for us to decide."

"What the hell do you mean?" Raoul thundered.

The popping of rifle fire on the other side of Old Man's Creek cut short
the argument. White Bear turned to look.

A moment later Perrault, his horse's legs dripping creek water, came
pounding up.

"You were right, mon colonel," he panted. "Those woods are full of
Indians. They were sneaking up on the camp."

"These three were supposed to distract us with peace talk while the
others snuck up on us," Raoul shouted to his men. "First we'll shoot
these Indians. Then we'll hunt down the rest of them."

"It wasn't an ambush!" White Bear cried. "There were only five of them,
and they were just there to see what happened to us."

"Well, why didn't you tell us they were out there?" Raoul said, smiling.
"We'd have invited them in for a whiskey."

The coonskin-capped men standing near him guffawed.

Raoul's lips stretched in a grimace. "Eli, Armand, let's shoot these
three redskins."

Greenglove said, "Raoul--Colonel--I still say you ought to think this
over."

