wickedness of the motive to know that a wonderful providence has
rectified the consequences. It will rather deepen the sense of evil,
and give new cause of adoration of the love that pardons the wrong, and
the providence that neutralises the harm.

Joseph takes the true point of view, which we are all bound to occupy,
if we would practise the Christian grace of forgiveness. He looks
beyond the mere human hate and envy to the divine purpose. 'The sword
is theirs; the hand is Thine.' He can even be grateful to his foes who
have been unintentionally his benefactors. He thinks of the good that
has come out of their malice, and anger dies within him.

Highest attainment of all, the good for which he is grateful is not his
all-but-regal dignity, but the power to save and gladden those who
would fain have slain, and had saddened him for many a weary year. We
read in these utterances of a lofty piety and of a singularly gentle
heart, the fruit of sorrow and the expression of thoughts which had
slowly grown up in his mind, and had now been long familiar there. Such
a calm, certain grasp of the divine shaping and meaning of his life
could not have sprung up all at once in him, as he looked at the
conscience-stricken culprits cowering before him. More than natural
sweetness and placability must have gone to the making of such a temper
of forgiveness. He must have been living near the Fountain of all mercy
to have had so full a cup of it to offer. Because he had caught a gleam
of the divine pardon, he becomes a mirror of it; and we may fairly see
in this ill-used brother, yearning over the half-sullen sinners, and
seeking to open a way for his forgiveness to steal into their hearts,
and rejoicing over his very sorrows which have fitted him to save them
alive, and satisfy them in the days of famine, an adumbration of our
Elder Brother's forgiving love and saving tenderness.

4. The second part of Joseph's address is occupied with his message to
Jacob, and shows how he longed for his father's presence. There is
something very natural and beautiful in the repeated exhortations to
haste, as indicating the impatient love of a long-absent son. If his
heart was so true to his father, why had he sent him no message for all
these years? Egypt was near enough, and for nine years now he had been
in power. Surely he could have gratified his heart. But he could not
have learned by any other means his brethren's feelings, and if they
were still what they had been, no intercourse would be possible. He
could only be silent, and yearn for the way to open in God's
providence, as it did.

The message to Jacob is sent from 'thy son Joseph,' in token that the
powerful ruler lays his dignity at his father's feet. No elevation will
ever make a true son forget his reverence for his father. If he rise
higher in the world, and has to own an old man, away in some simple
country home, for his sire, he will be proud to do it. The enduring
sanctity of the family ties is not the least valuable lesson from our
narrative for this generation, where social conditions are so often
widely different in parents and in children. There is an affectionate
spreading out of all his glory before his father's old eyes; not that
he cared much about it for himself, since, as we have seen, elevation
to him meant mainly work, but because he knew how the eyes would
glisten at the sight. His mother, who would have been proud of him, is
gone, but he has still the joy of gladdening his father by the
exhibition of his dignity. It bespeaks a simple nature, unspoiled by
prosperity, to delight thus in his father's delight, and to wish the
details of all his splendour to be told him. A statesman who takes most
pleasure in his elevation because of the good he can do by it, and
because it will please the old people at home, must be a pure and
lovable man. The command has another justification in the necessity to
assure his father of the wisdom of so great a change. God had set him
in the Promised Land, and a very plain divine injunction was needed to
warrant his leaving it. Such a one was afterwards given in vision; but
the most emphatic account of his son's honour and power was none the
less required to make the old Jacob willing to abandon so much, and go
into such strange conditions.

We have another instance of the difference between man's purposes and
God's counsel in this message. Joseph's only thought is to afford his
family temporary shelter during the coming five years of famine.
Neither he nor they knew that this was the fulfilment of the covenant
with Abraham, and the bringing of them into the land of their
oppression for four centuries. No shadow of that future was cast upon
their joy, and yet, the steady march of God's plan was effected along
the path which they were ignorantly preparing. The road-maker does not
know what bands of mourners, or crowds of holiday makers, or troops of
armed men may pass along it.

5. This wonderfully beautiful scene ends with the kiss of full
reconciliation and frank communion. All the fear is out of the
brothers' hearts. It has washed away all the envy along with it. The
history of Jacob's household had hitherto been full of sins against
family life. Now, at last, they taste the sweetness of fraternal love.
Joseph, against whom they had sinned, takes the initiative, flinging
himself with tears on the neck of Benjamin, his own mother's son,
nearer to him than all the others, crowding his pent-up love in one
long kiss. Then, with less of passionate affection, but more of
pardoning love, he kisses his contrite brothers. The offender is ever
less ready to show love than the offended. The first step towards
reconciliation, whether of man with man or of man with God, comes from
the aggrieved. We always hate those whom we have harmed; and if enmity
were ended only by the advances of the wrong-doer, it would be
perpetual. The injured has the prerogative of praying the injurer to be
reconciled. So was it in Pharaoh's throne-room on that long past day;
so is it still in the audience chamber of heaven. 'He that might the
vantage best have took found out the remedy.' 'We love Him, because He
first loved us.'

The pardoned men find their tongues at last. Forgiveness has opened
their lips, and though their reverence and thanks are no less, their
confidence and familiarity are more. How they would talk when once the
terror was melted away! So should it be with the soul which has tasted
the sweetness of Christ's forgiving love, and has known 'the kisses of
His mouth.' Long, unrestrained, and happy should be the intercourse
which we forgiven sinners keep up with our Brother, the Prince of all
the land. 'After that his brethren talked with him.'




JOSEPH, THE PARDONER AND PRESERVER


II


THE noble words in which Joseph dissipates his brothers' doubts have,
as their first characteristic, the recognition of the God by whom his
career had been shaped, and, for their next, the recognition of the
purpose for which it had been. There is a world of tenderness and
forgivingness in the addition made to his first words in verse 4,
'Joseph, _your brother_.' He owns the mystic bond of kindred, and
thereby assures them of his pardon for their sin against it. It was
right that he should remind them of their crime, even while declaring
his pardon. But he rises high above all personal considerations and
graciously takes the place of soother, instead of that of accuser. Far
from cherishing thoughts of anger or revenge, he tries to lighten the
reproaches of their own consciences. Thrice over in four verses he
traces his captivity to God. He had learned that wisdom in his long
years of servitude, and had not forgotten it in those of rule.

There will be little disposition in us to visit offences against
ourselves on the offenders, if we discern God's purpose working through
our sorrows, and see, as the Psalmist did, that even our foes are 'men
which are Thy hand, O Lord.' True, His overruling providence does not
make their guilt less; but the recognition of it destroys all
disposition to revenge, and injured and injurer may one day unite in
adoring the result of what the One suffered at the other's hands.
Surely, some Christian persecutors and their victims have thus joined
hands in heaven. If we would cultivate the habit of seeing God behind
second causes, our hearts would be kept free from much wrath and
bitterness.

Joseph was as certain of the purpose as of the source of his elevation.
He saw now what he had been elevated for, and he eagerly embraced the
task which was a privilege. No doubt, he had often brooded over the
thought, 'Why am I thus lifted up?' and had felt the privilege of being
a nation's saviour; but now he realises that he has a part to play in
fulfilling God's designs in regard to the seed of Abraham. Cloudy as
his outlook into the future may have been, he knew that great promises
affecting all nations were intertwined with his family, separation from
whom had been a sorrow for years. But now the thought comes to him with
sudden illumination and joy: 'This, then, is what it all has meant,
that I should be a link in the chain of God's workings.' He knows
himself to be God's instrument for effecting His covenant promises. How
small a thing honour and position became in comparison!

We cannot all have great tasks in the line of God's purposes, but we
can all feel that our little ones are made great by being seen to be in
it. The less we think about chariots and gold chains, and the more we
try to find out what God means by setting us where we are, and to do
that, the better for our peace and true dignity. A true man does not
care for the rewards of work half as much as for the work itself. Find
out what God intends, and never mind whether He puts you in a dungeon
or in a palace. Both places lie on the road which He has marked and, in
either, the main thing is to do His will.

Next comes the swiftly devised plan for carrying out God's purpose. It
sounds as if Joseph, with prompt statesmanship, had struck it out then
and there. At all events, he pours it forth with contagious earnestness
and haste. Note how he says over and over again 'My father,' as if he
loved to dwell on the name, but also as if he had not yet completely
realised the renewal of the broken ties of brotherhood. It was some
trial of the stuff he was made of, to have to bring his father and his
family to be stared at, and perhaps mocked at, by the court. Many a
successful man would be very much annoyed if his old father, in his
country clothes, and hands roughened by toil, sat down beside him in
his prosperity. Joseph had none of that baseness. Jacob would come, if
at all, as a half-starved immigrant, and would be 'an abomination to
the Egyptians.' But what of that? He was 'my father,' and his son knows
no better use to make of his dignity than to compel reverence for
Jacob's grey hairs, which he will take care shall _not_ be 'brought
down with sorrow to the grave.' It is a very homely lesson--never be
ashamed of your father. But in these days, when children are often
better educated than their parents, and rise above them in social
importance, it is a very needful one.

The first overtures of reconciliation should come from the side of the
injured party. That is Christ's law, and if it were Christians'
practice, there would be fewer alienations among them. It is Christ's
law, because it is Christ's own way of dealing with us. He, too, was
envied, and sold by His brethren. His sufferings were meant 'to
preserve life.' Stephen's sermon in the Sanhedrin dwells on Joseph as a
type of Christ; and the typical character is seen not least distinctly
in this, that He against whom we have sinned pleads with us, seeks to
draw us nearer to Himself, and to lead us to put away all hard thoughts
of Him, and to cherish all loving ones towards Him, by showing us how
void His heart is of anger against us, and how full of yearning love
and of gracious intention to provide for us a dwelling-place, with
abundance of all needful good, beside Himself, while the years of
famine shall last.




GROWTH BY TRANSPLANTING


    'Then Joseph came and told Pharaoh, and said, My father
    and my brethren, and their flocks, and their herds, and
    all that they have, are come out of the land of Canaan;
    and, behold, they are in the land of Goshen. And he took
    some of his brethren, even five men, and presented them
    unto Pharaoh. And Pharaoh said unto his brethren, What
    is your occupation? And they said unto Pharaoh, Thy
    servants are shepherds, both we, and also our fathers.
    They said moreover unto Pharaoh, For to sojourn in the
    land are we come; for thy servants have no pasture for
    their flocks, for the famine is sore in the land of
    Canaan: now therefore, we pray thee, let thy servants
    dwell in the land of Goshen. And Pharaoh spake unto
    Joseph, saying, Thy father and thy brethren are come
    unto thee: The land of Egypt is before thee; in the
    best of the land make thy father and brethren to dwell;
    in the land of Goshen let them dwell: and if thou knowest
    any men of activity among them, then make them rulers
    over my cattle. And Joseph brought in Jacob his father,
    and set him before Pharaoh: and Jacob blessed Pharaoh.
    And Pharaoh said unto Jacob, How old art thou? And Jacob
    said unto Pharaoh, The days of the years of my pilgrimage
    are an hundred and thirty years: few and evil have the
    days of the years of my life been, and have not attained
    unto the days of the years of the life of my fathers in
    the days of their pilgrimage. And Jacob blessed Pharaoh,
    and went out from before Pharaoh. And Joseph placed his
    father and his brethren, and gave them a possession in
    the land of Egypt, in the best of the land, in the land
    of Rameses, as Pharaoh had commanded. And Joseph nourished
    his father, and his brethren, and all his father's
    household, with bread, according to their families.'
    --GENESIS xlvii. 1-12.

1. The conduct of Joseph in reference to the settlement in Goshen is an
example of the possibility of uniting worldly prudence with high
religious principle and great generosity of nature. He had promised his
brothers a home in that fertile eastern district, which afforded many
advantages in its proximity to Canaan, its adaptation to pastoral life,
and its vicinity to Joseph when in Zoan, the capital. But he had not
consulted Pharaoh, and, however absolute his authority, it scarcely
stretched to giving away Egyptian territory without leave. So his first
care, when the wanderers arrive, is to manage the confirmation of the
grant. He goes about it with considerable astuteness--a hereditary
quality, which is redeemed from blame because used for unselfish
purposes and unstained by deceit. He does not tell Pharaoh how far he
had gone, but simply announces that his family are in Goshen, as if
awaiting the monarch's further pleasure. Then he introduces a
deputation, no doubt carefully chosen, of five of his brothers (as if
the whole number would have been too formidable), previously instructed
how to answer. He knows what Pharaoh is in the habit of asking, or he
knows that he can lead him to ask the required question, which will
bring out the fact of their being shepherds, and utilise the prejudice
against that occupation, to ensure separation in Goshen. All goes as he
had arranged. Thanks partly to the indifference of the king, who seems
to have been rather a _roi faineant_ in the hands of his energetic
_maire du palais_, and to have been contented to give, with a flourish
of formality, as a command to Joseph, what Joseph had previously
carefully suggested to him (vers. 6, 7). There is nothing unfair in all
this. It is good, shrewd management, and no fault can be found with it;
but it is a new trait in the ideal character of a servant of God, and
contrasts strongly with the type shown in Abraham. None the less, it is
a legitimate element in the character and conduct of a good man, set
down to do God's work in such a world. Joseph is a saint and a
politician. His shrewdness is never craft; sagacity is not alien to
consecration. No doubt it has to be carefully watched lest it
degenerate; but prudence is as needful as enthusiasm, and he is the
complete man who has a burning fire down in his heart to generate the
force that drives him, and a steady hand on the helm, and a keen eye on
the chart, to guide him. Be ye 'wise as serpents' but also 'harmless as
doves.'

2 We may note in Joseph's conduct also an instance of a man in high
office and not ashamed of his humble relations. One of the great
lessons meant to be taught by the whole patriarchal period was the
sacredness of the family. That is, in some sense, the keynote of
Joseph's history. Here we see family love, which had survived the trial
of ill-usage and long absence, victorious over the temptation of
position and high associates. It took some nerve and a great deal of
affection, for the viceroy, whom envious and sarcastic courtiers
watched, to own his kin. What a sweet morsel for malicious tongues it
would be, 'Have you heard? He is only the son of an old shepherd, who
is down in Goshen, come to pick up some crumbs there!' One can fancy
the curled lips and the light laugh, as the five brothers, led by the
great man himself, made their rustic reverences to Pharaoh. It is as if
some high official in Paris were to walk in half a dozen peasants in
blouse and sabots, and present them to the president as 'my brothers.'
It was a brave thing to do; and it teaches a lesson which many people,
who have made their way in the world, would be nobler and more esteemed
if they learned.

3. The brother's words to Pharaoh are another instance of that ignorant
carrying out of the divine purposes which we have already had to
notice. They evidently contemplate only a temporary stay in the
country. They say that they are come 'to _sojourn_'--the verb from
which are formed the noun often rendered '_strangers_,' and that which
Jacob uses in verse 9, 'my _pilgrimage_.' The reason for their coming
is given as the transient scarcity of pasturage in Canaan, which
implies the intention of return as soon as that was altered. Joseph had
the same idea of the short duration of their stay; and though Jacob had
been taught by vision that the removal was in order to their being made
a great nation, it does not seem that his sons' intentions were
affected by that--if they knew it. So mistaken are our estimates. We go
to a place for a month, and we stay in it for twenty years. We go to a
place to settle for life, and our tent-pegs are pulled up in a week.
They thought of five years, and it was to be nearly as many centuries.
They thought of temporary shelter and food; God meant an education of
them and their descendants. Over all this story the unseen Hand hovers,
chastising, guiding, impelling; and the human agents are free and yet
fulfilling an eternal purpose, blind and yet accountable, responsible
for motives, and mercifully ignorant of consequences. So we all play
our little parts. We have no call to be curious as to what will come of
our deeds. This end of the action, the motive of it, is our care; the
other end, the outcome of it, is God's business to see to.

4. We may also observe how trivial incidents are wrought into God's
scheme. The Egyptian hatred of the shepherd class secured one of the
prime reasons for the removal from Canaan--the unimpeded growth of a
tribe into a nation. There was no room for further peaceful and
separate expansion in that thickly populated country. Nor would there
have been in Egypt, unless under the condition of comparative
isolation, which could not have been obtained in any other way. Thus an
unreasonable prejudice, possibly connected with religious ideas, became
an important factor in the development of Israel; and, once again, we
have to note the wisdom of the great Builder who uses not only gold,
silver, and precious stones, but even wood, hay, stubble--follies and
sins--for His edifice.

5. The interview of Jacob with Pharaoh is pathetic and beautiful. The
old man comports himself, in all the later history of Joseph, as if
done with the world, and waiting to go. 'Let me die, since I have seen
thy face,' was his farewell to life. He takes no part in the
negotiation about Goshen, but has evidently handed over all temporal
cares to younger hands. A halo of removedness lies round his grey
hairs, and to Pharaoh he behaves as one withdrawn from fleeting things,
and, by age and nearness to the end, superior even to a king's dignity.
As he enters the royal presence he does not do reverence, but invokes a
blessing upon him. 'The less is blessed of the better.' He has nothing
to do with court ceremonials or conventionalities. The hoary head is a
crown of honour, Pharaoh recognises his right to address him thus by
the kindly question as to his age, which implied respect for his years.
The answer of the 'Hebrew Ulysses,' as Stanley calls him, breathes a
spirit of melancholy not unnatural in one who had once more been
uprooted, and found himself again a wanderer in his old age. The
tremulous voice has borne the words across all the centuries, and has
everywhere evoked a response in the hearts of weary and saddened men.
Look at the component parts of this pensive retrospect.

Life has been to him a 'pilgrimage'. He thinks of all his wanderings
from that far-off day when at Bethel he received the promise of God's
presence 'in all places whither thou goest,' till this last happy and
yet disturbing change. But he is thinking not only, perhaps not
chiefly, of the circumstances, but of the spirit, of his life. This is,
no doubt, the confession 'that they were strangers and pilgrims'
referred to in the Epistle to the Hebrews. He was a pilgrim, not
because he had often changed his place of abode, but because he sought
the 'city which hath foundations,' and therefore could not be at home
here. The goal of his life lay in the far future; and whether he looked
for the promises to be fulfilled on earth, or had the unformulated
consciousness of immortality, and saluted the dimly descried coast from
afar while tossing on life's restless ocean, he was effectually
detached from the present, and felt himself an alien in the existing
order. We have to live by the same hope, and to let it work the same
estrangement, if we would live noble lives. Not because all life is
change, nor because it all marches steadily on to the grave, but
because our true home--the community to which we really belong, the
metropolis, the mother city of our souls--is above, are we to feel
ourselves strangers upon earth. They who only take into account the
transiency of life are made sad, or sometimes desperate, by the
unwelcome thought. But they whose pilgrimage is a journey home may look
that transiency full in the face, and be as glad because of it as
colonists on their voyage to the old country which they call 'home,'
though they were born on the other side of the world and have never
seen its green fields.

To Jacob's eyes his days seem 'few.' Abraham's one hundred and
seventy-five years, Isaac's one hundred and eighty, were in his mind.
But more than these was in his mind. The law of the moral perspective
is other than that of the physical. The days in front, seen through the
glass of anticipation, are drawn out; the days behind, viewed through
the telescope of memory, are crowded together. What a moment looked all
the long years of his struggling life--shorter now than even had once
seemed the seven years of service for his Rachel, that love had made to
fly past on such swift wings! That happy wedded life, how short it
looked! A bright light for a moment, and

 'Ere a man could say "Behold!"
  The jaws of darkness did devour it up.'

It is well to lay the coolness of this thought on our fevered hearts,
and, whether they be torn by sorrows or gladdened with bliss, to
remember 'this also will pass' and the longest stretch of dreary days
be seen in retrospect, in their due relation to eternity, as but a
moment. That will not paralyse effort nor abate sweetness, but it will
teach proportion, and deliver from the illusions of this solid-seeming
shadow which we call life.

The pensive retrospect darkens as the old man's memory dwells upon the
past. His days have not only been few--that could be borne--but they
have been 'evil' by which I understand not unfortunate so much as
faulty. We have seen in preceding pages the slow process by which the
crafty Jacob had his sins purged out of him, and became 'God's
wrestler.' Here we learn that old wrong-doing, even when forgiven--or,
rather, when and because forgiven--leaves regretful memories lifelong.
The early treachery had been long ago repented of and pardoned by God
and man. The nature which hatched it had been renewed. But here it
starts up again, a ghost from the grave, and the memory of it is full
of bitterness. No lapse of time deprives a sin of its power to sting.
As in the old story of the man who was killed by a rattlesnake's poison
fang embedded in a boot which had lain forgotten for years, we may be
wounded by suddenly coming against it, long after it is forgiven by God
and almost forgotten by ourselves. Many a good man, although he knows
that Christ's blood has washed away his guilt, is made to possess the
iniquities of his youth. 'Thou shalt be ashamed and confounded, and
never open thy mouth any more, when I am pacified toward thee for all
that thou hast done.'

But this shaded retrospect is one-sided. It is true, and in some moods
seems all the truth; but Jacob saw more distinctly, and his name was
rightly Israel, when, laying his trembling hands on the heads of
Joseph's sons, he laid there the blessing of 'the God which fed me all
my life long, ... 'the Angel which redeemed me from all evil.' That was
his last thought about his life, as it began to be seen in the breaking
light of eternal day. Pensive and penitent memory may call the years
few and evil, but grateful faith even here, and still more the cleared
vision of heaven, will discern more truly that they have been a long
miracle of loving care, and that all their seeming evil has been
transmuted into good.




TWO RETROSPECTS OF ONE LIFE


    'And Jacob said unto Pharaoh, Few and evil have the
    days of the years of my life been.'--GENESIS xlvii. 9.

    'The God which fed me all my life long unto this day;
    the Angel which redeemed me from all evil.'
    --GENESIS xlviii. 15,16.

These are two strangely different estimates of the same life to be
taken by the same man. In the latter Jacob categorically contradicts
everything that he had said in the former. 'Few and evil,' he said
before Pharaoh. 'All my life long,' 'the Angel which redeemed me from
all evil,' he said on his death-bed.

If he meant what he said when he spoke to Pharaoh, and characterised
his life thus, he was wrong. He was possibly in a melancholy mood. Very
naturally, the unfamiliar splendours of a court dazzled and bewildered
the old man, accustomed to a quiet shepherd life down at Hebron. He had
not come to see Pharaoh, he only cared to meet Joseph; and, as was
quite natural, the new and uncongenial surroundings depressed him.
Possibly the words are only a piece of the etiquette of an Eastern
court, where it is the correct thing for the subject to depreciate
himself in all respects as far inferior to the prince. And there may be
little more than conventional humility in the words of my first text.
But I am rather disposed to think that they express the true feeling of
the moment, in a mood that passed and was followed by a more wholesome
one.

I put the two sayings side by side just for the sake of gathering up
one or two plain lessons from them.

1. We have here two possible views of life.

Now the key to the difference between these two statements and moods of
feeling seems to me to be a very plain one. In the former of them there
is nothing about God. It is all Jacob. In the latter we notice that
there is a great deal more about God than about Jacob, and that
determines the whole tone of the retrospect. In the first text Jacob
speaks of 'the days of the years of _my_ pilgrimage,' 'the days of the
years of _my_ life,' and so on, without a syllable about anything
except the purely earthly view of life. Of course, when you shut out
God, the past is all dark enough, grey and dismal, like the landscape
on some cloudy day, where the woods stand black, and the rivers creep
melancholy through colourless fields, and the sky is grey and formless
above. Let the sun come out, and the river flashes into a golden
mirror, and the woods are alive with twinkling lights and shadows, and
the sky stretches a blue pavilion above them, and all the birds sing.
Let God into your life, and its whole complexion and characteristics
change. The man who sits whining and complaining, when he has shut out
the thought of a divine Presence, finds that everything alters when he
brings that in.

And, then, look at the two particulars on which the patriarch dwells.
'I am only one hundred and thirty years old,' he says; a mere infant
compared with Abraham and Isaac! How did he know he was not going to
live to be as old as either of them? And 'if his days were evil,' as he
said, was it not a good thing that they were few? But, instead of that,
he finds reasons for complaint in the brevity of the life which, if it
were as evil as he made it out to be, must often have seemed
wearisomely long, and dragged very slowly. Now, both things are
true--life is short, life is long. Time is elastic--you can stretch it
or you can contract it. It is short compared with the duration of God;
it is short, as one of the Psalms puts it pathetically, as compared
with this Nature round us--'The earth abideth for ever'; we are
strangers upon it, and there is no abiding for us. It is short as
compared with the capacities and powers of the creatures that possess
it; but, oh! if we think of our days as a series of gifts of God, if we
look upon them, as Jacob looked upon them when he was sane, as being
one continued shepherding by God, they stretch out into blessed length.
Life is long enough if it manifests that God takes care of us, and if
we learn that He does. Life is long enough if it serves to build up a
God-pleasing character.

It is beautiful to see how the thought of God enters into the dying
man's remembrances in the shape which was natural to him, regard being
had to his own daily avocations. For the word translated 'fed' means
much more than supplied with nourishment. It is the word for doing the
office of shepherd, and we must not forget, if we want to understand
its beauty, that Jacob's sons said, 'Thy servants are shepherds; both
we and also our fathers.' So this man, in the solitude of his pastoral
life, and whilst living amongst his woolly people who depended upon his
guidance and care, had learned many a lesson as to how graciously and
tenderly and constantly fed, and led, and protected, and fostered by
God were the creatures of His hand.

It was he, I suppose, who first gave to religious thought that metaphor
which has survived temple and sacrifice and priesthood, and will
survive even earth itself; for 'I am the Good Shepherd' is as true
to-day as when first spoken by Jesus, and 'the Lamb which is in the
midst of the throne shall lead them,' and be their Shepherd when the
flock is carried to the upper pastures and the springs that never fail.
The life which has brought us that thought of a Shepherd-God has been
long enough; and the days which have been so expanded as to contain a
continuous series of His benefits and protections need never be
remembered as 'few,' whatsoever be the arithmetic that is applied to
them.

The other contradiction is equally eloquent and significant. 'Few and
evil' have my days been, said Jacob, when he was not thinking about
God; but when he remembered the Angel of the Presence, that mysterious
person with whom he had wrestled at Peniel, and whose finger had lamed
the thigh while His lips proclaimed a blessing, his view changed, and
instead of talking about 'evil' days, he says, 'The Angel that redeemed
me from all evil.' Yes, his life had been evil, whether by that we mean
sorrowful or sinful, and the sorrows and the sins had been closely
connected. A sorely tried man he had been. Far away back in the past
had been his banishment from home; his disappointment and hard service
with the churlish Laban; the misbehaviour of his sons; the death of
Rachel--that wound which was never stanched; and then the twenty years'
mourning for Rachel's son, the heir of his inheritance. These were the
evils, the sins were as many, for every one of the sorrows, except
perhaps the chiefest of them all, had its root in some piece of
duplicity, dishonesty, or failure. But he was there in Egypt beside
Joseph. The evils had stormed over him, but he was there still. And so
at the end he says, 'The Angel ... redeemed me from evil, though it
smote me. Sorrow became chastisement, and I was purged of my sin by my
calamities.' The sorrows are past, like some raging inundation that
comes up for a night over the land and then subsides; but the blessing
of fertility which it brought in its tawny waves abides with me yet.
Joseph is by my side. 'I had not thought to see thy face, and God hath
showed me the face of thy seed.' That sorrow is over. Rachel's grave is
still by the wayside, and that sorest of sorrows has wrought with
others to purify character. Jacob has been tried by sorrows; he has
been purged from sins. 'The Angel delivered me from all evil.' So, dear
friends, sorrow is not evil if it helps to strip us from the evil that
we love, and the ills that we bear are good if they alienate our
affections from the ills that we do.

2. Secondly, note the wisdom and the duty of taking the completer and
brighter view.

These first words of Jacob's are very often quoted as if they were the
pattern of the kind of thing people ought to say, 'Few and evil have
been the days of the years of my pilgrimage.' That is a text from which
many sermons have been preached with approbation of the pious
resignation expressed in it. But it does not seem to me that that is
the tone of them. If the man believed what he said, then he was very
ungrateful and short-sighted, though there were excuses to be made for
him under the circumstances. If the days had been evil, he had made
them so.

But the point which I wish to make now is that it is largely a matter
for our own selection which of the two views of our lives we take. We
may make our choice whether we shall fix our attention on the brighter
or on the darker constituents of our past.

Suppose a wall papered with paper of two colours, one black, say, and
the other gold. You can work your eye and adjust the focus of vision so
that you may see either a black background or a gold one. In the one
case the prevailing tone is gloomy, relieved by an occasional touch of
brightness; and in the other it is brightness, heightened by a
background of darkness. And so you can do with life, fixing attention
on its sorrows, and hugging yourselves in the contemplation of these
with a kind of morbid satisfaction, or bravely and thankfully and
submissively and wisely resolving that you will rather seek to learn
what God means by darkness, and not forgetting to look at the
unenigmatical blessings, and plain, obvious mercies, that make up so
much of our lives. We have to govern memory as well as other faculties,
by Christian principle. We have to apply the plain teaching of
Christian truth to our sentimental, and often unwholesome,
contemplations of the past. There is enough in all our lives to make
material for plenty of whining and complaining, if we choose to take
hold of them by that handle. And there is enough in all our lives to
make us ashamed of one murmuring word, if we are devout and wise and
believing enough to lay hold of them by that one. Remember that you can
make your view of your life either a bright one or a dark one, and
there will be facts for both; but the facts that feed melancholy are
partial and superficial, and the facts that exhort, 'Rejoice in the
Lord alway; and again I say, Rejoice,' are deep and fundamental.

3. So, lastly, note how blessed a thing it is when the last look is the
happiest.

When we are amongst the mountains, or when we are very near them, they
look barren enough, rough, stony, steep. When we travel away from them,
and look at them across the plain, they lie blue in the distance; and
the violet shadows and the golden lights upon them and the white peaks
above make a dream of beauty. Whilst we are in the midst of the
struggle, we are often tempted to think that things go hardly with us
and that the road is very rough. But if we keep near our dear Lord, and
hold by His hand, and try to shape our lives in accordance with His
will--whatever be their outward circumstances and texture--then we may
be very sure of this, that when the end comes, and we are far enough
away from some of the sorrows to see what they lead to and blossom
into, then we shall be able to say, It was all very good, and to thank
Him for all the way by which the Lord our God has led us.

In the same conversation in which the patriarch, rising to the height
of a prophet and organ of divine revelation, gives this his dying
testimony of the faithfulness of God, and declares that he has been
delivered from all evil, he recurs to the central sorrow of his life;
and speaks, though in calm words, of that day when he buried Rachel by
'Ephrath, which is Bethel.' But the pain had passed and the good was
present to him. And so, leaving life, he left it according to his own
word, 'satisfied with favour, and full of the blessing of the Lord.' So
we in our turns may, at the last, hope that what we know not now will
largely be explained; and may seek to anticipate our dying verdict by a
living confidence, in the midst of our toils and our sorrows, that 'all
things work together for good to them that love God.'




'THE HANDS OF THE MIGHTY GOD OF JACOB'


    The archers shot at him, but his bow abode in strength,
    and the arms of his hands were made strong by the hands
    of the mighty God of Jacob.'
    GENESIS xlix. 23, 24.

These picturesque words are part of what purports to be one of the
oldest pieces of poetry in the Bible--the dying Jacob's prophetic
blessing on his sons. Of these sons there are two over whom his heart
seems especially to pour itself--Judah the ancestor of the royal tribe,
and Joseph. The future fortunes of their descendants are painted in
most glowing colours. And of these two, the blessing on the 'son who
was dead and is alive again, who was lost and is found' is the fuller
of tender desire and glad prediction. The words of our text are
probably to be taken as prophecy, not as history--as referring to the
future conflicts and victories of the tribe, not to the past trials and
triumphs of its father. But be that as it may, they contain, in most
vivid metaphor, the earliest utterance of a very familiar truth. They
are the first hint of that thought which is caught up and expanded in
many a later saying of psalmist, and prophet, and apostle. We hear
their echoes in the great song ascribed to David 'in the day that the
Lord delivered him from the hand of all his enemies, and from the hand
of Saul': 'He teacheth my hands to war, so that a bow of steel is
broken by mine arms'; and the idea receives its fullest carrying out
and noblest setting forth, in the trumpet-call of the apostle, who had
seen more formidable weapons and a more terrible military discipline in
Rome's legions than Jacob knew, and who pressed them into his
stimulating call: 'Be strong in the Lord, and in the power of His
might.' 'Put on the whole armour of God.' Strength for conflict by
contact with the strength of God is the common thought of all these
passages--a very familiar thought, which may perhaps be freshened for
us by the singular intensity with which this metaphor of our text
presents it. Look at the picture.--Here stands the solitary man, ringed
all round by enemies full of bitter hate. Their arrows are on the
string, their bows drawn to the ear. The shafts fly thick, and when
they have whizzed past him, and he can be seen again, he stands
unharmed, grasping his unbroken bow. The assault has shivered no
weapon, has given no wound. He has been able to stand in the evil
day--and look! a pair of great, gentle, strong hands are laid upon his
hands and arms, and strength passes into his feebleness from the touch
of 'the hands of the mighty God of Jacob.' So the enemy have two, not
one, to reckon with. By the side of the hunted man stands a mighty
figure, and it is His strength, not the mortal's impotence, that has to
be overcome. Some dream of such divine help in the struggle of battle
has floated through the minds, and been enshrined in the legends, of
many people, as when the panoplied Athene has been descried leading the
Grecian armies, or, through the dust of conflict, the gleaming armour
and white horses of the Twin Brethren were seen far in advance of the
armies of Rome. But the dream is for us a reality. It _is_ true that we
go not to warfare at our own charges, nor by our own strength. If we
love Him and try to make a brave stand against our own evil, and to
strike a manful blow for God in this world, we shall not have to bear
the brunt alone. Remember he who fights for God never fights without
God.

There is a strange story in a later book of Scripture, which almost
reads as if it had been modelled on some reminiscence of these words of
the dying Jacob--and is, at any rate, a remarkable illustration of
them. The kingdom of Israel, of which the descendants of Joseph were
the most conspicuous part, was in the very crisis and agony of one of
its Syrian wars. Its principal human helper was 'fallen sick of the
sickness whereof he died.' And to his death-bed came, in a passion of
perplexity and despair, the irresolute weakling who was then king,
bewailing the impending withdrawal of the nation's best defence. The
dying Elisha, with curt authority, pays no heed to the tears of Joash,
but bids him take bow and arrows. 'And he said to the king of Israel,
Put thine hand upon the bow,' and he put his hand upon it; and '_Elisha
put his hands upon the king's hands_.' Then, when the thin, wasted,
transparent fingers of the old man were thus laid, guiding and infusing
strength, by a strange paradox, into the brown, muscular hands of the
young king, he tells him to open the casement that looked eastward
towards the lands of the enemy, and, as the blinding sunshine and the
warm air streamed into the sick-chamber, he bids him draw the bow. He
was obeyed, and, as the arrow whizzed Jordanwards, the dying prophet
followed its flight with words brief and rapid like it, 'the arrow of
the Lord's deliverance.' Here we have all the elements of our text
singularly repeated--the dying seer, the king the representative of
Joseph in the royal dignity to which his descendants have come, the
arrows and the bow, the strength for conflict by the touch of hands
that had the strength of God in them. The lesson of that paradox that
the dying gave strength to the living, the feeble to the strong, was
the old one which is ever new, that mere human power is weakness when
it is strongest, and that power drawn from God is omnipotent when it
seems weakest. And the further lesson is the lesson of our text, that
our hands are then strengthened, when His hands are laid upon them, of
whom it is written: 'Thou hast a mighty arm: strong is Thy hand, and
high is Thy right hand.

As a father in old days might have taken his little boy out to the
butts, and put a bow into his hand, and given him his first lesson in
archery, directing his unsteady aim by his own firmer finger, and
lending the strength of his wrist to his child's feebler pull, so God
does with us. The sure, strong hand is laid on ours, and is 'profitable
to direct.' A wisdom not our own is ever at our side, and ready for our
service. We but dimly perceive the conditions of the conflict, and the
mark at which we should aim is ever apt to be obscured to our
perceptions. But in all cases where conscience is perplexed, or where
the judgment is at fault, we may, if we will, have Him for our teacher.
And when we know not where to strike the foes that seem invulnerable,
like the warrior who was dipped in the magic stream, or clothed in mail
impenetrable as rhinoceros' hide, He will make us wise to know the one
spot where a wound is fatal. We shall not need to fight as he that
beats the air; to strike at random; or to draw our bow at a venture, if
