Cohen_.)

What has heretofore been mentioned is but a mere trifle when one
considers the vast number of similar incidents in which religion has
played the role of barrier to progress. These examples, though few, are
sufficient to impress the mind of any clear-minded, intelligent
individual with the conviction, in spite of all the sophistry and
casuistry of the ecclesiastical apologies, that progress in this world
has taken place in direct proportion to the degree that the mind of man
has liberated itself from the control of theology and the myth of
religion.




CHAPTER XII

RELIGION AND WITCHCRAFT

    _Better that a man's body should be destroyed than his soul. The
    worst death of the soul is freedom to err_.

    ST. AUGUSTINE.

    _It would be hard to calculate the perilous import of so treacherous
    an utterance, an utterance the latent sentiment of which has been
    responsible for I know not how much human agony. Menacing indeed to
    human happiness was such a claim, and in the course of time when the
    corporate body of the church became all-powerful in Christendom, it
    put into tyrannical practice what had been but a theological
    theory_.

    LLEWELYN POWYS.


It is the purpose of this chapter to trace the origin of witches,
wizards, and devils, the widespread belief in them at the time of pagan
Rome, and the manner in which these were incorporated into Christian
theology.

With the rise of Christianity and the gain of political power by its
adherents, the perverted pagan idea of witchcraft became the source of
the most terrible persecutions in the bloody history of religion. The
numerous references to witches and devils in both the Old and New
Testaments established the authority for the organized religious mania
that scourged both Roman Catholic and Protestant Europe, and extended
its tentacles into the New England colonies.

Instigated by ecclesiastics, and carried into effect by the intellectual
serfs, their adherents, hundreds of thousands of "witches" were tortured
and burned during the sway of the Witchcraft Delusion. With the Bible
as an inspiration, the clergy inflamed the superstitious minds of the
masses of that time with the conception of a ceaseless strife between
the Kingdom of God and the Kingdom of Satan for possession of their
souls and their bodies.

We of the present age may readily wonder how such a belief could have
had so firm a grasp on the minds of our ancestors. Perhaps we will be
tempted to attribute it to the ignorance of that time, particularly to
the ignorance of the untutored masses. On the contrary, this does not
approximate the actual situation. History reveals that the greatest
minds of that age, men eminent in law, letters, and philosophy, not only
defended this conception strenuously, but even engaged in the
extermination of "witches."

That men of such superior intellect could defend such a barbaric
institution, which today is revolting to our senses, necessitates the
conclusion formulated at the end of this chapter.

       *       *       *       *       *

The ancient Greeks and Romans believed that it was possible by
supernatural means to inflict evil on their fellowmen, and all the sects
of philosophers admitted this, with the exception of the Epicureans, who
denied the existence of evil spirits. The magicians, in Greece and Rome,
were at times punished because they injured men and not because they
offended the gods. During the latter period of pagan Rome, some of the
emperors passed laws against the magicians, if it was proven that by
casting the horoscope the magicians had ascertained what was, according
to their belief, the most auspicious time to start a rebellion against
their rule. The emperors, however, notably Marcus Aurelius and Julian,
were the patrons of magicians who foretold coming events to them. The
public methods of foretelling the future, such as the oracle of the
gods, formed part of their religion.

When the first Christians came into Rome and spread Christianity
throughout the empire, they were inspired by an intense religious
enthusiasm. They thought much less of the civil than of the religious
consequence of magic, and sacrilege seemed much more terrible in their
eyes than anarchy.

The Christians found in Rome a vast polytheistic religion in contrast to
their own in which the entire world was divided into the Kingdom of God
and the Kingdom of Satan. For them the world seemed to be teeming with
malignant demons, who had in all ages persecuted and deluded mankind.
"According to these Christians, the immediate objects of the devotions
of the pagan world were subsidiary spirits of finite power and imperfect
morality; angels, or, as they were then called, demons, who acted the
part of mediators, and who, by permission of the Supreme and
Inaccessible Deity, regulated the religious government of mankind. The
Christians had adopted this conception of subsidiary spirits, but they
maintained them to be not the willing agents, but the adversaries of the
Deity; and the word demon, which among the pagans, signified only a
spirit below the level of a Divinity, among the Christians signified a
devil." (_Lecky._)

"This notion seems to have existed in the very earliest period of
Christianity; and in the second century, we find it elaborated with the
most minute and detailed care. Tertullian, who wrote in that century,
assures us that the world was full of these evil spirits, whose
influence might be descried in every portion of the pagan creed. If a
Christian in any respect deviated from the path of duty, a visible
manifestation of the devil sometimes appeared to terrify him. The terror
which such a doctrine must have spread among the early Christians may
be easily conceived. They seemed to breathe an atmosphere of miracles.
Wherever they turned they were surrounded and beleaguered by malicious
spirits, who were perpetually manifesting their presence by supernatural
arts. Watchful fiends stood beside every altar, they mingled with every
avocation of life, and the Christians were the special objects of their
hatred. All this was universally believed, and was realized with an
intensity which, in this secular age, we can scarcely conceive. The
bearing of this view upon the conception of magic is very obvious. Among
the more civilized pagans, magic was mainly a civil, and in the last
days of the empire, a political crime. In the early church, on the other
hand, it was esteemed the most horrible form of sacrilege effected by
the direct agency of evil spirits. It included the whole system of
paganism, explained all its prodigies, and gave a fearful significance
to all its legends. When the Church obtained the direction of the civil
power, she soon modified or abandoned the tolerant maxims she had
formerly inculcated; and in the course of a few years, restrictive laws
were enacted, both against Jews and heretics." (_Lecky._)

Constantine, after his conversion to Christianity, enacted laws against
the magicians. These were made more rigid under Constantius, his son,
but suspended under Julian. These persecutions were renewed by
Valentinian, spasmodically carried on to a slight extent, and then
lapsed. During the period that elapsed between the sixth and thirteenth
centuries the executions for sorcery were comparatively rare.

It is to be borne in mind, then, that magic as existing in pagan Rome
was part of the religious conceptions of the Romans. The oracle as well
as the various demons, which to them signified what the word "angel"
signifies to us now, formed an elaborate system of mythology and
idolatry. The early Christians coming into contact with these
conceptions, at first found an insurmountable difficulty in spreading
their beliefs among the rural inhabitants of the Roman empire.
Polytheism was dominant while their monotheism was as yet a persecuted
belief. The road of least resistance was compromise, and so this vast
system of polytheism was perverted, while seemingly accepted into their
beliefs, by making these "angels," "demons," as we now understand the
word. Since the early Christians were dominated by a belief in constant
Satanic presence, these demons were said to be the "Hosts of Satan." It
was firmly believed that the arch-fiend (Satan) was forever hovering
about the Christians, but it was also believed that the sign of the
cross, or a few drops of holy water, or the name of Mary, could put him
to an immediate and ignominious flight.

"In the twelfth century, however, the subject passed into an entirely
new phase. The conception of a witch, as we now conceive it, that is to
say of a woman who had entered into a deliberate compact with Satan, who
was endowed with the power of working miracles whenever she pleased, and
who was continually transported through the air to the Sabbath, where
she paid her homage to the Evil One--first appeared. The panic created
by the belief at first advanced slowly, but after a time with a
fearfully accelerated rapidity. Thousands of victims were sometimes
burnt alive in a few years. Every country in Europe was stricken with
the wildest fever. Hundreds of the ablest judges were selected for the
extirpation of this crime. A vast literature was created on the subject,
and it was not until a considerable portion of the eighteenth century
had passed away that the executions finally ceased. The vast majority of
those accused of witchcraft were women, and again the Bible furnished
the authority for the belief that women were inherently wicked. That
the Fathers of the Church believed this is exemplified by the statement
of Chrysostom in which he said that women were a 'necessary evil, a
natural temptation, a desirable calamity, a domestic peril, a deadly
fascination, and a painted ill.'" (_Lecky._)

At this period the conception of a witch is radically different from
that which was prevalent in the era prior to this one. The popular
belief of the witchcraft ages, a belief sanctioned by most of the
learned men of the time, was that the earth swarmed with millions upon
millions of demons. They multiplied by reproduction in the usual way, by
the accession of the souls of wicked men, of women dying in childbirth,
of children still-born, of men killed in duels. The air was filled with
them, and one was always in danger of inspiring them with the air, of
swallowing them in food and drink. Most Christian writers and legendists
said that there were so many of them they could not be counted, but
Wierus took a census of them and reported that there were only 7,505,926
divided into seventy-two companies, each commanded by a captain or
prince. They could make themselves hideous, or beautiful, as suited
their purposes, and assume any shape. While capable of appearing at any
time, they preferred the night between Friday and Saturday. Any human
being who gave up to them his immortal soul could command their services
for a certain time. Occasionally general conferences took place, at the
pleasure of Satan, which were attended by all the demons and all the
witches.

"These 'sabbaths' were held on the Brocken or other high mountain. Upon
the spot where they met, nothing would ever grow afterwards, as their
hot feet burnt all the fecundity out of the soil. In France, England,
and the American Colonies, it was supposed that witches made their trips
on broomsticks; in Spain and Italy it was believed that they twirled on
the back of the Devil himself, who, for the occasion, transformed
himself into male goat. On no account would a witch, when starting for a
sabbath, go out through the open door or window; she would pass through
the keyhole or up the chimney. While they were gone, inferior demons
assumed their shape, and lay in their beds, feigning illness. Assembled
on the Brocken, the Devil, as a double-headed goat, took his seat on the
throne. His subjects paid their respects to him, kissing his posterior
face. With a master of ceremonies appointed for the occasion, he made a
personal examination of all the wizards and witches, to see if they had
the secret mark about them by which they were stamped as the Devil's
own. This mark was always insensible to pain, and it was the sure proof
of witchery when found by the inquisitor. Any witches found by the Devil
not so marked received the mark from him then and there, also a
nickname. Then they all sang and danced furiously. If a stranger came to
be admitted, silence reigned while he denied his salvation, spat upon
the Bible, kissed the Devil, and swore absolute obedience to him.
Singing and dancing was resumed, a mythical formula being used in the
singing. When tired, they sat down and told of their evil deeds; those
who had not been bad enough were scourged by Satan himself with thorns
and scorpions until they could neither sit nor stand. Then came a dance
by thousands of toads who were conjured out of the ground and standing
on their hind legs kept time to the music Satan evoked from bagpipes or
a trumpet. They could all talk, and asked the witches to give them the
flesh of unbaptized babes for food. The witches promised to do so. The
Devil told them to remember and keep their word and then stamped his
foot, and the frogs disappeared instantly into the earth. Next came a
most disgusting banquet, except for a few of the most wicked witches,
to whom were given rich viands on golden plates and expensive wines in
crystal goblets. Then came more dancing; those who did not care for that
amused themselves by mocking the sacrament of baptism. For this purpose
the toads were again called up and sprinkled with filthy water, the
Devil making the sign of the cross, while the witches repeated a formula
as absurd as that used in ordinary baptisms. Sometimes the Devil made
the witches take off their clothes and dance before him, each with a cat
tied around her neck, and another dangling behind as a tail. Sometimes,
again, there were lascivious orgies. At cock-crow, all disappeared; the
sabbath was over." (_"The Story of the Inquisition"--Freethought Press
Association._)

This conception of a witch continued from the twelfth century to the
time witch-burning ceased. With this idea of a witch being constantly
instilled into the minds of their listeners, the clergy set loose
fervidly religious mobs to scourge the countries of innocent women. With
the entire world divided into the "Hosts of Heaven" and the "Hosts of
Satan," with witches abounding in the air, in the water, and in the
food, and with their immortal souls at stake, the frenzied population
found evidences of witchcraft in all manner of happenings.

"Pope after pope set the seal of his infallibility upon the bloody
persecutions. At length came Innocent VIII who, on the 7th of December,
1484, sent forth his bull Summis Desiderantis. Of all documents ever
issued from Rome, imperial and papal, this, doubtless, first and last,
caused the greatest shedding of innocent blood. Yet no document was ever
more clearly dictated by conscience. Inspired by the scriptural command,
'Thou shalt not suffer a witch to live,' Pope Innocent exhorted the
clergy of Germany to leave no means untried to detect sorcerers, and
especially, those who by evil practice destroy vineyards, gardens,
meadows, and growing crops. These precepts were based upon various texts
of scripture, especially upon the famous statement in the Book of Job;
and to carry them out, witch-finding inquisitors were authorized by the
Pope to scour Europe, especially Germany, and a manual was prepared for
their use, the Witch-Hammer, Malleus Maleficarum." (_White: "Warfare of
Science."_)

Another important and much discussed department was the connection
between evil spirits and animals. That the Devil could assume the form
of any animal he pleased, seems to have been generally admitted, and it
presented no difficulty to those who remembered that the first
appearance of that personage on earth was as a serpent, and that on one
occasion a legion of devils had entered into a herd of swine. Saint
Jerome also assures us that in the desert St. Anthony had met a centaur
and a faun, a little man with horns growing from his forehead, who were
possibly devils, and at all events, at a later period, the "Lives of the
Saints" represent evil spirits in the form of animals as not infrequent.
Lycanthropy, however, or the transformation of witches into wolves,
presented more difficulty. The history of Nebuchadnezzar and the
conversion of Lot's wife were, it is true, eagerly alleged in support of
its possibility; but it was impossible to forget that St. Augustine
appeared to regard lycanthropy as a fable, and a canon of the Council of
Ancyra had emphatically condemned the belief. On the other hand, that
belief has been very widely diffused among the ancients. It had been
accepted by many of the greatest and most orthodox theologians, by the
inquisitors who were commissioned by the popes, and by the law courts of
most countries. The evidence on which it rested was very curious and
definite. If the witch was wounded in the form of an animal, she
retained that wound in her human form, and hundreds of such cases were
alleged before tribunals. Sometimes the hunter, having severed the paw
of his assailant, retained it as a trophy; but, when he opened his bag,
he discovered in it only a bleeding hand, which he recognized as the
hand of his wife.

A French judge named Boguet, at the end of the sixteenth century,
devoted himself especially to the subject and burnt multitudes of
lycanthropes. He wrote a book about them and drew up a code in which he
permitted ordinary witches to be strangled before they were burnt, but
excepted lycanthropes who were to be burnt alive.

Now let us examine on what authority the popes and afterwards the
reformers so rigorously persecuted the "witches." Both the Old and the
New Testaments are riddled with references to witches, wizards, and
devils. For example, this passage from Exodus XXII 18, "Thou shalt not
suffer a witch to live."

From Matthew VIII 28-32, "There met him two possessed with devils coming
out of the tombs, exceeding fierce, so that no man might pass by that
way. And, behold, they cried out, saying, 'What have we to do with thee,
Jesus, Son of God? Art thou come hither to torment us before the time?'
And there was a good way off from them a herd of many swine feeding. So
the devils besought him, saying, 'If thou cast us out, suffer us to go
away into the herd of swine. And he said unto them, 'Go!' And when they
were come out, they went into the herd of swine. And behold, the whole
herd of swine ran violently down a steep place into the sea and perished
in the waters."

The Old Testament, therefore, definitely commands its adherents to kill,
and the New Testament gives a brilliant example of its chief magician,
Jesus, exorcising devils from men and driving them into swine. There
are numerous passages of the Bible which speak of the Devil, the Devil
and his angels, spirit of an unclean devil, dumb spirit, foul spirit,
unclean spirit, evil spirit, witch, witchcraft, wizards, necromancers,
satan, the tempter, prince of the power of the air, prince of devils,
etc.

These passages in the Bible were at once the chief source and sanction
