"What's that? What's that?"

"It's just what I say," and Colonel Smith brought out of his pocket one
of the square cakes of compressed food. "Set your teeth in that, and see
what you think of it, but don't take too much, for its powerful strong."

"I say," he continued, "we have got enough of that stuff to last us all
for a month, but we've done more than that; we have got a surprise for
you that will make you open your eyes. Just wait a minute."

Colonel Smith made a signal to the electrical ship which we had just
quitted to draw near. It came alongside, so that one could step from its
deck onto the flagship. Colonel Smith disappeared for a minute in the
interior of his ship, then re-emerged, leading the girl whom we had
found upon the planet.

"Take her inside, quick," he said, "for she is not used to this thin
air."

In fact, we were at so great an elevation that the rarity of the
atmosphere now compelled us all to wear our air-tight suits, and the
girl, not being thus attired, would have fallen unconscious on the deck
if we had not instantly removed her to the interior of the car.

There she quickly recovered from the effects of the deprivation of air
and looked about her, pale, astonished, but yet apparently without fear.

Every motion of this girl convinced me that she not only recognized us
as members of her own race, but that she felt that her only hope lay in
our aid. Therefore, strange as we were to her in many respects,
nevertheless she did not think that she was in danger while among us.

The circumstances under which we had found her were quickly explained.
Her beauty, her strange fate and the impenetrable mystery which
surrounded her excited universal admiration and wonder.

"How did she get on Mars?" was the question that everybody asked, and
that nobody could answer.

But while all were crowding around and overwhelming the poor girl with
their staring, suddenly she burst into tears, and then, with arms
outstretched in the same appealing manner which had so stirred our
sympathies when we first saw her in the house of the Martians, she broke
forth in a wild recitation, which was half a song and half a wail.

As she went on I noticed that a learned professor of languages from the
University of Heidelberg was listening to her with intense attention.
Several times he appeared to be on the point of breaking in with an
exclamation. I could plainly see that he was becoming more and more
excited as the words poured from the girl's lips. Occasionally he nodded
and muttered, smiling to himself.

Her song finished, the girl sank half-exhausted upon the floor. She was
lifted and placed in a reclining position at the side of the car.

Then the Heidelberg professor stepped to the center of the car, in the
sight of all, and in a most impressive manner said:

"Gentlemen, our sister.

"I have her tongue recognized! The language that she speaks, the roots
of the great Indo-European, or Aryan stock, contains.

"This girl, gentlemen, to the oldest family of the human race belongs.
Her language every tongue that now upon the earth is spoken antedates.
Convinced am I that it that great original speech is from which have all
the languages of the civilized world sprung.

"How she here came, so many millions of miles from the earth, a great
mystery is. But it shall be penetrated, and it is from her own lips that
we shall the truth learn, because not difficult to us shall it be the
language that she speaks to acquire since to our own it is akin."

This announcement of the Heidelberg professor stirred us all most
profoundly. It not only deepened our interest in the beautiful girl whom
we had rescued, but, in a dim way, it gave us reason to hope that we
should yet discover some means of mastering the Martians by dealing them
a blow from within.

It had been expected, the reader will remember, that the Martian whom we
had made prisoner on the asteroid, might be of use to us in a similar
way, and for that reason great efforts had been made to acquire his
language, and considerable progress had been effected in that direction.

But from the moment of our arrival at Mars itself, and especially after
the battles began, the prisoner had resumed his savage and
uncommunicative disposition, and had seemed continually to be expecting
that we would fall victims to the prowess of his fellow beings, and that
he would be released. How an outlaw, such as he evidently was, who had
been caught in the act of robbing the Martian gold mines, could expect
to escape punishment on returning to his native planet it was difficult
to see. Nevertheless, so strong are the ties of race we could plainly
perceive that all his sympathies were for his own people.

In fact, in consequence of his surly manner, and his attempts to escape,
he had been more strictly bound than before and to get him out of the
way had been removed from the flagship, which was already overcrowded,
and placed in one of the other electric ships, and this ship--as it
happened--was one of those which were lost in the great battle beneath
the clouds. So after all, the Martian had perished, by a vengeful stroke
launched from his native globe.

But Providence had placed in our hands a far better interpreter than he
could ever have been. This girl of our own race would need no urging, or
coercion, on our part in order to induce her to reveal any secrets of
the Martians that might be useful in our further proceedings.

But one thing was first necessary to be done.

We must learn to talk with her.

But for the discovery of the store of provisions it would have been
impossible for us to spare the time needed to acquire the language of
the girl, but now that we had been saved from the danger of starvation,
we could prolong the siege for several weeks, employing the intervening
time to the best advantage.

The terrible disaster which we had suffered in the great battle above
the Lake of the Sun, wherein we had lost nearly a third of our entire
force, had been quite sufficient to convince us that our only hope of
victory lay in dealing the Martians some paralyzing stroke that at one
blow would deprive them of the power of resistance. A victory that cost
us the loss of a single ship would be too dearly purchased now.

How to deal that blow, and first of all, how to discover the means of
dealing it, were at present the uppermost problems in our minds.

The only hope for us lay in the girl.

If, as there was every reason to believe, she was familiar with the ways
and secrets of the Martians, then she might be able to direct our
efforts in such a manner as to render them effective.

"We can spare two weeks for this," said Mr. Edison. "Can you fellows of
many tongues learn to talk with the girl in that time?"

"We'll try it," said several.

"It shall we do," cried the Heidelberg professor more confidently.

"Then there is no use of staying here," continued the commander. "If we
withdraw the Martians will think that we have either given up the
earth's moon, always keep the same face toward their master. By blanket
and let us see their face once more. That will give us a better
opportunity to strike effectively when we are again ready."

"Why not rendezvous at one of the moons?" said an astronomer. "Neither
of the two moons is of much consequence, as far as size goes, but still
it would serve as sort of an anchorage ground, and while there, if we
were careful to keep on the side away from Mars, we should escape
detection."

This suggestion was immediately accepted, and the squadron having been
signalled to assemble quickly bore off in the direction of the more
distant moon of Mars, Deimos. We knew that it was slightly smaller than
Phobos, but its greater distance gave promise that it would better serve
our purpose of temporary concealment. The moons of Mars, like the
earth's moon, always kept the same face toward their master. By hiding
behind Deimos we should escape the prying eyes of the Martians, even
when they employed telescopes, and thus be able to remain comparatively
close at hand, ready to pounce down upon them again, after we had
obtained, as we now had good hope of doing, information that would make
us masters of the situation.




CHAPTER THIRTEEN

_THERE WERE GIANTS IN THE EARTH_


Deimos proved to be, as we had expected, about six miles in diameter.
Its mean density is not very great so that the acceleration of gravity
did not exceed one-two-thousandths of the earth's. Consequently the
weight of a man turning the scales at 150 pounds at home was here only
about one ounce.

The result was that we could move about with greater ease than on the
golden asteroid, and some of the scientific men eagerly resumed their
interrupted experiments.

But the attraction of this little satellite was so slight that we had to
be very careful not to move too swiftly in going about lest we should
involuntarily leave the ground and sail out into space, as, it will be
remembered, happened to the fugitives from the fight on the asteroid.

Not only would such an adventure have been an uncomfortable experience,
but it might have endangered the success of our scheme. Our present
distance from the surface of Mars did not exceed 12,500 miles, and we
had reasons to believe the Martians possessed telescopes powerful enough
to enable them not merely to see the electrical ships at such a
distance, but to also catch sight of us individually. Although the cloud
curtain still rested on the planet it was probable that the Martians
would send some of their airships up to its surface in order to
determine what our fate had been. From that point of vantage with their
exceedingly powerful glasses, we feared that they might be able to
detect anything unusual upon or in the neighborhood of Deimos.

Accordingly strict orders were given, not only that the ships should be
moored on that side of the satellite which is perpetually turned away
from Mars, but that, without orders, no one should venture around on the
other side of the little globe or even on the edge of it, where he might
be seen in profile against the sky.

Still, of course, it was essential that we, on our part, should keep a
close watch, and so a number of sentinels were selected, whose duty it
was to place themselves at the edge of Deimos, where they could peep
over the horizon, so to speak, and catch sight of the globe of our
enemies.

The distance of Mars from us was only about three times its own
diameter, consequently it shut off a large part of the sky, as viewed
from our position.

But in order to see its whole surface it was necessary to go a little
beyond the edge of the satellite, on that side which faced Mars. At the
suggestion of Colonel Smith, who had so frequently stalked Indians that
devices of this kind readily occurred to his mind, the sentinels all
wore garments corresponding in color to that of the soil of the
asteroid, which was of a dark, reddish brown hue. This would tend to
conceal them from the prying eyes of the Martians.

The commander himself frequently went around the edge of the planet in
order to take a look at Mars, and I often accompanied him.

I shall never forget one occasion, when, lying flat on the ground, and
cautiously worming our way around on the side toward Mars, we had just
begun to observe it with our telescopes, when I perceived, against the
vast curtain of smoke, a small, glinting object, which I instantly
suspected to be an airship.

I called Mr. Edison's attention to it, and we both agreed that it was,
undoubtedly, one of the Martian's aerial vessels, probably on the
lookout for us.

A short time afterward a large number of airships made their appearance
at the upper surface of the clouds, moving to and fro, and although,
with our glasses, we could only make out the general form of the ships,
without being able to discern the Martians upon them, yet we had not the
least doubt but they were sweeping the sky in every direction in order
to determine whether we had been completely destroyed or had retreated
to a distance from the planet.

Even when that side of Mars on which we were looking had passed into
night, we could still see the guardships circling above the clouds,
their presence being betrayed by the faint twinkling of the electric
lights that they bore.

Finally, after about a week had passed, the Martians evidently made up
their minds that they had annihilated us, and that there was no longer
danger to be feared. Convincing evidence that they believed we should
not be heard from again was furnished when the withdrawal of the great
curtain of cloud began.

This phenomenon first manifested itself by a gradual thinning of the
vaporous shield, until, at length, we began to perceive the red surface
of the planet dimly shining through it. Thinner and rarer it became,
and, after the lapse of about eighteen hours, it had completely
disappeared, and the huge globe shone out again, reflecting the light of
the sun from its continents and oceans with a brightness that, in
contrast with the all-enveloping night to which we had so long been
subjected, seemed unbearable to our eyes.

Indeed, so brilliant was the illumination which fell upon the surface of
Deimos that the number of persons who had been permitted to pass around
on the exposed side of the satellite was carefully restricted. In the
blaze of light which had been suddenly poured upon us we felt somewhat
like malefactors unexpectedly enveloped in the illumination of a
policeman's dark lantern.

Meanwhile, the object which we had in view in retreating to the
satellite was not lost sight of, and the services of the chief linguists
of the expedition were again called into use for the purpose of
acquiring a new language. The experiment was conducted in the flagship.
The fact that this time it was not a monster belonging to an utterly
alien race upon whom we were to experiment, but a beautiful daughter of
our common Mother Eve, added zest and interest as well as the most
confident hopes of success to the efforts of those who were striving to
understand the accents of her tongue.

Still the difficulty was very great, notwithstanding the conviction of
the professors that her language would turn out to be a form of the
great Indo-European speech from which the many tongues of civilized men
upon the earth had been derived.

The learned men, to tell the truth, gave the poor girl no rest. For
hours at a time they would ply her with interrogations by voice and by
gesture, until, at length, wearied beyond endurance, she would fall
asleep before their faces.

Then she would be left undisturbed for a little while, but the moment
her eyes opened again the merciless professors flocked about her once
more, and resumed the tedious iteration of their experiments.

Our Heidelberg professor was the chief inquisitor, and he revealed
himself to us in a new and entirely unexpected light. No one could have
anticipated the depth and variety of his resources. He placed himself in
front of the girl and gestured and gesticulated, bowed, nodded, shrugged
his shoulders, screwed his face into an infinite variety of expressions,
smiled, laughed, scowled and accompanied all these dumb shows with
posturings, exclamations, queries, only half expressed in words and
cadences which, by some ingenious manipulation of the tones of the
voice, he managed to make expressive of his desires.

He was a universal actor--comedian, tragedian, buffoon--all in one.
There was no shade of human emotions to which he did not seem capable of
giving expression.

His every attitude was a symbol, and all his features became in quick
succession types of thought and exponents of hidden feelings, while his
inquisitive nose stood forth in the midst of their ceaseless play like a
perpetual interrogation point that would have electrified the Sphinx
into life, and set its stone lips gabbling answers and explanations.

The girl looked on, partly astonished, partly amused, and partly
comprehending. Sometimes she smiled, and then the beauty of her face
became most captivating. Occasionally she burst into a cherry laugh when
the professor was executing some of his extraordinary gyrations before
her.

It was a marvelous exhibition of what the human intellect, when all its
powers are concentrated upon a single object, is capable of achieving.
It seemed to me, as I looked at the performance, that if all the races
of men, who had been stricken asunder at the foot of the Tower of Babel
by the miracle which made the tongues of each to speak a language
unknown to the others, could be brought together again at the foot of
the same tower, with all the advantages which thousands of years of
education had in the meantime imparted to them, they would be able,
without any miracle, to make themselves mutually understood.

And it was evident that an understanding was actually growing between
the girl and the professor. Their minds were plainly meeting, and when
both had become focused upon the same point, it was perfectly certain
that the object of the experiment would be attained.

Whenever the professor got from the girl an intelligent reply to his
pantomimic inquiries, or whenever he believed that he got such a reply,
it was immediately jotted down in the ever open note book which he
carried in his hand.

And then he would turn to us standing by, and with one hand on his
heart, and the other sweeping grandly through the air, would make a
profound bow and say:

"The young lady and I great progress make already. I have her words
comprehended. We shall wondrous mysteries solve. Jawohl! Wunderlich!
Make yourselves gentlemen easy. Of the human race the ancestral stem
have I here discovered."

Once I glanced over a page of his notebook and there I read this:

"Mars--Zahmor

"Copper--Hayez

"Sword--Anz

"I jump--Altesna

"I slay--Amoutha

"I cut off a head--Ksutaskofa

"I sleep--Zlcha

"I love--Levza"

When I saw this last entry I looked suspiciously at the professor.

Was he trying to make love without our knowing it to the beautiful
captive from Mars?

If so, I felt certain that he would get himself into difficulty. She had
made a deep impression upon every man in the flagship, and I knew that
there was more than one of the younger men who would promptly have
called him to account if they had suspected him of trying to learn from
those beautiful lips the words, "I love."

I pictured to myself the state of mind of Colonel Alonzo Jefferson Smith
if, in my place, he had glanced over the notebook and read what I had
read.

And then I thought of another handsome young fellow in the
flagship--Sydney Phillips--who, if mere actions and looks could make him
so, had become exceedingly devoted to this long lost and happily
recovered daughter of Eve.

In fact, I had already questioned within my own mind whether the peace
would be strictly kept between Colonel Smith and Mr. Phillips, for the
former had, to my knowledge, noticed the young fellow's adoring glances,
and had begun to regard him out of the corners of his eyes as if he
considered him no better than an Apache.

"But what," I asked myself, "would be the vengeance that Colonel Smith
would take upon this skinny professor from Heidelberg if he thought that
he, taking advantage of his linguistic powers, had stepped in between
him and the damsel whom he had rescued?"

However, when I took a second look at the professor, I became convinced
that he was innocent of any such amorous intentions, and that he had
learned, or believed he had learned, the word for "love" simply in
pursuances of the method by which he meant to acquire the language of
the girl.

There was one thing which gave some of us considerable misgivings, and
that was the question whether, after all, the language the professor was
acquiring was really the girl's own tongue or one that she had learned
from the Martians.

But the professor bade us rest easy on that point. He assured us, in the
first place, that this girl could not be the only human being living
upon Mars, but that she must have friends and relatives there. That
being so, they unquestionably had a language of their own, which they
spoke when they were among themselves. Here finding herself among beings
belonging to her own race, she would naturally speak her own tongue and
not that which she had acquired from the Martians.

"Moreover, gentlemen," he added, "I have in her speech many roots of the
great Aryan tongue already recognized."

