esset, quod autem satis esset ipsis relinquere. Quam rationem maiorum etiam
comprobat diligentia, qui primum iurare 'ex sui animi sententia' quemque
voluerunt, deinde ita teneri 'si sciens falleret,' quod inscientia multa
versaretur in vita, tum, qui testimonium diceret, ut 'arbitrari' se diceret
etiam quod ipse vidisset, quaeque iurati iudices cognovissent, ea non ut
esse facta, sed ut 'videri' pronuntiarentur.

XLVIII. 147. Verum, quoniam non solum nauta significat, sed etiam Favonius
ipse insusurrat navigandi nobis, Luculle, tempus esse et quoniam satis
multa dixi, est mihi perorandum. Posthac tamen, cum haec quaeremus, potius
de dissensionibus tantis summorum virorum disseramus, de obscuritate
naturae deque errore tot philosophorum, qui de bonis contrariisque rebus
tanto opere discrepant, ut, cum plus uno verum esse non possit, iacere
necesse sit tot tam nobilis disciplinas, quam de oculorum sensuumque
reliquorum mendaciis et de sorite aut pseudomeno, quas plagas ipsi contra
se Stoici texuerunt. 148. Tum Lucullus: Non moleste, inquit, fero nos haec
contulisse. Saepius enim congredientes nos, et maxime in Tusculanis
nostris, si quae videbuntur, requiremus. Optime, inquam, sed quid Catulus
sentit? quid Hortensius? Tum Catulus: Egone? inquit, ad patris revolvor
sententiam, quam quidem ille Carneadeam esse dicebat, ut percipi nihil
putem posse, adsensurum autem non percepto, id est, opinaturum sapientem
existimem, sed ita, ut intellegat se opinari sciatque nihil esse quod
comprehendi et percipi possit: qua re [Greek: epochen] illam omnium rerum
non probans, illi alteri sententiae, nihil esse quod percipi possit,
vehementer adsentior. Habeo, inquam, sententiam tuam nec eam admodum
aspernor. Sed tibi quid tandem videtur, Hortensi? Tum ille ridens:
Tollendum. Teneo te, inquam: nam ista Academiae est propria sententia. Ita
sermone confecto Catulus remansit: nos ad naviculas nostras descendimus.

       *       *       *       *       *

NOTES.

BOOK I.

    Sec.Sec.1--14. Summary. Cic., Varro and Atticus meet at Cumae (1). Cic.,
    after adroitly reminding Varro that the promised dedication of the _De
    Lingua Latina_ is too long delayed, turns the conversation towards
    philosophy, by asking Varro why he leaves this subject untouched (2,
    3). Varro thinks philosophy written in Latin can serve no useful
    purpose, and points to the failures of the Roman Epicureans (4--6). He
    greatly believes in philosophy, but prefers to send his friends to
    Greece for it, while he devotes himself to subjects which the Greeks
    have not treated (7, 8). Cic. lauds this devotion, but demurs to the
    theory that philosophy written in Latin is useless. Latins may surely
    imitate Greek philosophers as well as Greek poets and orators. He gives
    reasons why he should himself make the attempt, and instancing the
    success of Brutus, again begs Varro to write on philosophy (9--12).
    Varro putting the request on one side charges Cic. with deserting the
    Old Academy for the New. Cic. defends himself, and appeals to Philo for
    the statement that the New Academy is in harmony with the Old. Varro
    refers to Antiochus as an authority on the other side. This leads to a
    proposal on the part of Cic. to discuss thoroughly the difference
    between Antiochus and Philo. Varro agrees, and promises an exposition
    of the principles of Antiochus (13, 14).

Sec.1. _Noster_: our common friend. Varro was much more the friend of Atticus
than of Cic., see Introd. p. 37. _Nuntiatum_: the spelling _nunciatum_ is a
mistake, cf. Corssen, _Ausspr._ I. p. 51. _A M. Varrone_: _from M. Varro's
house_ news came. _Audissemus_: Cic. uses the contracted forms of such
subjunctives, as well as the full forms, but not intermediate forms like
_audiissemus_. _Confestim_: note how artfully Cic. uses the dramatic form
of the dialogue in order to magnify his attachment for Varro. _Ab eius
villa_: the prep is absent from the MSS., but Wesenberg (_Em. M.T. Cic.
Epistolarum_, p. 62) shows that it must be inserted. Cic. writes _abesse
Roma_ (_Ad Fam._ V. 15, 4), _patria_ (_T.D._ V. 106) etc., but not _abesse
officio_ (_De Off._ I. 43, where Wes. alters it) or the like. _Satis eum
longo intervallo_: so all the MSS.; but Halm, after Davies, reads _se
visentum_ for _satis eum_, quoting _Ad Att._ I. 4, Madv. _tum_ for _eum_
(Baiter and Halm's ed. of 1861, p. 854). The text is sound; the repetition
of pronouns (_illum_, _eum_) is quite Ciceronian. The emphatic _ille_ is
often repeated by the unemphatic _is_, cf. _T.D._ III. 71, and _M.D.F._ V.
22. I may note that the separation of _satis_ from _longo_ by the word
_eum_ is quite in Cicero's style (see my note on 25 _quanta id magis_).
Some editors stumble (Goerenz miserably) by taking _intervallo_ of distance
in space, instead of duration in time, while others wrongly press _satis_,
which only means "tolerably," to mean "sufficiently." The words _satis
longo intervallo_ simply = "after a tolerably long halt." For the clause
_ut mos_, etc., cf. _De Or._ II. 13.

Sec.2. _Hic pauca primo_: for the omission of _locuti_, cf. the very similar
passages in _D.F._ I. 14, III. 8, also my note on 14. _Atque ea_: Halm
brackets _ea_, quite needlessly, for its insertion is like Cic. _Ecquid
forte Roma novi_: _Roma_ is the ablative, and some verb like _attulisset_
is omitted. (So Turnebus.) To take it as nom., understanding _faciat_, is
clearly wrong. _Percontari_: the spelling _percunctari_ rests on false
derivation (Corss. I. 36). _Ecquid ipse novi_: cf. _De Or._ II. 13. The
MSS. have _et si quid_, bad Latin altered by Manutius. _Istum_: some edd.
_ipsum_, but Cic. often makes a speaker use _iste_ of a person who is
present. Goer. qu. _Brut._ 125, _De Or._ II. 228. _Velit_: Walker reads
_velis_ with St Jerome. For _quod velit_ = _quod quis velit_, cf. _De Or._
I. 30. _In manibus_: so often, cf. _Cat. Mai._ 38. _Idque_: MSS. have in
the place of this _quod_ with variants _que_, _quae_, _qui_, _quo_. Dav.
gave _quia_, which was the vulgate reading down to Halm, who reads _idque_,
after Christ. _Ad hunc enim ipsum_: MSS. have _eum_ for _enim_ (exc. Halm's
G). Such a combination of pronouns is vainly defended by Goer.; for
expressions like _me illum ipsum_ (_Ad Att._ II. 1, 11) are not in point.
Of course if _quia_ be read above, _eum_ must be ejected altogether.
_Quaedam institui_: the _De Lingua Latina_; see _Ad. Att_ XIII. 12.

Sec.3. _E Libone_: the father-in-law of Sext. Pompeius; see Caesar _B. Civ._
III. 5, 16, 24. _Nihil enim eius modi_ again all MSS. except Halm's G. have
_eum_ for _enim_. Christ conj. _enim eum_; so Baiter. _Illud ...
requirere_: i.e. the question which follows; cf. _requiris_ in 4. _Tecum
simul_: Halm's G om. _tecum_; but cf. _De Or._ III. 330. _Mandare
monumentis--letteris illustrare_: common phrases in Cic., e.g. _D.F._ I. 1,
_T.D._ I. 1, _De Div._ II. 4. _Monumentis_: this, and not _monimentis_
(Halm) or _monementis_, is probably the right spelling; cf. Corss. II. 314.
_Ortam a_: Cic. _always_ writes the prep. after _ortus_; cf. _M.D.F._ V.
69. _Genus_: regularly used by Cic. as _opus_ by Quintilian to mean
"department of literature." _Ea res_: one of Halm's MSS. followed by Baiter
has _ars_; on the other hand Bentley (if the _amicus_ so often quoted in
Davies' notes be really he) reads _artibus_ for _rebus_ below. The slight
variation, however, from _res_ to _artibus_ is such as Cic. loves.
_Ceteris_: the spelling _caeteris_ (Klotz) is absolutely wrong, cf. Corss.
I. 325. _Antecedat_: some MSS. give _antecellat_. a frequent variant, cf.
_De Off._ I. 105

Sec.4. _Deliberatam--agitatam_: Cic. as usual exaggerates the knowledge
possessed by the _personae_ of the dialogue; cf. Introd. p. 38, _De Or._
II. 1. _In promptu_: so II. 10. _Quod ista ipsa ... cogitavi_: Goer., who
half a page back had made merry over the gloss hunters, here himself
scented a miserable gloss; Schutz, Goerenz's echo expels the words. Yet
they are thoroughly like Cic. (cf. _De Div._ II. 1, _Cat. Mai._ 38), and
moreover nothing is more Ciceronian than the repetition of words and
clauses in slightly altered forms. The reason here is partly the intense
desire to flatter Varro. _Si qui ... si essent_: the first _si_ has really
no conditional force, _si qui_ like [Greek: eitines] merely means "all
who," for a strong instance see _Ad Fam._ I. 9, 13, ed Nobbe, _si accusandi
sunt, si qui pertimuerunt_. _Ea nolui scribere_, etc.: very similar
expressions occur in the prologue to _D.F._ I., which should be compared
with this prologue throughout.

Sec.5. _Vides ... didicisti_: MSS. have _vides autem eadem ipse didicisti
enim_. My reading is that of Dav. followed by Baiter. Halm, after Christ,
has _vides autem ipse--didicisti enim eadem--non posse_, etc. _Similis_:
Halm, in deference to MSS., makes Cic. write _i_ and _e_ indiscriminately
in the acc. plur. of i stems. I shall write _i_ everywhere, we shall thus,
I believe, be far nearer Cicero's real writing. Though I do not presume to
say that his usage did not vary, he must in the vast majority of instances
have written _i_, see Corss. I. 738--744. _Amafinii aut Rabirii_: cf.
Introd. p. 26. _Definiunt ... partiuntur_: n. on 32. _Interrogatione_:
Faber saw this to be right, but a number of later scholars alter it, e.g.
Bentl. _argumentatione_, Ernesti _ratione_. But the word as it stands has
exactly the meaning these alterations are intended to secure.
_Interrogatio_ is merely the _conclusio_ or syllogism put as a series of
questions. Cf. _Paradoxa_ 2, with _T.D._ II. 42 which will show that
_interrogatiuncula_ and _conclusiuncula_ are almost convertible terms. See
also _M.D.F._ I. 39. _Nec dicendi nec disserendi_: Cic.'s constant mode of
denoting the Greek [Greek: rhetorike] and [Greek: dialektike]; note on 32.
_Et oratorum etiam_: Man., Lamb. om. _etiam_, needlessly. In _Ad Fam._ IX.
25, 3, the two words even occur without any other word to separate them.
For _oratorum_ Pearce conj. _rhetorum_. _Rhetor_, however is not thus used
in Cic.'s phil. works. _Utramque vim virtutem_: strange that Baiter (esp.
after Halm's note) should take Manutius' far-fetched conj. _unam_ for
_virtutem_. Any power or faculty (vis, [Greek: dynamis]) may be called in
Gk. [Greek: arete], in Lat _virtus_. Two passages, _D.F._ III. 72, _De Or._
III. 65, will remove all suspicion from the text. _Verbis quoque novis_:
MSS. have _quanquam_ which however is impossible in such a place in Cic.
(cf. _M.D.F._ V. 68). _Ne a nobis quidem_: so all the MSS., but Orelli
(after Ernesti) thinking the phrase "_arrogantius dictum_" places _quidem_
after _accipient_. The text is quite right, _ne quidem_, as Halm remarks,
implies no more than the Germ. _auch nicht_, cf. also Gk. [Greek: oude].
_Suscipiatur labor_: MSS. om. the noun, but it is added by a later hand in
G.

Sec.6. _Epicurum, id est si Democritum_: for the charge see _D.F._ I. 17, IV.
13, _N.D._ I. 73. _Id est_ often introduces in Cic. a clause which
intensifies and does not merely explain the first clause, exx. in _M.D.F._
I. 33. _Cum causas rerum efficientium sustuleris_: cf. _D.F._ I. 18, the
same charge is brought by Aristotle against the Atomists, _Met._ A, 2. Many
editors from Lamb. to Halm and Baiter read _efficientis_, which would then
govern _rerum_ (cf. _D.F._ V. 81, _De Fato_, 33, also Gk. [Greek:
poietikos]). But the genitive is merely one of definition, the _causae_ are
the _res efficientes_, for which cf. 24 and _Topica_, 58, _proximus locus
est rerum efficientium, quae causae appellantur_. So Faber, though less
fully. _Appellat_: i.e. Amafinius, who first so translated [Greek: atomos].
_Quae cum contineantur_: this reading has far the best MSS. authority, it
must be kept, and _adhibenda etiam_ begins the _apodosis_. Madvig
(_Emendationes ad Ciceronis Libros Philosophicos_, Hauniae, 1825, p. 108)
tacitly reads _continentur_ without _cum_, so Orelli and Klotz. Goer.
absurdly tries to prop up the subj. without _cum_. _Quam quibusnam_:
Durand's em. for _quoniam quibusnam_ of the MSS., given by Halm and also
Baiter. Madv. (_Em._ p. 108) made a forced defence of _quoniam_, as marking
a rapid transition from one subject to another (here from physics to
ethics) like the Gk. [Greek: epei], only one parallel instance, however,
was adduced (_T.D._ III. 14) and the usage probably is not Latin.
_Adducere?_: The note of interrogation is Halm's; thus the whole sentence,
so far, explains the difficulty of setting forth the true system of
physics. If _quoniam_ is read and no break made at _adducere_, all after
_quoniam_ will refer to ethics, in that case there will be a strange change
of subject in passing from _quisquam_ to _haec ipsa_, both which
expressions will be nominatives to _poterit_, further, there will be the
almost impossible ellipse of _ars_, _scientia_, or something of the kind
after _haec ipsa_. On every ground the reading of Madv. is insupportable.
_Quid, haec ipsa_: I have added _quid_ to fill up the lacuna left by Halm,
who supposes much more to have fallen out. [The technical philosophical
terms contained in this section will be elucidated later. For the Epicurean
ignorance of geometry see note on II. 123] _Illi enim simpliciter_:
"frankly," cf. _Ad Fam._ VIII. 6, 1 _Pecudis et hominis_: note on II. 139.

Sec.7. _Sive sequare ... magnum est_: for the constr. cf. II. 140. _Magnum
est_: cf. _quid est magnum_, 6. _Verum et simplex bonum_: cf. 35. _Quod
bonum ... ne suspicari quidem_ an opinion often denounced by Cic., see esp
_T.D._ III. 41, where Cic.'s Latin agrees very closely with the Greek
preserved by Diog. Laert. X. 6 (qu. Zeller, 451), and less accurately by
Athenaeus, VII. 279 (qu. R. and P. 353). _Ne suspicari quidem_: for this
MSS. give _nec suspicari_, but Madv. (_D.F._, Excursus III.) has
conclusively shown that _nec_ for _ne ... quidem_ is post Augustan Latin.
Christ supposes some thing like _sentire_ to have fallen out before _nec
suspicari_; that this is wrong is clear from the fact that in _D.F._ II.
20, 30, _T.D._ III. 46, _N.D._ I. 111, where the same opinion of Epicurus
is dealt with, we have either _ne suspicari quidem_ or _ne intellegere
quidem_ (cf. also _In Pisonem_ 69). Further, _ne ... quidem_ is esp
frequent with _suspicari_ (_D.F._ II. 20), and verbs of the kind
(_cogitari_ II. 82), and especially, as Durand remarked, at the end of
sentences eg _Verr._ II. 1, 155. Notice _negat ... ne suspicari quidem_
without _se_, which however Baiter inserts, in spite of the numerous
passages produced from Cic. by Madv. (_Em._ 111), in which not only _se_,
but _me_, _nos_, and other accusatives of pronouns are omitted before the
infinitive, after verbs like _negat_. Cf. also the omission of _sibi_ in
_Paradoxa_ 40. _Si vero_: this, following _sive enim_ above, is a departure
from Cic.'s rule which is to write _sive--sive_ or _si--sin_, but not
_si--sive_ or _sive--si_. This and two or three other similar passages in
Cic. are explained as anacolutha by Madv. in a most important and
exhaustive excursus to his _D.F._ (p. 785, ed. 2), and are connected with
other instances of broken sequence. There is no need therefore to read
_sive_ here, as did Turn. Lamb. Dav. and others. _Quam nos ... probamus_:
cf. Introd. p. 62. _Erit explicanda_: for the separation of these words by
other words interposed, which is characteristic of Cic., see 11, 17. I am
surprised that Halm and Baiter both follow Ernesti in his hypercritical
objection to the phrase _explicare Academiam_, and read _erunt_ against the
MSS., making _illa_ plural. If _erunt_ is read, _erit_ must be supplied
from it to go with _disserendum_, which is harsh. _Quam argute, quam
obscure_: at first sight an oxymoron, but _argute_ need not only imply
_clearness_, it means merely "acutely". _Quantum possum_: some MSS. have
_quantam_, which is scarcely Latin, since in Cic. an accusative only
follows _nequeo_, _volo_, _malo_, _possum_, and such verbs when an
infinitive can be readily supplied to govern it. For _velle_ see a good
instance in _D.F._ III. 68, where consult Madv. _Constantiam_: the notions
of firmness, consistency, and clearness of mind are bound up in this word,
cf. II. 53. _Apud Platonem_: _Timaeus_, 47 B, often quoted or imitated by
Cic., cf. _De Leg._ I. 58, _Laelius_ 20, 47, _T.D._ I. 64.

Sec.8. _Id est ... jubeo_: these words have been naturally supposed a gloss.
But Cicero is nothing if not tautological; he is fond of placing slight
variations in phrase side by side. See some remarkable instances of
slightly varied phrases connected by _id est_ in _D.F._ I. 72, II. 6, 90. I
therefore hold Halm and Baiter to be wrong in bracketing the words. _Ea a_:
Lamb., objecting to the sound (which is indeed not like Cic.), would read
_e_ for _a_, which Halm would also prefer. _De_, _ab_, and _ex_ follow
_haurire_ indifferently in Cic. _Rivulos consectentur_: so Wordsworth, "to
hunt the waterfalls". The metaphor involved in _fontibus--rivulos_ is often
applied by Cic. to philosophy, see esp. a sarcastic passage about Epicurus
in _N.D._ I. 120. _Nihil enim magno opere_: _magno opere_ should be written
in two words, not as _magnopere_, cf. the phrases _maximo opere_, _nimio
opere_, the same holds good of _tanto opere_, _quanto opere_. _L. Aelii_:
MSS. _Laelii_. The person meant is L. Aelius Stilo or Praeconinus, the
master of Varro, and the earliest systematic grammarian of Rome. See
Quintil. _Inst. Or._ X. 1, 99, Gellius X. 21, Sueton. _Gramm._ 3.
_Occasum_: an unusual metaphor. _Menippum_: a Cynic satirist, see _Dict.
Biogr._ Considerable fragments of Varro's Menippean Satires remain, and
have often been edited--most recently by Riese (published by Teubner).
_Imitati non interpretati_: Cic. _D.F._ I. 7, gives his opinion as to the
right use to be made of Greek models. _+Quae quo_: these words are
evidently wrong. Halm after Faber ejects _quae_, and is followed by Baiter.
Varro is thus made to say that he stated many things dialectically, _in
order that_ the populace might be enticed to read. To my mind the fault
lies in the word _quo_, for which I should prefer to read _cum_ (=_quom_,
which would be written _quo_ in the MSS.) The general sense would then be
"Having introduced philosophy into that kind of literature which the
unlearned read, I proceeded to introduce it into that which the learned
read." _Laudationibus_: [Greek: logois epitaphiois], cf. _Ad Att._ XIII. 48
where Varro's are mentioned. _+Philosophe scribere_: the MSS. all give
_philosophie_. Klotz has _philosophiam_, which is demonstrably wrong,
_physica_, _musica_ etc. _scribere_ may be said, but not _physicam_,
_musicam_ etc. _scribere_. The one passage formerly quoted to justify the
phrase _philosophiam scribere_ is now altered in the best texts (_T.D._ V.
121, where see Tischer). Goer. reads _philosophiae scribere_; his
explanation is, as Orelli gently says, "vix Latina." I can scarcely think
Halm's _philosophe_ to be right, the word occurs nowhere else, and Cic.
almost condemns it by his use of the Greek [Greek: philosophos] (_Ad Att._
XIII. 20). In older Greek the adverb does not appear, nor is [Greek:
philosophos] used as an adjective much, yet Cic. uses _philosophus_
adjectivally in _T.D._ V. 121, _Cat. Mai._ 22, _N.D._ III. 23, just as he
uses _tyrannus_ (_De Rep._ III. 45), and _anapaestus_ (_T.D._ III. 57)
Might we not read _philosophis_, in the dative, which only requires the
alteration of a single letter from the MSS. reading? The meaning would then
be "to write _for_ philosophers," which would agree with my emendation
_cum_ for _quo_ above. _Philosophice_ would be a tempting alteration, but
that the word [Greek: philosophikos] is not Greek, nor do _philosophicus_,
_philosophice_ occur till very late Latin times. _Si modo id consecuti
sumus_: cf. _Brut._ 316.

Sec.9. _Sunt ista_: = [Greek: esti tauta], so often, e.g. _Lael._ 6. Some edd.
have _sint_, which is unlikely to be right. _Nos in nostra_: Augustine (_De
Civ. Dei_ VI. 2) quotes this with the reading _reduxerunt_ for
_deduxerunt_, which is taken by Baiter and by Halm; who quotes with
approval Durand's remark, "_deducimus honoris causa sed errantes reducimus
humanitatis_." The words, however, are almost convertible; see _Cat. Mai._
63. In _Lael._ 12, _Brut._ 86, we have _reducere_, where Durand's rule
requires _deducere_, on the other hand cf. _Ad Herennium_ IV. 64, _hospites
domum deducere. Aetatem patriae_ etc., August. (_De Civ. Dei_ VI. 3)
describes Varro's "_Libri Antiquitatum_" (referred to in 8), in which most
of the subjects here mentioned were treated of. _Descriptiones temporum_:
lists of dates, so [Greek: chronoi] is technically used for dates, Thuc. V.
20, etc. _Tu sacerdotum_: after this Lamb. inserts _munera_ to keep the
balance of the clauses. Cic. however is quite as fond of variety as of
formal accuracy. _Domesticam--bellicam_: opposed like _domi bellique_, cf.
_Brut._ 49, _De Off._ I. 74. Augustine's reading _publicam_ shows him to
have been quoting from memory. _Sedem_: so the best MSS. of Aug., some edd.
here give _sedium_. The argument for _sedem_ is the awkwardness of making
the three genitives, _sedium_, _regionum_, _locorum_, dependent on the
accusatives, _nomina_, _genera_, _officia_, _causas_. Cic. is fond of using
_sedes_, _locus_, _regio_ together, see _Pro Murena_, 85, _Pro Cluentio_,
171, quoted by Goer. _Omnium divinarum humanarumque rerum_: from the
frequent references of Aug. it appears that the "_Libri Antiquitatum_" were
divided into two parts, one treating of _res humanae_, the other of _res
divinae_ (_De Civ. Dei_, IV. 1, 27, VI. 3). _Et litteris luminis_: for
_luminis_, cf. _T.D._ I. 5. _Et verbis_: Manut. reads _rebus_ from 26.
Varro's researches into the Latin tongue are meant. _Multis locis
incohasti_: Varro's book "_De Philosophia_" had apparently not yet been
written.

Sec.10. _Causa_: = [Greek: prophasis]. _Probabilem_: = specious. _Nesciunt_:
Halm with his one MS. G, which is the work of a clever emendator, gives
_nescient_ to suit _malent_ above, and is followed by Baiter. It is not
necessary to force on Cic. this formally accurate sequence of tenses, which
Halm himself allows to be broken in two similar passages, II. 20, 105. _Sed
da mihi nunc, satisne probas?_: So all MSS. except G, which has the evident
conj. _sed ea (eam) mihi non sane probas_. This last Baiter gives, while
Halm after Durand reads _sed eam mihi non satis probas_, which is too far
from the MSS. to please me. The text as it stands is not intolerable,
though _da mihi_ for _dic mihi_ is certainly poetic. _Da te mihi_ (Manut.,
