water-pan:

'Rob, there is one thing to do for the sake of safety, and it must
be done at once. We can't wait to see if Don is--sick--or to go for a
doctor. I can do it, and I will; but it is very painful, and I hate to
hurt you, dear.'

A most unprofessional quiver got into Nan's voice as she spoke, and her
keen eyes dimmed as she looked at the two anxious young faces turned so
confidingly to her for help.

'I know, burn it; well, do it, please; I can bear it. But Ted better
go away,' said Rob, with a firm setting of his lips, and a nod at his
afflicted brother.

'I won't stir; I can stand it if he can, only it ought to be me!' cried
Ted, with a desperate effort not to cry, so full of grief and fear and
shame was he that it seemed as if he couldn't bear it like a man.

'He'd better stay and help; do him good,' answered

Nan sternly, because, her heart was faint within her, knowing as she did
all that might be in store for both poor boys. 'Keep quiet; I'll be back
in a minute,' she added, going towards the house, while her quick mind
hastily planned what was best to be done.

It was ironing day, and a hot fire still burned in the empty kitchen,
for the maids were upstairs resting. Nan put a slender poker to heat,
and as she sat waiting for it, covered her face with her hands, asking
help in this sudden need for strength, courage, and wisdom; for there
was no one else to call upon, and young as she was, she knew what was to
be done if she only had the nerve to do it. Any other patient would have
been calmly interesting, but dear, good Robin, his father's pride, his
mother's comfort, everyone's favourite and friend, that he should be
in danger was very terrible; and a few hot tears dropped on the
well-scoured table as Nan tried to calm her trouble by remembering how
very likely it was to be all a mistake, a natural but vain alarm.

'I must make light of it, or the boys will break down, and then there
will be a panic. Why afflict and frighten everyone when all is in doubt?
I won't. I'll take Rob to Dr Morrison at once, and have the dog man see
Don. Then, having done all we can, we will either laugh at our scare--if
it is one--or be ready for whatever comes. Now for my poor boy.'

Armed with the red-hot poker, a pitcher of ice-water, and several
handkerchiefs from the clotheshorse, Nan went back to the barn ready to
do her best in this her most serious 'emergency case'. The boys sat like
statues, one of despair, the other of resignation; and it took all Nan's
boasted nerve to do her work quickly and well.

'Now, Rob, only a minute, then we are safe. Stand by, Ted; he may be a
bit faintish.'

Rob shut his eyes, clinched his hands, and sat like a hero. Ted knelt
beside him, white as a sheet, and as weak as a girl; for the pangs of
remorse were rending him, and his heart failed at the thought of all
this pain because of his wilfulness. It was all over in a moment, with
only one little groan; but when Nan looked to her assistant to hand the
water, poor Ted needed it the most, for he had fainted away, and lay on
the floor in a pathetic heap of arms and legs.

Rob laughed, and, cheered by that unexpected sound, Nan bound up the
wound with hands that never trembled, though great drops stood on her
forehead; and she shared the water with patient number one before she
turned to patient number two. Ted was much ashamed, and quite broken
in spirit, when he found how he had failed at the critical moment, and
begged them not to tell, as he really could not help it; then by way of
finishing his utter humiliation, a burst of hysterical tears disgraced
his manly soul, and did him a world of good.

'Never mind, never mind, we are all right now, and no one need be the
wiser,' said Nan briskly, as poor Ted hiccoughed on Rob's shoulder,
laughing and crying in the most tempestuous manner, while his brother
soothed him, and the young doctor fanned both with Silas's old straw
hat.

'Now, boys, listen to me and remember what I say. We won't alarm anyone
yet, for I've made up my mind our scare is all nonsense. Don was out
lapping the water as I came by, and I don't believe he's mad any more
than I am. Still, to ease our minds and compose our spirits, and get our
guilty faces out of sight for a while, I think we had better drive into
town to my old friend Dr Morrison, and let him just take a look at
my work, and give us some quieting little dose; for we are all rather
shaken by this flurry. Sit still, Rob; and Ted, you harness up while I
run and get my hat and tell Aunty to excuse me to Daisy. I don't know
those Penniman girls, and she will be glad of our room at tea, and we'll
have a cosy bite at my house, and come home as gay as larks.'

Nan talked on as a vent for the hidden emotions which professional pride
would not allow her to show, and the boys approved her plan at once; for
action is always easier than quiet waiting. Ted went staggering away to
wash his face at the pump, and rub some colour into his cheeks before
he harnessed the horse. Rob lay tranquilly on the hay, looking up at the
swallows again as he lived through some very memorable moments. Boy as
he was, the thought of death coming suddenly to him, and in this way,
might well make him sober; for it is a very solemn thing to be arrested
in the midst of busy life by the possibility of the great change. There
were no sins to be repented of, few faults, and many happy, dutiful
years to remember with infinite comfort. So Rob had no fears to daunt
him, no regrets to sadden, and best of all, a very strong and simple
piety to sustain and cheer him.

'Mein Vater,' was his first thought; for Rob was very near the
Professor's heart, and the loss of his eldest would have been a bitter
blow. These words, whispered with a tremble of the lips that had been so
firm when the hot iron burned, recalled that other Father who is always
near, always tender and helpful; and, folding his hands, Rob said the
heartiest little prayer he ever prayed, there on the hay, to the soft
twitter of the brooding birds. It did him good; and wisely laying all
his fear and doubt and trouble in God's hand, the boy felt ready for
whatever was to come, and from that hour kept steadily before him the
one duty that was plain--to be brave and cheerful, keep silent, and hope
for the best.

Nan stole her hat, and left a note on Daisy's pincushion, saying she had
taken the boys to drive, and all would be out of the way till after tea.
Then she hurried back and found her patients much better, the one for
work, the other for rest. In they got, and, putting Rob on the back seat
with his leg up drove away, looking as gay and care-free as if nothing
had happened.

Dr Morrison made light of the affair, but told Nan she had done right;
and as the much-relieved lads went downstairs, he added in a whisper:
'Send the dog off for a while, and keep your eye on the boy. Don't let
him know it, and report to me if anything seems wrong. One never knows
in these cases. No harm to be careful.'

Nan nodded, and feeling much relieved now that the responsibility was
off her shoulders, took the lads to Dr Watkins, who promised to come out
later and examine Don. A merry tea at Nan's house, which was kept open
for her all summer, did them good, and by the time they got home in the
cool of the evening no sign of the panic remained but Ted's heavy eyes,
and a slight limp when Rob walked. As the guests were still chattering
on the front piazza they retired to the back, and Ted soothed his
remorseful soul by swinging Rob in the hammock, while Nan told stories
till the dog man arrived.

He said Don was a little under the weather, but no more mad than the
grey kitten that purred round his legs while the examination went on.

'He wants his master, and feels the heat. Fed too well, perhaps. I'll
keep him a few weeks and send him home all right,' said Dr Watkins, as
Don laid his great head in his hand, and kept his intelligent eyes on
his face, evidently feeling that this man understood his trials, and
knew what to do for him.

So Don departed without a murmur, and our three conspirators took
counsel together how to spare the family all anxiety, and give Rob the
rest his leg demanded. Fortunately, he always spent many hours in his
little study, so he could lie on the sofa with a book in his hand
as long as he liked, without exciting any remark. Being of a quiet
temperament, he did not worry himself or Nan with useless fears, but
believed what was told him, and dismissing all dark possibilities, went
cheerfully on his way, soon recovering from the shock of what he called
'our scare'.

But excitable Ted was harder to manage, and it took all Nan's wit and
wisdom to keep him from betraying the secret; for it was best to say
nothing and spare all discussion of the subject for Rob's sake. Ted's
remorse preyed upon him, and having no 'Mum' to confide in, he was very
miserable. By day he devoted himself to Rob, waiting on him, talking to
him, gazing anxiously at him, and worrying the good fellow very much;
though he wouldn't own it, since Ted found comfort in it. But at night,
when all was quiet, Ted's lively imagination and heavy heart got the
better of him, and kept him awake, or set him walking in his sleep. Nan
had her eye on him, and more than once administered a little dose to
give him a rest, read to him, scolded him, and when she caught him
haunting the house in the watches of the night, threatened to lock him
up if he did not stay in his bed. This wore off after a while; but a
change came over the freakish boy, and everyone observed it, even before
his mother returned to ask what they had done to quench the Lion's
spirits. He was gay, but not so heedless; and often when the old
wilfulness beset him, he would check it sharply, look at Rob, and give
up, or stalk away to have his sulk out alone. He no longer made fun of
his brother's old-fashioned ways and bookish tastes, but treated him
with a new and very marked respect, which touched and pleased modest
Rob, and much amazed all observers. It seemed as if he felt that he owed
him reparation for the foolish act that might have cost him his life;
and love being stronger than will, Ted forgot his pride, and paid his
debt like an honest boy.

'I don't understand it,' said Mrs Jo, after a week of home life, much
impressed by the good behaviour of her younger son. 'Ted is such a
saint, I'm afraid we are going to lose him. Is it Meg's sweet influence,
or Daisy's fine cooking, or the pellets I catch Nan giving him on
the sly? Some witchcraft has been at work during my absence, and this
will-o'-the-wisp is so amiable, quiet, and obedient, I don't know him.'

'He is growing up, heart's-dearest, and being a precocious plant, he
begins to bloom early. I also see a change in my Robchen. He is more
manly and serious than ever, and is seldom far from me, as if his
love for the old papa was growing with his growth. Our boys will often
surprise us in this way, Jo, and we can only rejoice over them and leave
them to become what Gott pleases.'

As the Professor spoke, his eyes rested proudly on the brothers, who
came walking up the steps together, Ted's arm over Rob's shoulder as
he listened attentively to some geological remarks Rob was making on a
stone he held. Usually, Ted made fun of such tastes, and loved to lay
boulders in the student's path, put brickbats under his pillow, gravel
in his shoes, or send parcels of dirt by express to 'Prof. R. M. Bhaer'.
Lately, he had treated Rob's hobbies respectfully, and had begun to
appreciate the good qualities of this quiet brother whom he had always
loved but rather undervalued, till his courage under fire won Ted's
admiration, and made it impossible to forget a fault, the consequences
of which might have been so terrible. The leg was still lame, though
doing well, and Ted was always offering an arm as support, gazing
anxiously at his brother, and trying to guess his wants; for regret was
still keen in Ted's soul, and Rob's forgiveness only made it deeper. A
fortunate slip on the stairs gave Rob an excuse for limping, and no one
but Nan and Ted saw the wound; so the secret was safe up to this time.

'We are talking about you, my lads. Come in and tell us what good fairy
has been at work while we were gone. Or is it because absence sharpens
our eyes, that we find such pleasant changes when we come back?' said
Mrs Jo, patting the sofa on either side, while the Professor forgot his
piles of letters to admire the pleasing prospect of his wife in a bower
of arms, as the boys sat down beside her, smiling affectionately, but
feeling a little guilty; for till now 'Mum' and 'Vater' knew every event
in their boyish lives.

'Oh, it's only because Bobby and I have been alone so much; we are sort
of twins. I stir him up a bit, and he steadies me a great deal. You and
father do the same, you know. Nice plan. I like it'; and Ted felt that
he had settled the matter capitally.

'Mother won't thank you for comparing yourself to her, Ted. I'm
flattered at being like father in any way. I try to be,' answered Rob,
as they laughed at Ted's compliment.

'I do thank him, for it's true; and if you, Robin, do half as much for
your brother as Papa has for me, your life won't be a failure,' said
Mrs Jo heartily. 'I'm very glad to see you helping one another. It's the
right way, and we can't begin too soon to try to understand the needs,
virtues, and failings of those nearest us. Love should not make us blind
to faults, nor familiarity make us too ready to blame the shortcomings
we see. So work away, my sonnies, and give us more surprises of this
sort as often as you like.'

'The liebe Mutter has said all. I too am well pleased at the friendly
brother-warmth I find. It is good for everyone; long may it last!' and
Professor Bhaer nodded at the boys, who looked gratified, but rather at
a loss how to respond to these flattering remarks.

Rob wisely kept silent, fearing to say too much; but Ted burst out,
finding it impossible to help telling something:

'The fact is I've been finding out what a brave good chap Bobby is, and
I'm trying to make up for all the bother I've been to him. I knew he
was awfully wise, but I thought him rather soft, because he liked books
better than larks, and was always fussing about his conscience. But I
begin to see that it isn't the fellows who talk the loudest and show
off best that are the manliest. No, sir! quiet old Bob is a hero and a
trump, and I'm proud of him; so would you be if you knew all about it.'

Here a look from Rob brought Ted up with a round turn; he stopped short,
grew red, and clapped his hand on his mouth in dismay.

'Well, are we not to "know all about it"?' asked Mrs Jo quickly; for her
sharp eye saw signs of danger and her maternal heart felt that something
had come between her and her sons. 'Boys,' she went on solemnly, 'I
suspect that the change we talk about is not altogether the effect of
growing up, as we say. It strikes me that Ted has been in mischief and
Rob has got him out of some scrape; hence the lovely mood of my bad boy
and the sober one of my conscientious son, who never hides anything from
his mother.'

Rob was as red as Ted now, but after a moment's hesitation he looked up
and answered with an air of relief:

'Yes, mother, that's it; but it's all over and no harm done, and I think
we'd better let it be, for a while at least. I did feel guilty to keep
anything from you, but now you know so much I shall not worry and you
needn't either. Ted's sorry, I don't mind, and it has done us both
good.'

Mrs Jo looked at Ted, who winked hard but bore the look like a man;
then she turned to Rob, who smiled at her so cheerfully that she felt
reassured; but something in his face struck her, and she saw what it was
that made him seem older, graver, yet more lovable than ever. It was the
look pain of mind, as well as body, brings, and the patience of a sweet
submission to some inevitable trial. Like a flash she guessed that some
danger had been near her boy, and the glances she had caught between the
two lads and Nan confirmed her fears.

'Rob, dear, you have been ill, hurt, or seriously troubled by Ted? Tell
me at once; I will not have any secrets now. Boys sometimes suffer all
their lives from neglected accidents or carelessness. Fritz, make them
speak out!'

Mr Bhaer put down his papers and came to stand before them, saying in a
tone that quieted Mrs Jo, and gave the boys courage:

'My sons, give us the truth. We can bear it; do not hold it back to
spare us. Ted knows we forgive much because we love him, so be frank,
all two.'

Ted instantly dived among the sofa pillows and kept there, with only a
pair of scarlet ears visible, while Rob in a few words told the little
story, truthfully, but as gently as he could, hastening to add the
comfortable assurance that Don was not mad, the wound nearly well, and
no danger would ever come of it.

But Mrs Jo grew so pale he had to put his arms about her, and his father
turned and walked away, exclaiming: 'Ach Himmel!' in a tone of such
mingled pain, relief, and gratitude, that Ted pulled an extra pillow
over his head to smother the sound. They were all right in a minute;
but such news is always a shock, even if the peril is past, and Mrs Jo
hugged her boy close till his father came and took him away, saying with
a strong shake of both hands and a quiver in his voice:

'To be in danger of one's life tries a man's mettle, and you bear it
well; but I cannot spare my good boy yet; thank Gott, we keep him safe!'

A smothered sound, between a choke and a groan, came from under the
pillows, and the writhing of Ted's long legs so plainly expressed
despair that his mother relented towards him, and burrowing till she
found a tousled yellow head, pulled it out and smoothed it, exclaiming
with an irrepressible laugh, though her cheeks were wet with tears:

'Come and be forgiven, poor sinner! I know you have suffered enough, and
I won't say a word; only if harm had come to Rob you would have made
me more miserable than yourself. Oh, Teddy, Teddy, do try to cure that
wilful spirit of yours before it is too late!'

'Oh, Mum, I do try! I never can forget this--I hope it's cured me; if it
hasn't, I am afraid I ain't worth saving,' answered Ted, pulling his own
hair as the only way of expressing his deep remorse.

'Yes, you are, my dear; I felt just so at fifteen when Amy was nearly
drowned, and Marmee helped me as I'll help you. Come to me, Teddy, when
the evil one gets hold of you, and together we'll rout him. Ah, me! I've
had many a tussle with that old Apollyon, and often got worsted, but not
always. Come under my shield, and we'll fight till we win.'

No one spoke for a minute as Ted and his mother laughed and cried in
one handkerchief, and Rob stood with his father's arm round him so happy
that all was told and forgiven, though never to be forgotten; for
such experiences do one good, and knit hearts that love more closely
together.

Presently Ted rose straight up and going to his father, said bravely and
humbly:

'I ought to be punished. Please do it; but first say you forgive me, as
Rob does.'

'Always that, mein Sohn, seventy time seven, if needs be, else I am
not worthy the name you give me. The punishment has come; I can give no
greater. Let it not be in vain. It will not with the help of the mother
and the All Father. Room here for both, always!'

The good Professor opened his arms and embraced his boys like a true
