yaoan mochiuhque. Yn calla in mochiua yauyutl in i calipan.


_Translation._

_The Hymn of Huitzilopochtli._

  1. Huitzilopochtli is first in rank, no one, no one is like unto him:
not vainly do I sing (his praises) coming forth in the garb of our
ancestors; I shine; I glitter.

  2. He is a terror to the Mixteca; he alone destroyed the
Picha-Huasteca, he conquered them.

  3. The Dart-Hurler is an example to the city, as he sets to work. He
who commands in battle is called the representative of my God.

  4. When he shouts aloud he inspires great terror, the divine hurler,
the god turning himself in the combat, the divine hurler, the god
turning himself in the combat.

  5. Amanteca, gather yourselves together with me in the house of war
against your enemies, gather yourselves together with me.

  6. Pipiteca, gather yourselves together with me in the house of war
against your enemies, gather yourselves together with me.


_Notes._

Huitzilopochtli was the well-known war-god of the Azteca, whose
functions are described by Sahagun (_Historia_, Lib. I., cap. 1) and
many other writers. The hymn here given is probably the _tlaxotecuyotl_,
which was chanted at the celebration of his feast in the fifteenth month
of the Mexican calendar (see Sahagun, _Historia_, Lib. II., cap. 34).
The word means "his glory be established." It was commenced at sunset
and repeated till sunrise.

  1. "In the garb of our ancestors" (_to-citli-quemitl_). The high
priest appeared in the insignia of Quetzalcoatl, which, says Sahagun,
"were very gorgeous." (_Hist._, Lib. II., Appendix.)

  2. Mixteca, plural of Mixtecatl, an inhabitant of Mixtecapan, near the
Pacific. The Huasteca, a nation of Maya lineage, lived on the Gulf
coast.

  3. The god was called the Hurler, as he was believed to hurl the
lightning serpent (the _xiuhcoatl_).

  5. Sahagun recites the legends about the Amanteca (_Historia_, Lib.
IX., cap. 18). Here the name refers to the inhabitants of the quarter
called Amantlan.

  6. _Pipiteca_, a _nomen gentile_, referring doubtless to a certain
class of the hearers.

This hymn may be compared to another, descriptive of the same divinity,
preserved in Sahagun's MS. in Madrid. It is as follows, with my
translation by its side.

Vitzilopuchtli                     Huitzilopochtli,

Can maceualli                      Only a subject,

Can tlacatl catca.                 Only a mortal was.

Naualli                            A magician,

Tetzauitl                          A terror,

Atlacacemelle                      A stirrer of strife,

Teixcuepani                        A deceiver,

Quiyocoyani in yaoyotl             A maker of war,

Yautecani                          An arranger of battles,

Yautlatoani;                       A lord of battles;

Ca itechpa mitoaya                 And of him it was said

Tepan quitlaza                     That he hurled

In xiuhcoatl                       His flaming serpent,

Immamalhuaztli                     His fire stick;

Quitoznequi yaoyotl                Which means war,

Teoatl tlachinolli.                Blood and burning;

Auh iniquac ilhuiq'xtililoya       And when his festival was celebrated,

Malmicouaya                        Captives were slain,

Tlaaltilmicoaya                    Washed slaves were slain,

Tealtilaya impochteca.             The merchants washed them.

Auh inic mochichiuaya:             And thus he was arrayed:

Xiuhtotonacoche catca              With head-dress of green feathers,

Xiuhcoanauale                      Holding his serpent torch,

Xiuhtlalpile                       Girded with a belt,

Matacaxe                           Bracelets upon his arms,

Tzitzile                           Wearing turquoises,

Oyuvale.                           As a master of messengers.

When in Florence, in 1889, I had an accurate copy made of the Nahuatl
text and all the figures of the first book of Sahagun's History. The
colored figure of Huitzilopochtli is in accordance with the above
description.




II. _Uitznaoac yautl icuic._


  1. Ahuia tlacochcalco notequioa ayayui nocaquia tlacatl, ya
nechyapinauia, ayaca nomati, nitetzauiztli, auia, ayaca nomati niya,
yautla, aquitoloc tlacochcalco notequioa, iuexcatlatoa ay nopilchan.

  2. Ihiya quetl tocuilechcatl quauiquemitl nepapan oc uitzetla.

  3. Huia oholopa telipuchtla, yuiyoc yn nomalli, ye nimauia, ye
nimauia, yuiyoc yn nomalli.

  4. Huia uitznauac telepochtla yuiyoc, yn nomalli, ye nimauia, ye
nimauia yuiyoc, ynomalli.

  5. Huia ytzicotla telipochtla, yuiyoc, yn nomalli, ye nimauia, ye
nimauia, yuiyoc yn nomalli.

  6. Uitznauac teuaqui, machiyotla tetemoya, ahuia oyatonac, yahuia
oyatonac, machiyotla tetemoya.

  7. Tocuilitla teuaqui, machiyotla tetemoya, ahuia oyatonac, yahuia
oyatonac uia, machiyotla tetemoya.

_Var._ 6. Vitzanaoac teuhoaqui machiotla. _MS. Med._


_The War Song of the Huitznahuac._

  1. What ho! my work is in the hall of arms, I listen to no mortal, nor
can any put me to shame, I know none such, I am the Terror, I know none
other, I am where war is, my work is said to be in the hall of arms, let
no one curse my children.

  2. Our adornment comes from out the south, it is varied in color as
the clothing of the eagle.

  3. Ho! ho! abundance of youths doubly clothed, arrayed in feathers,
are my captives, I deliver them up, I deliver them up, my captives
arrayed in feathers.

  4. Ho! youths for the Huitznahuac, arrayed in feathers, these are my
captives, I deliver them up, I deliver them up, arrayed in feathers, my
captives.

  5. Youths from the south, arrayed in feathers, my captives, I deliver
them up, I deliver them up, arrayed in feathers, my captives.

  6. The god enters, the Huitznahuac, he descends as an example, he
shines forth, he shines forth, descending as an example.

  7. Adorned like us he enters as a god, he descends as an example, he
shines forth, he shines forth, descending as an example.


_Notes._

There is no Gloss to this hymn, but its signification seems clear.
_Huitznahuac_ was a name applied to several edifices in the great temple
at Tenochtitlan, as we are informed at length by Sahagun. The word is a
locative from _huitznahua_. This term means "magicians from the south"
or "diviners with thorns," and was applied in the Quetzalcoatl mythical
cyclus to the legendary enemies of Huitzilopochtli, whom he is said to
have destroyed as soon as he was born. (See my discussion of this myth
in _Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society_ for 1887.)
Apparently to perpetuate the memory of this exploit, the custom was, at
the festival of Huitzilopochtli, for the slaves who were to be
sacrificed to form two bands, one representing the Huitznahua and the
other the partisans of the god, and to slaughter each other until the
arrival of the god Paynal put an end to the combat (Sahagun,
_Historia_, Lib. II., cap. 34). The song here given belongs to this
portion of the ancient rite.

  1. The _tlacochcalli_, "house of arrows" (_tlacochtli_, arrow,
_calli_, house), was a large hall in the temple of Huitzilopochtli where
arrows, spears and other arms were kept (Sahagun, Lib. VIII., cap. 32).

  2. The "adornment from the south" refers to the meaning of the name
_Huitznahua_. (See Glossary.)

  3. Sahagun (_ubi sup._) informs us that the slaves condemned to die
fought against free warriors, and when any of the latter were captured
they were promptly put to death by their captors.




III. _Tlalloc icuic._


  1. Ahuia Mexico teutlaneuiloc amapanitla anauhcampa, ye moquetzquetl,
aoyequene y chocaya.

  2. Ahuia anneuaya niyocoloc, annoteua eztlamiyaual, aylhuicolla nic
yauicaya teutiualcoya.

  3. Ahuia annotequiua naualpilli aquitlanella motonacayouh tic yachiuh
quitla catlachtoquetl, can mitziyapinauia.

  4. Ahuia cana catella nechyapinauia anechyaca uelmatia, anotata yn
oquacuillo ocelocoatl aya.

  5. Ahuia tlallocana, xiuacalco aya quizqui aquamotla, acatonalaya.

  6. Ahuia xiyanouia, nahuia xiyamotecaya ay poyauhtla, ayauh
chicauaztica, ayauicalo tlallocanaya.

  7. Aua nacha tozcuecuexi niyayalizqui aya y chocaya.

  8. Ahuia queyamica xinechiuaya, temoquetl aitlatol, aniquiya
ilhuiquetl, tetzauhpilla niyayalizqui aya y chocaya.

  9. Ahuia nauhxiuhticaya itopanecauiloc ayoc ynomatia, ay motlapoalli,
aya ximocaya ye quetzalcalla nepanauia ay yaxcana teizcaltequetl.

  10. Ahuia xiyanouia, ahuia xiyamotequaya ay poyauhtla, ayauh
chicauaztlica ayauicallo tlalloca.

_Var._ 1. Amopanitl.


_Gloss._

  1. Auia Mexico teutlanauiloc, _q.n._, yn Mexico onetlanauiloc in
tlaloc. Amapanitl annauhcampa ye moquetzquetl, _q.n._, amapanitl
nauhcampa omoquequetz. Aoyeque naichocaya, _id est_, itlaocuyaya.

  2. Auia anneuaya niyocoloc, _q.n._, ynehuatl ni tlalloc oniyocoloc.
Annoteua eztlamiyaual, _q.n._, noteu eztlamiyaualtitiuh. Aylhuicolla,
_q.n._, yn umpa ilhuicololo. Inic yauicaya teuitualcoya, _q.n._ in
teuitualoc.

  3. Auia annotequiua naualpilli, _q.n._ in tinoteuh naualpilli, _i.e._,
tlalloc. Aquitlanella motonacayouh, _q.n._, ca nelli teuatl
ticmochiuilia in motonacayouh. Catlachtoquetl, _q.n._, teuatl
ticmochiuilia auh in aquin timitzpinauia.

  4. Ahuia cana catella nechyapinauia, _q.n._, catel nechpinauia ca
monechuelmati. Annotata ynoquacuillo ocelocoatl aya, _q.n._, yn notaua
ioan yna quacuiloa yn oceloquacuili.

  5. Ahuia tlallocana xiuacalco, _q.n._, in tlalocan xiuhcalco, _id
est_, acxoyacalco. Ayaquizqui, _q.n._, umpa ualquizque. Aquamotla
acatonalaya, _q.n._, y notauan yn oquacuiloan acatonal.

  6. Ahuia xicanouia nauia xiyamotecaya, _q.n._, xiuian ximotecati. Ay
poyauhtlan, _q.n._, in umpa poyauhtlan tepeticpac. Ayauh chicauaztica
ayauicalo tlalocana, _q.n._, ayauh chicauaztica in auicalo tlalocan.

  7. Aua nach tozcuecuexi niyayalizqui, _q.n._, y nach tozcuecuex y ye
niauh niman ye choca.

  8. Ahuia queyamica xinechiuaya, _q.n._, quenamican y ya niauh aco
anechtemozque. Aniquiya ilhuiquetl tetzapilla niyayalizqui ayaichocaya,
_q.n._, onquilhui yn tetzapilli ye niyauh niman ye choca.

  9. Ahuia nauhxiuhticaya nitopanecauiloc, _q.n._, nauhxiuhtica in
topanecauiloz, _id est_, in tepan mochiuaz. Ayoc inomatia ay
motlapoalli, _q.n._, aocmo nomatia iniquin motlapoalpan. Ca oximoac ye
quetzalcalla nepanauia, _q.n._, ye qualcan ye netlamachtiloyan ynemca.
Ay yaxcana teizcaltiquetl, _q.n._, iniaxca inic oteizcalli.

  10. Ahuia xiyanouia, _q.n._, xiuia. Auia xiya motecaya ay poyauhtla,
_q.n._, ximotecati in umpa poyauhtla. Ayauh chicauaztica auicallo
tlalocan, _q.n._, ayauh chicauaztica in auicallo in umpa tlallocan.


_The Hymn of Tlaloc._

  1. In Mexico the god appears; thy banner is unfolded in all
directions, and no one weeps.

  2. I, the god, have returned again, I have turned again to the place
of abundance of blood-sacrifices; there when the day grows old, I am
beheld as a god.

  3. Thy work is that of a noble magician; truly thou hast made thyself
to be of our flesh; thou hast made thyself, and who dare affront thee?

  4. Truly he who affronts me does not find himself well with me; my
fathers took by the head the tigers and the serpents.

  5. In Tlalocan, in the verdant house, they play at ball, they cast the
reeds.

  6. Go forth, go forth to where the clouds are spread abundantly, where
the thick mist makes the cloudy house of Tlaloc.

  7. There with strong voice I rise up and cry aloud.

  8. Go ye forth to seek me, seek for the words which I have said, as I
rise, a terrible one, and cry aloud.

  9. After four years they shall go forth, not to be known, not to be
numbered, they shall descend to the beautiful house, to unite together
and know the doctrine.

  10. Go forth, go forth to where the clouds are spread abundantly,
where the thick mist makes the cloudy house of Tlaloc.


_Notes._
