John had always been convivial, but Susanna at seventeen had been at
once too innocent and too ignorant to judge a man's tendencies truly,
or to rate his character at its real worth. As time went on, his earlier
leanings grew more definite; he spent on pleasure far more than he could
afford, and his conduct became a byword in the neighborhood. His boy
he loved. He felt on a level with Jack, could understand him, play
with him, punish him, and make friends with him; but little Sue was
different. She always seemed to him the concentrated essence of her
mother's soul, and when unhappy days came, he never looked in her
radiant, searching eyes without a consciousness of inferiority. The
little creature had loved her jolly, handsome, careless father at first,
even though she feared him; but of late she had grown shy, silent, and
timid, for his indifference chilled her and she flung herself upon
her mother's love with an almost unchildlike intensity. This unhappy
relation between the child and the father gave Susanna's heart new
pangs. She still loved her husband, not dearly, but a good deal; and
over and above that remnant of the old love which still endured she gave
him unstinted care and hopeful maternal tenderness.

The crash came in course of time. John transcended the bounds of his
wife's patience more and more. She made her last protests; then she took
one passionate day to make up her mind, a day when John and the boy
were away together; a day of complete revolt against everything she was
facing in the present, and, so far as she could see, everything that she
had to face in the future. Prayer for light left her in darkness, and
she had no human creature to advise her. Conscience was overthrown; she
could see no duty save to her own outraged personality. Often and often
during the year just past she had thought of the peace, the grateful
solitude and shelter of that Shaker Settlement hidden among New England
orchards; that quiet haven where there was neither marrying nor giving
in marriage. Now her bruised heart longed for such a life of nunlike
simplicity and consecration, where men and women met only as brothers
and sisters, where they worked side by side with no thought of personal
passion or personal gain, but only for the common good of the community.

Albion village was less than three hours distant by train. She hastily
gathered her plainest clothes and Sue's, packed them in a small
trunk, took her mother's watch, her own little store of money and the
twenty-dollar gold piece John's senior partner had given Sue on her last
birthday, wrote a letter of goodbye to John, and went out of her cottage
gate in a storm of feeling so tumultuous that there was no room for
reflection. Besides, she had reflected, and reflected, for months
and months, so she would have said, and the time had come for action.
Susanna was not unlettered, but she certainly had never read Meredith or
she would have learned that "love is an affair of two, and only for two
that can be as quick, as constant in intercommunication as are sun and
earth, through the cloud, or face to face. They take their breath of
life from each other in signs of affection, proofs of faithfulness,
incentives to admiration. But a solitary soul dragging a log must make
the log a God to rejoice in the burden." The demigod that poor, blind
Susanna married had vanished, and she could drag the log no longer, but
she made one mistake in judging her husband, in that she regarded him,
at thirty-two, as a finished product, a man who was finally this and
that, and behaved thus and so, and would never be any different.

The "age of discretion" is a movable feast of extraordinary uncertainty,
and John Hathaway was a little behindhand in overtaking it. As a matter
of fact, he had never for an instant looked life squarely in the face.
He took a casual glance at it now and then, after he was married, but it
presented no very distinguishable features, nothing to make him stop
and think, nothing to arouse in him any special sense of responsibility.
Boys have a way of "growing up," however, sooner or later, at least
most of them have, and that possibility was not sufficiently in the
foreground of Susanna's mind when she finished what she considered an
exhaustive study of her husband's character.

I am leaving you, John [she wrote], to see if I can keep the little love
I have left for you as the father of my children. I seem to have lost
all the rest of it living with you. I am not perfectly sure that I
am right in going, for everybody seems to think that women, mothers
especially, should bear anything rather than desert the home. I could
not take Jack away, for you love him and he will be a comfort to you. A
comfort to you, yes, but what will you be to him now that he is growing
older? That is the thought that troubles me, yet I dare not take him
with me when he is half yours. You will not miss me, nor will the loss
of Sue make any difference. Oh, John! how can you help loving that
blessed little creature, so much better and so much more gifted than
either of us that we can only wonder how we came to be her father and
mother? Your sin against her is greater than that against me, for at
least you are not responsible for bringing me into the world. I know
Louisa will take care of Jack, and she lives so near that you can see
him as often as you wish. I shall let her know my address, which I have
asked her to keep to herself. She will write to me if you or Jack should
be seriously ill, but not for any other reason.

As for you, there is nothing more that I can say except to confess
freely that I was not the right wife for you and that mine was not the
only mistake. I have tried my very best to meet you in everything that
was not absolutely wrong, and I have used all the arguments I could
think of, but it only made matters worse. I thought I knew you, John,
in the old days. How comes it that we have traveled so far apart, we
who began together? It seems to me that some time you must come to your
senses and take up your life seriously, for this is not life, the sorry
thing you have lived lately, but I cannot wait any longer! I am tired,
tired, tired of waiting and hoping, too tired to do anything but drag
myself away from the sight of your folly. You have wasted our children's
substance, indulged your appetites until you have lost the respect of
your best friends, and you have made me--who was your choice, your wife,
the head of your house, the woman who brought your children into the
world--you have made me an object of pity; a poor, neglected thing who
could not meet her neighbors' eyes without blushing.

When Jack and his father returned from their outing at eight o'clock in
the evening, having had supper at a wayside hotel, the boy went to bed
philosophically, lighting his lamp for himself, the conclusion being
that the two other members of the household were a little late, but
would be in presently.

The next morning was bright and fair. Jack waked at cockcrow, and after
calling to his mother and Sue, jumped out of bed, ran into their rooms
to find them empty, then bounced down the stairs two at a time, going
through the sitting-room on his way to find Ellen in the kitchen. His
father was sitting at the table with the still-lighted student lamp on
it; the table where lessons had been learned, books read, stories told,
mending done, checkers and dominoes played; the big, round walnut table
that was the focus of the family life--but mother's table, not father's.

John Hathaway had never left his chair nor taken off his hat. His cane
leaned against his knee, his gloves were in his left hand, while the
right held Susanna's letter.

He was asleep, although his lips twitched and he stirred uneasily. His
face was haggard, and behind his closed lids, somewhere in the center
of thought and memory, a train of fiery words burned in an ever-widening
circle, round and round and round, ploughing, searing their way through
some obscure part of him that had heretofore been without feeling, but
was now all quick and alive with sensation.

You have made me--who was your choice, your wife, the head of your
house, the woman who brought your children into the world--you have made
me an object of pity; a poor, neglected thing who could not meet her
neighbors' eyes without blushing.

Any one who wished to pierce John Hathaway's armor at that period of his
life would have had to use a very sharp and pointed arrow, for he was
well wadded with the belief that a man has a right to do what he likes.
Susanna's shaft was tipped with truth and dipped in the blood of her
outraged heart. The stored-up force of silent years went into the
speeding of it. She had never shot an arrow before, and her skill was
instinctive rather than scientific, but the powers were on her side and
she aimed better than she knew--those who took note of John Hathaway's
behavior that summer would have testified willingly to that. It was the
summer in which his boyish irresponsibility slipped away from him
once and for all; a summer in which the face of life ceased to be an
indistinguishable mass of meaningless events and disclosed an order,
a reason, a purpose hitherto unseen and undefined. The boy "grew up,"
rather tardily it must be confessed. His soul had not added a cubit to
its stature in sunshine, gayety, and prosperity; it took the shock of
grief, hurt pride, solitude, and remorse to make a man of John Hathaway.




III. Divers Doctrines


It was a radiant July morning in Albion village, and when Sue first
beheld it from the bedroom window at the Shaker Settlement, she had
wished ardently that it might never, never grow dark, and that Jack and
Fardie might be having the very same sunshine in Farnham. It was not
noon yet, but experience had in some way tempered the completeness of
her joy, for the marks of tears were on her pretty little face. She had
neither been scolded nor punished, but she had been dragged away from
a delicious play without any adequate reason. She had disappeared after
breakfast, while Susanna was helping Sister Tabitha with the beds and
the dishes, but as she was the most docile of children, her mother never
thought of anxiety. At nine o'clock Eldress Abby took Susanna to the
laundry house, and there under a spreading maple were Sue and the two
youngest little Shakeresses, children of seven and eight respectively.
Sue was directing the plays: chattering, planning, ordering, and
suggesting expedients to her slower-minded and less experienced
companions. They had dragged a large box from one of the sheds and set
it up under the tree. The interior had been quickly converted into
a commodious residence, one not in the least of a Shaker type. Small
bluing-boxes served for bedstead and dining-table, bits of broken
china for the dishes, while tiny flat stones were the seats, and four
clothes-pins, tastefully clad in handkerchiefs, surrounded the table.

"Do they kneel in prayer before they eat, as all Believers do?" asked
Shaker Mary.

"I don't believe Adam and Eve was Believers, 'cause who would have
taught them to be?" replied Sue; "still we might let them pray, anyway,
though clothespins don't kneel nicely."

"I've got another one all dressed," said little Shaker Jane.

"We can't have any more; Adam and Eve did n't have only two children in
my Sunday-School lesson, Cain and Abel," objected Sue.

"Can't this one be a company?" pleaded Mary, anxious not to waste the
clothespin.

"But where could comp'ny come from?" queried Sue. "There was n't any
more people anywheres but just Adam and Eve and Cain and Abel. Put the
clothespin in your apron-pocket, Jane, and bimeby we'll let Eve have a
little new baby, and I'll get Mardie to name it right out of the Bible.
Now let's begin. Adam is awfully tired this morning; he says, 'Eve, I've
been workin' all night and I can't eat my breakfuss.' Now, Mary, you be
Cain, he's a little boy, and you must say, 'Fardie, play a little with
me, please!' and Fardie will say, 'Child'en should n't talk at the--'"

What subjects of conversation would have been aired at the Adamic family
board before breakfast was finished will never be known, for Eldress
Abby, with a firm but not unkind grasp, took Shaker Jane and Mary by
their little hands and said, "Morning's not the time for play; run over
to Sister Martha and help her shell the peas; then there'll be your
seams to oversew."

Sue watched the disappearing children and saw the fabric of her dream
fade into thin air; but she was a person of considerable individuality
for her years. Her lip quivered, tears rushed to her eyes and flowed
silently down her cheeks, but without a glance at Eldress Abby or a word
of comment she walked slowly away from the laundry, her chin high.

"Sue meant all right, she was only playing the plays of the world," said
Eldress Abby, "but you can well understand, Susanna, that we can't let
our Shaker children play that way and get wrong ideas into their heads
at the beginning. We don't condemn an honest, orderly marriage as a
worldly institution, but we claim it has no place in Christ's kingdom;
therefore we leave it to the world, where it belongs. The world's people
live on the lower plane of Adam; the Shakers try to live on the Christ
plane, in virgin purity, longsuffering, meekness, and patience."

"I see, I know," Susanna answered slowly, with a little glance at
injured Sue walking toward the house, "but we need n't leave the
children unhappy this morning, for I can think of a play that will
comfort them and please you. Come back, Sue! Wait a minute, Mary and
Jane, before you go to Sister Martha! We will play the story that Sister
Tabitha told us last week. Do you remember about Mother Ann Lee in the
English prison? The soapbox will be her cell, for it was so small she
could not lie down in it. Take some of the shingles, Jane, and close
up the open side of the box. Do you see the large brown spot in one of
them, Mary? Push that very hard with a clothespin and there 'll be a
hole through the shingle; that's right! Now, Sister Tabitha said that
Mother Ann was kept for days without food, for people thought she was a
wicked, dangerous woman, and they would have been willing to let her
die of starvation. But there was a great keyhole in the door, and James
Whittaker, a boy of nineteen, who loved Mother Ann and believed in her,
put the stem of a clay pipe in the hole and poured a mixture of wine and
milk through it. He managed to do this day after day, so that when the
jailer opened the cell door, expecting to find Mother Ann dying for lack
of food, she walked out looking almost as strong and well as when she
entered. You can play it all out, and afterwards you can make the ship
that brought Mother Ann and the other Shakers from Liverpool to New
York. The clothes-pins can be who will they be, Jane?"

"William Lee, Nancy Lee, James Whittaker, and I forget the others,"
recited Jane, like an obedient parrot.

"And it will be splendid to have James Whittaker, for he really came to
Albion," said Mary.

"Perhaps he stood on this very spot more than once," mused Abby. "It was
Mother Ann's vision that brought them to this land, a vision of a large
tree with outstretching branches, every leaf of which shone with the
brightness of a burning torch! Oh! if the vision would only come true!
If Believers would only come to us as many as the leaves on the tree,"
she sighed, as she and Susanna moved away from the group of chattering
children, all as eager to play the history of Shakerism as they had been
to dramatize the family life of Adam and Eve.

"There must be so many men and women without ties, living useless lives,
with no aim or object in them," Susanna said, "I wonder that more of
them do not find their way here. The peace and goodness and helpfulness
of the life sink straight into my heart. The Brothers and Sisters are so
friendly and cheery with one another; there is neither gossip nor hard
words; there is pleasant work, and your thoughts seem to be all so
concentrated upon right living that it is like heaven below, only I feel
that the cross is there, bravely as you all bear it."

 "There are roses on my cross most beautiful to see,
 As I turn from all the dross from which it sets me free,"

quoted Eldress Abby, devoutly.

"It is easy enough for me," continued Susanna, "for it was no cross
for me to give up my husband at the time; but oh, if a woman had a
considerate, loving man to live with, one who would strengthen her and
help her to be good, one who would protect and cherish her, one who
would be an example to his children and bring them up in the fear of the
Lord--that would be heaven below, too; and how could she bear to give
it all up when it seems so good, so true, so right? Might n't two people
walk together to God if both chose the same path?"

"It's my belief that one can find the road better alone than when
somebody else is going alongside to distract them. Not that the Lord
is going to turn anybody away, not even when they bring Him a lot of
burned-out trash for a gift," said Eldress Abby, bluntly. "But don't you
believe He sees the difference between a person that comes to Him when
there is nowhere else to turn--a person that's tried all and found it
wanting--and one that gives up freely pleasure, and gain, and husband,
and home, to follow the Christ life?"

"Yes, He must, He must," Susanna answered faintly. "But the children,
Eldress Abby! If you had n't any, you could perhaps keep yourself from
wanting them; but if you had, how could you give them up? Jesus was the
great Saviour of mankind, but next to Him it seems as if the children
had been the little saviours, from the time the first one was born until
this very day!"

"Yee, I've no doubt they keep the worst of the world's people, those
that are living in carnal marriage without a thought of godliness, I've
no doubt children keep that sort from going to the lowest perdition,"
allowed Eldress Abby; "and those we bring up in the Community make the
best converts; but to a Shaker, the greater the sacrifice, the greater
the glory. I wish you was gathered in, Susanna, for your hands and feet
are quick to serve, your face is turned toward the truth, and your heart
is all ready to receive the revelation."

"I wish I need n't turn my back on one set of duties to take up
another," murmured Susanna, timidly.

"Yee; no doubt you do. Your business is to find out which are the higher
duties, and then do those. Just make up your mind whether you'd rather
replenish earth, as you've been doing, or replenish heaven, as we're
trying to do. But I must go to my work; ten o'clock in the morning's
a poor time to be discussing doctrine! You're for weeding, Susanna, I
suppose?"

Brother Ansel was seated at a grindstone under the apple trees, teaching
(intermittently) a couple of boys to grind a scythe, when Susanna came
to her work in the herb-garden, Sue walking discreetly at her heels.

Ansel was a slow-moving, humorously-inclined, easygoing Brother, who was
drifting into the kingdom of heaven without any special effort on his
part.

"I'd 'bout as lives be a Shaker as anything else," had been his rather
dubious statement of faith when he requested admittance into the band
of Believers. "No more crosses, accordin' to my notion, an' consid'able
more chance o' crowns!"

His experience of life "on the Adamic plane," the holy estate of
matrimony, being the chief sin of this way of thought, had disposed
him to regard woman as an apparently necessary, but not especially
desirable, being. The theory of holding property in common had no
terrors for him. He was generous, unambitious, frugal-minded, somewhat
lacking in energy, and just as actively interested in his brother's
welfare as in his own, which is perhaps not saying much. Shakerism was
to him not a craving of the spirit, not a longing of the soul, but a
simple, prudent theory of existence, lessening the various risks that
man is exposed to in his journey through this vale of tears.

"Womenfolks makes splendid Shakers," he was wont to say. "They're all
right as Sisters, 'cause their belief makes 'em safe. It kind o' shears
'em o' their strength; tames their sperits; takes the sting out of 'em
an' keeps 'em from bein' sassy an' domineerin'. Jest as long as they
think marriage is right, they'll marry ye spite of anything ye can do or
say--four of 'em married my father one after another, though he fit 'em
off as hard as he knew how. But if ye can once get the faith o' Mother
Ann into 'em, they're as good afterwards as they was wicked afore.
There's no stoppin' women-folks once ye get 'em started; they don't keer
whether it's heaven or the other place, so long as they get where they
want to go!"

Elder Daniel Gray had heard Brother Ansel state his religious theories
more than once when he was first "gathered in," and secretly lamented
the lack of spirituality in the new convert. The Elder was an instrument
more finely attuned; sober, humble, pure-minded, zealous, consecrated to
the truth as he saw it, he labored in and out of season for the faith
he held so dear; yet as the years went on, he noted that Ansel,
notwithstanding his eccentric views, lived an honest, temperate,
Godfearing life, talking no scandal, dwelling in unity with his brethren
and sisters, and upholding the banner of Shakerism in his own peculiar
way.

As Susanna approached him, Ansel called out, "The yairbs are all ready
for ye, Susanna; the weeds have been on the rampage sence yesterday's
rain. Seems like the more uselesser a thing is, the more it flourishes.
The yairbs grow; oh, yes, they make out to _grow_; but you don't see 'em
come leapin' an' tearin' out o' the airth like weeds. Then there's the
birds! I've jest been stoppin' my grindin' to look at 'em carry on.
Take 'em all in all, there ain't nothin' so lazy an' aimless an'
busy 'bout nothin' as birds. They go kitin' 'roun' from tree to tree,
hoppin' an' chirpin', flyin' here an' there 'thout no airthly objeck
'ceptin' to fly back ag'in. There's a heap o' useless critters in
the univarse, but I guess birds are 'bout the uselessest, 'less it's
grasshoppers, mebbe."

"I don't care what you say about the grasshoppers, Ansel, but you shan't
abuse the birds," said Susanna, stooping over the beds of tansy and
sage, thyme and summer savory. "Weeds or no weeds, we're going to have a
great crop of herbs this year, Ansel!"

"Yee, so we be! We sowed more'n usual so's to keep the two jiners at
work long's we could.--Take that scythe over to the barn, Jacob, an'
fetch me another, an' step spry."

"What's a 'jiner,' Ansel?"

"Winter Shakers, I call 'em. They're reg'lar constitooshanal
dyed-in-the-wool jiners, jinin' most anything an' hookin' on most
anywheres. They jine when it comes on too cold to sleep outdoors, an'
they onjine when it comes on spring. Elder Gray's always hopin' to
gather in new souls, so he gives the best of 'em a few months' trial.
How are ye, Hannah?" he called to a Sister passing through the orchard
to search for any possible green apples under the trees. "Make us a good
old-fashioned deep-dish pandowdy an' we'll all do our best to eat it!"

"I suppose the 'jiners' get discouraged and fear they can't keep up to
the standard. Not everybody is good enough to lead a self-denying Shaker
life," said Susanna, pushing back the close sunbonnet from her warm
face, which had grown younger, smoother, and sweeter in the last few
