"I guess his reason," he said.

"Yes; what may it be, think you?"

"He fears to meet Okiok in a singing duel."

Rooney laughed.  "Well, you know best," he said; "I daresay you are
right.  Okiok is a sharp fellow, and Ujarak is but a blundering booby
after--"

A low chuckle in the region of the lamp attracted their attention at
this point.  They looked quickly at Kannoa, but that ancient's face was
absolutely owlish in its gravity, and her little black eyes peered into
her pot with a look of intense inquiry that was almost philosophic.
Resuming their belief that she was as deaf as a post, or an iceberg,
Rooney and Angut proceeded to discuss Ujarak and his probable plans
without any regard to her.  After having talked the matter over for some
time, Angut shook his head, and said that Ujarak must be closely
watched.

"More than that," said Rooney, with decision; "he must be stultified."

The seaman's rendering of the word "stultified" into Eskimo was curious,
and cannot easily be explained, but it was well understood by Angut, and
apparently by Kannoa, for another chuckle came just then from the
culinary department.  Again the two men glanced at the old woman
inquiringly, and again were they baffled by that look of owlish
intensity at the stewing meat.

"She hears," whispered Rooney.

"Impossible," replied Angut; "a dead seal is not much deafer."

Continuing the conversation, the seaman explained how he thought it
possible to stultify the wizard, by discrediting him in the eyes of his
own people--by foiling him with his own weapons,--and himself undertook
to accomplish the task of stultification.

He was in the act of concluding his explanation when another chuckle
burst upon them from the region of the lamp.  This time there was no
attempt at concealment, for there stood old Kannoa, partly enveloped in
savoury steam, her head thrown back, and her mouth wide-open.

With a laugh Rooney leaped up, and caught her by the arm.

"You've heard what I've been saying, mother?"

"Ye-yes.  I've heard," she replied, trying to smother the laughter.

"Now, look here.  You must promise me not to tell _anybody_," said the
seaman earnestly, almost sternly.

"Oh, I not tell," returned the old woman; "I love not Ujarak."

"Ah! just so; then you're pretty safe not to tell," said Rooney.

"No fear of Kannoa," remarked Angut, with a pleasant nod; "she never
tells anything to anybody."

Satisfied, apparently, with this assurance, the seaman took the old
woman into his counsels, congratulating himself not a little on having
found an ally in the very hut in which it had been arranged that the
mysterious performance was to take place.  Shortly after that Angut
left.

"Now, Kannoa," said Rooney, after some preliminary talk, "you remember
the big white bear that Angut killed two moons ago?"

"Remember it?  Ay," said Kannoa, licking her lips; "it was the fattest
and best bear I ever chewed.  Huk! it _was_ good!"

"Well, where is that bear's skin?"

The old dame pointed to a corner of the hut where the skin lay.  Rooney
went and picked it up, and laid it at the upper end of the hut farthest
from the door.

"Now, mother," said he; "you'll not touch that skin.  Let it lie there,
and let no one touch it till I come again.  You understand?"

"Yes," answered Kannoa, with a look so intensely knowing that it made
the seaman laugh.

"But tell me," said the old woman, becoming suddenly grave, and laying
her thin scraggy hand on the man's arm; "why do you call me mother?"

"Oh, it's just a way we have in my country when--when we feel kindly to
an old woman.  And I do feel kindly to you, Kannoa," he added, with
sudden warmth and energy of look and tone, "because you are so like my
own grandmother--only she was younger than you, and much
better-looking."

Rooney meant no rudeness by the last remark, but, having observed the
straightforward simplicity of his new friends in saying exactly what
they meant, he willingly adopted their style.

Kannoa seemed much pleased with the explanation.

"It is strange," she said pathetically, "that I should find you so very
like my husband."

"Indeed!" returned the seaman, who did not feel flattered by the
compliment; "is it long since he died?"

"O yes; long, long--very long," she answered, with a sigh.  "Moons,
moons, moons without number have passed since that day.  He was as young
as you when he was killed, but a far finer man.  His face did not look
dirty like yours--all over with hair.  It was smooth and fat, and round
and oily.  His cheeks were plump, and they would shine when the sun was
up.  He was also bigger than you--higher and wider.  Huk! he was grand!"

Although Rooney felt inclined to laugh as he listened to this
description, he restrained himself when he observed the tears gathering
in the old eyes.  Observing and appreciating the look of sympathy, she
tightened her clutch on the seaman's arm and said, looking wistfully up
in his face--

"Has Ridroonee ever felt something in here,"--she laid a hand on her
withered bosom--"as if it broke in two, and then went dead for evermore?
That is what I felt the day they brought my man home; he was so kind.
Like my son Okiok, and Angut."

As the seaman looked down at the pitiful old soul that had thus broken
the floodgates of a long silence, and was pouring out her confidences to
him, he felt an unusual lump in his throat.  Under a sudden impulse, he
stooped and kissed the wrinkled brow, and then, turning abruptly, left
the hut.

It was well he did so, for by that time it was nearly dark, and Kannoa
had yet to arrange the place for the expected meeting.

As the time drew near, the night seemed to sympathise with the occasion,
for the sky became overcast with clouds, which obliterated the stars,
and rendered it intensely dark.

The chief performer in the approaching ceremony was in a fearful state
of mind.  He would have done or given anything to escape being made a
wise man.  But Ujarak was inexorable.  Poor Ippegoo sought comfort from
his mother, and, to say truth, Kunelik did her best for him, but she
could not resist the decrees of Fate--i.e. of the wizard.

"Be a man, my son, and all will go well," she said, as he sat beside her
in her hut, with his chin on his breast and his thin hands clasped.

"O mother, I _am_ such a fool!  He might let me off.  I'll be disgraced
forever."

"Not you, Ippe; you're not half such a fool as he is.  Just go boldly,
and do your best.  Look as fierce and wild as you can, and make awful
faces.  There's nothing like frightening people!  Howl as much as
possible, and gasp sometimes.  I have seen a good deal done in that way.
I only wish they would try to make an angekok of _me_.  I would
astonish them."

The plucky little woman had to stop here for a moment to chuckle at her
own conceit, but her poor son did not respond.  He had got far beyond
the point where a perception of the ludicrous is possible.

"But it is time to go now, my son.  Don't forget your drum and the
face-making.  You know what you've got to do?"

"Yes, yes, I know," said Ippegoo, looking anxiously over his shoulder,
as if he half expected to see a torngak already approaching him; "I know
only too well what I've got to do.  Ujarak has been stuffing it into me
the whole day till my brain feels ready to burst."

The bitter tone in which the poor youth pronounced his master's name
suggested to his mother that it would not require much more to make the
worm turn upon its tormentor.  But the time had arrived to send him off,
so she was obliged to bring her questions and advices to an abrupt
close.

As Ippegoo walked towards the dreaded hut, he was conscious of many
glaring eyes and whispered words around him.  This happily had the
effect of stirring up his pride, and made him resolve to strive to do
his part creditably.

At the door of the hut two dark figures glided swiftly in before him.
One he could perceive was Angut; the other he thought looked very like
the Kablunet "Ridroonee."  The thought gave him some comfort--not much,
indeed, but anything that distracted his mind for an instant from the
business in hand afforded him comfort.

He now braced himself desperately to the work.  Seizing the drum which
he had been told not to forget, he struck it several times, and began to
twist his body about violently.  There was just light enough to show to
onlookers that the poor youth was whirling himself round in contortions
of the most surprising kind.  This he did for the purpose of working
himself up to the proper pitch of enthusiasm.

There seems little doubt that the mere exertion of great muscular
effort, coupled with a resolute wish and intention to succeed in some
object, has a powerful tendency to brace the energies of the human mind.
Ippegoo had not contorted himself and beaten his drum for many minutes
when his feeling of warmth and physical power began to increase.  The
feeling seemed to break on his mind as a revelation.

"Ho!" he thought, "here it comes; it comes at last!  Ujarak told the
truth--I am becoming one of the wise men."

So delighted was the poor fellow with the idea, and with the strong hope
created thereby, that his blood began to course more rapidly and his
heart to beat high.  Under the impulse, he gave vent to a yell that drew
a nod of gratified approval from his mother, and quite astonished those
who knew him best.  Redoubling his twistings and drummings, he soon wore
himself out, and ere long fell down in a state of temporary exhaustion.

Having thus, according to instruction, worked himself up to the proper
pitch of enthusiasm, Ippegoo lay still and panted.  Ujarak then, coming
forward, led him into Angut's hut, which was lighted as usual with
several cooking-lamps.  The people flocked in after them till it was
nearly full; but spaces in the centre and upper end were kept
comparatively free.  Near the lamp the Kablunet was seen seated,
observing the proceedings with much gravity; Okiok sat near him.

When all were seated, the wizard led his pupil into the centre space,
and, making him sit down, bent him forward until his head was between
his legs.  He fastened it in that position, and then tied his hands
behind his back.  All the lights were now extinguished, for no one is
allowed to witness the interview of the unfinished angekok with the
torngak, nor to move a finger for fear of disturbing him.

The room being now in the state which is described as darkness just
visible, Ippegoo began to sing a song, in which all joined.  Presently
he took to groaning by way of variety; then he puffed and gasped, and in
a quavering voice entreated his torngak to come.  Spirits, however, like
human creatures, are not always open to entreaty.  At all events,
Ippegoo's torngak refused to appear.

In such circumstances it is usual for an aspirant to writhe about until
he brings on a sort of _fit_, during the continuance of which his soul
goes off to fetch the obstinate torngak.  After a short time he returns
with him, laughing loudly for joy, while a rustling noise, resembling
the wings of birds as they swoop about the roof, is heard.

But Ippegoo was not a sufficiently wise man to get through this part of
the programme.  True, he wrought himself into a wonderful state of
excitement, and then humbly lay down on his side to have a fit.  But the
fit would not come.  He tried his best to have it.  He wished with all
his heart for it, but all his efforts were vain.

"O why won't you come to me, torngak?" demanded the poor youth, with a
pitiful whine.

"Because you are wise enough already," said a low voice, which startled
the audience very much, and sent a thrill of alarm, not unmingled with
surprise, to the hearts of Ippegoo and his master.

The voice seemed to come from the outside of the hut.

"Ask him to come inside and speak to us," whispered Ujarak, who was a
good deal more surprised even than his pupil at this unexpected turn of
affairs.

"Won't you come in, torngak?" said Ippegoo timidly.  "It is very cold
outside.  You will be more comfortable inside, and we shall hear you
better.  I suppose you can come as easily through the wall as by--"

"Stop your stupid tongue!" growled Ujarak.

At that moment a deep unearthly voice was heard inside the hut.  Every
one trembled, and there ensued a silence so oppressive as to suggest the
idea that all present were holding their breath, and afraid to move even
by a hair's-breadth.

Suddenly there was a faint murmur, for at the upper end of the hut a
dark form was seen slowly to arise.  It must be remembered that there
was barely light enough to render darkness visible.  No features could
be distinguished on this apparition, but it gradually assumed the form
of a gigantic bear, rising nearly to the roof, and with its great
forelegs extended, as if it were brooding over the assembly.  Every one
remained perfectly still, as if spell-bound.

Only one of the audience was sceptical.  Being himself a master of
deception, Ujarak suspected some trick, and slowly approached the giant
bear with the intention of testing its reality--in some trepidation,
however, for he was naturally superstitious.  When he had drawn near
enough to touch it, he received a tremendous blow on the forehead, which
laid him flat on his back in a partially stunned condition, with his
head in Pussimek's lap.  That amiable woman considerately allowed it to
remain there, and as the wizard felt mentally confused he did not care
to change his position.

Presently a low musical voice broke upon the assembly.  We need scarcely
say that it was that of our hero, Red Rooney, but so changed in
character and tone as to be quite unrecognisable by the company, most of
whom, indeed, were not yet very familiar with it.  Even his more
intimate friends, Angut and the Okiok family, were startled by it.  In
fact, the seaman, besides being something of a mimic, possessed a
metallic bass voice of profound depth, which, like most bass voices, was
capable of mounting into the higher latitudes of tone by means of a
falsetto.  He utilised his gifts on the present occasion.

"Ippegoo," he said solemnly and very slowly, "I am not your torngak.  I
am an angekok, and as I chanced to be passing by your hut in my
wanderings, I stopped to hear.  I have heard enough to be able to tell
you that you shall never be an angekok.  Nor shall you ever have a
torngak.  You do not need one.  You are wise enough already, much wiser
than your master, who is no better than a miserable puffin.  Is it not
the duty of one who would be an angekok to go away and live alone for
many days fasting, and praying, and meditating?  Has not Ujarak advised
you to change the ancient customs?  Pooh! he is a fool.  You cannot
succeed now.  All the spirits of water, earth, and air have been
insulted.  This assembly must break up.  You must leave off trying.  You
may all be thankful that the ice does not burst up and crush you; that
the sky does not fall upon you; that the great sea does not roll its
maddest waves over you.  Up, all of you--Begone!"

Rooney finished off with a roar so deep and fearsome that the very
rafters trembled.  A pile of wood, stones, and earthenware, previously
prepared for the purpose, was tipped over, and fell with a most awful
crash.  At the same moment the seaman culminated in a falsetto shriek
that might have shamed a steam whistle.

It was enough.  Had the tunnel entrance of the hut been long and strong,
suffocation to many must have been the result, for they went into it
pell-mell, rolling rather than running.  Fortunately, it was short and
weak.  Ujarak and Simek, sticking in it, burst it up, and swept it away,
thus clearing the passage for the rest.  The last to disappear was
Kunelik, whose tail flapped on the door-post like a small pistol-shot as
she doubled round it and scrambled out, leaving Rooney, Angut, Kannoa,
and Ippegoo to enjoy the situation.



CHAPTER FIFTEEN.

A GREAT SINGING DUEL INTERRUPTED BY A CATASTROPHE.

When the lamps were rekindled by Kannoa, it was discovered that the old
lady's nostrils were twitching and her throat contracting in a
remarkable manner, with smothered laughter.  Very different was the
condition of Ippegoo, who still lay bound in the middle of the room.
Fear and surprise in equal proportions seemed to have taken possession
of him.  Rooney, having dropped the bear-skin, approached him, while
Angut stood beside the lamp looking on with a sort of serious smile.

"Now, Ippegoo," said the sailor, stooping and cutting his bonds, "I set
you free.  It is to be hoped also that I have freed you from
superstition."

"But where is the bear-angekok?" asked the bewildered youth.

"I am the bear-angekok."

"Impossible!" cried Ippegoo.

To this Rooney replied by going back to his bear-skin, spreading it over
himself, getting on a stool so as to tower upwards, spreading out his
long arms, and saying in his deepest bass tones--

"Now, Ippegoo, do you believe me?"

A gleam of intelligence flashed on the youth's countenance, and at that
moment he became more of a wise man than he had ever before been in his
life, for he not only had his eyes opened as to the ease with which some
people can be deceived, but had his confidence in the infallibility of
his old tyrant completely shaken.  He reasoned somewhat thus--

"If Ujarak's torngak was good and true, it would have told him of the
deceit about to be practised on him, and would not have allowed him to
submit to disgrace.  If it did not care, it was a bad spirit.  If it did
not know, it was no better than a man, and not worth having--so I don't
want to have one, and am very glad I have escaped so well."

The poor fellow shrank from adding, "Ujarak must be a deceiver;" but he
began to think that Red Rooney might not have been far wrong after all
when he called him a fool.

Ippegoo was now warned that he must keep carefully out of the wizard's
way, and tell no one of the deceit that had been practised.  He promised
most faithfully to tell no one, and then went straight home and told his
mother all about it--for it never for a moment occurred to the poor
fellow to imagine that he was meant to conceal it from his mother!

Fortunately Kunelik was a wise little woman.  She knew how to keep her
own counsel, and did not even by nod or look insinuate to any one that
she was in possession of a secret.

"Now, then, Angut, what is the next thing to be done?" asked Rooney,
after Ippegoo had left.

"Make Ujarak fight his duel," said Angut.

