land-ice that stretches from Bylot's Island to the west. Also, the
strong current which sets east out of Lancaster Sound carried with it
mile upon mile of what they call pack-ice--rough ice that has not frozen
into fields; and this pack was bombarding the floe at the same time
that the swell and heave of the storm-worked sea was weakening and
undermining it. What Kotuko and the girl had been listening to were the
faint echoes of that fight thirty or forty miles away, and the little
tell-tale rod quivered to the shock of it.

Now, as the Inuit say, when the ice once wakes after its long winter
sleep, there is no knowing what may happen, for solid floe-ice changes
shape almost as quickly as a cloud. The gale was evidently a spring gale
sent out of time, and anything was possible.

Yet the two were happier in their minds than before. If the floe broke
up there would be no more waiting and suffering. Spirits, goblins, and
witch-people were moving about on the racking ice, and they might find
themselves stepping into Sedna's country side by side with all sorts of
wild Things, the flush of excitement still on them. When they left the
hut after the gale, the noise on the horizon was steadily growing, and
the tough ice moaned and buzzed all round them.

"It is still waiting," said Kotuko.

On the top of a hummock sat or crouched the eight-legged Thing that they
had seen three days before--and it howled horribly.

"Let us follow," said the girl. "It may know some way that does not lead
to Sedna"; but she reeled from weakness as she took the pulling-rope.
The Thing moved off slowly and clumsily across the ridges, heading
always toward the westward and the land, and they followed, while the
growling thunder at the edge of the floe rolled nearer and nearer. The
floe's lip was split and cracked in every direction for three or four
miles inland, and great pans of ten-foot-thick ice, from a few yards
to twenty acres square, were jolting and ducking and surging into one
another, and into the yet unbroken floe, as the heavy swell took and
shook and spouted between them. This battering-ram ice was, so to speak,
the first army that the sea was flinging against the floe. The incessant
crash and jar of these cakes almost drowned the ripping sound of sheets
of pack-ice driven bodily under the floe as cards are hastily pushed
under a tablecloth. Where the water was shallow these sheets would be
piled one atop of the other till the bottommost touched mud fifty feet
down, and the discoloured sea banked behind the muddy ice till the
increasing pressure drove all forward again. In addition to the floe and
the pack-ice, the gale and the currents were bringing down true bergs,
sailing mountains of ice, snapped off from the Greenland side of the
water or the north shore of Melville Bay. They pounded in solemnly,
the waves breaking white round them, and advanced on the floe like an
old-time fleet under full sail. A berg that seemed ready to carry the
world before it would ground helplessly in deep water, reel over, and
wallow in a lather of foam and mud and flying frozen spray, while a much
smaller and lower one would rip and ride into the flat floe, flinging
tons of ice on either side, and cutting a track half a mile long before
it was stopped. Some fell like swords, shearing a raw-edged canal;
and others splintered into a shower of blocks, weighing scores of tons
apiece, that whirled and skirted among the hummocks. Others, again, rose
up bodily out of the water when they shoaled, twisted as though in
pain, and fell solidly on their sides, while the sea threshed over their
shoulders. This trampling and crowding and bending and buckling and
arching of the ice into every possible shape was going on as far as the
eye could reach all along the north line of the floe. From where
Kotuko and the girl were, the confusion looked no more than an uneasy,
rippling, crawling movement under the horizon; but it came toward them
each moment, and they could hear, far away to landward a heavy booming,
as it might have been the boom of artillery through a fog. That showed
that the floe was being jammed home against the iron cliffs of Bylot's
Island, the land to the southward behind them.

"This has never been before," said Kotuko, staring stupidly. "This is
not the time. How can the floe break NOW?"

"Follow THAT!" the girl cried, pointing to the Thing half limping,
half running distractedly before them. They followed, tugging at the
hand-sleigh, while nearer and nearer came the roaring march of the ice.
At last the fields round them cracked and starred in every direction,
and the cracks opened and snapped like the teeth of wolves. But where
the Thing rested, on a mound of old and scattered ice-blocks some fifty
feet high, there was no motion. Kotuko leaped forward wildly, dragging
the girl after him, and crawled to the bottom of the mound. The talking
of the ice grew louder and louder round them, but the mound stayed fast,
and, as the girl looked at him, he threw his right elbow upward and
outward, making the Inuit sign for land in the shape of an island. And
land it was that the eight-legged, limping Thing had led them to--some
granite-tipped, sand-beached islet off the coast, shod and sheathed and
masked with ice so that no man could have told it from the floe, but at
the bottom solid earth, and not shifting ice! The smashing and rebound
of the floes as they grounded and splintered marked the borders of it,
and a friendly shoal ran out to the northward, and turned aside the rush
of the heaviest ice, exactly as a ploughshare turns over loam. There was
danger, of course, that some heavily squeezed ice-field might shoot up
the beach, and plane off the top of the islet bodily; but that did not
trouble Kotuko and the girl when they made their snow-house and began
to eat, and heard the ice hammer and skid along the beach. The Thing
had disappeared, and Kotuko was talking excitedly about his power over
spirits as he crouched round the lamp. In the middle of his wild sayings
the girl began to laugh, and rock herself backward and forward.

Behind her shoulder, crawling into the hut crawl by crawl, there were
two heads, one yellow and one black, that belonged to two of the most
sorrowful and ashamed dogs that ever you saw. Kotuko the dog was one,
and the black leader was the other. Both were now fat, well-looking, and
quite restored to their proper minds, but coupled to each other in an
extraordinary fashion. When the black leader ran off, you remember, his
harness was still on him. He must have met Kotuko the dog, and played or
fought with him, for his shoulder-loop had caught in the plaited copper
wire of Kotuko's collar, and had drawn tight, so that neither could get
at the trace to gnaw it apart, but each was fastened sidelong to
his neighbour's neck. That, with the freedom of hunting on their own
account, must have helped to cure their madness. They were very sober.

The girl pushed the two shamefaced creatures towards Kotuko, and,
sobbing with laughter, cried, "That is Quiquern, who led us to safe
ground. Look at his eight legs and double head!"

Kotuko cut them free, and they fell into his arms, yellow and black
together, trying to explain how they had got their senses back again.
Kotuko ran a hand down their ribs, which were round and well clothed.
"They have found food," he said, with a grin. "I do not think we shall
go to Sedna so soon. My tornaq sent these. The sickness has left them."

As soon as they had greeted Kotuko, these two, who had been forced to
sleep and eat and hunt together for the past few weeks, flew at each
other's throat, and there was a beautiful battle in the snow-house.
"Empty dogs do not fight," Kotuko said. "They have found the seal. Let
us sleep. We shall find food."

When they waked there was open water on the north beach of the island,
and all the loosened ice had been driven landward. The first sound of
the surf is one of the most delightful that the Inuit can hear, for it
means that spring is on the road. Kotuko and the girl took hold of hands
and smiled, for the clear, full roar of the surge among the ice
reminded them of salmon and reindeer time and the smell of blossoming
ground-willows. Even as they looked, the sea began to skim over between
the floating cakes of ice, so intense was the cold; but on the horizon
there was a vast red glare, and that was the light of the sunken sun.
It was more like hearing him yawn in his sleep than seeing him rise, and
the glare lasted for only a few minutes, but it marked the turn of the
year. Nothing, they felt, could alter that.

Kotuko found the dogs fighting over a fresh-killed seal who was
following the fish that a gale always disturbs. He was the first of some
twenty or thirty seal that landed on the island in the course of the
day, and till the sea froze hard there were hundreds of keen black heads
rejoicing in the shallow free water and floating about with the floating
ice.

It was good to eat seal-liver again; to fill the lamps recklessly with
blubber, and watch the flame blaze three feet in the air; but as soon
as the new sea-ice bore, Kotuko and the girl loaded the hand-sleigh, and
made the two dogs pull as they had never pulled in their lives, for they
feared what might have happened in their village. The weather was as
pitiless as usual; but it is easier to draw a sleigh loaded with good
food than to hunt starving. They left five-and-twenty seal carcasses
buried in the ice of the beach, all ready for use, and hurried back to
their people. The dogs showed them the way as soon as Kotuko told them
what was expected, and though there was no sign of a landmark, in two
days they were giving tongue outside Kadlu's house. Only three dogs
answered them; the others had been eaten, and the houses were all dark.
But when Kotuko shouted, "Ojo!" (boiled meat), weak voices replied, and
when he called the muster of the village name by name, very distinctly,
there were no gaps in it.

An hour later the lamps blazed in Kadlu's house; snow-water was heating;
the pots were beginning to simmer, and the snow was dripping from the
roof, as Amoraq made ready a meal for all the village, and the boy-baby
in the hood chewed at a strip of rich nutty blubber, and the hunters
slowly and methodically filled themselves to the very brim with
seal-meat. Kotuko and the girl told their tale. The two dogs sat between
them, and whenever their names came in, they cocked an ear apiece and
looked most thoroughly ashamed of themselves. A dog who has once gone
mad and recovered, the Inuit say, is safe against all further attacks.

"So the tornaq did not forget us," said Kotuko. "The storm blew, the ice
broke, and the seal swam in behind the fish that were frightened by the
storm. Now the new seal-holes are not two days distant. Let the good
hunters go to-morrow and bring back the seal I have speared--twenty-five
seal buried in the ice. When we have eaten those we will all follow the
seal on the floe."

"What do YOU do?" said the sorcerer in the same sort of voice as he used
to Kadlu, richest of the Tununirmiut.

Kadlu looked at the girl from the North, and said quietly, "WE build a
house." He pointed to the north-west side of Kadlu's house, for that is
the side on which the married son or daughter always lives.

The girl turned her hands palm upward, with a little despairing shake
of her head. She was a foreigner, picked up starving, and could bring
nothing to the housekeeping.

Amoraq jumped from the bench where she sat, and began to sweep things
into the girl's lap--stone lamps, iron skin-scrapers, tin kettles,
deer-skins embroidered with musk-ox teeth, and real canvas-needles such
as sailors use--the finest dowry that has ever been given on the far
edge of the Arctic Circle, and the girl from the North bowed her head
down to the very floor.

"Also these!" said Kotuko, laughing and signing to the dogs, who thrust
their cold muzzles into the girl's face.

"Ah," said the angekok, with an important cough, as though he had been
thinking it all over. "As soon as Kotuko left the village I went to the
Singing-House and sang magic. I sang all the long nights, and called
upon the Spirit of the Reindeer. MY singing made the gale blow that
broke the ice and drew the two dogs toward Kotuko when the ice would
have crushed his bones. MY song drew the seal in behind the broken ice.
My body lay still in the quaggi, but my spirit ran about on the ice, and
guided Kotuko and the dogs in all the things they did. I did it."

Everybody was full and sleepy, so no one contradicted; and the angekok,
by virtue of his office, helped himself to yet another lump of boiled
meat, and lay down to sleep with the others in the warm, well-lighted,
oil-smelling home.

*****

Now Kotuko, who drew very well in the Inuit fashion, scratched pictures
of all these adventures on a long, flat piece of ivory with a hole at
one end. When he and the girl went north to Ellesmere Land in the year
of the Wonderful Open Winter, he left the picture-story with Kadlu, who
lost it in the shingle when his dog-sleigh broke down one summer on the
beach of Lake Netilling at Nikosiring, and there a Lake Inuit found
it next spring and sold it to a man at Imigen who was interpreter on a
Cumberland Sound whaler, and he sold it to Hans Olsen, who was afterward
a quartermaster on board a big steamer that took tourists to the North
Cape in Norway. When the tourist season was over, the steamer ran
between London and Australia, stopping at Ceylon, and there Olsen sold
the ivory to a Cingalese jeweller for two imitation sapphires. I found
it under some rubbish in a house at Colombo, and have translated it from
one end to the other.




'ANGUTIVAUN TAINA'

[This is a very free translation of the Song of the Returning Hunter,
as the men used to sing it after seal-spearing. The Inuit always repeat
things over and over again.]

      Our gloves are stiff with the frozen blood,
        Our furs with the drifted snow,
      As we come in with the seal--the seal!
        In from the edge of the floe.

      Au jana! Aua! Oha! Haq!
        And the yelping dog-teams go,
      And the long whips crack, and the men come back,
        Back from the edge of the floe!

      We tracked our seal to his secret place,
        We heard him scratch below,
      We made our mark, and we watched beside,
        Out on the edge of the floe.

      We raised our lance when he rose to breathe,
        We drove it downward--so!
      And we played him thus, and we killed him thus,
        Out on the edge of the floe.

      Our gloves are glued with the frozen blood,
        Our eyes with the drifting snow;
      But we come back to our wives again,
        Back from the edge of the floe!

      Au jana! Aua! Oha! Haq!
        And the loaded dog-teams go,
      And the wives can hear their men come back.
        Back from the edge of the floe!




RED DOG

     For our white and our excellent nights---for the nights of
           swift running.
         Fair ranging, far seeing, good hunting, sure cunning!
     For the smells of the dawning, untainted, ere dew has departed!
     For the rush through the mist, and the quarry blind-started!
     For the cry of our mates when the sambhur has wheeled and is
           standing at bay,
               For the risk and the riot of night!
               For the sleep at the lair-mouth by day,
               It is met, and we go to the fight.
                                 Bay! O Bay!

It was after the letting in of the Jungle that the pleasantest part of
Mowgli's life began. He had the good conscience that comes from paying
debts; all the Jungle was his friend, and just a little afraid of him.
The things that he did and saw and heard when he was wandering from one
people to another, with or without his four companions, would make many
many stories, each as long as this one. So you will never be told how
he met the Mad Elephant of Mandla, who killed two-and-twenty bullocks
drawing eleven carts of coined silver to the Government Treasury,
and scattered the shiny rupees in the dust; how he fought Jacala, the
Crocodile, all one long night in the Marshes of the North, and broke his
skinning-knife on the brute's back-plates; how he found a new and longer
knife round the neck of a man who had been killed by a wild boar, and
how he tracked that boar and killed him as a fair price for the knife;
how he was caught up once in the Great Famine, by the moving of the
deer, and nearly crushed to death in the swaying hot herds; how he saved
Hathi the Silent from being once more trapped in a pit with a stake
at the bottom, and how, next day, he himself fell into a very cunning
leopard-trap, and how Hathi broke the thick wooden bars to pieces above
him; how he milked the wild buffaloes in the swamp, and how----

But we must tell one tale at a time. Father and Mother Wolf died, and
Mowgli rolled a big boulder against the mouth of their cave, and cried
the Death Song over them; Baloo grew very old and stiff, and even
Bagheera, whose nerves were steel and whose muscles were iron, was a
shade slower on the kill than he had been. Akela turned from gray to
milky white with pure age; his ribs stuck out, and he walked as though
he had been made of wood, and Mowgli killed for him. But the young
wolves, the children of the disbanded Seeonee Pack, throve and
increased, and when there were about forty of them, masterless,
full-voiced, clean-footed five-year-olds, Akela told them that they
ought to gather themselves together and follow the Law, and run under
one head, as befitted the Free People.

This was not a question in which Mowgli concerned himself, for, as he
said, he had eaten sour fruit, and he knew the tree it hung from; but
when Phao, son of Phaona (his father was the Gray Tracker in the days
of Akela's headship), fought his way to the leadership of the Pack,
according to the Jungle Law, and the old calls and songs began to ring
under the stars once more, Mowgli came to the Council Rock for memory's
sake. When he chose to speak the Pack waited till he had finished, and
he sat at Akela's side on the rock above Phao. Those were days of good
hunting and good sleeping. No stranger cared to break into the jungles
that belonged to Mowgli's people, as they called the Pack, and the young
wolves grew fat and strong, and there were many cubs to bring to the
Looking-over. Mowgli always attended a Looking-over, remembering the
night when a black panther bought a naked brown baby into the pack,
and the long call, "Look, look well, O Wolves," made his heart flutter.
Otherwise, he would be far away in the Jungle with his four brothers,
tasting, touching, seeing, and feeling new things.

One twilight when he was trotting leisurely across the ranges to give
Akela the half of a buck that he had killed, while the Four jogged
behind him, sparring a little, and tumbling one another over for joy of
being alive, he heard a cry that had never been heard since the bad days
of Shere Khan. It was what they call in the Jungle the pheeal, a hideous
kind of shriek that the jackal gives when he is hunting behind a tiger,
or when there is a big killing afoot. If you can imagine a mixture of
hate, triumph, fear, and despair, with a kind of leer running through
it, you will get some notion of the pheeal that rose and sank and
wavered and quavered far away across the Waingunga. The Four stopped at
once, bristling and growling. Mowgli's hand went to his knife, and he
checked, the blood in his face, his eyebrows knotted.

"There is no Striped One dare kill here," he said.

"That is not the cry of the Forerunner," answered Gray Brother. "It is
some great killing. Listen!"

It broke out again, half sobbing and half chuckling, just as though the
jackal had soft human lips. Then Mowgli drew deep breath, and ran to the
Council Rock, overtaking on his way hurrying wolves of the Pack.
