"They like that toll well enough, father, I can tell you; else they
could go round the other way. Why, you yourself salute the farmers'
little wenches on the cheek sometimes--I have seen you do it; and
why not I the older ones?"

The Squire looked at his son with mournful intensity of gaze.

"Tom, Tom, I think sometimes that thou dost err more from
thoughtlessness than from wickedness; but, my son, thoughtlessness,
if carried to excess, may become wickedness, and may breed vice. I
verily believe that in half thy pranks thou dost mean no great
harm; but thou art growing to man's estate, Tom. It is time that
thou didst put away childish things. What is pardoned to youth, may
not so easily be pardoned to manhood. Have a care, Tom, have a
care! Oh, my son, remember that the day will come when thou too
must lie face to face with death, even as I do tonight. Let not the
record upon which thou wilt then look be one of vice and
profligacy. It needs must be that in such a moment our lives seem
deeply stained by sin; but strive so to live that thou mayest at
least be able to say, 'I have striven to do my duty--the Lord
pardon all my imperfections!' For, Tom, if thou dost persevere in
careless and evil courses, it may be that the power to ask the
Lord's forgiveness may pass from thee; and if it comes to such a
pass, may the Lord have mercy upon thy wretched soul!"

The dying man stopped short, a spasm of suffering passing over his
face. The thought had been a terrible one to him. Yet he had been
bred up in the somewhat stern Puritan tenets, and it was not in his
creed to speak so much of the everlasting mercy as the everlasting
judgment.

Tom put the cup of cordial to his father's lips, himself somewhat
sobered by the words heard and the visions called up. He was
neither callous nor hard-hearted; and his father was dying. In that
moment he really longed to turn over a new leaf, and cut adrift
from former temptations.

"Then, father, let me go," he said; "let me try afresh in a new
place. I could not do it here perhaps; but I think I could
elsewhere."

"If that be so, my son, then thou hadst better go," said the dying
man. "I would that thou couldst have remained to be the stay and
support of thy mother; but if not, then it may be thou wilt be
better elsewhere. I have thought often of this. I and thy mother
have talked it over many times. I have even made provision for it,
as she will tell thee and show thee. But, Tom, if thou go hence,
linger not in London, where, I fear me, thou wouldst soon be ruined
body and soul. There be stirring things passing in the great world
beyond the seas. Take ship, and go and see some of these things.
Linger not in idleness in the haunts of vice. The world is a bigger
place than thou canst know. Go forth and see it, and learn and find
thy manhood's strength."

Tom's eyes glistened at the thought. It had never occurred to him
as possible to leave his native place. Now it suddenly seemed as
though a new life were opening out before him.

"Where shall I go, father?" he asked.

The Squire was silent for a while. He had exhausted himself by the
energy with which he had spoken hitherto. When next he opened his
lips his words came more slowly and languidly.

"If I were in your place, boy, I should go forth and see what is
doing at the seat of war. I love not war for its own sake. It is a
cruel and terrible thing. Yet there be times when it becomes a
righteous thing; and methinks England is doing right to ally
herself with the foes of France to crush the tyranny of that proud
nation, whose king would fain be monarch of all Europe if he could.
I know not whether men untrained to arms may enlist themselves in
the ranks of the great Duke of Marlborough, whose genius is winning
renown for England's sons. But were I young, methinks I would go
forth and see some of the great things that are doing in the world;
and it might well be that a fine grown young fellow, with stalwart
limbs, a firm seat on a horse, and a knowledge of sword play and
the use of firearms, might even find a place in the ranks of the
great general. Whether or not, he would see life as he had never
seen it before, and learn lessons which might make a man of him all
his life."

The prospect was attractive and exciting for Tom, who loved a fight
as he loved nothing else, and who had a very exalted idea of his
own prowess and skill in arms. He could wrestle and throw better
than any antagonist he had ever met, and was no novice with pistol
or sword. He had the good opinion of his powers which naturally
came to one who had seldom or never found his match in his native
place; and already in imagination he saw himself riding at the head
of a troop of soldiers, and winning laurels on all sides by his
bravery and address.

The Squire's voice had sunk into the silence of exhaustion. He had
closed his eyes, and only opened them again after a long interval.
Their glance met that of young Tom, and the father seemed to read
something of what was passing in his mind.

"Tom, lad," he said feebly, reaching forth his hand and trying to
grasp the great horny fist of his son, "strive to be humble. Think
not too well of thyself. Seek counsel from God in all things. Be
not wise in thine own eyes. If thou art self willed, vain, and
headstrong, grief and pain will be thy lot. Seek first the kingdom
of heaven and its righteousness--"

But here the voice failed; and Tom, his quick nature touched and
sobered, rose hastily, and, with a muttered promise of quick
return, threw himself out of the room, as though afraid to trust
himself there longer. He was such a stranger to keen emotion, that
he fled from before it with a sense of dread.

The wife came back to her husband's bedside. He looked into her
face and said, faintly:

"The lad hath yet a warm heart."

"I have always felt that," she answered quickly. "But oh, my
husband, why send him forth to the perils of war?"

"In the hope that the stern discipline of a soldier's life may fit
him for the duties which will be his at home. The lad needs above
all things to learn to obey. Till he has mastered the lesson of
submission, he can never be fit to hold the reins of government.
That lesson he will learn most quickly in the life of the camp.
There he will be no great man, but an overgrown boy to be taught
and drilled. Young Tom needs to find his own level. That is what he
never will do at home. He has lorded it over the neighbourhood too
long already."

"But if he leaves us and goes forth into the world, who will care
for his immortal soul?" asked the mother, with tears in her eyes.

"Has he listened to our words of admonition and warning at home?"
asked the Squire, with a strange look in his glazing eyes. "Nay,
wife, I feel as I lie here dying, that the life of the soul is
something we poor frail human creatures must not try too much to
touch. The Spirit of God will work in His own time. We may pray and
weep and plead before God for an erring son, and we believe our
prayers will be answered; but it will be in His time, not in our
own. And time and place are no barriers with Him. He will do for
Tom, I will not doubt it, what we have failed to do with all our
pains and care."

The mother wept silently--for the husband whose life was ebbing
away; for the son over whose heart she seemed to have so little
control; for herself, soon to be left alone in the world, with only
her daughter for her prop and stay. She was not a weak or helpless
creature. She had been in her husband's confidence, and had been
his helpmeet throughout their married life. She was well able to
carry on single-handed the course of action he had pursued through
his long rule at Gablehurst; yet not the less for this did she feel
the desolation of her approaching widowhood; and it seemed an
additional sorrow (although she recognized its necessity) that Tom
was also to be taken from her.

A mother's love for her only son is a very sacred and compelling
thing. Tom had not been a comfort or support to his parents; he was
likely, if he remained, to be a source of endless trouble to his
mother during her reign at the old house; yet none the less did it
seem to her a heart-breaking thing to have to part from him.

The light about them grew more dim as the fire burned with a steady
glow instead of with dancing flames. Rachel had lighted a lamp, yet
it did little to illumine the great room. The sick man lay as
though asleep.

Presently the mother spoke in a whisper to her daughter.

"Fetch Tom," she said.

Rachel knew what that meant, and her heart beat to suffocation. She
crept from the room, and returned with her brother, and they stood
side by side at one side of the bed, whilst their mother knelt at
the other.

Once the dying man opened his eyes, and looked from one to another
of those about him, though whether he saw them they did not know.
Then his eyes closed, he gave a sigh, and turned upon his pillows.

The Squire of Gablehurst had passed to his last account.



CHAPTER II. OUT INTO THE WORLD.


"You had better let me go, mother. I shall do no good here."

Tom stood before his mother with a flush upon his handsome face--a
flush that was one partly of shame, partly of anger, with a dash of
excitement and eagerness thrown in.

His mother was in tears. She had been uttering words of reproach
and sorrow; for after a period of wonderful steadiness immediately
succeeding his father's death, young Tom had broken out into his
wild ways again, and her fond hopes of seeing him grow into her
comfort and stay were dashed ruthlessly to the ground again. The
impression made upon him by the death of the Squire was growing dim
now. His old companions were tempting him back to their ranks, and
he had neither strength of purpose nor the resolute desire to
resist their overtures.

"You had better let me go. You know my father said it. I have never
done any good here, and I never shall. I want to see the world, and
I see nothing here. Gablehurst and Gablethorpe are too narrow for
me. I will go to foreign lands, and come back to you with a better
record to show. I think I could make a fine soldier, but in this
miserable little place a man has no scope."

"A man has scope to become a good landlord, a kind master, a
God-fearing head of his household," said the mother, with a sigh in
her voice.

But Tom interrupted impatiently:

"That is all very well when one is the master. Perhaps when I come
back I can be all that myself; but now I am a dummy--a nobody, and
they all make game of me for being a mock squire! My father himself
knew that no man of spirit would stand such a humiliating
arrangement. If he could not trust me to succeed him, he did well
to arrange for me to go elsewhere. He said you would tell me what
provision he had made for me to do so."

The moment had come that the mother had so long dreaded. She had to
face the separation from her son, and to send him forth into the
world alone. But the experiences of the past weeks had taught her
that perhaps this was the best thing that could happen to young
Tom. In Gablethorpe he had no chance of getting away from evil
associates. In a different place he might find friends of a
different stamp.

She rose and silently unlocked a great oaken press, clamped with
iron, a place where the Squire kept all his valuable papers, and
some of the heirlooms which had come down to him from his
forefathers. Tom looked on with curious eyes. He had always
experienced, from childhood upwards, a certain sense of awe when
that press was unlocked and thrown open. He now observed his
mother's actions with great curiosity.

"Come, Tom, and lift down that box, for it is heavy," she said; and
Tom came forward and carefully lifted down a small iron-bound
chest, which, for its size, was in truth remarkably heavy. This box
was placed upon the table, whilst the mother locked up the safe
once more.

Then she selected a small key from a number in a bag at her girdle,
and offered it to her son.

"There, Tom, the box and its contents are yours. You will find
within five hundred golden pieces--guineas every one of them,
bright and new from the mint. Your father saved them up for you for
many long years, in case it should ever become needful that you
should leave home to see the world. Always it was his hope that you
would remain at home to be his comfort and stay; but if that could
not be, then would he wish to send forth his only son in such a
manner as beseemed his condition in life."

Tom's eyes sparkled. A flush mounted to his cheek, and his hand
shook a little as he put the key into the lock.

It was all true. There lay, in neat rolls, more money than he had
ever seen in all his life--a fortune for a prince, as it seemed to
him in his youthful inexperience. The admonitions and counsel of
his mother fell on deaf ears. Tom's busy brain was planning a
thousand ways in which his wealth might be expended. He would go
forth. He would see the world. He would win fame and fortune. He
would never return to Gablehurst until he brought with him a name
which should cause the ears of those who knew him to tingle by
reason of the fame he had won!

"Nay, but boast not of the future, my son," pleaded the mother,
with a note of anxiety in her voice; "and be not over confident.
The times are perilous, and you are but an untried youth. Boasting
is not well."

But Tom could not listen. He laughingly repeated his boast, and was
off to the stables forthwith, to pick for himself the best horses
for his ride to London. For, of course, he must first go there, to
fit himself out for his journey beyond seas, and find out where the
army of the Duke was at present to be found.

Vague rumours of the great victory had penetrated to the wilds of
Essex; but where Blenheim was, and what the victory was all about,
the rustics knew as little as "Old Kaspar" of the immortal ballad
of later days. The squires were little less vague in their ideas as
to the scope and purpose of the war. It was to abase the power of
France--so much they knew, and was unpopular with the Tories of
Jacobite leanings, for the reason that the French king was
sheltering the dethroned monarch of the Stuart line. But then the
great Duke who was winning all these victories was said to be a
stanch Tory himself; so that it was all rather confusing, and Tom
was just as ignorant and ill-informed on all these topics as the
hinds who tilled his fields. He had never cared to inform himself
of what was passing in the world, and the newspapers had always
seemed to him very dull reading.

Now, however, he wished he knew a little more; but he told himself
that he should quickly pick up everything in London. His heart beat
at the thought of seeing that wonderful city; and although he
carelessly promised his mother not to linger there long, he was by
no means sure that he would not make a good stay, and learn the
fashions of the gay world before he crossed the sea.

He was quite of the opinion that, clad in a new suit of fashionable
make, he could ruffle it with the best of the young bloods about
town. He was now all in a fever to be off. He selected for his
attendant a young groom, with whom he had long been more intimate
than his father approved. His mother in vain besought him to take
faithful old John, or at least Peter, whom they had known from
boyhood; but Tom would have nobody but young Robin, and declared
that he and Robin, mounted upon Wildfire and Wildgoose--two of the
best and fleetest horses ever reared in the meadows round
Gablehurst--could distance any highwaymen who might try to stop
them, or shoot them down if they could not shake them off.

For these were days when travelling was none too safe, and the
transit of the heavy bag of golden guineas made an additional
source of danger. For there were highway robbers and footpads, who
seemed to have a seventh sense for the scenting of gold. It was
probable that they had spies and confederates in all sorts of
places, and that they were warned beforehand when travellers rode
with money and valuables upon their persons.

It was, therefore, small wonder that mother and sister looked with
somewhat sinking hearts at the handsome young fellow, in his
workman-like, if rustic, riding dress, as he sat upon his horse at
the hall door, giving a last look round him at the little crowd
gathered to see him ride away.

"You will write and tell us of your safe arrival in London; and be
very careful how you cross Epping Forest," said the mother.

And young Tom answered gaily,--"Oh, never fear for me. Wildfire and
I can ride through and ride down anything! I will send a letter
from London, but after that you must not look for anything but
silence. When men cross the seas, and live amid battles and
marches, letters can scarce be written, still less safely carried."

He stooped from his saddle, and once more kissed both mother and
sister. Then the servants and tenants crowded round, full of good
wishes for a prosperous journey and a happy return; and Tom
answered them with gay words of promise. He would come back again,
covered with fame and glory. They would hear of his doings before
they saw him again, and when he came back he would "take toll again
of all his old playmates;" and so saying, he looked laughingly
round upon the blushing girls, who had paid Tom Tufton's toll many
a time, between jest and earnest, by the lych gate.

They all admired and liked the handsome lad, even though his ways
were more wild and reckless than the elders could approve. But all
declared that it would do him all the good in the world to go out
and see life in other places. It would cool his hot blood, and
teach him wisdom; and, after all, lads always would be lads till
manhood's cares and lessons had tamed them.

So Tom rode away in high spirits, Robin following on Wildgoose,
with the saddlebags strapped in front of him. They did not take
much with them, as Tom meant to equip himself in town, and was
wearing his finest home-made suit upon the journey. He had his
precious guineas carefully secured about his person. They were
heavy, it is true, but he liked to feel the weight of them, and to
know that they were safe.

For many miles he was constantly receiving hails from friends and
comrades; sometimes a band of young men would ride with him for a
few miles, and then, wishing him good luck, return home again. At
some houses which he passed, bright eyes would look out from the
windows, and kerchiefs would be waved in greeting and farewell.

Tom may perhaps be forgiven for regarding himself somewhat in the
light of a young prince riding forth to see the world. Everything
in his past life had combined to give him a good opinion of
himself, and make him fancy himself irresistible alike with men and
women. For he was undoubtedly the strongest and handsomest youth in
his own small world.

He sang and whistled as he rode along in the crisp morning air.
October had dashed the trees with vivid tints of red and gold. A
crisp touch of frost was in the air, and though the noonday sun was
bright and hot, there were indications of approaching winter plain
to be seen.

They baited their horses for an hour at a little inn where Tom was
slightly known; but when he spoke of pressing on, and asked where
the next halting place was, mine host advised his remaining where
he was till morning, as he was now close to the forest boundaries,
and not only were the paths somewhat intricate, but there were
always footpads, if not worse, lurking in the recesses of the wood,
ready to pounce upon unwary travellers, especially after sundown.

"And the light goes quickly beneath the trees. For my part, I would
rather travel by the waxing light of early morn than by the fading
glow of an autumn evening."

Tom had meant to arrive at this inn full two hours before he did;
for he had allowed his friends to hinder him on his way, and had
stopped all too often to exchange a word with some maiden watching
from a window or by a gate. He had intended reaching a little
village known to Robin, situated in the forest itself, before night
fell; and even as it was, he was by no means prepared to abandon
the hope of getting there.

Robin was not afraid of darkness or of footpads. He had a very good
knowledge of the forest, and was eager to press on. It was still
quite light, and Tom was in all the fervour of his first
impetuosity. So, as soon as the horses were baited and themselves
refreshed, they mounted once more, and pushed gaily along, feeling
themselves quite equal to repel any wretched footpads who might try
to assault them.

As for the regular highway robbers, well armed and well mounted,
they favoured better-frequented routes than this. Open heaths were
their favourite hunting grounds, though they liked well enough to
lie in hiding in the forests when they had brought too much
notoriety upon themselves. These unfrequented forest paths did not
offer them sufficient hope of booty to attract them in large
numbers, and Tom had no fear of meeting an enemy too strong for
him.

But security is not always safety, as Tom was destined to find to
his cost. In spite of their best efforts, and the gallant response
made by their good horses, dusk fell whilst they were still
threading the tortuous forest paths, and Robin was fain to admit
that he would be puzzled to find the way in the dark; indeed, he
