
"Turn on the outside generator propellers," ordered Wichter. "I think
our batteries are getting low."

Joyce slipped the tiny, slim-bladed propellers into gear. They began
to turn, slowly at first in the almost non-existent atmosphere.

"Four hundred miles," announced Wichter. "How's the temperature?"

Joyce stepped to the thermometer that registered the heat of the outer
wall. "Nine hundred degrees," he said.

"Cut down to a thousand miles an hour," commanded Wichter. "Five
hundred as soon as the motor will catch that much. I'll keep our
course straight toward this crater. It's in wells like that, that
we'll find livable air--if we're right in believing there is such a
thing on Zeud."

       *       *       *       *       *

Joyce glanced at the thermometer. It still registered hundreds of
degrees, though their speed had been materially reduced.

"I guess there's livable air, all right," he said. "It's pretty thick
outside already."

The professor smiled. "Another theory vindicated. I was sure that
Zeud, swinging on the outside of the Earth-moon-Zeud chain and hence
traveling at a faster rate, would pick up most of the moon's
atmosphere over a period of millions of years. Also it must have been
shielded by the moon, to some extent, against the constant small
atmospheric leakage most celestial globes are subject to. Just the
same, when we land, we'll test conditions with a rat or two."

At a signal from him, Joyce checked their speed to four hundred miles
an hour, then to two hundred, and then, as they descended below the
highest rim of the circular cliffs of the crater, almost to a full
stop. They floated toward the surface of Zeud, watching with
breathless interest the panorama that unfolded beneath them.

They were nosing toward a spot that was being favored with the Zeudian
sunrise. Sharp and clear the light rays slanted down, illuminating
about half the crater's floor and leaving the cliff protected half in
dim shadow.

The illuminated part of the giant pit was as bizarre as the landscape
of a nightmare. There were purplish trees, immense beyond belief.
There were broad, smooth pools of inky black fluid that was oily and
troubled in spots as though disturbed by some moving things under the
surface. There were bare, rocky patches where the stones, the long
drippings of ancient lava flow, were spread like bleaching gray
skeletons of monsters. And over all, rising from pools and bare ground
and jungle alike, was a thin, miasmic mist.

       *       *       *       *       *

Sustained by the slow, steady exhaust of the motor, rising a little
with each partly muffled explosion and sinking a little further in
each interval, they settled toward a bare, lava strewn spot that
appealed to Wichter as being a good landing place. With a last hiss,
and a grinding jar, they grounded. Joyce opened the switch to cut off
the generator.

"Now let's see what the air's like," said Wichter, lifting down a
small cage in which was penned an active rat.

He opened a double panel in the shell's hull, and freed the little
animal. In an agony of suspense they watched it as it leaped onto the
bare lava and halted a moment....

"Seems to like it," said Joyce, drawing a great breath.

The rat, as though intoxicated by its sudden freedom, raced away out
of sight, covering eight or ten feet at a bound, its legs scurrying
ludicrously in empty air during its short flights.

"That means that we can dispense with oxygen helmets--and that we'd
better take our guns," said Wichter, his voice tense, his eyes
snapping behind his glasses.

He stepped to the gun rack. In this were half a dozen air-guns. Long
and of very small bore, they discharged a tiny steel shell in which
was a liquid of his invention that, about a second after the heat of
its forced passage through the rifle barrel, expanded instantly in
gaseous form to millions of times its liquid bulk. It was the most
powerful explosive yet found, but one that was beautifully safe to
carry inasmuch as it could be exploded only by heat.

"Are we ready?" he said, handing a gun to Joyce. "Then--let's go!"

       *       *       *       *       *

But for a breath or two they hesitated before opening the heavy double
door in the side of the hull, savoring to the full the immensity of
the moment.

The rapture of the explorer who is the first to set foot on a vast new
continent was theirs, magnified a hundredfold. For they were the first
to set foot on a vast new planet! An entire new world, containing
heaven alone knew what forms of life, what monstrous or infinitesimal
creatures, lay before them. Even the profound awe they had experienced
when landing on the moon was dwarfed by the solemnity of this
occasion; just as it is less soul stirring to discover an arctic
continent which is perpetually cased in barren ice, than to discover a
continent which is warmly fruitful and, probably, teeming with life.

Still wordless, too stirred to speak, they opened the vault-like door
and stepped out--into a humid heat which was like that of their own
tropical regions, but not so unendurable.

In their short stay on the moon, during which they had taken several
walks in their insulated suits, they had become somewhat accustomed to
the decreased weight of their bodies due to the lesser gravity, so
that here, where their weight was even less, they did not make any
blunders of stepping twenty feet instead of a yard.

Walking warily, glancing alertly in all directions to guard against
any strange animals that might rush out to destroy them, they moved
toward the nearest stretch of jungle.

       *       *       *       *       *

The first thing that arrested their attention was the size of the
trees they were approaching. They had got some idea of their hugeness
from the shell, but viewed from ground level they loomed even larger.
Eight hundred, a thousand feet they reared their mighty tops, with
trunks hundreds of feet in circumference; living pyramids whose bases
wove together to make an impenetrable ceiling over the jungle floor.
The leaves were thick and bloated like cactus growths, and their color
was a pronounced lavender.

"We must take back several of those leaves," said Wichter, his
scientific soul filled with cold excitement.

"I wish we could take back some of this air, too." Joyce filled his
lungs to capacity. "Isn't it great? Like wine! It almost counteracts
the effects of the heat."

"There's more oxygen in it than in our own," surmised Wichter. "My
God! What's that!"

They halted for an instant. From the depths of the lavender jungle had
come an ear shattering, screaming hiss, as though some monstrous
serpent were in its death agony.

They waited to hear if the noise would be repeated. It wasn't.
Dubiously they started on again.

"We'd better not go in there too far," said Joyce. "If we didn't come
out again it would cost Earth a new planet. No one else knows the
secret of your water-motor."

"Oh, nothing living can stand against these guns of ours," replied
Wichter confidently. "And that noise might not have been caused by
anything living. It might have been steam escaping from some volcanic
crevice."

They started cautiously down a well defined, hard packed trail through
thorny lavender underbrush. As they went, Joyce blazed marks on
various tree trunks marking the direction back to the shell. The tough
fibres exuded a bluish liquid from the cuts that bubbled slowly like
blood.

       *       *       *       *       *

To the right and left of them were cup-shaped bushes that looked like
traps; and that their looks were not deceiving was proved by a
muffled, bleating cry that rose from the compressed leaves of one of
them they passed. Sluggish, blind crawling things like three-foot
slugs flowed across their path and among the tree trunks, leaving
viscous trails of slime behind them. And there were larger things....

"Careful," said Wichter suddenly, coming to a halt and peering into
the gloom at their right.

"What did you see?" whispered Joyce.

Wichter shook his head. The gigantic, two-legged, purplish figure he
had dimly made out in the steamy dark, had moved away. "I don't know.
It looked a little like a giant ape."

They halted and took stock of their situation, mechanically wiping
perspiration from their streaming faces, and pondering as to whether
or not they should turn back. Joyce, who was far from being a coward,
thought they should.

"In this undergrowth," he pointed out, "we might be rushed before we
could even fire our guns. And we're nearly a mile from the shell."

But Wichter was like an eager child.

"We'll press on just a little," he urged. "To that clear spot in front
of us." He pointed along the trail to where sunlight was blazing down
through an opening in the trees. "As soon as we see what's there,
we'll go back."

With a shrug, Joyce followed the eager little man down the weird trail
under the lavender trees. In a few moments they had reached the
clearing which was Wichter's goal. They halted on its edge, gazing at
it with awe and repulsion.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was a circular quagmire of festering black mud about a hundred
yards across. Near at hand they could see the mud heaving, very
slowly, as though abysmal forms of life were tunneling along just
under the surface. They glanced toward the center of the bog, which
was occupied by one of the smooth black pools, and cried aloud at
what they saw.

At the brink of the pool was lying a gigantic creature like a great,
thick snake--a snake with a lizard's head, and a series of
many-jointed, scaled legs running down its powerful length. Its mouth
was gaping open to reveal hundreds of needle-sharp, backward pointing
teeth. Its legs and thick, stubbed tail were threshing feebly in the
mud as though it were in distress; and its eyes, so small as to be
invisible in its repulsive head, were glazed and dull.

"Was that what we heard back a ways?" wondered Joyce.

"Probably," said Wichter. His eyes shone as he gazed at the nightmare
shape. Impulsively he took a step toward the stirring mud.

"Don't be entirely insane," snapped Joyce, catching his arm.

"I must see it closer," said Wichter, tugging to be free.

"Then we'll climb a tree and look down on it. We'll probably be safer
up off the ground anyway."

       *       *       *       *       *

They ascended the nearest jungle giant--whose rubbery bark was so
ringed and scored as to be as easy to climb as a staircase--to the
first great bough, about fifty feet from the ground, and edged out
till they hung over the rim of the quagmire. From there, with the aid
of their binoculars, they expected to see the dying monster in every
detail. But when they looked toward the pool it was not in sight!

"Were we seeing things?" exclaimed Wichter, rubbing his glasses. "I'd
have sworn it was lying there!"

"It was," said Joyce grimly. "Look at the pool. That'll tell you where
it went."

The black, secretive surface was bubbling and waving as though, down
in its depths, a terrific fight were taking place.

"Something came up and dragged our ten-legged lizard down to its den.
Then that something's brothers got onto the fact that a feast was
being held, and rushed in. That pool would be no place for a
before-breakfast dip!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Wichter started to say something in reply, then gazed, hypnotized, at
the opposite wall of the jungle.

From the dense screen of lavender foliage stretched a glistening,
scale-armored neck, as thick as a man's body at its thinnest point,
which was just behind a tremendous-jawed crocodilian head. It tapered
back for a distance of at least thirty feet, to merge into a body as
big as that of a terrestial whale, that was supported by four squat,
ponderous legs.

Moving with surprising rapidity, the enormous thing slid into the mud
and began ploughing a way, belly deep, toward the pool. Shapeless,
slow-writhing forms were cast up in its wake, to quiver for a moment
in the sunlight and then melt below the mud again.

One of the bloated, formless mud-crawlers was snapped up in the huge
jaws with an abrupt plunge of the long neck, and the monster began to
feed, hog-like, slobbering over the loathsome carcass.

Wichter shook his head, half in fanatical eagerness, half in despair.
"I'd like to stay and see more," he said with a sigh, "but if that's
the kind of creatures we're apt to encounter in the Zeudian jungle,
we'd better be going at once--"

"Sh-h!" snapped Joyce. Then, in a barely audible whisper: "I think the
thing heard your voice!"

The monster had abruptly ceased its feeding. Its head, thrust high in
the air, was waving inquisitively from side to side. Suddenly it
expelled the air from its vast lungs in a roaring cough--and started
directly for their tree.

"Shoot!" cried Wichter, raising his gun.

       *       *       *       *       *

Moving with the speed of an express train, the monster had almost got
to their overhanging branch before they could pull the triggers. Both
shells imbedded themselves in the enormous chest, just as the long
neck reached up for them. And at once things began to happen with
cataclysmic rapidity.

Almost with their impact the shells exploded. The monster stopped,
with a great hole torn in its body. Then, dying on its feet, it thrust
its great head up and its huge jaws crunched over the branch to which
its two puny destroyers were clinging.

With all its dozens of tons of weight, it jerked in a gargantuan death
agony. The tree, enormous as it was, shook with it, and the branch
itself was tossed as though in a hurricane.

There was a splintering sound. Wichter and Joyce dropped their guns to
cling more tightly to the bole of the drooping branch that was their
only security. The guns glanced off the mountainous body--and, with a
last convulsion of the mighty legs, were swept underneath!

The monster was still at last, its insensate jaws yet gripping the
bough. The two men looked at each other in speechless consternation.
The shell a mile off through the dreadful jungle.... Themselves,
helpless without their guns....

"Well," said Joyce at last. "I guess we'd better be on our way.
Waiting here, thinking it over, won't help any. Lucky there's no
night, for a couple of weeks at least, to come stealing down on us."

       *       *       *       *       *

He started down the great trunk, with Wichter following close behind.
Walking as rapidly as they could, they hurried back along the tunneled
trail toward their shell.

They hadn't covered a hundred yards when they heard a mighty crashing
of underbrush behind them. Glancing back, they saw tooth-studded jaws
gaping cavernously at the end of a thirty-foot neck--little,
dead-looking eyes glaring at them--a hundred-foot body smashing its
way over the trap-bushes and through tangles of vines and
down-drooping branches.

"The mate to the thing we killed back there!" Joyce panted. "Run, for
God's sake!"

Wichter needed no urging. He hadn't an ounce of fear in his spare,
small body. But he had an overwhelming desire to get back to Earth and
deliver his message. He was trembling as he raced after Joyce, thirty
feet to a bound, ducking his head to avoid hitting the thick lavender
foliage that roofed the trail.

"One of us must get through!" he panted over and over. "One of us must
make it!"

It was speedily apparent that they could never outrun their pursuer.
The reaching jaws were only a few yards behind them now.

"You go," called Joyce, sobbing for breath. He slowed his pace
deliberately.

"No--you--" Wichter slowed too. In a frenzy, Joyce shoved him along
the trail.

"I tell you--"

He got no further. In front of them, where there had appeared to be
solid ground, they suddenly saw a yawning pit. Desperately, they tried
to veer aside, but they were too close. Their last long birdlike leap
carried them over the edge. They fell, far down, into a deep chasm,
splashing into a shallow pool of water.
