own Indians, when this band of strangers arrived.

Remembering my last conversation with Waboose, and being very curious to
know what were the contents of the mysterious packet she had mentioned,
I had gone to the camp to visit her, but, to my extreme regret, found
that Big Otter and several of the Indians had struck their tents and
gone off on a long hunting expedition, taking their families with them--
Waboose among the rest.

On finding, however, that strange Indians had arrived with a goodly
supply of furs to trade, thoughts of all other matters were driven out
of my mind, the depression of spirits fled, and a burst of enthusiasm
supervened as the thought occurred to me that now, at last, the great
object of our expedition was about to begin in earnest.  I verily
believe that the same spirit of enthusiasm, or satisfaction--call it
what you will--animated more or less every man at the fort.  Indeed, I
believe that it is always so in every condition of life; that men who
lay claim to even the smallest amount of spirit or self-respect,
experience a thrill of justifiable pride in performing their duty well,
and earning the approval of their official superiors.  My own thoughts,
if defined, would probably have amounted to this--

"Now then, here's a chance at last of driving a good trade, and we will
soon show the Governor and Council of the Fur-traders that they were
well advised when they selected John Lumley as the chief of this trading
expedition into the remote wilderness!"

"Come, Max," cried my friend, whom I met hastening to the store as I
arrived, "you're just in time.  Here's a big band of redskins with
splendid packs of furs.  I fear, however, that what is our gain will to
some extent be poor Macnab's loss, for they say they used to take their
furs to him in former years."

"But, then," said I, "will not the company gain the furs which used to
be damaged, and therefore lost, on the long voyage to Muskrat?  Besides,
the Indians will now be enabled to devote the time thus saved to hunting
and trapping, and that will also be clear gain."

We reached the store as I said this, followed by a dozen Indians with
large packs on their shoulders.  These were the chief men of the tribe,
who were to be attended to first.  The others, who had to await their
turn with what patience they could command, followed behind in a body to
gaze at least upon the outside of the store--that mysterious temple of
unknown wealth of which all of them had heard, though many of them had
never seen or entered one.

Putting a large key into the lock, Lumley turned it with all due
solemnity, for it was his plan among savages to make all acts of
importance as impressive as possible in their eyes.  And this act of
visiting for the first time the stores--the palace of wealth--the abode
of bliss--the red-man's haven of rest--was a very important act.  It may
not seem so to the reader, but it was so to the savage.  The very smell
of the place was to him delicious--and no wonder, for even to more
cultivated nostrils there is an odour about the contents of a
miscellaneous store--such as tea, molasses, grindstones, coffee, brown
paper, woollen cloths, sugar, fish-hooks, raisins, scalping-knives, and
soap--which is pleasantly suggestive.

Entering, then, with the dozen Indians, this important place, of which I
was the chief and only clerk, Lumley salesman and trader, and Salamander
warehouseman, the door was shut.  Becoming instantly aware of a sudden
diminution in the light, I looked at the windows and observed a
flattened brown nose, a painted face and glaring eyes in the centre of
nearly every pane!

When I looked at this band of powerful, lithe, wiry, covetous savages,
and thought of the hundreds of others whom they could summon by a single
war-whoop to their side, and of the smallness of our own party, I could
not help feeling that moral influence was a powerful factor in the
affairs of man.  No doubt they were restrained to some extent by the
certain knowledge that, if they attacked and killed us, and appropriated
our goods without the preliminary ceremony of barter, the white men
would not only decline to send them goods in future, but would organise
a force to hunt down and slay the murderers: nevertheless, savages are
not much given to prudential reasoning when their cupidity or passions
are roused, and I cannot help thinking that we owed our safety, under
God, to the belief in the savage mind that men who put themselves so
completely in their power, as we did, and who looked so unsuspicious of
evil, _must_ somehow be invulnerable.

Be that as it may, we calmly acted as if there could be no question at
all about our being their masters.  Lumley conveyed that impression,
however, without the slightest assumption of dignity.  He was all
kindness, gentleness, and urbanity, yet treated them with that
unassertive firmness which a father exercises--or ought to exercise--
towards a child.

"Now then, Salamander," said Lumley, when he was inside the counter, and
the Indians stood in a group on the other side, "tell the principal
chief to open his pack."

Lumley, I may remark, made use of Salamander as an interpreter, until he
found that the dialect of those Indians was not very different from that
to which he had been accustomed.  Then he dispensed with his services,
and took up the conversation himself, to the obvious astonishment as
well as respect of the Indians, who seemed to think the white chief had
actually picked up a new language after listening to it for only half an
hour!

The principal chief opened his pack slowly and spread its contents on
the counter with care.  He did not hurry himself, being a very dignified
man.  There were beavers, martens, otters, silver-foxes, and many other
valuable furs, for which large sums are given in the European markets.
To obtain these, however, the Company of Traders had to expend very
large sums in transporting goods into those northern wilds, and still
larger sums would have to be paid to voyageurs, clerks, and employes
generally, as well as risks run and time spent before these furs could
be conveyed to market and turned into gold--hence our red chief had to
content himself with moderate prices.  These prices, moreover, he did
not himself put on his furs.  Lumley did that for him, according to the
tariff used by the fur-traders all over the country, every article being
rated at a standard unit of value, styled a "made-beaver" in some parts
of the country--a "castore" in other parts.  On the counter was marked,
with a piece of chalk, the value of each fur--a beaver was valued at so
many castores, according to its quality, a fox at so many--and when the
sum was added up, the total was made known by a number of goose-quills
being presented to the chief, each quill representing a castore.  The
Indians, being acquainted with this process, did not require to have it
explained.

Profoundly did that chief gaze at his bundle of quills on receiving them
from Lumley after Salamander had swept his furs into a corner.  He was
studying, as it were, the credit balance of his bank-account before
investing.

"Now then, chief," asked Lumley, with an urbane expression of
countenance, "what shall I give you?"

The chief gazed solemnly round the store with his piercing black eyes,
while all the other piercing black eyes around gazed at him expectantly!
At last his gaze became riveted on a particular spot.  The surrounding
black eyes turned to that spot intently, and the chief said:

"_Baskisigan_."

"Ah, I thought so--a gun?" said Lumley; "hand one over, Salamander."

The interpreter went to a box which contained half a dozen of the common
cheap articles which were supplied for the trade.  Long,
single-barrelled affairs they were, the barrels of blue metal, stocks
extending to the muzzles and stained red, brass mountings of toy-like
flimsiness, and flint-locks; the entire gun being worth something less
than a pound sterling.  These weapons were capable, nevertheless, of
shooting pretty straight, though uncomfortably apt to burst.

One having been handed to the chief he received it with a grasp of
almost reverential affection, while Lumley extracted from his funds the
requisite number of quills in payment.

"What next?" asked Salamander, and again the solemn gaze went slowly
round the store, on the shelves of which our goods were displayed most
temptingly.  Black eyes riveted once more!  What is it?

"A green blanket."

"Just so.  Fetch a four-point one, Max, he's a big man."

I took up one of our largest-sized thick green blankets, handed it to
the chief, and Lumley abstracted a few more quills from the bundle.

At this point the red-man seemed to get into the swing of the thing, for
a white blanket of medium size, and another of very small dimensions,
were demanded.  These represented wife and infant.  After this a tin
kettle and a roll of tobacco were purchased.  The chief paused here,
however, to ponder and count his quills.

"Do you observe," said Lumley to me, in a low voice, "what a
well-balanced mind he has?"

"I can't say that I do, Lumley."

"No?  Don't you see; first a gun--self-and-family-preservation being the
first law of nature; then, after thus providing for war and hunting,
comes repose, d'you see? a big blanket, which immediately suggests
similar comfort to the squaw, a smaller blanket; then comes comfort to
the baby, a miniature blanket; then, how naturally the squaw and the
squawker conduct his mind to food--a tin kettle! after which he feels
justified in refreshing himself with a slight luxury--tobacco!  But
you'll see that he will soon repress self, with Indian stoicism, and
return to essentials."

Lumley was right for he had barely ceased to speak, when the chief
turned and demanded an axe; then fish-hooks; then twine for lines; then
awls for boring holes in the bark with which he made his canoes; then
powder and shot and pipes.  After this, another fit of tenderness came
over him, and he bought some bright scarlet and blue cloth--doubtless
for the squaw or the baby--and some brilliantly coloured silk thread
with needles and variegated beads to ornament the same.  Soon his quills
dwindled away till at last they disappeared; yet his wants were not
fully supplied--would the pale-face chief advance him some goods on
credit?

Oh yes--he seemed a good and trustworthy brave--the pale-face chief had
no objection to do that!

Accordingly I opened a ledger and inserted the man's name.  It was
almost Welsh-like in difficulty of pronunciation, but, unlike a
Welshman, I spelt it as pronounced, and set down in order the additional
goods he required.  When Lumley thought he had given him enough on
credit, he firmly closed the account, gave the man a small gratuity of
tobacco, powder and shot, etcetera, and bade another chief come forward.

It was slow but interesting work, for, as the Indians grew familiar with
the place and our ways, those of them who were loquacious, or possessed
of humour, began to chat and comment on the goods, and on the white
man's doings in a way that was very diverting.

After the chief men had traded their furs, the rank and file of the band
came on, and, as is the case with all rank and file, there were some
indifferent, and a few bad characters among them.  It was now that I
observed and admired the tact, combined with firmness, of Lumley.  He
spoke to these Indians with exactly the same respect and suavity that
had characterised him when trading with the chiefs.  When he saw any one
become puzzled or undecided, he suggested or quietly advised.  If a
man's eye appeared to twinkle he cut a mild joke with him.  If one
became too familiar, or seemed disposed to be insolent he took no
notice, but turned aside and busied himself in arranging the goods.

At last, however, an incident occurred which called for different
treatment.  There was among the Indians a long-legged, wiry fellow who
had been named Attick, or Reindeer, because he was a celebrated runner.
Those who disliked him--and they were numerous--said he was good at
running away from his foes.  However that might be, he was undoubtedly
dexterous in the use of his fingers--and it was through this propensity
that we were first introduced to him.  It happened thus:

Lumley, whose powers of observation often surprised me, had noticed that
Attick looked often and with longing eyes at a very small roll of
tobacco which belonged to one of his comrades, and lay on the counter
temptingly near at hand.  Slowly, and, as it were, inadvertently, he
advanced his hand until it touched the tobacco, then, laying hold on it,
when the owner was busy with something else, he carried it towards the
bosom of his leather hunting-shirt.  Before it reached that place of
concealment, however, Lumley quickly, yet so quietly that the act was
scarce perceived, seized the elbow of the chief and gave him a look.
Attick promptly put the tobacco down and looked at Lumley with a scowl,
but the pale-face chief was smilingly giving some advice to the man,
with whom he was trading.

He thought that the man would not attempt anything more of a similar
kind, at least at that time, but he was mistaken.  He under-estimated
the force of covetousness and the power of temptation in a savage.  Soon
afterwards he saw Attick deftly pass a packet of bright beads, belonging
to another comrade, from the counter to his breast, where he let it
remain, grasped in his hand.  Immediately afterwards the owner of the
beads missed them.  He turned over his goods hastily, but could not find
the packet and looked suspiciously at Salamander, who had been standing
near all the time, besides fingering the things occasionally.

"A comrade has stolen it," said Lumley, in a quiet voice and without
looking at any one save the robbed man.

This was received with scowls and strong marks of disapprobation.

"Not so!  The interpreter, the pale-face, has stolen it," returned the
Indian fiercely.

Instead of replying, Lumley vaulted lightly over the counter, stood
before the astonished Attick, thrust his hand into the bosom of that
savage, and, by main force, dragged forth the thieving fist still closed
over the missing packet.  The Indians were too much taken by surprise at
the promptness of the act to speak--they could only glare.

"My friends," said Lumley, still maintaining, however, something of
kindliness in his look of stern gravity, "the Great Master of Life does
not love thieving, and no thief will be permitted to enter this store."

What more he would have said I know not for, swift as lightning, Attick
drew his knife and made a plunge at my friend's heart.  Expecting a
scuffle, I had also leaped the counter.  Lumley caught the wrist of the
savage; at the same time he exclaimed, "Open the door, Max."

I obeyed, expecting to see the Indian kicked out, but I was wrong, for
my friend, with a sharp twist turned Attick's back to his own breast,
then, seizing him by both elbows, he lifted him off his feet as if he
had been a mere infant, carried him forward a few paces, and set him
gently down outside.  Then, stepping back, he shut the door.

A roar of laughter from those without showed the light in which they
viewed the incident, and the amused looks of some of those in the store
told that at least they did not disapprove of the act.

Without paying any regard to these things, however, Lumley returned to
his place, and with his usual air of good humour continued to barter
with the red-men.

Thus the work of trading went on for three days, and, during that time,
there was much fraternising of what I may call our home--Indians with
the newcomers, and a great deal, I regret to say, of gambling.  We found
that this evil prevailed to a great extent among them, insomuch that one
or two of them gambled away all that they possessed, and came to us with
very penitent looks, asking for a small quantity of goods on credit to
enable them to face the winter!

I need scarcely say that our amiable chief complied with these requests,
but only on the solemn promise that the goods so advanced should not be
risked in gambling, and I have reason to believe that these men were
faithful to their promises.  This gambling was of the simplest kind,
consisting of the method which is known by the name of "odd or even?"

In the evenings the chiefs were encouraged to come into our hall and
palaver.  They availed themselves of the invitation to come, and
sometimes palavered, but more frequently smoked, with owlish solemnity,
squatting on the floor with their backs against the wall.

Nevertheless, on these occasions we gained a good deal of information,
and Lumley availed himself of the opportunities sometimes to lecture
them on the sin of gambling.  He always, I observed, laid much more
stress on the idea that the Great Master of Life was grieved with His
children when they did evil, than that He visited the sin with
disagreeable consequences.  On one of these occasions an elderly chief
surprised us by suddenly putting the question, "Do the pale-faces trade
fire-water?"

Every pipe was removed from every lip, and the glittering eyes of
expectancy, coupled with the all but total cessation of breathing, told
of the intense interest with which they awaited the answer.

"No," replied Lumley, "we sell none.  We do not love fire-water."

A deep but quiet sigh followed, and the pipes were resumed in silent
resignation.  And, I must add, I felt devoutly thankful that we did
_not_ sell fire-water, when I looked at the strong features and powerful
frames of the red-men around me.



CHAPTER FIFTEEN.

A CATASTROPHE, A LETTER, AND A SURPRISE.

Autumn at length gradually drew to a close, and we began to make
preparations for the long winter that lay before us.

Our saw-mill, having been repaired and improved, had worked so well that
we had cut a considerable quantity of planks, as well for the boats
which we intended to build as for the houses.  It was fortunate that
this had been accomplished before the occurrence of an event which put
an effectual stop to that branch of our industries.  It happened thus:

One afternoon the fine weather which we had been enjoying so long gave
place to boisterous winds and deluges of rain, confining us all to the
fort and making us feel slightly miserable.

"But we mustn't grumble, Max," said Lumley to me, as we looked out of
our small windows.  "We must take the evil with the good as it comes,
and be thankful."

"Please, I wasn't grumbling," said I, sharply.

"No?  I thought you were."

"No, I was not.  It must have been internal grumbling by yourself that
you heard," I retorted, sauntering back to the fire, which by that time
we had begun to light daily.

"I daresay you're right, Max; it has often struck me as a curious fact
that, when one is cross or grumpy, he is apt to think all the rest of
the world is also cross or grumpy.  By the way, that reminds me--though
I don't see why it should remind me, seeing that the two things have no
connection--that Coppet came to me last night saying he had discovered a
slight leak in the dam.  We'd better look to it now, as the rain seems
to have moderated a little."
