
"But good heavens!" exclaimed Elwood, who had not entirely recovered
from his excitement, "the land is miles off, and we can't swim there,
not taking into account the heavy sea."

"What does that mean?"

As Howard spoke, the bow of the steamer made a sweeping bend to the
right.

"They've headed toward shore," said Elwood.

This snatch of conversation had occupied the shortest possible space of
time. The fire had been discovered by the officials on board fully as
soon as by our friends, and the men could be seen running hurriedly to
and fro, all quiet and still, for they knew too well what the result
would be if the alarm was communicated to the sleeping passengers. The
pilot had headed the vast craft toward land, and by the furious
throbbing of the engines it could be seen that the doomed vessel was
straining to the utmost, like some affrighted, faithful horse striving
to carry his master as nearly as possible to the port of safely ere he
dropped down and died.

It was fully midnight, and, as a matter of course, very nearly all the
passengers were in their berths. There were a few, however, who were
lingering on the promenade deck, some smoking--here and there a couple
of lovers all unconscious of everything else--one or two avaricious
speculators; and but a few minutes could elapse before the startling
danger should become known.

The last words, which we have given as spoken by our friends, had
scarcely been said, when a man, who apparently had been stretched out
sound asleep, suddenly sprung up, wild with terror. "The boat is on
fire! _fire! fire_!"

He darted hither and thither like some wild animal compassed on every
hand by death, and then suddenly made a leap overboard, and was
swallowed up in the sea.

The alarm spread with fearful rapidity, and was soon ringing through
every part of the steamer, and now began that fearful confusion and
panic which no pen can clearly picture, and which, once seen, can never
be forgotten to the dying day.

Our three friends were gathered at the stern of the steamer, earnestly
and anxiously discussing the best course to pursue.

"Let's stay here," said Howard, "for every second is taking us nearer
land."

"That is what nearly all will do," said Elwood, "but we can never reach
the shore, and when the time comes we shall all be in the sea together,
struggling and sinking, and we shall then be sure to go down."

"Yez are right," said Tim, addressing the last speaker. "Our only chance
is to jump overboard this very minute, before the sea is full of the
poor fellows. They'll begin to go over the ship's side and will kaap it
up until the thing is burned up."

"It's time then that we hunted our life-preservers," said Howard.

"Git out wid yer life-presarvers!" impatiently exclaimed Tim. "Didn't me
uncle wear one of 'em for six months, and then die with the faver! I'll
heave over one of these settaas, and that'll kaap up afloat."

"Be quick about it, Tim," urged Elwood, who was beginning to get
nervous. "See, the fire is spreading, and everybody seems to have found
out what the matter is."

There was indeed no time to be lost. The steamer was doomed beyond all
possibility of salvation, and must soon become unmanageable, when
everything would be turned into a pandemonium. One of the large settees
was wrenched loose and lifted over the stern of the steamer.

"Now," said Tim, "the minute it goes over yez must follow. The owld
staamer is going like a straak of lightning, and if aither of yez wait,
he'll be lift behind."

"All right, no danger, go ahead!"

They now clambered up, and sat poised on the stern. In this fearful
position Tim O'Rooney held the settee balanced for a few minutes.

"Be yez riddy?"

"Yes."

"Do yez jump a little to the right, Elwood, and yez a little to the
left, Howard, so as not to hit the owld thing. All riddy; here we go!"

The next moment the three were spinning down through the air, and struck
the water. They went below the surface, the boys sinking quite a
distance; but almost instantly they arose and struck bravely out.

"Tim, where are you?" called out Elwood, not seeing his friend.

"Here, to the left," responded the Irishman, as he rose on a huge swell.
"Can ye swim to me?"

"I hope so, but my clothes bother me like creation."

Strange! that not one of the three had once thought of removing their
superfluous clothing before jumping into the ocean. But Elwood was a
fine swimmer, and he struggled bravely, although at a great
disadvantage, until his outstretched hand was seized by the Irishman,
and he then caught hold of the settee and rested himself.

"Where is Howard?" he asked, panting from his exertions.

"Here he is," responded Howard himself. "I struck the water so close
that when I came up my hand hit the settee."

"I tell you what it is," said Elwood. "We ought to have brought
something else with us beside this. We have got to keep all of our
bodies underwater for this to bear us."

"And what of it?"

"Suppose some poor fellow claims a part. Gracious! here comes a man this
minute!"

"We can't turn him off," said Tim, "but this owld horse has all the
grist he can carry."

A dark body could be seen struggling and rapidly approaching them.

"Whoever he is, he is a good swimmer," remarked Howard, watching the
stranger.

"Of course he is, for it comes natural; don't you see it isn't a man,
but old Terror."

"Thank heaven for that! we never thought about him. I am glad he is with
us."

The next moment the Newfoundland placed his paw on the settee and gave a
low bark to announce his joy at being among his friends. The sagacious
brute seemed to understand how frail the tenure was that held them all
suspended over eternity; for he did nothing more than rest the top of
his paw on the precious raft.




CHAPTER IV.

A PASSENGER.


By this time our friends were a quarter of a mile in the rear of the
burning steamer. The furious pulsations of the engines had stopped, and
from stern to stern the great ship was one mass of soothing flame. The
light threw a glare upon the clouds above, and made it so bright where
our friends were floating in the water that they could have read the
pages of a printed book. The illumination must have been seen for many
and many a mile in every direction upon the Pacific.

"Yes, the steamer has stopped," said Howard; "the fire has reached the
engines, and now they must do as we have done."

"But they have boats and may escape."

"Not half enough of them; and then what they have got will be seized by
the crew, as they always do at such times."

"Look! you can see them jumping over. The poor wretches hang fast till
they are so scorched that they have to let go."

"It's mighty lucky yees are here," said Tim, "for every mother's son
that can swim will be hugged by a half-dozen that can't, which would be
bad for me."

"Why so; can't you swim?"

"Not a bit of it."

"And nothing but this bench to keep us from sinking."

"And be the same towken isn't that good enough, if it only kaaps us
afloat? Can't ye be satisfied?"

"Look! how grand!"

It was indeed a fearful sight, the steamer being one pyramid of roaring,
blazing fire, sweeping upward in great fan-like rifts, then blowing
outward, horizontally across the deep, as if greedy for the poor beings
who had sprung in agony from its embrace. Millions of sparks were
floating and drifting overhead and falling all around. The shrieks of
the despairing passengers, as with their clothes all aflame they sprung
blindly into the ocean, could be heard by our friends, and must indeed
have extended a far greater distance.

For an hour the conflagration raged with apparently unabated violence,
the wreck drifting quite rapidly; but the fire soon tired of its work,
large pieces of burning timber could be seen floating in the water, and
finally the charred hull made a plunge downward into the sea, and our
friends were left alone upon their frail support.

"Now, it's time to decide what we are going to do," said Howard.

"You are right, and what shall it be? Shall we drift about here until
morning, when some vessel will pick us up? I have no doubt this fire has
drawn a half-dozen toward it."

"No; let's make for shore."

"That is the best plan," said Tim.

"But it is a good way off," remarked Howard; "and I have little hope of
reaching it."

"Never mind; it, will keep us busy, and that will make the time pass
faster than if we do nothing but float."

"We may need our strength; but it is the best plan."

"But do we know the direction?"

"I can tell you that," said Elwood; "for the moon was directly over the
shore; so all we've got to do is to aim for the moon."

"Begorrah! we can walk and talk, as the owld lady said when her husband
stopped on the way to the gallows to bid her good-by. So paddle away!"

It being a warm summer night, the water was quite pleasant, although our
friends were sure to get enough of it long before they could hope to
place their feet upon the earth. Having now an object, they began
working with a will, the boys swimming as lustily as possible straight
for the shore, while Tim assisted materially in pushing forward the
craft.

The intelligent Newfoundland appeared to comprehend what was wanted, and
contributed not a little to the momentum.

"Do you think we are making any progress----"

"O, save me! save me! I'm drowning!"

The voice sounded close by them, and caused an involuntary start from
all three.

"Where is he?" asked Howard, in a terrified whisper.

"There!"

At that moment they caught sight of a man fiercely buffeting the waves,
as he rose on an immense swell, and then sunk down again in the trough
of the sea.

"Can we do anything for him?" asked Elwood. "It's too bad to see the
poor fellow sink when we may save him."

"I'm afeared the owld bench won't bear another hand on it."

But Terror had heard that cry and anticipated the wishes of his friends.
Leaving them with their raft, he struck powerfully out toward the
drowning man, and they both went down in the vast sea chasm together.
When they came in view again upon the crest of the swell, the
Newfoundland had the hair of the man's head in his teeth and had begun
his return. A moment later the gasping man threw out his hands and
caught the settee with such eagerness that it instantly sunk.

"Be careful!" admonished Howard, "or you'll drown us all. One of us
can't swim!"

"Won't your raft bear us?"

"Yes, if you keep only your head above water and bear very lightly upon
it. Don't attempt to rise up."

"All right!"

The buoyant raft came to the surface, and was instantly grasped firmly
but carefully by all. Poor Tim O'Rooney had come very near drowning. A
man when suddenly cast into the water for the first time has been known
to swim long and well; and the Irishman, by the most furious effort, had
saved himself from strangling and sinking, although he had swallowed a
good deal of the nauseating sea-water, and was now ejecting it.

"Worrah! I took an overdose that time, and it wouldn't sthay on my
stomach!" he said. "I'm thinking there'll be no necessity of me
swallowing any salts for some time to coom, be the towken that I've
enough to last me me life-time."

"We are all right now!" said the stranger. "I can swim, but I was just
about used up when your dog took me in tow. May I inquire who my friends
are?"

Howard gave their names and destination, and he instantly said:

"My name is Manuel Yard, and my place of business is next door to that
of your fathers."

"You know them then."

"I have known them both very well for years, and now that you have given
me your names I remember you both."

After a few more words, our friends recognized him as a tall,
pale-looking man, with whom they had exchanged greetings more than once
on their passage from Panama.

"I've been down to the Isthmus," he added, "and was on my way home when
the steamer took fire."

"Where were you when you heard the alarm?"

"Sound asleep in my berth; I had no time even to put on my clothes; but,
thank God, if I can escape in any way."

"Stick to us, and help shove this craft, and I'm in hopes we'll fetch up
somewhere by morning."




CHAPTER V.

LAND.


Under the united propulsion of three men and a large Newfoundland dog,
the small raft moved shoreward with no insignificant speed. It was found
amply sufficient to preserve them all from drowning had none known how
to swim, provided they managed the matter prudently. There is so little
difference in the quantity of water and the human body, that a slight
effort, if properly made, will keep it afloat. The trouble with new
beginners is that when they first go beyond their depth their blind
struggles tend to carry them downward more than upward.

"This is rather pleasant," remarked Mr. Yard. "There is little doubt, I
think, of reaching land. There is only one thing that makes the shivers
run over me."

"What is that?"

"The thought of _sharks_!"

"Ugh! Why did you spake of them?" asked Tim, with a strong expression of
disgust. "I've been thinking of 'em ever since I've been in the water,
but I didn't want to skeer the boys."

"They never once entered my head," said Howard.

"Nor mine either," added Elwood. "Are they in this part of the ocean?"

"You will find them in almost every part of the sea, I was going to say.
They abound off the coast of California."

"But it is night, and they will not be apt to see!"

"This fire and the numbers of drowning people will draw hundreds of the
finny inhabitants toward us. You know a fire at night is sure to attract
fish."

"You seem determined to frighten us," said Howard, "but I shall continue
to think that God who has so mercifully saved us intends to save us to
the end."

"Perhaps so, too, but it does no harm to understand all the dangers to
which we are subject."

"I believe with Howard," said Elwood. "I ain't afraid of sharks, but for
all that, they are ugly creatures. They swim under you and the first
thing you know clip goes one of your legs off, just the same as a pair
of snuffers would clip off a piece of wick."

"They are the hyenas of the sea," said Howard, "although I believe some
kinds are stupid and harmless. I think I have heard them called that by
somebody, I don't remember who. They will snap up anything that is
thrown to them."

"Wouldn't it make their eyes water to come this way then? Jis' to think
of their saaing four pair of legs dancing over their hids, not to spake
of the dog that could come in by way of dessart."

"O Tim! keep still, it is too dreadful!"

"Worrah! it wasn't meself that introduced the subject, but as yez have
got started, I've no objection to continue the same."

"Let us try and talk about something more pleasant----"

"A shark! a shark!" suddenly screamed Elwood, springing half his length
out of the water in his excitement.

"Where?" demanded Mr. Yard, while the others were speechless with
terror.

"He has hold of my leg! O, save me, for he is pulling me under!"

There was danger for a moment that all would go to the bottom, but Mr.
Yard displayed a remarkable coolness that saved them all.

"It is not a shark," said he, "or he would have had your leg off before
this."

"What is it then? What can it be?"

"It is a drowning man that has caught your foot as he was going down.
You must kick him off or he will drown you. Has he one foot or both?"

"My left ankle is grasped by something."

"That is good; if he had hold of both feet it would be bad for you. Use
your free foot and force his grasp loose."

Elwood did so with such vigor that he soon had the inexpressible relief
of announcing that the drag weight was loosed and his limbs were free
again.

"That is terrible," said he, as they resumed their progress. "Just to
think of being seized in that way by some poor fellow who, I don't
suppose, really knew what he was doing."

"How came he there?" asked Howard.

"You see, we ain't far from where the steamer sunk, and there may be
more near us. This man has gone down just as we were passing by him, and
in his blind struggles has caught your ankle."

"If a drowning man will catch at a straw, wouldn't he be after catching
at a leg?" inquired Tim.

"It seems natural that he should do so; but we are in the most dangerous
place we could be. Let's keep a sharp lookout."
