
Her answering laugh, though shaky, was sane enough.

"I do pick the wrong times to display my sense of humor, don't I? Val,
is it so very bad?"

Something within him crumbled at that question.

"Not so good, Lady," he replied in spite of the resolutions he had made.

She brushed back the hair glued by perspiration to his forehead. Ricky
was not gold, he thought, for gold is a rather dirty thing. But she was
all steel, as clean and shining as a blade fresh from the hands of a
master armorer. He made a great effort and found that he could move his
right arm an inch or two. Concentrating all his strength there, he
wriggled it back and forth until he could draw it free from the
wreckage. But his left shoulder and side were numb save for the pain
which came and went.

"Got my arm free," Val told her exultantly and reached up to feel for
her in the dark. His fingers closed upon coarse cloth. He pulled feebly
and something rolled toward him.

"What's this?"

Ricky's hands slid along his arm to the thing he had found. He could
hear her exploring movements.

"It's some sort of a bundle. I wonder where it came from."

"Some more remains of the jolly pirate days, I suppose."

"Here's something else. A bag, I think. Ugh! It smells nasty! There's a
hole in it--Oh, here's a piece of money. At least it feels like money.
There's more in the bag." She pressed a disk about as large as a
half-dollar into Val's palm.

"Pirate loot--" he began. Anything that would keep them from thinking of
where they were and what had happened was to be welcomed.

"Val"--he could hear her move uneasily--"remember that old saying:
'Pieces of eight--Ralestones' fate?"

"All good families have curses," he reminded her.

"And good families can have--can have accidents, too."

There could be no answer to that. Nor did Val feel like answering. The
savage pain in his legs and back had given way to a kind of numbness. A
chill not caused by the dank air crawled up his body. What--what if his
injuries were worse than he had thought? What if--if--

The dripping of the water seemed louder, and it no longer fell with the
same rhythm. Ricky must be counting money from the bag. He could hear
the clink of metal against stone as she dropped a piece.

"Don't lose it," he muttered foggily.

"Lose what?"

"Your pieces of eight."

"What do you mean?"

"You just dropped a piece."

"I haven't touched--Val, do--do you feel worse?"

But he had no thought now for his body. If Ricky had not dropped the
money, then what had caused the clink? He ground his cheek against the
clay. _Thud, thud, clink, thud._ That was not water dripping nor coin
rattling. That was the sound of digging. And digging meant--

"Ricky! They're digging! I can hear them!"

Her fingers closed about his free hand until the nails dug into the
flesh. "Where?"

"I don't know. Listen!"

The sound had grown in strength until now, though muffled, it sounded
through that part of the passage still remaining open.

"It comes from this end. From behind that wall. But why should it come
from there?"

"Does it matter? Val, do you suppose they could hear me if I pounded on
the wall at this side?"

"You haven't anything heavy enough to pound with."

"Yes, I have. This package thing that you found. It's quite heavy. Val,
we've got to let them know we're here!"

She crawled away, moving with caution lest she bring on another slide.
That reassuring _thud, thud_ still sounded. Then, after long minutes,
Val heard the answering blow from their side. Three times Ricky struck
before the rhythm of the digging was broken. Then there was silence
followed by three sharp blows. They had heard!

Ricky beat a perfect tattoo in joy and was quickly answered. Then the
_thud, thud_ began again, but this time the pace was quickened.

"They've heard! They're coming!" Ricky's voice shrilled until it became
a scream. "Val, we're found!"

A clod was loosened somewhere above them and crashed upon the wreckage.
Would the efforts of their rescuers bring on another slide?

"Be quiet, Ricky," Val croaked a warning, "it's still moving."

Then there came the sharp clink of metal against stone. "Val," called
Ricky, "they're right against the wall now!"

"Come back here, away from it. We--we don't want you caught, too," he
answered her.

Obediently she crawled back to him and again he felt her hand close
about his. The sound of metal grating against stubborn brick filled
their pocket of safety. But as an ominous accompaniment came the soft
hiss of earth sliding onto the wreckage. Which would win to them first,
the rescuers or the second slide?

There was a vicious grinding noise from the walled end of the passage. A
moment later a blinding ray of light swung in, to focus upon them.

"Ricky! Val!"

Val was blinking stupidly at the light, but Ricky had presence of mind
enough to answer.

"Here we are!"

"Look out," Val roused enough to warn, "the walls are unsafe!"

"We're coming through," rang the answer out of the dark. "Stand away!"

Now that they could see, Val realized for the first time the danger of
their position. A jagged, water-rotted beam half covered with clay and
sand lay across him, and beyond that was a mass of splintered wood and
wet earth. A little sick, he looked up at Ricky. She was staring at the
wreckage. Her eyes were black in a white, mud-smeared face.

"Val--Val!" His name came as the thinnest of whispers.

"It isn't as bad as it looks," he said hurriedly. "Something underneath
must be supporting most of the weight or--or I wouldn't be here at all."

"Val," she repeated, and then, paying no heed to his frantic injunctions
to keep away, she dug at earth and rotten wood with her hands. Using the
long bundle clumsily wrapped in stained canvas, she levered a piece of
beam out of the way so that she might get down on her knees and scoop up
the sand and clay.

"Ricky! Val!" The light swung ahead as someone scrambled through the
hole in the barrier wall. Then, when the ray held firm upon them, the
headlong rush was checked for a long instant. "Val!"

"Get her--away," he begged. "Another--slip--"

But before he had done, a long arm gathered Ricky up as if she had been
a child. "Right," came the firm answer. "Sam, take Miss 'Chanda back.
Then--"

Val was watching the reflection of the flash on the broken roof above
him. Sand slid in tiny streams down the wall, mingling with the greenish
trickles of water. There were queer blue and green arcs painted on the
brick which had something to do with the hot pain behind his eyes. The
blue turned to orange--to scarlet--

"Careful! Right here in the hall, Holmes--"

The broken earth above him had somehow been changed to a high ceiling,
the chill darkness to blazing light and warmth.

"Ricky?" he asked.

"Here, Val." Her face was very close to his.

"You--are--all--right?"

"'Course!" But she was crying. "Don't try to talk, Val. You must be
quiet."

He heard someone moving toward them but he kept his eyes on Ricky's
face. "We did it!"

"Yes," she answered slowly, "we did it."

"Val, don't try to talk." Rupert's face showed above Ricky's hunched
shoulder. There was an odd, strained look about his mouth, a smear of
mud across his cheek. But the harsh tone of his voice struck his brother
as dumb as if he had slapped him.

"Sorry," Val shaped the words stiffly, "all my fault."

"Nothing's your fault," Ricky's indignant answer cut in. "But--but just
be quiet, Val, until the doctor comes."

He turned his head slowly. On the hearth-stone stood Charity talking
quietly to Holmes. Just within the circle of the firelight lay a bundle
which he had seen before. But of course, that was the thing they had
found in the passage, which Ricky had used to pound out their answer to
Rupert.

"Ricky--" Val always believed that it was some instinct out of the past
which forced that whisper out of him--"Ricky, open that package."

"Why--" she began, but then she got to her feet and went to the bundle,
twisting the tarred rope that fastened it in a vain attempt to undo the
intricate knots. It was Holmes who produced a knife and sawed through
the tough cord. And it was Holmes who unrolled the strips of canvas,
oil-silk, and greasy skins. But it was Ricky who took up what lay within
and held it out so that it reflected both red firelight and golden room
light.

Her brother's sigh was one of satisfaction.

For Ricky held aloft by its ponderous hilt a great war sword. There
could be no doubt in any of them--the Luck of Lorne had returned.

[Illustration: _Ricky held aloft a great war sword. There could be no
doubt in any of them--the Luck of Lorne had returned._]

"We found it!" breathed Ricky.

"Put it in its place," Val ordered.

Without a word, Rupert drew out a chair and scrambled up. Taking from
Ricky's hands the ancient weapon, he slipped it into the niche their
pirate ancestor had made for it. In spite of the years underground, the
metal of hilt and blade was clear. Seven hundred years of history--their
Luck!

"Everything will come right again," Val repeated as Ricky came back to
him. "You'll see. Everything--will--be--all--right."

His eyes closed in spite of his efforts. He was back in the darkness
where he could only feel the warmth of Ricky's hands clasped about his.




CHAPTER XVI

RALESTONES STAND TOGETHER


"I like Louisiana," drawled Holmes lazily from his perch on the
window-seat. "The most improbable things happen here. One finds secret
passages under houses and medieval war swords stuck in drains. Then
there are 'things that go boomp in the night,' too. It might be worth
settling down here--"

"Not for you," cut in Charity briskly. "Too far from the bright lights
for you, my man."

"Just for that," he triumphed, "I shall not return this lost property
found under a cushion of the couch in the hall."

At the sight of that familiar black note-book, Val shifted uneasily on
his pillows. Rupert got up.

"Tired, old man?" he asked and reached to straighten one of his
brother's feather-stuffed supports.

Val shook his head. Being bandaged like a mummy was wearying, but one
had to humor two broken ribs and a fractured collar-bone.

"Sometimes," replied Charity, "you are just too clever, Mr. Judson
Holmes. That does not happen to be my property."

"No?" He flipped it open and held it up so that she might see what lay
within. "I'll admit that it isn't your usual sort of stuff, but--"

She was staring at the drawings. "No, that isn't mine. But who--"

Ricky got up from the end of Val's cot and went to look. Then she
turned, her eyes shining with excitement. "You're trying them again!
But, Val, you said you never would."

"Give me that book!" he ordered grimly. But Rupert had calmly collected
the trophy and was turning over the pages one by one. Val made a
horrible face at Ricky and resigned himself to the inevitable.

"How long have you been doing this sort of thing?" his brother asked as
he turned the last page.

"Ever so long," Ricky answered for Val brightly. "He used to draw whole
letters of them when we were at school. There were two sets, one for
good days and the other for bad."

"And now," Val cut in, "suppose we just forget the whole matter. Will
you please let me have that!"

"Rupert, don't let him go all modest on us now," urged the demon sister.
"One retiring violet in the family is enough."

"And who is the violet? Your charming self?" inquired Holmes.

"No." Ricky smiled pleasantly. "Only Mr. Creighton might be interested
in the contents of Bluebeard's Chamber. What do you think, Rupert?"

At that audacious hint, Val remembered the night of the storm and
Ricky's strange attitude then.

"So Rupert's the missing author," he commented lightly. "Well, well,
well."

Charity's indulgent smile faded, and Holmes, suddenly alert, leaned
forward. Rupert stared at Val for a long moment, his face blank. Was he
going to retire behind his wall of reserve from which their venture
underground had routed him? Or was he going to remain the very human
person who had spent eight hours of every day at his brother's beck and
call for the past few weeks?

"Regular Charlie Chan, aren't you?" he asked mildly.

Val's sigh of relief was echoed by Ricky. "Thanks--so much," Val replied
humbly in the well-known manner of the famous detective Rupert had
likened him to.

"Then we are right?" asked Ricky.

Rupert's eyebrows slid upward. "You seemed too sure to be in doubt," he
commented.

"Well, I was sure at times. But then no one can ever be really sure of
anything about you," she admitted frankly.

"But why--" protested Charity.

"Why didn't I spread the glad tidings that I was turning out the great
American novel?" he asked. "I don't know. Perhaps I am a violet--no?" He
looked pained at Ricky's snort of dissent. "Or perhaps I just don't like
to talk about things which may never come true. When I didn't hear from
Lever, I thought that my worst forebodings were realized and that my
scribbling was worthless. But you know," he paused to fill his pipe,
"writing is more or less like the drug habit. I've told stories all my
life, and I found myself tied to my typewriter in spite of my
disappointment. As for talking about it--well, how much has Val ever
said about these?" He ruffled the pages of the note-book provokingly.

"Nothing. And you would never have seen those if I could have prevented
it," his brother replied. "Those are for my private satisfaction only."

"Two geniuses in one family." Ricky rolled her eyes heavenward. "This is
almost too, too much!"

"Jeems," Val ordered, "you're the nearest. Can't you make her shut up?"

"Just let him try," said his sister sweetly. The swamper grinned but
made no move to stir from his chair.

Jeems had become as much a part of Pirate's Haven as the Luck, which Val
could see from his cot glimmering dully in its niche in the Long Hall.
The swamper's confinement in the sick-room had paled his heavy tan and
he had lost the sullen frown which had made him appear so old and
bitter. Now, dressed in a pair of Val's white slacks and a shirt from
his wardrobe, Jeems was as much at ease in his surroundings as Rupert or
Holmes.

It had been Jeems who had saved Ricky and Val on that night of terror
when they had been trapped in the secret ways of their pirate ancestors.
Sam Two had trailed Ricky to the garden and had witnessed their entering
the tunnel. But his racial fear of the dark unknown had kept him from
venturing in after them. So he had lingered there long enough to see the
invaders come out and take to the river. Catching some words of theirs
about a cave-in, he had gone pelting off to Rupert with the story.

The investigating party from the levee had discovered, to their horror,
the passage choked for half its length. They were making a futile and
dangerous attempt to clear it when Jeems appeared on the scene.
Letty-Lou having given him a garbled account of events, he had staggered
from his bed in an effort to reach Rupert. He alone knew the underground
ways as well as he knew the garden. And so once getting Rupert's
attention, he had set them to work in the cellar cutting through to the
one passage which paralleled the foundation walls.

In the weeks which followed their emergence from the threatened tomb,
the swamper had unobtrusively slipped into a place in the household.
While Val was frightening his family by indulging in a bout of fever to
complicate his injuries, Jeems was proving himself a tower of strength
and a person to be relied upon. Even Lucy had once asked his opinion on
the importance of a fire in the hall, and with that his position was
assured.

Of the invaders they had heard or seen no more, although the police had
visited Pirate's Haven on two separate occasions, interviewing each and
every member of the household. They had also made a half-hearted attempt
to search the swamp. But for all the evidence they found, Ricky and Val
might have been merely indulging in an over-vivid dream. Save that the
Luck hung again in the Long Hall.

"Seriously, though," Holmes drew Val's thoughts out of the past, "these
are worth-while. Would you mind if I showed them to a friend of mine who
might be interested?"

Since Rupert had already nodded and Charity had handed him the
note-book, Val decided that he could hardly raise a protest.
