field beyond were Adam and Athalia. By the trimming on the blue dress
she wore, he could see that she was still in the Fourth Dimension, for
he did not see her as a mirror image.

A look of fear leaped to Eve's face. She clutched Northwood's arm,
trembling.

"I don't want Adam to see that I have passed you beyond," she gasped.
"We are existing but one minute in the future. Always Adam and I have
feared to pass too far beyond the sweetness of reality. But now, so that
Adam may not see us, we shall step five minutes into what-is-yet-to-be.
And even he, with all his power, cannot see into a future that is more
distant than that in which he exists."

She raised her humid lips to his. "Come, beloved."

Northwood kissed her. Again came the moment of confusion, of the awful
vacancy that was like death, and then he found himself and Eve in the
laboratory, following Adam and Athalia down a long corridor. Athalia was
crying and pleading frantically with Adam. Once she stopped and threw
herself at his feet in a gesture of dramatic supplication, arms
outflung, streaming eyes wide open with fear.

Adam stooped and lifted her gently and continued on his way, supporting
her against his side.

       *       *       *       *       *

Eve dug her fingers into Northwood's arm. Horror contorted her face,
horror mixed with rage.

"My mind hears what he is saying, understands the vile plan he has made,
John Northwood. He is on his way to his laboratory to destroy not only
you and most of these in New Eden, but me as well. He wants only
Athalia."

Striding forward like an avenging goddess, she pulled Northwood after
her.

"Hurry!" she whispered. "Remember, you and I are five minutes in the
future, and Adam is only one. We are witnessing what will occur four
minutes from now. We yet have time to reach the laboratory before him
and be ready for him when he enters. And because he will have to go back
to Present Time to do his work of destruction, I will be able to destroy
him. Ah!"

Fierce joy burned in her flashing blue eyes, and her slender nostrils
quivered delicately. Northwood, peeping at her in horror, knew that no
mercy could be expected of her. And when she stopped at a certain door
and inserted a key, he remembered Athalia. What if she should enter with
Adam in Present Time?

       *       *       *       *       *

They were inside Adam's laboratory, a huge apartment filled with queer
apparatus and cages of live animals. The room was a strange paradox.
Part of the equipment, the walls, and the floor was glistening with
newness, and part was moulding with extreme age. The powers of
disintegration that haunt a tropical forest seemed to be devouring
certain spots of the room. Here, in the midst of bright marble, was a
section of wall that seemed as old as the pyramids. The surface of the
stone had an appalling mouldiness, as though it had been lifted from an
ancient graveyard where it had lain in the festering ground for
unwholesome centuries.

Between cracks in this stained and decayed section of stone grew fetid
moss that quivered with the microscopic organisms that infest age-rotten
places. Sections of the flooring and woodwork also reeked with
mustiness. In one dark, webby corner of the room lay a pile of bleached
bones, still tinted with the ghastly grays and pinks of putrefaction.
Northwood, overwhelmingly nauseated, withdrew his eyes from the bones,
only to see, in another corner, a pile of worm-eaten clothing that lay
on the floor in the outline of a man.

Faint with the reek of ancient mustiness, Northwood retreated to the
door, dizzy and staggering.

"It sickens you," said Eve, "and it sickens me also, for death and decay
are not pleasant. Yet Nature, left to herself, reduces all to this.
Every grave that has yawned to receive its prey hides corruption no less
shocking. Nature's forces of creation and destruction forever work in
partnership. Never satisfied with her composition, she destroys and
starts again, building, building towards the ultimate of perfection.
Thus, it is natural that if Dr. Mundson isolated the Life Ray, Nature's
supreme force of compensation, isolation of the Death Ray should closely
follow. Adam, thirsting for power, has succeeded. A few sweeps of his
unholy ray of decomposition will undo all Dr. Mundson's work in this
valley and reduce it to a stinking holocaust of destruction. And the
time for his striking has come!"

She seized his face and drew it toward her. "Quick!" she said. "We'll
have to go back to the third dimension. I could leave you safe in the
fourth, but if anything should happen to me, you would be stranded
forever in future time."

She kissed his lips. In a moment, he was back in the old familiar world,
where right is right and left is left. Again the subtle change wrought
by Eve's magic lips had taken place.

       *       *       *       *       *

Eve went to a machine standing in a corner of the room.

"Come here and get behind me, John Northwood. I want to test it before
he enters."

Northwood stood behind her shoulder.

"Now watch!" she ordered. "I shall turn it on one of those cages of
guinea pigs over there."

She swung the projector around, pointed it at the cage of small,
squealing animals, and threw a lever. Instantly a cone of black mephitis
shot forth, a loathsome, bituminous stream of putrefaction that reeked
of the grave and the cesspool, of the utmost reaches of decay before the
dust accepts the disintegrated atoms. The first touch of seething,
pitchy destruction brought screams of sudden agony from the guinea pigs,
but the screams were cut short as the little animals fell in shocking,
instant decay. The very cage which imprisoned them shriveled and
retreated from the hellish, devouring breath that struck its noisome rot
into the heart of the wood and the metal, reducing both to revolting
ruin.

Eve cut off the frightful power, and the black cone disappeared, leaving
the room putrid with its defilement.

"And Adam would do that to the world," she said, her blue eyes like
electric-shot icicles. "He would do it to you, John Northwood--and to
me!" Her full bosom strained under the passion beneath.

"Listen!" She raised her hand warningly. "He comes! The destroyer
comes!"

       *       *       *       *       *

A hand was at the door. Eve reached for the lever, and, the same moment,
Northwood leaned over her imploringly.

"If Athalia is with him!" he gasped. "You will not harm her?"

A wild shriek at the door, a slight scuffle, and then the doorknob was
wrenched as though two were fighting over it.

"For God's sake, Eve!" implored Northwood. "Wait! Wait!"

"No! She shall die, too. You love her!"

Icy, cruel eyes cut into him, and a new-fleshed hand tried to push him
aside. The door was straining open. A beloved voice shrieked. "John!"

Eve and Northwood both leaped for the lever. Under her tender white
flesh she was as strong as a man. In the midst of the struggle, her red,
humid lips approached his--closer. Closer. Their merest pressure would
thrust him into Future Time, where the laboratory and all it contained
would be but a shadow, and where he would be helpless to interfere with
her terrible will.

He saw the door open and Adam stride into the room. Behind him, lying
prone in the hall where she had probably fainted, was Athalia. In a mad
burst of strength he touched the lever together with Eve.

The projector, belching forth its stinking breath of corruption swung in
a mad arc over the ceiling, over the walls--and then straight at Adam.

Then, quicker than thought, came the accident. Eve, attempting to throw
Northwood off, tripped, fell half over the machine, and, with a short
scream of despair, dropped into the black path of destruction.

       *       *       *       *       *

Northwood paused, horrified. The Death Ray was pointed at an inner wall
of the room, which, even as he looked, crumbled and disappeared,
bringing down upon him dust more foul than any obscenity the bowels of
the earth might yield. In an instant the black cone ate through the
outer parts of the building, where crashing stone and screams that were
more horrible because of their shortness followed the ruin that swept
far into the fair reaches of the valley.

The paralyzing odor of decay took his breath, numbed his muscles, until,
of all that huge building, the wall behind him and one small section of
the room by the doorway alone remained whole. He was trying to nerve
himself to reach for the lever close to that quiet formless thing still
partly draped over the machine, when a faint sound in the door
electrified him. At first, he dared not look, but his own name, spoken
almost in a gasp, gave him courage.

Athalia lay on the floor, apparently untouched.

He jerked the lever violently before running to her, exultant with the
knowledge that his own efforts to keep the ray from the door had saved
her.

"And you're not hurt!" He gathered her close.

"John! I saw it get Adam." She pointed to a new mound of mouldy clothes
on the floor. "Oh, it is hideous for me to be so glad, but he was going
to destroy everything and everyone except me. He made the ray projector
for that one purpose."

Northwood looked over the pile of putrid ruins which a few minutes ago
had been a building. There was not a wall left intact.

"His intention is accomplished, Athalia," he said sadly. "Let's get out
before more stones fall."

       *       *       *       *       *

In a moment they were in the open. An ominous stillness seemed to grip
the very air--the awful silence of the polar wastes which lay not far
beyond the mountains.

"How dark it is, John!" cried Athalia. "Dark and cold!"

"The sunshine projector!" gasped Northwood. "It must have been
destroyed. Look, dearest! The golden light has disappeared."

"And the warm air of the valley will lift immediately. That means a
polar blizzard." She shuddered and clung closer to him. "I've seen
Antarctic storms, John. They're death."

Northwood avoided her eyes. "There's the sun-ship. We'll give the ruins
the once over in case there are any survivors; then we'll save
ourselves."

Even a cursory examination of the mouldy piles of stone and dust
convinced them that there could be no survivors. The ruins looked as
though they had lain in those crumbling piles for centuries. Northwood,
smothering his repugnance, stepped among them--among the green, slimy
stones and the unspeakable revolting debris, staggering back and faint
and shocked when he came upon dust that was once human.

"God!" he groaned, hands over eyes. "We're alone, Athalia! Alone in a
charnal house. The laboratory housed the entire population, didn't it?"

"Yes. Needing no sleep nor food, we did not need houses. We all worked
here, under Dr. Mundson's generalship, and, lately under Adam's, like a
little band of soldiers fighting for a great cause."

"Let's go to the sun-ship, dearest."

"But Daddy Mundson was in the library," sobbed Athalia. "Let's look for
him a little longer."

       *       *       *       *       *

Sudden remembrance came to Northwood. "No, Athalia! He left the library.
I saw him go down the jungle path several minutes before I and Eve went
to Adam's laboratory."

"Then he might be safe!" Her eyes danced. "He might have gone to the
sun-ship."

Shivering, she slumped against him. "Oh, John! I'm cold."

Her face was blue. Northwood jerked off his coat and wrapped it around
her, taking the intense cold against his unprotected shoulders. The low,
gray sky was rapidly darkening, and the feeble light of the sun could
scarcely pierce the clouds. It was disturbing to know that even the
summer temperature in the Antarctic was far below zero.

"Come, girl," said Northwood gravely. "Hurry! It's snowing."

They started to run down the road through the narrow strip of jungle.
The Death Ray had cut huge swathes in the tangle of trees and vines, and
now areas of heaped debris, livid with the colors of recent decay,
exhaled a mephitic humidity altogether alien to the snow that fell in
soft, slow flakes. Each hesitated to voice the new fear: had the
sun-ship been destroyed?

By the time they reached the open field, the snow stung their flesh like
sharp needles, but it was not yet thick enough to hide from them a
hideous fact.

The sun-ship was gone.

       *       *       *       *       *

It might have occupied one of several black, foul areas on the green
grass, where the searching Death Ray had made the very soil putrefy, and
the rocks crumble into shocking dust.

Northwood snatched Athalia to him, too full of despair to speak. A
sudden terrific flurry of snow whirled around them, and they were almost
blown from their feet by the icy wind that tore over the unprotected
field.

"It won't be long," said Athalia faintly. "Freezing doesn't hurt, John,
dear."

"It isn't fair, Athalia! There never would have been such a marriage as
ours. Dr. Mundson searched the world to bring us together."

"For scientific experiment!" she sobbed. "I'd rather die, John. I want
an old-fashioned home, a Black Age family. I want to grow old with you
and leave the earth to my children. Or else I want to die here now under
the kind, white blanket the snow is already spreading over us." She
drooped in his arms.

Clinging together, they stood in the howling wind, looking at each other
hungrily, as though they would snatch from death this one last picture
of the other.

Northwood's freezing lips translated some of the futile words that
crowded against them. "I love you because you are not perfect. I hate
perfection!"

"Yes. Perfection is the only hopeless state, John. That is why Adam
wanted to destroy, so that he might build again."

They were sitting in the snow now, for they were very tired. The storm
began whistling louder, as though it were only a few feet above their
heads.

"That sounds almost like the sun-ship," said Athalia drowsily.

"It's only the wind. Hold your face down so it won't strike your flesh
so cruelly."

"I'm not suffering. I'm getting warm again." She smiled at him sleepily.

       *       *       *       *       *

Little icicles began to form on their clothing, and the powdery snow
frosted their uncovered hair.

Suddenly came a familiar voice: "_Ach Gott!_"

Dr. Mundson stood before them, covered with snow until he looked like a
polar bear.

"Get up!" he shouted. "Quick! To the sun-ship!"

He seized Athalia and jerked her to her feet. She looked at him sleepily
for a moment, and then threw herself at him and hugged him frantically.

"You're not dead?"

Taking each by the arm, he half dragged them to the sun-ship, which had
landed only a few feet away. In a few minutes he had hot brandy for
them.

While they sipped greedily, he talked, between working the sun-ship's
controls.

"No, I wouldn't say it was a lucky moment that drew me to the sun-ship.
When I saw Eve trying to charm John, I had what you American slangists
call a hunch, which sent me to the sun-ship to get it off the ground so
that Adam couldn't commandeer it. And what is a hunch but a mental
penetration into the Fourth Dimension?" For a long moment, he brooded,
absent-minded. "I was in the air when the black ray, which I suppose is
Adam's deviltry, began to destroy everything it touched. From a safe
elevation I saw it wreck all my work." A sudden spasm crossed his face.
"I've flown over the entire valley. We're the only survivors--thank
God!"

"And so at last you confess that it is not well to tamper with human
life?" Northwood, warmed with hot brandy, was his old self again.

"Oh, I have not altogether wasted my efforts. I went to elaborate pains
to bring together a perfect man and a perfect woman of what Adam called
our Black Age." He smiled at them whimsically.

"And who can say to what extent you have thus furthered natural
evolution?" Northwood slipped his arm around Athalia. "Our children
might be more than geniuses, Doctor!"

Dr. Mundson nodded his huge, shaggy head gravely.

"The true instinct of a Creature of the Light," he declared.

       *       *       *       *       *

  _Remember_
  ASTOUNDING STORIES
  _Appears on Newsstands_
  THE FIRST THURSDAY IN EACH MONTH

       *       *       *       *       *




Into Space

_By Sterner St. Paul_


    What was the extraordinary connection between Dr. Livermore's
    sudden disappearance and the coming of a new satellite to the
    Earth?

[Illustration: _A loud hum filled the air, and suddenly the projectile
rose, gaining speed rapidly._]


Many of my readers will remember the mysterious radio messages which
were heard by both amateur and professional short wave operators during
the nights of the twenty-third and twenty-fourth of last September, and
even more will remember the astounding discovery made by Professor
Montescue of the Lick Observatory on the night of September
twenty-fifth. At the time, some inspired writers tried to connect the
two events, maintaining that the discovery of the fact that the earth
had a new satellite coincident with the receipt of the mysterious
messages was evidence that the new planetoid was inhabited and that the
messages were attempts on the part of the inhabitants to communicate
with us.

The fact that the messages were on a lower wave length than any receiver
then in existence could receive with any degree of clarity, and the
additional fact that they appeared to come from an immense distance lent
a certain air of plausibility to these ebullitions in the Sunday
magazine sections. For some weeks the feature writers harped on the
subject, but the hurried construction of new receivers which would work
on a lower wave length yielded no results, and the solemn pronouncements
of astronomers to the effect that the new celestial body could by no
possibility have an atmosphere on account of its small size finally put
an end to the talk. So the matter lapsed into oblivion.

While quite a few people will remember the two events I have noted, I
doubt whether there are five hundred people alive who will remember
anything at all about the disappearance of Dr. Livermore of the
University of Calvada on September twenty-third. He was a man of some
local prominence, but he had no more than a local fame, and few papers
outside of California even noted the event in their columns. I do not
think that anyone ever tried to connect up his disappearance with the
radio messages or the discovery of the new earthly satellite; yet the
three events were closely bound up together, and but for the Doctor's
disappearance, the other two would never have happened.

       *       *       *       *       *
