English sherry that he'd been dreaming about for twelve solid months. He
took one out and broke the seal almost reverently.

Not that there had been nothing to drink for the men on Lobon: the
University had not been so blue-nosed as all that. But the choice had
been limited to bourbon and Scotch. Turnbull, who was not a whisky
drinker by choice, had longed for the mellow smoothness of Bristol Cream
Sherry instead of the smokiness of Scotch or the heavy-bodied strength
of the bourbon.

He was just pouring his first glass when the announcer chimed. Frowning,
Turnbull walked over to the viewscreen that was connected to the little
eye in the door. It showed the face of--what was his name? Samson?
Sanders. That was it, Sanders, the building superintendent.

Turnbull punched the opener and said: "Come in. I'll be right with you,
Mr. Sanders."

Sanders was a round, pleasant-faced, soft-voiced man, a good ten years
older than Turnbull himself. He was standing just inside the door as
Turnbull entered the living room; there was a small brief case in his
hand. He extended the other hand as Turnbull approached.

"Welcome home again, Dr. Turnbull," he said warmly. "We've missed you
here at the Excelsior."

Turnbull took the hand and smiled as he shook it. "Glad to be back, Mr.
Sanders; the place looks good after a year of roughing it."

The superintendent lifted the brief case. "I brought up the mail that
accumulated while you were gone. There's not much, since we sent cards
to each return address, notifying them that you were not available and
that your mail was being held until your return."

He opened the brief case and took out seven standard pneumatic mailing
tubes and handed them to Turnbull.

Turnbull glanced at them. Three of them were from various friends of his
scattered over Earth; one was from Standard Recording Company; the
remaining three carried the return address of James M. Duckworth, Ph.
Sch., U.C.L.A., Great Los Angeles, California.

"Thanks, Mr. Sanders," said Turnbull. He was wondering why the man had
brought them up so promptly after his own arrival. Surely, having waited
a year, they would have waited until they were called for.

Sanders blinked apologetically. "Uh ... Dr. Turnbull, I wonder if ... if
any of those contain money ... checks, cash, anything like that?"

"I don't know. Why?" Turnbull asked in surprise.

Sanders looked even more apologetic. "Well, there was an attempted
robbery here about six months ago. Someone broke into your mailbox
downstairs. There was nothing in it, of course; we've been putting
everything into the vault as it came in. But the police thought it might
be someone who knew you were getting money by mail. None of the other
boxes were opened, you see, and--" He let his voice trail off as
Turnbull began opening the tubes.

None of them contained anything but correspondence. There was no sign of
anything valuable.

"Maybe they picked my box at random," Turnbull said. "They may have been
frightened off after opening the one box."

"That's very likely it," said Sanders. "The police said it seemed to be
a rather amateurish job, although whoever did it certainly succeeded in
neutralizing the alarms."

Satisfied, the building superintendent exchanged a few more pleasantries
with Turnbull and departed. Turnbull headed back toward the kitchen,
picked up his glass of sherry, and sat down in the breakfast nook to
read the letters.

The one from Standard Recording had come just a few days after he'd
left, thanking him for notifying them that he wanted to suspend his
membership for a year. The three letters from Cairo, London, and Luna
City were simply chatty little social notes, nothing more.

The three from Scholar Duckworth were from a different breed of cat.

The first was postmarked 21 August 2187, three months after Turnbull had
left for Lobon. It was neatly addressed to Dave F. Turnbull, Ph.D.

       *       *       *       *       *

Dear Dave (it read):

I know I haven't been as consistent in keeping up with my old pupils as
I ought to have been. For this, I can only beat my breast violently and
mutter _mea culpa, mea culpa, mea maxima culpa_. I can't even plead that
I was so immersed in my own work that I hadn't the time to write,
because I'm busier right now than I've been for years, and I've had to
_make_ time for this letter.

Of course, in another way, this is strictly a business letter, and it
does pertain to my work, so the time isn't as hard to find as it might
be.

But don't think I haven't been watching your work. I've read every one
of your articles in the various journals, and I have copies of all four
of your books nestled securely in my library. Columbia should be--and
apparently is--proud to have a man of your ability on its staff. At the
rate you've been going, it won't be long before you get an invitation
from the Advanced Study Board to study for your Scholar's degree.

As a matter of fact, I'd like to make you an offer right now to do some
original research with me. I may not be a top-flight genius like
Metternick or Dahl, but my reputation does carry some weight with the
Board. (_That, Turnbull thought, was a bit of needless modesty;
Duckworth wasn't the showman that Metternick was, or the prolific writer
that Dahl was, but he had more intelligence and down-right wisdom than
either._) So if you could manage to get a few months leave from
Columbia, I'd be honored to have your assistance. (_More modesty,
thought Turnbull. The honor would be just the other way round._)

The problem, in case you're wondering, has to do with the Centaurus
Mystery; I think I've uncovered a new approach that will literally kick
the supports right out from under every theory that's been evolved for
the existence of that city. Sound interesting?

I'm mailing this early, so it should reach you in the late afternoon
mail. If you'll be at home between 1900 and 2000, I'll call you and give
you the details. If you've got a pressing appointment, leave details
with the operator.

    All the best,
            Jim Duckworth

       *       *       *       *       *

Turnbull slid the letter back into its tube and picked up the second
letter, dated 22 August 2187, one day later.

       *       *       *       *       *

Dear Dave,

I called last night, and the operator said your phone has been
temporarily disconnected. I presume these letters will be forwarded, so
please let me know where you are. I'm usually at home between 1800 and
2300, so call me collect within the next three or four days.

    All the best,
              Jim

       *       *       *       *       *

The third letter was dated 10 November 2187. Turnbull wondered why it
had been sent. Obviously, the manager of the Excelsior had sent
Duckworth a notice that Dr. Turnbull was off-planet and could not be
reached. He must have received the notice on the afternoon of 22 August.
That would account for his having sent a second letter before he got the
notice. Then why the third letter?

       *       *       *       *       *

Dear Dave,

I know you won't be reading this letter for six months or so, but at
least it will tell you where I am. I guess I wasn't keeping as close
tabs on your work as I thought: otherwise I would have known about the
