But now-a-days men say--"The cedars of Lebanon are not God's trees, nor
are any other trees.  They belong to nature."  Now I believe in nature no
more than I do in Baal.  Nature is merely things--a great many things it
is true, but only things--and when I add them all up together, and call
them nature, as if they were one thing, I make an abstraction of them.
There is no harm in that: but if I treat that abstraction as if it really
existed, and did anything, then I make of it an idol, the which I have no
mind to do.  I believe, I say, in nature no more than I do in Baal.  Both
words were at first symbols; and both have become in due course of time
mere idols.  But those who worship nature and not God, say now--God did
not make trees; they were made by the laws of nature and nothing else.
Well: I believe that the so-called philosophers who say that, will be
proved at last to be no more right, and no more rational, than those
heathen workmen of Tyre.  But meanwhile, what the Psalmist says, and what
the Bible says, is--Those trees belong to God.  He made them, He made all
things; the sap--the mysterious life in them, by which each grows and
seeds according to its kind--is His gift.  Their growth is ordered by
Him; and so are all things in earth and heaven.

Then why speak of them especially as trees of God?  Because, my friends,
we can only find out that something is true of many things, by finding
out that it is true of one thing; and that we usually find out by some
striking instance; some case about which there can be no mistake.  And
these cedars of Lebanon were, and are still, such a striking instance,
which there was no mistaking.  Upon the slopes of the great snow-mountain
of Lebanon stood those gigantic cedar-trees--whole forests of them
then--now only one or two small groups, but awful, travellers tell us,
even in their decay.  Whence did they come?  There are no trees like them
for hundreds, I had almost said for thousands, of miles.  There are but
two other patches of them left now on the whole earth, one in the Atlas,
one in the Himalaya.  The Jews certainly knew of no trees like them; and
no trees either of their size.  There were trees among them then,
probably, two and three hundred feet in height; trees whose tops were as
those minster towers; whose shafts were like yonder pillars; and their
branches like yonder vaults.  No king, however mighty, could have planted
them up there upon the lofty mountain slopes.  The Jew, when he entered
beneath the awful darkness of these cedars; the cedars with a shadowy
shroud--as the Scripture says--the cedars high and lifted up, whose tops
were among the thick boughs, and their height exalted above all the trees
of the field; fair in their greatness; their boughs multiplied, and their
branches long--for it is in such words of awe and admiration that the
Bible talks always of the cedars--then the Jew said, "God has planted
these, and God alone."  And when he thought, not merely of their grandeur
and their beauty, but of their use; of their fragrant and incorruptible
timber, fit to build the palaces of kings, and the temples of gods; he
said--and what could he say better?--"These are trees of God;" wonderful
and glorious works of a wonderful and a glorious Creator.  If he had not,
he would have had less reason in him, and less knowledge of God, than the
Hindoos of old; who when they saw the other variety of the cedar growing,
in like grandeur, on the slopes of the Himalaya, called them the
Deodara--which means, in the old Sanscrit tongue, neither more nor less
than "the timber of God," "the lance of God"--and what better could they
have said?

My friends, I speak on this matter from the fulness of my heart.  It has
happened to me--through the bounty of God, for which I shall be ever
grateful--to have spent days in primeval forests, as grand, and far
stranger and far richer than that of Lebanon and its cedars; amid trees
beside which the hugest tree in Britain would be but as a sapling;
gorgeous too with flowers, rich with fruits, timbers, precious gums, and
all the yet unknown wealth of a tropic wilderness.  And as I looked up,
awestruck and bewildered, at those minsters not made by hands, I found
the words of Scripture rising again and again unawares to my lips, and
said--Yes: the Bible words are the best words, the only words for such a
sight as this.  These too are trees of God which are full of sap.  These,
too, are trees, which God, not man, has planted.  Mind, I do not say that
I should have said so, if I had not learnt to say so from the Bible.
Without the Bible I should have been, I presume, either an idolater or an
atheist.  And mind, also, that I do not say that the Psalmist learnt to
call the cedars trees of God by his own unassisted reason.  I believe the
very opposite.  I believe that no man can see the truth of a thing unless
God shews it him; that no man can find out God, in earth or heaven,
unless God condescends to reveal Himself to that man.  But I believe that
God did reveal Himself to the Psalmist; did enlighten his reason by the
inspiration of His Holy Spirit; did teach him, as we teach a child, what
to call those cedars; and, as it were, whispered to him, though with no
audible voice: "Thou wishest to know what name is most worthy whereby to
call those mighty trees: then call them trees of God.  Know that there is
but one God, of whom are all things; and that they are His trees; and
that He planted them, to shew forth His wisdom, His power, and His good
will to man."

And do you fancy that because the Jew called the great cedars trees of
God, that therefore he thought that the lentiscs and oleanders, by the
brook outside, were not God's shrubs; or the lilies and anemones upon the
down below were not God's flowers?  Some folk have fancied so.--It seems
to me most unreasonably.  I should have thought that here the rule stood
true; that that which is greater contains the less; that if the Psalmist
knew God to be mighty enough to make and plant the cedars, he would think
Him also mighty enough to make and plant the smallest flower at his feet.
I think so.  For I know it was so with me.  My feeling that those
enormous trees over my head were God's trees, did not take away in the
least from my feeling of God's wisdom and power in the tiniest herb at
their feet.  Nay rather, it increased my feeling that God was filling all
things with life and beauty; till the whole forest,--if I may so speak in
all humility, but in all honesty--from the highest to the lowest, from
the hugest to the smallest, and every leaf and bud therein, seemed full
of the glory of God.  And if I could feel that,--being the thing I am--how
much more must the inspired Psalmist have felt it?  You see by this very
psalm that he did feel it.  The grass for the use of cattle, and the
green herb for men, and the corn and the wine and the oil, he says, are
just as much God's making, and God's gift.  The earth is "filled," he
says, "with the fruit of God's works."  Filled: not dotted over here and
there with a few grand and wonderful things which God cares for, while He
cares for nothing else: but filled.  Let us take the words of Scripture
honestly in their whole strength; and believe that if the Psalmist saw
God's work in the great cedars, he saw it everywhere else likewise.

Nay, more: I will say this.  That I believe it was such teaching as that
of this very 104th Psalm--teaching which runs, my friends, throughout the
Old Testament, especially through the Psalmists and the Prophets--which
enabled the Jews to understand our Lord's homely parables about the
flowers of the field and the birds of the air.  Those of them at least
who were Israelites indeed; those who did understand, and had treasured
up in their hearts, the old revelation of Moses, and the Psalmists, and
the Prophets; those who did still believe that the cedars were the trees
of God, and that God brought forth grass for the cattle, and green herb
for the service of men; and who could see God's hand, God's laws, God's
love, working in them--those men and women, be sure, were the very ones
who understood our Lord, when He said, "Consider the lilies of the field,
how they grow.  They toil not, neither do they spin.  And yet I say unto
you, that Solomon in all his glory was not compared unto one of these."

And why should it not be so with you, townsfolk though you are?  Every
Londoner has now, in the public parks and gardens, the privilege of
looking on plants and flowers, more rich, more curious, more varied than
meet the eye of any average countryman.  Then when you next avail
yourselves of that real boon of our modern civilization, let me beg you
not to forget the lesson which I have been trying to teach you.

You may feel--you ought to feel--that those strange and stately
semitropic forms are indeed plants of God; the work of a creative Spirit
who delights to employ His Almighty power in producing ever fresh shapes
of beauty--seemingly unnecessary, seemingly superfluous, seemingly
created for the sake of their beauty alone--in order that the Lord may
delight Himself in His works.  Let that sight make you admire and
reverence more, not less, the meanest weed beneath your feet.  Remember
that the very weeds in your own garden are actually more highly
organized; have cost--if I may so say, with all reverence, but I can only
speak of the infinite in clumsy terms of the finite--the Creator more
thought, more pains, than the giant cedars of Lebanon, and the giant
cypresses of California.  Remember that the smallest moss or lichen which
clings upon the wall, is full of wonders and beauties, as inexplicable as
unexpected; and that of every flower on your own window-sill the words of
Christ stand literally true--that Solomon in all his glory was not
arrayed as one of these: and bow your hearts and souls before the
magnificent prodigality, the exquisite perfection of His work, who can
be, as often as He will, greatest in that which is least, because to His
infinity nothing is great, and nothing small; who hath created all
things, and for His pleasure they are, and were created; who rejoices for
ever in His own works, because He beholds for ever all that He makes, and
it is very good.

And then refresh your hearts as well as your brains--tired it may be, too
often, with the drudgery of some mechanical, or merely calculating,
occupation--refresh your hearts, I say, by lifting them up unto the Lord,
in truly spiritual, truly heavenly thoughts; which bring nobleness, and
trust, and peace, to the humblest and the most hardworked man.

For you can say in your hearts--All the things which I see, are God's
things.  They are thoughts of God.  God gives them law, and life, and
use.  My heavenly Father made them.  My Saviour redeemed them with His
most precious blood, and rules and orders them for ever.  The Holy Spirit
of God, which was given me at my baptism, gives them life and power to
grow and breed after their kinds.  The divine, miraculous, and
supernatural power of God Himself is working on them, and for them,
perpetually: and how much more on me, and for me, and all my children,
and fellow-creatures for whom Christ died.  Without my Father in heaven
not a sparrow falls to the ground: and am I not of more value than many
sparrows?  God feeds the birds: and will He not feed me?  God clothes the
lilies of the field: and will He not clothe me?  Ah, me of little faith,
who forget daily that in God I live, and move, and have my being, and am,
in spite of all my sins, the child of God.  Him I can trust in prosperous
times, and in disastrous times; in good harvests and in bad harvests; in
life and in death, in time and in eternity.  For He has given all things
a law which cannot be broken.  And they continue this day as at the
beginning, serving Him.  And if I serve Him likewise, then shall I be in
harmony with God, and with God's laws, and with God's creatures, great
and small.  The whole powers of nature as well as of spirit will be
arrayed on my side in the struggle for existence; and all things will
work together for good to those who love God.




SERMON XVII.  LIFE.


PSALM CIV. 24, 28-30.

   O Lord, how manifold are Thy works! in wisdom hast Thou made them all:
   the earth is full of Thy riches.

   That Thou givest them they gather.  Thou openest Thine hand, they are
   filled with good.  Thou hidest Thy face, they are troubled.  Thou
   takest away their breath, they die, and return to their dust.  Thou
   sendest forth Thy Spirit, they are created: and Thou renewest the face
   of the earth.

What is the most important thing to you, and me, and every man?

I suppose that most, if they answered honestly, would say--Life.  I will
give anything I have for my life.

And if some among you answered--as I doubt not some would--No: not life:
but honour and duty.  There is many a thing which I would rather die than
do--then you would answer like valiant and righteous folk; and may God
give you grace to keep in the same mind, and to hold your good resolution
to the last.  But you, too, will agree that, except doing your duty, life
is the most important thing you have.  The mother, when she sacrifices
her life to save her child, shews thereby how valuable she holds the
child's life to be; so valuable that she will give up even her own to
save it.

But did you never consider, again--and a very solemn and awful thought it
is--that this so important thing called life is the thing, above all
other earthly things, of which we know least--ay, of which we know
nothing?

We do not know what death is.  We send a shot through a bird, and it
falls dead--that is, lies still, and after a while decays again into the
dust of the earth, and the gases of the air.  But what has happened to
it?  How does it die?  How does it decay?  What is this life which is
gone out of it?  No man knows.  Men of science, by dissecting and making
experiments, which they do with a skill and patience which deserve not
only our belief, but our admiration, will describe to us the phenomena,
or outward appearances, which accompany death, and follow death.  But
death itself--for want of what the animal has died--what has gone out of
it--they cannot tell.  No man can tell; for that is invisible, and not to
be discovered by the senses.  They are therefore forced to explain death
by theories, which may be true, or false: but which are after all not
death itself, but their own thoughts about death put into their own
words.  Death no man can see: but only the phenomena and effects of
death; and still more, life no man can see: but only the phenomena and
effects of life.

For if we cannot tell what death is, still more we cannot tell what life
is.  How life begins; how it organizes each living thing according to its
kind; and makes it grow; how it gives it the power of feeding on other
things, and keeping up its own body thereby: of this all experiments tell
us as yet nothing.  Experiment gives us, here again, the phenomena--the
visible effects.  But the causes it sees not, and cannot see.

This is not a matter to be discussed here.  But this I say, that
scientific men, in the last generation or two, have learnt, to their
great honour, and to the great good of mankind--everything, or almost
everything, about it--except the thing itself; and that, below all facts,
below all experiments, below all that the eye or brain of man can
discover, lies always a something nameless, invisible, imponderable, yet
seemingly omnipresent and omnipotent; retreating before the man of
science deeper and deeper, the deeper he delves: namely, the life, which
shapes and makes all phenomena, and all facts.  Scientific men are
becoming more and more aware of this unknown force, I had almost said,
ready to worship it.  More and more the noblest minded of them are
becoming engrossed with that truly miraculous element in nature which is
always escaping them, though they cannot escape it.  How should they
escape it?  Was it not written of old--Whither shall I go from Thy
presence? and whither shall I flee from Thy Spirit?

What then can we know of this same life, which is so precious in most
men's eyes?

My friends, it was once said--That man's instinct was in all unknown
matters to take refuge in God.  The words were meant as a sneer.  I, as a
Christian, glory in them; and ask, Where else should man take refuge,
save in God?  When man sees anything--as he must see hundreds of
things--which he cannot account for; things mysterious, and seemingly
beyond the power of his mind to explain: what safer, what wiser word can
he say than--This is the Lord's doing, and it is marvellous in our eyes?
God understands it: though I do not.  Be it what it may, it is a work of
God.  From God it comes: by God it is ruled and ordered.  That at least I
know: and let that be enough for me.  And so we may say of life.  When we
are awed, and all but terrified, by the unfathomable mystery of life, we
can at least take refuge in God.  And if we be wise, we shall take refuge
in God.  Whatever we can or cannot know about it, this we know; that it
is the gift of God.  So thought the old Jewish Prophets and Psalmists;
and spoke of a breath of God, a vapour, a Spirit of God, which breathed
life into all things.  It was but a figure of speech, of course: but if a
better one has yet been found, let the words in which it has been written
or spoken be shewn to me.  For to me, at least, they are yet unknown.  I
have read, as yet, no wiser words about the matter than those of the old
Jewish sages, who told how, at the making of the world, the Spirit, or
breath, of God moved on the face of the waters, quickening all things to
life; or how God breathed into man's nostrils the breath or spirit of
life, and man became a living soul.

And in the same temper does that true philosopher and truly inspired
Psalmist, who wrote the 139th Psalm, speak of the Spirit or breath of
God.  He considers his own body: how fearfully and wonderfully it is
made; how God did see his substance, yet being imperfect; and in God's
book were all his members written, which day by day were fashioned, while
as yet there was none of them.  "Thou," he says, "O God, hast fashioned
me behind and before, and laid Thine hand upon me.  Such knowledge is too
wonderful and excellent for me; I cannot attain to it."  "But," he says
to himself, "there is One Who has attained to it; Who does know; for He
has done it all, and is doing it still: and that is God and the Spirit of
God.  Whither"--he asks--"shall I go then from God's Spirit?  Whither
shall I flee from God's presence?"  And so he sees by faith--and by the
highest reason likewise--The Spirit of God, as a living, thinking, acting
being, who quickens and shapes, and orders, not his mortal body merely,
but all things; giving life, law, and form to all created things, from
the heights of heaven to the depths of hell; and ready to lead him and
hold him, if he took the wings of the morning and fled into the uttermost
parts of the sea.

And so speaks again he who wrote the 104th Psalm, and the text which I
have chosen.  To him, too, the mystery of death, and still more the
mystery of life, could be explained only by faith in God, and in the
Spirit of God.  If things died, it was because God took away their
breath, and therefore they returned to their dust.  And if things lived,
it was because the Spirit of God, breathed forth, and proceeding, from
God, gave them life.  He pictured to himself, I dare to fancy, what we
may picture to ourselves--for such places have often been, and are now,
in this world--some new and barren land, even as the very gravel on which
we stand was once, just risen from the icy sea, all waste and lifeless,
without a growing weed, an insect, even a moss.  Then, gradually, seeds
float thither across the sea, or are wafted by the winds, and grow; and
after them come insects; then birds; then trees grow up; and larger
animals arrive to feed beneath their shade; till the once barren land has
become fertile and rich with life, and the face of the earth is renewed.
But by what?  "God," says the Psalmist, "has renewed the face of the
earth."  True, the seeds, the animals came by natural causes: but who was
the Cause of those causes?  Who sent the things thither, save God?  And
who gave them life?  Who kept the life in floating seeds, in flying
spores?  Who made that life, when they reached the barren shore, grow and
thrive in each after their kind?  Who, but the Spirit of God, the Lord
and Giver of life?  God let His Spirit proceed and go forth from Himself
upon them; and they were made; and so He renewed the face of the earth.

That, my good friends, is not only according to Scripture, but according
to true philosophy.  Men are slow to believe it now: and no wonder.  They
have been always slow to believe in the living God; and have made
themselves instead dead gods--if not of wood and stone, still out of
their own thoughts and imaginations; and talk of laws of nature, and long
abstractions ending in ation and ality, like that "Evolution" with which
so many are in love just now; and worship them as gods; mere words, the
work of their own brains, though not of their own hands--even though they
be--as many of them are--Evolution, I hold, among the rest--true and fair
approximations to actual laws of God.  But before them, and behind them,
and above them and below them, lives the Author of Evolution, and of
everything else.  For God lives, and reigns, and works for ever.  The
Spirit of God proceedeth from the Father and the Son, giving, evolving,
and ruling the life of all created things; and what we call nature, and
this world, and the whole universe, is an unfathomable mystery, and a
perpetual miracle, The one Author and Ruler of which is the ever-blessed
Trinity, of whom it is written--"The glorious majesty of the Lord shall
endure for ever: the Lord shall rejoice in His works."

I believe, therefore, that the Psalmist in the text is speaking, not
merely sound doctrine but sound philosophy.  I believe that the simplest
and the most rational account of the mystery of life is that which is
given by the Christian faith; and that the Nicene Creed speaks truth and
fact, when it bids us call the Holy Spirit of God the Lord and Giver of
life.

That this is according to the orthodox Catholic Faith there is no doubt.
Many mistakes were made on this matter, in the early times of the Church,
even by most learned and holy divines; as was to be expected, considering
the mysteriousness of the subject.  They were inclined, often, to what is
called Pantheism--that is, to fancy that all living things are parts of
God; that God's Spirit is in them, as our soul is in our body, or as heat
is in a heated matter; and to speak of God's Spirit as the soul and life
of the world.

But this is exactly what the Nicene Creed does not do.  It does not say
that the Holy Spirit is life: but that He is the Lord and Giver of life--a
seemingly small difference in words: but a most vast and important
difference in meaning and in truth.

The true doctrine, it seems to me, is laid down most clearly by the
famous bishop, Cyril of Alexandria; who, whatever personal faults he
had--and they were many--had doubtless dialectic intellect enough for
this, and even deeper questions.  And he says--"The Holy Spirit moves all
things that are moved; and holds together, and animates, and makes alive,
the whole universe.  Nor is He another Nature different from the Father
and the Son: but as He is in us; of the same nature and the same essence
as they."  And so says another divine, Eneas of Gaza--"The Father, with
the Son, sends forth the Holy Spirit; and inspiring with this Spirit all
things, beyond sense and of sense--invisible and visible--fills them with
power, and holds them together, and draws them to Himself."  And he prays
thus to the Holy Spirit a prayer which is to my mind as noble as it is
true--"O Holy Spirit, by whom God inspires, and holds together, and
preserves all things, and leads them to perfection."  I quote such words
to shew you that I am not giving you new fancies of my own: but simply
what I believe to be the ancient, orthodox and honest meaning of that
same Nicene Creed, which you just new heard; where it says that the Holy
Spirit is the Lord and Giver of life; and the meaning of the 104th Psalm
also, where it says--"Thou lettest Thy breath--Thy Spirit--go forth, and
they shall be made, and Thou shall renew the face of the earth."

And now--if anyone shall say--This may be all very true.  But what is it
to me?  You are talking about nature; about animals and plants, and lands
and seas.  What I come to church to hear of, is about my own soul--

I should answer such a man--My good friend, you come to church to hear
about God as well as about what you call your soul.  And any sound
knowledge which you can learn about God, must be--believe me--of use to
your immortal soul.  For if you have wrong notions concerning God: how
can you avoid having wrong notions concerning your soul, which lives and
moves and has its being in God?

But look at it thus.  At least I have been speaking of the works of God.
And are not you, too, a work of God?  The Lord shall rejoice in His
works, even to the tiniest gnat that dances in the sun.  Is the Lord
rejoicing in you?  I have said--Whither shall a man go from God's
presence?  Are you forgetting or remembering God's presence?  And--Whither
shall a man flee from God's Spirit?  Are you, O man, fleeing from God's
Spirit, and forgetting His gracious inspirations; all pure and holy, and
noble, and just and lovely and truly human, thoughts, in the whirl of
pleasure, or covetousness, or ambition, or actual sin?  If so, look at
the tiniest gnat which dances in the air, the meanest flower beneath your
feet; and be ashamed, and fear, and tremble before the Living God, and
before His Spirit.  For the gnat and the flower are doing their duty, and
pleasing the Holy Spirit of God; and you are not doing your duty, and are
grieving the Holy Spirit of God.  For simply: because that Spirit is the
Spirit of God, He is a Holy Spirit, who tries to make you--O man and not
animal--holy; a moral, and spiritual, and good being.  Because you are a
moral and spiritual being, God's Spirit exercises over you a moral power
which He does not exercise over the plants and animals.  He works not
merely on your body and your brain: but on your heart and immortal soul.
But if you choose to be immoral, when He is trying to keep you moral; if
you choose to be carnal like the brutes, while He is trying to make you
spiritual, like Jesus Christ, from whom He proceeds: then, oh then,
tremble, and beware, and be ashamed before the very flowers which grow in
your own garden-bed; for they fulfil the law which God has given them.
They are what they ought to be, each after its kind.  But you are not
what you ought to be, after your kind; which is a good man, or a good
woman, or a good child.

Oh beware lest the Lord should fulfil in you the awful words of this
Psalm; lest He should hide His face from you, and you be troubled; and
lest when He takes away your breath you should die, and turn again to
your dust; and find, too late, that the wages of sin are death--death not
merely of the body, but of the soul.  Rather repent, and amend, and
remember that most blessed, and yet most awful fact--that God's Spirit is
with you from your baptism until now, putting into your heart good
desires, and ready to enable you--if you will--to bring those good
desires to good effect: instead of leaving them only as good intentions,
