The Project Gutenberg EBook of Omega, the Man, by Lowell Howard Morrow

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Omega, the Man

Author: Lowell Howard Morrow

Illustrator: Leo Morey

Release Date: October 11, 2008 [EBook #26882]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK OMEGA, THE MAN ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









A Classic Reprint from AMAZING STORIES, January, 1933

[Illustration]


OMEGA, the MAN

By LOWELL HOWARD MORROW

Illustrated by MOREY


The silver airship cut swiftly through the hot thin air. The noonday sun
blazed down upon it and the desert world below. All about was the solemn
silence of death. No living thing appeared either in the air or on the
drab, gray earth. Only the aircraft itself displayed any signs of life.
The sky, blue as indigo, held not the shadow of a cloud, and on the
horizon the mountains notched into it like the teeth of a giant saw.

The airship finally came to a hovering stop, then dropped rapidly toward
the salt-encrusted plain. It came to rest at last on the bottom of a
great, bowl-shaped hollow situated at the end of a chasm whose gray,
rock-strewn sides rose in rugged terraces for miles back into the sky.
In a few moments a panel in the vessel's side rolled noiselessly upward,
disclosing a brilliant light, and from the interior of the airship soon
appeared two figures who paused at the aperture and gazed out over the
parched earth. Then without fear or visible effort--although they were
seventy-five feet above the ground--they emerged from the ship and
floated down to earth.

These two humans--the sole survivors of all earth's children--were man
and wife--Omega and Thalma. They were burned a deep cherry by the fierce
rays of the sun. In stature they were above the average man now on
earth. Their legs were slender and almost fleshless, because for many
centuries man had ceased to walk. Their feet were mere toeless
protuberances attached to the ankle bone. Their arms were long and as
spare as their legs, but their hands, although small, were
well-proportioned and powerful. Their abdominal regions were very small,
but above them were enormous chests sheltering lungs of tremendous
power, for thus nature had armored man against the rarefaction of the
earth's atmosphere. But the most remarkable parts about this truly
remarkable couple were there massive heads set upon short, slim necks.
The cranial development was extraordinary, their bulging foreheads
denoting great brain power. Their eyes--set wide apart--were large and
round, dark and luminous with intelligence and their ears were
remarkably large, being attuned to all the music and voices of life.
While their nostrils were large and dilated, their mouths were very
small, though sensuous and full-lipped. They were entirely hairless--for
even the eyebrows and the eyelashes of man had entirely disappeared ages
before. And when they smiled they betrayed no gleam of teeth, for nature
had long discarded teeth in man's evolution.

The great, silver ship of the sky now rested in a deep pocket on the
floor of an ancient sea. Millions of years, under the sucking energy of
the sun and the whip of many winds, had sapped its waters, until only a
shallow, brackish lake remained. Along the shores of this lake, which
covered scarcely more than a hundred acres, a rim of yellowish, green
grass followed the water's edge and struggled against the inevitable,
and here and there among the grasses flowers of faded colors and
attenuated foliage reared their heads bravely in the burning sunshine.
And this lone lake, nestled in the lowest spot among the mountains and
valleys which once floored the Pacific, now held the last of earth's
waters. Barren and lifeless the rest of the world baked under a
merciless sun.

       *       *       *       *       *

Now clasping hands, like children at play, Omega and Thalma approached
the lake. They glided over the ground, merely touching their feet to the
highest points, and finally stopped with their feet in the warm, still
water.

Omega ran his cupped hand through the water, then drank eagerly.

"It is good," he said in a low, musical voice. "And there is much of it.
Here we may live a long time."

Thalma laughed with sheer joy, her large, red-rimmed eyes aglow with
mother light and love.

"I am glad," she cried. "I know that Alpha will be happy here."

"It is so, my love, and--"

Omega checked and stared out over the glassy lake. A spot in its center
was stirring uneasily. Great bubbles rose to the surface and eddied to
one side, then suddenly huge cascades of water shot into the air as if
ejected by subterraneous pressure. As they stared in silent astonishment
the commotion suddenly ceased and the surface of the lake became as
tranquil as before.

"There is volcanic action out there," said Omega fearfully. "At any time
the ground may open and engulf the lake in a pit of fire. But no, that
cannot be," he added, staring at Thalma with an odd light in his eyes.
For he suddenly recalled that no volcanic action or earth tremor had
disturbed the surface crust for ages.

"What is it, Omega?" she whispered in accents of awe.

"Nothing to fear, my dear, I am sure," he replied, averting his eyes.
"Likely some fissure in the rock has suddenly opened."

And then he embraced her in the joy of new-found life. For long ages
mind had communicated with mind by telepathic waves, speech being used
for its cheer and companionship.

"We will make ready for Alpha," said Omega joyfully. "In very truth he
may be able to carry on. Moisture may return to earth, and it is more
likely to return here than elsewhere. Remember what the Mirror showed
last week over the Sahara plains--the makings of a cloud!"

They cheered each other by this remembrance how, just before they had
consumed the last of the water in their recent home and buried the last
of their neighbors and friends, the reflecting Mirror had brought a view
of a few stray wisps of vapor above the Great Sahara which once had been
reclaimed by man, where teeming millions in by-gone ages had lived their
lives.

"The inclination of the earth's axis is changing as we know," he went on
hopefully as they turned back toward the ship. "The moisture may come
back."

His was the voice of hope but not of conviction. Hope, planted in man's
soul in the beginning, still burned brightly in these last stout
hearts.

Alpha was still unborn. Omega and Thalma had willed a male child. In him
was to be the beginning of a new race which they hoped with the aid of
science would repeople the earth. Hence his name, the first letter of
the Greek alphabet, of which "omega" is the last.

"I am afraid, my love," said Thalma, looking back over her shoulder at
the placid lake. "I wonder what heaved the water about that way."

"Don't worry about it, my dear," he said as they paused beneath the ship
and he put his arm protectingly about her. "As I have said, it probably
was the shifting of a rock on the bed of the lake. It is nothing to
worry about, and I feel that we have nothing to fear for a long, long
time. And we have so much joy to look forward to. Remember Alpha is
coming, and think of his glorious future! Think of his changing all
this!" And he swept his hand toward the grim, gray hills. "Just think of
again gardenizing the world!"

       *       *       *       *       *

It was indeed a dreary view upon which they gazed. On every side, upon
the mountains and hills, over salt-encrusted plains and upon the rocks,
