
And, indeed, after that time there was never any question among us
three vikings about it. It seemed to us that if we had lost Norway
as a home, we had gained what would make as good a country; and,
moreover, Alfred won us to him in such wise that it seemed we could
do nought but serve him. There can be few who have such power over
men's hearts as he.

Exeter seemed very quiet when we came back; for the Danes were
gone, and the king's levies had dispersed, and only the court
remained, though that was enough to make all the old city seem very
gay to those who had known it only in the quiet of peace.

One man was there whom I had hardly thought to meet again, and that
was Osmund the Danish jarl. For he was a hostage in the king's
hands, to make more sure that the peace would be kept. I knew there
were hostages to be given by the beaten host; but I had not asked
who they were, and had been at the ships when they were given up,
ten of them in all, and of the best men among the Danes.

Alfred treated his captives very well, giving them good lodgings,
and bating them often at his own table, so that I saw much of
Osmund. And more than that, I saw much of the Lady Thora, his
daughter, who would not leave him. I do not think that there could
be more certain manner of beginning a close friendship between a
warrior and the lady whom he shall learn to hold first in his
heart, than that in which I first met this fair maiden.

Now one will say that straightway I must fall in love with her, but
it was not so: first of all, because I had not time, since every
day Alfred planned new ships with me and Thord; and next, because I
was his guest, and Osmund was his hostage. Maybe I thought not much
of that, however, not having the thoughts of a Saxon towards a
Dane. But I will say this, that among all the fair ladies of the
queen's household there was none of whom I thought at all; while of
what Thora would say I thought often, and it pleased me that the
Lady Etheldreda, Odda's fair eldest daughter, took pity on the
lonely maiden, and made much of her after a time.

Three weeks I was in Exeter, and then the king went eastward
through his country to repair what damage had been done. Then I
took up my work for him, and got out my ship and sailed westward,
putting into every harbour where a ship might be built, and set the
shipwrights to work, having with me royal letters to sheriffs and
port reeves everywhere that they should do what I ordered them. In
each yard I left two or three of my men, that they should oversee
all things; because if one Saxon thinks he knows better than his
fellow, he will not be ruled by him, whereas no man can dispute
what a born viking has to say about ship craft. It seemed that all
were glad of our coming, and the work began very cheerfully.

All this took long, but at last I came up the Severn, and so into
the river Parret--for the weather would serve me no longer and laid
up the ship in a creek there is at Bridgwater, where Heregar, the
king's standard bearer, was sheriff. He made me very welcome at his
great house near by, at Cannington, and then rode with me to
Bristol; and there I set two ships in frame, and so ended all I
could do for the winter. King Alfred would have a fleet when the
spring came.

Then Heregar and I would go to Chippenham, to spend the time of the
Yule feast with King Alfred; and we rode there with Harek and
Kolgrim, and were made most welcome. Many friends whom I had made
at Exeter were there, and among them, quiet and yet hopeful of
release, were the hostages.

That was a wonderful Yule to me; but I will say little of it, for
the tale of the most terrible Twelfth Night that England has ever
known overshadows it all, though there were things that I learned
at that time, sitting in the church with Harek, at the west end,
and listening, that are bright to me. But they are things by
themselves, and apart from all else.

Now peace was on all the land, and the frost and snow were bright
and sharp everywhere; so that men said that it was a hard winter,
and complained of the cold which seemed nothing to us Northmen.
Maybe there was a foot of snow in deep places, and the ice was six
inches thick on the waters; and the Saxons wondered thereat, saying
that they minded the like in such and such years before. Then I
would tell them tales of the cold north to warm them, but I think
they hardly believed me.

The town was full of thanes and their families who had been called
to Alfred's Yule keeping, and it was very bright and pleasant among
them all, though here and there burnt ruins made gaps between the
houses, minding one that the Danes had held the place not so long
since.

So they kept high feasting for Yule and the New Year, and the last
great feast was for Twelfth Night, and all were bidden for that,
and there was much pleasant talk of what revels should be in the
evening.

The day broke very bright and fair, with a keen, windless frost
that made the snow crisp and pleasant to ride over, hindering one
in no way. And there was the sun shining over all in a way that
made the cold seem nought to me, so that I had known nothing more
pleasant than this English winter, having seen as yet nothing of
the wet and cold times that come more often than such as this.
Then, too, the clear ringing of the bells from every village near
and far was new to me, and I thought I had heard nothing sweeter
than the English call to the church for high festival {x}.

So I went to the king, and asked him if I might take with me the
Danish jarl for a ride beyond the town; for the hostages were only
free inside the walls, and I knew this would please Osmund and
Thora well. I said that I would see to his safety and be answerable
for him.

"This must be Osmund, I suppose," the king said, smiling. "I have
heard how you came to know him and his fair daughter at Wareham. It
was well done, though maybe I should blame you for running
over-much risk."

"I think I ran little, lord king," I said; "and I could have done
no less for the poor maiden."

"Surely; but I meant that to go at all was over dangerous."

"I am ready to do the same again for you, my king," I said. "And
after all I was in no danger."

Then said the king, smiling gravely at me:

"Greater often are the dangers one sees not than those which one
has to meet. I have my own thoughts of what risk you ran.

"Well, take your fair lady and the jarl also where you will. But
the feast is set for two hours after noon, and all must be there."

So I thanked him, and he bade me ask his steward for horses if I
would, and I went straight to Osmund from his presence.

"I think it will be a more pleasant ride than our last," said
Thora. "Yet that is one that I shall not forget."

Then I tried to say that I hoped she did not regret it either, but
I minded me of the loved nurse she had to leave, and was silent in
time. Yet I thought that she meant nothing of sorrow in the
remembrance as she spoke.

We called out my two comrades, for Osmund liked them well, and rode
away northward, that the keen air might be behind us as we
returned. That was all the chance that led us that way, and it was
well that we were so led, as things turned out.

The white downs and woodlands sparkling with frost were very
beautiful as we rode, and we went fast and joyously in the fresh
air; but the countryside was almost deserted, for the farmsteads
were burned when the Danes broke in on the land last spring, and
few were built up as yet. The poor folk were in the town now, for
the most part, finding empty houses enough to shelter them, and
none left to whom they belonged.

Now we rode for twelve miles or so, and then won to a hilltop which
we had set as our turning place. I longed to stand there and look
out over all this country, that seemed so fair after the rugged
northern lands I had known all my life. But when we were there we
saw a farmstead just below us, on the far slope of the gentle hill;
and we thought it well to go there and dismount, and maybe find
some food for ourselves and the horses before turning back.

So we went on. It was but a couple of furlongs distant, and the
buildings lay to the right of the road, up a tree-shaded lane of
their own.

We turned into this, and before we had gone ten yards along it I
halted suddenly. I had seen somewhat that seemed strange, and
unmeet for the lady to set eyes on.

"Bide here, jarl," I said, "and let us go on and see what is here;
the place looks deserted."

And I looked meaningly at him, glancing at Thora.

But he had seen what had caught my eye, and he stayed at once,
turning back into the main road, and beckoning Harek to come with
him and Thora, for some reason of his own.

Then Kolgrim and I went on. What we had seen was a man lying
motionless by the farm gate, in a way that was plain enough to me.
And when we came near, we knew that the man had been slain. He was
a farm thrall, and he had a pitchfork in his hand, the shaft of
which was half cut through, as with a sword stroke that he had
warded from him, though he had not stayed a second cut, for so he
was killed.

"Here is somewhat strangely wrong," I said.

"Outlaws' work," answered Kolgrim; for the wartime had made the
masterless folk very bold everywhere, and the farm was lonely
enough.

We rode through the swinging gate, and then we saw three horses by
the stable yard paling, and with them was an armed man, who saw us
as we came round the house, and whistled shrilly. Whereon two
others came running from the building, and asked in the Danish
tongue what he called for. The first man pointed to us, and all
three mounted at once. They were in mail and helm, fully armed.

Now we were not, for we had thought of no meeting such as this, and
rode in woollen jerkins and the like, and had only our swords and
seaxes, as usual; but for the moment I did not think that we should
need either. Outlaws such as I took them for do not make any stand
unless forced.

Presently one of the men, having mounted leisurely enough, called
to us.

"There is no plunder to be had," he said, "even if you were not too
late; our folk cleared out the place over well last time."

Then a fourth man, one who seemed of some rank, rode from beyond
the house, passing behind us without paying any heed to us, except
that he called to the men to follow him, and so went down the lane
towards where Osmund was waiting with Harek.

All this puzzled me, and so I cried to the three men:

"What do you here? Whose men are you?"

At that they looked at one another--they were not more than ten
yards from us now--and halted.

"You should know that," one said; and then he put his hand to his
sword suddenly, adding in a sharp voice:

"These be Saxons; cut them down."

When hand goes to sword hilt one knows what is coming, and even as
the man said his last words I was on them, and Kolgrim was not a
pace behind me. The Dane's sword was out first; but I was upon him
in time. His horse swerved as mine plunged forward, and I rode him
down, horse and man rolling together in the roadway. Then the man
to my right cut at me, and I parried the blow and returned it. Then
that horse was riderless, and I heard Kolgrim laugh as his man went
down with a clatter and howl.

My horse plunged on for a few steps, and then I turned. Kolgrim had
one horse by the bridle, and was catching that which had fallen. I
caught the other, and so we looked at each other.

"This is your luck, master," said Kolgrim.

"Well," said I, "these are Danes, and I do not think they are
wanderers either. Here are forage bags behind the saddles. One
would say that they were on the march if this were not mid-winter
and time of peace. The horsemen in advance of a host, or the like."

Then Kolgrim said:

"Where has the other man gone? I had forgotten him for the moment."

"Bide here and see if any poor farm folk are yet alive," I said. "I
will ride after him."

So I gave the horse I was holding to my comrade, and went back
quickly down the lane to where Osmund and the other two were. The
man I sought was speaking with the jarl, whose face was white and
troubled. Harek was looking red and angry, but on Thora's face was
written what I could not understand--as it were some fear of a new
terror.

Now it was plain that all three were very glad of my coming; but
the stranger looked round for a single glance, and then went on
speaking to Osmund.

"Be not a fool, jarl," he said angrily. "Here is your chance; let
it not slip."

"I tell you that my word shall not be broken," Osmund replied, very
coldly and sternly.

"What say you, girl?" the man said then, turning to Thora. "Short
shrift will be the jarl's when Alfred finds that we are on him."

But Thora turned away without a word, and then the Dane spoke to
me:

"Here! you are another hostage, I suppose."

"I am not," I answered.

"Well, then, here is Jarl Osmund, if you know him not, and he is
one. Tell him that what I say is true, and that Chippenham town
will be burned out tonight king and all."

I saw that the Dane, seeing that I was armed, and not clad in the
Saxon manner altogether, took me for one of his own people. And
from his words it was plain that some of the Danish chiefs had
broken away from Guthrum, and were making this unheard-of
mid-winter march to surprise Alfred. Most likely they were
newcomers into Mercia, and had nought to do with the Exeter host.

"Maybe it is true," I answered; "but I am no Dane."

He laughed loudly.

"Why, then, you are one of Alfred's Norsemen! Now I warn you to get
away from Chippenham, for it is unsafe, and there will be no king
to pay you tomorrow. I think that you will say with me that it were
better for Osmund to come with me to meet the host than to go back
to Alfred and be hung before he flies--if he gets news of us in
time to do so."

Herein the man was right, for Alfred had warned the chiefs at
Exeter that he held the hostages in surety for peace on the part of
all and any Danes. But I thought I might learn more, so I said:

"Guthrum thinks little of his friends' lives."

"Guthrum!" the Dane answered sneeringly; "what have we to do with
him and his peace making?"

"What then are you Hubba's men?"
