guaranteed, had the idea of the original toppling been considered.
Especially after the gigantic wooden life-thing had smashed across the
double-ply fence, thereby adding man-made energy to its already
powerful bulk and blazing surface.

But--that it would have fallen across Storage Shed Number One? Was
_that_ predictable?

Fennister shook his head slowly. No. It wasn't. The accident was simply
that--an accident. No one was to blame; no one was responsible.

Except Fennister. _He_ was responsible. Not for the accident, but for
the personnel of the expedition. He was the Military Officer; he was the
Man In Charge of Fending Off Attack.

And he had failed.

Because that huge, blazing, stricken tree had toppled majestically down
from the sky, crashing through its smaller brethren, to come to rest on
Storage Shed Number One, thereby totally destroying the majority of the
food supply.

There were eighty-five men on Alphegar IV, and they would have to wait
another six months before the relief ship came.

And they didn't have food enough to make it, now that their reserve had
been destroyed.

Fennister growled something under his breath.

"What?" asked Major Grodski, rather surprised at his superior's tone.

"I said: 'Water, water, everywhere--', that's what I said."

Major Grodski looked around him at the lush forest which surrounded the
double-ply fence of the compound.

"Yeah," he said. "'Nor any drop to drink.' But I wish one of those
boards had shrunk--say, maybe, a couple hundred feet."

"I'm going back to my quarters," Fennister said. "I'll be checking with
the civilian personnel. Let me know the total damage, will you?"

The major nodded. "I'll let you know, sir. Don't expect good news."

"I won't," said Colonel Fennister, as he turned.

       *       *       *       *       *

The colonel let his plump bulk sag forward in his chair, and he covered
his hands with his eyes. "I can imagine all kinds of catastrophes," he
said, with a kind of hysterical glumness, "but this has them all beat."

Dr. Pilar stroked his, short, gray, carefully cultivated beard. "I'm
afraid I don't understand. We could all have been killed."

The colonel peeked one out from between the first and second fingers of
his right hand. "You think starving to death is cleaner than fire?"

Pilar shook his head slowly. "Of course not. I'm just not certain that
we'll all die--that's all."

Colonel Fennister dropped his hands to the surface of his metal desk. "I
see," he said dryly. "Where there's life, there's hope. Right? All
right, I agree with you." He waved his hand around, in an
all-encompassing gesture. "Somewhere out there, we may find food. But
don't you see that this puts us in the Siege Position?"

Dr. Francis Pilar frowned. His thick salt-and-pepper brows rumpled in a
look of puzzlement. "Siege Position? I'm afraid--"

Fennister gestured with one hand and leaned back in his chair, looking
at the scientist across from him. "I'm sorry," he said. "I've let my
humiliation get the better of me." He clipped his upper lip between his
teeth until his lower incisors were brushed by his crisp, military
mustache, and held it there for a moment before he spoke.

"The Siege Position is one that no military commander of any cerebral
magnitude whatever allows himself to get into. It is as old as Mankind,
and a great deal stupider. It is the position of a beleaguered group
which lacks one simple essential to keep them alive until help comes.

"A fighting outfit, suppose, has enough ammunition to stand off two more
attacks; but they know that there will be reinforcements within four
days. Unfortunately, the enemy can attack _more than twice_ before help
comes. Help will come too late.

"Or, it could be that they have enough water to last a week, but help
won't come for a month.

"You follow me, I'm sure. The point, in so far as it concerns us, is
that we have food for about a month, but we won't get help before six
months have passed. We know help is coming, but we won't be alive to see
it."

Then his eyes lit up in a kind of half hope. "Unless the native flora--"

But even before he finished, he could see the look in Dr. Pilar's eyes.

       *       *       *       *       *

Broderick MacNeil was a sick man. The medical officers of the Space
Service did not agree with him _in toto_, but MacNeil was in a position
to know more about his own state of health than the doctors, because it
was, after all, he himself who was sick.

Rarely, of course, did he draw the attention of the medical officers to
his ever-fluctuating assortment of aches, pains, signs, symptoms,
malaises, and malfunctions. After all, it wouldn't do for him to be
released from the Service on a Medical Discharge. No, he would suffer in
silence for the sake of his chosen career--which, apparently, was to be
a permanent Spaceman 2nd Class.

Broderick MacNeil had never seen his medical record, and therefore did
not know that, aside from mention of the normal slight defects which
every human body possesses, the only note on the records was one which
said: "Slight tendency toward hypochondria, compensated for by tendency
to immerse self in job at hand. According to psych tests, he can
competently handle positions up to Enlisted Space Officer 3rd Class, but
positions of ESO/2 and above should be carefully considered. (See Psych
Rept. Intelligence Sectn.)"

But, if MacNeil did not know what the medics thought of him, neither did
the medics know what he thought of them. Nor did they know that MacNeil
carried a secret supply of his own personal palliatives, purgatives and
poly-purpose pills. He kept them carefully concealed in a small section
of his space locker, and had labeled them all as various vitamin
mixtures, which made them seem perfectly legal, and which was not _too_
dishonest, since many of them _were_ vitamins.

On the morning after the fire, he heaved his well-muscled bulk out of
bed and scratched his scalp through the close-cropped brown hair that
covered his squarish skull. He did not feel well, and that was a fact.
Of course, he had been up half the night fighting the blaze, and that
hadn't helped any. He fancied he had a bit of a headache, and his nerves
seemed a little jangled. His insides were probably in their usual balky
state. He sighed, wished he were in better health, and glanced around at
the other members of the company as they rose grumpily from their beds.

He sighed again, opened his locker, took out his depilator, and ran it
quickly over his face. Then, from his assortment of bottles, he began
picking over his morning dosage. Vitamins, of course; got to keep plenty
of vitamins in the system, or it goes all to pot on you. A, B_1, B_2,
B_12, C, ... and on down the alphabet and past it to A-G. All-purpose
mineral capsules, presumably containing every element useful to the
human body and possibly a couple that weren't. Two APC capsules.
(Aspirin-Phenacetin-Caffeine. He liked the way those words sounded; very
medicinal.) A milk-of-magnesia tablet, just in case. A couple of
patent-mixture pills that were supposed to increase the bile flow.
(MacNeil wasn't quite sure what bile was, but he _was_ quite sure that
its increased flow would work wonders within.) A largish tablet of
sodium bicarbonate to combat excess gastric acidity--obviously a
