The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Kenzie Report, by Mark Clifton

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Kenzie Report

Author: Mark Clifton

Illustrator: Kelly Freas

Release Date: April 25, 2010 [EBook #32131]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE KENZIE REPORT ***




Produced by Sankar Viswanathan, Greg Weeks, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net







                         Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from If Worlds of Science Fiction May 1953.
    Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
    copyright on this publication was renewed.


                         THE _Kenzie_ REPORT


                          _By Mark Clifton_


                      Illustrated by Kelly Freas


     _If this story has a moral, it is: "Leave well enough
      alone." Just look what happened to Kenzie "mad-about-ants"
      MacKenzie, who didn't...._

       *       *       *       *       *




That Kenzie MacKenzie was a mad scientist hardly showed at all. To see
him ambling down the street in loose jointed manner, with sandy hair
uncombed, blue eyes looking vaguely beyond normal focus, you might
think here was a young fellow dreaming over how his gal looked last
night. It might never occur to you that he was thinking of--ants.

Of course, we fellows in the experimental lab all knew it, but Kenzie
wasn't too hard to get along with. In fact, he could usually be
counted on to pull us out of a technical hole. We put up with him
through a certain fondness, maybe even a little pride. It gave us a
harmless subject to talk about when security was too rigid on other
things.

Our Department Chief knew it, but Kenzie had solved quite a few knotty
electronics problems. The Chief never has been too particular to see
credit get back to the guy who earned it. We guessed he figured having
Kenzie there was profitable to him. In fact, the little redhead in
payroll told me the Chief was drawing quite a few bonus checks.

Personnel probably didn't know about it. Kenzie's papers, buried deep
in the files, wouldn't show it; because about the only question they
had _not_ asked us was, "Where do you stand on the matter of ants?"

There was an unwritten law in the lab for nobody ever to mention
insects, or even elderly female relatives. I guess that was why it
wasn't mentioned to the new guy, name of Robert Pringle. This fellow
Pringle worked along for a couple weeks and showed us he had the old
know-how in his fingers. A capable tech, a good joe, and we thought we
were lucky to get him.

On this particular morning, it happened that Pringle was working at
the bench next to Kenzie. Being a talented tech, like the rest of us,
his mind naturally ran along more than one channel at the same time. I
expect he was really surprised at the reaction he got when he shouted
out to the room at large.

"Hey, fellows," he yelled. "I got little green bugs on my roses. What
do you do about it?"

The silence made him look up from his work, and he couldn't help
noticing we all stood there with clinched hands and gritted teeth. We
were watching Kenzie, who snapped the juice off his soldering iron and
