Seeing her distress, Grace went on quickly:

"The janitress found your scarab pin just outside the door on the day of
the game. Anne has it here for you."

Anne fumbled in her purse and drew out the pin.

"But how did you get it?" asked Miriam faintly, as she took the pin with
evident reluctance.

"Miss Thompson gave it to me," Anne answered.

Miriam looked frightened. "Then she knows----"

"Nothing," said Grace softly. "As soon as Anne heard that Miss Thompson
had your pin and knew where it had been found, she went right to the
office and asked Miss Thompson to give it to her. Miss Thompson thought
from the first that I had been the victim of a trick. Anne knew that the
finding of your pin would make her suspect you. She had already sent for
you when Anne reached the office. Luckily you weren't in school. Anne
asked permission to return the pin to you. She wouldn't give any reason
for asking. Finally Miss Thompson handed it to her, and told Anne she was
sure she would do what was right."

"You owe a great deal to Anne, Miriam," Grace continued, "for if she had
not gone to Miss Thompson I am afraid you would have been suspended from
school. Miss Thompson would have had very little mercy upon you, for she
knew about those examination papers last June."

Miriam looked so utterly miserable and ashamed at Grace's words, that Anne
hastened to say:

"I would have given you your pin at once, Miriam, but you were away from
school. Then David told me how unhappy you seemed. I hadn't said a word
to any one about the pin until I told Grace. We decided to come and see
you, and say that we were willing to 'let bygones be bygones' if you were.
We thought it was right to let you know that we knew everything. There is
only one other person who knows. That person is your brother."

"He knew I locked you up the day of the game," faltered Miriam, "The way
he looked at me has haunted me ever since. He thinks me the most
dishonorable girl in the world." She began to cry again.

Anne and Grace walked along silently beside the weeping girl. They thought
it better to let her have her cry out. She really deserved to spend a
brief season in the Valley of Humiliation.

They had now left the fields and were turning into one of the smaller
streets of Oakdale.

"Miriam," said Grace, "try and brace up. We'll soon be on Main Street and
you don't want people to see you cry, do you? Here," extracting a little
book of rice powder paper from her bag, "rub this over your face and the
marks of your tears won't show."

Miriam took the paper gratefully, and did as Grace bade her. Then she
straightened up and gave a long sigh, "I feel like that man in Pilgrim's
Progress, after he dropped his burden from his back," she said. "The mean
things I did never bothered me until just lately. After I saw that my own
brother had nothing but contempt for me, I began to realize what a wretch
I was, and the remorse has been just awful."

It was David, after all, who had been instrumental in holding up the
mirror so that his stubborn sister could see herself as others saw her.
Although she had quarreled frequently with him, she had secretly respected
his high standard of honor and fine principles. The fear that he despised
her utterly had brought her face to face with herself at last.

"Anne has always wanted to be friends with you, Miriam," Grace said
earnestly as they neared the Nesbit home. "You and I used to play together
when we were little girls in the grammar school. It's only since we
started High School that this quarreling has begun. Let's put it all aside
and swear to be friends, tried and true, from now on? You can be a great
power for good if you choose. We all ought to try to set up a high
standard, for the sake of those who come after. Then Oakdale will have
good reason to be proud of her High School girls."

They had reached the gate.

Miriam turned and stretched out a hand to each girl. There was a new
light in her eyes. "My dear, dear friends," she said softly.

A shrill whistle broke in upon this little love feast and the three girls
looked up. David was hurrying down the walk, his face aglow.

"I whistled to attract your attention. I was afraid you girls would go
before I could reach you. Mother wants you girls to come in for dinner.
She saw you from the window. Don't say you can't, for I'm going to call on
the Piersons and Harlowes right now and inform them that their daughters
are dining out to-night. So hurry along now, for mother's waiting for
you."

A minute later he had mounted his motorcycle and was off down the street,
going like the wind.

The girls entered the house and were warmly greeted by Mrs. Nesbit. She
and David had viewed the little scene from the window. She had deeply
deplored Miriam's attitude toward Grace and her chums. It was with delight
that she and David had watched the three girls stop at the gate and clasp
hands. She therefore hurried her son out to the girls to offer them her
hospitality.

Anne had never before entered the Nesbit home. She thought it very
beautiful and luxurious. Miriam put forth every effort to be agreeable,
and the time passed so rapidly that they were surprised when dinner was
announced.

After dinner, Miriam, who was really a brilliant performer for a girl of
her age, played for them. Anne, who was a music-hungry little soul,
listened like one entranced. David, seeing her absorption, beckoned to
Grace, who stole softly out of the room without being observed.

Once out in the hall the two young people did a sort of wild dance to
express their feelings.

"You are the best girl a fellow ever knew," said David in a whisper. "How
did you do it?"

"I'll tell you some other time," whispered Grace, who had cautioned the
girls to say nothing of the adventure for fear of frightening Miriam's
mother. "Let's go back before they notice we're gone."

"Anne is too wrapped up in music to pay any attention to us. Come on up to
my workshop. I want to show you something I'm working at in connection
with my aeroplane. We can talk there, without being disturbed. I want to
know what worked this transformation. It is really too good to be true.
I've always wanted Miriam to be friends with Anne, but I had just about
lost all hope."

Grace followed David up the stairs and through the hall to his workshop,
which was situated at the back of the house.

"Now," said the young man, as he pushed forward a stool for his guest,
"fire away."

Grace began with their call at the house, their walk in search of Miriam,
and their adventure with the tramp, modestly making light of her own
bravery. When she had finished, David held out his hand, his face glowing
with appreciation "Grace," he said, "you've more spirit and courage than
any girl I ever knew. You ought to have been a boy. You would have done
great things."

Grace felt that this was the highest compliment David could pay her. She
had always cherished a secret regret that she had been born a girl.

"Thank you, David," she said, blushing, then hastily changed the subject.
"Tell me about your aeroplane. Is it still at the old Omnibus House?"

"Yes," David answered. "I had it here all winter, but I moved it out there
again about a month ago."

"I should like to see it again," said Grace. "I didn't have time to look
at it carefully the day you invited us out there."

"I'll take you over any time you want to go," said David. "Oh, better
still, here's a duplicate key to the place. You can take the girls and go
over there whenever you please, without waiting for me. You are the only
person that I'd trust with this key, Grace," he added gravely. "I had it
made in case old Jean or I should lose those we carry. I wouldn't even let
the fellows have one, for fear they might go over there, get careless and
do some damage."

"It's awfully good of you, David," Grace replied as she took the key.
"I'll be careful not to lose it. I'll put it on my watch chain. It's such
a small key it is not likely it will be noticed."

Grace took from her neck the long, silver chain from which her watch was
suspended. She opened the clasp, slid the key on the chain and tucked both
watch and key snugly into her belt.

"There," she said, patting it, "that can't get lost. My chain is very
strong. I prefer a chain to a pin or fob, because either one is so easy to
lose."

"That's sensible," commented David. "Girls wouldn't be eternally losing
their watches if they weren't so vain about wearing those silly little
chatelaine pins."

"Why, David Nesbit!" exclaimed Grace, glancing up at the mission clock on
the wall. "It's almost nine o'clock! I had no idea it was so late. Let's
go down at once."

They returned to the parlor to find Anne and Miriam deep in some foreign
photographs that Miriam had collected during her trip to Europe the
previous summer.

"How I should love to see Europe," sighed Anne. "I'm going there some day,
though, if I live," she added with a sudden resolution.

"Mother and father have promised me a trip across as a graduation gift.
Maybe you'll be able to go, too, by that time, Anne," said Grace
hopefully.

"Perhaps I shall, but I'm afraid it's doubtful," said Anne, smiling a
little.

"We've had a fine time, Miriam," said Grace, "but we really must go.
Mother will worry if I stay any later."

"Please come again soon," said Miriam, kissing both girls affectionately.
"I have a plan to talk over with you, but I can't say anything about it
now. I must consult mother first. You'll like it, I'm sure."

"Of course we shall," responded Grace. "Good night, Miriam, and pleasant
dreams."

"They are the nicest girls in Oakdale, and I shall try hard to be like
them," thought Miriam, as she closed the door. "David is right. It
certainly pays to be square."




CHAPTER XXIII

GRACE MEETS A DISTINGUISHED CHARACTER


June had come, bringing with it the trials and tribulations of final
examinations. The days grew long and sunny. Roses nodded from every bush,
but the pupils of Oakdale's two High Schools were far too busy to think
about the beauty of the weather. Golf, tennis, baseball and other outdoor
sports were sternly put aside, and the usual season of "cramming" set in.
Young faces wore an almost tragic expression, and back lessons were
reviewed with desperate zeal.

Grace Harlowe had crammed as assiduously as the rest, for a day or two.
She was particularly shaky on her geometry. She went over her theorems
until she came to triangles, then she threw the book down in disgust.
"What's the use of cramming?" she said to herself. "If I keep on I won't
even be able to remember that 'the hypotenuse of a right-angled triangle
is equal to the sum of the squares of the other two sides.' I'm in a
muddle over these triangles now. I'll find the girls and get them to go to
the woods with me. I really ought to collect a few more botany
specimens."

Grace's specimens were a source of keen delight to her girlish heart. She
didn't care so much about pressing and mounting them. It was the joy she
experienced in being in the woods that, to her, made botany the most
fascinating of studies. She poked into secluded spots unearthing rare
specimens. Her collection was already overflowing; still she could never
resist adding just a few more.

She was doomed to disappointment as far as Nora and Jessica were
concerned. Both girls mournfully shook their heads when invited to
specimen-hunting, declaring regretfully they were obliged to study. Anne
was at Mrs. Gray's attending to the old lady's correspondence. This had
been her regular task since the beginning of the freshman year, and she
never failed to perform it.

"Oh, dear, I wish examinations and school were over," Grace sighed
impatiently. "I can't go to the woods alone, and I can't get any one to go
with me. I suppose I'll have to give it up and go home. No, I won't,
either. I'll go as far as the old Omnibus House. There are lots of wild
plants in the orchard surrounding it, and I may get some new specimens."

With her basket on her arm, Grace turned her steps in the direction of the
old house. She had not been there since the day of their reunion. She
smiled to herself as she recalled the absurdities of that occasion.

After traversing the orchard several times and finding nothing startling
in the way of specimens, Grace concluded that she might as well have
stayed at home.

She walked slowly over to the steps and sat down, placing the basket
beside her. "How lonely it seems here to-day," she thought. "I wonder
where old Jean is? I haven't seen him for an age." Then she fell to musing
over the school year so nearly ended. Everything that had happened passed
through her mind like a panorama. It had been a stormy year, full of
quarrels and bickerings, but it was about to end gloriously. Anne and
Miriam had become the best of friends, while she and Julia Crosby were
daily finding out each other's good qualities There was nothing left to be
desired.

Grace started from her dream and looked at her watch. It was after six
o'clock. She had better be getting back.

She rose and reached for her basket.

Suddenly a figure loomed up before her. Grace started in surprise, to find
herself facing a tall, thin man with wild, dark eyes. He stood with folded
arms, regarding her fixedly.

[Illustration: Grace Found Herself Facing a Tall, Thin Man.]

"Why, where----" but she got no further, for the curious new-comer
interrupted her.

"Ah, Josephine," he said, "so I have found you at last."

"My name isn't Josephine at all. It's Grace Harlowe, and you have made a
mistake," said Grace, endeavoring to pass him. But he barred her way,
saying sadly:

"What, do you, too, pretend? Do you think I do not know you? I, your royal
husband, Napoleon Bonaparte."

"Good gracious," gasped Grace. "He's crazy as can be. How ever shall I get
away from him?"

The man heard the word "crazy" and exclaimed angrily: "How dare you call
me crazy! You, of all people, should know I am sane. I have just returned
from Isle of St. Helena to claim my empire. For years I have been an
exile, but now I am free, free." He waved his arms wildly.

"Yes, of course I know you, now," said Grace, thinking to mollify him.
"How strange that I didn't recognize you before."

Then she remembered reading in the paper of the preceding night of the
escape of a dangerous lunatic from the state asylum, that was situated a
few miles from Oakdale. This must be the man. Grace decided that he
answered the description the paper had given. She realized that she would
have to be careful not to anger him. It would require strategy to get
clear of him.

"It's time you remembered me," returned Napoleon Bonaparte, petulantly.
"They told me that you had died years ago, but I knew better. Now that I
have found you, we'd better start for France at once. Have you your court
robes with you? And what have you done with your crown? You are dressed
like a peasant." He was disdainfully eyeing her brown, linen gown.

In spite of her danger, Grace could scarcely repress a laugh. It all
seemed so ludicrous. Then a sudden thought seized her.

"You see, I have nothing fit to travel in," she said. "Suppose you wait
here for me while I go back to town and get my things? then I can appear
properly at court."

"No you don't," said Napoleon promptly, a cunning expression stealing into
his face. "If you go you'll never come back. I need your influence at the
royal court, and I can't afford to lose you. I am about to conquer the
world. I should have done it long ago, if those villains hadn't exiled me,
and locked me up."

He walked back and forth, muttering to himself still keeping his eye on
Grace for fear that she might escape.

"Oh, what shall I do?" thought the terrified girl. "Goodness knows what
he'll think of next. He may keep me here until dark, and I shall die if I
have to stay here until then, I must get away."

Grace knew that it would be sheer folly to try to run. Her captor would
overtake her before she had gone six yards, not to mention the fit of rage
her attempted flight would be likely to throw him into.

She anxiously scanned the neighboring fields in the hope of seeing old
Jean, the hunter. He was usually not far away. But look as she might, she
could discover no sign of him. There was only one thing in her favor. It
would be light for some time yet. Being June, the darkness would not
descend for two hours. She must escape, but how was she to do it!
