
S: Do not strain your eyes after what We have given certain classes of
them to enjoy, and do not grieve for them, and make yourself gentle to
the believers.

015.089
Y: And say: "I am indeed he that warneth openly and without ambiguity,"-

P: And say: Lo! I, even I, am a plain warner,

S: And say: Surely I am the plain warner.

015.090
Y: (Of just such wrath) as We sent down on those who divided (Scripture
into arbitrary parts),-

P: Such as We send down for those who make division,

S: Like as We sent down on the dividers

015.091
Y: (So also on such) as have made Qur'an into shreds (as they please).

P: Those who break the Qur'an into parts.

S: Those who made the Quran into shreds.

015.092
Y: Therefore, by the Lord, We will, of a surety, call them to account,

P: Them, by thy Lord, We shall question, every one,

S: So, by your Lord, We would most certainly question them all,

015.093
Y: For all their deeds.

P: Of what they used to do.

S: As to what they did.

015.094
Y: Therefore expound openly what thou art commanded, and turn away from
those who join false gods with Allah.

P: So proclaim that which thou art commanded, and withdraw from the
idolaters.

S: Therefore declare openly what you are bidden and turn aside from the
polytheists.

015.095
Y: For sufficient are We unto thee against those who scoff,-

P: Lo! We defend thee from the scoffers,

S: Surely We will suffice you against the scoffers

015.096
Y: Those who adopt, with Allah, another god: but soon will they come to
know.

P: Who set some other god along with Allah. But they will come to know.

S: Those who set up another god with Allah; so they shall soon know.

015.097
Y: We do indeed know how thy heart is distressed at what they say.

P: Well know We that thy bosom is oppressed by what they say,

S: And surely We know that your breast straitens at what they say;

015.098
Y: But celebrate the praises of thy Lord, and be of those who prostrate
themselves in adoration.

P: But hymn the praise of thy Lord, and be of those who make prostration
(unto Him).

S: Therefore celebrate the praise of your Lord, and be of those who make
obeisance.

015.099
Y: And serve thy Lord until there come unto thee the Hour that is
Certain.

P: And serve thy Lord till the Inevitable cometh unto thee.

S: And serve your Lord until there comes to you that which is certain.

---------------------------------------------------------------------

 Chapter 16:

                             AN-NAHL (THE BEE)
 Total Verses: 128 Revealed At: MAKKA


---------------------------------------------------------------------

           In the name of Allah, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

016.001
Y: (Inevitable) cometh (to pass) the Command of Allah: seek ye not then
to hasten it: Glory to Him, and far is He above having the partners
they ascribe unto Him!

P: The commandment of Allah will come to pass, so seek not ye to hasten
it. Glorified and Exalted be He above all that they associate (with
Him).

S: Allah's commandment has come, therefore do not desire to hasten it;
glory be to Him, and highly exalted be He above what they associate
(with Him).

016.002
Y: He doth send down His angels with inspiration of His Command, to such
of His servants as He pleaseth, (saying): "Warn (Man) that there is no
god but I: so do your duty unto Me."

P: He sendeth down the angels with the Spirit of His command unto whom
He will of His bondmen, (saying): Warn mankind that there is no God
save Me, so keep your duty unto Me.

S: He sends down the angels with the inspiration by His commandment on
whom He pleases of His servants, saying: Give the warning that there is
no god but Me, therefore be careful (of your duty) to Me.

016.003
Y: He has created the heavens and the earth for just ends: Far is He
above having the partners they ascribe to Him!

P: He hath created the heavens and the earth with truth. High be He
Exalted above all that they associate (with Him).

S: He created the heavens and the earth with the truth, highly exalted
be He above what they associate (with Him).

016.004
Y: He has created man from a sperm-drop; and behold this same (man)
becomes an open disputer!

P: He hath created man from a drop of fluid, yet behold! he is an open
opponent.

S: He created man from a small seed and lo! he is an open contender.

016.005
Y: And cattle He has created for you (men): from them ye derive warmth,
and numerous benefits, and of their (meat) ye eat.

P: And the cattle hath He created, whence ye have warm clothing and
uses, and whereof ye eat;

S: And He created the cattle for you; you have in them warm clothing and
(many) advantages, and of them do you eat.

016.006
Y: And ye have a sense of pride and beauty in them as ye drive them home
in the evening, and as ye lead them forth to pasture in the morning.

P: And wherein is beauty for you, when ye bring them home, and when ye
take them out to pasture.

S: And there is beauty in them for you when you drive them back (to
home), and when you send them forth (to pasture).

016.007
Y: And they carry your heavy loads to lands that ye could not
(otherwise) reach except with souls distressed: for your Lord is indeed
Most Kind, Most Merciful,

P: And they bear your loads for you unto a land ye could not reach save
with great trouble to yourselves. Lo! your Lord is Full of Pity,
Merciful.

S: And they carry your heavy loads to regions which you could not reach
but with distress of the souls; most surely your Lord is Compassionate,
Merciful.

016.008
Y: And (He has created) horses, mules, and donkeys, for you to ride and
use for show; and He has created (other) things of which ye have no
knowledge.

P: And horses and mules and asses (hath He created) that ye may ride
them, and for ornament. And He createth that which ye know not.

S: And (He made) horses and mules and asses that you might ride upon
them and as an ornament; and He creates what you do not know.

016.009
Y: And unto Allah leads straight the Way, but there are ways that turn
aside: if Allah had willed, He could have guided all of you.

P: And Allah's is the direction of the way, and some (roads) go not
straight. And had He willed He would have led you all aright.

S: And upon Allah it rests to show the right way, and there are some
deviating (ways); and if He please He would certainly guide you all
aright.

016.010
Y: It is He who sends down rain from the sky: from it ye drink, and out
of it (grows) the vegetation on which ye feed your cattle.

P: He it is Who sendeth down water from the sky, whence ye have drink,
and whence are trees on which ye send your beasts to pasture.

S: He it is Who sends down water from the cloud for you; it gives drink,
and by it (grow) the trees upon which you pasture.

016.011
Y: With it He produces for you corn, olives, date-palms, grapes and
every kind of fruit: verily in this is a sign for those who give
thought.

P: Therewith He causeth crops to grow for you, and the olive and the
date-palm and grapes and all kinds of fruit. Lo! herein is indeed a
portent for people who reflect.

S: He causes to grow for you thereby herbage, and the olives, and the
palm trees, and the grapes, and of all the fruits; most surely there is
a sign in this for a people who reflect.

016.012
Y: He has made subject to you the Night and the Day; the sun and the
moon; and the stars are in subjection by His Command: verily in this
are Signs for men who are wise.

P: And He hath constrained the night and the day and the sun and the
moon to be of service unto you, and the stars are made subservient by
His command. Lo! herein indeed are portents for people who have sense.

S: And He has made subservient for you the night and the day and the sun
and the moon, and the stars are made subservient by His commandment;
most surely there are signs in this for a people who ponder;

016.013
Y: And the things on this earth which He has multiplied in varying
colours (and qualities): verily in this is a sign for men who celebrate
the praises of Allah (in gratitude).

P: And whatsoever He hath created for you in the earth of divers hues,
lo! therein is indeed a portent for people who take heed.

S: And what He has created in the earth of varied hues most surely there
is a sign in this for a people who are mindful.

016.014
Y: It is He Who has made the sea subject, that ye may eat thereof flesh
that is fresh and tender, and that ye may extract therefrom ornaments
to wear; and thou seest the ships therein that plough the waves, that
ye may seek (thus) of the bounty of Allah and that ye may be grateful.

P: And He it is Who hath constrained the sea to be of service that ye
eat fresh meat from thence, and bring forth from thence ornaments which
ye wear. And thou seest the ships ploughing it that ye (mankind) may
seek of His bounty and that haply ye may give thanks.

S: And He it is Who has made the sea subservient that you may eat fresh
flesh from it and bring forth from it ornaments which you wear, and you
see the ships cleaving through it, and that you might seek of His
bounty and that you may give thanks.

016.015
Y: And He has set up on the earth mountains standing firm, lest it
should shake with you; and rivers and roads; that ye may guide
yourselves;

P: And He hath cast into the earth firm hills that it quake not with
you, and streams and roads that ye may find a way.

S: And He has cast great mountains in the earth lest it might be
convulsed with you, and rivers and roads that you may go aright,

016.016
Y: And marks and sign-posts; and by the stars (men) guide themselves.

P: And landmarks (too), and by the star they find a way.

S: And landmarks; and by the stars they find the right way.

016.017
Y: Is then He Who creates like one that creates not? Will ye not receive
admonition?

P: Is He then Who createth as him who createth not? Will ye not then
remember?

S: Is He then Who creates like him who does not create? Do you not then
mind?

016.018
Y: If ye would count up the favours of Allah, never would ye be able to
number them: for Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful.

P: And if ye would count the favour of Allah ye cannot reckon it. Lo!
Allah is indeed Forgiving, Merciful.

S: And if you would count Allah's favors, you will not be able to number
them; most surely Allah is Forgiving, Merciful.

016.019
Y: And Allah doth know what ye conceal, and what ye reveal.

P: And Allah knoweth that which ye keep hidden and that which ye
proclaim.

S: And Allah knows what you conceal and what you do openly.

016.020
Y: Those whom they invoke besides Allah create nothing and are
themselves created.

P: Those unto whom they cry beside Allah created naught, but are
themselves created.

S: And those whom they call on besides Allah have not created anything
while they are themselves created;

016.021
Y: (They are things) dead, lifeless: nor do they know when they will be
raised up.

P: (They are) dead, not living. And they know not when they will be
raised.

S: Dead (are they), not living, and they know not when they shall be
raised.

016.022
Y: Your Allah is one Allah: as to those who believe not in the
Hereafter, their hearts refuse to know, and they are arrogant.

P: Your Allah is One Allah. But as for those who believe not in the
Hereafter their hearts refuse to know, for they are proud.

S: Your God is one Allah; so (as for) those who do not believe in the
hereafter, their hearts are ignorant and they are proud.

016.023
Y: Undoubtedly Allah doth know what they conceal, and what they reveal:
verily He loveth not the arrogant.

P: Assuredly Allah knoweth that which they keep hidden and that which
they proclaim. Lo! He loveth not the proud.

S: Truly Allah knows what they hide and what they manifest; surely He
does not love the proud.

016.024
Y: When it is said to them, "What is it that your Lord has revealed?"
they say, "Tales of the ancients!"

P: And when it is said unto them: What hath your Lord revealed? they
say: (Mere) fables of the men of old,

S: And when it is said to them, what is it that your Lord has revealed?
They say: Stories of the ancients;

016.025
Y: Let them bear, on the Day of Judgment, their own burdens in full, and
also (something) of the burdens of those without knowledge, whom they
misled. Alas, how grievous the burdens they will bear!

P: That they may bear their burdens undiminished on the Day of
Resurrection, with somewhat of the burdens of those whom they mislead
without knowledge. Ah! evil is that which they bear!

S: That they may bear their burdens entirely on the day of resurrection
and also of the burdens of those whom they lead astray without
knowledge; now surely evil is what they bear.

016.026
Y: Those before them did also plot (against Allah's Way): but Allah took
their structures from their foundations, and the roof fell down on them
from above; and the Wrath seized them from directions they did not
perceive.

P: Those before them plotted, so Allah struck at the foundations of
their building, and then the roof fell down upon them from above them,
and the doom came on them whence they knew not;

S: Those before them did indeed devise plans, but Allah demolished their
building from the foundations, so the roof fell down on them from above
them, and the punishment came to them from whence they did not
perceive.

016.027
Y: Then, on the Day of Judgment, He will cover them with shame, and say:
"Where are My 'partners' concerning whom ye used to dispute (with the
godly)?" Those endued with knowledge will say: "This Day, indeed, are
the Unbelievers covered with shame and misery,-"

P: Then on the Day of Resurrection He will disgrace them and will say:
Where are My partners, for whose sake ye opposed (My guidance)? Those
who have been given knowledge will say: Disgrace this day and evil are
upon the disbelievers,

S: Then on the resurrection day He will bring them to disgrace and say:
Where are the associates you gave Me, for whose sake you became
hostile? Those who are given the knowledge will say: Surely the
disgrace and the evil are this day upon the unbelievers:

016.028
Y: "(Namely) those whose lives the angels take in a state of wrong-doing
to their own souls." Then would they offer submission (with the
pretence), "We did no evil (knowingly)." (The angels will reply), "Nay,
but verily Allah knoweth all that ye did;"

P: Whom the angels cause to die while they are wronging themselves. Then
will they make full submission (saying): We used not to do any wrong.
Nay! Surely Allah is Knower of what ye used to do.

S: Those whom the angels cause to die while they are unjust to
themselves. Then would they offer submission: We used not to do any
evil. Aye! surely Allah knows what you did.

016.029
Y: "So enter the gates of Hell, to dwell therein. Thus evil indeed is
the abode of the arrogant."

P: So enter the gates of hell, to dwell therein for ever. Woeful indeed
will be the lodging of the arrogant.

S: Therefore enter the gates of hell, to abide therein; so certainly
evil is the dwelling place of the proud.

016.030
Y: To the righteous (when) it is said, "What is it that your Lord has
revealed?" they say, "All that is good." To those who do good, there is
good in this world, and the Home of the Hereafter is even better and
excellent indeed is the Home of the righteous,-

P: And it is said unto those who ward off (evil): What hath your Lord
revealed? They say: Good. For those who do good in this world there is
a good (reward) and the home of the Hereafter will be better. Pleasant
indeed will be the home of those who ward off (evil) -

S: And it is said to those who guard (against evil): What is it that
your Lord has revealed? They say, Good. For those who do good in this
world is good, and certainly the abode of the hereafter is better; and
certainly most excellent is the abode of those who guard (against
evil);

016.031
Y: Gardens of Eternity which they will enter: beneath them flow
(pleasant) rivers: they will have therein all that they wish: thus doth
Allah reward the righteous,-

P: Gardens of Eden which they enter, underneath which rivers flow,
wherein they have what they will. Thus Allah repayeth those who ward
off (evil),

S: The gardens of perpetuity, they shall enter them, rivers flowing
beneath them; they shall have in them what they please. Thus does Allah
reward those who guard (against evil),

016.032
Y: (Namely) those whose lives the angels take in a state of purity,
saying (to them), "Peace be on you; enter ye the Garden, because of
(the good) which ye did (in the world)."

P: Those whom the angels cause to die (when they are) good. They say:
Peace be unto you! Enter the Garden because of what ye used to do.

S: Those whom the angels cause to die in a good state, saying: Peace be
on you: enter the garden for what you did.

016.033
Y: Do the (ungodly) wait until the angels come to them, or there comes
the Command of thy Lord (for their doom)? So did those who went before
them. But Allah wronged them not: nay, they wronged their own souls.

P: Await they aught say that the angels should come unto them or thy
Lord's command should come to pass? Even so did those before them.
Allah wronged them not, but they did wrong themselves,

S: They do not wait aught but that the angels should come to them or
that the commandment of your Lord should come to pass. Thus did those
before them; and Allah was not unjust to them, but they were unjust to
themselves.

016.034
Y: But the evil results of their deeds overtook them, and that very
(Wrath) at which they had scoffed hemmed them in.

P: So that the evils of what they did smote them, and that which they
used to mock surrounded them.

S: So the evil (consequences) of what they did shall afflict them and
that which they mocked shall encompass them.

016.035
Y: The worshippers of false gods say: "If Allah had so willed, we should
not have worshipped aught but Him - neither we nor our fathers,- nor
should we have prescribed prohibitions other than His." So did those
who went before them. But what is the mission of messengers but to
preach the Clear Message?

P: And the idolaters say: Had Allah willed, we had not worshipped aught
beside Him, we and our fathers, nor had we forbidden aught without
(command from) Him. Even so did those before them. Are the messengers
charged with aught save plain conveyance (of the message)?

S: And they who give associates (to Allah) say: If Allah had pleased, we
would not have served anything besides Allah, (neither) we nor our
fathers, nor would we have prohibited anything without (order from)
Him. Thus did those before them; is then aught incumbent upon the
messengers except a plain delivery (of the message)?

016.036
Y: For We assuredly sent amongst every People a messenger, (with the
Command), "Serve Allah, and eschew Evil": of the People were some whom
Allah guided, and some on whom error became inevitably (established).
So travel through the earth, and see what was the end of those who
denied (the Truth).

P: And verily We have raised in every nation a messenger, (proclaiming):
Serve Allah and shun false gods. Then some of them (there were) whom
Allah guided, and some of them (there were) upon whom error had just
hold. Do but travel in the land and see the nature of the consequence
for the deniers!

S: And certainly We raised in every nation a messenger saying: Serve
Allah and shun the Shaitan. So there were some of them whom Allah
guided and there were others against whom error was due; therefore
travel in the land, then see what was the end of the rejecters.

016.037
Y: If thou art anxious for their guidance, yet Allah guideth not such as
He leaves to stray, and there is none to help them.

P: Even if thou (O Muhammad) desirest their right guidance, still Allah
assuredly will not guide him who misleadeth. Such have no helpers.

S: If you desire for their guidance, yet surely Allah does not guide him
who leads astray, nor shall they have any helpers.

016.038
Y: They swear their strongest oaths by Allah, that Allah will not raise
up those who die: Nay, but it is a promise (binding) on Him in truth:
but most among mankind realise it not.

P: And they swear by Allah their most binding oaths (that) Allah will
not raise up him who dieth. Nay, but it is a promise (binding) upon Him
in truth, but most of mankind know not,

S: And they swear by Allah with the most energetic of their oaths: Allah
will not raise up him who dies. Yea! it is a promise binding on Him,
quite true, but most people do not know;

016.039
Y: (They must be raised up), in order that He may manifest to them the
truth of that wherein they differ, and that the rejecters of Truth may
realise that they had indeed (surrendered to) Falsehood.

P: That He may explain unto them that wherein they differ, and that
those who disbelieved may know that they were liars.

S: So that He might make manifest to them that about which they differ,
and that those who disbelieve might know that they were liars.

016.040
Y: For to anything which We have willed, We but say the word, "Be", and
it is.

P: And Our word unto a thing, when We intend it, is only that We say
unto it: Be! and it is.

S: Our word for a thing when We intend it, is only that We say to it,
Be, and it is.

016.041
Y: To those who leave their homes in the cause of Allah, after suffering
oppression,- We will assuredly give a goodly home in this world; but
truly the reward of the Hereafter will be greater. If they only
realised (this)!

P: And those who became fugitives for the cause of Allah after they had
been oppressed, We verily shall give them goodly lodging in the world,
and surely the reward of the Hereafter is greater, if they but knew;

S: And those who fly for Allah's sake after they are oppressed, We will
most certainly give them a good abode in the world, and the reward of
the hereafter is certainly much greater, did they but know;

016.042
Y: (They are) those who persevere in patience, and put their trust on
their Lord.

P: Such as are steadfast and put their trust in Allah.

S: Those who are patient and on their Lord do they rely.

016.043
Y: And before thee also the messengers We sent were but men, to whom We
granted inspiration: if ye realise this not, ask of those who possess
the Message.

P: And We sent not (as Our messengers) before thee other than men whom
We inspired - Ask the followers of the Remembrance if ye know not! -

S: And We did not send before you any but men to whom We sent
revelation-- so ask the followers of the Reminder if you do not know--

016.044
Y: (We sent them) with Clear Signs and Books of dark prophecies; and We
have sent down unto thee (also) the Message; that thou mayest explain
clearly to men what is sent for them, and that they may give thought.

P: With clear proofs and writings; and We have revealed unto thee the
Remembrance that thou mayst explain to mankind that which hath been
revealed for them, and that haply they may reflect.

S: With clear arguments and scriptures; and We have revealed to you the
Reminder that you may make clear to men what has been revealed to them,
and that haply they may reflect.

016.045
Y: Do then those who devise evil (plots) feel secure that Allah will not
cause the earth to swallow them up, or that the Wrath will not seize
them from directions they little perceive?-

P: Are they who plan ill-deeds then secure that Allah will not cause the
earth to swallow them, or that the doom will not come on them whence
they know not?

S: Do they then who plan evil (deeds) feel secure (of this) that Allah
will not cause the earth to swallow them or that punishment may not
overtake them from whence they do not perceive?

016.046
Y: Or that He may not call them to account in the midst of their goings
to and fro, without a chance of their frustrating Him?-

P: Or that He will not seize them in their going to and fro so that
there be no escape for them?

S: Or that He may not seize them in the course of their journeys, then
shall they not escape;

016.047
Y: Or that He may not call them to account by a process of slow wastage
- for thy Lord is indeed full of kindness and mercy.

P: Or that He will not seize them with a gradual wasting? Lo! thy Lord
is indeed Full of Pity, Merciful.

S: Or that He may not seize them by causing them to suffer gradual loss,
for your Lord is most surely Compassionate, Merciful.

016.048
Y: Do they not look at Allah's creation, (even) among (inanimate)
things,- How their (very) shadows turn round, from the right and the
left, prostrating themselves to Allah, and that in the humblest manner?

P: Have they not observed all things that Allah hath created, how their
shadows incline to the right and to the left, making prostration unto
Allah, and they are lowly?

S: Do they not consider every thing that Allah has created? Its (very)
shadows return from right and left, making obeisance to Allah while
they are in utter abasement.

016.049
Y: And to Allah doth obeisance all that is in the heavens and on earth,
whether moving (living) creatures or the angels: for none are arrogant
(before their Lord).

P: And unto Allah maketh prostration whatsoever is in the heavens and
whatsoever is in the earth of living creatures, and the angels (also)
and they are not proud.

S: And whatever creature that is in the heavens and that is in the earth
makes obeisance to Allah (only), and the angels (too) and they do not
show pride.

016.050
Y: They all revere their Lord, high above them, and they do all that
they are commanded.

P: They fear their Lord above them, and do what they are bidden.

S: They fear their Lord above them and do what they are commanded.

016.051
Y: Allah has said: "Take not (for worship) two gods: for He is just One
Allah: then fear Me (and Me alone)."

P: Allah hath said: Choose not two gods. There is only One Allah. So of
Me, Me only, be in awe.

S: And Allah has said: Take not two gods, He is only one Allah; so of Me
alone should you be afraid.

016.052
Y: To Him belongs whatever is in the heavens and on earth, and to Him is
duty due always: then will ye fear other than Allah?

P: Unto Him belongeth whatsoever is in the heavens and the earth, and
religion is His for ever. Will ye then fear any other than Allah?

S: And whatever is in the heavens and the earth is His, and to Him
should obedience be (rendered) constantly; will you then guard against
other than (the punishment of) Allah?

016.053
Y: And ye have no good thing but is from Allah: and moreover, when ye
are touched by distress, unto Him ye cry with groans;

P: And whatever of comfort ye enjoy, it is from Allah. Then, when
misfortune reacheth you, unto Him ye cry for help.

S: And whatever favor is (bestowed) on you it is from Allah; then when
evil afflicts you, to Him do you cry for aid.

016.054
Y: Yet, when He removes the distress from you, behold! some of you turn
to other gods to join with their Lord-

P: And afterward, when He hath rid you of the misfortune, behold! a set
of you attribute partners to their Lord,

S: Yet when He removes the evil from you, lo! a party of you associate
others with their Lord;

016.055
Y: (As if) to show their ingratitude for the favours we have bestowed on
them! then enjoy (your brief day): but soon will ye know (your folly)!

P: So as to deny that which We have given them. Then enjoy life (while
ye may), for ye will come to know.

S: So that they be ungrateful for what We have given them; then enjoy
yourselves; for soon will you know.

016.056
Y: And they (even) assign, to things they do not know, a portion out of
that which We have bestowed for their sustenance! By Allah, ye shall
certainly be called to account for your false inventions.

P: And they assign a portion of that which We have given them unto what
they know not. By Allah! but ye will indeed be asked concerning (all)
that ye used to invent.

S: And they set apart for what they do not know a portion of what We
have given them. By Allah, you shall most certainly be questioned about
that which you forged.

016.057
Y: And they assign daughters for Allah! - Glory be to Him! - and for
themselves (sons,- the issue) they desire!

P: And they assign unto Allah daughters - Be He Glorified! - and unto
themselves what they desire;

S: And they ascribe daughters to Allah, glory be to Him; and for
themselves (they would have) what they desire.

016.058
Y: When news is brought to one of them, of (the birth of) a female
(child), his face darkens, and he is filled with inward grief!

P: When if one of them receiveth tidings of the birth of a female, his
face remaineth darkened, and he is wroth inwardly.

S: And when a daughter is announced to one of them his face becomes
black and he is full of wrath.

016.059
Y: With shame does he hide himself from his people, because of the bad
news he has had! Shall he retain it on (sufferance and) contempt, or
bury it in the dust? Ah! what an evil (choice) they decide on?

P: He hideth himself from the folk because of the evil of that whereof
he hath had tidings, (asking himself): Shall he keep it in contempt, or
bury it beneath the dust. Verily evil is their judgment.

S: He hides himself from the people because of the evil of that which is
announced to him. Shall he keep it with disgrace or bury it (alive) in
the dust? Now surely evil is what they judge.

016.060
Y: To those who believe not in the Hereafter, applies the similitude of
evil: to Allah applies the highest similitude: for He is the Exalted in
Power, full of Wisdom.

P: For those who believe not in the Hereafter is an evil similitude, and
Allah's is the Sublime Similitude. He is the Mighty, the Wise.

S: For those who do not believe in the hereafter is an evil attribute,
and Allah's is the loftiest attribute; and He is the Mighty, the Wise.

016.061
Y: If Allah were to punish men for their wrong-doing, He would not
leave, on the (earth), a single living creature: but He gives them
respite for a stated Term: When their Term expires, they would not be
able to delay (the punishment) for a single hour, just as they would
not be able to anticipate it (for a single hour).

P: If Allah were to take mankind to task for their wrong-doing, he would
not leave hereon a living creature, but He reprieveth them to an
appointed term, and when their term cometh they cannot put (it) off an
hour nor (yet) advance (it).

S: And if Allah had destroyed men for their iniquity, He would not leave
on the earth a single creature, but He respites them till an appointed
time; so when their doom will come they shall not be able to delay (it)
an hour nor can they bring (it) on (before its time).

016.062
Y: They attribute to Allah what they hate (for themselves), and their
tongues assert the falsehood that all good things are for themselves:
without doubt for them is the Fire, and they will be the first to be
hastened on into it!

P: And they assign unto Allah that which they (themselves) dislike, and
their tongues expound the lie that the better portion will be theirs.
Assuredly theirs will be the Fire, and they will be abandoned.

S: And they ascribe to Allah what they (themselves) hate and their
tongues relate the lie that they shall have the good; there is no
avoiding it that for them is the fire and that they shall be sent
before.

016.063
Y: By Allah, We (also) sent (Our messengers) to Peoples before thee; but
Satan made, (to the wicked), their own acts seem alluring: He is also
their patron today, but they shall have a most grievous penalty.

P: By Allah, We verily sent messengers unto the nations before thee, but
the devil made their deeds fairseeming unto them. So he is their patron
this day, and theirs will be a painful doom.

S: By Allah, most certainly We sent (messengers) to nations before you,
but the Shaitan made their deeds fair-seeming to them, so he is their
guardian today, and they shall have a painful punishment.

016.064
Y: And We sent down the Book to thee for the express purpose, that thou
shouldst make clear to them those things in which they differ, and that
it should be a guide and a mercy to those who believe.

P: And We have revealed the Scripture unto thee only that thou mayst
explain unto them that wherein they differ, and (as) a guidance and a
mercy for a people who believe.

S: And We have not revealed to you the Book except that you may make
clear to them that about which they differ, and (as) a guidance and a
mercy for a people who believe.

016.065
Y: And Allah sends down rain from the skies, and gives therewith life to
the earth after its death: verily in this is a Sign for those who
listen.

P: Allah sendeth down water from the sky and therewith reviveth the
earth after her death. Lo! herein is indeed a portent for a folk who
hear.

S: And Allah has sent down water from the cloud and therewith given life
to the earth after its death; most surely there is a sign in this for a
people who would listen.

016.066
Y: And verily in cattle (too) will ye find an instructive sign. From
what is within their bodies between excretions and blood, We produce,
for your drink, milk, pure and agreeable to those who drink it.

P: And lo! in the cattle there is a lesson for you. We give you to drink
of that which is in their bellies, from betwixt the refuse and the
blood, pure milk palatable to the drinkers.

S: And most surely there is a lesson for you in the cattle; We give you
to drink of what is in their bellies-- from betwixt the feces and the
blood-- pure milk, easy and agreeable to swallow for those who drink.

016.067
Y: And from the fruit of the date-palm and the vine, ye get out
wholesome drink and food: behold, in this also is a sign for those who
are wise.

P: And of the fruits of the date-palm, and grapes, whence ye derive
strong drink and (also) good nourishment. Lo! therein is indeed a
portent for people who have sense.

S: And of the fruits of the palms and the grapes-- you obtain from them
intoxication and goodly provision; most surely there is a sign in this
for a people who ponder.

016.068
Y: And thy Lord taught the Bee to build its cells in hills, on trees,
and in (men's) habitations;

P: And thy Lord inspired the bee, saying: Choose thou habitations in the
hills and in the trees and in that which they thatch;

S: And your Lord revealed to the bee saying: Make hives in the mountains
and in the trees and in what they build:

016.069
Y: Then to eat of all the produce (of the earth), and find with skill
the spacious paths of its Lord: there issues from within their bodies a
drink of varying colours, wherein is healing for men: verily in this is
a Sign for those who give thought.

P: Then eat of all fruits, and follow the ways of thy Lord, made smooth
(for thee). There cometh forth from their bellies a drink divers of
hues, wherein is healing for mankind. Lo! herein is indeed a portent
for people who reflect.

S: Then eat of all the fruits and walk in the ways of your Lord
submissively. There comes forth from within it a beverage of many
colours, in which there is healing for men; most surely there is a sign
in this for a people who reflect.

016.070
Y: It is Allah who creates you and takes your souls at death; and of you
there are some who are sent back to a feeble age, so that they know
nothing after having known (much): for Allah is All-Knowing,
All-Powerful.

P: And Allah createth you, then causeth you to die, and among you is he
who is brought back to the most abject stage of life, so that he
knoweth nothing after (having had) knowledge. Lo! Allah is Knower,
Powerful.

S: And Allah has created you, then He causes you to die, and of you is
he who is brought back to the worst part of life, so that after having
knowledge he does not know anything; surely Allah is Knowing, Powerful.

016.071
Y: Allah has bestowed His gifts of sustenance more freely on some of you
than on others: those more favoured are not going to throw back their
gifts to those whom their right hands possess, so as to be equal in
that respect. Will they then deny the favours of Allah?

P: And Allah hath favoured some of you above others in provision. Now
those who are more favoured will by no means hand over their provision
to those (slaves) whom their right hands possess, so that they may be
equal with them in respect thereof. Is it then the grace of Allah that
they deny?

S: And Allah has made some of you excel others in the means of
subsistence, so those who are made to excel do not give away their
sustenance to those whom their right hands possess so that they should
be equal therein; is it then the favor of Allah which they deny?

016.072
Y: And Allah has made for you mates (and companions) of your own nature,
and made for you, out of them, sons and daughters and grandchildren,
and provided for you sustenance of the best: will they then believe in
vain things, and be ungrateful for Allah's favours?-

P: And Allah hath given you wives of your own kind, and hath given you,
from your wives, sons and grandsons, and hath made provision of good
things for you. Is it then in vanity that they believe and in the grace
of Allah that they disbelieve?

S: And Allah has made wives for you from among yourselves, and has given
you sons and grandchildren from your wives, and has given you of the
good things; is it then in the falsehood that they believe while it is
in the favor of Allah that they disbelieve?

016.073
Y: And worship others than Allah,- such as have no power of providing
them, for sustenance, with anything in heavens or earth, and cannot
possibly have such power?

P: And they worship beside Allah that which owneth no provision
whatsoever for them from the heavens or the earth, nor have they (whom
they worship) any power.

S: And they serve besides Allah that which does not control for them any
sustenance at all from the heavens and the earth, nor have they any
power.

016.074
Y: Invent not similitudes for Allah: for Allah knoweth, and ye know not.

P: So coin not similitudes for Allah. Lo! Allah knoweth; ye know not.

S: Therefore do not give likenesses to Allah; surely Allah knows and you
do not know.

016.075
Y: Allah sets forth the Parable (of two men: one) a slave under the
dominion of another; He has no power of any sort; and (the other) a man
on whom We have bestowed goodly favours from Ourselves, and he spends
thereof (freely), privately and publicly: are the two equal? (By no
means;) praise be to Allah. But most of them understand not.

P: Allah coineth a similitude: (on the one hand) a (mere) chattel slave,
who hath control of nothing, and (on the other hand) one on whom we
have bestowed a fair provision from Us, and he spendeth thereof
secretly and openly. Are they equal? Praise be to Allah! But most of
them know not.

S: Allah sets forth a parable: (consider) a slave, the property of
another, (who) has no power over anything, and one whom We have granted
from Ourselves a goodly sustenance so he spends from it secretly and
openly; are the two alike? (All) praise is due to Allah! Nay, most of
them do not know.

016.076
Y: Allah sets forth (another) Parable of two men: one of them dumb, with
no power of any sort; a wearisome burden is he to his master; whichever
way be directs him, he brings no good: is such a man equal with one who
commands Justice, and is on a Straight Way?

P: And Allah coineth a similitude: Two men, one of them dumb, having
control of nothing, and he is a burden on his owner; whithersoever he
directeth him to go, he bringeth no good. Is he equal with one who
enjoineth justice and followeth a straight path (of conduct)?

S: And Allah sets forth a parable of two men; one of them is dumb, not
able to do anything, and he is a burden to his master; wherever he
sends him, he brings no good; can he be held equal with him who enjoins
what is just, and he (himself) is on the right path?

016.077
Y: To Allah belongeth the Mystery of the heavens and the earth. And the
Decision of the Hour (of Judgment) is as the twinkling of an eye, or
even quicker: for Allah hath power over all things.

P: And unto Allah belongeth the Unseen of the heavens and the earth, and
the matter of the Hour (of Doom) is but as a twinkling of the eye, or
it is nearer still. Lo! Allah is Able to do all things.

S: And Allah's is the unseen of the heavens and the earth; and the
matter of the hour is but as the twinkling of an eye or it is higher
still; surely Allah has power over all things.

016.078
Y: It is He Who brought you forth from the wombs of your mothers when ye
knew nothing; and He gave you hearing and sight and intelligence and
affections: that ye may give thanks (to Allah).

P: And Allah brought you forth from the wombs of your mothers knowing
nothing, and gave you hearing and sight and hearts that haply ye might
give thanks.

S: And Allah has brought you forth from the wombs of your mothers-- you
did not know anything-- and He gave you hearing and sight and hearts
that you may give thanks.

016.079
Y: Do they not look at the birds, held poised in the midst of (the air
and) the sky? Nothing holds them up but (the power of) Allah. Verily in
this are signs for those who believe.

P: Have they not seen the birds obedient in mid-air? None holdeth them
save Allah. Lo! herein, verily, are portents for a people who believe.

S: Do they not see the birds, constrained in the middle of the sky? None
withholds them but Allah; most surely there are signs in this for a
people who believe.

016.080
Y: It is Allah Who made your habitations homes of rest and quiet for
you; and made for you, out of the skins of animals, (tents for)
dwellings, which ye find so light (and handy) when ye travel and when
ye stop (in your travels); and out of their wool, and their soft fibres
(between wool and hair), and their hair, rich stuff and articles of
convenience (to serve you) for a time.

P: And Allah hath given you in your houses an abode, and hath given you
(also), of the hides of cattle, houses which ye find light (to carry)
on the day of migration and on the day of pitching camp; and of their
wool and their fur and their hair, caparison and comfort for a while.

S: And Allah has given you a place to abide in your houses, and He has
given you tents of the skins of cattle which you find light to carry on
the day of your march and on the day of your halting, and of their wool
and their fur and their hair (He has given you) household stuff and a
provision for a time.

016.081
Y: It is Allah Who made out of the things He created, some things to
give you shade; of the hills He made some for your shelter; He made you
garments to protect you from heat, and coats of mail to protect you
from your (mutual) violence. Thus does He complete His favours on you,
that ye may bow to His Will (in Islam).

P: And Allah hath given you, of that which He hath created, shelter from
the sun; and hath given you places of refuge in the mountains, and hath
given you coats to ward off the heat from you, and coats (of armour) to
save you from your own foolhardiness. Thus doth He perfect His favour
unto you, in order that ye may surrender (unto Him).

S: And Allah has made for you of what He has created shelters, and He
has given you in the mountains places of retreat, and He has given you
garments to preserve you from the heat and coats of mail to preserve
you in your fighting; even thus does He complete His favor upon you,
that haply you may submit.

016.082
Y: But if they turn away, thy duty is only to preach the clear Message.

P: Then, if they turn away, thy duty (O Muhammad) is but plain
conveyance (of the message).

S: But if they turn back, then on you devolves only the clear
deliverance (of the message).

016.083
Y: They recognise the favours of Allah; then they deny them; and most of
them are (creatures) ungrateful.

P: They know the favour of Allah and then deny it. Most of them are
ingrates.

S: They recognize the favor of Allah, yet they deny it, and most of them
are ungrateful.

016.084
Y: One Day We shall raise from all Peoples a Witness: then will no
excuse be accepted from Unbelievers, nor will they receive any favours.

P: And (bethink you of) the day when we raise up of every nation a
witness, then there is no leave for disbelievers, nor are they allowed
to make amends.

S: And on the day when We will raise up a witness out of every nation,
then shall no permission be given to those who disbelieve, nor shall
they be made to solicit favor.

016.085
Y: When the wrong-doers (actually) see the Penalty, then will it in no
way be mitigated, nor will they then receive respite.

P: And when those who did wrong behold the doom, it will not be made
light for them, nor will they be reprieved.

S: And when those who are unjust shall see the chastisement, it shall
not be lightened for them, nor shall they be respited. .

016.086
Y: When those who gave partners to Allah will see their "partners", they
will say: "Our Lord! these are our 'partners,' those whom we used to
invoke besides Thee." But they will throw back their word at them (and
say): "Indeed ye are liars!"

P: And when those who ascribed partners to Allah behold those partners
of theirs, they will say: Our Lord! these are our partners unto whom we
used to cry instead of Thee. But they will fling to them the saying:
Lo! ye verily are liars!

S: And when those who associate (others with Allah) shall see their
associate-gods, they shall say: Our Lord, these are our associate-gods
on whom we called besides Thee. But they will give them back the reply:
Most surely you are liars.

016.087
Y: That Day shall they (openly) show (their) submission to Allah; and
all their inventions shall leave them in the lurch.

P: And they proffer unto Allah submission on that day, and all that they
used to invent hath failed them.

S: And they shall tender submission to Allah on that day; and what they
used to forge shall depart from them.

016.088
Y: Those who reject Allah and hinder (men) from the Path of Allah - for
them will We add Penalty to Penalty; for that they used to spread
mischief.

P: For those who disbelieve and debar (men) from the way of Allah, We
add doom to doom because they wrought corruption,

S: (As for) those who disbelieve and turn away from Allah's way, We will
add chastisement to their chastisement because they made mischief.

016.089
Y: One day We shall raise from all Peoples a witness against them, from
amongst themselves: and We shall bring thee as a witness against these
(thy people): and We have sent down to thee the Book explaining all
things, a Guide, a Mercy, and Glad Tidings to Muslims.

P: And (bethink you of) the day when We raise in every nation a witness
against them of their own folk, and We bring thee (Muhammad) as a
witness against these. And We reveal the Scripture unto thee as an
exposition of all things, and a guidance and a mercy and good tidings
for those who have surrendered (to Allah).

S: And on the day when We will raise up in every people a witness
against them from among themselves, and bring you as a witness against
these-- and We have revealed the Book to you explaining clearly
everything, and a guidance and mercy and good news for those who
submit.

016.090
Y: Allah commands justice, the doing of good, and liberality to kith and
kin, and He forbids all shameful deeds, and injustice and rebellion: He
instructs you, that ye may receive admonition.

P: Lo! Allah enjoineth justice and kindness, and giving to kinsfolk, and
forbiddeth lewdness and abomination and wickedness. He exhorteth you in
order that ye may take heed.

S: Surely Allah enjoins the doing of justice and the doing of good (to
others) and the giving to the kindred, and He forbids indecency and
evil and rebellion; He admonishes you that you may be mindful.

016.091
Y: Fulfil the Covenant of Allah when ye have entered into it, and break
not your oaths after ye have confirmed them; indeed ye have made Allah
your surety; for Allah knoweth all that ye do.

P: Fulfil the covenant of Allah when ye have covenanted, and break not
your oaths after the asseveration of them, and after ye have made Allah
surety over you. Lo! Allah knoweth what ye do.

S: And fulfill the covenant of Allah when you have made a covenant, and
do not break the oaths after making them fast, and you have indeed made
Allah a surety for you; surely Allah knows what you do.

016.092
Y: And be not like a woman who breaks into untwisted strands the yarn
which she has spun, after it has become strong. Nor take your oaths to
practise deception between yourselves, lest one party should be more
numerous than another: for Allah will test you by this; and on the Day
of Judgment He will certainly make clear to you (the truth of) that
wherein ye disagree.

P: And be not like unto her who unravelleth the thread, after she hath
made it strong, to thin filaments, making your oaths a deceit between
you because of a nation being more numerous than (another) nation.
Allah only trieth you thereby, and He verily will explain to you on the
Day of Resurrection that wherein ye differed.

S: And be not like her who unravels her yarn, disintegrating it into
pieces after she has spun it strongly. You make your oaths to be means
of deceit between you because (one) nation is more numerous than
(another) nation. Allah only tries you by this; and He will most
certainly make clear to you on the resurrection day that about which
you differed.

016.093
Y: If Allah so willed, He could make you all one people: But He leaves
straying whom He pleases, and He guides whom He pleases: but ye shall
certainly be called to account for all your actions.

P: Had Allah willed He could have made you (all) one nation, but He
sendeth whom He will astray and guideth whom He will, and ye will
indeed be asked of what ye used to do.

S: And if Allah please He would certainly make you a single nation, but
He causes to err whom He pleases and guides whom He pleases; and most
certainly you will be questioned as to what you did.

016.094
Y: And take not your oaths, to practise deception between yourselves,
with the result that someone's foot may slip after it was firmly
planted, and ye may have to taste the evil (consequences) of having
hindered (men) from the Path of Allah, and a Mighty Wrath descend on
you.

P: Make not your oaths a deceit between you, lest a foot should slip
after being firmly planted and ye should taste evil forasmuch as ye
debarred (men) from the way of Allah, and yours should be an awful
doom.

S: And do not make your oaths a means of deceit between you, lest a foot
should slip after its stability and you should taste evil because you
turned away from Allah's way and grievous punishment be your (lot).

016.095
Y: Nor sell the covenant of Allah for a miserable price: for with Allah
is (a prize) far better for you, if ye only knew.

P: And purchase not a small gain at the price of Allah's covenant. Lo!
that which Allah hath is better for you, if ye did but know.

S: And do not take a small price in exchange for Allah's covenant;
surely what is with Allah is better for you, did you but know.

016.096
Y: What is with you must vanish: what is with Allah will endure. And We
will certainly bestow, on those who patiently persevere, their reward
according to the best of their actions.

P: That which ye have wasteth away, and that which Allah hath remaineth.
And verily We shall pay those who are steadfast a recompense in
proportion to the best of what they used to do.

S: What is with you passes away and what is with Allah is enduring; and
We will most certainly give to those who are patient their reward for
the best of what they did.

016.097
Y: Whoever works righteousness, man or woman, and has Faith, verily, to
him will We give a new Life, a life that is good and pure and We will
bestow on such their reward according to the best of their actions.

P: Whosoever doeth right, whether male or female, and is a believer, him
verily we shall quicken with good life, and We shall pay them a
recompense in proportion to the best of what they used to do.

S: Whoever does good whether male or female and he is a believer, We
will most certainly make him live a happy life, and We will most
certainly give them their reward for the best of what they did.

016.098
Y: When thou dost read the Qur'an, seek Allah's protection from Satan
the rejected one.

P: And when thou recitest the Qur'an, seek refuge in Allah from Satan
the outcast.

S: So when you recite the Quran, seek refuge with Allah from the
accursed Shaitan,

016.099
Y: No authority has he over those who believe and put their trust in
their Lord.

P: Lo! he hath no power over those who believe and put trust in their
Lord.

S: Surely he has no authority over those who believe and rely on their
Lord.

016.100
Y: His authority is over those only, who take him as patron and who join
partners with Allah.

P: His power is only over those who make a friend of him, and those who
ascribe partners unto Him (Allah).

S: His authority is only over those who befriend him and those who
associate others with Him.

016.101
Y: When We substitute one revelation for another,- and Allah knows best
what He reveals (in stages),- they say, "Thou art but a forger": but
most of them understand not.

P: And when We put a revelation in place of (another) revelation, - and
Allah knoweth best what He revealeth - they say: Lo! thou art but
inventing. Most of them know not.

S: And when We change (one) communication for (another) communication,
and Allah knows best what He reveals, they say: You are only a forger.
Nay, most of them do not know.

016.102
Y: Say, the Holy Spirit has brought the revelation from thy Lord in
Truth, in order to strengthen those who believe, and as a Guide and
Glad Tidings to Muslims.

P: Say: The holy Spirit hath delivered it from thy Lord with truth, that
it may confirm (the faith of) those who believe, and as guidance and
good tidings for those who have surrendered (to Allah).

S: Say: The Holy spirit has revealed it from your Lord with the truth,
that it may establish those who believe and as a guidance and good news
for those who submit.

016.103
Y: We know indeed that they say, "It is a man that teaches him." The
tongue of him they wickedly point to is notably foreign, while this is
Arabic, pure and clear.

P: And We know well that they say: Only a man teacheth him. The speech
of him at whom they falsely hint is outlandish, and this is clear
Arabic speech.

S: And certainly We know that they say: Only a mortal teaches him. The
tongue of him whom they reproach is barbarous, and this is clear Arabic
tongue.

016.104
Y: Those who believe not in the Signs of Allah,- Allah will not guide
them, and theirs will be a grievous Penalty.

P: Lo! those who disbelieve the revelations of Allah, Allah guideth them
not and theirs will be a painful doom.

S: (As for) those who do not believe in Allah's communications, surely
Allah will not guide them, and they shall have a painful punishment.

016.105
Y: It is those who believe not in the Signs of Allah, that forge
falsehood: it is they who lie!

P: Only they invent falsehood who believe not Allah's revelations, and
(only) they are the liars.

S: Only they forge the lie who do not believe in Allah's communications,
and these are the liars.

016.106
Y: Any one who, after accepting faith in Allah, utters Unbelief,- except
under compulsion, his heart remaining firm in Faith - but such as open
their breast to Unbelief, on them is Wrath from Allah, and theirs will
be a dreadful Penalty.

P: Whoso disbelieveth in Allah after his belief - save him who is forced
thereto and whose heart is still content with the Faith - but whoso
findeth ease in disbelief: On them is wrath from Allah. Theirs will be
an awful doom.

S: He who disbelieves in Allah after his having believed, not he who is
compelled while his heart is at rest on account of faith, but he who
opens (his) breast to disbelief-- on these is the wrath of Allah, and
they shall have a grievous chastisement.

016.107
Y: This because they love the life of this world better than the
Hereafter: and Allah will not guide those who reject Faith.

P: That is because they have chosen the life of the world rather than
the Hereafter, and because Allah guideth not the disbelieving folk.

S: This is because they love this world's life more than the hereafter,
and because Allah does not guide the unbelieving people.

016.108
Y: Those are they whose hearts, ears, and eyes Allah has sealed up, and
they take no heed.

P: Such are they whose hearts and ears and eyes Allah hath sealed. And
such are the heedless.

S: These are they on whose hearts and their hearing and their eyes Allah
has set a seal, and these are the heedless ones.

016.109
Y: Without doubt, in the Hereafter they will perish.

P: Assuredly in the Hereafter they are the losers.

S: No doubt that in the hereafter they will be the losers.

016.110
Y: But verily thy Lord,- to those who leave their homes after trials and
persecutions,- and who thereafter strive and fight for the faith and
patiently persevere,- Thy Lord, after all this is Oft-Forgiving, Most
Merciful.

P: Then lo! thy Lord - for those who became fugitives after they had
been persecuted, and then fought and were steadfast - lo! thy Lord
afterward is (for them) indeed Forgiving, Merciful.

S: Yet surely your Lord, with respect to those who fly after they are
persecuted, then they struggle hard and are patient, most surely your
Lord after that is Forgiving, Merciful.

016.111
Y: One Day every soul will come up struggling for itself, and every soul
will be recompensed (fully) for all its actions, and none will be
unjustly dealt with.

P: On the Day when every soul will come pleading for itself, and every
soul will be repaid what it did, and they will not be wronged.

S: (Remember) the day when every soul shall come, pleading for itself
and every soul shall be paid in full what it has done, and they shall
not be dealt with unjustly.

016.112
Y: Allah sets forth a Parable: a city enjoying security and quiet,
abundantly supplied with sustenance from every place: Yet was it
ungrateful for the favours of Allah: so Allah made it taste of hunger
and terror (in extremes) (closing in on it) like a garment (from every
side), because of the (evil) which (its people) wrought.

P: Allah coineth a similitude: a township that dwelt secure and well
content, its provision coming to it in abundance from every side, but
it disbelieved in Allah's favours, so Allah made it experience the garb
of dearth and fear because of what they used to do.

S: And Allah sets forth a parable: (Consider) a town safe and secure to
which its means of subsistence come in abundance from every quarter;
but it became ungrateful to Allah's favors, therefore Allah made it to
taste the utmost degree of hunger and fear because of what they
wrought.

016.113
Y: And there came to them a Messenger from among themselves, but they
falsely rejected him; so the Wrath seized them even in the midst of
their iniquities.

P: And verily there had come unto them a messenger from among them, but
they had denied him, and so the torment seized them while they were
wrong-doers.

S: And certainly there came to them a Messenger from among them, but
they rejected him, so the punishment overtook them while they were
unjust.

016.114
Y: So eat of the sustenance which Allah has provided for you, lawful and
good; and be grateful for the favours of Allah, if it is He Whom ye
serve.

P: So eat of the lawful and good food which Allah hath provided for you,
and thank the bounty of your Lord if it is Him ye serve.

S: Therefore eat of what Allah has given you, lawful and good (things),
and give thanks for Allah's favor if Him do you serve.

016.115
Y: He has only forbidden you dead meat, and blood, and the flesh of
swine, and any (food) over which the name of other than Allah has been
invoked. But if one is forced by necessity, without wilful
disobedience, nor transgressing due limits,- then Allah is
Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful.

P: He hath forbidden for you only carrion and blood and swineflesh and
that which hath been immolated in the name of any other than Allah; but
he who is driven thereto, neither craving nor transgressing, lo! then
Allah is Forgiving, Merciful.

S: He has only forbidden you what dies of itself and blood and flesh of
swine and that over which any other name than that of Allah has been
invoked, but whoever is driven to necessity, not desiring nor exceeding
the limit, then surely Allah is Forgiving, Merciful.

016.116
Y: But say not - for any false thing that your tongues may put forth,-
"This is lawful, and this is forbidden," so as to ascribe false things
to Allah. For those who ascribe false things to Allah, will never
prosper.

P: And speak not, concerning that which your own tongues qualify (as
clean or unclean), the falsehood: "This is lawful, and this is
forbidden," so that ye invent a lie against Allah. Lo! those who invent
a lie against Allah will not succeed.

S: And, for what your tongues describe, do not utter the lie, (saying)
This is lawful and this is unlawful, in order to forge a lie against
Allah; surely those who forge the lie against Allah shall not prosper.

016.117
Y: (In such falsehood) is but a paltry profit; but they will have a most
grievous Penalty.

P: A brief enjoyment (will be theirs); and theirs a painful doom.

S: A little enjoyment and they shall have a painful punishment.

016.118
Y: To the Jews We prohibited such things as We have mentioned to thee
before: We did them no wrong, but they were used to doing wrong to
themselves.

P: And unto those who are Jews We have forbidden that which We have
already related unto thee. And We wronged them not, but they were wont
to wrong themselves.

S: And for those who were Jews We prohibited what We have related to you
already, and We did them no injustice, but they were unjust to
themselves.

016.119
Y: But verily thy Lord,- to those who do wrong in ignorance, but who
thereafter repent and make amends,- thy Lord, after all this, is
Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful.

P: Then lo! thy Lord - for those who do evil in ignorance and afterward
repent and amend - lo! (for them) thy Lord is afterward indeed
Forgiving, Merciful.

S: Yet surely your Lord, with respect to those who do an evil in
ignorance, then turn after that and make amends, most surely your Lord
after that is Forgiving, Merciful.

016.120
Y: Abraham was indeed a model, devoutly obedient to Allah, (and) true in
Faith, and he joined not gods with Allah:

P: Lo! Abraham was a nation obedient to Allah, by nature upright, and he
was not of the idolaters;

S: Surely Ibrahim was an exemplar, obedient to Allah, upright, and he
was not of the polytheists.

016.121
Y: He showed his gratitude for the favours of Allah, who chose him, and
guided him to a Straight Way.

P: Thankful for His bounties; He chose him and He guided him unto a
straight path.

S: Grateful for His favors; He chose him and guided him on the right
path.

016.122
Y: And We gave him Good in this world, and he will be, in the Hereafter,
in the ranks of the Righteous.

P: And We gave him good in the world, and in the Hereafter he is among
the righteous.

S: And We gave him good in this world, and in the next he will most
surely be among the good.

016.123
Y: So We have taught thee the inspired (Message), "Follow the ways of
Abraham the True in Faith, and he joined not gods with Allah."

P: And afterward We inspired thee (Muhammad, saying): Follow the
religion of Abraham, as one by nature upright. He was not of the
idolaters.

S: Then We revealed to you: Follow the faith of Ibrahim, the upright
one, and he was not of the polytheists.

016.124
Y: The Sabbath was only made (strict) for those who disagreed (as to its
observance); But Allah will judge between them on the Day of Judgment,
as to their differences.

P: The Sabbath was appointed only for those who differed concerning it,
and lo! thy Lord will judge between them on the Day of Resurrection
concerning that wherein they used to differ.

S: The Sabbath was ordained only for those who differed about it, and
most surely your Lord will judge between them on the resurrection day
concerning that about which they differed.

016.125
Y: Invite (all) to the Way of thy Lord with wisdom and beautiful
preaching; and argue with them in ways that are best and most gracious:
for thy Lord knoweth best, who have strayed from His Path, and who
receive guidance.

P: Call unto the way of thy Lord with wisdom and fair exhortation, and
reason with them in the better way. Lo! thy Lord is Best Aware of him
who strayeth from His way, and He is Best Aware of those who go aright.

S: Call to the way of your Lord with wisdom and goodly exhortation, and
have disputations with them in the best manner; surely your Lord best
knows those who go astray from His path, and He knows best those who
follow the right way.

016.126
Y: And if ye do catch them out, catch them out no worse than they catch
you out: But if ye show patience, that is indeed the best (course) for
those who are patient.

P: If ye punish, then punish with the like of that wherewith ye were
afflicted. But if ye endure patiently, verily it is better for the
patient.

S: And if you take your turn, then retaliate with the like of that with
which you were afflicted; but if you are patient, it will certainly be
best for those who are patient.

016.127
Y: And do thou be patient, for thy patience is but from Allah; nor
grieve over them: and distress not thyself because of their plots.

P: Endure thou patiently (O Muhammad). Thine endurance is only by (the
help of) Allah. Grieve not for them, and be not in distress because of
that which they devise.

S: And be patient and your patience is not but by (the assistance of)
Allah, and grieve not for them, and do not distress yourself at what
they plan.

016.128
Y: For Allah is with those who restrain themselves, and those who do
good.

P: Lo! Allah is with those who keep their duty unto Him and those who
are doers of good.

S: Surely Allah is with those who guard (against evil) and those who do
good (to others).

---------------------------------------------------------------------

 Chapter 17:

           AL-ISRA (ISRA', THE NIGHT JOURNEY, CHILDREN OF ISRAEL)
 Total Verses: 111 Revealed At: MAKKA


---------------------------------------------------------------------

           In the name of Allah, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

017.001
Y: Glory to (Allah) Who did take His servant for a Journey by night from
the Sacred Mosque to the farthest Mosque, whose precincts We did
bless,- in order that We might show him some of Our Signs: for He is
the One Who heareth and seeth (all things).

P: Glorified be He Who carried His servant by night from the Inviolable
Place of Worship to the Far distant place of worship the neighbourhood
whereof We have blessed, that We might show him of Our tokens! Lo! He,
only He, is the Hearer, the Seer.

S: Glory be to Him Who made His servant to go on a night from the Sacred
Mosque to the remote mosque of which We have blessed the precincts, so
that We may show to him some of Our signs; surely He is the Hearing,
the Seeing.

017.002
Y: We gave Moses the Book, and made it a Guide to the Children of
Israel, (commanding): "Take not other than Me as Disposer of (your)
affairs."

P: We gave unto Moses the Scripture, and We appointed it a guidance for
the children of Israel, saying: Choose no guardian beside Me.

S: And We gave Musa the Book and made it a guidance to the children of
Israel, saying: Do not take a protector besides Me;

017.003
Y: O ye that are sprung from those whom We carried (in the Ark) with
Noah! Verily he was a devotee most grateful.

P: (They were) the seed of those whom We carried (in the ship) along
with Noah. Lo! he was a grateful slave.

S: The offspring of those whom We bore with Nuh; surely he was a
grateful servant.

017.004
Y: And We gave (Clear) Warning to the Children of Israel in the Book,
that twice would they do mischief on the earth and be elated with
mighty arrogance (and twice would they be punished)!

P: And We decreed for the Children of Israel in the Scripture: Ye verily
will work corruption in the earth twice, and ye will become great
tyrants.

S: And We had made known to the children of Israel in the Book: Most
certainly you will make mischief in the land twice, and most certainly
you will behave insolently with great insolence.

017.005
Y: When the first of the warnings came to pass, We sent against you Our
servants given to terrible warfare: They entered the very inmost parts
of your homes; and it was a warning (completely) fulfilled.

P: So when the time for the first of the two came, We roused against you
slaves of Ours of great might who ravaged (your) country, and it was a
threat performed.

S: So when the promise for the first of the two came, We sent over you
Our servants, of mighty prowess, so they went to and fro among the
houses, and it was a promise to be accomplished.

017.006
Y: Then did We grant you the Return as against them: We gave you
increase in resources and sons, and made you the more numerous in
man-power.

P: Then we gave you once again your turn against them, and We aided you
with wealth and children and made you more in soldiery.

S: Then We gave you back the turn to prevail against them, and aided you
with wealth and children and made you a numerous band.

017.007
Y: If ye did well, ye did well for yourselves; if ye did evil, (ye did
it) against yourselves. So when the second of the warnings came to
pass, (We permitted your enemies) to disfigure your faces, and to enter
your Temple as they had entered it before, and to visit with
destruction all that fell into their power.

P: (Saying): If ye do good, ye do good for your own souls, and if ye do
evil, it is for them (in like manner). So, when the time for the second
(of the judgments) came (We roused against you others of Our slaves) to
ravage you, and to enter the Temple even as they entered it the first
time, and to lay waste all that they conquered with an utter wasting.

S: If you do good, you will do good for your own souls, and if you do
evil, it shall be for them. So when the second promise came (We raised
another people) that they may bring you to grief and that they may
enter the mosque as they entered it the first time, and that they might
destroy whatever they gained ascendancy over with utter destruction.

017.008
Y: It may be that your Lord may (yet) show Mercy unto you; but if ye
revert (to your sins), We shall revert (to Our punishments): And we
have made Hell a prison for those who reject (all Faith).

P: It may be that your Lord will have mercy on you, but if ye repeat
(the crime) We shall repeat (the punishment), and We have appointed
hell a dungeon for the disbelievers.

S: It may be that your Lord will have mercy on you, and if you again
return (to disobedience) We too will return (to punishment), and We
have made hell a prison for the unbelievers.

017.009
Y: Verily this Qur'an doth guide to that which is most right (or
stable), and giveth the Glad Tidings to the Believers who work deeds of
righteousness, that they shall have a magnificent reward;

P: Lo! this Qur'an guideth unto that which is straightest, and giveth
tidings unto the believers who do good works that theirs will be a
great reward.

S: Surely this Quran guides to that which is most upright and gives good
news to the believers who do good that they shall have a great reward.

017.010
Y: And to those who believe not in the Hereafter, (it announceth) that
We have prepared for them a Penalty Grievous (indeed).

P: And that those who believe not in the Hereafter, for them We have
prepared a painful doom.

S: And that (as for) those who do not believe in the hereafter, We have
prepared for them a painful chastisement.

017.011
Y: The prayer that man should make for good, he maketh for evil; for man
is given to hasty (deeds).

P: Man prayeth for evil as he prayeth for good; for man was ever hasty.

S: And man prays for evil as he ought to pray for good, and man is ever
hasty.

017.012
Y: We have made the Night and the Day as two (of Our) Signs: the Sign of
the Night have We obscured, while the Sign of the Day We have made to
enlighten you; that ye may seek bounty from your Lord, and that ye may
know the number and count of the years: all things have We explained in
detail.

P: And We appoint the night and the day two portents. Then We make dark
the portent of the night, and We make the portent of the day
sight-giving, that ye may seek bounty from your Lord, and that ye may
know the computation of the years, and the reckoning; and everything
have We expounded with a clear expounding.

S: And We have made the night and the day two signs, then We have made
the sign of the night to pass away and We have made the sign of the day
manifest, so that you may seek grace from your Lord, and that you might
know the numbering of years and the reckoning; and We have explained
everything with distinctness.

017.013
Y: Every man's fate We have fastened on his own neck: On the Day of
Judgment We shall bring out for him a scroll, which he will see spread
open.

P: And every man's augury have We fastened to his own neck, and We shall
bring forth for him on the Day of Resurrection a book which he will
find wide open.

S: And We have made every man's actions to cling to his neck, and We
will bring forth to him on the resurrection day a book which he will
find wide open:

017.014
Y: (It will be said to him:) "Read thine (own) record: Sufficient is thy
soul this day to make out an account against thee."

P: (And it will be said unto him): Read thy Book. Thy soul sufficeth as
reckoner against thee this day.

S: Read your book; your own self is sufficient as a reckoner against you
this day.

017.015
Y: Who receiveth guidance, receiveth it for his own benefit: who goeth
astray doth so to his own loss: No bearer of burdens can bear the
burden of another: nor would We visit with Our Wrath until We had sent
a messenger (to give warning).

P: Whosoever goeth right, it is only for (the good of) his own soul that
he goeth right, and whosoever erreth, erreth only to its hurt. No laden
soul can bear another's load, We never punish until we have sent a
messenger.

S: Whoever goes aright, for his own soul does he go aright; and whoever
goes astray, to its detriment only does he go astray: nor can the
bearer of a burden bear the burden of another, nor do We chastise until
We raise a messenger.

017.016
Y: When We decide to destroy a population, We (first) send a definite
order to those among them who are given the good things of this life
and yet transgress; so that the word is proved true against them: then
(it is) We destroy them utterly.

P: And when We would destroy a township We send commandment to its folk
who live at ease, and afterward they commit abomination therein, and so
the Word (of doom) hath effect for it, and we annihilate it with
complete annihilation.

S: And when We wish to destroy a town, We send Our commandment to the
people of it who lead easy lives, but they transgress therein; thus the
word proves true against it, so We destroy it with utter destruction.

017.017
Y: How many generations have We destroyed after Noah? and enough is thy
Lord to note and see the sins of His servants.

P: How many generations have We destroyed since Noah! And Allah
sufficeth as Knower and Beholder of the sins of His slaves.

S: And how many of the generations did We destroy after Nuh! and your
Lord is sufficient as Knowing and Seeing with regard to His servants'
faults.

017.018
Y: If any do wish for the transitory things (of this life), We readily
grant them - such things as We will, to such person as We will: in the
end have We provided Hell for them: they will burn therein, disgraced
and rejected.

P: Whoso desireth that (life) which hasteneth away, We hasten for him
therein what We will for whom We please. And afterward We have
appointed for him hell; he will endure the heat thereof, condemned,
rejected.

S: Whoever desires this present life, We hasten to him therein what We
please for whomsoever We desire, then We assign to him the hell; he
shall enter it despised, driven away.

017.019
Y: Those who do wish for the (things of) the Hereafter, and strive
therefor with all due striving, and have Faith,- they are the ones
whose striving is acceptable (to Allah).

P: And whoso desireth the Hereafter and striveth for it with the effort
necessary, being a believer; for such, their effort findeth favour
(with their Lord).

S: And whoever desires the hereafter and strives for it as he ought to
strive and he is a believer; (as for) these, their striving shall
surely be accepted.

017.020
Y: Of the bounties of thy Lord We bestow freely on all- These as well as
those: The bounties of thy Lord are not closed (to anyone).

P: Each do We supply, both these and those, from the bounty of thy Lord.
And the bounty of thy Lord can never be walled up.

S: All do We aid-- these as well as those-- out of the bounty of your
Lord, and the bounty of your Lord is not confined.

017.021
Y: See how We have bestowed more on some than on others; but verily the
Hereafter is more in rank and gradation and more in excellence.

P: See how We prefer one of them above another, and verily the Hereafter
will be greater in degrees and greater in preferment.

S: See how We have made some of them to excel others, and certainly the
hereafter is much superior in respect of excellence.

017.022
Y: Take not with Allah another object of worship; or thou (O man!) wilt
sit in disgrace and destitution.

P: Set not up with Allah any other god (O man) lest thou sit down
reproved, forsaken.

S: Do not associate with Allah any other god, lest you sit down
despised, neglected.

017.023
Y: Thy Lord hath decreed that ye worship none but Him, and that ye be
kind to parents. Whether one or both of them attain old age in thy
life, say not to them a word of contempt, nor repel them, but address
them in terms of honour.

P: Thy Lord hath decreed, that ye worship none save Him, and (that ye
show) kindness to parents. If one of them or both of them attain old
age with thee, say not "Fie" unto them nor repulse them, but speak unto
them a gracious word.

S: And your Lord has commanded that you shall not serve (any) but Him,
and goodness to your parents. If either or both of them reach old age
with you, say not to them (so much as) "Ugh" nor chide them, and speak
to them a generous word.

017.024
Y: And, out of kindness, lower to them the wing of humility, and say:
"My Lord! bestow on them thy Mercy even as they cherished me in
childhood."

P: And lower unto them the wing of submission through mercy, and say: My
Lord! Have mercy on them both as they did care for me when I was
little.

S: And make yourself submissively gentle to them with compassion, and
say: O my Lord! have compassion on them, as they brought me up (when I
was) little.

017.025
Y: Your Lord knoweth best what is in your hearts: If ye do deeds of
righteousness, verily He is Most Forgiving to those who turn to Him
again and again (in true penitence).

P: Your Lord is Best Aware of what is in your minds. If ye are
righteous, then lo! He was ever Forgiving unto those who turn (unto
Him).

S: Your Lord knows best what is in your minds; if you are good, then He
is surely Forgiving to those who turn (to Him) frequently.

017.026
Y: And render to the kindred their due rights, as (also) to those in
want, and to the wayfarer: But squander not (your wealth) in the manner
of a spendthrift.

P: Give the kinsman his due, and the needy, and the wayfarer, and
squander not (thy wealth) in wantonness.

S: And give to the near of kin his due and (to) the needy and the
wayfarer, and do not squander wastefully.

017.027
Y: Verily spendthrifts are brothers of the Evil Ones; and the Evil One
is to his Lord (himself) ungrateful.

P: Lo! the squanderers were ever brothers of the devils, and the devil
was ever an ingrate to his Lord.

S: Surely the squanderers are the fellows of the Shaitans and the
Shaitan is ever ungrateful to his Lord.

017.028
Y: And even if thou hast to turn away from them in pursuit of the Mercy
from thy Lord which thou dost expect, yet speak to them a word of easy
kindness.

P: But if thou turn away from them, seeking mercy from thy Lord, for
which thou hopest, then speak unto them a reasonable word.

S: And if you turn away from them to seek mercy from your Lord, which
you hope for, speak to them a gentle word.

017.029
Y: Make not thy hand tied (like a niggard's) to thy neck, nor stretch it
forth to its utmost reach, so that thou become blameworthy and
destitute.

P: And let not thy hand be chained to thy neck nor open it with a
complete opening, lest thou sit down rebuked, denuded.

S: And do not make your hand to be shackled to your neck nor stretch it
forth to the utmost (limit) of its stretching forth, lest you should
(afterwards) sit down blamed, stripped off.

017.030
Y: Verily thy Lord doth provide sustenance in abundance for whom He
pleaseth, and He provideth in a just measure. For He doth know and
regard all His servants.

P: Lo! thy Lord enlargeth the provision for whom He will, and
straiteneth (it for whom He will). Lo, He was ever Knower, Seer of His
slaves.

S: Surely your Lord makes plentiful the means of subsistence for whom He
pleases and He straitens (them); surely He is ever Aware of, Seeing,
His servants.

017.031
Y: Kill not your children for fear of want: We shall provide sustenance
for them as well as for you. Verily the killing of them is a great sin.

P: Slay not your children, fearing a fall to poverty, We shall provide
for them and for you. Lo! the slaying of them is great sin.

S: And do not kill your children for fear of poverty; We give them
sustenance and yourselves (too); surely to kill them is a great wrong.

017.032
Y: Nor come nigh to adultery: for it is a shameful (deed) and an evil,
opening the road (to other evils).

P: And come not near unto adultery. Lo! it is an abomination and an evil
way.

S: And go not nigh to fornication; surely it is an indecency and an evil
way.

0.033
Y: Nor take life - which Allah has made sacred - except for just cause.
And if anyone is slain wrongfully, we have given his heir authority (to
demand qisas or to forgive): but let him not exceed bounds in the
matter of taking life; for he is helped (by the Law).

P: And slay not the life which Allah hath forbidden save with right.
Whoso is slain wrongfully, We have given power unto his heir, but let
him not commit excess in slaying. Lo! he will be helped.

S: And do not kill any one whom Allah has forbidden, except for a just
cause, and whoever is slain unjustly, We have indeed given to his heir
authority, so let him not exceed the just limits in slaying; surely he
is aided.

017.034
Y: Come not nigh to the orphan's property except to improve it, until he
attains the age of full strength; and fulfil (every) engagement, for
(every) engagement will be enquired into (on the Day of Reckoning).

P: Come not near the wealth of the orphan save with that which is better
till he come to strength; and keep the covenant. Lo! of the covenant it
will be asked.

S: And draw not near to the property of the orphan except in a goodly
way till he attains his maturity and fulfill the promise; surely
(every) promise shall be questioned about.

017.035
Y: Give full measure when ye measure, and weigh with a balance that is
straight: that is the most fitting and the most advantageous in the
final determination.

P: Fill the measure when ye measure, and weigh with a right balance;
that is meet, and better in the end.

S: And give full measure when you measure out, and weigh with a true
balance; this is fair and better in the end.

017.036
Y: And pursue not that of which thou hast no knowledge; for every act of
hearing, or of seeing or of (feeling in) the heart will be enquired
into (on the Day of Reckoning).

P: (O man), follow not that whereof thou hast no knowledge. Lo! the
hearing and the sight and the heart - of each of these it will be
asked.

S: And follow not that of which you have not the knowledge; surely the
hearing and the sight and the heart, all of these, shall be questioned
about that.

017.037
Y: Nor walk on the earth with insolence: for thou canst not rend the
earth asunder, nor reach the mountains in height.

P: And walk not in the earth exultant. Lo! thou canst not rend the
earth, nor canst thou stretch to the height of the hills.

S: And do not go about in the land exultingly, for you cannot cut
through the earth nor reach the mountains in height.

017.038
Y: Of all such things the evil is hateful in the sight of thy Lord.

P: The evil of all that is hateful in the sight of thy Lord.

S: All this-- the evil of it-- is hateful in the sight of your Lord.

017.039
Y: These are among the (precepts of) wisdom, which thy Lord has revealed
to thee. Take not, with Allah, another object of worship, lest thou
shouldst be thrown into Hell, blameworthy and rejected.

P: This is (part) of that wisdom wherewith thy Lord hath inspired thee
(O Muhammad). And set not up with Allah any other god, lest thou be
cast into hell, reproved, abandoned.

S: This is of what your Lord has revealed to you of wisdom, and do not
associate any other god with Allah lest you should be thrown into hell,
blamed, cast away.

017.040
Y: Has then your Lord (O Pagans!) preferred for you sons, and taken for
Himself daughters among the angels? Truly ye utter a most dreadful
saying!

P: Hath your Lord then distinguished you (O men of Makka) by giving you
sons, and hath chosen for Himself females from among the angels? Lo!
verily ye speak an awful word!

S: What! has then your Lord preferred to give you sons, and (for
Himself) taken daughters from among the angels? Most surely you utter a
grievous saying.

017.041
Y: We have explained (things) in various (ways) in this Qur'an, in order
that they may receive admonition, but it only increases their flight
(from the Truth)!

P: We verily have displayed (Our warnings) in this Qur'an that they may
take heed, but it increaseth them in naught save aversion.

S: And certainly We have repeated (warnings) in this Quran that they may
be mindful, but it does not add save to their aversion.

017.042
Y: Say: If there had been (other) gods with Him, as they say,- behold,
they would certainly have sought out a way to the Lord of the Throne!

P: Say (O Muhammad, to the disbelievers): If there were other gods along
with Him, as they say, then had they sought a way against the Lord of
the Throne.

S: Say: If there were with Him gods as they say, then certainly they
would have been able to seek a way to the Lord of power.

017.043
Y: Glory to Him! He is high above all that they say!- Exalted and Great
(beyond measure)!

P: Glorified is He, and High Exalted above what they say!

S: Glory be to Him and exalted be He in high exaltation above what they
say.

017.044
Y: The seven heavens and the earth, and all beings therein, declare His
glory: there is not a thing but celebrates His praise; And yet ye
understand not how they declare His glory! Verily He is Oft-Forbearing,
Most Forgiving!

P: The seven heavens and the earth and all that is therein praise Him,
and there is not a thing but hymneth His praise; but ye understand not
their praise. Lo! He is ever Clement, Forgiving.

S: The seven heavens declare His glory and the earth (too), and those
who are in them; and there is not a single thing but glorifies Him with
His praise, but you do not understand their glorification; surely He is
Forbearing, Forgiving.

017.045
Y: When thou dost recite the Qur'an, We put, between thee and those who
believe not in the Hereafter, a veil invisible:

P: And when thou recitest the Qur'an we place between thee and those who
believe not in the Hereafter a hidden barrier;

S: And when you recite the Quran, We place between you and those who do
not believe in the hereafter a hidden barrier;

017.046
Y: And We put coverings over their hearts (and minds) lest they should
understand the Qur'an, and deafness into their ears: when thou dost
commemorate thy Lord and Him alone in the Qur'an, they turn on their
backs, fleeing (from the Truth).

P: And We place upon their hearts veils lest they should understand it,
and in their ears a deafness; and when thou makest mention of thy Lord
alone in the Qur'an, they turn their backs in aversion.

S: And We have placed coverings on their hearts and a heaviness in their
ears lest they understand it, and when you mention your Lord alone in
the Quran they turn their backs in aversion.

017.047
Y: We know best why it is they listen, when they listen to thee; and
when they meet in private conference, behold, the wicked say, "Ye
follow none other than a man bewitched!"

P: We are Best Aware of what they wish to hear when they give ear to
thee and when they take secret counsel, when the evil-doers say: Ye
follow but a man bewitched.

S: We know best what they listen to when they listen to you, and when
they take counsel secretly, when the unjust say: You follow only a man
deprived of reason.

017.048
Y: See what similes they strike for thee: but they have gone astray, and
never can they find a way.

P: See what similitudes they coin for thee, and thus are all astray, and
cannot find a road!

S: See what they liken you to! So they have gone astray and cannot find
the way.

017.049
Y: They say: "What! when we are reduced to bones and dust, should we
really be raised up (to be) a new creation?"

P: And they say: When we are bones and fragments, shall we forsooth, be
raised up as a new creation?

S: And they say: What! when we shall have become bones and decayed
particles, shall we then certainly be raised up, being a new creation?

017.050
Y: Say: "(Nay!) be ye stones or iron,"

P: Say: Be ye stones or iron

S: Say: Become stones or iron,

017.051
Y: "Or created matter which, in your minds, is hardest (to be raised
up),- (Yet shall ye be raised up)!" then will they say: "Who will cause
us to return?" Say: "He who created you first!" Then will they wag
their heads towards thee, and say, "When will that be?" Say, "May be it
will be quite soon!"

P: Or some created thing that is yet greater in your thoughts! Then they
will say: Who shall bring us back (to life). Say: He Who created you at
the first. Then will they shake their heads at thee, and say: When will
it be? Say: It will perhaps be soon;

S: Or some other creature of those which are too hard (to receive life)
in your minds! But they will say: Who will return us? Say: Who created
you at first. Still they will shake their heads at you and say: When
will it be? Say: Maybe it has drawn nigh.

017.052
Y: "It will be on a Day when He will call you, and ye will answer (His
call) with (words of) His praise, and ye will think that ye tarried but
a little while!"

P: A day when He will call you and ye will answer with His praise, and
ye will think that ye have tarried but a little while.

S: On the day when He will call you forth, then shall you obey Him,
giving Him praise, and you will think that you tarried but a little
(while).

017.053
Y: Say to My servants that they should (only) say those things that are
best: for Satan doth sow dissensions among them: For Satan is to man an
avowed enemy.

P: Tell My bondmen to speak that which is kindlier. Lo! the devil soweth
discord among them. Lo! the devil is for man an open foe.

S: And say to My servants (that) they speak that which is best; surely
the Shaitan sows dissensions among them; surely the Shaitan is an open
enemy to man.

017.054
Y: It is your Lord that knoweth you best: If He please, He granteth you
mercy, or if He please, punishment: We have not sent thee to be a
disposer of their affairs for them.

P: Your Lord is Best Aware of you. If He will, He will have mercy on
you, or if He will, He will punish you. We have not sent thee (O
Muhammad) as a warden over them.

S: Your Lord knows you best; He will have mercy on you if He pleases, or
He will chastise you if He pleases; and We have not sent you as being
in charge of them.

017.055
Y: And it is your Lord that knoweth best all beings that are in the
heavens and on earth: We did bestow on some prophets more (and other)
gifts than on others: and We gave to David (the gift of) the Psalms.

P: And thy Lord is Best Aware of all who are in the heavens and the
earth. And we preferred some of the prophets above others, and unto
David We gave the Psalms.

S: And your Lord best knows those who are in the heavens and the earth;
and certainly We have made some of the prophets to excel others, and to
Dawood We gave a scripture.

017.056
Y: Say: "Call on those - besides Him - whom ye fancy: they have neither
the power to remove your troubles from you nor to change them."

P: Say: Cry unto those (saints and angels) whom ye assume (to be gods)
beside Him, yet they have no power to rid you of misfortune nor to
change.

S: Say: Call on those whom you assert besides Him, so they shall not
control the removal of distress from you nor (its) transference.

017.057
Y: Those whom they call upon do desire (for themselves) means of access
to their Lord, - even those who are nearest: they hope for His Mercy
and fear His Wrath: for the Wrath of thy Lord is something to take heed
of.

P: Those unto whom they cry seek the way of approach to their Lord,
which of them shall be the nearest; they hope for His mercy and they
fear His doom. Lo! the doom of thy Lord is to be shunned.

S: Those whom they call upon, themselves seek the means of access to
their Lord-- whoever of them is nearest-- and they hope for His mercy
and fear His chastisement; surely the chastisement of your Lord is a
thing to be cautious of.

017.058
Y: There is not a population but We shall destroy it before the Day of
Judgment or punish it with a dreadful Penalty: that is written in the
(eternal) Record.

P: There is not a township but We shall destroy it ere the Day of
Resurrection, or punish it with dire punishment. That is set forth in
the Book (of Our decrees).

S: And there is not a town but We will destroy it before the day of
resurrection or chastise it with a severe chastisement; this is written
in the Divine ordinance.

017.059
Y: And We refrain from sending the signs, only because the men of former
generations treated them as false: We sent the she-camel to the Thamud
to open their eyes, but they treated her wrongfully: We only send the
Signs by way of terror (and warning from evil).

P: Naught hindereth Us from sending portents save that the folk of old
denied them. And We gave Thamud the she-camel - a clear portent save to
warn.

S: And nothing could have hindered Us that We should send signs except
that the ancients rejected them; and We gave to Samood the she-camel--
a manifest sign-- but on her account they did injustice, and We do not
send signs but to make (men) fear.

017.060
Y: Behold! We told thee that thy Lord doth encompass mankind round
about: We granted the vision which We showed thee, but as a trial for
men,- as also the Cursed Tree (mentioned) in the Qur'an: We put terror
(and warning) into them, but it only increases their inordinate
transgression!

P: And (it was a warning) when we told thee: Lo! thy Lord encompasseth
mankind, and We appointed the sight which We showed thee as an ordeal
