ghosts and fairies in Ireland, Scotland, and Wales, in Brittany the dead
guard hidden treasure. It is after sunset that the dead have most power
to strike down the living,[105] and to _take_ them just as fairies do. A
natural phenomenon, a malady, a death, or a tempest may be the work of a
spirit in Brittany,[105] and in Ireland the work of a fairy. The Breton
dead, like the Scotch fairies described in Kirk's _Secret Commonwealth_,
are capable of making themselves visible or invisible to mortals, at
will.[105] Their bodies--for they have bodies--are material,[105] being
composed of matter in a state unknown to us; and the bodies of daemons
as described by the Ancients are made of congealed air. The dead in
Brittany have forms more slender and smaller in stature than those of
the living;[105] and herein we find one of the factors which supporters
of the Pygmy Theory would emphasize, but it is thoroughly psychical. Old
Breton farmers after death return to their farms, as though come from
Fairyland; and sometimes they even take a turn at the ploughing.[105] As
in Ireland, so in Brittany, the day belongs to the living, and the
night, when a mortal is safer indoors than out, to spirits and the
dead.[105] The Bretons take great care not to counterfeit the dead nor
to speak slightingly of them,[106] for, like fairies, they know all that
is done by mortals, and can hear all that is said about them, and can
take revenge. Just as in the case of all fairies and goblins, the dead
disappear at first cock-crow.[107] The world of the dead, like the land
of Faerie or the Otherworld, may be underground, in the air, in a hill
or mountain like a fairy palace, under a river or sea, and even on an
island out amid the ocean.[107] As other Celts do against evil spirits
and fairies, the Breton peasants use magic against evil souls of the
dead,[108] and the priests use exorcisms. The Breton realm of the dead
equally with the Irish Fairyland is an invisible world peopled by other
kinds of spirits besides disembodied mortals and fairies.[109] The dead
haunt houses just as Robin Good-fellows and brownies, or pixies and
goblins, generally do. The dead are fond of frequenting cross-roads, and
so are all sorts of fairies. In Brittany one must always guard against
the evil dead, in Cornwall against pixies, in other Celtic lands against
different kinds of fairies. In Ireland and Scotland there is the
banshee, in Wales the death-candle, in Brittany the _Ankou_ or king of
the dead, to foretell a death. And as the banshee wails before the
ancestral mansion, so the _Ankou_ sounds its doleful cry before the door
of the one it calls.[109] There seems not to be a family in the Carnac
region of the Morbihan without some tradition of a warning coming before
the death of one of its members. In Ireland only certain families have a
banshee, but in Brittany all families. Professor Le Braz has devoted a
large part of his work on _La Legende de la Mort_ to these Breton
death-warnings or _intersignes_. They may be shades of the dead under
many aspects--ghostly hands, or ghosts of inanimate objects. They may
come by the fall of objects without known cause; by a magpie resting on
a roof--just as in Ireland; by the crowing of cocks, and the howling of
dogs at night. They may be death-candles or torches, dreams, peculiar
bodily sensations, images in water, phantom funerals, and death-chariots
or death-coaches as in Wales.

The Bretons may be said to have a Death-Faith, whereas the other Celts
have a Fairy-Faith, and both are a real folk-religion innate in the
Celtic nature, and thus quite as influential as Christianity. Should
Christianity in some way suddenly be swept away from the Celt he would
still be religious, for it is his nature to be so. And as Professor Le
Braz has suggested to me, Carnac with its strange monuments of an
unknown people and time, and wrapped in its air of mystery and silence,
is a veritable Land of the Dead. I, too, have felt that there are
strange, vague, indefinable influences at work at Carnac at all times of
the day and night, very similar to those which I have felt in the most
fairy-haunted regions of Ireland. We might say that all of Brittany is a
Land of the Dead, and ancient Carnac its Centre, just as Ireland is
Fairyland, with its Centre at ancient Tara.


CONCLUSION

We can very appropriately conclude our inquiry about Brittany with a
very beautiful description of a _Veillee_ in Lower Brittany, written
down in French for our special use by the Breton poet, M. Le Scour, of
Carnac, and here translated. M. Le Scour draws the whole picture from
life, and from his own intimate experience. It will serve to give us
some insight into the natural literary ability of the Breton Celts, to
illustrate their love of tales dealing with the marvellous and the
supernormal, and is especially valuable for showing the social
environment amidst which the Fairy-Faith of Lower Brittany lives and
flourishes, isolated from foreign interference:--

_A 'Veillee'[110] in Lower Brittany._--'The wind was blowing from the
east, and in the intermittent moonlight the roof of the thatched cottage
already gleamed with a thin covering of snow which had fallen since
sunset. Each comer reached on the run the comfortable bakehouse, wherein
Alain Corre was at work kneading his batch of barley bread; and the
father Le Scour was never the last to arrive, because he liked to get
the best seat in front of the bake-oven.

'Victor had promised us for that night a pretty story which no person
had ever heard before. I was not more than fourteen years old then, but
like all the neighbours I hurried to get a place in order to hear
Victor. My mother was already there, making her distaff whirr between
her two fingers as she sat in the light of a rosin candle, and my
brother Yvon was finishing a wooden butter-spoon. Every few minutes I
and my little cousin went out to see if it was still snowing, and if
Victor had arrived.

'At last Victor entered, and everybody applauded, the young girls
lengthening out their distaffs to do him reverence. Then when silence
was restored, after some of the older men had several times shouted out,
"Let us commence; hold your tongues," Victor began his story as
follows:--

'"Formerly, in the village of Kastel-Laer, Plouneventer (Finistere),
there were two neighbours; the one was Paol al Ludu and the other Yon
Rustik. Paol al Ludu was a good-for-nothing sort of fellow; he gained
his living easily, by cheating everybody and by robbing his neighbours;
and being always well dressed he was much envied by his poorer
acquaintances. Yon Rustik, on the contrary, was a poor, infirm, and
honest man, always seeking to do good, but not being able to work, had
to beg.

'"One evening our two men were disputing. Paol al Ludu treated Yon
shamefully, telling him that it would be absurd to think an old lame man
such as he was could ever get to Paris; 'But I,' added Paol, 'am going
to see the capital and amuse myself like a rich _bourgeois_.' At this,
Yon offered to bet with Paol that in spite of infirmities he would also
go to Paris; and being an honest man he placed his trust in God. The
wager was mutually agreed to, and our two men set out for Paris by
different routes.

'"Paol al Ludu, who had no infirmities, arrived at Paris within three
weeks. He followed the career of a thief, and deceived everybody; and as
he was well dressed, people had confidence in him. The poor Yon Rustik,
on the contrary, did not travel rapidly. He was obliged to beg his way,
and being meanly dressed was compelled to sleep outdoors when he could
not find a stable. At the end of a month he arrived in a big forest in
the region of Versailles, and having no other shelter for the night
chose a great oak tree which was hollowed by the centuries and lined
with fungi within. In front of this ancient oak there was a fountain
which must have been miraculous, for it flowed from east to west, and
Yon had closely observed it.

'"Towards midnight Yon was awakened by a terrible uproar; there were a
hundred _corrigans_ dancing round the fountain. He overheard one of them
say to the others: 'I have news to report to you; I have cast an evil
spell upon the daughter of the King, and no mortal will ever be able to
cure her, and yet in order to cure her nothing more would be needed than
a drop of water from this fountain.' The _corrigan_ who thus spoke was
upon two sticks[111] (crippled), and commanded all the others. The
beggar having understood the conversation, awaited impatiently the
departure of the _corrigans_. When they were gone, he took a little
water from the fountain in a bottle, and hurried on to Paris, where he
arrived one fine morning.

'"In the house where Yon stopped to eat his crust of dry bread he heard
it reported that the daughter of the King was very ill, and that the
wisest doctors in France had been sent for. Three days later, Yon Rustik
presented himself at the palace, and asked audience with the King, but
as he was so shabbily dressed the attendants did not wish to let him
enter. When he strongly insisted, they finally prevailed upon the King
to receive him; and then Yon told the King that he had come to cure the
princess. Thereupon the King caused Yon to be fittingly dressed and
presented before the sick-bed; and Yon drew forth his bottle of water,
and, at his request, the princess drank it to the last drop. Suddenly
she began to laugh with joy, and throwing her arms about the neck of the
beggar thanked him: she was radically cured. At once the King gave
orders that his golden coach of state be made ready; and placing the
princess and the beggar on one seat, made a tour throughout all the most
beautiful streets of Paris. Never before were such crowds seen in Paris,
for the proclamation had gone forth that the one who had made the
miraculous cure was a beggar.

'"Paol al Ludu, who was still in Paris, pressed forward to see the royal
coach pass, and when he saw who sat next to the princess he was beside
himself with rage. But before the day was over he discovered Yon in the
great hotel of the city, and asked him how it was that he had been able
to effect the cure; and Yon replied to his old rival that it was with
the water of a miraculous fountain, and relating everything which had
passed, explained to him in what place the hollow oak and the fountain
were to be found.

'"Paol did not wait even that night, but set off at once to find the
miraculous fountain. When he finally found it the hour was almost
midnight, and so he hid himself in the hollow of the oak, hoping to
overhear some mysterious revelation. Midnight had hardly come when a
frightful uproar commenced: this time the crippled _corrigan_ chief was
swearing like a demon, and he cried to the others, 'The daughter of the
King has been cured by a beggar! He must have overheard us by hiding in
the hollow of that d----d old oak. Quick! let fire be put in it, for it
has brought us misfortune.'

'"In less than a minute, the trunk of the oak was in flames; and there
were heard the cries of anguish of Paol al Ludu and the gnashing of his
teeth, as he fought against death. Thus the evil and dishonest man ended
his life, while Yon Rustik received a pension of twenty thousand
francs, and was able to live happy for many years, and to give alms to
the poor."'

Here M. Le Scour ends his narrative, leaving the reader to imagine the
enthusiastic applause and fond embraces bestowed upon Victor for this
most marvellous story, by the happy gathering of country-folk in that
cosy warm bakehouse in Lower Brittany, while without the cold east wind
of winter was whirling into every nook and corner the falling flakes of
snow.

       *       *       *       *       *

The evidence from Ireland, Scotland, Isle of Man, Wales, Cornwall, and
Brittany, which the living Celtic Fairy-Faith offers, has now been
heard; and, as was stated at the beginning of the inquiry, apparently
most of it can only be interpreted as belonging to a world-wide doctrine
of souls. But before this decision can be arrived at safely, all the
evidence should be carefully estimated according to anthropological and
psychological methods; and this we shall proceed to do in the following
chapter, before passing to Section II of our study.




SECTION I

THE LIVING FAIRY-FAITH




CHAPTER III

AN ANTHROPOLOGICAL EXAMINATION OF THE EVIDENCE

     Anthropology is concerned with man and what is in man--_humani
     nihil a se alienum putat_.--ANDREW LANG.

     The Celtic Fairy-Faith as part of a World-wide Animism--Shaping
     Influence of Social Psychology--Smallness of Elvish Spirits and
     Fairies, according to Ethnology, Animism, and Occult Sciences--The
     Changeling Belief and its explanation according to the Kidnap,
     Human-Sacrifice, Soul-Wandering, and Demon-Possession
     Theory--Ancient and Modern Magic and Witchcraft shown to be based
     on definite psychological laws--Exorcisms--Taboos, of Name, Food,
     Iron, Place--Taboos among Ancient Celts--Food-Sacrifice--Legend of
     the Dead--Conclusion: The background of the modern belief in
     Fairies is animistic.


THE CELTIC FAIRY-FAITH AS PART OF A WORLD-WIDE ANIMISM

The modern belief in fairies, with which until now we have been
specifically concerned, is Celtic only in so far as it reflects Celtic
traditions and customs, Celtic myth and religion, and Celtic social and
environmental conditions. Otherwise, as will be shown throughout this
and succeeding chapters, it is in essence a part of a world-wide
animism, which forms the background of all religions in whatever stage
of culture religions exist or to which they have attained by evolution,
from the barbarism of the Congo black man to the civilization of the
Archbishop of Canterbury; and as far back as we can go into human
origins there is some corresponding belief in a fairy or spirit realm,
as there is to-day among contemporary civilized and uncivilized races of
all countries. We may therefore very profitably begin our examination
of the living Fairy-Faith of the Celts by comparing it with a few
examples, taken almost at random, from the animistic beliefs current
among non-Celtic peoples.

To the Arunta tribes of Central Australia, furthest removed in space
from the Celts and hence least likely to have been influenced by them,
let us go first, in order to examine their doctrine of ancestral
_Alcheringa_ beings and of the _Iruntarinia_, which offers an almost
complete parallel to the Celtic belief in fairies. These _Alcheringa_
beings and _Iruntarinia_--to ignore the secondary differences between
the two--are a spirit race inhabiting an invisible or fairy world. Only
certain persons, medicine-men and seers, can see them; and these
describe them as thin and shadowy, and, like the Irish _Sidhe_, as
always youthful in appearance. Precisely like their Celtic counterparts
in general, these Australian spirits are believed to haunt inanimate
objects such as stones and trees; or to frequent totem centres, as in
Ireland demons (daemons) are believed to frequent certain places known
to have been anciently dedicated to the religious rites of the
pre-Christian Celts; and, quite after the manner of the Breton dead and
of most fairies, they are said to control human affairs and natural
phenomena. All the Arunta invariably regard themselves as incarnations
or reincarnations of these ancestral spirit-beings; and, in accordance
with evidence to be set forth in our seventh chapter, ancient and modern
Celts have likewise regarded themselves as incarnations or
reincarnations of ancestors and of fairy beings. Also the Arunta think
of the _Alcheringa_ beings exactly as Celts think of fairies: as real
invisible entities who must be propitiated if men wish to secure their
goodwill; and as beneficent and protecting beings when not offended, who
may attach themselves to individuals as guardian spirits.[112]

Among the Melanesian peoples there is an equally firm faith in spiritual
beings, which they call _Vui_ and _Wui_, and these beings have very
many of the chief attributes of the _Alcheringa_ beings.[113]

In Africa, the _Amatongo_, or _Abapansi_ of Amazulu belief, have
essentially the same motives for action toward men and women, and
exhibit the same powers, as the Scotch and Irish peasants assign to the
'good people'. They _take_ the living through death; and people so
_taken_ appear afterwards as apparitions, having become _Amatongo_.[114]

In the New World, we find in the North American Red Men a race as much
given as the Celts are to a belief in various spirits like fairies. They
believe that there are spirits in lakes, in rivers and in waterfalls, in
rocks and trees, in the earth and in the air; and that these beings
produce storms, droughts, good and bad harvests, abundance and scarcity
of game, disease, and the varying fortunes of men. Mr. Leland, who has
carefully studied these American beliefs, says that the _Un a
games-suk_, or little spirits inhabiting rocks and streams, play a much
more influential part in the social and religious life of the North
American Red Men than elves or fairies ever did among the Aryans.[115]

In Asia there is the well-known and elaborate animistic creed of the
Chinese and of the Japanese, to be in part illustrated in subsequent
sections. In popular Indian belief, as found in the Panjab, there is no
essential difference between various orders of beings endowed with
immortality, such as ghosts and spirits on the one hand, and gods,
demi-gods, and warriors on the other; for whether in bodies in this
world or out of bodies in the invisible world, they equally live and
act--quite as fairies do.[116] Throughout the Malay Peninsula, belief in
many orders of good and bad spirits, in demon-possession, in exorcism,
and in the power of black magicians is very common.[117] But in the
_Phi_ races of Siam we discover what is probably the most important and
complete parallel to the Celtic Fairy-Faith existing in Asia.

According to the Siamese folk-belief, all the stars and various planets,
as well as the ethereal spaces, are the dwelling-places of the
_Thevadas_, gods and goddesses of the old pre-Buddhist mythology, who
correspond pretty closely to the Tuatha De Danann of Irish mythology;
and this world itself is peopled by legions of minor deities called
_Phi_, who include all the various orders of good and bad spirits
continually influencing mankind. Some of these _Phi_ live in forests, in
trees, in open spaces; and watercourses are full of them. Others inhabit
mountains and high places. A particular order who haunt the sacred trees
surrounding the Buddhist temples are known as _Phi nang mai_; and since
_nang_ is the word for female, and _mai_ for tree, they are comparable
to tree-dwelling fairies, or Greek wood-nymphs. Still another order
called _Chao phum phi_ (gods of the earth) are like house-frequenting
brownies, fairies, and pixies, or like certain orders of _corrigans_ who
haunt barns, stables, and dwellings; and in many curious details these
_Chao phum phi_ correspond to the Penates of ancient Rome. Not only is
the worship of this order of _Phi_ widespread in Siam, but to every
other order of _Phi_ altars are erected and propitiatory offerings made
by all classes of the Siamese people.[118]

Before passing westwards to Europe, in completion of our rapid folk-lore
tour of the world, we may observe that the Persians, even those who are
well educated, have a firm belief in _jinns_ and _afreets_, different
orders of good and bad spirits with all the chief characteristics of
fairies.[119] And modern Arabs and Egyptians and Egyptian Turks hold
similar animistic beliefs.[120]

In Europe, the Greek peasant as firmly believes in nymphs or nereids as
the Celtic peasant believes in fairies; and nymphs, nereids, and fairies
alike are often the survivals of an ancient mythology. Mr. J. C. Lawson,
who has very carefully investigated the folk-lore of modern Greece,
says: 'The nereids are conceived as women half-divine yet not immortal,
always young, always beautiful, capricious at best, and at their worst
cruel. Their presence is suspected everywhere. I myself had a nereid
pointed out to me by my guide, and there certainly was the semblance of
a female figure draped in white, and tall beyond human stature, flitting
in the dusk between the gnarled and twisted boles of an old olive-yard.
What the apparition was, I had no leisure to investigate; for my guide
with many signs of the cross and muttered invocations of the Virgin
urged my mule to perilous haste along the rough mountain path.' Like
Celtic fairies, these Greek nereids have their queens; they dance all
night, disappearing at cock-crow; they can cast spells on animals or
maladies on men and women; they can shift their shape; they _take_
children in death and make changelings; and they fall in love with young
men.[121]

Among the Roumain peoples the widespread belief in the _Iele_ shows in
other ways equally marked parallels with the Fairy-Faith of the Celts.
These _Iele_ wait at cross-roads and near dwellings, or at village
fountains or in fields and woods, where they can best cast on men and
women various maladies. Sometimes they fall in love with beautiful young
men and women, and have on such occasions even been controlled by their
mortal lovers. They are extremely fond of music and dancing, and many a
shepherd with his pipes has been favoured by them, though they have
their own music and songs too. The Albanian peoples have evil fairies,
no taller than children twelve years old, called in Modern Greek [Greek:
ta exotika], 'those without,' who correspond to the _Iele_. Young
people who have been enticed to enter their round dance afterwards waste
away and die, apparently becoming one of 'those without'. These Albanian
spirits, like the 'good people' and the Breton dead, have their own
particular paths and retreats, and whoever violates these is struck and
falls ill.[122] These parallels from Roumain lands are probably due to
the close Aryan relationship between the Roumains, the Greeks, and the
Celts. The _Iele_ seem nothing more than the nymphs and nereids of
classical antiquity transformed under Christian influence into beings
who contradict their original good character, as in Celtic lands the
fairy-folk have likewise come to be fallen angels and evil spirits.

There is an even closer relationship between the Italian and Celtic
fairies. For example, among the Etruscan-Roman people there are now
flourishing animistic beliefs almost identical in all details with the
Fairy-Faith of the Celts.[123] In a very valuable study on the Neo-Latin
Fay, Mr. H. C. Coote writes:--'Who were the Fays--the _fate_ of later
Italy, the _fees_ of mediaeval France? For it is perfectly clear that
the _fatua_, _fata_, and _fee_ are all one and the same word.' And he
proceeds to show that the race of immortal damsels whom the old natives
of Italy called _Fatuae_ gave origin to all the family of _fees_ as
these appear in Latin countries, and that the Italians recognized in the
Greek nymphs their own _Fatuae_.[124]

It is quite evident that we have here discovered in Italy, as we
discovered in Greece and Roumain lands, fairies very Celtic in
character; and should further examination be made of modern European
folk-lore yet other similar fairies would be found, such, for example,
as the elves of Germany and of Scandinavia, or as the _servans_ of the
Swiss peasant. And in all cases, whether the beliefs examined be Celtic
or non-Celtic, Aryan or non-Aryan, from Australia, Polynesia, Africa,
America, Asia, or Europe, they are in essence animistically the same, as
later sections in this chapter will make clear. But while the
parallelism of these beliefs is indicated it is, of course, not meant
for a moment that in all of the cases or in any one of the cases the
specific differences are not considerable. The ground of comparison
consists simply in those generic characteristics which these
fairy-faiths, as they may be called, invariably display--characteristics
which we have good precedent for summing up in the single adjective
animistic.


SHAPING INFLUENCE OF SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY

For the term animism we have to thank Dr. E. B. Tylor, whose _Primitive
Culture_, in which the animistic theory is developed, may almost be said
to mark the beginning of scientific anthropology. In this work, however,
there is a decided tendency (which indeed displays itself in most of the
leading anthropological works, as, for example, in those by Dr. Frazer)
to regard men, or at any rate primitive men, as having a mind absolutely
homogeneous, and therefore as thinking, feeling, and acting in the same
way under all conditions alike. But a decided change is beginning to
manifest itself in the interpretation of the customs and beliefs of the
ruder races. It is assumed as a working principle that each ethnic group
has or tends to have an individuality of its own, and, moreover, that
the members of such a group think, feel, and act primarily as the
representatives, so to speak, of that ethnic individuality in which they
live, move, and have their being. That is to say, a social as contrasted
with an individual psychology must, it is held, pronounce both the first
and last word regarding all matters of mythology, religion, and art in
its numerous forms. The reason is that these are social products, and as
such are to be understood only in the light of the laws governing the
workings of the collective mind of any particular ethnic group. Such a
method is, for instance, employed in Mr. William McDougall's _Social
Psychology_, in Mr. R. R. Marett's _Threshold of Religion_, and in many
anthropological articles to be found in _L'Annee Sociologique_.

If, therefore, we hold by this new and fruitful method of social
psychology we must be prepared to treat the Fairy-Faith of the Celtic
peoples also in and for itself, as expressive of an individuality more
or less unique. It might, indeed, be objected that these peoples are not
a single social group, but rather a number of such groups, and this is,
in a way, true. Nevertheless their folk-lore displays such remarkable
homogeneity, from whatever quarter of the Celtic world it be derived,
that it seems the soundest method to treat them as one people for all
the purposes of the student of sociology, mythology, and religion.
Granting, then, such a unity in the beliefs of the pan-Celtic race, we
are finally obliged to distinguish as it were two aspects thereof.

On the one hand there is shown, even in the mere handful of non-Celtic
parallels, which for reasons of space we have been content to cite, as
well as in their Celtic equivalents, a generic element common to all
peoples living under primitive conditions of society. It is emphatically
a social element, but at the same time one which any primitive society
is bound to display. On the other hand, in a second aspect, the Celtic
beliefs show of themselves a character which is wholly Celtic: in the
Fairy-Faith, which is generically animistic, we find reflected all sorts
of specific characteristics of the Celtic peoples--their patriotism,
their peculiar type of imagination, their costumes, amusements,
household life, and social and religious customs generally. With this
fact in mind, we may proceed to examine certain of the more specialized
aspects of the Fairy-Faith, as manifested both among Celts and
elsewhere.


THE SMALLNESS OF ELVISH SPIRITS AND FAIRIES

_Ethnological or Pygmy Theory_

In any anthropological estimate of the Fairy-Faith, the pygmy stature so
commonly attributed to various orders of Celtic and of non-Celtic
fairies should be considered. Various scholarly champions of the Pygmy
Theory have attempted to explain this smallness of fairies by means of
the hypothesis that the belief in such fairies is due _wholly_ to a
folk-memory of small-statured pre-Celtic races;[125] and they add that
these races, having dwelt in caverns like the prehistoric Cave Men, and
in underground houses like those of Lapps or Eskimos, gave rise to the
belief in a fairy world existing in caverns and under hills or
mountains. When analysed, our evidence shows that in the majority of
cases witnesses have regarded fairies either as non-human nature-spirits
or else as spirits of the dead; that in a comparatively limited number
of cases they have regarded them as the souls of prehistoric races; and
that occasionally they have regarded the belief in them as due to a
folk-memory of such races. It follows, then, from such an analysis of
evidence, that the Pygmy Theory probably does explain some ethnological
elements which have come to be almost inseparably interwoven with the
essentially animistic fabric of the primitive Fairy-Faith. But though
the theory may so account for such ethnological elements, it disregards
the animism that has made such interweaving possible; and, on the whole,
we are inclined to accept Mr. Jenner's view of the theory (see p. 169).
Since the Pygmy Theory thus fails entirely to provide a basis for what
is by far the most important part of the Fairy-Faith, a more adequate
theory is required.

_Animistic Theory_

The testimony of Celtic literature goes to show that leprechauns and
similar dwarfish beings are not due to a folk-memory of a real pygmy
race, that they are spirits like elves, and that the folk-memory of a
Lappish-like people (who may have been Picts) evidently was confused
with them, so as to result in their being anthropomorphosed. Thus, in
_Fionn's Ransom_, there is reference to an under-sized apparently
Lappish-like man, who may be a Pict; and as Campbell, who records the
ancient tale, has observed, there are many similar traditional Highland
tales about little men or even about true dwarfs who are good
bowmen;[126] but it is very certain that such tales have often blended
with other tales, in which supernatural figures like fairies play a
role; and, apparently, the former kind of tales are much more historical
and modern in their origin, while the latter are more mythological and
extremely archaic. This blending of the natural or ethnological and the
supernatural--in quite the same manner as in the modern Fairy-Faith--is
clearly seen in another of Campbell's collected tales, _The Lad with the
Skin Coverings_,[127] which in essence is an otherworld tale: 'a little
thickset man in a russet coat,' who is a magician, but who otherwise
seems to be a genuine Lapp dressed in furs, is introduced into a story
where real fairy-like beings play the chief parts. Again, in Irish
literature, we read of a _loch luchra_ or 'lake of the pygmies'.[128]
Light is thrown upon this reference by what is recorded about the
leprechauns and Fergus:--While asleep on the seashore one day, Fergus
was about to be carried off by the _luchorpain_; 'whereat he awoke and
caught three of them, to wit, one in each of his two hands, and one on
his breast. "Life for life" (i. e. protection), say they. "Let my three
wishes (i. e. choices) be given," says Fergus. "Thou shalt have," says
the dwarf, "save that which is impossible for us." Fergus requested of
him knowledge of passing under loughs and linns and seas. "Thou shalt
have," says the dwarf, "save one which I forbid to thee: thou shalt not
go under Lough Rudraide [which] is in thine own country." Thereafter the
_luchuirp_ (little bodies) put herbs into his ears, and he used to go
with them under seas. Others say the dwarf gave his cloak to him, and
that Fergus used to put it on his head and thus go under seas.'[129] In
an etymological comment on this passage, Sir John Rhys says:--'The
words _luchuirp_ and _luchorpain_ [Anglo-Irish leprechaun] appear to
mean literally "small bodies", and the word here rendered _dwarf_ is in
the Irish _abac_, the etymological equivalent of the Welsh _avanc_, the
name by which certain water inhabitants of a mythic nature went in
Welsh....'[130]

Besides what we find in the recorded Fairy-Faith, there are very many
parallel traditions, both Celtic and non-Celtic, about various classes
of spirits, like leprechauns or other small elvish beings, which Dr.
Tylor has called nature-spirits;[131] and apparently all of these can
best be accounted for by means of the animistic hypothesis. For example,
in North America (as in Celtic lands) there is no proof of there ever
having been an actual dwarf race, but Lewis and Clark, in their _Travels
to the Source of the Missouri River_, found among the Sioux a tradition
that a hill near the Whitestone River, which the Red Men called the
'Mountain of Little People' or 'Little Spirits', was inhabited by pygmy
demons in human form, about eighteen inches tall, armed with sharp
arrows, and ever on the alert to kill mortals who should dare to invade
their domain. So afraid were all the tribes of Red Men who lived near
the mountain of these little spirits that no one of them could be
induced to visit it.[132] And we may compare this American
spirit-haunted hill with similar natural hills in Scotland said to be
fairy knolls: one near the turning of a road from Reay Wick to Safester,
Isle of Unst;[133] one the well-known fairy-haunted Tomnahurich, near
Inverness;[133] and a third, the hill at Aberfoyle on which the 'people
of peace' took the Rev. Robert Kirk when he profaned it by walking on
it; or we may equate the American hill with the fairy-haunted Slieve
Gullion and Ben Bulbin in Ireland.

The Iroquois had a belief that they could summon dwarfs, who were
similar nature-spirits, by knocking on a certain large stone.[134]
Likewise the Polong, a Malay familiar spirit, is 'an exceedingly
diminutive female figure or mannikin'.[135] East Indian nature-spirits,
too, are pygmies in stature.[136] In Polynesia, entirely independent of
the common legends about wild races of pygmy stature, are myths about
the spirits called _wui_ or _vui_, who correspond to European dwarfs and
trolls. These little spirits seem to occupy the same position toward the
Melanesian gods or culture heroes, Qat of the Banks Islands and Tagaro
of the New Hebrides, as daemons toward Greek gods, or as good angels
toward the Christian Trinity, or as fairy tribes toward the Brythonic
Arthur and toward the Gaelic hero Cuchulainn.[137] Similarly in Hindu
mythology pygmies hold an important place, being sculptured on most
temples in company with the gods; e. g. Siva is accompanied by a
bodyguard of dwarfs, and one of them, the three-legged Bhringi, is a
good dancer[138]--like all _corrigans_, pixies, and most fairies.

Beyond the borders of Celtic lands--in Southern Asia with its islands,
in Melanesia with New Guinea, and in Central Africa--pygmy races,
generally called Negritos, exist at the present day; but they themselves
have a fairy-faith, just as their normal-sized primitive neighbours
have, and it would hardly be reasonable to argue that either of the two
fairy-faiths is due to a folk-memory of small-statured peoples. Ancient
and thoroughly reliable manuscript records testify to the existence of
pygmies in China during the twenty-third century B. C.;[139] yet no one
has ever tried to explain the well-known animistic beliefs of modern
Chinamen in ghosts, demons, and in little nature-spirits like fairies,
by saying that these are a folk-memory of this ancient pygmy race. In
Yezo and the Kurile Islands of Japan still survive a few of the hairy
Ainu, a Caucasian-like, under-sized race; and their immediate
predecessors, whom they exterminated, were a Negrito race, who,
according to some traditions, were two to three feet in stature, and,
according to other traditions, only one inch in stature.[140] Both pygmy
races, the surviving and the exterminated race, seem independently to
have evolved a belief in ghosts and spirits, so that here again it need
not be argued that the present pre-Buddhist animism of the Japanese is
due to a folk-memory of either Ainus or Negritos.

Further examination of the animistic hypothesis designed to explain the
smallness of elvish spirits leads away from mere mythology into
psychology, and sets us the task of finding out if, after all, primitive
ideas about the disembodied human soul may not have originated or at
least have helped to shape the Celtic folk conception of fairies as
small-statured beings. Mr. A. E. Crawley, in his _Idea of the Soul_ (pp.
200-1, 206), shows by carefully selected evidence from ancient and
modern psychologies that 'first among the attributes of the soul in its
primary form may be placed its size', and that 'in the majority of cases
it is a miniature replica of the person, described often as a mannikin,
or homunculus, of a few inches in height'. Sometimes the soul is
described as only about three inches in stature. Dr. Frazer shows,
likewise, that by practically all contemporary primitive peoples the
soul is commonly regarded as a dwarf.[141]

The same opinions regarding the human soul prevailed among ancient
peoples highly civilized, i. e. the Egyptians and Greeks, and may have
thence directly influenced Celtic tradition. Thus, in bas-relief on the
Egyptian temple of _Der el Bahri_, Queen Hatshepsu Ramaka is making
offerings of perfume to the gods, while just behind her stands her _Ka_
(soul) as a pygmy so little that the crown of its head is just on a
level with her waist.[142] The _Ka_ is usually represented as about half
the size of an ordinary man. In the _Book of the Dead_, the _Ba_, which
like the _Ka_ is one of the many separable parts of the soul, is
represented as a very little man with wings and bird-like body.

On Greek vases the human soul is depicted as a pygmy issuing from the
body through the mouth; and this conception existed among Romans and
Teutons.[143] Like their predecessors the Egyptians, the Greeks also
often represented the soul as a small winged human figure, and Romans,
in turn, imagined the soul as a pygmy with butterfly wings. These ideas
reappear in mediaeval reliefs and pictures wherein the soul is shown as
a child or little naked man going out of the dying person's mouth;[144]
and, according to Caedmon, who was educated by Celtic teachers, angels
are small and beautiful[145]--quite like good fairies.

_Alchemical and Mystical Theory_

In the positive doctrines of mediaeval alchemists and mystics, e. g.
Paracelsus and the Rosicrucians, as well as their modern followers, the
ancient metaphysical ideas of Egypt, Greece, and Rome find a new
expression; and these doctrines raise the final problem--if there are
any scientific grounds for believing in such pygmy nature-spirits as
these remarkable thinkers of the Middle Ages claim to have studied as
beings actually existing in nature. To some extent this interesting
problem will be examined in our chapter entitled _Science and Fairies_;
here we shall simply outline the metaphysical theory, adding the
testimony of some of its living advocates to explain the smallness of
elvish spirits and fairies.

These mediaeval metaphysicians, inheritors of pre-Platonic, Platonic,
and neo-Platonic teachings, purposely obscured their doctrines under a
covering of alchemical terms, so as to safeguard themselves against
persecution, open discussion of occultism not being safe during the
Middle Ages, as it was among the ancients and happily is now again in
our own generation. But they were quite scientific in their methods, for
they divided all invisible beings into four distinct classes: the
Angels, who in character and function are parallel to the gods of the
ancients, and equal to the Tuatha De Danann of the Irish, are the
highest; below them are the Devils or Demons, who correspond to the
fallen angels of Christianity; the third class includes all Elementals,
sub-human Nature-Spirits, who are generally regarded as having pygmy
stature, like the Greek daemons; and the fourth division comprises the
Souls of the Dead, and the shades or ghosts of the dead.

For us, the third class, which includes spirits of pygmy-like form, is
the most important in this present discussion. All its members are of
four kinds, according as they inhabit one of the four chief elements of
nature.[146] Those inhabiting the earth are called Gnomes. They are
definitely of pygmy stature, and friendly to man, and in fairy-lore
ordinarily correspond to mine-haunting fairies or goblins, to pixies,
_corrigans_, leprechauns, and to such elves as live in rocks, caverns,
or earth--an important consideration entirely overlooked by champions of
the Pygmy Theory. Those inhabiting the air are called Sylphs. These
Sylphs, commonly described as little spirits like pygmies in form,
correspond to most of the fairies who are not of the Tuatha De Danann or
'gentry' type, and who as a race are beautiful and graceful. They are
quite like the fairies in Shakespeare's _Midsummer-Night's Dream_; and
especially like the aerials in _The Tempest_, which, according to Mr.
Morton Luce, a commentator on the drama, seem to have been shaped by
Shakespeare from his knowledge of Rosicrucian occultism, in which such
spirits hold an important place. Those inhabiting the water are called
Undines, and correspond exactly to the fairies who live in sacred
fountains, lakes, or rivers. And the fourth kind, those inhabiting the
fire, are called Salamanders, and seldom appear in the Celtic
Fairy-Faith: they are supreme in the elementary hierarchies. All these
Elementals, who procreate after the manner of men, are said to have
bodies of an elastic half-material essence, which is sufficiently
ethereal not to be visible to the physical sight, and probably
comparable to matter in the form of invisible gases. Mr. W. B. Yeats has
given this explanation:--'Many poets, and all mystic and occult writers,
in all ages and countries, have declared that behind the visible are
chains on chains of conscious beings, who are not of heaven but of the
earth, who have no inherent form, but change according to their whim, or
the mind that sees them. You cannot lift your hand without influencing
and being influenced by hordes. The visible world is merely their skin.
In dreams we go amongst them, and play with them, and combat with them.
They are, perhaps, human souls in the crucible--these creatures of
whim.'[147] And bringing this into relation with ordinary fairies, he
says:--'Do not think the fairies are always little. Everything is
capricious about them, even their size. They seem to take what size or
shape pleases them.'[147] In _The Celtic Twilight_ Mr. Yeats makes the
statement that the 'fairies in Ireland are sometimes as big as we are,
sometimes bigger, and sometimes, as I have been told, about three feet
high.'[148]

Mrs. X, a cultured Irishwoman now living in County Dublin, who as a
percipient fulfils all the exacting requirements which psychologists and
pathologists would demand, tells me that very frequently she has had
visions of fairy beings in Ireland, and her own classification and
description of these fairy beings, chiefly according to their stature,
are as follows:--'Among the usually invisible races which I have seen in
Ireland, I distinguish five classes. (1) There are the Gnomes, who are
earth-spirits, and who seem to be a sorrowful race. I once saw some of
them distinctly on the side of Ben Bulbin. They had rather round heads
and dark thick-set bodies, and in stature were about two and one-half
feet. (2) The Leprechauns are different, being full of mischief, though
they, too, are small. I followed a leprechaun from the town of Wicklow
out to the _Carraig Sidhe_, "Rock of the Fairies," a distance of half a
mile or more, where he disappeared. He had a very merry face, and
beckoned to me with his finger. (3) A third class are the Little People,
who, unlike the Gnomes and Leprechauns, are quite good-looking; and they
are very small. (4) The Good People are tall beautiful beings, as tall
as ourselves, to judge by those I saw at the _rath_ in Rosses Point.
They direct the magnetic currents of the earth. (5) The Gods are really
the Tuatha De Danann, and they are much taller than our race. There may
be many other classes of invisible beings which I do not know.'
(Recorded on October 16, 1910.)

And independently of the Celtic peoples there is available very much
testimony of the most reliable character from modern disciples of the
mediaeval occultists, e. g. the Rosicrucians, and the Theosophists, that
there exist in nature invisible spiritual beings of pygmy stature and of
various forms and characters, comparable in all respects to the little
people of Celtic folk-lore. How all this is parallel to the Celtic
Fairy-Faith is perfectly evident, and no comment of ours is
necessary.[149]

This point of view, presented by mediaeval and modern occult sciences
and confirmed by Celtic and non-Celtic percipients, when considered in
relation to its non-Celtic sources and then at once contrasted with
ancient and modern Celtic beliefs of the same character which constitute
it--to be seen in the above Gaelic and Brythonic manuscript and other
evidence, and in Caedmon's theory that angels are small beings--plunges
us into the very complex and extremely difficult problem how far fairies
as pygmy spirits may be purely Celtic, and how far they may reflect
beliefs not Celtic. The problem, however, is far too complicated to be
discussed here; and one may briefly say that there seems to have been a
time in the evolution of animism when the ancient Celts of Britain, of
Ireland, and of Continental Europe too, held, in common with the ancient
Greeks, Romans, and Teutons, an original Aryan doctrine. This doctrine,
after these four stocks separated in possession of it, began to evolve
its four specialized aspects which we now can study; and in the Irish
Universities of the early Christian centuries, when Ireland was the
centre of European learning, the classical and Celtic aspects of it met
for the first time since their prehistoric divorcement. There, as is
clearly seen later among the mediaeval alchemists and occultists, a new
influence--from Christian theology--was superadded to the ancient
animistic beliefs of Europe as they had evolved up to that time.

_Conclusion_

The ethnological argument, after allowing for all its shortcomings,
