cylindrical cone, more or less like an Earthly tornado. The largest
vessels were high above the stratosphere; the smallest fighters were
hedge-hoppingly close to ground. Each Dilipic unit seemed madly,
suicidally determined that nothing would get through that furious wall
to interfere with whatever it was that was coming down from space to the
ground through--along?--the relatively quiet "eye" of the
pseudo-hurricane.

On the other hand, the Arpalones were madly, suicidally determined to
break through that vortex wall, to get into the "eye," to wreak all
possible damage there. Group after group after group of five
jet-fighters each came driving in; and, occasionally, the combined
blasts of all five made enough of opening in the wall so that the center
fighter could get through. Once inside, each pilot stood his little,
stubby-winged craft squarely on her tail, opened his projectors to
absolute maximum of power and of spread, and climbed straight up the
spout until he was shot down.

And the Arpalones were winning the battle. Larger and larger gaps were
being opened in the vortex wall; gaps which it became increasingly
difficult for the Dilipics to fill. More and more Arpalone fighters were
getting inside. They were lasting longer and doing more damage all the
time. The tube was growing narrower and narrower.

All four Galaxians perceived all this in seconds. Garlock weighed out
and detonated a terrific matter-conversion bomb in the exact center of
one of the largest vessels of the attacking fleet. It had no effect.
Then a larger one. Then another, still heavier. Finally, at over a
hundred megatons equivalent, he did get results--of a sort. The
invaders' guns, ammunition, and missiles were blown out of the ship and
scattered outward for miles in all directions; but the structure of the
Dilipic ship itself was not harmed.

Belle had been studying, analyzing, probing the things that were coming
down through that hellish tube.

"Clee!" She drove a thought. "Cut out the monkey-business with those
damn firecrackers of yours and look here--pure, solid force, like ball
lightning or our Op field, but entirely different--see if you can
analyze the stuff!"

"Alive?" Garlock asked, as he drove a probe into one of the things--they
were furiously-radiating spheres some seven feet in diameter--and began
to tune to it.

"I don't know--don't think so--if they are, they're a form of life that
no sane human being could even imagine!"

"Let's see what they actually do," Garlock suggested, still trying to
tune in with the thing, whatever it was, and still following it down.

This particular force-ball happened to hit the top of a six-story
building. It was not going very fast--fifteen or twenty miles an
hour--but when it struck the roof it did not even slow down. Without any
effort at all, apparently, it continued downward through the concrete
and steel and glass of the building; and everything in its path became
monstrously, sickeningly, revoltingly changed.

"I simply can't stand any more of this," Lola gasped. "If you don't
mind, I'm going to my room, set all the Gunther blocks it has, and bury
my head under a pillow."

"Go ahead, Brownie," James said. "This is too tough for _anybody_ to
watch. I'd do the same, except I've got to run these cameras."

Lola disappeared.

        *           *           *

Garlock and Belle kept on studying. Neither had paid any attention at
all to either Lola or James.

Instead of the structural material it had once been, the bore that the
thing had traversed was now full of a sparkling, bubbling, writhing,
partly-fluid-partly-viscous, obscenely repulsive mass of something
unknown and unknowable on Earth; a something which, Garlock now
recalled, had been thought of by the Arpalone Inspector as "golop."

As that unstoppable globe descended through office after office, it
neither sought out people nor avoided them. Walls, doors, windows,
ceilings, floors and rugs, office furniture and office personnel; all
alike were absorbed into and made a part of that indescribably horrid
brew.

Nor did the track of that hellishly wanton globe remain a bore. Instead,
it spread. That devil's brew ate into and dissolved everything it
touched like a stream of boiling water being poured into a
loosely-heaped pile of granulated sugar. By the time the ravening sphere
had reached the second floor, the entire roof of the building was gone
and the writhing, racing flood of corruption had flowed down the outer
walls and across the street, engulfing and transforming sidewalks,
people, pavement, poles, wires, automobiles, people-anything and
everything it touched.

        *           *           *

The globe went on down, through basement and sub-basement, until it
reached solid, natural ground. Then, with its top a few inches below the
level of natural ground, it came to a full stop and--apparently--did
nothing at all. By this time, the ravening flood outside had eaten far
into the lower floors of the buildings across the street, as well as
along all four sides of the block, and tremendous masses of masonry and
steel, their supporting structures devoured, were subsiding, crumbling,
and crashing down into the noisome flood of golop--and were being
transformed almost as fast as they could fall.

One tremendous mass, weighing hundreds or perhaps thousands of tons,
toppled almost as a whole; splashing the stuff in all directions for
hundreds of yards. Wherever each splash struck, however, a new center of
attack came into being, and the peculiarly disgusting, abhorrent
liquidation went on.

"Can you do anything with it, Clee?" Belle demanded.

"Not too much--it's a mess," Garlock replied. "Besides, it wouldn't get
us far, I don't think. It'll be more productive to analyze the beams the
Arpalones are using to break them up, don't you think?"

Then, for twenty solid minutes, the two Prime Operators worked on those
enigmatic beams.

"We can't assemble _that_ kind of stuff with our minds," Belle decided
then.

"I'll say we can't," Garlock agreed. "Ten megacycles, and cycling only
twenty per second." He whistled raucously through his teeth. "My guess
is it'd take four months to design and build a generator to put out that
kind of stuff. It's worse than our Op field."

"I'm not sure I could _ever_ design one," Belle said, thoughtfully, "but
of course I'm not the engineer you are...." Then, she could not help
adding, "... yet."

"No, and you never will be," he said, flatly.

"No? That's what _you_ think!" Even in such circumstances as those,
Belle Bellamy was eager to carry on her warfare with her Project Chief.

"That's _exactly_ what I think--and I'm so close to knowing it for a
fact that the difference is indetectible."

Belle almost--but not quite--blew up. "Well, what _are_ you going to
do?"

"Unless and until I can figure out something effective to do, I'm not
going to try to do anything. If you, with your vaunted and flaunted
belief in the inherent superiority of the female over the male, can dope
out something useful before I do, I'll eat crow and help you do it. As
for arguing with you, I'm all done for the moment."

Belle gritted her teeth, flounced away, and plumped herself down into a
chair. She shut her eyes and put every iota of her mind to work on the
problem of finding something--_anything_--that could be done to help
this doomed world and to show that big, overbearing jerk of a Garlock
that she was a better man than he was. Which of the two objectives
loomed more important, she herself could not have told, to save her
life.

And Garlock looked around. The air and the sky over the now-vanished
city were both clear of Dilipic craft. The surviving Arpalone fighters
and other small craft were making no attempt to land, anywhere on the
world's surface. Instead, they were flying upward toward, and were being
drawn one by one into the bowels of, huge Arpalonian space-freighters.
When each such vessel was filled to capacity, it flew upward and set
itself into a more-or-less-circular orbit around the planet.

Around and around and around the ruined world the _Pleiades_ went;
recording, observing, charting. Fifty-eight of those atrocious Dilipic
vortices had been driven to ground. Every large land-mass surrounded by
large bodies of water had been struck once, and only once; from the
tremendous area of the largest continent down to the relatively tiny
expanses of the largest islands. One land-mass, one vortex. One only.

"What d'you suppose _that_ means?" James asked. "Afraid of water?"

"Damfino. Could be. Let's check ... mountains, too. Skip us back to
where we started--oceans and mountains both fairly close there."

The city had disappeared long since; for hundreds of almost-level square
miles there extended a sparkling, seething, writhing expanse of--of
what? The edge of that devouring flood had almost reached the
foot-hills, and over that gnawing, dissolving edge the _Pleiades_
paused.

        *           *           *

Small lakes and ordinary rivers bothered the golop very little if at
all. There was perhaps a slightly increased sparkling, a slight
stiffening, a little darkening, some freezing and breaking off of solid
blocks; but the thing's forward motion was not noticeably slowed down.
It drank a fairly large river and a lake one mile wide by ten miles long
while the two men watched.

The golop made no attempt to climb either foot-hills or mountains. It
leveled them. It ate into their bases at its own level; the undermined
masses, small and large, collapsed into the foul, corrosive semi-liquid
and were consumed. Nor was there much raising of the golop's level, even
when the highest mountains were reached and miles-high masses of solid
rock broke off and toppled. There was some raising, of course; but the
stuff was fluid enough so that its slope was not apparent to the eye.

        *           *           *

Then the _Pleiades_ went back, over the place where the city had been
and on to what had once been an ocean beach. The original wave of
degradation had reached that shore long since, had attacked its sands
out into deep water, and there it had been stopped. The corrupt flood
was now being reinforced, however, by an ever-rising tide of material
that had once been mountains. And the slope, which had not been even
noticeable at the mountains or over the plain, was here very evident.

As the rapidly-flowing golop struck water, the water shivered, came to a
weirdly unforgettable cold boil, and exploded into drops and streamers
and jagged-edged chunks of something that was neither water nor land; or
rock or soil or sand or Satan's unholy brew. Nevertheless, the water
won. There was _so_ much of it! Each barrel of water that was destroyed
was replaced instantly and enthusiastically; with no lowering of level
or of pressure.

And when water struck the golop, the golop also shivered violently, then
sparkled even more violently, then stopped sparkling and turned dark,
then froze solid. The frozen surface, however, was neither thick enough
nor strong enough to form an effective wall.

Again and again the wave of golop built up high enough to crack and to
shatter that feeble wall; again and again golop and water met in
ultimately furious, if insensate, battle. Inch by inch the ocean's
shoreline was driven backward toward ocean's depths; but every inch the
ocean lost was to its tactical advantage, since the advancing front was
by now practically filled with hard, solid, dead blocks of its own
substance which it could neither assimilate nor remove from the scene of
conflict.

Hence the wall grew ever thicker and solider; the advance became slower
and slower.

Then, finally, ocean waves of ever-increasing height and violence rolled
in against the new-formed shore. What caused those tremendous
waves--earthquakes, perhaps, due to the shifting of the mountains'
masses?--no Tellurian ever surely knew. Whatever the cause, however,
those waves operated to pin the golop down. Whenever and wherever one of
those monstrous waves whitecapped in, hurling hundreds of thousands of
tons of water inland for hundreds of yards, the battle-front stabilized
then and there.

All over that world the story was the same. Wherever there was water
enough, the water won. And the total quantity of water in that world's
oceans remained practically unchanged.

"Good. A lot of people escaped," James said, expelling a long-held
breath. "Everybody who lives on or could be flown to all the islands
smaller than the biggest ones ... if they can find enough to eat and if
the air isn't poisoned."

"Air's okay--so's the water--and they'll get food," Garlock said. "The
Arpalones will handle things, including distribution. What I'm thinking
about is how they're going to rehabilitate it. That, as an engineering
project, is a feat to end all feats."

"_Brother!_ You can play _that_ in spades!" James agreed. "Except that
it'll take too many months before they can even start the job, I'd like
to stick around and see how they go about it. How does this kind of
stuff fit into that theory you're not admitting is a theory?"

"Not worth a damn. However, it's a datum--and, as I've said before and
may say again, if we can get _enough_ data we can build a theory out of
it."

Then it began to rain. For many minutes the clouds had been piling
up--black, far-flung, thick and high. Immense bolts of lightning flashed
and snapped and crackled; thunder crashed and rolled and rumbled; rain
fell, and continued to fall, like a cloud-burst in Colorado. And shortly
thereafter--first by square feet and then by acres and then by square
miles--the surface of the golop began to die. To die, that is, if it had
ever been even partially alive. At least it stopped sparkling, darkened,
and froze into thick skins; which broke up into blocks; which in turn
sank--thus exposing an ever-renewed surface to the driving, pelting,
relentlessly cascading rain.

"Well, I don't know that there's anything to hold us here any longer,"
Garlock said, finally. "Shall we go?"

They went; but it was several days before any of the wanderers really
felt like smiling; and Lola did not recover from her depression for over
a week.




CHAPTER 5


Supper was over, but the four were still at the table, sipping coffee
and smoking. During a pause in the casual conversation, James suddenly
straightened up.

"I want an official decision, Clee," he said, abruptly. "While we're out
of touch with United Worlds you, as captain of the ship and director of
the project, are Boss, with a capital B. The Lord of Justice, High and
Low. The Works. Check?"

"On paper, yes; with my decisions subject to appeal and/or review when
we get back to Base. In practice, I didn't expect to have to make any
very gravid rulings."

"I never thought you'd have to, either, but Belle fed me one with a bone
in it, so...."

"Just a minute. How official do you want it? Full formal, screens down
and recorded?"

"Not unless we have to. Let's explore it first. As of right now, are we
