

LEARNING TO THINK.


Grandpa Dennis is one of the kindest and gentlest, as well as one of the
wisest men I know; and although his step is somewhat feeble, and the few
locks that are left him are gray, he is still more hale and hearty than
many a younger man.

Like all old people whose hearts are in the right place, he is fond of
children, whom he likes to amuse and instruct by his pleasant talk, as
they gather round his fireside or sit upon his knee.

Sometimes he puts questions to the young folks, not only to find out
what they know, but also to sharpen their wits and lead them to think.

"Tell me, Norman," he said one day, as they sat together, "if I have a
cake to divide among three persons, how ought I to proceed?"

"Why, cut it into three parts, and give one to each, to be sure," said
Norman.

"Let us try that plan, and see how it will succeed. Suppose the cake has
to be divided among you, Arthur and Winnie. If I cut off a very thin
slice for you, and divide what is left between your brother and sister,
will that be fair?"

"No, that would not be at all fair, Grandpa."

"Why not? Did I not divide the cake according to your advice? Did I not
cut it into three parts?"

"But one was larger than the other, and they ought to have been exactly
the same size."

"Then you think, that if I had divided the cake into three equal parts,
it would have been quite fair?"

"Yes; if you had done so, I should have no cause to complain."

"Now, Norman, let us suppose that I have three baskets to send to a
distance by three persons; shall I act fairly if I give each a basket to
carry?"

"Stop a minute, Grandpa, I must think a little. No, it might not be
fair, for one of the baskets might be a great deal larger than the
others."

"Come, Norman, I see that you are really beginning to think. But we will
take care that the baskets are all of the same size."

"Then it would be quite fair for each one to take a basket."

"What! if one was full of lead, and the other two were filled with
feathers?"

"Oh, no! I never thought of that. Let the baskets be of the same weight,
and all will be right."

"Are you quite sure of that? Suppose one of the three persons is a
strong man, another a weak woman, and the third a little child?"

"Grandpa! Grandpa! Why, I am altogether wrong. How many things there are
to think about."

"Well, Norman, I hope you see that if burdens have to be equally borne,
they must be suited to the strength of those who have to bear them."

"Yes, I see that clearly now. Put one more question to me, Grandpa, and
I will try to answer it properly this time."

"Well, then, my next question is this: If I want a man to dig for me,
and three persons apply for the situation, will it not be fair if I set
them to work to try them, and choose the one who does his task in the
quickest time?"

"Are they all to begin their work at the same time?"

"A very proper question, Norman: yes, they shall all start together."

"Has one just as much ground to dig as another?"

"Exactly the same."

"And will each man have a good spade?"

"Yes, their spades shall be exactly alike."

"But one part of the field may be soft earth, and the other hard and
stony."

"I will take care of that. All shall be fairly dealt with. The ground
shall be everywhere alike."

"Well, I think, Grandpa, that he who does his work first, if done as
well as that of either of the other two, is the best man."

"And I think so, too, Norman; and if you go on in this way it will be
greatly to your advantage. Only form the habit of being thoughtful in
little things, and you will be sure to judge wisely in important ones."


       *       *       *       *       *


In the words _suit_ (s[=u]t) and _soon_ (s[=oo]n), have the marked
vowels the same sound?


In the two statements,--


       I give it to you because it's good;
       Virtue brings its own reward;


why is there an apostrophe in the first "it's," and none in the second?


       Let your hands be honest and clean--
       Let your conscience be honest and clean--


Combine these two sentences by the word _and_; rewrite them, omitting
all needless words.

Compose two sentences, one having the action-word _learned_; the other
the word _taught_.

Fill each of the following blank spaces with the correct form of the
action-word _bear_:


As Christ -- His cross, so must we -- ours.
Our cross must be --. "And -- His own
cross, He went forth to Calvary."



       *       *       *       *       *




_38_


elate'
despond'
lu' mi nous
pil' grim age



ONE BY ONE.


       One by one the sands are flowing,
         One by one the moments fall;
       Some are coming, some are going;
         Do not strive to grasp them all.

       One by one thy duties wait thee;
         Let thy whole strength go to each;
       Let no future dreams elate thee,
         Learn thou first what these can teach.

       One by one (bright gifts from Heaven)
         Joys are sent thee here below;
       Take them readily when given,
         Ready, too, to let them go.

       One by one thy griefs shall meet thee;
         Do not fear an armed band;
       One will fade as others greet thee--
         Shadows passing through the land.

       Do not look at life's long sorrow;
         See how small each moment's pain;
       God will help thee for to-morrow,
         So each day begin again.

       Every hour that fleets so slowly
         Has its task to do or bear;
       Luminous the crown, and holy,
         When each gem is set with care.

       Do not linger with regretting,
         Or for passing hours despond;
       Nor, thy daily toil forgetting,
         Look too eagerly beyond.

       Hours are golden links, God's token,
         Reaching heaven; but one by one
       Take them, lest the chain be broken
         Ere the pilgrimage be done.


_Adelaide A. Procter._


       *       *       *       *       *


Choose any four lines of the poem, and tell what lesson each line
teaches.

Name some great works that were done little by little.

What does "Rome was not built in a day" mean?

Tell what is meant by "He that despiseth small faults shall fall by
little and little."

What is the real or literal meaning of the word _gem_?

Find the word in the poem, and tell what meaning it has there.

Explain the line--


       "Let no future dreams elate thee."


What is meant by "building castles in the air?"

Study the whole poem line by line, and try to tell yourself what each
line means. Nearly every single line of it teaches an important moral
lesson. Find out what that lesson is.

Tell what you know of the author.


       *       *       *       *       *




_39_


ca noe'
sup' ple
fi' brous
res' in
sin' ews
tam' a rack
ooz' ing
bal' sam
sol' i ta ry
pli' ant
fis' sure
re sist' ance
som' ber
crev' ice
re splen' dent



THE BIRCH CANOE.


           "Give me of your bark, O Birch Tree!
       Of your yellow bark, O Birch Tree!
       Growing by the rushing river,
       Tall and stately in the valley!
       I a light canoe will build me,
       That shall float upon the river,
       Like a yellow leaf in autumn,
       Like a yellow water lily!
           Lay aside your cloak, O Birch Tree!
       Lay aside your white-skin wrapper,
       For the summer time is coming,
       And the sun is warm in heaven,
       And you need no white-skin wrapper!"
           Thus aloud cried Hiawatha
       In the solitary forest,
       When the birds were singing gayly,
       In the Moon of Leaves were singing.
           And the tree with all its branches
       Rustled in the breeze of morning,
       Saying, with a sigh of patience,
       "Take my cloak, O Hiawatha!"
           With his knife the tree he girdled;
       Just beneath its lowest branches,
       Just above the roots, he cut it,
       Till the sap came oozing outward;
       Down the trunk, from top to bottom,
       Sheer he cleft the bark asunder,
       With a wooden wedge he raised it,
       Stripped it from the trunk unbroken.
           "Give me of your boughs, O Cedar!
       Of your strong and pliant branches,
       My canoe to make more steady,
       Make more strong and firm beneath me!"
           Through the summit of the Cedar
       Went a sound, a cry of horror,
       Went a murmur of resistance;
       But it whispered, bending downward,
       "Take my boughs, O Hiawatha!"
           Down he hewed the boughs of cedar
       Shaped them straightway to a framework,
       Like two bows he formed and shaped them,
       Like two bended bows together.
           "Give me of your roots, O Tamarack!
       Of your fibrous roots, O Larch Tree!
       My canoe to bind together,
       So to bind the ends together,
       That the water may not enter,
       That the river may not wet me!"
           And the Larch with all its fibers
       Shivered in the air of morning,
       Touched his forehead with its tassels,
       Said, with one long sigh of sorrow,
       "Take them all, O Hiawatha!"
           From the earth he tore the fibers,
       Tore the tough roots of the Larch Tree.
       Closely sewed the bark together,
       Bound it closely to the framework.
           "Give me of your balm, O Fir Tree!
       Of your balsam and your resin,
       So to close the seams together
       That the water may not enter,
       That the river may not wet me!"
           And the Fir Tree, tall and somber,
       Sobbed through all its robes of darkness,
       Rattled like a shore with pebbles,
       Answered wailing, answered weeping,
       "Take my balm, O Hiawatha!"
           And he took the tears of balsam,
       Took the resin of the Fir Tree,
       Smeared therewith each seam and fissure,
       Made each crevice safe from water.
           "Give me of your quills, O Hedgehog!
       I will make a necklace of them,
       Make a girdle for my beauty,
       And two stars to deck her bosom!"
           From a hollow tree the Hedgehog,
