The Project Gutenberg EBook of The World Beyond, by Raymond King Cummings

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The World Beyond

Author: Raymond King Cummings

Release Date: June 7, 2009 [EBook #29059]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE WORLD BEYOND ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, adhere and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net





Transcriber's Note

This etext was produced from Amazing Stories July 1942. Extensive
research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S. copyright on this
publication was renewed.




_Out of nowhere came these grim, cold, black-clad men, to kidnap three
Earth people and carry them to a weird and terrible world where a man
could be a giant at will._


[Illustration: Lee Anthony crouched and set himself to resist the
attack of the robed men.]




THE WORLD BEYOND

By RAY CUMMINGS


The old woman was dying. There could be no doubt of it now. Surely she
would not last through the night. In the dim quiet bedroom he sat
watching her, his young face grim and awed. Pathetic business, this
ending of earthly life, this passing on. In the silence, from the living
room downstairs the gay laughter of the young people at the birthday
party came floating up. His birthday--Lee Anthony, twenty-one years old
today. He had thought he would feel very different, becoming--legally--a
man. But the only difference now, was that old Anna Green who had been
always so good to him, who had taken care of him almost all his life,
now was dying.

Terrible business. But old age is queer. Anna knew what was happening.
The doctor, who had given Lee the medicines and said he would be back in
the morning, hadn't fooled her. And she had only smiled.

Lee tensed as he saw that she was smiling now; and she opened her eyes.
His hand went to hers where it lay, so white, blue-veined on the white
bedspread.

"I'm here, Anna. Feel better?"

"Oh, yes. I'm all right." Her faint voice, gently tired, mingled with
the sounds from the party downstairs. She heard the laughter. "You
should be down there, Lee. I'm all right."

"I should have postponed it," he said. "And what you did, preparing for
it--"

She interrupted him, raising her thin arm, which must have seemed so
heavy that at once she let it fall again. "Lee--I guess I am glad you're
here--want to talk to you--and I guess it better be now."

"Tomorrow--you're too tired now--"

"For me," she said with her gentle smile, "there may not be any
tomorrow--not here. Your grandfather, Lee--you really don't remember
him?"

"I was only four or five."

"Yes. That was when your father and mother died in the aero accident and
your grandfather brought you to me."

Very vaguely he could remember it. He had always understood that Anna
Green had loved his grandfather, who had died that same year.

"What I want to tell you, Lee--" She seemed summoning all her last
remaining strength. "Your grandfather didn't die. He just went away.
What you've never known--he was a scientist. But he was a lot more than
that. He had--dreams. Dreams of what we mortals might be--what we ought
to be--but are not. And so he--went away."

This dying old woman; her mind was wandering?...

"Oh--yes," Lee said. "But you're much too tired now, Anna dear--"

"Please let me tell you. He had--some scientific apparatus. I didn't see
it--I don't know where he went. I think he didn't know either, where he
was going. But he was a very good man, Lee. I think he had an
intuition--an inspiration. Yes, it must have been that. A man--inspired.
And so he went. I've never seen or heard from him since. Yet--what he
promised me--if he could accomplish it--tonight--almost now, Lee, would
be the time--"

       *       *       *       *       *

Just a desperately sick old woman whose blurred mind was seeing visions.
The thin wrinkled face, like crumpled white parchment, was transfigured
as though by a vision. Her sunken eyes were bright with it. A wonderment
stirred within Lee Anthony. Why was his heart pounding? It seemed
suddenly as though he must be sharing this unknown thing of science--and
mysticism. As though something within him--his grandfather's blood
perhaps--was responding.... He felt suddenly wildly excited.

"Tonight?" he murmured.

"Your grandfather was a very good man, Lee--"

"And you, Anna--all my life I have known how good you are. Not like most
women--you're just all gentleness--just kindness--"

"That was maybe--just an inspiration from him." Her face was bright with
it. "I've tried to bring you up--the way he told me. And what I must
tell you now--about tonight, I mean--because I may not live to see it--"

Her breath gave out so that her faint tired voice trailed away.

"What?" he urged. "What is it, Anna? About tonight--"

What a tumult of weird excitement was within him! Surely this was
something momentous. His twenty-first birthday. Different, surely, for
Lee Anthony than any similar event had ever been for anyone else.

"He promised me--when you were twenty-one--just then--at this time, if
he could manage it--that he would come back--"

"Come back, Anna? Here?"

"Yes. To you and me. Because you would be a man--brought up, the best I
could do to make you be--like him--because you would be a man who would
know the value of love--and kindness--those things that ought to rule
this world--but really do not."

This wild, unreasoning excitement within him...! "You think he will
come--tonight, Anna?"

"I really do. I want to live to see him. But now--I don't know--"

He could only sit in silence, gripping her hand. And again the gay
voices of his guests downstairs came up like a roar of intrusion. They
didn't know that she was more than indisposed. She had made him promise
not to tell them.

Her eyes had closed, and now she opened them again. "They're having a
good time, aren't they, Lee? That's what I wanted--for you and them
both. You see, I've had to be careful--not to isolate you from
life--life as it is. Because your grandfather wanted you to be normal--a
healthy, happy--regular young man. Not queer--even though I've tried to
show you--"

"If he--he's coming tonight, Anna--we shouldn't have guests here."

"When they have had their fun--"

"They have. We're about finished down there. I'll get rid of them--tell
them you're not very well--"

She nodded. "Perhaps that's best--now--"

He was hardly aware of how he broke up the party and sent them away.
Then in the sudden heavy silence of the little cottage, here in the
grove of trees near the edge of the town, he went quietly back upstairs.

       *       *       *       *       *

Her eyes were closed. Her white face was placid. Her faint breath was
barely discernible. Failing fast now. Quietly he sat beside her. There
was nothing that he could do. The doctor had said that very probably she
could not live through the night. Poor old Anna. His mind rehearsed the
life that she had given him. Always she had been so gentle, so wise,
ruling him with kindness.

He remembered some of the things she had reiterated so often that his
childish mind had come to realize their inevitable truth. The greatest
instinctive desire of every living creature is happiness. And the way to
get it was not by depriving others of it. It seemed now as though this
old woman had had something of goodness inherent to her--as though she
