against the wall--and I mean fast!"

The sudden attack from the rear startled the Nationalist guards, and
they milled around in confusion. There was no confusion, however, when
Connel fired a blast over their heads. Astro grabbed a paralo-ray gun
and opened up on the guards. A second later the squad of Nationalists
were frozen in their tracks.

Once the men were no further danger to them, Connel and Astro locked the
front and rear doors and then raced up the stairs that led to the main
radar and communications rooms on the second floor.

"You start at that end of the hall, I'll start here!" shouted Connel.
"Smash everything you see!"

"Aye, aye, sir." Astro waved his hand and charged down the hall. He
exploded into a room, firing rapidly, and an electronics engineer froze
in a startled pose in front of his worktable. The big cadet gleefully
swung a heavy chair across the table of delicate electronic instruments,
and smashed shelves of vital parts, pausing only long enough to see if
he had left anything unbroken. He rushed out into the hall again. At the
other end he heard Connel in action in another room. Astro grinned. It
sounded as if the major was having a good time. "Well," thought the big
cadet, "I'm not having such a bad time myself!"

The next room he invaded contained the radar-control panel, and the big
cadet howled with glee as he smashed the butt of his paralo-ray gun into
the delicate vacuum tubes, and ripped wires and circuits loose.

Suddenly he stopped, conscious of someone behind him. He spun around,
finger starting to squeeze the trigger of his gun, and then caught
himself just in time. Major Connel was leaning against the doorjamb, a
wide grin on his face.

"How're you doing?" he drawled.

"Not bad," said Astro casually. "Be a lot of work here, fixing these
things, eh?" He grinned.

"What time is it?" asked Connel.

Astro looked at his watch. "Twenty to twelve."

"We'd better clear out of here and head for the jungle."

Astro hesitated. "You know, sir, I've been thinking."

"If you have an idea, spill it," said the major.

"How about releasing the prisoners, taking over a ship, and blasting
off?"

"And have the Solar Guard fleet blast us out of the skies? No, sir! Come
on, we've got to get moving!"

"We could still try to release Carson and the others," said Astro
stoutly.

"We can try all right, but I don't think we'll be very successful."

The two spacemen returned to the first floor of the building and headed
for the rear door without so much as a look at the line of frozen guards
along the wall. Once outside, they skirted the edge of the building,
staying close to the hedge, and then struck out boldly across the canyon
floor toward the prison building. They were surprised to see that their
smashing attack had gone unnoticed, and Connel reasoned that the
constant roar of activity in the canyon had covered the sounds of their
raid.

"We'll have to hurry, sir," said Astro as they turned into the lane
leading to the prison. "Ten minutes to twelve."

"It's no good, Astro," said Connel, suddenly pulling the cadet back and
pointing to the building. "Look at all the guards--at least a dozen of
them."

Astro waited a second before saying grimly, "We could try, sir."

"Don't be a pigheaded idiot!" roared Connel. "Nothing will happen to
those men now, and in five minutes there'll be so much confusion around
here that we'll be able to walk over and open the door without firing a
shot!"

Suddenly there was an explosive roar behind them and they spun around.
On the opposite side of the canyon three rocket ships were hurtling
spaceward.

"They must have spotted our fleet coming in," said Connel, a puzzled
frown on his face.

"But how could they?" asked Astro. "We knocked out their radar!"

Connel slammed his fist into the palm of his hand. "By the stars, Astro,
we forgot about their monitoring spaceship above the tower! When we
knocked out the main station here in the canyon, it took over and warned
the base of the attack!"

From all sides the canyon reverberated with the roaring blasts of the
Nationalist fleet blasting off. Around them, the green-clad rebels were
running to their defense posts. Officers shouted frantic orders and
workers dropped tools to pick up guns. The building that held Carson and
the other planters was suddenly left alone as the guards hurried to
ships and battle stations.

Connel counted the number of ships blasting off and smiled. "They don't
stand a chance! They're sending up only two heavy cruisers, four
destroyers, and about twenty scouts. The Solar Guard fleet will blast
them into space dust."

Astro jumped up and started to run.

"Hey, Astro! Where are you going?" shouted Connel.

"To find Roger!" Astro shouted in reply. "I'll meet you back here!"

"Right!" shouted Connel, settling back into concealment. There was no
need to release the planters in the guardhouse now. Connel was satisfied
that in a few moments the rebellion against the Solar Alliance would be
defeated. He smiled in prospect of seeing a good fight.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Bandit at three o'clock--range twenty miles!" Aboard the command ship
of the first group of attacking Solar Guard squadrons, Captain Strong
stood in the middle of the control deck and watched the outline of an
approaching Nationalist cruiser on the radar scanner. The voice of the
range finder droned over the ship's intercom.

"Change course three degrees starboard, one degree down on ecliptic
plane," ordered Strong calmly.

"Aye, aye, sir," replied Tom at the controls.

"Main battery, stand by to fire." Strong watched the enemy ship closely.

"Aye, aye!" came the answer over the intercom.

"Approaching target!" called the range finder. "Closing to fifty
thousand yards--forty thousand--"

"_Pleiades_ and _Regulus_," Strong called the other two ships of his
squadron. "Cut in on port and starboard flanks. Squadron B, stand by!"

Abrupt acknowledgment came over the audioceiver as the cruisers deployed
for the attack.

"Twenty-three thousand yards, holding course." The range-finder's voice
was a steady monotone.

"Stand by to fire!" snapped Strong.

"Two bandits at nine o'clock on level plane of ecliptic!" came the
warning from the radar bridge.

Before Strong could issue an order countering the enemy move, the voice
of the commander of the _Pleiades_ came in over the audioceiver, "Our
meat, Strong, you take care of the big baby!"

On the scanner screen Strong saw the trails of two space torpedoes erupt
from the side of the _Pleiades_, followed immediately by two more from
its flanking ship, the _Regulus_. The four missiles hurtled toward the
two enemy destroyers, and a second later two brilliant flashes of light
appeared on the scanner. Direct hits on the two destroyers!

"Range--ten thousand feet," came the calm voice over the intercom,
reminding Strong of the enemy cruiser.

"Arm war heads!" snapped Strong over the intercom, and, on the gun deck,
men twirled the delicate fuses on the noses of the space torpedoes and
stepped back.

"On target!" called the range finder.

"Full salvo--fire!" called Strong, and turned to Tom quickly.
"Ninety-degree turn--five degrees up!"

The Solar Guard cruiser quivered under the recoil of the salvo and then
bucked under the sudden change of course to elude the torpedoes fired by
the enemy a split second later.

As the Solar Guard cruiser roared up in a long arc, eluding the enemy
torpedoes, the Nationalist ship maneuvered frantically to evade the
salvo of war heads, but Strong had fired a deadly pattern. In a few
seconds the enemy ship was reduced to space junk.

Concentrating on the control panel, Tom had been too busy maneuvering
the giant ship to see the entire engagement, but he heard the loud
exulting cries of the gun crew over the intercom. He looked up at
Strong, and the Solar Guard captain winked. "One down!"

"Here come squadrons C, D, and E, sir," said Tom, indicating the radar.
"Right on time." He glanced at the astral chronometer over his head.
"Two minutes after twelve."

"It doesn't look as if we'll need them, Tom," said Strong. "The
Nationalists got only two cruisers and four destroyers off the ground.
We've already knocked out one of their cruisers and two destroyers, and
Squadron B is taking on the second cruiser and its destroyer escorts
now!" He turned to the radar scanner and saw the white evenly spaced
blips that represented Squadron B enveloping the three enemy ships. The
bulky converted cruiser was maneuvering frantically to get away. But
there was no escape. In a perfectly co-ordinated action the Solar Guard
ships fired their space torpedoes simultaneously. The three Nationalist
ships exploded in a deadly flash of fire.

[Illustration]

"Don't tell me that's all they've got!" exclaimed Strong. "Why, we
still have the rest of the fleet coming in at 1205!"

Suddenly Tom froze in his seat. Before him on the radar scanner he saw a
new cluster of white blips, seemingly coming from nowhere. They were
enemy ships, hurtling spaceward to meet the Solar Guard fleet. "Captain
Strong! Look! More of them. From secret ramps in the jungle!"

"By the craters of Luna!" roared the Solar Guard captain. "Attention!
Attention! All ships--all ships!" he called into the fleet intercom.
"This is Strong aboard command ship. Bandit formation closing fast.
Regroup! Take tight defensive pattern!"

As the Solar Guard squadrons deployed to meet this new attack, Tom felt
a chill run down his spine. The mass of ships blasting to meet them
outnumbered them by almost three to one. And there were more ships
blasting off from the secret ramps in the jungle! He had led the Solar
Guard into a trap!

[Illustration]




CHAPTER 18


"Fire at will! Fire at will!"

Aboard the command ship, Captain Strong roared the order to the rest of
the fleet, and the individual ship commanders of the Solar Guard vessels
broke formation and rocketed into the mass of Nationalist ships, firing
salvo after salvo of space torpedoes. But it was a losing battle. Time
and again, Strong and Tom saw Solar Guard ships hemmed in by three and
four Nationalists' vessels, then blasted into oblivion.

Strong had ordered Tom to maneuver the command ship at will, seeking
targets, yet still keeping from being a target, and the young cadet had
guided the powerful ship through a series of maneuvers that had even
surprised the experienced Solar Guard officer.

"Where's the rest of the fleet?" roared Strong. "Why aren't they here
yet?"

"I don't know, sir," replied Tom, "but if they don't show up soon, there
won't be much left to save!"

"Bandits dead ahead," droned the voice from the radar bridge calmly,
"trying to envelop us."

Tom's hand shot out for the intercom to relay orders to the power deck
and glanced quickly at the scanner. He almost cheered. "Steve--I mean,
Captain Strong. The rest of the fleet! It's coming in! Attacking from
top-side!"

"By the craters of Luna, you're right!" yelled the young Solar Guard
captain, as he saw the white blips on the scanner screen. "O.K., it's
time to stop running and fight!"

The Solar Guard reinforcements swooped down on the fighting ships with
dazzling speed, and the sky over the jungle belt of Venus base was so
thick with zooming, firing, maneuvering ships that observers on the
ground couldn't tell one ship from another. For an hour the battle
raged. During the seesawing back and forth it seemed as if all ships
must be blasted into space junk. Finally the superior maneuvering and
over-all spacemanship of the Solar Guard vessels began to count heavily,
and the Nationalist ships began to plunge into the jungle or drift
helplessly out into space. Reforming, the Solar Guard ships encircled
the enemy in a deadly englobement pattern, and wheeling in great
co-ordinated arcs through space, sent combined volleys of torpedoes
crashing into the enemy ships. The space battle was over, a complete
Solar Guard victory.

Strong called to the remaining ships of his fleet, "Take formation K.
Land and attack the enemy base according to prearranged order. The enemy
fleet is destroyed, but we still have a big job to do."

"What happens now, sir?" asked Tom, relaxing for the first time since
the space battle had begun.

"We try to destroy their base and put an end to this rebellion as
quickly as possible," replied Strong coldly.

One by one, the ships of the Solar Guard fleet landed around the rim of
the canyon base. Troop carriers, that had stood off while the space
battle raged, disgorged hundreds of tough Solar Guard Marines, each
carrying shock rifles, paralo-ray pistols, and small narco grenades
that would put an enemy to sleep in five seconds. A half-hour later,
after the last Nationalist ship had been blasted out of the skies, the
rim of the canyon was alive with Solar Guardsmen waiting to go into
action. Many had comrades in the Solar Guard ships lost in the space
fight and they were eager to avenge their friends.

"How many ships did we lose, sir?" asked Tom, after the squadron
commanders had made their reports to Captain Strong.

"Forty," said Strong grimly. "But the entire Nationalist fleet was wiped
out. Thank the universe that their radar was knocked out, or we would
have been completely wiped out."

"Thank Astro and Major Connel for that, sir," said Tom with the first
smile on his face in days. "I knew none of those green jokers could stop
those two!"

"I've got to report to Commander Walters and the Solar Alliance, Tom.
You take a squad of men and move out. Your job is to find Astro, Roger,
and Major Connel."

"Thank you, sir!" said Tom happily.

       *       *       *       *       *

Down in the canyon, Major Connel had waited as long as he dared for
Astro to return with news of Roger. From his position, the tough
spaceman could not tell how the gigantic space battle had ended until he
saw the Solar Guard troop carriers land on the rim of the canyon above.
Satisfied, he decided that it was time to move.

[Illustration: _The Solar Guard troops landed on the rim of the canyon_]

He stood up, careful not to expose himself, since fighting had broken
out among the workers. Every street, shop, and corner would bring
dangers, and having stayed alive this far, Connel wanted to reach the
Solar Guard forces and continue the fight alongside his friends. Astro
was nowhere in sight when the major moved cautiously down a side
alley, and he was beginning to think that Astro had not escaped from the
base with Roger, when he saw the big cadet suddenly appear around a
corner running as hard as he could. A few seconds later three green-clad
Nationalist guards rounded the corner and pounded after him.

Astro saw Connel and ducked behind an overturned jet car, yelling, "I'm
unarmed! Nail them, Major!"

In a flash Connel dropped to the pavement, and firing from a kneeling
position, cut the Nationalists down expertly. When the last of the enemy
was frozen, Connel rushed to Astro's side.

"What about Roger?" he asked.

"I couldn't reach him," replied Astro. "The sick bay's in the main
administration building and that's so well guarded it would take a full
company to break in."

Connel nodded grimly. "Well, the best thing for us to do is get more men
and then tackle it."

"Yes, sir," said Astro. "I think we'd better head for the canyon walls
on the west. The Marines are pouring down that side."

"Let's go," grunted the major, and led the way down the narrow lane. But
when they reached the open area beyond the repair shops they saw that
the Nationalist guards had thrown up barriers in the streets and were
preparing defenses against frontal assault.

"Maybe we'd better stay where we are, sir," the big cadet said, after
scanning the Nationalist defenses. "We'd never be able to get through
now."

"Ummmh," mused Connel. "You're right. Maybe we can be of more use
striking behind the lines."

Astro grinned. "That's just what I was thinking, sir." He pointed to a
near-by barrier set up in the middle of the street. "We could pick off
the men behind that--"

