
There were assorted startled responses. The Ermetyne went briefly over
some of the details Quillan had told; essentially it was the same story.
"And do you know, Belchik, what the creature was trying to do? It was
trying to get into the rest cubicle vaults. Just think, it might have
been sent after you!"

It was rather cruel. Pluly's head jerked, and he blinked rapidly at
Lyad, saying nothing. He was a badly scared little man at that moment.
Trigger felt a little sorry for him, but not too sorry. Belchy's ogle
had been of the straightforward, loose-lipped, drooling variety.

"You're safe when you're in one of those things, Belchik!" Quillan said
reassuringly. "Wouldn't you feel a little safer there yourself, Lyad? If
you say they're not even sure they've killed the creature...."

"I probably shall have a cubicle set up here," Lyad said. "But not as
protection against a catassin. It would never get past Pilli, for one
thing." She looked at Trigger. "Oh, I forgot. You haven't met Pilli.
Virod!" she called.

Virod appeared at the far end of the terrace.

"Yes, First Lady?"

"Bring in Pilli," she told him.

Virod bowed. "Pilli is in the room, First Lady." He glanced about, went
over to a massive easy chair a few feet way, and swung it aside.
Something like a huge ball of golden fur behind it moved and sat up.

It was an animal of some sort. Its head seemed turned toward the group,
but whatever features it had remained hidden under the fur. Then an arm
like the arm of a bear reached out and Trigger saw a great furred hand
that in shape seemed completely human clutch the chair's edge.

"He was resting," Lyad said. "Not sleeping. Pilli doesn't sleep. He's a
perfect guardian. Come here, Pilli--meet Trigger Argee."

Pilli swung up on his feet. It was an impressively effortless motion.
There was a thick wide torso on short thick legs under the golden fur.
The structure was gorilla-like. Pilli might weigh around four hundred
pounds.

He started silently forward and Trigger felt a tingle of alarm. But he
stopped six feet away. She looked at him. "Do I say something to Pilli?"

Lyad looked pleased. "No. He's a biostructure. A very intelligent one,
but speech isn't included in his pattern."

Trigger kept looking at the golden-furred nightmare. "How can he see to
guard you through all that hair?"

"He doesn't see," Lyad said. "At least not as we do. Pilli's part of one
of our Tranest experiments--the original stock came from the Maccadon
life banks, a small golden-haired Earth monkey. The present level of the
experiment is on the fancy side--it has four hearts, for example, and
what amounts to a second brain at the lower half of its spine. But it
doesn't come equipped with visual organs. Pilli is one of twenty-three
of the type. They have compensatory perception of a kind that is still
quite mysterious. We hope to breed them past the speech barrier so they
can tell us what they do instead of seeing.... All right, Pilli. Run
along!" She said to Balmordan, "I believe he doesn't like that Vethi
thing of yours very much."

Balmordan nodded. "I had the same impression."

Perhaps, Trigger thought, that was why Pilli had been lurking so close
to them. She watched the biostructure move off down the terrace,
grotesque and huge. She had got its scent as it went past her, a fresh,
rather pleasant whiff, like the smell of ripe apples. An almost amiable
sort of nightmare figure, Pilli was; the apple smell went with that,
seemed to fit it. But nightmare was there too. She found herself feeling
rather sorry for Pilli.

"In a way," Lyad said, "Pilli brings us to that matter of business I
mentioned this afternoon."

The group's eyes shifted over to her. She smiled.

"We have good scientists on Tranest," she said, "as Pilli, I think,
demonstrates." She nodded at Balmordan. "There are good scientists in
the Devagas Union. And everyone here is aware that the Treaties of
Restriction imposed on both our governments have made it impossible for
our citizens to engage seriously in plasmoid research."

Trigger nodded briefly as the light-amber eyes paused on her for a
moment. Quillan had cautioned her not to show surprise at anything the
Ermetyne might say or do. If Trigger didn't know what to say herself,
she was merely to look inscrutable. "I'll scrut," he explained. "The
others won't. I'll take over then and you just follow my lead. Get it?"

"Balmordan," Lyad said, "I understand you are going to Manon to attend
the seminars and demonstrations on the plasmoid station?"

"That is true, First Lady," said Balmordan.

"Now I," Lyad told the company, "shall be more honest. The information
released in those seminars is of no value whatever. He"--she nodded at
the Devagas scientist--"and I are going to Manon with the same goal in
mind. That is to obtain plasmoids for our government laboratories."

Balmordan smiled amiably.

Trigger asked. "How do you intend to obtain them?"

"By offering very large sums of money, or equivalent inducements, to
people who are in a position to get them for me," said Lyad.

Quillan tut-tutted disapprovingly. "The First Lady's mind," he told
Trigger, "turns readily to illegal methods."

"When necessary," Lyad said undisturbed, "as it is here."

"How about you, sir?" Quillan asked Balmordan. "Are we to understand
that you also would be interested in the purchase of a middling plasmoid
or two?"

"I would be, naturally," Balmordan said. "But not at the risk of causing
trouble for my government."

"Of course not," Quillan said. He thought a moment. "You, Belchy?" he
asked.

Pluly looked alarmed. "No! No! No!" he said hastily. He blinked wildly.
"I'll stick to the shipping business. It's safer."

Quillan patted him fondly on the shoulder. "That's one law-abiding
citizen in this group!" He winked at Trigger. "Trigger's wondering," he
told Lyad, "why she and I are being told these things."

"Well, obviously," Lyad said, "Trigger and you are in an excellent
position--or will be, very soon--to act as middlemen in the matter."

"Wha...." Trigger began, astounded. Then, as all eyes swiveled over to
her, she checked herself. "Did you really think," she asked Lyad, "that
we'd agree to such a thing?"

"Certainly not," said Lyad. "I don't expect anyone to agree to anything
tonight--though it's a safe assumption I'm not the only one here who has
made sure this conversation is not being recorded, and will not be
available for reconstruction. Well, Quillan?" She smiled.

"How right you are, First Lady!" Quillan said. He tapped a breast
pocket. "Scrambler and distorter present and in action."

"And you, Balmordan?"

"I must admit," Balmordan said pleasantly, "that I thought it wise to
take certain precautions."

"Very wise!" said Lyad. Her glance shifted, with some amusement in it,
to Pluly. "Belchik?"

"You're a nerve-wracking woman, Lyad," Belchik said unhappily. "Yes. I'm
scrambling, of course." He shuddered. "I can't afford to take chances.
Not when you're around."

"Of course not, and even so," said Lyad, "there are still reasons why
an unconsidered word might be embarrassing in this company. So, no,
Trigger, I'm not expecting anybody to agree to anything tonight. I'm
merely mentioning that I'm interested in the purchase of plasmoids.
Incidentally, I'd be very much more interested even in seeing you, and
Quillan, enter my employ directly. Yes, Belchik?"

Pluly had begun giggling wildly.

"I was--ha-ha--having the same idea!" he gasped. "About one
of--ha-ha--of 'em anyway! I--"

He jerked and came to an abrupt stop, transfixed by Trigger's stare.
Then he reached for his glass, blinking at top speed. "Excuse me," he
muttered.

"Hardly, Belchik!" said Lyad. She gave Trigger a small wink. "But I can
assure you, Trigger Argee, that you'd find my pay and working conditions
very attractive indeed."

It seemed a good moment to look inscrutable. Trigger did.

"Serious about that, Lyad?" asked Quillan.

The Ermetyne said, "Certainly I'm serious. Both of you could be of great
value to me at present." She looked at him a moment. "Did you ever
happen to tell Trigger about the manner in which you re-established the
family fortune?"

"Not in any great detail," Quillan said.

"A very good hijacker and smuggler went to waste when you signed up with
the Engineers," Lyad said. "But perhaps not entirely to waste."

"Perhaps not," acknowledged Quillan. He grinned. "But I'm a modest man.
One fortune's enough for me."

"There was a time, you know," Lyad said, "when I was rather afraid it
would be necessary to have you killed."

Quillan laughed. "There was a time," he admitted, "when I suspected you
might be thinking along those lines, First Lady! Didn't lose too much,
did you?"

"I lost enough!" Lyad said. She wrinkled her nose at him. "But that's
all over and done with. And now--no more business tonight. I promise."
She turned her head a little. "Flam!" she called.

"Yes, First Lady?" said the voice of the red-headed girl.

"Bring us Miss Argee's property, please."

Flam brought in a small package of flat disks taped together. Lyad took
them.

"Sometimes," she told Quillan, "the Askab becomes a little independent.
He's been spoken to. Here--you keep them for Trigger."

She tossed the package lightly over to them. Quillan put out a hand and
caught it.

"Thanks," he said. He put the package in a pocket. "I'll call off my
beagles."

"Suit yourself as to that," said the Ermetyne. "It won't hurt the Askab
to stay frightened a little longer."

She checked herself. The room's ComWeb was signaling. Virod went over to
it. A voice came through.

"... The Garth-Manon subspace run begins in one hour. Rest cubicles
have been prepared...."

"That means me," Belchik Pluly said. He climbed hastily to his feet.
"Can't stand dives! Get hallucinations. Nasty ones." He staggered a
little then, and Trigger realized for the first time that Belchy had got
pretty thoroughly drunk.

"Better give our guest a hand, Virod," Lyad called over her shoulder.
"Happy dreams, Belchik! Are you going by Rest, Trigger? No? You're not,
of course, Quillan. Balmordan?"

The Devagas scientist also shook his head.

"Then by all means," Lyad said, "let's stay together a little while
longer."





15


"She," said Trigger, "is a remarkable woman."

"Yeah," said Quillan. "Remarkable."

"May I ask you, finally, a few pertinent questions?" Trigger inquired
humbly.

"Not here, sweet stuff," said Quillan.

"You're a bossy sort of slob, Heslet Quillan," she said equably.

Quillan didn't answer. They had come down the stairway to the storerooms
level and were walking along the big lit hallway toward their cabins.
Trigger felt pleasantly relaxed. But she did have a great many pertinent
questions to ask Quillan now, and she wanted to get started on them.

"Oh!" she said suddenly. Just as suddenly, Quillan's hand was on her
shoulder, moving her along.

"Hush now," he said. "And keep walking."

"But you saw it, didn't you?" Trigger asked, trying to look back to the
small open door into the storerooms they'd just passed.

Quillan sighed. "Certainly," he said. "Guy in space armor."

"But what's he doing there?"

"Checking something, I suppose." His hand left her shoulder; and, for
just a moment, his finger rested lightly across her lips. Trigger
glanced up at him. He was walking on beside her, not looking at her.

All right, she thought--she could take a hint. But she felt tense and
uncomfortable now. Something was going on again, apparently.

They turned into the side passage and came up to her cabin. Trigger
started to turn to face him, and Quillan picked her up and went on
without a noticeable break in his stride. Close to her ear, his voice
whispered, "Explain in a moment! Dangerous here."

As the door to the end cabin closed behind them, he put her back on her
feet. He looked at his watch.

"We can talk here," he said. "But there may not be much time for
conversation." He gestured toward a table against the wall. "Take a look
at the setup."

Trigger looked. The table was littered with instruments, like an
electronic workbench. A visual screen showed a view of both her own
cabin and a section of the passage outside it, up to the point where it
entered the big hall.

"What is it?" she asked uncertainly.

"Essentially," said Quillan, "we've set up a catassin trap."

"Catassin!" Trigger squeaked.

"That's right. Don't get too nervous though. I've caught them before.
Used to be a sort of specialty of mine. And there's one thing about
them--they'll blab their pointed little heads off if you can get one
alive and promise it its catnip...." He'd shucked off his jacket and
taken out of it a very large handgun with a bell-shaped mouth. He laid
the gun down next to the view screen. "In case," he said,
unreassuringly. "Now just a moment."

He sat down in front of the view screen and did something to it.

"All right," he said then. "We're here and set. Probability period
starts in three minutes, continues for sixty. Signal on any blip.
Otherwise no gabbing. And remember they're _fast_. Don't get sappy."

There was no answer. Quillan did something else to the screen and stood
up again. He looked broodingly at Trigger. "It's those damn computers
again!" he said. "I don't see any sense in it."

"In what?" she asked shakily.

"Everything that's happening around here is being fed back to them at
the moment," he said. "When they heard about our invite to Lyad's dinner
party, and who was to be present, they came up with a honey. In the time
period I mentioned a catassin is supposed to show up at your cabin. They
give it a pretty high probability."

Trigger didn't say anything. If she had, she probably would have
squeaked again.

"Now don't worry," he said, squeezing her shoulder reassuringly between
a large thumb and four slightly less large fingers. "Nice muscle!" he
said absently. "The cabin's trapped and I've taken other precautions."
He massaged the muscle gently. "Probably the only thing that will happen
is that we'll sit around here for an hour or so, and then we'll have a
hearty laugh together at those foolish computers!" He smiled.

"I thought," Trigger said without squeaking, "that everybody was pretty
sure it was dead."

Quillan frowned. "Well, that's something else again! There are at least
two ways I know of to sneak it past that search. Jump it out and in with
a subtub is one--they could have done that from their own cabin as soon
as they had its pattern. So I don't really think it's dead. It's just--"

"Quillan," a tiny voice said from the viewer.

He turned, took two steps, and sat down fast before the viewer. "Go
ahead!"

"Fast motion in B section. Going your way."

Fast motion. A thought flicked up. "Quillan--" Trigger began.

He raised a shushing hand. "Get a silhouette?" he asked. His hands went
to a set of control switches and stayed there.

"No. Pickup shows a haze like in the reconstruct." An instant's pause.
"Leaving B section."

"Motion in C section," said another voice.
