of the alphabet for the numerals from 1 to 9, then nine others for 10 to
90, and further letters to represent 100 to 900. As the ordinary Greek
alphabet was insufficient, containing only twenty-four letters, an alphabet
of twenty-seven letters was used.

[118] _Institutiones mathematicae_, 2 vols., Strassburg, 1593-1596, a
somewhat rare work from which the following quotation is taken:

"_Quis est harum Cyphrarum autor?_

"A quibus hae usitatae syphrarum notae sint inventae: hactenus incertum
fuit: meo tamen iudicio, quod exiguum esse fateor: a graecis librarijs
(quorum olim magna fuit copia) literae Graecorum quibus veteres Graeci
tamquam numerorum notis sunt usi: fuerunt corruptae. vt ex his licet
videre.

"Graecorum Literae corruptae.

[Illustration]

_"Sed qua ratione graecorum literae ita fuerunt corruptae?_

"Finxerunt has corruptas Graecorum literarum notas: vel abiectione vt in
nota binarij numeri, vel additione vt in ternarij, vel inuersione vt in
septenarij, numeri nota, nostrae notae, quibus hodie utimur: ab his sola
differunt elegantia, vt apparet."

See also Bayer, _Historia regni Graecorum Bactriani_, St. Petersburg, 1788,
pp. 129-130, quoted by Martin, _Recherches nouvelles_, etc., loc. cit.

[119] P. D. Huet, _Demonstratio evangelica_, Paris, 1769, note to p. 139 on
p. 647: "Ab Arabibus vel ab Indis inventas esse, non vulgus eruditorum
modo, sed doctissimi quique ad hanc diem arbitrati sunt. Ego vero falsum id
esse, merosque esse Graecorum characteres aio; a librariis Graecae linguae
ignaris interpolatos, et diuturna scribendi consuetudine corruptos. Nam
primum 1 apex fuit, seu virgula, nota [Greek: monados]. 2, est ipsum [beta]
extremis suis truncatum. [gamma], si in sinistram partem inclinaveris &
cauda mutilaveris & sinistrum cornu sinistrorsum flexeris, fiet 3. Res ipsa
loquitur 4 ipsissimum esse [Delta], cujus crus sinistrum erigitur [Greek:
kata katheton], & infra basim descendit; basis vero ipsa ultra crus
producta eminet. Vides quam 5 simile sit [Greek: toi] [epsilon]; infimo
tantum semicirculo, qui sinistrorsum patebat, dextrorsum converso. [Greek:
episemon bau] quod ita notabatur [digamma], rotundato ventre, pede
detracto, peperit [Greek: to] 6. Ex [Zeta] basi sua mutilato, ortum est
[Greek: to] 7. Si [Eta] inflexis introrsum apicibus in rotundiorem &
commodiorem formam mutaveris, exurget [Greek: to] 8. At 9 ipsissimum est
[alt theta]."

I. Weidler, _Spicilegium observationum ad historiam notarum numeralium_,
Wittenberg, 1755, derives them from the Hebrew letters; Dom Augustin
Calmet, "Recherches sur l'origine des chiffres d'arithmetique," _Memoires
pour l'histoire des sciences et des beaux arts_, Trevoux, 1707 (pp.
1620-1635, with two plates), derives the current symbols from the Romans,
stating that they are relics of the ancient "Notae Tironianae." These
"notes" were part of a system of shorthand invented, or at least perfected,
by Tiro, a slave who was freed by Cicero. L. A. Sedillot, "Sur l'origine de
nos chiffres," _Atti dell' Accademia pontificia dei nuovi Lincei_, Vol.
XVIII, 1864-1865, pp. 316-322, derives the Arabic forms from the Roman
numerals.

[120] Athanasius Kircher, _Arithmologia sive De abditis Numerorum,
mysterijs qua origo, antiquitas & fabrica Numerorum exponitur_, Rome, 1665.

[121] See Suter, _Die Mathematiker und Astronomen der Araber_, p. 100.

[122] "Et hi numeri sunt numeri Indiani, a Brachmanis Indiae Sapientibus ex
figura circuli secti inuenti."

[123] V. A. Smith, _The Early History of India_, Oxford, 2d ed., 1908, p.
333.

[124] C. J. Ball, "An Inscribed Limestone Tablet from Sippara,"
_Proceedings of the Society of Biblical Archaeology_, Vol. XX, p. 25
(London, 1898). Terrien de Lacouperie states that the Chinese used the
circle for 10 before the beginning of the Christian era. [_Catalogue of
Chinese Coins_, London, 1892, p. xl.]

[125] For a purely fanciful derivation from the corresponding number of
strokes, see W. W. R. Ball, _A Short Account of the History of
Mathematics_, 1st ed., London, 1888, p. 147; similarly J. B. Reveillaud,
_Essai sur les chiffres arabes_, Paris, 1883; P. Voizot, "Les chiffres
arabes et leur origine," _La Nature_, 1899, p. 222; G. Dumesnil, "De la
forme des chiffres usuels," _Annales de l'universite de Grenoble_, 1907,
Vol. XIX, pp. 657-674, also a note in _Revue Archeologique_, 1890, Vol. XVI
(3), pp. 342-348; one of the earliest references to a possible derivation
from points is in a work by Bettino entitled _Apiaria universae
philosophiae mathematicae in quibus paradoxa et noua machinamenta ad usus
eximios traducta, et facillimis demonstrationibus confirmata_, Bologna,
1545, Vol. II, Apiarium XI, p. 5.

[126] _Alphabetum Barmanum_, Romae, MDCCLXXVI, p. 50. The 1 is evidently
Sanskrit, and the 4, 7, and possibly 9 are from India.

[127] _Alphabetum Grandonico-Malabaricum_, Romae, MDCCLXXII, p. 90. The
zero is not used, but the symbols for 10, 100, and so on, are joined to the
units to make the higher numbers.

[128] _Alphabetum Tangutanum_, Romae, MDCCLXXIII, p. 107. In a Tibetan MS.
in the library of Professor Smith, probably of the eighteenth century,
substantially these forms are given.

[129] Bayley, loc. cit., plate II. Similar forms to these here shown, and
numerous other forms found in India, as well as those of other oriental
countries, are given by A. P. Pihan, _Expose des signes de numeration
usites chez les peuples orientaux anciens et modernes_, Paris, 1860.

[130] Buehler, loc. cit., p. 80; J. F. Fleet, _Corpus inscriptionum
Indicarum_, Vol. III, Calcutta, 1888. Lists of such words are given also by
Al-B[=i]r[=u]n[=i] in his work _India_; by Burnell, loc. cit.; by E.
Jacquet, "Mode d'expression symbolique des nombres employe par les Indiens,
les Tibetains et les Javanais," _Journal Asiatique_, Vol. XVI, Paris, 1835.

[131] This date is given by Fleet, loc. cit., Vol. III, p. 73, as the
earliest epigraphical instance of this usage in India proper.

[132] Weber, _Indische Studien_, Vol. VIII, p. 166 seq.

[133] _Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society_, Vol. I (N.S.), p. 407.

[134] VIII, 20, 21.

[135] Th. H. Martin, _Les signes numeraux_ ..., Rome, 1864; Lassen,
_Indische Alterthumskunde_, Vol. II, 2d ed., Leipzig and London, 1874, p.
1153.

[136] But see Burnell, loc. cit., and Thibaut, _Astronomie, Astrologie und
Mathematik_, p. 71.

[137] A. Barth, "Inscriptions Sanscrites du Cambodge," in the _Notices et
extraits des Mss. de la Bibliotheque nationale_, Vol. XXVII, Part I, pp.
1-180, 1885; see also numerous articles in _Journal Asiatique_, by
Aymonier.

[138] Buehler, loc. cit., p. 82.

[139] Loc. cit., p. 79.

[140] Buehler, loc. cit., p. 83. The Hindu astrologers still use an
alphabetical system of numerals. [Burnell, loc. cit., p. 79.]

[141] Well could Ramus say, "Quicunq; autem fuerit inventor decem notarum
laudem magnam meruit."

[142] Al-B[=i]r[=u]n[=i] gives lists.

[143] _Propagation_, loc. cit., p. 443.

[144] See the quotation from _The Light of Asia_ in Chapter II, p. 16.

[145] The nine ciphers were called _a[.n]ka_.

[146] "Zur Geschichte des indischen Ziffernsystems," _Zeitschrift fuer die
Kunde des Morgenlandes_, Vol. IV, 1842, pp. 74-83.

[147] It is found in the Bakh[s.][=a]l[=i] MS. of an elementary arithmetic
which Hoernle placed, at first, about the beginning of our era, but the
date is much in question. G. Thibaut, loc. cit., places it between 700 and
900 A.D.; Cantor places the body of the work about the third or fourth
century A.D., _Geschichte der Mathematik_, Vol. I (3), p. 598.

[148] For the opposite side of the case see G. R. Kaye, "Notes on Indian
Mathematics, No. 2.--[=A]ryabha[t.]a," _Journ. and Proc. of the Asiatic
Soc. of Bengal_, Vol. IV, 1908, pp. 111-141.

[149] He used one of the alphabetic systems explained above. This ran up to
10^{18} and was not difficult, beginning as follows:

[Illustration]

the same letter (_ka_) appearing in the successive consonant forms, _ka_,
_kha_, _ga_, _gha_, etc. See C. I. Gerhardt, _Ueber die Entstehung und
Ausbreitung des dekadischen Zahlensystems_, Programm, p. 17, Salzwedel,
1853, and _Etudes historiques sur l'arithmetique de position_, Programm, p.
24, Berlin, 1856; E. Jacquet, _Mode d'expression symbolique des nombres_,
loc. cit., p. 97; L. Rodet, "Sur la veritable signification de la notation
numerique inventee par [=A]ryabhata," _Journal Asiatique_, Vol. XVI (7),
pp. 440-485. On the two [=A]ryabha[t.]as see Kaye, _Bibl. Math._, Vol. X
(3), p. 289.

[150] Using _kha_, a synonym of _['s][=u]nya_. [Bayley, loc. cit., p. 22,
and L. Rodet, _Journal Asiatique_, Vol. XVI (7), p. 443.]

[151] Var[=a]ha-Mihira, _Pancasiddh[=a]ntik[=a]_, translated by G. Thibaut
and M. S. Dvived[=i], Benares, 1889; see Buehler, loc. cit., p. 78; Bayley,
loc. cit., p. 23.

[152] _B[r.]hat Sa[m.]hit[=a]_, translated by Kern, _Journal of the Royal
Asiatic Society_, 1870-1875.

[153] It is stated by Buehler in a personal letter to Bayley (loc. cit., p.
65) that there are hundreds of instances of this usage in the _B[r.]hat
Sa[m.]hit[=a]_. The system was also used in the _Pancasiddh[=a]ntik[=a]_ as
early as 505 A.D. [Buehler, _Palaeographie_, p. 80, and Fleet, _Journal of
the Royal Asiatic Society_, 1910, p. 819.]

[154] Cantor, _Geschichte der Mathematik_, Vol. I (3), p. 608.

[155] Buehler, loc. cit., p. 78.

[156] Bayley, p. 38.

[157] Noviomagus, in his _De numeris libri duo_, Paris, 1539, confesses his
ignorance as to the origin of the zero, but says: "D. Henricus Grauius, vir
Graece & Hebraice exime doctus, Hebraicam originem ostendit," adding that
Valla "Indis Orientalibus gentibus inventionem tribuit."

[158] See _Essays_, Vol. II, pp. 287 and 288.

[159] Vol. XXX, p. 205 seqq.

[160] Loc. cit., p. 284 seqq.

[161] Colebrooke, loc. cit., p. 288.

[162] Loc. cit., p. 78.

[163] Hereafter, unless expressly stated to the contrary, we shall use the
word "numerals" to mean numerals with place value.

[164] "The Gurjaras of R[=a]jput[=a]na and Kanauj," in _Journal of the
Royal Asiatic Society_, January and April, 1909.

[165] Vol. IX, 1908, p. 248.

[166] _Epigraphia Indica_, Vol. IX, pp. 193 and 198.

[167] _Epigraphia Indica_, Vol. IX, p. 1.

[168] Loc. cit., p. 71.

[169] Thibaut, p. 71.

[170] "Est autem in aliquibus figurarum istaram apud multos diuersitas.
Quidam enim septimam hanc figuram representant," etc. [Boncompagni,
_Trattati_, p. 28.] Enestroem has shown that very likely this work is
incorrectly attributed to Johannes Hispalensis. [_Bibliotheca Mathematica_,
Vol. IX (3), p. 2.]

[171] _Indische Palaeographie_, Tafel IX.

[172] Edited by Bloomfield and Garbe, Baltimore, 1901, containing
photographic reproductions of the manuscript.

[173] Bakh[s.][=a]l[=i] MS. See page 43; Hoernle, R., _The Indian
Antiquary_, Vol. XVII, pp. 33-48, 1 plate; Hoernle, _Verhandlungen des VII.
Internationalen Orientalisten-Congresses, Arische Section_, Vienna, 1888,
"On the Baksh[=a]l[=i] Manuscript," pp. 127-147, 3 plates; Buehler, loc.
cit.

[174] 3, 4, 6, from H. H. Dhruva, "Three Land-Grants from Sankheda,"
_Epigraphia Indica_, Vol. II, pp. 19-24 with plates; date 595 A.D. 7, 1, 5,
from Bhandarkar, "Daulatabad Plates," _Epigraphia Indica_, Vol. IX, part V;
date c. 798 A.D.

[175] 8, 7, 2, from "Buckhala Inscription of Nagabhatta," Bhandarkar,
_Epigraphia Indica_, Vol. IX, part V; date 815 A.D. 5 from "The Morbi
Copper-Plate," Bhandarkar, _The Indian Antiquary_, Vol. II, pp. 257-258,
with plate; date 804 A.D. See Buehler, loc. cit.

[176] 8 from the above Morbi Copper-Plate. 4, 5, 7, 9, and 0, from "Asni
Inscription of Mahipala," _The Indian Antiquary_, Vol. XVI, pp. 174-175;
inscription is on red sandstone, date 917 A.D. See Buehler.

[177] 8, 9, 4, from "Rashtrakuta Grant of Amoghavarsha," J. F. Fleet, _The
Indian Antiquary_, Vol. XII, pp. 263-272; copper-plate grant of date c. 972
A.D. See Buehler. 7, 3, 5, from "Torkhede Copper-Plate Grant of the Time of
Govindaraja of Gujerat," Fleet, _Epigraphia Indica_, Vol. III, pp. 53-58.
See Buehler.

[178] From "A Copper-Plate Grant of King Tritochanapala Chanlukya of
L[=a][t.]ade['s]a," H.H. Dhruva, _Indian Antiquary_, Vol. XII, pp. 196-205;
date 1050 A.D. See Buehler.

[179] Burnell, A. C., _South Indian Palaeography_, plate XXIII,
Telugu-Canarese numerals of the eleventh century. See Buehler.

[180] From a manuscript of the second half of the thirteenth century,
reproduced in "Della vita e delle opere di Leonardo Pisano," Baldassare
Boncompagni, Rome, 1852, in _Atti dell' Accademia Pontificia dei nuovi
Lincei_, anno V.

[181] From a fourteenth-century manuscript, as reproduced in _Della vita_
etc., Boncompagni, loc. cit.

[182] From a Tibetan MS. in the library of D. E. Smith.

[183] From a Tibetan block-book in the library of D. E. Smith.

[184] ['S][=a]rad[=a] numerals from _The Kashmirian Atharva-Veda,
reproduced by chromophotography from the manuscript in the University
Library at Tuebingen_, Bloomfield and Garbe, Baltimore, 1901. Somewhat
similar forms are given under "Numeration Cachemirienne," by Pihan,
_Expose_ etc., p. 84.

[185] Franz X. Kugler, _Die Babylonische Mondrechnung_, Freiburg i. Br.,
1900, in the numerous plates at the end of the book; practically all of
these contain the symbol to which reference is made. Cantor, _Geschichte_,
Vol. I, p. 31.

[186] F. X. Kugler, _Sternkunde und Sterndienst in Babel_, I. Buch, from
the beginnings to the time of Christ, Muenster i. Westfalen, 1907. It also
has numerous tables containing the above zero.

[187] From a letter to D. E. Smith, from G. F. Hill of the British Museum.
See also his monograph "On the Early Use of Arabic Numerals in Europe," in
_Archaeologia_, Vol. LXII (1910), p. 137.

[188] R. Hoernle, "The Baksh[=a]l[=i] Manuscript," _Indian Antiquary_, Vol.
XVII, pp. 33-48 and 275-279, 1888; Thibaut, _Astronomie, Astrologie und
Mathematik_, p. 75; Hoernle, _Verhandlungen_, loc. cit., p. 132.

[189] Bayley, loc. cit., Vol. XV, p. 29. Also Bendall, "On a System of
Numerals used in South India," _Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society_,
1896, pp. 789-792.

[190] V. A. Smith, _The Early History of India_, 2d ed., Oxford, 1908, p.
14.

[191] Colebrooke, _Algebra, with Arithmetic and Mensuration, from the
Sanskrit of Brahmegupta and Bhascara_, London, 1817, pp. 339-340.

[192] Ibid., p. 138.

[193] D. E. Smith, in the _Bibliotheca Mathematica_, Vol. IX (3), pp.
106-110.

[194] As when we use three dots (...).

[195] "The Hindus call the nought explicitly _['s][=u]nyabindu_ 'the dot
marking a blank,' and about 500 A.D. they marked it by a simple dot, which
latter is commonly used in inscriptions and MSS. in order to mark a blank,
and which was later converted into a small circle." [Buehler, _On the Origin
of the Indian Alphabet_, p. 53, note.]

[196] Fazzari, _Dell' origine delle parole zero e cifra_, Naples, 1903.

[197] E. Wappler, "Zur Geschichte der Mathematik im 15. Jahrhundert," in
the _Zeitschrift fuer Mathematik und Physik_, Vol. XLV, _Hist.-lit. Abt._,
p. 47. The manuscript is No. C. 80, in the Dresden library.

[198] J. G. Praendel, _Algebra nebst ihrer literarischen Geschichte_, p.
572, Munich, 1795.

[199] See the table, p. 23. Does the fact that the early European
arithmetics, following the Arab custom, always put the 0 after the 9,
suggest that the 0 was derived from the old Hindu symbol for 10?

[200] Bayley, loc. cit., p. 48. From this fact Delambre (_Histoire de
l'astronomie ancienne_) inferred that Ptolemy knew the zero, a theory
accepted by Chasles, _Apercu historique sur l'origine et le developpement
des methodes en geometrie_, 1875 ed., p. 476; Nesselmann, however, showed
