"Twenty-five dollars a week."

"You're in luck. How came Barlow to give you so much?"

"I think he took a liking to me. Perhaps he wanted to pay me for facing
the lion at Smyrna."

"Were you the boy who did that? I thought your face looked familiar.
You've got pluck, Kit."

"I hope so; but I'm not sure whether it is I or the snuff that is
entitled to the most credit."

"Anyhow it took some courage, even if you did have the snuff with you."

"Do you know what is to be our route this season?"

"I think we are going West as far as St. Louis, taking all the larger
towns and cities on our way. We are to show a week in Chicago. But I
don't care so much for the cities as the country towns--the one-night
places."

"Does Mr. Barlow go with us?"

"Not steadily. He drops in on us here and there. There's one thing I
can say for him--he won't have any man in his employ drink or gamble. We
have to bind ourselves to total abstinence while we are in his
employ--that is, till the end of the season. Gambling is the great vice
of circus men; it is more prevalent even than drinking."

"Don't the men do it on the sly?"

"They run a risk if they do. At the first offense they are fined, at the
second or third they are bounced."

"That doesn't trouble me any. I neither drink nor gamble."

"Good for you."

"Say, when are you two fellows goin' to stop talkin'?" was heard from a
neighboring berth. "You don't give a fellow a chance to sleep."

Kit and his new friend took the hint and addressed themselves to
slumber.




CHAPTER XXI.

KIT MEETS A SCHOOLMATE.


Kit slept profoundly, being very tired. He was taken by surprise when,
the next morning, he was shaken into a state of wakefulness, and opening
his eyes met those of his neighbor Harry Thorne.

"Is it morning?" he asked, in a sleepy tone.

"I should say it was. It is a quarter after nine, and the parade starts
at ten."

"The parade?"

"Yes; we give a morning parade in every place we visit. If you are not
on hand to take part in it, you will be fined five dollars."

"I'll be up in a jiffy," said Kit, springing out of his berth. "But
there's time enough, isn't there?"

"Yes; but not too much. You will want to get some breakfast. By the way,
are you used to driving?"

"Oh, yes. I have done a good deal of it," answered Kit.

"I thought so, as you are a country boy. How would you like to drive a
span of horses attached to one of the small chariots?"

Kit was extremely fond of a horse, and he answered promptly, "I'll do
it."

"There are two. The other is driven by Charlie Davis, once a performer
but now a ticket man. He is a little older than you."

"All right! I don't see how I came to sleep so late."

"You and Charlie are good matches. Once he went to bed Saturday night,
and did not wake up till Monday morning."

"That beats my record!"

Kit was dressed in less than ten minutes.

"Where shall I get breakfast?" he asked.

"The regular breakfast is over, and you will have to buy some. There is
a restaurant just opposite the lot. You might get in with one of the
cooks, and get something in the cook tent."

"No; I'll go to the restaurant. To-morrow I'll be on hand at the regular
breakfast."

The restaurant was a small one, with no pretensions to style, but Kit
was hungry and not particular. At the same table there was a dark
complexioned boy of about his own size, who had just begun to dispatch a
beefsteak.

He looked up as Kit seated himself.

"You're the new acrobat, are you not?" asked the other.

"Yes; are you Charlie Davis?"

"Yes; how do you know me?"

"Harry Thorne was speaking of you."

"I see you're one of the late birds as well as I. I generally have to
buy my breakfast outside. How do you like circus life?"

"I haven't tried it well enough to tell. This is only my second day."

"I went into it at fourteen. I've been an acrobat, too, but I have a
weak ankle, and have gone into the ticket department."

"Are you going to remain in the circus permanently?"

"No, I'm trying to wean myself from it. A friend has promised to set me
up in business whenever I get ready to retire. If I kept on, I would be
no better off at forty than I am now."

"Yet circus people make a good deal of money, I hear."

"Right you are, my boy, but they don't keep it. They get spoiled for
anything else, and soon or later they are left out in the cold. I've had
a good deal of fun out of it, for I like traveling, but I'm going to
give it up."

"I took it up because I had nothing else to do, but I shan't stay in it
long. I'll tell you about it some day. I hear you drive one of the pony
chariots."

"Yes."

"I am to drive the other."

"Good! Don't let them run away with you, my boy."

"I'll try not to," said Kit, smiling. "Is there any danger?"

"Not much. They're trained. Are you fond of horses?"

"I like nothing better."

"So it is with me. I'll wait till you are through breakfast, and then
we'll go over together."

Half an hour later Kit sat on the box of a chariot, drawn by two
beautiful ponies. The circus line had been formed, and the parade began.
Behind him was a circus wagon, or rather a cage on wheels, through the
gratings of which could be seen a tiger, crafty and cruel looking. In
front was an elephant, with two or three performers on his back. Kit was
dressed in street costume, his circus dress not being required.

In another part of the procession was Charlie Davis, driving a
corresponding wagon.

Kit felt a peculiar exhilaration as he drove his ponies, and reflected
upon the strangeness of his position, as compared with his previous
experiences. He had from time to time watched circus processions, but
not in his wildest and most improbable dreams had it ever occurred to
him to imagine that he would ever himself take part in one. As he looked
down from his perch he saw the streets lined with the usual curious
crowd of spectators, among whom boys were largely represented.

"I suppose some of them are envying me," he thought to himself, with a
smile. "Suppose there was some one who recognized me?"

No sooner had the thought come into his mind, than he heard his own name
called in a voice indicating amazement.

"Kit Watson, by all that's wonderful!" were the words that fell on his
ears.

Looking to the right, his glance fell upon Jack Dormer, a schoolmate,
who had been attending the same academy with him for a year past.

Kit colored, feeling a little embarrassed.

"How are you, Jack?" he said.

"How came you in this circus procession, Kit?"

"I can't tell you now. Come round to the lot, after the parade is over,
and I'll tell you all about it."

Jack availed himself of the invitation and presented himself at the
circus grounds.

"What does it all mean, Kit?" he asked. "Have you really and truly
joined the circus?"

"Come round this afternoon, and you'll see me perform. I am one of the
Vincenti brothers, acrobats."

"But what put it in your head? That's what I want to know?"

"I thought I would like it better than being a blacksmith."

"But who ever dreamed of your being a blacksmith?"

"My uncle did. I'll tell you all about it."

Kit told his story. Jack Dormer listened with sympathetic interest.

"Do they pay you well?" he asked.

"I get twenty-five dollars a week, and all expenses."

"Can you get me a job?" asked Jack quite overcome by the magnificence of
the salary.

"As an acrobat, Jack?" asked Kit, laughing, for Jack had the reputation
of being one of the clumsiest boys in school.

"Well, no, I don't suppose I could do much in that way, but isn't there
something I could do?"

"Take my advice, Jack, and give it up. You've got a good home, and
there is no need of your going into any such business even if you were
qualified."

"Don't you like it?"

"I can't tell yet. Of course it is exciting, but those who have been in
it a good while advise against it. I may not stay in it more than one
season."

"Shall I tell the fellows at school where you are?"

"No, I would rather you wouldn't."

"Does your cousin Ralph come back to school?"

"Yes."

"We could spare him a good deal better than you."

"I am not fond of Ralph myself, but the world is wide enough for us
both."

Kit saw his schoolmate again after the afternoon performance, and
received many compliments.

"I couldn't believe it was you," he said. "You acted as if you were an
old hand at the business."




CHAPTER XXII.

NEW ACQUAINTANCES.


Sunday was of course a day of rest for the circus employees. Most of
them observed it by lying in bed unusually late. Kit, however, rose in
good season, and found himself first at breakfast. When the proper time
arrived, he walked to the village, and selecting the first church he
came to, entered. He had always been in the habit of attending church,
and felt that there was no good reason why he should give up the
practice now that he was away from home.

He stood in the lobby, waiting for the sexton to appear, when a
fine-looking man of middle age entered the church with a young girl of
fourteen at his side.

He glanced at Kit with interest, and after a moment's pause walked up to
him.

"Are you a stranger here?" he asked.

"Yes, sir," answered Kit.

"I shall be glad to have you accept a seat in my pew."

"Thank you, sir," said Kit, politely; "I was waiting for the sexton,
intending to ask him for a seat."

"I have plenty of room in my pew, having only my daughter with me. Are
you staying long in the town?"

"Only as long as the circus does," answered Kit.

The gentleman looked surprised.

"Are you connected with the circus?" he asked, quickly.

"Yes, sir."

By this time the young girl was examining Kit with interest and
attention.

"Is it possible you are a performer?"

"Yes, sir."

"I wouldn't have dreamed it. You look like a young gentleman."

"I hope I am, sir."

"Pardon me, I meant no offense, but you don't at all answer my idea of a
circus performer."

"I have only been two days with the circus," said Kit; "and that may
account for my not having a circus look."

"It is time to take our seats. I will speak with you afterwards. First,
however, let me introduce my daughter, Evelyn Grant."

"I am glad to make your acquaintance, Miss Evelyn," said Kit, removing
his hat. "My name is Christopher Watson."

Evelyn offered her hand with a smile.

"I had no idea circus young men were so polite," she said.

There was no chance for any further conversation, as they had entered
the church. Mr. Grant's pew was in a prominent position. He drew back to
let the two young people enter. They seated themselves at the lower end
of the pew and Mr. Grant took his seat at the head. Kit noticed that
several persons in neighboring pews regarded him with apparent
curiosity.

Kit enjoyed the services, which were of an interesting character. He had
expected to feel like a stranger, but thanks to the kindness of Mr.
Grant, he felt quite as much at home as when he sat in his uncle's pew
at Smyrna.

When the services were over, they filed slowly out of church. A new
surprise was in store for Kit.

"If you have no engagement we shall be glad to have you dine with us,
Master Watson," said Mr. Grant.

"You will come, won't you?" said Evelyn, with a smile.

"You are very kind," said Kit, in grateful surprise. "Nothing could be
more agreeable to me."

Just then a gentleman approached Mr. Grant, and said: "I am glad to see
you looking so well, Mr. Mayor."

"Is your father the mayor of the city?" asked Kit.

"Yes; he was elected last December."

"I am very fortunate to be invited to dinner by the mayor."

"And by the mayor's daughter. Don't forget that."

"You may be sure I appreciate that, too."

"How funny it seems to me to be walking with a circus performer! What do
you do? You don't stand upon a horse's back, and jump through hoops, do
you?"

"No, I can't do that."

"But what do you do?"

"I am an acrobat."

Kit explained to her what he did.

"It must be very hard."

"Oh, no! I learned to do it in a gymnasium, before I ever dreamed of
being connected with a circus."

"Where was the gymnasium?"

"Attached to Dr. Codman's academy."

"Why, I had a cousin who attended there," said Evelyn, in surprise.

"What was his name?"

"Edward Moore."

"I know him very well. He is a nice fellow."

At this moment Kit, in looking around, was surprised to see the familiar
face and figure of Mr. Barlow, the circus proprietor, who had evidently,
like himself, been attending the service. Recognition was mutual.

"I am glad to see you here, Watson," said Mr. Barlow, offering his hand.
"I always attend church myself when I have an opportunity, but I am
afraid few in my employ follow my example. I always feel more confidence
in any young man who seems to enjoy a church service."

Mr. Barlow was a man whose name was widely known, and Kit saw that Mr.
Grant looked as if he would like to be introduced.

"Mr. Barlow," he said, "allow me to introduce a new friend, Mr. Grant,
the mayor of the town."

"I am pleased to make your acquaintance, Mr. Mayor," said the showman,
offering his hand.

"The pleasure is mutual, sir," said the mayor. "I need not say that your
name has long been familiar to me."
