he had difficulty in conceiving it possible to become more so, but
remembering the change that was about to take place, he said brightly,
"Yes, I'll remember."

"You see," continued his instructor, "we must get people to suppose that
you are troubled by a spirit of some sort--"

"Oh! only to suppose it," cried Ippegoo hopefully.  "Then I'm not
_really_ to be troubled with a spirit?"

"Of course you are, foolish man.  But don't you understand people must
see that you are, else how are they to know it?"

Ippegoo thought that if he was really to be troubled in that way, the
only difficulty would be to prevent people from knowing it, but
observing that his master was getting angry, he wisely held his tongue,
and listened with earnest attention while Ujarak related the details of
the ordeal through which he was about to pass.

At the time this conversation was being held in the sea-green cave,
Okiok, rising from his lair with a prodigious yawn, said to his wife--

"Nuna, I go to see Kunelik."

"And what may ye-a-o-u---my husband want with the mother of Ippegoo?"
asked Nuna sleepily, but without moving.

"I want to ye-a-o-u---ask about her son."

"Ye-a-a-o-o-u!" exclaimed Nuna, turning on her other side; "go, then,"
and she collapsed.

Seeing that his wife was unfit just then to enter into conversation,
Okiok got up, accomplished what little toilet he deemed necessary in
half a minute, and took his way to the hut of Ippegoo's mother.

It is not usual in Eskimo land to indulge in ceremonious salutation.
Okiok was naturally a straightforward and brusque man.  It will not
therefore surprise any one to be told that he began his interview with--

"Kunelik, your son Ippegoo is a lanky fool!"

"He is," assented Kunelik, with quiet good-humour.

"He has given himself," continued Okiok, "spirit and body, to that
villain Ujarak."

"He has," assented Kunelik again.

"Where is he now?"

"I do not know."

"But me knows," said a small sweet little child-voice from the midst of
a bundle of furs.

It was the voice of Pussi.  That Eskimo atom had been so overcome with
sleep at the breaking up of the festivities of the previous night that
she was unable to distinguish between those whom she loved and those for
whom she cared not.  In these circumstances, she had seized the first
motherly tail that came within her reach, and followed it home.  It
chanced to belong to Kunelik, so she dropped down and slept beside her.

"_You_ know, my dear little seal?" said Okiok in surprise.

"Yes, me knows.  When I was 'sleep, a big man comes an' stump on my
toes--not much, only a leetle.  Dat wokes me, an' I see Ujiyak.  He
shooks Ip'goo an' bose hoed out degidder."

Okiok looked at Kunelik, Kunelik looked at Okiok, and both gravely shook
their heads.

Before they could resume the conversation, Ippegoo's voice was heard
outside asking if his mother was in.

"Go," said Kunelik; "though he is a fool, he is wise enough to hold his
tongue when any one but me is near."

Okiok took the hint, rose at once, and went out, passing the youth as he
entered, and being much struck with the lugubrious solemnity of his
visage.

"Mother," said Ippegoo, sitting down on a skin beside the pleasant
little woman, "it comes."

"What comes, my son?"

"I know not."

"If you know not, how do you know that it comes?" asked Kunelik, who was
slightly alarmed by the wild manner and unusual, almost dreadful,
gravity of her boy.

"It is useless to ask me, mother.  I do not understand.  My mind cannot
take it in, but--but--it comes."

"Yes; when is it coming?" asked Kunelik, who knew well how to humour
him.

"How can I tell?  I--I think it has come _now_," said the youth, growing
paler, or rather greener; "I think I feel it in my breast.  Ujarak said
the torngak would come to-day, and to-night I am to _be--changed_!"

"Oho!" exclaimed Kunelik, with a slight touch of asperity, "it's a
torngak that is to come, is it? and Ujarak says so?  Don't you know,
Ippe, that Ujarak is an idiot!"

"Mother!" exclaimed the youth remonstratively, "Ujarak an idiot?
Impossible!  He is to make me an angekok to-night."

"You, Ippe!  You are not more fit for an angekok than I am for a
seal-hunter."

"Yes, true; but I am to _be--changed_!" returned the youth, with a
bright look; then remembering that his _role_ was solemnity, he dropped
the corners of his mouth, elongated his visage, turned up his eyes, and
groaned.

"Have you the stomach twist, my boy?" asked his mother tenderly.

"No; but I suppose I--I--am changing."

"No, you are not, Ippe.  I have seen many angekoks made.  There will be
no change till you have gone through the customs, so make your mind
easy, and have something to eat."

The youth, having had no breakfast, was ravenously hungry, and as the
process of feeding would not necessarily interfere with solemnity, he
agreed to the proposal with his accustomed look of satisfaction--which,
however, he suddenly nipped in the bud.  Then, setting-to with an
expression that might have indicated the woes of a lifetime, he made a
hearty breakfast.

Thereafter he kept moving about the village all day in absolute silence,
and with a profound gloom on his face, by which the risibility of some
was tickled, while not a few were more or less awe-stricken.

It soon began to be rumoured that Ippegoo was the angekok-elect.  In the
afternoon Ujarak returned from a visit, as he said, to the nether world,
and with his brother wizards--for there were several in the tribe--
confirmed the rumour.

As evening approached, Rooney entered Okiok's hut.  No one was at home
except Nuna and Tumbler.  The latter was playing, as usual, with his
little friend Pussi.  The goodwife was busy over the cooking-lamp.

"Where is your husband, Nuna?" asked the sailor, sitting down on a
walrus skull.

"Out after seals."

"And Nunaga?"

"Visiting the mother of Arbalik."

The seaman looked thoughtfully at the lamp-smoke for a few moments.

"She is a hard woman, that mother of Arbalik," he said.

"Issek is not so hard as she looks," returned Mrs Okiok; "her voice is
rough, but her heart is soft."

"I'm glad to hear you speak well of her," said Rooney, "for I don't like
to think ill of any one if I can help it; but sometimes I can't help it.
Now, there's your angekok Ujarak: I cannot think well of him.  Have you
a good word to say in his favour?"

"No, not one.  He is bad through and through--from the skin to the bone.
I know him well," said Nuna, with a flourish of her cooking-stick that
almost overturned the lamp.

"But you may be mistaken," remarked Rooney, smiling.  "You are mistaken
even in the matter of his body, to say nothing of his spirit."

"How so?" asked Nuna quickly.

"You said he is bad through and through.  From skin to bone is not
through and through.  To be quite correct, you must go from skin to
marrow."

Nuna acknowledged this by violently plunging her cooking-stick into the
pot.

"Well now, Nuna," continued Rooney, in a confidential tone, "tell me--"

At that moment he was interrupted by the entrance of the master of the
mansion, who quietly sat down on another skull close to his friend.

"I was just going to ask your wife, Okiok, what she and you think of
this business of making an angekok of poor Ippegoo," said Rooney.

"We think it is like a seal with its tail where its head should be, its
skin in its stomach, and all its bones outside; all nonsense--
foolishness," answered Okiok, with more of indignation in his look and
tone than he was wont to display.

"Then you don't believe in angekoks?" asked Rooney.

"No," replied the Eskimo earnestly; "I don't.  I think they are clever
scoundrels--clever fools.  And more, I don't believe in torngaks or any
other spirits."

"In that you are wrong," said Rooney.  "There is one great and good
Spirit, who made and rules the universe."

"I'm not sure of that," returned the Eskimo, with a somewhat dogged and
perplexed look, that showed the subject was not quite new to him.  "I
never saw, or heard, or tasted, or smelt, or felt a spirit.  How can I
know anything about it?"

"Do you believe in your own spirit, Okiok?"

"Yes, I must.  I cannot help it.  I am like other men.  When a man dies
there is something gone out of him.  It must be his spirit."

"Then you believe in other men's spirits as well as your own spirit,"
said Rooney, "though you have never seen, heard, tasted, smelt, or felt
them?"

For a moment the Eskimo was puzzled.  Then suddenly his countenance
brightened.

"But I _have_ felt my own," he cried.  "I have felt it moving within me,
so that it made me _act_.  My legs and arms and brain would not go into
action if they were dead, if the spirit had gone out of them."

"In the very same way," replied the seaman, "you may _feel_ the Great
Spirit, for your own spirit could not go into action so as to cause your
body to act unless a greater Spirit had given it life.  So also we may
feel or understand the Great Spirit when we look at the growing flowers,
and hear the moving winds, and behold the shining stars, and feel the
beating of our own hearts.  I'm not much of a wise man, an angekok--
which they would call _scholar_ in my country--but I know enough to
believe that it is only `the fool who has said in his heart, There is no
Great Spirit.'"

"There is something in what you say," returned the Eskimo, as the lines
of unusually intense thought wrinkled his brow; "but for all that you
say, I think there are no torngaks, and that Ujarak is a liar as well as
a fool."

"I agree with you, Okiok, because I think you have good reason for your
disbelief.  In the first place, it is well-known that Ujarak is a liar,
but that is not enough, for liar though he be, he _sometimes_ tells the
truth.  Then, in the second place, he is an ass--hum!  I forgot--you
don't know what an ass is; well, it don't matter, for, in the third
place, he never gave any proof to anybody of what he and his torngak are
said to have seen and done, and, strongest reason of all, this familiar
spirit of his acts unwisely--for what could be more foolish than to
choose out of all the tribe a poor half-witted creature like Ippegoo for
the next angekok?"

A gleaming glance of intelligent humour lighted up Okiok's face as he
said--

"Ujarak is wiser than his torngak in that.  He wants to make use of the
poor lad for his own wicked ends.  I know not what these are--but I have
my suspicions."

"So have I," broke in Nuna at this point, giving her pot a rap with the
cooking-stick by way of emphasis.

Rooney laughed.

"You think he must be watched, and his mischief prevented?" he said.

"That's what I think," said Okiok firmly.

"Tell me, what are the ceremonies to be gone through by that poor
unwilling Ippegoo, before he can be changed into a wise man?"

"Oh, he has much to do," returned Okiok, with his eyes on the lamp-flame
and his head a little on one side, as if he were thinking.  "But I am
puzzled.  Ujarak is cunning, though he is not wise; and I am quite sure
he has some secret reason for hurrying on this business.  He is changing
the customs, and that is never done for nothing."

"What customs has he changed?" asked Rooney.

"The customs for the young angekok before he gets a torngak," replied
the Eskimo.

Okiok's further elucidation of this point was so complex that we prefer
to give the reader our own explanation.

Before assuming the office of an angekok or diviner, an Eskimo must
procure one of the spirits of the elements for his own particular
familiar spirit or torngak.  These spirits would appear to be somewhat
coquettish and difficult to win, and marvellous tales are related of the
manner in which they are wooed.  The aspirant must retire for a time to
a desert place, where, entirely cut off from the society of his fellows,
he may give himself up to fasting and profound meditation.  He also
prays to Torngarsuk to give him a torngak.  This Torngarsuk is the chief
of the good spirits, and dwells in a pleasant abode under the earth or
sea.  He is not, however, supposed to be God, who is named Pirksoma,
i.e. "He that is above," and about whom most Eskimos profess to know
nothing.  As might be expected, the weakness of body and agitation of
mind resulting from such exercises carried on in solitude throw into
disorder the imaginative faculty of the would-be diviner, so that
wonderful figures of men and monsters swim before his mental vision,
which tend to throw his body into convulsions--all the more that he
labours to cherish and increase such symptoms.

How far the aspirants themselves believe in these delusions it is
impossible to tell; but the fact that, after their utmost efforts, some
of them fail to achieve the coveted office, leads one to think that some
of them are too honest, or too strong-minded, to be led by them.
Others, however, being either weak or double-minded, are successful.
They assert that, on Torngarsuk appearing in answer to their earnest
petition, they shriek aloud, and die from fear.  At the end of three
days they come to life again, and receive a torngak, who takes them
forthwith on a journey to heaven and hell, after which they return home
full-fledged angekoks, prepared to bless their fellows, and guide them
with their counsels.

"Now, you must know," said Okiok, after explaining all this, "what
puzzles me is, that Ujarak intends to alter the customs at the beginning
of the affair.  Ippegoo is to be made an angekok to-night, and to be let
off all the fasting and hard thinking and fits.  If I believed in these
things at all, I should think him only a half-made angekok.  As it is, I
don't care a puff of wind what they make of poor Ippegoo--so long as
they don't kill him; but I'm uneasy because I'm afraid the rascal Ujarak
has some bad end in view in all this."

"I'm _quite_ sure of it," muttered Nuna, making a stab with her stick at
the contents of her pot, as if Ujarak's heart were inside.

At that moment Nunaga entered, looking radiant, in all the glory of a
new under-garment of eider-duck pelts and a new sealskin upper coat with
an extra long tail.

"Have you seen Angut lately?" asked Rooney of the young girl.

"Yes," she replied, with a modest smile that displayed her brilliant
teeth; "he is in his own hut."

"I will go and talk with him on this matter, Okiok," said the seaman.
"Meanwhile, do you say nothing about it to any one."



CHAPTER FOURTEEN.

SOLEMN AND MYSTERIOUS DOINGS ARE BROUGHT TO A VIOLENT CLOSE.

Angut was seated at the further end of his abode when his friend
entered, apparently absorbed in contemplation of that remarkable
specimen of Eskimo longevity, the grandmother of Okiok.

"I have often wondered," said Angut, as the seaman sat down beside him,
"at the contentment and good-humour and cheerfulness, sometimes running
into fun, of that poor old woman Kannoa."

"Speak lower," said Rooney in a soft voice; "she will hear you."

"If she does, she will hear no evil.  But she is nearly deaf, and takes
no notice."

"It may be so; poor thing!" returned the sailor in a tender tone, as he
looked at the shrivelled-up old creature, who was moving actively round
the never-idle lamp, and bending with inquiring interest over the
earthen pot, which seemed to engross her entire being.  "But why do you
wonder?"

"I wonder because she has so little to make her contented, and so much
to ruin her good-humour and cheerfulness, and to stop her fun.  Her life
is a hard one.  She has few relations to care for her.  She is very old,
and must soon grow feeble, and then--"

"And then?" said Rooney, as the other paused.

"Then she knows not what follows death--who does know?--and she does not
believe in the nonsense that our people invent.  It is a great mystery."

The Eskimo said the last words in a low voice and with a wistful gaze,
as if he were rather communing with himself than conversing with his
friend.  Rooney felt perplexed.  The thoughts of Angut were often too
profound for him.  Not knowing what to say, he changed the subject by
mentioning the object of his visit.

At once Angut turned, and gave undivided attention to the subject, while
the seaman described his recent conversation with Okiok.  As he
concluded, a peculiar look flitted across Angut's countenance.

