distance. {27} In fact, the extraordinary thing is not that Messenians
and certain Peloponnesians should act against their own better
judgement, but that you who understand for yourselves, and who hear us,
your orators, telling you, that there is a design against you, and that
the toils are closing round you--that you, I say, by always refusing to
act at once, should be about to find (as I think you will) that you
have exposed yourselves unawares to the utmost peril: so much more does
the pleasure and ease of the moment weigh with you, than any advantage
to be reaped at some future date.

{28} In regard to the practical measures which you must take, you will,
if you are wise, deliberate by yourselves[n] later. But I will at once
propose an answer which you may make to-day, and which it will be
consistent with your duty to have adopted.

[_The answer is read._]

Now the right course, men of Athens, was to have summoned before you
those who conveyed the promises[n] on the strength of which you were
induced to make the Peace. {29} For I could never have brought myself
to serve on the Embassy, nor, I am sure, would you have discontinued
the war, had you imagined that Philip, when he had obtained peace,
would act as he has acted. What we were then told was something very
different from this. And there are others, too, whom you should summon.
You ask whom I mean? After the Peace had been made, and I had returned
from the Second Embassy, which was sent to administer the oaths, I saw
how the city was being hoodwinked, and I spoke out repeatedly,
protesting and forbidding you to sacrifice Thermopylae and the
Phocians: {30} and the men to whom I refer were those who then said
that a water-drinker[n] like myself was naturally a fractious and
ill-tempered fellow; while Philip, if only he crossed the Pass, would
fulfil your fondest prayers; for he would fortify Thespiae and
Plataeae; he would put an end to the insolence of the Thebans; he would
cut a canal through the Chersonese at his own charges, and would repay
you for Amphipolis by the restoration of Euboea and Oropus. All this
was said from this very platform, and I am quite sure that you remember
it well, though your memory of those who injure you is but short. {31}
To crown your disgrace, with nothing but these hopes in view, you
resolved that this same Peace should hold good for your posterity also;
so completely had you fallen under their influence. But why do I speak
of all this now? why do I bid you summon these men? By Heaven, I will
tell the truth without reserve, and will hold nothing back. {32} My
object is not to give way to abuse, and so secure myself as good a
hearing[n] as others in this place, while giving those who have come
into collision with me from the first an opportunity for a further
claim[n] upon Philip's money. Nor do I wish to waste time in empty
words. {33} No; but I think that the plan which Philip is pursuing will
some day trouble you more than the present situation does; for his
design is moving towards fulfilment, and though I shrink from precise
conjecture, I fear its accomplishment may even now be only too close at
hand. And when the time comes when you can no longer refuse to attend
to what is passing; when you no longer hear from me or from some other
that it is all directed against you, but all alike see it for
yourselves and know it for a certainty; then, I think, you will be
angry and harsh enough. {34} And I am afraid that because your envoys
have withheld from you the guilty secret of the purposes which they
have been bribed to forward, those who are trying to remedy in some
degree the ruin of which these men have been the instruments will fall
victims to your wrath. For I observe that it is the general practice of
some persons to vent their anger, not upon the guilty, but upon those
who are most within their grasp. {35} While then the trouble is still
to come, still in process of growth, while we can still listen to one
another's words, I would remind each of you once more of what he well
knows--who it was that induced you to sacrifice the Phocians and
Thermopylae, the control of which gave Philip command of the road to
Attica and the Peloponnesus; who it was, I say, that converted your
debate about your rights and your interests abroad into a debate about
the safety of your own country, and about war on your own borders--a
war which will bring distress to each of us personally, when it is at
our doors, but which sprang into existence on that day. {36} Had you
not been misled by them, no trouble would have befallen this country.
For we cannot imagine that Philip would have won victories by sea which
would have enabled him to approach Attica with his fleet, or would have
marched by land past Thermopylae and the Phocians; but he would either
have been acting straightforwardly--keeping the Peace and remaining
quiet; or else he would have found himself instantly plunged into a war
no less severe than that which originally made him desirous of the
Peace. {37} What I have said is sufficient by way of a reminder to you.
Heaven grant that the time may not come when the truth of my words will
be tested with all severity: for I at least have no desire to see any
one meet with punishment, however much he may deserve his doom, if it
is accompanied by danger and calamity to us all.




ON THE EMBASSY (OR. XIX)


[_Introduction_. The principal events with which a reader of this
Speech ought to be acquainted have already been narrated (see
especially the Introductions to the last two Speeches). The influence
of the anti-Macedonian party grew gradually from the time of the Peace
onwards. In 346, within a month after the return of the Second Embassy,
the ambassadors presented their reports before the Logistae or Board of
Auditors (after a futile attempt on the part of Aeschines to avoid
making a report altogether); and Timarchus, supported by Demosthenes,
there announced his intention of taking proceedings against Aeschines
for misconduct on the Second Embassy. But Timarchus' own past history
was not above reproach: he was attacked by Aeschines for the
immoralities of his youth, which, it was stated, disqualified him from
acting as prosecutor, and though defended by Demosthenes, was condemned
and disfranchised (345 B.C.). But early in 343 Hypereides impeached
Philocrates for corruption as ambassador, and obtained his condemnation
to death--a penalty which he escaped by voluntary exile before the
conclusion of the trial; and, later in the same year, Demosthenes
brought the same charge against Aeschines.

In the meantime (since the delivery of Demosthenes' Second Philippic)
Philip had been making fresh progress. The Arcadians and Argives (for
the Athenian envoys to the Peloponnese in 344 seem to have had little
success) were ready to open their gates to him. His supporters in Elis
massacred their opponents, and with them the remnant of the Phocians
who had crossed over to Elis with Phalaecus. At Megara, Perillus and
Ptoeodorus almost succeeded in bringing a force of Philip's mercenaries
into the town, but the attempt was defeated, by the aid of an Athenian
force under Phocion. In Euboea Philip's troops occupied Porthmus, where
the democratic party of Eretria had taken refuge, owing to an overthrow
of the constitution (brought about by Philip's intrigues) which
resulted in the establishment of Cleitarchus as tyrant. In the course
of the same year (343) occurred two significant trials. The first was
that of Antiphon, who had made an offer to Philip to burn the Athenian
dockyards at the Peiraeus. He was summarily arrested by order of
Demosthenes (probably in virtue of some administrative office):
Aeschines obtained his release, but he was re-arrested by order of the
Council of Areopagus[1] and condemned to death. The other trial was
held before the Amphictyonic Council on the motion of the people of
Delos, to decide whether the Athenians should continue to possess the
right of managing the Temple of Delos. The Assembly chose Aeschines as
counsel for Athens; but the Council of Areopagus, which had been given
power to revise the appointment, put Hypereides in his place.
Hypereides won the case. Early in 343 (or at all events before the
middle of the year), Philip sent Python of Byzantium to complain of the
language used about him by Athenian orators, and to offer to revise and
amend the terms of the Peace of Philocrates. In response, an embassy
was sent, headed by Hegesippus, a violent opponent of Macedonia, to
propose to Philip (1) that instead of the clause 'that each party shall
retain possession of what they have', a clause, 'that each party shall
possess what is their own,' should be substituted; and (2) that all
Greek States not included in the Treaty of Peace should be declared
free, and that Athens and Philip should assist them, if they were
attacked. These proposals, if sanctioned, would obviously have reopened
the question of Amphipolis, Pydna, and Poteidaea, as well as of Cardia
and the Thracian towns taken by Philip in 346. Hegesippus, moreover,
was personally objectionable, and the embassy was dismissed with little
courtesy by Philip, who even banished from Macedonia the Athenian poet
Xenocleides for acting as host to the envoys. The feeling against
Philip in Athens was evidently strong, when the prosecution of
Aeschines by Demosthenes took place.

The trial was held before a jury (probably consisting of 1,501
persons), presided over by the Board of Auditors. Demosthenes spoke
first, and Aeschines replied in a speech which is preserved. There is
no doubt, on a comparison of the two speeches, that each, before it was
published, received alterations and insertions, intended to meet the
adversary's points, or to give a better colour to passages which had
been unfavourably received. Probably not all the refutations 'in
advance' were such in reality. But there is no sufficient reason to
doubt that the speeches were delivered substantially as we have them.
Aeschines was acquitted by thirty votes.

The question of the guilt or innocence of Aeschines will probably never
be finally settled. A great part of his conduct can be explained as a
sincere attempt to carry out the policy of Eubulus, or as the issue of
a genuine belief that it was best for Athens to make terms with Philip
and stand on his side. Even so the wisdom and the veracity of certain
speeches which he had made is open to grave question; but this is a
different thing from corruption. Moreover, to some of Demosthenes'
arguments he has a conclusive reply. It is more difficult to explain
his apparent change of opinion between the 18th and 19th of
Elaphebolion, 346 (if Demosthenes' report of the debates is to be
trusted); and some writers are disposed to date his corruption from the
intervening night. Nor is it easy to meet Demosthenes' argument that if
Aeschines had really been taken in by Philip, and believed the promises
which he announced, or if he had actually heard Philip make the
promises, he would have regarded Philip afterwards as a personal enemy,
and not as a friend. But even on these points Aeschines might reply
(though he could not reply so to the Athenian people or jury) that
though he did not trust the promises, he regarded the interest of
Athens as so closely bound up with the alliance with Philip, that he
considered it justifiable to deceive the people into making the
alliance, or at least to take the risk of the promises which he
announced proving untrue. In any case there is no convincing evidence
of corruption; and it may be taken as practically certain that he was
not bribed to perform particular services. It is less certain that he
was not influenced by generous presents from Philip in forming his
judgement of Philip's character and intentions. The standard of
Athenian public opinion in regard to the receipt of presents was not
that of the English Civil Service; and the ancient orators accuse one
another of corruption almost as a matter of course. (We have seen that
Demosthenes began the attack upon Eubulus' party in this form as early
as the Speech for the Rhodians; it appears in almost every subsequent
oration: and in their turn, his opponents make the same charge against
him.) It is, in any case, remarkable that at a time when the people was
plainly exasperated with the Peace and its authors, and very
ill-disposed towards Philip, a popular jury nevertheless acquitted
Aeschines; and the verdict is not sufficiently explained either by the
fact that Eubulus supported Aeschines or by the jurors' memory of
Demosthenes' own part in the earlier peace-negotiations, though this
must have weakened the force of his attack. That Demosthenes himself
believed Aeschines to have been bribed, and could himself see no other
explanation of his conduct, need not be doubted; and although the
speech contains some of those misrepresentations of fact and passages
of irrelevant personal abuse which deface some of his best work, it
also contains some of his finest pieces of oratory and narrative.

The second part of the speech is more broken up into short sections and
less clearly arranged than the first; earlier arguments are repeated,
and a few passages may be due (at least in their present shape) to
revision after the trial: but the latter part even as it stands is
successful in leaving the points of greatest importance strongly
impressed upon the mind.

The following analysis of the speech may enable the reader to find his
way through it without serious difficulty:--


INTRODUCTION (Secs. 1-28)

(i) _Exordium_ (Secs. 1, 2). Impartiality requested of the jury, in view
of Aeschines' attempt to escape by indirect means.

(ii) _Points of the trial_ (Secs. 3-8). An ambassador must (1) give true
reports; (2) give good advice; (3) obey his instructions; (4) not lose
time; (5) be incorruptible.

(iii) _Preliminary exposition of the arguments_ (Secs. 9-28).

    (1) The previous anti-Macedonian zeal of Aeschines suddenly collapsed
        after the First Embassy.

    (2) In the deliberations on the Peace, Aeschines supported
        Philocrates.

    (3) After the Second Embassy, Aeschines prevented Athens from guarding
        Thermopylae and saving the Phocians, by false reports and
        promises.

    (4) Such a change of policy is only explicable by corruption.

PART 1 (Secs. 29-178)

The five points of Introduction (ii) are treated as three, or in three
groups.

(i) The reports made by Aeschines on his return from the Second
Embassy, and his advice, especially as to the ruin of the Phocians (Secs.
29-97).

    (1) The reports (a) to the Senate, (b) to the People, and their
        reception (Secs. 29-46).

    (2) Evidence that Aeschines conspired with Philip against the
        Phocians, whose ruin is described (Secs. 47-71).

    (3) Refutation of three anticipated objections, beginning at Sec. 72, Sec.
        78, Sec. 80 respectively (Secs. 72-82).

    (4) The danger to Athens from Aeschines' treachery (Secs. 83-7).

    (5) Request to confine the trial strictly to relevant points
        (Secs. 88-97).

(ii) The corruption of Aeschines by the bribes of Philip (Secs. 98-149).

    (1) Arguments (beginning Sec. 102, Sec. 111, Sec. 114, Sec. 116) showing the
        corruption of Aeschines (Secs. 98-119).

    (2) Refutation of anticipated objections (beginning at Sec. 120, Sec. 134,
        Sec. 147) (Secs. 120-49).

(iii) Aeschines' loss of time, by which Philip profited, and
disobedience to his instructions (Secs. 150-77).

    (1) Narrative of the Second Embassy (Secs. 150-62).

    (2) Comparison of the two Embassies (Secs. 163-5).

    (3) Comparison of Demosthenes' own conduct with that of the other
        ambassadors (Secs. 167-77). Recapitulation of the points established
        (Secs. 177, 178).

PART II (Secs. 179-343)

(i) The injury done to Athens--

    (a) by the loss of Thrace and the Hellespont;

    (b) generally, by false reports from ambassadors (Secs. 179-86).

(ii) Refutation of anticipated objections--

    (a) 'It is not Philip's fault that he has not satisfied Athens'
        (Sec. 187).

    (b) 'Demosthenes has no right to prosecute' (Secs. 188-220): including a
        digression (Secs. 192-200) on Aeschines' character and incidents in
        his life.

(iii) Demosthenes' object in prosecuting, passing into reproof of the
laxity of Athens towards traitors (Secs. 221-33).

(iv) Warning against any attempt by Aeschines to confuse the dates and
incidents of the two Embassies (Secs. 234-6.)

(v) Criticism of Aeschines' brothers and his prosecution of Timarchus
(Secs. 237-58).

(vi) The increasing danger from traitors, and the traditional attitude
of Athens towards them (Secs. 259-87).

(vii) Attack upon Eubulus for defending Aeschines (Secs. 288-99).

(viii) Philip's policy and methods; proofs of Aeschines' complicity
repeated (Secs. 300-31).

(ix) Warnings to the jury against Aeschines' attempts to mislead them;
and conclusion (Secs. 331-43).]


{1} How much interest this case has excited, men of Athens, and how
much canvassing has taken place, must, I feel sure, have become fairly
evident to you all, after the persistent overtures just now made to
you, while you were drawing your lots.[n] Yet I will make the request
of you all--a request which ought to be granted even when unasked--that
you will not allow the favour or the person of any man to weigh more
with you than justice and the oath which each of you swore before he
entered the court. Remember that what I ask is for your own welfare and
for that of the whole State; while the entreaties and the eager
interest of the supporters of the accused have for their aim the
selfish advantage of individuals: and it is not to confirm criminals in
the possession of such advantages that the laws have called you
together, but to prevent their attainment of them. {2} Now I observe
that while all who enter upon public life in an honest spirit profess
themselves under a perpetual responsibility, even when they have passed
their formal examination, the defendant Aeschines does the very
reverse. For before entering your presence to give an account of his
actions, he has put out of the way one of those[n] who appeared against
him at his examination; and others he pursues with threats, thus
introducing into public life a practice which is of all the most
atrocious and most contrary to your interests. For if one who has
transacted and managed any public business is to render himself secure
against accusation by spreading terror round him, rather than by the
justice of his case, your supremacy[n] must pass entirely out of your
hands.

{3} I have every confidence and belief that I shall prove the defendant
guilty of many atrocious crimes, for which he deserves the extreme
penalty of the law. But I will tell you frankly of the fear which
troubles me in spite of this confidence. It seems to me, men of Athens,
that the issue of every trial before you is determined as much by the
occasion as by the facts; and I am afraid that the length of time which
has elapsed since the Embassy may have caused you to forget the crimes
of Aeschines, or to be too familiar with them. {4} I will tell you
therefore how, in spite of this, you may yet, as I believe, arrive at a
just decision and give a true verdict to-day. You have, gentlemen of
the jury, to inquire and to consider what are the points on which it is
proper to demand an account from an ambassador. He is responsible first
for his report; secondly, for what he has persuaded you to do; thirdly,
for his execution of your instructions; next, for dates; and, besides
all these things, for the integrity or venality of his conduct
throughout. {5} And why is he responsible in these respects? Because on
his report must depend your discussion of the situation: if his report
is true, your decision is a right one: if otherwise, it is the reverse.
Again, you regard the counsels of ambassadors as especially
trustworthy. You listen to them in the belief that they have personal
knowledge of the matter with which they were sent to deal. Never,
therefore, ought an ambassador to be convicted of having given you any
worthless or pernicious advice. {6} Again, it is obviously proper that
he should have carried out your instructions to him with regard to both
speech and action, and your express resolutions as to his conduct. Very
good. But why is he responsible for dates? Because, men of Athens, it
often happens that the opportunity upon which much that is of great
importance depends lasts but for a moment; and if this opportunity is
deliberately and treacherously surrendered to the enemy, no subsequent
steps can possibly recover it. {7} But as to the integrity or
corruption of an ambassador, you would all, I am sure, admit that to
make money out of proceedings that injure the city is an atrocious
thing and deserves your heavy indignation. Yet the implied distinction
was not recognized by the framer of our law. He absolutely forbade
_all_ taking of presents, thinking, I believe, that a man who has once
received presents and been corrupted with money no longer remains even
a safe judge of what is to the interest of the city. {8} If then I can
convict the defendant Aeschines by conclusive proofs of having made a
report that was utterly untrue, and prevented the people from hearing
the truth from me; if I prove that he gave advice that was entirely
contrary to your interests; that on his mission he fulfilled none of
your instructions to him; that he wasted time, during which
