there in spite of the pain, till the colored light went out, and then
remove it. The process was very hard on the fingers, made of metal
though they were. What was it the farmer had shouted down the hall?
"Wears your fingers out?" Well, it did that, all right. After an hour or
two of it, when he had learned to perform the various operations with
mechanical precision and the tip of his index finger had already begun
to scale off, the ape-man smiled at him, waved approval and reaching
down beneath the black board, pulled out a drawer from which he
extracted a finger-tip, made in the same metal as those he already bore,
and proceeded to show Sherman how to attach it.

As a mechanic, he watched the process with some interest. The "bone" of
the finger, with its joint, screwed cunningly into the bone of the next
joint below, the lower end of the screw being curiously cut away and
having a tiny point of wire set in it. The muscular bands had loose ends
that merely tucked in, but so well were they fashioned, that once in
position, it was impossible to pull them out until the finger-tip had
been unscrewed.

The instruction process over, he was returned to his cell, wondering
what was to happen next. The poisoned paradise was becoming less of a
paradise. He speculated on the possibility of wrecking the car that bore
him from place to place, but finally decided that it could not be done
without some heavy tool and was hardly worth the trouble in any case
until he was more certain of getting away afterward.




CHAPTER XIII

The Lassan


When the car next called for him, it took a much longer course; one
steadily downward and around a good many curves as he could judge from
the way in which it swayed and gained and lost speed. It was fully a
twenty-minute ride, and when he stepped out it was not into a room of
any kind, but in what appeared to be a tunnel cut in the living rock, at
least six feet wide and fully twice as high. The rock on all sides had
been beautifully smoothed by some unknown hand, except underfoot where
it had been left rough enough to give a grip to the feet.

At his side were two of the ape-men who had been released from the car
at the same time. The tunnel led them straight ahead for a distance,
then dipped and turned to the right. As he rounded the corner he could
see that it ended below and before him in some room where machinery
whirred. The ape-men went straight on, looking neither to the right nor
the left. As they reached the door that gave into the machine-room they
encountered another ape-man wearing the same kind of helmet with its
attached tube, as Sherman's instructor had worn. The ape-men who came
with him stopped. The helmeted one looked at them stupidly for a moment
and then, as though obeying some unspoken command, took one by the arm
and led him across the room to the front of a machine and there thrust
one of the ubiquitous helmets on his head.

The machine, as nearly as Sherman could make out, was a duplicate of
that on which he had injured his fingers; as the helmet was buckled on
the ape-man who stood before it he immediately began to watch the
ground-glass panels and put his fingers in the holes below.

The process was repeated with the second ape-man, and then the sentinel
returned to Sherman. Taking him by the arm, the mechanical beast led him
past the row of machines (there seemed to be only four in the room) and
to a door at one side, giving him a gentle push. It was the opening of
another tunnel, down which Sherman walked for some forty or fifty yards
before encountering a second door and a second helmeted ape-man sentry.

This one did exactly as the first had done. Stared at him for a moment,
then took him by the arm and led him across the room to a machine, where
it left him. Sherman perceived that he was supposed to care for it, and
with a sigh, bent to his task.

It was some moments before the rapid flashing of lights gave him a
respite. Then he had an opportunity to look about him and observed that,
as in the other room, there were four machines. Two of them were
untenanted, but at the one next to his, there was someone working. When
he glanced again, he was sure it was a mechanized human like
himself--and a girl!

"What is this place?" he asked, "and who are you?"

The other gave a covert glance over his shoulder at the sentry by the
door.

"Sssh!" she said out of the corner of her mouth, "not so loud.... I'm
Marta Lami--and I think this place is hell!"

After a time they contrived a sort of conversation, a word at a time,
with covert glances at the ape-man sentry. He looked at them
suspiciously once or twice, but as he made no attempt to interfere they
gained confidence.

"Who--is--keeping--us--here?" asked Sherman.

"Don't--know," she replied in the same manner.
"Think--it's--the--elephants."

"What elephants?" he asked a word at a time. "I haven't seen any."

"You will. They come around and inspect what you're doing. Are you new
here?"

"New at these machines. They had me teaching them to write English. This
is my first day in here."

"This is my eightieth work-period. We lost track of the days."

"So did I. Where are we? Are there any other humans with you?"

"One in the cage across the corridor from me. Walter Stevens the Wall
Street man."

"Have they got him on this job, too?"

"Yes."

Sherman could not avoid a snicker. Back in the days before the comet he
had had Stevens as a passenger once, and a more difficult customer to
satisfy, a more cocksure-of-his-own-importance man he had never seen.
The thought of him burning his fingertips up in one of these machines
gave him some amusement. But his next question was practical.

"Do you know what these machines are for?"

"Haven't the least idea; Stevens said they were for digging something.
They had the helmets on him twice."

"What helmets?"

"Like the dopey at the door wears. The dopeys all have to wear them."

"Why?"

"Haven't got any brains, I guess. I had one on once when they were
teaching me to do this. They tell you what to think."

"What do you mean?"

"You put the helmet on and it's like you're hypnotized. You can't think
anything but what they want you to think."

Sherman shuddered slightly. So that was how the mechanical ape-men were
controlled so perfectly!

"How did they get you?" asked the girl who had described herself as
Marta Lami.

"In an airplane. I'm an aviator. They shot me down somewhere and when I
came to, put me in one of those cages. How did you get here?"

"The birds. I was at West Point with Stevens and that old fool
Vanderschoof. They started shooting at the birds and the birds just
picked us up and flew away with us."

"Where were you after you came to? I mean after the comet."

"New York. Century Roof. I was dancing there before."

"You aren't Marta Lami, the dancer?"

"Sure. Who the hell do you think?"

       *       *       *       *       *

He turned and regarded her deliberately, careless of the aroused
attention of the sentry. So this was the famous dancer who had blazed
across two continents and three divorce suits--who had been proclaimed
the most beautiful woman in the world in starring electric lights before
an applauding Broadway; for whose performances speculators held tickets
at prize-fight premiums! How little she resembled it now, a parody of
the human form, working her fingers off as the slave of an alien and
conquering race.

She asked the next question:

"Where have they got you?"

"I don't know. In a cage somewhere. The only people around there are
like these mugs." He nodded toward the ape-man.

"I wonder how long they'll keep us at this."

"I wish I could tell you. How's chances of making a break?"

"Rotten. There was a guy at the next machine tried it three or four
work-periods ago. He socked the dopey at the door."

"What happened?"

"They sent a machine down for him and gave him the yellow lights all
over. It was fierce, you should have heard him scream."

"How far down are we, anyway?"

"You got me, boy friend. Sssh! Watch the dopey."

Sherman glanced over his shoulder to see the ape-man moving aside from
the door and bent back to his work. Evidently something important was
imminent, judging from the actions of the sentry and the energetic
attention the ex-dancer was giving to her machine. He was not deceived.
Down the passage came something moving; something flesh-like and smooth,
of a pale, grey-blue, dead-fish color, like a dangling serpent, then a
round bulging head and finally the full form of an elephant!

But such an elephant as mortal eye had never before seen. For it stood
barely eight feet high and its legs were both longer and infinitely more
slender and graceful than the legs of any earthly elephant. The ears
were smaller, not loose flaps of skin, but possessed of definite form
and pressed close to the head. The skull was enormous, bulging at the
forehead, and wrinkled in the middle down over the large intelligent
eyes in an expression permanently cross and dissatisfied. As for the
trunk it reached nearly to the floor, longer and thinner in proportion
than the trunk of an ordinary elephant, and at its tip divided into four
finger-like projections set around the circle of the nostril.

Oddest of all, the elephant wore clothes! Or at least an outer garment,
a kind of long cloak which appeared to be attached underneath its body
and which covered every portion except the ankles. The feet also were
covered. A kind of hood hung back from the head on that portion of the
cloak which rested on the creature's back. But what chiefly aroused
Sherman's sense of strangeness and loathing was that the naked skin,
wherever exposed, was of that same poisonous, dead-fish blue.

For a moment the thing stood in the doorway, regarding them, swinging
its long trunk around restlessly, as though it could tell something
about them by its sense of smell. Then it advanced a step or two into
the room, and placing its trunk close to Sherman's body, began to run
over it, sniffing, a few inches away. He felt that he wanted to shriek,
to turn and strike the thing, or to run, but a warning glance from the
dancer kept him motionless.

Apparently satisfied with the result of its examination the elephant
turned to go, stopping as it did so to unhook some projection on the
ape-man's helmet and apply it to its ear. After listening for a moment,
it put the end of the trunk to this projection, snorted into it, and
went away with soundless steps.

For several minutes the two worked on in silence after this. Then:

"Well, now you seen him," said the dancer, in the same word-by-word
fashion as before. "That was our boss."

"That--thing?" asked Sherman, incredulously.

"I'll tell the cockeyed world. Say, those babies know more than Einstein
ever heard of. Try to get fresh with one of them and see."

"What do they do?"

"Shoot you with one of the light-guns. They carry little ones around
with them. They melt you down wherever they hit you and you have to go
to the operating room to have things put back and it hurts like hell."

"Oh, I must have been there after they brought me down in my plane. They
did something to my back."

"Then you know, boy friend. After that they put the helmet on you and
you have to tell 'em what you're thinking about. You can beat that game,
though, if you're careful. All I'd give 'em was how good a couple of
Scotch highballs would taste and it made monkeys of 'em."

It was all very strange and not a little bewildering. Intelligent
elephants that controlled forces beyond the powers of men; who could
place a helmet on your head and read your thoughts; who could repair the
new mechanized human form after it had apparently suffered irreparable
damage, and who treated men and women as lower animals. Their arrival
must have been that of the comet.

       *       *       *       *       *

Herbert Sherman had read deeply enough, though not widely. He remembered
some Englishman--Colvin--Kevin--Kelvin, that was it!--who had a theory
that life had drifted to the earth from somewhere out in the void of
space and time. Had these, too, drifted in, in the same way the
ancestors of man had come, to set a period to the day of man's dominance
over creation? A strange enough creation it was now, though, with its
mechanical men and its animals turned to metal statues. He wondered what
Noah would say, and giggled at the thought.

"What's the joke, boy friend?"

"Oh, nothing. I had an idea."

Their plight at the hands of these master-animals was bad, but it might
be worse. At least he had a certain amount of freedom, he was stronger
than he had ever before been in his life, and felt quite as intelligent.
It would be strange if he could not accomplish something.... He fell to
planning out ways of escaping and failed to notice the pain in his
fingers in the intensity of his thoughts.

Everything seemed to show that the operation of most of these machines
was predominantly electrical. It would be strange if the car that
carried them to and fro was not, yes and by Jove, the helmets the
ape-men wore. If he could short-circuit the works, or even a part of
them....

Apparently his new body was a good conductor and impervious to the
injurious effects of the electric current. Short-circuit something, that
was the idea, create a confusion--and trust to escaping in the midst of
it? Perhaps--but at all events a good deal could be learned about these
elephant-men and their methods by watching them in such an emergency.
Their machinery was so efficient that a child could operate it; it was
in a pinch that their real intelligence would show.

It struck him that it would do little good to escape unless he did learn
something about these elephant-people, their mysterious light-guns,
their vast city that they seemed to have hollowed out of the heart of
the solid Catskill rock, their chemistry and metallurgy and methods of
attack and defense. Otherwise escape would be a jumping from the
frying-pan into the fire. There would be nothing for it but a desperate,
harried existence, the existence of one of the lower animals faced by
the insupportable competition of man.

Information! That was the first need. He must bend all his energies to
the task of obtaining it.

"By the way, what do these eggs call themselves?" he asked.

"Lassans," said the dancer.

A light flickered along the corridor. The ape-man at the door came
forward, touched him on the arm and led him to the passage where he
caught the car back to his cage.




CHAPTER XIV

In the Passages


The first thing to be done, Sherman decided, was to short-circuit the
mind-reading helmet of the guard at the door, if it were possible. He
was not certain that the thing was electrical, and ignorant of how the
current was conveyed if it were. He realized that he was dealing with
the products of an utterly alien form of mentality, one that might not
produce its results in the same way as an earth-man would at all. But
something had to be dared, and this seemed to offer the best
opportunity.

If the thing were electrical, the current must come through the tube to
the top of the head. On his second work-period he observed this tube
with care. It ran through an aperture in the stone roof and was
apparently provided with some spring device, for a considerable length
of it reeled out when the ape-man wished to walk across the room, and
was absorbed as he returned.

The tube seemed to be made of the rubber-like material that composed the
floor of his cage. The simplest plan, of course, would be to bring his
chopping-knife with him and when the ape-man paused before the wall,
swing it up in a sweep, severing the tube. But this, he felt, was not to
be recommended. It would not necessarily short-circuit the current and
the damage would be too readily laid at his door. The desideratum was
some damage that apparently accidental, would yet produce a good deal of
uproar.

He talked it over with Marta Lami.

"I think you're bugs," she said frankly, "but anything for excitement.
What do you want me to do about it?"

"Well, here's what I figured out," Sherman explained. "We both arrive
about the same time. I'll bring my knife. When we come in you hang back
a bit, and while you're doing it, I'll take a poke at that cable with
the knife, not enough to cut it, but enough to damage it. Then about
half-way through the work period, I'll turn around and say something to
you. If I do it quick enough, I think the monk will start for me, and if
the cable doesn't go then, I'll miss my guess."

The next period proved unsuitable; the dancer's car arrived considerably
before Sherman's and the plan was dropped for the time, but on the
following occasion, as Sherman came down the passage, he noticed Marta
Lami just ahead of him. He hurried to catch up and she evidently
understood, for she avoided the guard's outstretched hand and hung back
a minute against the wall as Sherman came up behind. He made one quick
motion; the cable sheared half-way through exposing two wires of bright
metal.

As luck would have it, it proved unnecessary to put the second part of
the plan into operation. For just as Sherman was nerving himself to
swing round and attract the ape-man's attention, he heard the soft
pad-pad of one of the approaching Lassans. The ape-man stepped back to
clear the entrance as he had before, and as he did so, there was a
trickle of sparks, a blinding flash, and the cable short-circuited.

The result was totally unexpected. From the great machine before Sherman
there came an answering flash; the ground glass split across with a
bang, there was a hissing sound and something blew up with a roar that
rocked the underground chambers....

Sherman came to himself flat on his back and with pieces of rock and the
debris of the machine lying across his legs. He looked around; Marta
Lami lay some little distance across the room, half covered with fallen
rock, one arm flung across her eyes as though to protect them. Above,
the solid granite looked as though a blasting charge had been fired in
its midst. Sherman pulled himself to a sitting posture, and finding
nothing damaged, stood upright. The machine, badly shattered, lay in
fragments of bent rods, broken pulleys and wrecked cylinders all about
him. In the place where it had stood was a long narrow opening, down at
the end of which something irregular shut off a bright point of light. A
blast of heat exuded from the place and a steady, deep-voiced roaring
was audible. The ape-man guard was nowhere to be seen.

He bent to pick up the unconscious girl, wondering how one revived a
mechanical woman, especially without water, but she solved the problem
for him by opening her eyes and asking:
