
"What idea?"

"You told me the results of your research on the androids would be
valuable to whoever built them--as a guide to perfecting androids that
wouldn't die under earth conditions."

"That was obvious logic."

"And it ties in with another thought. A race of beings as advanced as
these could take us over without trouble, it would seem."

"Quite true. Except--"

"Except that they themselves may not be able to exist on earth, either;
no more so than we could exist on the moon without creating conditions
favorable to our physical capabilities."

"So ...?"

"So I'm betting that the ten androids were sent here on a
trial-and-error basis, with the objective of perfecting them and
creating an android army to move in and take us over."

"It's a thought, but with their power they could achieve the same result
with less effort by pulverizing us. Or so it would seem to me."

"True, but maybe they don't want us pulverized; maybe they'd rather take
over a working planet than a lot of rubble."

"All that follows logically," Entman admitted, "provided the original
hypothesis is true--that they cannot invade us in person."

"Right. But I've got to start somewhere and hope I'm on the right
track."

"One thing occurs to me. Eight of the androids died and one was killed.
What if all ten had succumbed? How did they plan to get their data?"

"Who knows? I'm not saying the idea is foolproof. But a certain amount
of risk had to be involved. If the ten died, they would have missed.
Maybe they'd try again in that case. But they were lucky--one survived."

Entman was peering thoughtfully at nothing. "Your idea is bolstered by
the fact that the androids were found all over the country. They could
have been testing various climates."

"But it's weakened by the creatures being found in cities--the least
likely places to escape detection. Why didn't they stay in isolated
sections?"

Entman smiled. "I like the way you reach out for arguments against your
own theory, but you reached too far for that one. If they'd done that,
who would find the androids and do the research work?"

Brent Taber brightened. "You comfort me, Doctor. That little thread got
lost in my maze. They wanted the creatures to be found. They didn't
expect to fool us. Why else would the one in Chicago go brazenly into a
tavern, start to drink and then get into an argument?"

"That's right. The argument must have been started deliberately." Entman
beamed on Taber. "I think we deserve another Scotch."

Entman poured the drink. He looked kindly at Taber as he handed it to
him, and made what seemed an abrupt change in subject. "They're giving
you a very hard time, aren't they, son?"

Taber considered the question as he downed a healthy belt from the
glass. "I guess you could call it that. I'm getting pretty unpopular in
some places. As a matter of fact, I've wondered why you stick by me."

Entman poured himself a drink. "That hurts me a little, son."

"I'm sorry. It's getting so I don't even know how to treat a friend."

Entman raised his glass in salute. "I'm afraid this sentimental
chit-chat doesn't become either of us. Let's go back to our friend from
the _Herald Tribune_. You're sure he photographed the data?"

"I think we can depend on it."

"When I got your call, I acted as fast as I could. The data looks
authentic, I'm sure, but it was a quick job of fiction. Now I'd like to
know the rest--whatever you didn't have time to tell me."

"It's still a logic-chain, with some pretty flimsy strands in some
places, but I'm afraid I'm stuck with it. King was greedy and hungry
when I first talked to him, but I think I scared him off. I think, left
to himself, he would have let the thing alone.

"So I was surprised when he showed up at the old location. My first
thought was that Crane had sent him. It would have been logical--Crane
sending a man to try and find out where we'd taken the cadavers he
obviously wants to get his hands on.

"But I couldn't connect Crane with King. I couldn't figure how Crane
could have known of King's existence." Taber paused to drink and grin
his humorless grin. "So I made a daring leap. If it had to be someone
else, why not the tenth android himself?"

Entman frowned as he toyed with the idea. "Why, good lord--!"

"You said yourself that the androids probably possessed extraordinary
powers."

"Yes, but--"

"All right. If we accept the need-of-data theory, which we have to, what
would the tenth android be doing? Trying to get his hands on it. He
could conceivably have made contact with King. King took a picture of
the ninth android. Our still able and functioning number ten found his
way to Doctor Corson's room in Greenwich Village and demolished number
nine, for reasons of his own, so he could have made contact with King,
put him under domination, and sent him after the data."

"How could he know where the data was?"

Taber shrugged. "I said there were some pretty weak strings in my logic.
But it so shaped, as I saw it, where it would stand or smash on one
point. If King had waited in your office for your return, I would have
been forced to assume he was there on his own. But he left, so I'm going
to figure he took what he came for--the bait you dangled under his
nose."

"That brings up a question in my mind. If you're right, King will now
make contact with the android, will he not?"

"I assume he will."

"And that will give you a chance to capture him and have the whole ten
accounted for?"

"I don't want him until he sends the data back to whoever is waiting for
it."

"You'd like to have them build their synthetic army on the
specifications I made out?"

"I'd dearly love that."

"Do you know where to contact King again?"

"He's being tailed. They stripped me, but I still have two men left."

"You're being treated miserably!" Entman scowled. "I'm going to talk to
some people about this. I refuse to allow--"

"Thanks, but not for a while. I've shaped my operation on a one-man
basis. I'd be embarrassed if they relented. I wouldn't know what to do
with all the men."

Entman's little eyes shone with affection. "I can only wish you good
luck."

"Thanks. I'll need it."

"And one more thing I was wondering."

"What's that?"

"Why do you suppose the tenth android killed the one in the Village?"

"Another case of taking one reason for want of a better one. I think it
was his way of delivering the creature to us for research. He couldn't
know for sure that we already had his 'brothers.'"

"You're right--you must be," Entman agreed.

"Small consolation. I'd like a few facts to go on for a change instead
of having to depend on logic all the time," Taber growled.

"What are you referring to?"

"The data. I'm assuming, _if_ that's what's important, that the tenth
creature has a way of getting the stuff back up there."

"I can help a little on that," Entman said. "I can assure you that from
what I've found in those brains, the data could, most likely, be sent
mentally."

"You're sure of that?"

"I've found a certain part of those brains developed in a peculiar
way--"

Taber smiled. "You're sure of that?"

"Well ... that's my theory. It would appear logical that--"

Taber leaned forward suddenly and extended his glass, the grin on his
face showing some genuine humor. "Let's have another drink, Doctor. Then
I'll go. I love the factual way this Scotch of yours hits my stomach."




12


Frank Corson entered the office of Wilson Maynard, Superintendent of
Park Hill Hospital. Maynard looked out over the tops of his
old-fashioned pince-nez glasses and said, "Oh, Doctor Corson. You phoned
for a chat."

It was the rather pompous superintendent's way of saying he was happy to
give Frank Corson a little time. He considered all the doctors and
nurses at Park Hill his "boys and girls," and he did the "father" bit
very well.

"Yes, I--"

Maynard peered even harder. "You don't look well, Frank. Pale. You've
been working too hard."

"Nothing important, Doctor Maynard."

"Sit down. Will you have a cigarette?"

"No, thank you. I just wanted to ask you about a transfer."

"A transfer!" This was amazing. "Aren't you happy at Park Hill?"

"I've been very happy."

Maynard went swiftly through a card file on his desk. "You have--let's
see--five more months of internship. Then--"

"Then I'd planned to enter private practice. But something personal has
come up and I think a change is for the best."

"I'm certainly sorry to hear that."

"One of the men I graduated with went to a hospital in a small Minnesota
town. We've corresponded and he's given me a pretty clear picture--a
nice town, a need for doctors and physicians--"

"But we need them here in the East, too."

"I realize that, and I'm making the move with some regret. But, frankly,
New York City no longer appeals to me. I think perhaps a small hospital
is more suited to my temperament."

"I'm certainly sorry to hear this, Corson. But I won't try to dissuade
you. Normally, I might bring a little more personal pressure to bear,
but I sense that your mind is made up. We're sorry to see you go, but
the best of luck to you."

"Thank you, sir."

After Frank Corson left, Superintendent Maynard sorted a memo out of the
pile on his desk. The memo concerned Frank Corson. Superintendent
Maynard reread it and thought how well things usually worked out. Now it
wouldn't be necessary to have that talk with Corson about sloppy work.
Obviously there had been something on the young intern's mind for weeks
now. Too bad. But let the Minnesota hospital, wherever it was, worry
about the trouble and perhaps put Corson on the right track again.

He was their baby now.

Maynard took Corson's card from the files and wrote across it: _Transfer
approved with regret._

       *       *       *       *       *

Brent Taber stood in the shelter of a doorway on the Lower East Side of
Manhattan and watched an entrance across the street. He had been there
for over an hour.

Another hour passed and Taber shifted from one aching foot to the other
as a man in a blue suit emerged from the entrance and moved off down the
street.

When the man had turned a corner, Taber crossed over and looked up at
the brownstone. It was a perfect place to hide--one of the many rooming
houses in the city where, if you paid your rent and kept your peace, no
one cared who you were or where you came from.

Not even, Taber reflected, if you had been born in a laboratory and had
come from someplace among the stars.

He climbed the steps of the brownstone and tried the knob. The door
opened. He went inside and found himself in a drab, dark hall furnished
with an umbrella stand, a worn carpet, and a table spread with mail.

There was a bell on the table. He tapped it and, after a lazy length of
time, a shapeless woman came through a door on the right and regarded
him with no great show of cordiality.

"Nothing vacant, mister. Everything I've got is rented."

"I wasn't looking for a room. I'm just doing a little checking."

"My license is okay," the woman said belligerently. "The place is clean
and orderly."

"That's not what I'm checking about. There's been some counterfeit money
passed in this neighborhood and we're trying to trace it down."

The woman had a pronounced mustache that quivered at this news.
"Counterfeit! My roomers are honest."

"I'm sure they are. But some people carry counterfeit money without
knowing it. Do they all pay in cash?"

"Only two of them."

"Men or women?"

"One girl--Katy Wynn."

"Where does she work?"

"Down in Wall Street."

"Not much chance we're interested. This money has been turning up around
Times Square."

"The other's a man--quiet, no trouble, pays his rent right on the dot
every week. John Dennis his name is and he doesn't look like no
counterfeiter."

Taber took a forward step. "What's his room number?"

"Six--on the second floor. But he isn't in now. He just went out."

"Okay. Maybe I'll be back. As I said, we don't suspect anybody. We're
just checking for sources."

Taber turned toward the door. The woman vanished back into her own
quarters as Taber snapped the lock. He stood in the vestibule for a
minute or two, studying some cards he took from his pocket, and when she
did not reappear, he opened the door, went back in, and climbed the
stairs.

The door to number six was not locked. Taber went inside. The window was
small and gave on an areaway. He could see nothing until he turned on
