Dureau de la Malle ('Comptes Rendus' tome 41 1855 page 690) advances this as a
good instance of reversion to the primitive stock, and as confirmatory of a
still more vague statement in classical times by Varro.), it is not known what
variety was first turned out, nor what character the feral birds have assumed.
The guinea-fowl in the West Indies, when feral, seems to vary more than in the
domesticated state.

With respect to plants run wild, Dr. Hooker (13/14. 'Flora of Australia' 1859
Introduction page 9.) has strongly insisted on what slight evidence the common
belief in their reversion to a primitive state rests. Godron (13/15. 'De
l'Espece' tome 2 pages 54, 58, 60.) describes wild turnips, carrots, and
celery; but these plants in their cultivated state hardly differ from their
wild prototypes, except in the succulency and enlargement of certain parts,--
characters which would certainly be lost by plants growing in poor soil and
struggling with other plants. No cultivated plant has run wild on so enormous
a scale as the cardoon (Cynara cardunculus) in La Plata. Every botanist who
has seen it growing there, in vast beds, as high as a horse's back, has been
struck with its peculiar appearance; but whether it differs in any important
point from the cultivated Spanish form, which is said not to be prickly like
its American descendant, or whether it differs from the wild Mediterranean
species, which is said not to be social (though this may be due merely to the
nature of the conditions), I do not know.]

REVERSION TO CHARACTERS DERIVED FROM A CROSS, IN THE CASE OF SUB-VARIETIES,
RACES, AND SPECIES.

When an individual having some recognisable peculiarity unites with another of
the same sub-variety, not having the peculiarity in question, it often
reappears in the descendants after an interval of several generations. Every
one must have noticed, or heard from old people of children closely resembling
in appearance or mental disposition, or in so small and complex a character as
expression, one of their grandparents, or some more distant collateral
relation. Very many anomalies of structure and diseases (13/16. Mr. Sedgwick
gives many instances in the 'British and Foreign Med.-Chirurg. Review' April
and July 1863 pages 448, 188.) of which instances have been given in the last
chapter, have come into a family from one parent, and have reappeared in the
progeny after passing over two or three generations. The following case has
been communicated to me on good authority, and may, I believe, be fully
trusted: a pointer-bitch produced seven puppies; four were marked with blue
and white, which is so unusual a colour with pointers that she was thought to
have played false with one of the greyhounds, and the whole litter was
condemned; but the gamekeeper was permitted to save one as a curiosity. Two
years afterwards a friend of the owner saw the young dog, and declared that he
was the image of his old pointer-bitch Sappho, the only blue and white pointer
of pure descent which he had ever seen. This led to close inquiry, and it was
proved that he was the great-great-grandson of Sappho; so that, according to
the common expression, he had only 1/16th of her blood in his veins. I may
give one other instance, on the authority of Mr. R. Walker, a large cattle-
breeder in Kincardineshire. He bought a black bull, the son of a black cow
with white legs, white belly and part of the tail white; and in 1870 a calf
the gr.-gr.-gr.-gr.-grandchild of this cow was born coloured in the same very
peculiar manner; all the intermediate offspring having been black. In these
cases there can hardly be a doubt that a character derived from a cross with
an individual of the same variety reappeared after passing over three
generations in the one case, and five in the other.

When two distinct races are crossed, it is notorious that the tendency in the
offspring to revert to one or both parent-forms is strong, and endures for
many generations. I have myself seen the clearest evidence of this in crossed
pigeons and with various plants. Mr. Sidney (13/17. In his edition of 'Youatt
on the Pig' 1860 page 27.) states that, in a litter of Essex pigs, two young
ones appeared which were the image of the Berkshire boar that had been used
twenty-eight years before in giving size and constitution to the breed. I
observed in the farmyard at Betley Hall some fowls showing a strong likeness
to the Malay breed, and was told by Mr. Tollet that he had forty years before
crossed his birds with Malays; and that, though he had at first attempted to
get rid of this strain, he had subsequently given up the attempt in despair,
as the Malay character would reappear.

This strong tendency in crossed breeds to revert has given rise to endless
discussions in how many generations after a single cross, either with a
distinct breed or merely with an inferior animal, the breed may be considered
as pure, and free from all danger of reversion. No one supposes that less than
three generations suffices, and most breeders think that six, seven, or eight
are necessary, and some go to still greater lengths. (13/18. Dr. P. Lucas,
'Hered. Nat.' tome 2 pages 314, 892: see a good practical article on the
subject in 'Gardener's Chronicle' 1856 page 620. I could add a vast number of
references, but they would be superfluous.) But neither in the case of a breed
which has been contaminated by a single cross, nor when, in the attempt to
form an intermediate breed, half-bred animals have been matched together
during many generations, can any rule be laid down how soon the tendency to
reversion will be obliterated. It depends on the difference in the strength or
prepotency of transmission in the two parent-forms, on their actual amount of
difference, and on the nature of the conditions of life to which the crossed
offspring are exposed. But we must be careful not to confound these cases of
reversion to characters which were gained by a cross, with those under the
first class, in which characters originally common to BOTH parents, but lost
at some former period, reappear; for such characters may recur after an almost
indefinite number of generations.

The law of reversion is as powerful with hybrids, when they are sufficiently
fertile to breed together, or when they are repeatedly crossed with either
pure parent-form, as in the case of mongrels. It is not necessary to give
instances. With plants almost every one who has worked on this subject, from
the time of Kolreuter to the present day, has insisted on this tendency.
Gartner has recorded some good instances; but no one has given more striking
ones than Naudin. (13/19. Kolreuter gives curious cases in his 'Dritte
Fortsetzung' 1766 ss. 53, 59; and in his well-known 'Memoirs on Lavatera and
Jalapa.' Gartner 'Bastarderzeugung' ss. 437, 441, etc. Naudin in his
"Recherches sur l'Hybridite" 'Nouvelles Archives du Museum' tome 1 page 25.)
The tendency differs in degree or strength in different groups, and partly
depends, as we shall presently see, on whether the parent-plants have been
long cultivated. Although the tendency to reversion is extremely general with
nearly all mongrels and hybrids, it cannot be considered as invariably
characteristic of them; it may also be mastered by long-continued selection;
but these subjects will more properly be discussed in a future chapter on
Crossing. From what we see of the power and scope of reversion, both in pure
races, and when varieties or species are crossed, we may infer that characters
of almost every kind are capable of reappearing after having been lost for a
great length of time. But it does not follow from this that in each particular
case certain characters will reappear; for instance, this will not occur when
a race is crossed with another endowed with prepotency of transmission.
Sometimes the power of reversion wholly fails, without our being able to
assign any cause for the failure: thus it has been stated that in a French
family in which 85 out of above 600 members, during six generations, had been
subject to night-blindness, "there has not been a single example of this
affection in the children of parents who were themselves free from it."
(13/20. Quoted by Mr. Sedgwick in 'Med.-Chirurg. Review' April 1861 page 485.
Dr. H. Dobell in 'Med.-Chirurg. Transactions' volume 46 gives an analogous
case in which, in a large family, fingers with thickened joints were
transmitted to several members during five generations; but when the blemish
once disappeared it never reappeared.)

REVERSION THROUGH BUD-PROPAGATION--PARTIAL REVERSION, BY SEGMENTS IN THE SAME
FLOWER OR FRUIT, OR IN DIFFERENT PARTS OF THE BODY IN THE SAME INDIVIDUAL
ANIMAL.

In the eleventh chapter many cases of reversion by buds, independently of
seminal generation, were given--as when a leaf-bud on a variegated, a curled,
or laciniated variety suddenly reassumes its proper character; or as when a
Provence-rose appears on a moss-rose, or a peach on a nectarine-tree. In some
of these cases only half the flower or fruit, or a smaller segment, or mere
stripes, reassume their former character; and here we have reversion by
segments. Vilmorin (13/21. Verlot 'Des Varietes' 1865 page 63.) has also
recorded several cases with plants derived from seed, of flowers reverting by
stripes or blotches to their primitive colours: he states that in all such
cases a white or pale-coloured variety must first be formed, and, when this is
propagated for a length of time by seed, striped seedlings occasionally make
their appearance; and these can afterwards by care be multiplied by seed.

The stripes and segments just referred to are not due, as far as is known, to
reversion to characters derived from a cross, but to characters lost by
variation. These cases, however, as Naudin (13/22. 'Nouvelles Archives du
Museum' tome 1 page 25. Alex. Braun (in his 'Rejuvenescence' Ray Soc. 1853
page 315) apparently holds a similar opinion.) insists in his discussion on
disjunction of character, are closely analogous with those given in the
eleventh chapter, in which crossed plants have been known to produce half-and-
half or striped flowers and fruit, or distinct kinds of flowers on the same
root resembling the two parent-forms. Many piebald animals probably come under
this same head. Such cases, as we shall see in the chapter on Crossing,
apparently result from certain characters not readily blending together, and,
as a consequence of this incapacity for fusion, the offspring either perfectly
resemble one of their two parents, or resemble one parent in one part, and the
other parent in another part; or whilst young are intermediate in character,
but with advancing age revert wholly or by segments to either parent-form, or
to both. Thus, young trees of the Cytisus adami are intermediate in foliage
and flowers between the two parent-forms; but when older the buds continually
revert either partially or wholly to both forms. The cases given in the
eleventh chapter on the changes which occurred during growth in crossed plants
of Tropaeolum, Cereus, Datura, and Lathyrus are all analogous. As, however,
these plants are hybrids of the first generation, and as their buds after a
time come to resemble their parents and not their grandparents, these cases do
not at first appear to come under the law of reversion in the ordinary sense
of the word; nevertheless, as the change is effected through a succession of
bud-generations on the same plant, they may be thus included.

Analogous facts have been observed in the animal kingdom, and are more
remarkable, as they occur in the same individual in the strictest sense, and
not as with plants through a succession of bud-generations. With animals the
act of reversion, if it can be so designated, does not pass over a true
generation, but merely over the early stages of growth in the same individual.
For instance, I crossed several white hens with a black cock, and many of the
chickens were, during the first year, perfectly white, but acquired during the
second year black feathers; on the other hand, some of the chickens which were
at first black, became during the second year piebald with white. A great
breeder (13/23. Mr. Teebay in 'The Poultry Book' by Mr. Tegetmeier 1866 page
72.) says, that a Pencilled Brahma hen which has any of the blood of the Light
Brahma in her, will "occasionally produce a pullet well pencilled during the
first year, but she will most likely moult brown on the shoulders and become
quite unlike her original colours in the second year." The same thing occurs
with light Brahmas if of impure blood. I have observed exactly similar cases
with the crossed offspring from differently coloured pigeons. But here is a
more remarkable fact: I crossed a turbit, which has a frill formed by the
feathers being reversed on its breast, with a trumpeter; and one of the young
pigeons thus raised at first showed not a trace of the frill, but, after
moulting thrice, a small yet unmistakably distinct frill appeared on its
breast. According to Girou (13/24. Quoted by Hofacker 'Ueber die
Eigenschaften' etc. s. 98.) calves produced from a red cow by a black bull, or
from a black cow by a red bull, are not rarely born red, and subsequently
become black. I possess a dog, the daughter of a white terrier by a fox-
coloured bulldog; as a puppy she was quite white, but when about six months
old a black spot appeared on her nose, and brown spots on her ears. When a
little older she was badly wounded on the back, and the hair which grew on the
cicatrix was of a brown colour, apparently derived from her father. This is
the more remarkable, as with most animals having coloured hair, that which
grows on a wounded surface is white.

In the foregoing cases, the characters which with advancing age reappeared,
were present in the immediately preceding generations; but characters
sometimes reappear in the same manner after a much longer interval of time.
Thus the calves of a hornless race of cattle which originated in Corrientes,
though at first quite hornless, as they become adult sometimes acquire small,
crooked, and loose horns; and these in succeeding years occasionally become
attached to the skull. (13/25. Azara 'Essais Hist. Nat. de Paraguay' tome 2
1801 page 372.) White and black Bantams, both of which generally breed true,
sometimes assume as they grow old a saffron or red plumage. For instance, a
first-rate black bantam has been described, which during three seasons was
perfectly black, but then annually became more and more red; and it deserves
notice that this tendency to change, whenever it occurs in a bantam, "is
almost certain to prove hereditary." (13/26. These facts are given on the high
authority of Mr. Hewitt in 'The Poultry Book' by Mr. Tegetmeier 1866 page
248.) The cuckoo or blue-mottled Dorking cock, when old, is liable to acquire
yellow or orange hackles in place of his proper bluish-grey hackles. (13/27.
'The Poultry Book' by Tegetmeier 1866 page 97.) Now as Gallus bankiva is
coloured red and orange, and as Dorking fowls and bantams are descended from
this species, we can hardly doubt that the change which occasionally occurs in
the plumage of these birds as their age advances, results from a tendency in
the individual to revert to the primitive type.

CROSSING AS A DIRECT CAUSE OF REVERSION.

It has long been notorious that hybrids and mongrels often revert to both or
to one of their parent-forms, after an interval of from two to seven or eight,
or, according to some authorities, even a greater number of generations. But
that the act of crossing in itself gives an impulse towards reversion, as
shown by the reappearance of long-lost characters, has never, I believe, been
hitherto proved. The proof lies in certain peculiarities, which do not
characterise the immediate parents, and therefore cannot have been derived
from them, frequently appearing in the offspring of two breeds when crossed,
which peculiarities never appear, or appear with extreme rarity, in these same
breeds, as long as they are precluded from crossing. As this conclusion seems
to me highly curious and novel, I will give the evidence in detail.

[My attention was first called to this subject, and I was led to make numerous
experiments, by MM. Boitard and Corbie having stated that, when they crossed
certain breeds of pigeons, birds coloured like the wild C. livia, or the
common dovecote--namely, slaty-blue, with double black wing-bars, sometimes
chequered with black, white loins, the tail barred with black, with the outer
feathers edged with white,--were almost invariably produced. The breeds which
I crossed, and the remarkable results attained, have been fully described in
the sixth chapter. I selected pigeons belonging to true and ancient breeds,
which had not a trace of blue or any of the above specified marks; but when
crossed, and their mongrels recrossed, young birds were often produced, more
or less plainly coloured slaty-blue, with some or all of the proper
characteristic marks. I may recall to the reader's memory one case, namely,
that of a pigeon, hardly distinguishable from the wild Shetland species, the
grandchild of a red-spot, white fantail, and two black barbs, from any of
which, when purely-bred, the production of a pigeon coloured like the wild C.
livia would have been almost a prodigy.

I was thus led to make the experiments, recorded in the seventh chapter, on
fowls. I selected long-established pure breeds, in which there was not a trace
of red, yet in several of the mongrels feathers of this colour appeared; and
one magnificent bird, the offspring of a black Spanish cock and white Silk
hen, was coloured almost exactly like the wild Gallus bankiva. All who know
anything of the breeding of poultry will admit that tens of thousands of pure
Spanish and of pure white Silk fowls might have been reared without the
appearance of a red feather. The fact, given on the authority of Mr.
Tegetmeier, of the frequent appearance, in mongrel fowls, of pencilled or
transversely-barred feathers, like those common to many gallinaceous birds, is
likewise apparently a case of reversion to a character formerly possessed by
some ancient progenitor of the family. I owe to the kindness of this excellent
observer the opportunity of inspecting some neck-hackles and tail-feathers
from a hybrid between the common fowl and a very distinct species, the Gallus
varius; and these feathers are transversely striped in a conspicuous manner
with dark metallic blue and grey, a character which could not have been
derived from either immediate parent.

I have been informed by Mr. B.P. Brent, that he crossed a white Aylesbury
drake and a black so-called Labrador duck, both of which are true breeds, and
he obtained a young drake closely like the mallard (A. boschas). Of the musk-
duck (Cairina moschata, Linn.) there are two sub-breeds, namely, white and
slate-coloured; and these I am informed breed true, or nearly true. But the
Rev. W.D. Fox tells me that, by putting a white drake to a slate-coloured
duck, black birds, pied with white, like the wild musk-duck, were always
produced. I hear from Mr. Blyth that hybrids from the canary and gold-finch
almost always have streaked feathers on their backs; and this streaking must
be derived from the original wild canary.

We have seen in the fourth chapter, that the so-called Himalayan rabbit, with
its snow-white body, black ears, nose, tail, and feet, breeds perfectly true.
This race is known to have been formed by the union of two varieties of
silver-grey rabbits. Now, when a Himalayan doe was crossed by a sandy-coloured
buck, a silver-grey rabbit was produced; and this is evidently a case of
reversion to one of the parent varieties. The young of the Himalayan rabbit
are born snow-white, and the dark marks do not appear until some time
subsequently; but occasionally young Himalayan rabbits are born of a light
silver-grey, which colour soon disappears; so that here we have a trace of
reversion, during an early period of life, to the parent varieties,
independently of any recent cross.

In the third chapter it was shown that at an ancient period some breeds of
cattle in the wilder parts of Britain were white with dark ears, and that the
cattle now kept half wild in certain parks, and those which have run quite
wild in two distant parts of the world, are likewise thus coloured. Now, an
experienced breeder, Mr. J. Beasley, of Northamptonshire (13/28. 'Gardener's
Chronicle and Agricultural Gazette' 1866 page 528.), crossed some carefully
selected West Highland cows with purely-bred shorthorn bulls. The bulls were
red, red and white, or dark roan; and the Highland cows were all of a red
colour, inclining to a light or yellow shade. But a considerable number of the
offspring--and Mr. Beasley calls attention to this as a remarkable fact--were
white, or white with red ears. Bearing in mind that none of the parents were
white, and that they were purely-bred animals, it is highly probable that here
the offspring reverted, in consequence of the cross, to the colour of some
ancient and half-wild parent-breed. The following case, perhaps, comes under
the same head: cows in their natural state have their udders but little
developed, and do not yield nearly so much milk as our domesticated animals.
Now there is some reason to believe (13/29. Ibid 1860 page 343. I am glad to
find that so experienced a breeder of cattle as Mr. Willoughby Wood,
'Gardener's Chronicle' 1869 page 1216, admits my principle of a cross giving a
tendency to reversion.) that cross-bred animals between two kinds, both of
which are good milkers, such as Alderneys and Shorthorns, often turn out
worthless in this respect.

In the chapter on the Horse reasons were assigned for believing that the
primitive stock was striped and dun-coloured; and details were given, showing
that in all parts of the world stripes of a dark colour frequently appear
along the spine, across the legs, and on the shoulders, where they are
occasionally double or treble, and even sometimes on the face and body of
horses of all breeds and of all colours. But the stripes appear most
frequently on the various kinds of duns. In foals they are sometimes plainly
seen, and subsequently disappear. The dun-colour and the stripes are strongly
transmitted when a horse thus characterised is crossed with any other; but I
was not able to prove that striped duns are generally produced from the
crossing of two distinct breeds, neither of which are duns, though this does
sometimes occur.

The legs of the ass are often striped, and this may be considered as a
reversion to the wild parent form, the Equus taeniopus of Abyssinia (13/30.
Sclater in 'Proc. Zoolog. Soc.' 1862 page 163.), which is generally thus
striped. In the domestic animal the stripes on the shoulder are occasionally
double, or forked at the extremity, as in certain zebrine species. There is
reason to believe that the foal is more frequently striped on the legs than
the adult animal. As with the horse, I have not acquired any distinct evidence
that the crossing of differently-coloured varieties of the ass brings out the
stripes.

But now let us turn to the result of crossing the horse and ass. Although
mules are not nearly so numerous in England as asses, I have seen a much
greater number with striped legs, and with the stripes far more conspicuous
than in either parent-form. Such mules are generally light-coloured, and might
be called fallow-duns. The shoulder-stripe in one instance was deeply forked
at the extremity, and in another instance was double, though united in the
middle. Mr. Martin gives a figure of a Spanish mule with strong zebra-like
marks on its legs (13/31. 'History of the Horse' page 212.), and remarks that
mules are particularly liable to be thus striped on their legs. In South
America, according to Roulin (13/32. 'Mem. presentes par divers Savans a
l'Acad. Royale' tome 6 1835 page 338.), such stripes are more frequent and
conspicuous in the mule than in the ass. In the United States, Mr. Gosse
(13/33. 'Letters from Alabama' 1859 page 280.), speaking of these animals,
says, "that in a great number, perhaps in nine out of every ten, the legs are
banded with transverse dark stripes."

Many years ago I saw in the Zoological Gardens a curious triple hybrid, from a
bay mare, by a hybrid from a male ass and female zebra. This animal when old
had hardly any stripes; but I was assured by the superintendent, that when
young it had shoulder-stripes, and faint stripes on its flanks and legs. I
mention this case more especially as an instance of the stripes being much
plainer during youth than in old age.

As the zebra has such a conspicuously striped body and legs, it might have
been expected that the hybrids from this animal and the common ass would have
had their legs in some degree striped; but it appears from the figures given
in Dr. Gray's 'Knowsley Gleanings' and still more plainly from that given by
Geoffroy and F. Cuvier (13/34. 'Hist. Nat. des Mammiferes' 1820 tome 1), that
the legs are much more conspicuously striped than the rest of the body; and
this fact is intelligible only on the belief that the ass aids in giving,
through the power of reversion, this character to its hybrid offspring.

The quagga is banded over the whole front part of its body like a zebra, but
has no stripes on its legs, or mere traces of them. But in the famous hybrid
bred by Lord Morton (13/35. 'Philosoph. Transact.' 1821 page 20.) from a
chestnut, nearly purely-bred, Arabian mare, by a male quagga, the stripes were
"more strongly defined and darker than those on the legs of "the quagga." The
mare was subsequently put to a black Arabian horse, and bore two colts, both
of which, as formerly stated, were plainly striped on the legs, and one of
them likewise had stripes on the neck and body.

The Equus indicus (13/36. Sclater in 'Proc. Zoolog. Soc.' 1862 page 163: this
species is the Ghor-Khur of N.W. India, and has often been called the Hemionus
of Pallas. See also Mr. Blyth's excellent paper in 'Journal of Asiatic Soc. of
Bengal' volume 28 1860 page 229.) is characterised by a spinal stripe, without
shoulder or leg stripes; but traces of these latter stripes may occasionally
be seen even in the adult (13/37. Another species of wild ass, the true E.
hemionus or Kiang, which ordinarily has no shoulder-stripes, is said
occasionally to have them; and these, as with the horse and ass, are sometimes
double: see Mr. Blyth in the paper just quoted and in 'Indian Sporting Review'
1856 page 320: and Col. Hamilton Smith in 'Nat. Library, Horses' page 318; and
'Dict. Class. d'Hist. Nat.' tome 3 page 563.) and Colonel S. Poole, who has
had ample opportunities for observation, informs me that in the foal, when
first born, the head and legs are often striped, but the shoulder-stripe is
not so distinct as in the domestic ass; all these stripes, excepting that
along the spine, soon disappear. Now a hybrid, raised at Knowsley (13/38.
Figured in the 'Gleanings from the Knowsley Menageries' by Dr. J.E. Gray.)
from a female of this species by a male domestic ass, had all four legs
transversely and conspicuously striped, had three short stripes on each
shoulder and had even some zebra-like stripes on its face! Dr. Gray informs me
that he has seen a second hybrid of the same parentage, similarly striped.

From these facts we see that the crossing of the several equine species tends
in a marked manner to cause stripes to appear on various parts of the body,
especially on the legs. As we do not know whether the parent-form of the genus
was striped, the appearance of the stripes can only hypothetically be
attributed to reversion. But most persons, after considering the many
undoubted cases of variously coloured marks reappearing by reversion in my
experiments on crossed pigeons and fowls, will come to the same conclusion
with respect to the horse-genus; and if so, we must admit that the progenitor
of the group was striped on the legs, shoulders, face, and probably over the
whole body, like a zebra.

Lastly, Professor Jaeger has given (13/39. 'Darwin'sche Theorie und ihre
Stellung zu Moral und Religion' page 85.) a good case with pigs. He crossed
the Japanese or masked breed with the common German breed, and the offspring
were intermediate in character. He then re-crossed one of these mongrels with
the pure Japanese, and in the litter thus produced one of the young resembled
in all its characters a wild pig; it had a long snout and upright ears, and
was striped on the back. It should be borne in mind that the young of the
Japanese breed are not striped, and that they have a short muzzle and ears
remarkably dependent.]

A similar tendency to the recovery of long lost characters holds good even
with the instincts of crossed animals. There are some breeds of fowls which
are called "everlasting layers," because they have lost the instinct of
incubation; and so rare is it for them to incubate that I have seen notices
published in works on poultry, when hens of such breeds have taken to sit.
(13/40. Cases of both Spanish and Polish hens sitting are given in the
'Poultry Chronicle' 1855 volume 3 page 477.) Yet the aboriginal species was of
course a good incubator; and with birds in a state of nature hardly any
instinct is so strong as this. Now, so many cases have been recorded of the
crossed offspring from two races, neither of which are incubators, becoming
first-rate sitters, that the reappearance of this instinct must be attributed
to reversion from crossing. One author goes so far as to say, "that a cross
between two non-sitting varieties almost invariably produces a mongrel that
becomes broody, and sits with remarkable steadiness." (13/41. 'The Poultry
Book' by Mr. Tegetmeier 1866 pages 119, 163. The author, who remarks on the
two negatives ('Journ. of Hort.' 1862 page 325), states that two broods were
raised from a Spanish cock and Silver-pencilled Hamburgh hen, neither of which
are incubators, and no less than seven out of eight hens in these two broods
"showed a perfect obstinacy in sitting." The Rev. E.S. Dixon ('Ornamental
Poultry' 1848 page 200) says that chickens reared from a cross between Golden
and Black Polish fowls, are "good and steady birds to sit." Mr. B.P. Brent
informs me that he raised some good sitting hens by crossing Pencilled
Hamburgh and Polish breeds. A cross-bred bird from a Spanish non-incubating
cock and Cochin incubating hen is mentioned in the 'Poultry Chronicle' volume
3 page 13, as an "exemplary mother." On the other hand, an exceptional case is
given in the 'Cottage Gardener' 1860 page 388 of a hen raised from a Spanish
cock and black Polish hen which did not incubate.) Another author, after
giving a striking example, remarks that the fact can be explained only on the
principle that "two negatives make a positive." It cannot, however, be
maintained that hens produced from a cross between two non-sitting breeds
invariably recover their lost instinct, any more than that crossed fowls or
pigeons invariably recover the red or blue plumage of their prototypes. Thus I
raised several chickens from a Polish hen by a Spanish cock,--breeds which do
not incubate,--and none of the young hens at first showed any tendency to sit;
but one of them--the only one which was preserved--in the third year sat well
on her eggs and reared a brood of chickens. So that here we have the
reappearance with advancing age of a primitive instinct, in the same manner as
we have seen that the red plumage of the Gallus bankiva is sometimes
reacquired both by crossed and purely-bred fowls of various kinds as they grow
old.

The parents of all our domesticated animals were of course aboriginally wild
in disposition; and when a domesticated species is crossed with a distinct
species, whether this is a domesticated or only a tamed animal, the hybrids
are often wild to such a degree, that the fact is intelligible only on the
principle that the cross has caused a partial return to a primitive
disposition. Thus, the Earl of Powis formerly imported some thoroughly
domesticated humped cattle from India, and crossed them with English breeds,
which belong to a distinct species; and his agent remarked to me, without any
question having been asked, how oddly wild the cross-bred animals were. The
European wild boar and the Chinese domesticated pig are almost certainly
specifically distinct: Sir F. Darwin crossed a sow of the latter breed with a
wild Alpine boar which had become extremely tame, but the young, though having
half-domesticated blood in their veins, were "extremely wild in confinement,
and would not eat swill like common English pigs." Captain Hutton, in India,
crossed a tame goat with a wild one from the Himalaya, and he remarked to me
how surprisingly wild the offspring were. Mr. Hewitt, who has had great
experience in crossing tame cock-pheasants with fowls belonging to five
breeds, gives as the character of all "extraordinary wildness" (13/42. 'The
Poultry Book' by Tegetmeier 1866 pages 165, 167.); but I have myself seen one
exception to this rule. Mr. S. J. Salter (13/43. 'Natural History Review' 1863
April page 277.) who raised a large number of hybrids from a bantam-hen by
Gallus sonneratii, states that "all were exceedingly wild." Mr. Waterton
(13/44. 'Essays on Natural History' page 917.) bred some wild ducks from eggs
hatched under a common duck, and the young were allowed to cross freely both
amongst themselves and with the tame ducks; they were "half wild and half
tame; they came to the windows to be fed, but still they had a wariness about
them quite remarkable."

On the other hand, mules from the horse and ass are certainly not in the least
wild, though notorious for obstinacy and vice. Mr. Brent, who has crossed
canary-birds with many kinds of finches, has not observed, as he informs me,
that the hybrids were in any way remarkably wild: but Mr. Jenner Weir who has
had still greater experience, is of a directly opposite opinion. He remarks
that the siskin is the tamest of finches, but its mules are as wild, when
young, as newly caught birds, and are often lost through their continued
efforts to escape. Hybrids are often raised between the common and musk duck,
and I have been assured by three persons, who have kept these crossed birds,
that they were not wild; but Mr. Garnett (13/45. As stated by Mr. Orton in his
'Physiology of Breeding' page 12.) observed that his hybrids were wild, and
exhibited "migratory propensities" of which there is not a vestige in the
common or musk duck. No case is known of this latter bird having escaped and
become wild in Europe or Asia, except, according to Pallas, on the Caspian
Sea; and the common domestic duck only occasionally becomes wild in districts
where large lakes and fens abound. Nevertheless, a large number of cases have
been recorded (13/46. M. E. de Selys-Longchamps refers ('Bulletin Acad. Roy.
de Bruxelles' tome 12 No. 10) to more than seven of these hybrids shot in
Switzerland and France. M. Deby asserts ('Zoologist' volume 5 1845-46 page
1254) that several have been shot in various parts of Belgium and Northern
France. Audubon ('Ornitholog. Biography' volume 3 page 168), speaking of these
hybrids, says that, in North America, they "now and then wander off and become
quite wild.") of hybrids from these two ducks having been shot in a completely
wild state, although so few are reared in comparison with purely-bred birds of
either species. It is improbable that any of these hybrids could have acquired
their wildness from the musk-duck having paired with a truly wild duck; and
this is known not to be the case in North America; hence we must infer that
they have reacquired, through reversion, their wildness, as well as renewed
powers of flight.

These latter facts remind us of the statements, so frequently made by
travellers in all parts of the world, on the degraded state and savage
disposition of crossed races of man. That many excellent and kind-hearted
mulattos have existed no one will dispute; and a more mild and gentle set of
men could hardly be found than the inhabitants of the island of Chiloe, who
consist of Indians commingled with Spaniards in various proportions. On the
other hand, many years ago, long before I had thought of the present subject,
I was struck with the fact that, in South America, men of complicated descent
between Negroes, Indians, and Spaniards, seldom had, whatever the cause might
be, a good expression. (13/47. 'Journal of Researches' 1845 page 71.)
Livingstone--and a more unimpeachable authority cannot be quoted,--after
speaking of a half-caste man on the Zambesi, described by the Portuguese as a
rare monster of inhumanity, remarks, "It is unaccountable why half-castes,
such as he, are so much more cruel than the Portuguese, but such is
undoubtedly the case." An inhabitant remarked to Livingstone, "God made white
men, and God made black men, but the Devil made halfcastes." (13/48.
'Expedition to the Zambesi' 1865 pages 25, 150.) When two races, both low in
the scale, are crossed the progeny seems to be eminently bad. Thus the noble-
hearted Humboldt, who felt no prejudice against the inferior races, speaks in
strong terms of the bad and savage disposition of Zambos, or half-castes
between Indians and Negroes; and this conclusion has been arrived at by
various observers. (13/49. Dr. P. Broca on 'Hybridity in the Genus Homo'
English translation 1864 page 39.) From these facts we may perhaps infer that
the degraded state of so many half-castes is in part due to reversion to a
primitive and savage condition, induced by the act of crossing, even if mainly
due to the unfavourable moral conditions under which they are generally
reared.

SUMMARY ON THE PROXIMATE CAUSES LEADING TO REVERSION.

When purely-bred animals or plants reassume long-lost characters,--when the
common ass, for instance, is born with striped legs, when a pure race of black
or white pigeons throws a slaty-blue bird, or when a cultivated heartsease
with large and rounded flowers produces a seedling with small and elongated
flowers,--we are quite unable to assign any proximate cause. When animals run
wild, the tendency to reversion, which, though it has been greatly
exaggerated, no doubt exists, is sometimes to a certain extent intelligible.
Thus, with feral pigs, exposure to the weather will probably favour the growth
of the bristles, as is known to be the case with the hair of other
domesticated animals, and through correlation the tusks will tend to be
redeveloped. But the reappearance of coloured longitudinal stripes on young
feral pigs cannot be attributed to the direct action of external conditions.
In this case, and in many others, we can only say that any change in the
habits of life apparently favour a tendency, inherent or latent in the
species, to return to the primitive state.

It will be shown in a future chapter that the position of flowers on the
summit of the axis, and the position of seeds within the capsule, sometimes
determine a tendency towards reversion; and this apparently depends on the
amount of sap or nutriment which the flower-buds and seeds receive. The
position, also, of buds, either on branches or on roots, sometimes determines,
as was formerly shown, the transmission of the character proper to the
variety, or its reversion to a former state.

We have seen in the last section that when two races or species are crossed
there is the strongest tendency to the reappearance in the offspring of long-
lost characters, possessed by neither parent nor immediate progenitor. When
two white, or red, or black pigeons, of well-established breeds, are united,
the offspring are almost sure to inherit the same colours; but when
differently-coloured birds are crossed, the opposed forces of inheritance
apparently counteract each other, and the tendency which is inherent in both
parents to produce slaty-blue offspring becomes predominant. So it is in
several other cases. But when, for instance, the ass is crossed with E.
indicus or with the horse--animals which have not striped legs--and the
hybrids have conspicuous stripes on their legs and even on their faces, all
that can be said is, that an inherent tendency to reversion is evolved through
some disturbance in the organisation caused by the act of crossing.

Another form of reversion is far commoner, indeed is almost universal with the
offspring from a cross, namely, to the characters proper to either pure
parent-form. As a general rule, crossed offspring in the first generation are
nearly intermediate between their parents, but the grandchildren and
succeeding generations continually revert, in a greater or lesser degree, to
one or both of their progenitors. Several authors have maintained that hybrids
and mongrels include all the characters of both parents, not fused together,
but merely mingled in different proportions in different parts of the body;
or, as Naudin (13/50. 'Nouvelles Archives du Museum' tome 1 page 151.) has
expressed it, a hybrid is a living mosaic-work, in which the eye cannot
distinguish the discordant elements, so completely are they intermingled. We
can hardly doubt that, in a certain sense, this is true, as when we behold in
a hybrid the elements of both species segregating themselves into segments in
the same flower or fruit, by a process of self-attraction or self-affinity;
this segregation taking place either by seminal or bud-propagation. Naudin
further believes that the segregation of the two specific elements or essences
is eminently liable to occur in the male and female reproductive matter; and
he thus explains the almost universal tendency to reversion in successive
hybrid generations. For this would be the natural result of the union of
pollen and ovules, in both of which the elements of the same species had been
segregated by self-affinity. If, on the other hand, pollen which included the
elements of one species happened to unite with ovules including the elements
of the other species, the intermediate or hybrid state would still be
retained, and there would be no reversion. But it would, as I suspect, be more
correct to say that the elements of both parent-species exist in every hybrid
in a double state, namely, blended together and completely separate. How this
is possible, and what the term specific essence or element may be supposed to
express, I shall attempt to show in the chapter on the hypothesis of
pangenesis.

But Naudin's view, as propounded by him, is not applicable to the reappearance
of characters lost long ago by variation; and it is hardly applicable to races
or species which, after having been crossed at some former period with a
distinct form, and having since lost all traces of the cross, nevertheless
occasionally yield an individual which reverts (as in the case of the great-
great-grandchild of the pointer Sappho) to the crossing form. The most simple
case of reversion, namely, of a hybrid or mongrel to its grandparents, is
connected by an almost perfect series with the extreme case of a purely-bred
race recovering characters which had been lost during many ages; and we are
thus led to infer that all the cases must be related by some common bond.

Gartner believed that only highly sterile hybrid plants exhibit any tendency
to reversion to their parent-forms. This erroneous belief may perhaps be
accounted for by the nature of the genera crossed by him, for he admits that
the tendency differs in different genera. The statement is also directly
contradicted by Naudin's observations, and by the notorious fact that
perfectly fertile mongrels exhibit the tendency in a high degree,--even in a
higher degree, according to Gartner himself, than hybrids. (13/51.
'Bastarderzeugung' s. 582, 438, etc.)

Gartner further states that reversions rarely occur with hybrid plants raised
from species which have not been cultivated, whilst, with those which have
been long cultivated, they are of frequent occurrence. This conclusion
explains a curious discrepancy: Max Wichura (13/52. 'Die Bastardbefruchtung...
der Weiden' 1865 s. 23. For Gartner's remarks on this head, see
'Bastarderzeugung' s. 474, 582.) who worked exclusively on willows which had
not been subjected to culture, never saw an instance of reversion; and he goes
so far as to suspect that the careful Gartner had not sufficiently protected
his hybrids from the pollen of the parent-species: Naudin, on the other hand,
who chiefly experimented on cucurbitaceous and other cultivated plants,
insists more strenuously than any other author on the tendency to reversion in
all hybrids. The conclusion that the condition of the parent-species, as
affected by culture, is one of the proximate causes leading to reversion,
agrees well with the converse case of domesticated animals and cultivated
plants being liable to reversion when they become feral; for in both cases the
organisation or constitution must be disturbed, though in a very different
way. (13/53. Prof. Weismann in his very curious essay on the different forms
produced by the same species of butterfly at different seasons ('Saison-
Dimorphismus der Schmetterlinge' pages 27, 28), has come to a similar
conclusion, namely, that any cause which disturbs the organisation, such as
the exposure of the cocoons to heat or even to much shaking, gives a tendency
to reversion.)

Finally, we have seen that characters often reappear in purely-bred races
without our being able to assign any proximate cause; but when they become
feral this is either indirectly or directly induced by the change in their
conditions of life. With crossed breeds, the act of crossing in itself
certainly leads to the recovery of long-lost characters, as well as of those
derived from either parent-form. Changed conditions, consequent on
cultivation, and the relative position of buds, flowers, and seeds on the
plant, all apparently aid in giving this same tendency. Reversion may occur
either through seminal or bud generation, generally at birth, but sometimes
only with an advance of age. Segments or portions of the individual may alone
be thus affected. That a being should be born resembling in certain characters
an ancestor removed by two or three, and in some cases by hundreds or even
thousands of generations, is assuredly a wonderful fact. In these cases the
child is commonly said to inherit such characters directly from its
grandparent, or more remote ancestors. But this view is hardly conceivable.
If, however, we suppose that every character is derived exclusively from the
father or mother, but that many characters lie latent or dormant in both
parents during a long succession of generations, the foregoing facts are
intelligible. In what manner characters may be conceived to lie latent, will
be considered in a future chapter to which I have lately alluded.

LATENT CHARACTERS.

But I must explain what is meant by characters lying latent. The most obvious
illustration is afforded by secondary sexual characters. In every female all
the secondary male characters, and in every male all the secondary female
characters, apparently exist in a latent state, ready to be evolved under
certain conditions. It is well known that a large number of female birds, such
as fowls, various pheasants, partridges, peahens, ducks, etc., when old or
diseased, or when operated on, assume many or all of the secondary male
characters of their species. In the case of the hen-pheasant this has been
observed to occur far more frequently during certain years than during others.
(13/54. Yarrell 'Phil. Transact.' 1827 page 268; Dr. Hamilton in 'Proc.
Zoolog. Soc.' 1862 page 23.) A duck ten years old has been known to assume
both the perfect winter and summer plumage of the drake. (13/55. 'Archiv.
Skand. Beitrage zur Naturgesch.' 8 s. 397-413.) Waterton (13/56. In his
'Essays on Nat. Hist.' 1838 Mr. Hewitt gives analogous cases with hen-
pheasants in 'Journal of Horticulture' July 12, 1864 page 37. Isidore Geoffroy
Saint-Hilaire in his 'Essais de Zoolog. Gen.' ('Suites a Buffon' 1842 pages
496-513), has collected such cases in ten different kinds of birds. It appears
that Aristotle was well aware of the change in mental disposition in old hens.
The case of the female deer acquiring horns is given at page 513.) gives a
curious case of a hen which had ceased laying, and had assumed the plumage,
voice, spurs, and warlike disposition of the cock; when opposed to an enemy
she would erect her hackles and show fight. Thus every character, even to the
instinct and manner of fighting, must have lain dormant in this hen as long as
her ovaria continued to act. The females of two kinds of deer, when old, have
been known to acquire horns; and, as Hunter has remarked, we see something of
an analogous nature in the human species.

On the other hand, with male animals, it is notorious that the secondary
sexual characters are more or less completely lost when they are subjected to
castration. Thus, if the operation be performed on a young cock, he never, as
Yarrell states, crows again; the comb, wattles, and spurs do not grow to their
full size, and the hackles assume an intermediate appearance between true
hackles and the feathers of the hen. Cases are recorded of confinement, which
often affects the reproductive system, causing analogous results. But
characters properly confined to the female are likewise acquired by the male;
the capon takes to sitting on eggs, and will bring up chickens; and what is
more curious, the utterly sterile male hybrids from the pheasant and the fowl
act in the same manner, "their delight being to watch when the hens leave
their nests, and to take on themselves the office of a sitter." (13/57.
'Cottage Gardener' 1860 page 379.) That admirable observer Reaumur (13/58.
'Art de faire Eclore' etc. 1749 tome 2 page 8.) asserts that a cock, by being
long confined in solitude and darkness, can be taught to take charge of young
chickens; he then utters a peculiar cry, and retains during his whole life
this newly acquired maternal instinct. The many well-ascertained cases of
various male mammals giving milk shows that their rudimentary mammary glands
retain this capacity in a latent condition.

We thus see that in many, probably in all cases, the secondary characters of
each sex lie dormant or latent in the opposite sex, ready to be evolved under
peculiar circumstances. We can thus understand how, for instance, it is
possible for a good milking cow to transmit her good qualities through her
male offspring to future generations; for we may confidently believe that
these qualities are present, though latent, in the males of each generation.
So it is with the game-cock, who can transmit his superiority in courage and
vigour through his female to his male offspring; and with man it is known
(13/59. Sir H. Holland 'Medical Notes and Reflections' 3rd edition 1855 page
31.) that diseases, such as hydrocele, necessarily confined to the male sex,
can be transmitted through the female to the grandson. Such cases as these
offer, as was remarked at the commencement of this chapter, the simplest
possible examples of reversion; and they are intelligible on the belief that
characters common to the grandparent and grandchild of the same sex are
present, though latent, in the intermediate parent of the opposite sex.

The subject of latent characters is so important, as we shall see in a future
chapter, that I will give another illustration. Many animals have the right
and left sides of their body unequally developed: this is well known to be the
case with flat-fish, in which the one side differs in thickness and colour and
in the shape of the fins, from the other, and during the growth of the young
fish one eye is gradually twisted from the lower to the upper surface. (13/60.
See Steenstrup on the 'Obliquity of Flounders' in Annals and Mag. of Nat.
Hist.' May 1865 page 361. I have given an abstract of Malm's explanation of
this wonderful phenomenon in the 'Origin of Species' 6th Edition page 186.) In
most flat-fishes the left is the blind side, but in some it is the right;
though in both cases reversed or "wrong fishes," are occasionally developed;
and in Platessa flesus the right or left side is indifferently the upper one.
With gasteropods or shell-fish, the right and left sides are extremely unlike;
the far greater number of species are dextral, with rare and occasional
reversals of development; and some few are normally sinistral; but certain
species of Bulimus, and many Achatinellae (13/61. Dr. E. von Martens in
'Annals and Mag. of Nat. Hist.' March 1866 page 209.) are as often sinistral
as dextral. I will give an analogous case in the great articulate kingdom: the
two sides of Verruca (13/62. Darwin 'Balanidae' Ray Soc. 1854 page 499: see
also the appended remarks on the apparently capricious development of the
thoracic limbs on the right and left sides in the higher crustaceans.) are so
wonderfully unlike, that without careful dissection it is extremely difficult
to recognise the corresponding parts on the opposite sides of the body; yet it
is apparently a mere matter of chance whether it be the right or the left side
that undergoes so singular amount of change. One plant is known to me (13/63.
Mormodes ignea: Darwin 'Fertilisation of Orchids' 1862 page 251.) in which the
flower, according as it stands on the one or other side of the spike, is
unequally developed. In all the foregoing cases the two sides are perfectly
symmetrical at an early period of growth. Now, whenever a species is as liable
to be unequally developed on the one as on the other side, we may infer that
the capacity for such development is present, though latent, in the
undeveloped side. And as a reversal of development occasionally occurs in
animals of many kinds, this latent capacity is probably very common.

The best yet simplest cases of characters lying dormant are, perhaps, those
previously given, in which chickens and young pigeons, raised from a cross
between differently coloured birds, are at first of one colour, but in a year
or two acquire feathers of the colour of the other parent; for in this case
the tendency to a change of plumage is clearly latent in the young bird. So it
is with hornless breeds of cattle, some of which acquire small horns as they
