The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Magic City, by Edith Nesbit

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Magic City

Author: Edith Nesbit

Illustrator: H. R. Millar

Release Date: February 16, 2007 [EBook #20606]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MAGIC CITY ***




Produced by Malcolm Farmer and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net












THE MAGIC CITY

BY
E. NESBIT

AUTHOR OF
'THE WOULD-BE-GOODS,' 'THE AMULET,' ETC. ETC.


WITH ILLUSTRATIONS BY H. R. MILLAR

          MACMILLAN AND CO., LIMITED
          ST. MARTIN'S STREET, LONDON
          1910


[Illustration: _Page 328_        _Frontispiece_

Three days later Mr. Noah arrived by elephant.]


                          TO

                   BARBARA, MAURICE,

                         AND

                    STEPHEN CHANT

                THIS BOOK IS DEDICATED

                          BY

                      E. NESBIT

          WELL HALL,
          ELTHAM, KENT, 1910.




CONTENTS


          CHAPTER I                                      PAGE
          THE BEGINNING                                     1

          CHAPTER II
          DELIVERER OR DESTROYER                           30

          CHAPTER III
          LOST                                             65

          CHAPTER IV
          THE DRAGON-SLAYER                                94

          CHAPTER V
          ON THE CARPET                                   131

          CHAPTER VI
          THE LIONS IN THE DESERT                         160

          CHAPTER VII
          THE DWELLERS BY THE SEA                         187

          CHAPTER VIII
          UPS AND DOWNS                                   218

          CHAPTER IX
          ON THE 'LIGHTNING LOOSE'                        245

          CHAPTER X
          THE GREAT SLOTH                                 272

          CHAPTER XI
          THE NIGHT ATTACK                                302

          CHAPTER XII
          THE END                                         318




ILLUSTRATIONS


                                                                       PAGE

  Three days later Mr. Noah arrived by elephant      _Frontispiece_

  'Lor', ain't it pretty!' said the parlour-maid                17

  Beyond it he could see dim piles that looked like
    churches and houses                                         27

  'Here--I say, wake up, can't you?'                            33

  'Top floor, if you please,' said the gaoler politely          49

  And behind him the clatter of hot pursuit                     61

  He heard quite a loud, strong, big voice say, 'That's
    better'                                                     85

  The gigantic porch lowered frowningly above him               91

  He walked on and on and on                                    97

  'Silence, trespasser,' said Mr. Noah, with cold dignity      115

  Then something hard and heavy knocked him over               127

  Mr. Noah whispered ardently, 'Don't!'                        139

  So, all down the wide clear floor, Lucy danced               157

  On the top of a very large and wobbly camel                  169

  It was heavy work turning the lions over                     179

  Slowly they came to the great gate of the castle             193

  'If your camel's not quite fresh I can mount you both'       199

  They loved looking on                                        211

  A long procession toiled slowly up it of animals in
    pairs                                                      223

  Walked straight into the arms of Helen                       243

  He induced them to build him a temple of solid gold          261

  Plunged headlong over the edge                               269

  The bucket began to go up                                    281

  Lucy threw herself across the well parapet                   287

  And all the while it had to go on turning that handle        299

  Philip felt that it was best to stop the car among the
    suburban groves of southernwood                            307

  They leapt in and disappeared                                321




CHAPTER I

THE BEGINNING


Philip Haldane and his sister lived in a little red-roofed house in a
little red-roofed town. They had a little garden and a little balcony,
and a little stable with a little pony in it--and a little cart for the
pony to draw; a little canary hung in a little cage in the little
bow-window, and the neat little servant kept everything as bright and
clean as a little new pin.

Philip had no one but his sister, and she had no one but Philip. Their
parents were dead, and Helen, who was twenty years older than Philip and
was really his half-sister, was all the mother he had ever known. And he
had never envied other boys their mothers, because Helen was so kind and
clever and dear. She gave up almost all her time to him; she taught him
all the lessons he learned; she played with him, inventing the most
wonderful new games and adventures. So that every morning when Philip
woke he knew that he was waking to a new day of joyous and interesting
happenings. And this went on till Philip was ten years old, and he had
no least shadow of a doubt that it would go on for ever. The beginning
of the change came one day when he and Helen had gone for a picnic to
the wood where the waterfall was, and as they were driving back behind
the stout old pony, who was so good and quiet that Philip was allowed to
drive it. They were coming up the last lane before the turning where
their house was, and Helen said:

'To-morrow we'll weed the aster bed and have tea in the garden.'

'Jolly,' said Philip, and they turned the corner and came in sight of
their white little garden gate. And a man was coming out of it--a man
who was not one of the friends they both knew. He turned and came to
meet them. Helen put her hand on the reins--a thing which she had always
taught Philip was _never_ done--and the pony stopped. The man, who was,
as Philip put it to himself, 'tall and tweedy,' came across in front of
the pony's nose and stood close by the wheel on the side where Helen
sat. She shook hands with him, and said, 'How do you do?' in quite the
usual way. But after that they whispered. Whispered! And Philip knew
how rude it is to whisper, because Helen had often told him this. He
heard one or two words, 'at last,' and 'over now,' and 'this evening,
then.'

After that Helen said, 'This is my brother Philip,' and the man shook
hands with him--across Helen, another thing which Philip knew was not
manners, and said, 'I hope we shall be the best of friends.' Pip said,
'How do you do?' because that is the polite thing to say. But inside
himself he said, 'I don't want to be friends with _you_.'

Then the man took off his hat and walked away, and Philip and his sister
went home. She seemed different, somehow, and he was sent to bed a
little earlier than usual, but he could not go to sleep for a long time,
because he heard the front-door bell ring and afterwards a man's voice
and Helen's going on and on in the little drawing-room under the room
which was his bedroom. He went to sleep at last, and when he woke up in
the morning it was raining, and the sky was grey and miserable. He lost
his collar-stud, he tore one of his stockings as he pulled it on, he
pinched his finger in the door, and he dropped his tooth-mug, with water
in it too, and the mug was broken and the water went into his boots.
There are mornings, you know, when things happen like that. This was
one of them.

Then he went down to breakfast, which tasted not quite so nice as usual.
He was late, of course. The bacon fat was growing grey with waiting for
him, as Helen said, in the cheerful voice that had always said all the
things he liked best to hear. But Philip didn't smile. It did not seem
the sort of morning for smiling, and the grey rain beat against the
window.

After breakfast Helen said, 'Tea in the garden is indefinitely
postponed, and it's too wet for lessons.'

That was one of her charming ideas--that wet days should not be made
worse by lessons.

'What shall we do?' she said; 'shall we talk about the island? Shall I
make another map of it? And put in all the gardens and fountains and
swings?'

The island was a favourite play. Somewhere in the warm seas where palm
trees are, and rainbow-coloured sands, the island was said to be--their
own island, beautified by their fancy with everything they liked and
wanted, and Philip was never tired of talking about it. There were times
when he almost believed that the island was real. He was king of the
island and Helen was queen, and no one else was to be allowed on it.
Only these two.

But this morning even the thought of the island failed to charm. Philip
straggled away to the window and looked out dismally at the soaked lawn
and the dripping laburnum trees, and the row of raindrops hanging fat
and full on the iron gate.

'What is it, Pippin?' Helen asked. 'Don't tell me you're going to have
horrid measles, or red-hot scarlet fever, or noisy whooping-cough.'

She came across and laid her hand on his forehead.

'Why, you're quite hot, boy of my heart. Tell sister, what is it?'

'_You_ tell _me_,' said Philip slowly.

'Tell you what, Pip?'

'You think you ought to bear it alone, like in books, and be noble and
all that. But you _must_ tell me; you promised you'd never have any
secrets from me, Helen, you know you did.'

Helen put her arm round him and said nothing. And from her silence Pip
drew the most desperate and harrowing conclusions. The silence lasted.
The rain gurgled in the water-pipe and dripped on the ivy. The canary in
the green cage that hung in the window put its head on one side and
tweaked a seed husk out into Philip's face, then twittered defiantly.
But his sister said nothing.

'Don't,' said Philip suddenly, 'don't break it to me; tell me straight
out.'

'Tell you what?' she said again.

'What is it?' he said. '_I_ know how these unforetold misfortunes
happen. Some one always comes--and then it's broken to the family.'

'_What_ is?' she asked.

'The misfortune,' said Philip breathlessly. 'Oh, Helen, I'm not a baby.
Do tell me! Have we lost our money in a burst bank? Or is the landlord
going to put bailiffs into our furniture? Or are we going to be falsely
accused about forgery, or being burglars?'

All the books Philip had ever read worked together in his mind to
produce these melancholy suggestions. Helen laughed, and instantly felt
a stiffening withdrawal of her brother from her arm.

'No, no, my Pippin, dear,' she made haste to say. 'Nothing horrid like
that has happened.'

'Then what is it?' he asked, with a growing impatience that felt like a
wolf gnawing inside him.

'I didn't want to tell you all in a hurry like this,' she said
anxiously; 'but don't you worry, my boy of boys. It's something that
makes me very happy. I hope it will you, too.'

He swung round in the circling of her arm and looked at her with sudden
ecstasy.

'Oh, Helen, dear--I know! Some one has left you a hundred thousand
pounds a year--some one you once opened a railway-carriage door for--and
now I can have a pony of my very own to ride. Can't I?'

'Yes,' said Helen slowly, 'you can have a pony; but nobody's left me
anything. Look here, my Pippin,' she added, very quickly, 'don't ask any
more questions. I'll tell you. When I was quite little like you I had a
dear friend I used to play with all day long, and when we grew up we
were friends still. He lived quite near us. And then he married some one
else. And then the some one died. And now he wants me to marry him. And
he's got lots of horses and a beautiful house and park,' she added.

'And where shall I be?' he asked.

'With me, of course, wherever I am.'

'It won't be just us two any more, though,' said Philip, 'and you said
it should be, for ever and ever.'

'But I didn't know then, Pip, dear. He's been wanting me so long----'

'Don't _I_ want you?' said Pip to himself.

'And he's got a little girl that you'll like so to play with,' she went
on. 'Her name's Lucy, and she's just a year younger than you. And
you'll be the greatest friends with her. And you'll both have ponies to
ride, and----'

'I hate her,' cried Philip, very loud, 'and I hate him, and I hate their
beastly ponies. And I hate _you_!' And with these dreadful words he
flung off her arm and rushed out of the room, banging the door after
him--on purpose.

Well, she found him in the boot-cupboard, among the gaiters and goloshes
and cricket-stumps and old rackets, and they kissed and cried and hugged
each other, and he said he was sorry he had been naughty. But in his
heart that was the only thing he was sorry for. He was sorry that he had
made Helen unhappy. He still hated 'that man,' and most of all he hated
Lucy.

He had to be polite to that man. His sister was very fond of that man,
and this made Philip hate him still more, while at the same time it made
him careful not to show how he hated him. Also it made him feel that
hating that man was not quite fair to his sister, whom he loved. But
there were no feelings of that kind to come in the way of the
detestation he felt for Lucy. Helen had told him that Lucy had fair hair
and wore it in two plaits; and he pictured her to himself as a fat,
stumpy little girl, exactly like the little girl in the story of 'The
Sugar Bread' in the old oblong 'Shock-Headed Peter' book that had
belonged to Helen when she was little.

Helen was quite happy. She divided her love between the boy she loved
and the man she was going to marry, and she believed that they were both
as happy as she was. The man, whose name was Peter Graham, was happy
enough; the boy, who was Philip, was amused--for she kept him so--but
under the amusement he was miserable.

And the wedding-day came and went. And Philip travelled on a very hot
afternoon by strange trains and a strange carriage to a strange house,
where he was welcomed by a strange nurse and--Lucy.

'You won't mind going to stay at Peter's beautiful house without me,
will you, dear?' Helen had asked. 'Every one will be kind to you, and
you'll have Lucy to play with.'
