The thought made him feel a little better, but it saddened him, too,
just a bit. He set himself grimly and shouted: "Forward!" once more. To
his own ears, his voice lacked conviction, but the crowd didn't seem to
notice. The cheered frantically. Forrester wished they would all go
away.

He started forward. His foot found a large pebble that hadn't been
there before, and he performed the magnificent feat of tripping on it.
He flailed the air frantically, and managed to regain his balance. Then
he was back on his feet, clutching at the girls. His big left toe hurt,
but he ignored the agony bravely.

He had to think of something to do, and fast. The crowd had seen him
stumble--and that just didn't happen to a God. It wouldn't have happened
to him, either except for Gerda.

He got his mind off Gerda with an effort and thought about what to do to
cover his slip. In a moment he had it. He swore a great oath, empurpling
the air. Then he bent down and picked up the stone. He held it aloft for
a second, and then threw it. Slowly and carefully he pointed his index
finger at it, extending it and raising his thumb like a little boy
playing Stick-'Em-Up.

"_Zap_," he said mildly, cocking the thumb forward.

A crackling, searing bolt of blue-white energy leaped out of the tip of
his index finger in a pencil-thin beam. It sped toward the falling
pebble, speared it and wrapped it in coruscating splendor. Then the
pebble exploded, scattering into a fine display of flying dust.

The crowd stopped moving and singing immediately.

Only the musicians, too intent on their noisemaking to see what had gone
on, went on playing. But the crowd, having seen Forrester's display and
heard his oath, was as silent as a collection of statues. When a God
became angry, each was obviously thinking, there was absolutely no
telling what was going to happen. Foxholes, some of them might have told
themselves, would definitely be a good idea. But, of course, there
weren't any foxholes in Central Park. There was nothing to do but stand
very still, and hope you weren't noticed, and hope for the best.

Even Gerda, Forrester saw, had stopped, her face still, her hand lifted
in a half-finished wave, the plastic cup forgotten.

_I've got to do something_, Forrester thought. _I can't let this kind of
thing go on._

He thought fast, spun around and pointed directly at Ed Symes, standing
in the water below the bridge.

"You, there!" he bellowed.

Symes turned a delicate fish-belly white. Against this basic color, his
pimples stood out strongly, making, Forrester thought, a rather unusual
and somewhat striking effect. The man looked as if he wished he could
sink out of sight in the ankle-deep water.

His mouth opened two or three times. Forrester waited, getting a good
deal of pleasure out of the simple sight. Finally Symes spoke. "Me?"

"Certainly you! You look like a tough young specimen."

Symes tried to grin. The effect was ghastly. "I do?" He said
tentatively.

"Of course you do. Your God tells you so. Do you doubt him?"

"Doubt? No. Absolutely not. Never. Wouldn't think of it. Tough young
specimen. That's what I am. Tough. And young. Tough young specimen.
Certainly. You bet."

"Good," Forrester said. "Now let's see you in action."

Symes took a deep breath. He seemed to be savoring it, as if he thought
it was going to be his very last. "Wh--what do you want me to do?"

"I want you to pick up another stone and throw it. Let's see how high
you can get it."

Symes was obviously afraid to move from his spot in the water. Instead
of going back to the land, he fished around near his feet and finally
managed to come up with a pebble almost as big as his fist. He looked at
it doubtfully.

"Throw!" Forrester said in a voice like thunder.

Symes, galvanized, threw. It flew up in the air. Forrester drew a
careful bead on it, went _zap_ again with the pointed finger, and
blasted the rock into dust.

The silence hung on.

Forrester laughed. "Not a bad throw for a mortal! And a good trick,
too--a fine display!" He faced the crowd. "Now, there--what do you say
to the entertainment your God provides? Wasn't that _fun_?"

Well, naturally it was, if Dionysus said so. A great trick, as a matter
of fact. And a perfectly wonderful display. The crowd agreed
immediately, giving a long rousing cheer. Forrester waved at them, and
then turned to a squad of Myrmidons standing nearby.

"Go to that man and his friends!" he shouted, noticing that Symes's
knees had begun to shake.

The Myrmidons obeyed.

"See that they follow near me. Allow them to remain close to me at all
times--I may need a good stone-thrower later!"

Gerda, her brother and the oaf without a name were rounded up in a
hurry, and soon found themselves being hustled along, willy-nilly, out
of the water, up onto the bridge and into Dionysus' van, where they
followed in the wake of the God, in front of the rest of the Procession.
Of the three, Forrester noted, Gerda was the only one who didn't seem to
think the invitation a high honor. The sight gave him a kind of hope.

_And at least_, he thought, _I can keep an eye on her this way_.

The Procession wended its way on, bending slowly southward toward the
little Temple-on-the-Green again. The musicians played energetically,
switching now from the hymn to their unofficial little ditty. Some
switched before others, some switched after, and some never bothered to
switch at all. The battery, caught between the opposing claims of two
perfectly good songs and a lot of extraneous matter, filled in as best
they could with a good deal of forceful banging and pounding, aided by
the steam calliope, and the result of all effort was a growing cacophony
that should have been terribly unpleasant but somehow wasn't.

The shouting of the crowd, joking and singing, may have had something to
do with it; nothing was clearly distinguishable, but the general feeling
was that a lot of noise was being produced, and that was all to the
good. Noise could have been packaged by the board foot and sold in
quantities sufficient to equip every town meeting throughout the country
in full for seven years, and there would have been enough left over,
Forrester thought, to provide for the subways, the classrooms, the
offices and even a couple of really top-grade traffic jams.

Gerda and the others of her party marched quietly. Ed, Forrester
noticed, tried a few cheers, but he got cold stares from his sister and
soon desisted. The oaf shambled along, his arm no longer around Gerda's
waist. This pleased Forrester no end, and he was in quite a happy mood
by the time the Procession reached the Temple-on-the-Green.

He was so happy that he performed his atoning high jump once again, this
time with a double somersault and a jack-knife thrown in, just to make
things interesting, and landed gently, feeling positively exhilarated
and very Godlike, on the roof of the Temple.

As the Procession straggled in, the music stopped. Forrester cleared his
throat and shouted in his most penetrating roar to the silent
assemblage: "Hear me!"

The crowd stirred, looked up and paid him the most rapt attention.

"On with the revels!" he roared. "Let the dancing begin! Let my wine
flow like the streams of the park! Let joy be unrestrained!"

He stood on the roof then, watching the crowd begin to disperse. It was
the middle of the afternoon, and Forrester was amazed at how quickly
the time had passed. The Procession itself had taken a good six hours
from start to finish, now that he looked back on it, but it certainly
hadn't seemed so long. And he didn't even feel tired, in spite of all
the dancing and cavorting he had gone in for.

He did feel slightly intoxicated, but he wasn't sure how much of that
feeling was due purely and simply to the liquor he had managed to
consume. But otherwise, he told himself, he felt perfectly fine.

The musicians were breaking up into little groups of three and four and
five and going off to play softly to themselves among the trees. The man
with the steam calliope sat exhausted over his keyboard. The old man
with the water glasses was receiving the earnest congratulations of a
lot of people who looked like relatives. And now that the official
music-making was over, a lot of amateurs playing jews'-harps and
tissue-paper-covered combs and slide-whistles had broken out their
contraptions and were gaily making a joyful noise unto their God. If,
Forrester thought, you wanted to call it joyful. The general tenor of
the sound was a kind of swooping, batlike whine.

Forrester stared down. There were Gerda and her brother and the oaf.
They were standing close by the Temple, three Myrmidons keeping guard
over them. The rest of the crowd had dissolved into little bunches
spreading all over the park. Forrester knew he would have to leave, too,
and very soon. There were seven girls waiting for him down below.

Not that he minded the idea. Seven beautiful girls, after all, were
seven beautiful girls. But he did want to keep an eye on Gerda, and he
wasn't sure whether he would be able to do it when he got busy.

Somewhere in the bushes, someone began to play a kazoo, adding the final
touch of melancholy and heartbreak to the music. The formal and
official part of the Bacchanal was now over.

The _real_ fun, Forrester thought dismally, was about to begin.




CHAPTER NINE


"Now," Forrester said gaily, "let's see if your God has all the names
right, shall we?"

The seven girls seated around him in a half-circle on the grass giggled.
One of them simpered.

"Hmm," Forrester said. He pointed a finger. "Dorothy," he said. The
finger moved. "Judy. Uh--Bette. Millicent. Jayne." He winked at the last
two. They had been his closest companions on the march down. "Beverly,"
he said, "and Kathy. Right?"

The girls laughed, nodding their heads. "You can call me Millie,"
Millicent said.

"All right, Millie." For some reason this drew another big laugh.
Forrester didn't know why, but then, he didn't much care, either.
"That's fine," he said. "Just fine."

He gave all the girls a big, wide grin. It looked perfectly convincing
to them, he was sure, but there was one person it didn't convince:
Forrester. He knew just how far from a grin he felt.

As a matter of fact, he told himself, he was in something of a quandary.

He was not exactly inexperienced in the art of making love to beautiful
young women. After the last few months, he was about as experienced as
he could stand being. But his education had, it now appeared, missed one
vital little factor.

He was used to making love to a beautiful girl all alone, just the two
of them locked quietly away from prying eyes. True, it had turned out
that a lot of his experiences had been judged by Venus and any other God
who felt like looking in, but Forrester hadn't known that at the time
and, in any case, the spectators had been invisible and thus ignorable.

Now, however, he was on the greensward of Central Park, within full view
of a couple of thousand drunken revelers, all of whom, if not otherwise
occupied, asked for nothing better than a good view of their God in
action. And whichever girl he chose would leave six others eagerly
awaiting their turns, watching his every move with appreciative eyes.

And on top of that, there was Gerda, close by. He was trying to keep an
eye on her. But was she keeping an eye on him, too?

It didn't seem to matter much that she couldn't recognize him as William
Forrester. She could still see him in action with the seven luscious
maidens. The idea was appalling.

All afternoon, he had put off the inevitable by every method he could
think of. He had danced with each of the girls in turn for entirely
improbable lengths of time. He had performed high-jumps, leaps,
barrel-rolls, Immelmann turns and other feats showing off his Godlike
prowess to anyone interested. He had made a display of himself until he
was sick of the whole business. He had consumed staggering amounts of
ferment and distillate, and he had forced the stuff on the girls
themselves, in the hope that, what with the liquor and the exertion,
they would lie down on the grass and quietly pass out.

Unfortunately, none of these plans had worked. Dancing and acrobatics
had to come to an end sometime, and as for the girls, what they wanted
to do was lie down, not pass out--at least not from liquor.

The Chosen Maidens had been imbued, temporarily, with extraordinary
staying powers by the Priests of the various temples, working with the
delegated powers of the various Gods. After all, an ordinary girl
couldn't be expected to keep up with Dionysus during a revel, could she?
A God reveling was more than any ordinary mortal could take for long--as
witness the ancient legend concerned the false Norse God, Thor.

But these girls were still raring to go, and the sun had set, and he was
running out of opportunities for delay. He tried to think of some more
excuses, and he couldn't think of one. Vaguely, he wished that the real
Dionysus would show up. He would gladly give the God not only the
credit, he told himself wearily, but the entire game.

He glanced out into the growing dimness. Gerda was out there still, with
her brother and the oaf--whose name, Forrester had discovered, was Alvin
Sherdlap. It was not a probable name, but Alvin did not look like a
probable human being.

Now and again during the long afternoon, Forrester had got Ed Symes to
toss up more rocks as targets, just to keep his hand in and to help him
in keeping an eye on Gerda and her oaf, Alvin. It was a boring business,
exploding rocks in mid-air, but after a while Symes apparently got to
like it, and thought of it as a singular honor. After all, he had been
picked for a unique position: target-tosser for the great God Dionysus.
Who else could make that statement?

He would probably grow in the estimation of his friends, Forrester
thought, and that was a picture that wouldn't stand much thinking about.
As a stupefying boor, Symes was bad enough. Adding insufferable
snobbishness to his present personality was piling Pelion on Ossa. And
only a God, Forrester reminded himself wryly, could possibly do that.

Now, Forrester discovered, Symes and Alvin Sherdlap and Gerda were all
sitting around a large keg of beer which Symes had somehow managed to
appropriate from some other part of the grounds. He and Alvin were
guzzling happily, and Gerda was just sitting there, whiling away the
time, apparently, by thinking. Forrester wondered if she was thinking of
him, and the notion made him feel sad and poetic.

Gerda couldn't see him any longer, he knew. The darkness of night had
come down and there was no moon. The only illumination was the glow
rising from the rest of the city, since the lights of the park would
stay out throughout the night. To an ordinary mortal, the remaining
light was not enough to see anything more than a few feet away. But to
Forrester's Godlike, abnormally perceptive vision, the park seemed no
darker than it had at dusk, an hour or so before. Though the Symes trio
could not possibly see him, he could still watch over them with no
effort at all.

He intended to continue doing so.

But now, with darkness putting a cloak over his activities, and his mind
completely empty of excuses, was the time to begin the task at hand.

He cleared his throat and spoke very softly.

"Well," he said. "Well."

There had to be something to follow that, but for a minute he couldn't
