bands on his homeward march. Not disheartened by ill success, Cato and his
friends determined to strike at higher game. L. Scipio Asiaticus (or
Asiagenus), the brother of Africanus, was asserted in the senate to have
appropriated 3000 talents of public money when in command against
Antiochus. Legal proceedings were taken not only against Asiaticus, but
against Africanus, who behaved with great violence and arrogance. In the
end Africanus withdrew to his country estate, while his brother was
condemned to pay a heavy fine. A death-stroke had been given to the almost
kingly authority of Africanus, who never again showed his face in Rome. The
proceedings against the Scipios seem to have begun in 187 and not to have
been completed before 185.

Nearly twenty years had passed since the conflict between Cato and Scipio
began, and now it had ended in a complete triumph for Cato.[43] But the new
modes of which Scipio was the chief patron were too strong to be conquered,
and Cato spent the rest of his life in fighting a hopeless battle against
them, though he fought for a time with the strongest weapons that the
constitution supplied. In 184 he was censor along with Flaccus, who seems
to have allowed his colleague full liberty of action. Every portion of the
censor's duty was carried out on the most severe and 'old Roman'
principles. Seven senators were degraded, among them L. Flamininus, an
ex-consul and brother of the 'liberator of the Hellenes,' for serious
misconduct,[44] also Manilius, an ex-praetor, for no worse offence than
that of having kissed his wife in presence of his daughter. M. Furius
Purpurio, who had actually competed with Cato for the censorship, was
punished for diverting a public aqueduct for his private advantage. Flaccus
was named leader of the senate in the place of Scipio Africanus, now dead.

On reviewing the _equites_, Cato removed from that body L. Scipio and many
others on various charges: this one had allowed himself to grow too fat for
horsemanship; that had failed to groom his horse properly; another had
neglected his farm; another again had made an untimely jest on the occasion
of the review itself. With the ordinary citizens Cato dealt just as
harshly. In his censorian edict he sharply reproved the extravagance
prevalent at private feasts. All articles of luxury, such as slaves
purchased at fancy prices, luxurious clothing, carriages, statues, and
pictures were rendered liable to heavy taxation. In this way Cato revenged
himself for the repeal of the Oppian law.

In looking after the property and income of the state Cato followed the
same principles he had acted on in Spain. He reduced the expenditure on
public works as far as possible, and took care to sell at the full price
the right to collect the revenue. Encroachments on the property of the
nation were severely punished.

Not by acts only, but by constant speeches, full at once of grimness and
humor, did Cato struggle against the degeneracy of his time[45]. He
concluded his period of office with a self-laudatory harangue, and assumed
the title _Censorius_, while his statue was placed in the temple of the
goddess Salus with an inscription affirming that he had reformed the Roman
nation.

But in a very brief time all trace of Cato's activity as censor was swept
away, except that afforded by the numerous life-long quarrels in which he
had involved himself[46]. In less than two years one of his victims,
Purpurio, was employed by the senate on a high political mission, while
another, L. Flamininus, sat among the senators at the games in defiance of
Cato's sentence. Yet Cato remained by far the most powerful member of the
senate. Titus Flamininus, his only important rival, quickly passed out of
notice. So far as there was any democratic opposition to the senatorial
oligarchy, Cato was the leader of that opposition for the remainder of his
life. But at that period no great political movements agitated the state
within; nearly the whole interest of the time was centred in the foreign
relations of Rome. On matters of foreign policy Cato offered but little
opposition to the prevailing tendencies of the age, though on particular
occasions he exercised great influence. But his voice was at all times
loudly heard on all questions of morality and public order. He supported
the _lex Furia_ and the _lex Voconia_, the object of which was to prevent
the dissipation of family property, and the _lex Orchia_, directed against
extravagant expenditure on feasts, also the _lex Baebia de ambitu_, the
first serious attempt to check bribery. We hear also that Cato bitterly
attacked Lepidus, censor in 180, for erecting a permanent theatre in place
of the movable booths before used. The building was actually pulled down.
We are told that from time to time he denounced the misdoings of provincial
governors. In 171 he was one of a commission of five for bringing to
justice three ex-praetors who had practised all manner of corruption in
Spain. Almost the last act of his life was to prosecute Galba for cruel
misgovernment of the Lusitanians. The titles of Cato's speeches show that
he played a great part in the deliberations of the senate concerning
foreign affairs, but as his fighting days were over and he was unfitted for
diplomacy, we have little explicit evidence of his activity in this
direction. At the end of the third Macedonian war he successfully opposed
the annexation of Macedonia. He also saved from destruction the Rhodians,
who during the war had plainly desired the victory of Perseus, and in the
early days, when the Roman commanders had ill success, had deeply wounded
the whole Roman nation by an offer to mediate between them and the king of
Macedon.

Cato had all his life retained his feeling of enmity to the Carthaginians,
whom Scipio, he thought, had treated too tenderly. In 150 he was one of an
embassy sent to Carthage, and came back filled with alarm at the prosperity
of the city. It is said that whatever was the subject on which he was asked
for his opinion in the senate, he always ended his speech with '_ceterum
censeo delendam esse Carthaginem_' P. Scipio Nasica, the son-in-law of
Africanus, and the representative of his policy, always shouted out the
opposite opinion, thinking that the fear of Carthage had a salutary effect
on the Roman populace at large. But the ideas of Cato prevailed, and a
cruel policy, carried out with needless brutality, led to the extinction of
Rome's greatest rival. Cato did not live to see the conclusion of the war;
he died in 149, at the age of 84 or 85 years, having retained his mental
and physical vigor to the last. He had two sons, one by his first wife, and
one by his second wife, born when Cato was 80 years of age. The elder son,
to whom many of Cato's works were addressed, died as praetor-elect, before
his father[47]. The other was grandfather of Cato Uticensis.

The literary activity of the old censor was great, though his leisure was
small.[48] In Cicero's time a collection of 150 speeches was still extant.
The titles of about 90 are still known to us, and of some we possess a few
fragments. Cato's greatest work, however, was his _Origines_, the first
real historical work written in Latin. His predecessors had been merely
compilers of chronicles. The work was founded on laborious investigations,
and comprised the history of Rome from the earliest times perhaps down to
150 B.C.[49], as well as notices of the history of other important Italian
states. Further, Cato wrote of Agriculture, to which he was
enthusiastically devoted. We still have his _De Re Rustica_, a collection
of maxims loosely strung together. He also composed works on law; a sort of
educational encyclopaedia for his son; and a collection of witty sayings,
[Greek: Apophthegmata], drawn from Greek as well as from Roman sources.

Plutarch seems to have known a collected edition of the pungent and
proverbial utterances for which the censor was famous, and for which (not
for any knowledge of philosophy[50]) he received the title of _sapiens_
('shrewd') which he bore at the end of his life. This edition, however, was
not compiled by Cato himself.

In view of Cicero's treatise, the Cato Maior, it is necessary to say
something of Cato's relations with the Greeks and Greek literature. The
ancients give us merely vague statements that he only began to learn Greek
'in his old age.' The expression must be liberally interpreted if, as seems
clear, the whole of his writings showed the influence of Greek literature.
It is certain, however, that he thoroughly detested the Greek nation. This
hatred was shown in acts more than once. No doubt Cato was at least a
consenting party to the expulsion from Rome of Greek teachers in 161 B.C.
When in 155 the famous embassy came from Athens consisting of Carneades the
Academic, Critolaus the Peripatetic and Diogenes the Stoic, Cato was a
prime mover of the decree by which they were removed from the city.
Socrates was one of Cato's favorite marks for jests. And this is the man
into whose mouth Cicero puts the utterances, but slightly veiled, of Greek
wisdom!

(2.) _Scipio_. P. Cornelius Scipio Africanus, the younger, was no blood
relation of the conqueror of Hannibal, but the adopted son of his son. It
must be remembered, however, that adoption was much more formal and
binding, and produced much closer ties in ancient than in modern times.[51]
The elder Africanus was unfortunate in his sons. The younger of these
attained to the praetorship in 174, but was immediately driven from the
senate by the censors of that year on account of his disreputable life. The
elder was an invalid, who never held any office except that of augur, and
died at an early age. He adopted the son of L. Aemilius Paulus, the victor
of Pydna; the adopted son bore the name Aemilianus in memory of his origin.
Cato's son married a daughter of Paulus, so that the censor was brought
into relationship with the Cornelii, whose most illustrious representative
he had hated and attacked.

The young Scipio was born about 185, and when scarce 17 years old fought
with daring bravery at Pydna. While still very young he showed a great
devotion to study, which he retained through life. He was a thorough
partisan of the new Greek learning, and grouped around him in friendship
all the leaders of the Hellenistic movement. Among his dearest friends were
Polybius, the Greek statesman and historian, and later Panaetius, the
Stoic. In 151 B.C. when the consuls found it difficult to enlist officers
and men for service in Spain, where great defeats had been suffered, Scipio
volunteered, and served with great distinction as military tribune. When
the war with Carthage broke out he held the same rank, and shone by
comparison with his blundering superior officers. Coming to Rome in 148 he
stood for the aedileship, but was elected consul for the year 147, and
again for 146, when he finished the war. He is said to have grieved over
the fate of Carthage, and to have dreaded any further increase of the Roman
territory. In 142 Scipio was censor, and acted with almost Catonian
severity. In 134, though not a candidate, he was elected to the consulship
and put in command of the Roman army then besieging the city of Numantia in
Spain. The war, of which this siege formed a part, had been going on for
some years most disastrously for the Romans, but Scipio speedily brought it
to a conclusion in 133. While before Numantia he received news of the
murder of Ti. Gracchus, whose sister he had married and whose cousin he had
become by adoption, but whose policy he had on the whole opposed, though he
had occasionally coquetted with the democrats. This course cost him the
favor of the people, and when in 131 he desired to conduct the war against
Aristonicus, only two of the thirty-five tribes voted for his appointment.
In 129, after a violent scene in the senate, where he had opposed the
carrying out of Ti. Gracchus' agrarian law, he was triumphantly escorted
home by a crowd, composed chiefly of Italians whose interests had been
threatened by the law. Next morning he was found dead in his bed. Opinion
as to the cause of his death was divided at the time and so remained. In
the _Laelius_ the death is assumed to have been from natural causes.[52]
Elsewhere, however, Cicero adopts the view of many of Scipio's friends that
he was murdered by Carbo.[53] Carbo afterwards lent color to the suspicions
by putting himself to death, in order, as was supposed, to avoid a direct
prosecution. In ancient times even C. Gracchus was suspected of having thus
avenged his brother's death, but no modern scholar of any rank has
countenanced the suspicion.

Whether the degree of intimacy between Cato and Scipio, which Cicero
assumes, ever existed or not, cannot be determined.[54] There was much in
Scipio that would attract Cato. Unlike the elder Africanus, he was severe
and simple in his outward life, and though a lover of Greek and Greeks, yet
attached to all that was best in the old Roman character and polity. Though
an opponent of revolution, he was far from being a partisan of the
oligarchy. Altogether, of all Romans, he most nearly deserved the
description, '[Greek: aner tetragonos aneu psogou],' 'a man four-square
without reproach.' In his _De Re Publica_, Cicero points to Scipio as the
ideal statesman, and often elsewhere eulogizes him as an almost perfect
Roman.

(3.) _Laelius_. Gaius Laelius, born about 186, was Scipio's most
distinguished officer before Carthage, and his most intimate friend
throughout life. The friendship of the two was one of the most famous in
antiquity, and is celebrated in the _Laelius_. Laelius was an able speaker,
writer and soldier, and devoted to Greek learning, particularly to the
Stoic philosophy. He is with Cicero the type of a man of culture.[55] He,
too, is one of the interlocutors in the _De Re Publica_.

(ii.) SUBJECT-MATTER.

1. _General View_.

The Cato Maior falls naturally into three parts:--

  Preliminary, dedication to Atticus, Sec.Sec. 1-3;
  Introductory Conversation, 4-9;
  Cato's Defence of Old Age, 10-85.

After Sec. 9 Cato continues to express his views on old age without
interruption to the end, and the dialogue thus becomes really a monologue.

2. _Analysis._

  PRELIMINARY  1-3.

Cicero, addressing Atticus, states his purpose in writing the book and the
effect of the work on himself (1, 2), the reasons for putting the
sentiments on old age into the mouth of Cato, and the circumstances of the
supposed conversation (3).

  INTRODUCTORY CONVERSATION    4-9.

Scipio declares his admiration of Cato's vigorous and happy old age. Cato
replies that the secret lies in following the guidance of Nature (4, 5).
Laelius then asks Cato to point out the road to such an old age as his own
(6). This the old man promises to do, but first remarks that the faults
charged against old age are generally due to defects of character (7).
Laelius suggests that prosperity makes Cato's declining years pleasant.
Cato admits that there may be some truth in this, but maintains that right
character alone can make old age tolerable (8, 9).

  CATO'S DEFENCE OF OLD AGE    10-85.

A. Introductory argument from fact. Account of celebrated old men whose
lives till death were useful and happy 10-14

  (a). Fabius Maximus                                  10-12
  (b). Plato; (c). Isocrates; (d). Gorgias                13
  (e). Ennius                                             14

B. Refutation of charges made against old age 15-85

_Statement of the four charges commonly made against old age_: it withdraws
men from active life, it weakens the physical powers, it takes away
capacity for enjoyment, and it involves the anticipation of death 15

A. Refutation of the first charge, that old age withdraws from active life.

  (a). There are employments suited to old age which
      are as necessary to the well-being of society as
      those which require greater physical powers          15-20

  (b). The special objection that old men have weak
      memories is answered by showing that this is
      due either to an original defect or to insufficient
      exercise                                             21-22


  (c). Argument from fact: instances of old men in
      public and in private life who till death were
      actively at work                                      23-26

B. Rebuttal of the second charge, that old age weakens the physical powers.

  (a). Old age does not desire nor require the strength
      of youth, because it may exert influence
      through other means. Instances cited to show
      this                                                  27-32

  (b). Temperate habits will retain a good measure
      of strength till old age (33, 34); many instances
      of weakness in old age may be attributed to
      ill-health, which is common to all periods of
      life (35); proper care will greatly  retard decay     33-38

C. Refutation of the third charge, that old age takes away the capacity for
enjoyment

  (a). The pleasures in which youth finds its keenest
      enjoyment are in themselves bad, and old age
      is beneficent in freeing from their allurements       39-44

  (b). Old age has pleasures far more refined and satisfying
      than those of sense                                   45-64
      Such as, those of conversation and literature
      (45-50); especially those of agriculture (51-61);
      and lastly, the exercise of influence, which old
      age will always possess if a rightly spent youth
      has preceded (62-64).

  (c). The special objection that old men's tempers
      spoil their enjoyments is met by the statement
      that this is the fault of character, not of age          65

D. Refutation of the fourth charge, that old age is unhappy because it
involves the anticipation of death.

  (a). Since the right aim of life is to live not long
      but well, death ought not to be dreaded at any
      age                                                   66-69


  (b). Old men, especially those of learning and culture,
      ought not to fear death                                       70-76
      Because, that which is according to nature is
      good, and it is natural for old men to die (70-73);
      the process of dying is brief and almost painless
      (74); even young men and those without learning
      often set the example of despising death
      (75); and old age, just as the other periods
      of life, has finally its season of ripeness and
      satiety (76).

  (c). Death is probably the gateway to a happy immortality     77-85
      Tending towards proof of this are the arguments
      stated in Plato; viz. the rapidity of the
      mind's action, its powers of memory and invention,
      its self-activity, indivisible nature and pre-existence
      (78); also the arguments, attributed
      to Cyrus, based upon the soul's immateriality,
      the posthumous fame of great men and the
      likeness of death to sleep (79-81); the instinctive
      belief in immortality, so strong as even to
      form an incentive for action (82); and, finally,
      the speaker's own longing after immortality and
      hope of union with those whom he once knew
      and loved (83-85).

       *       *       *       *       *

CATO MAIOR DE SENECTUTE

       *       *       *       *       *

M. TULLI CICERONIS

CATO MAIOR

DE SENECTUTE.

       *       *       *       *       *

1


  _O Tite, si quid ego adiuero curamve levasso_
  _quae nunc te coquit et versat in pectore fixa,_
  _ecquid erit praemi?_

Licet enim mihi versibus isdem affari te, Attice, quibus affatur Flamininum

  _ille vir haud magna cum re, sed plenus fidei,_

quamquam certo scio non, ut Flamininum,

  _sollicitari te, Tite, sic noctesque diesque,_

novi enim moderationem animi tui et aequitatem, teque non cognomen solum
Athenis deportasse, sed humanitatem et prudentiam intellego. Et tamen te
suspicor isdem rebus quibus me ipsum interdum gravius commoveri, quarum
consolatio et maior est et in aliud tempus differenda. Nunc autem visum est
mihi de senectute aliquid ad te conscribere. 2 Hoc enim onere, quod mihi
commune tecum est, aut iam urgentis aut certe adventantis senectutis et te
et me ipsum levari volo: etsi te quidem id modice ac sapienter, sicut
omnia, et ferre et laturum esse certo scio. Sed mihi, cum de senectute
vellem aliquid scribere, tu occurrebas dignus eo munere, quo uterque
nostrum communiter uteretur. Mihi quidem ita iucunda huius libri confectio
fuit, ut non modo omnis absterserit senectutis molestias, sed effecerit
mollem etiam et iucundam senectutem. Numquam igitur laudari satis digne
philosophia poterit cui qui pareat omne tempus aetatis sine molestia possit
degere. 3 Sed de ceteris et diximus multa et saepe dicemus: hunc librum ad
te de senectute misimus. Omnem autem sermonem tribuimus non Tithono, ut
Aristo Cius, parum enim esset auctoritatis in fabula, sed M. Catoni seni,
quo maiorem auctoritatem haberet oratio: apud quem Laelium et Scipionem
facimus admirantis, quod is tam facile senectutem ferat, eisque eum
respondentem, qui si eruditius videbitur disputare quam consuevit ipse in
suis libris, attribuito litteris Graecis, quarum constat eum perstudiosum
fuisse in senectute. Sed quid opus est plura? Iam enim ipsius Catonis sermo
explicabit nostram omnem de senectute sententiam.

II. 4 SCIPIO. Saepe numero admirari soleo cum hoc C. Laelio cum ceterarum
rerum tuam excellentem, M. Cato, perfectamque sapientiam, tum vel maxime
quod numquam tibi senectutem gravem esse senserim, quae plerisque senibus
sic odiosa est, ut onus se Aetna gravius dicant sustinere.

CATO. Rem haud sane, Scipio et Laeli, difficilem admirari videmini. Quibus
enim nihil est in ipsis opis ad bene beateque vivendum, eis omnis aetas
gravis est: qui autem omnia bona a se ipsi petunt, eis nihil potest malum
videri quod naturae necessitas afferat. Quo in genere est in primis
senectus, quam ut adipiscantur omnes optant, eandem accusant adeptam: tanta
est stultitiae inconstantia atque perversitas. Obrepere aiunt eam citius
quam putassent. Primum quis coegit eos falsum putare? Qui enim citius
adulescentiae senectus quam pueritiae adulescentia obrepit? Deinde qui
minus gravis esset eis senectus, si octingentesimum annum agerent, quam si
octogesimum? Praeterita enim aetas quamvis longa, cum effluxisset, nulla
consolatione permulcere posset stultam senectutem. 5 Quocirca si sapientiam
meam admirari soletis, quae utinam digna esset opinione vestra nostroque
cognomine, in hoc sumus sapientes, quod naturam optimam ducem tamquam deum
sequimur eique paremus: a qua non veri simile est, cum ceterae partes
aetatis bene descriptae sint, extremum actum tamquam ab inerti poeta esse
neglectum. Sed tamen necesse fuit esse aliquid extremum et, tamquam in
arborum bacis terraeque fructibus, maturitate tempestiva quasi vietum et
caducum, quod ferundum est molliter sapienti. Quid est enim aliud Gigantum
modo bellare cum dis nisi naturae repugnare?

6 LAELIUS. Atqui, Cato, gratissimum nobis, ut etiam pro Scipione pollicear,
feceris, si, quoniam speramus, volumus quidem certe, senes fieri, multo
ante a te didicerimus quibus facillime rationibus ingravescentem aetatem
ferre possimus.

CATO. Faciam vero, Laeli, praesertim si utrique vestrum, ut dicis, gratum
futurum est.

LAELIUS. Volumus sane, nisi molestum est, Cato, tamquam longam aliquam viam
confeceris, quam nobis quoque ingrediundum sit, istuc, quo pervenisti,
videre quale sit.

III. 7 CATO. Faciam ut potero, Laeli. Saepe enim interfui querellis
aequalium meorum, pares autem vetere proverbio cum paribus facillime
congregantur, quae C. Salinator, quae Sp. Albinus, homines consulares,
nostri fere aequales, deplorare solebant, tum quod voluptatibus carerent,
sine quibus vitam nullam putarent, tum quod spernerentur ab eis, a quibus
essent coli soliti; qui mihi non id videbantur accusare, quod esset
accusandum. Nam si id culpa senectutis accideret, eadem mihi usu venirent
reliquisque omnibus maioribus natu, quorum ego multorum cognovi senectutem
sine querella, qui se et libidinum vinculis laxatos esse non moleste
ferrent nec a suis despicerentur. Sed omnium istius modi querellarum in
moribus est culpa, non in aetate. Moderati enim et nec difficiles nec
inhumani senes tolerabilem senectutem agunt, importunitas autem et
inhumanitas omni aetati molesta est.

8 LAELIUS. Est, ut dicis, Cato; sed fortasse dixerit quispiam tibi propter
opes et copias et dignitatem tuam tolerabiliorem senectutem videri, id
autem non posse multis contingere.

CATO. Est istuc quidem, Laeli, aliquid, sed nequaquam in isto sunt omnia;
ut Themistocles fertur Seriphio cuidam in iurgio respondisse, cum ille
dixisset non eum sua, sed patriae gloria splendorem assecutum: 'nec
hercule', inquit, 'si ego Seriphius essem, nec tu, si Atheniensis, clarus
umquam fuisses'. Quod eodem modo de senectute dici potest; nec enim in
summa inopia levis esse senectus potest, ne sapienti quidem, nec insipienti
etiam in summa copia non gravis. 9 Aptissima omnino sunt, Scipio et Laeli,
arma senectutis artes exercitationesque virtutum, quae in omni aetate
cultae, cum diu multumque vixeris, mirificos ecferunt fructus, non solum
quia numquam deserunt, ne extremo quidem tempore aetatis, quamquam id
quidem maximum est, verum etiam quia conscientia bene actae vitae
multorumque bene factorum recordatio iucundissima est.

IV. 10 Ego Q. Maximum, eum qui Tarentum recepit, senem adulescens ita
dilexi, ut aequalem. Erat enim in illo viro comitate condita gravitas, nec
senectus mores mutaverat. Quamquam eum colere coepi non admodum grandem
natu, sed tamen iam aetate provectum. Anno enim post consul primum fuerat
quam ego natus sum, cumque eo quartum consule adulescentulus miles ad
Capuam profectus sum quintoque anno post ad Tarentum. Quaestor deinde
quadriennio post factus sum, quem magistratum gessi consulibus Tuditano et
Cethego, cum quidem ille admodum senex suasor legis Cinciae de donis et
muneribus fuit. Hic et bella gerebat ut adulescens, cum plane grandis
esset, et Hannibalem iuveniliter exsultantem patientia sua molliebat; de
quo praeclare familiaris noster Ennius:

  _unus homo nobis cunctando restituit rem;_
  _noenum rumores ponebat ante salutem;_
  _ergo plusque magisque viri nunc gloria claret._

11 Tarentum vero qua vigilantia, quo consilio recepit! Cum quidem me
audiente Salinatori, qui amisso oppido fugerat in arcem, glorianti atque
ita dicenti, 'mea opera, Q. Fabi, Tarentum recepisti', 'certe', inquit
ridens, 'nam nisi tu amisisses, numquam recepissem'. Nec vero in armis
praestantior quam in toga; qui consul iterum, Sp. Carvilio collega
quiescente, C. Flaminio tribuno plebis, quoad potuit, restitit agrum
Picentem et Gallicum viritim contra senatus auctoritatem dividenti,
augurque cum esset, dicere ausus est optimis auspiciis ea geri, quae pro
rei publicae salute gererentur; quae contra rem publicam ferrentur, contra
auspicia ferri. 12 Multa in eo viro praeclara cognovi, sed nihil
admirabilius quam quo modo ille mortem fili tulit, clari viri et
consularis. Est in manibus laudatio, quam cum legimus, quem philosophum non
contemnimus? Nec vero ille in luce modo atque in oculis civium magnus, sed
intus domique praestantior. Qui sermo, quae praecepta! Quanta notitia
antiquitatis, scientia iuris auguri! Multae etiam, ut in homine Romano,
litterae: omnia memoria tenebat non domestica solum, sed etiam externa
bella. Cuius sermone ita tum cupide fruebar, quasi iam divinarem, id quod
evenit, illo exstincto fore unde discerem neminem.

V. 13 Quorsus igitur haec tam multa de Maximo? Quia profecto videtis nefas
esse dictu miseram fuisse talem senectutem. Nec tamen omnes possunt esse
Scipiones aut Maximi, ut urbium expugnationes, ut pedestris navalisve
pugnas, ut bella a se gesta, ut triumphos recordentur. Est etiam quiete et
pure atque eleganter actae aetatis placida ac lenis senectus, qualem
accepimus Platonis, qui uno et octogesimo anno scribens est mortuus, qualem
Isocrati, qui eum librum, qui Panathenaicus inscribitur, quarto nonagesimo
anno scripsisse dicit vixitque quinquennium postea; cuius magister
Leontinus Gorgias centum et septem complevit annos, neque umquam in suo
studio atque opere cessavit. Qui, cum ex eo quaereretur cur tam diu vellet
esse in vita, 'nihil habeo,' inquit, 'quod accusem senectutem'. Praeclarum
responsum et docto homine dignum! 14 Sua enim vitia insipientes et suam
culpam in senectutem conferunt, quod non faciebat is, cuius modo mentionem
feci, Ennius:

  _sic ut fortis ecus, spatio qui saepe supremo_
  _vicit Olumpia, nunc senio confectus quiescit._

Equi fortis et victoris senectuti comparat suam; quem quidem probe
meminisse potestis; anno enim undevicesimo post eius mortem hi consules, T.
Flamininus et M'. Acilius, facti sunt; ille autem Caepione et Philippo
iterum consulibus mortuus est, cum ego quinque et sexaginta annos natus
legem Voconiam magna voce et bonis lateribus suasissem. Annos septuaginta
natus, tot enim vixit Ennius, ita ferebat duo quae maxima putantur, onera,
paupertatem et senectutem, ut eis paene delectari videretur.

15 Etenim, cum complector animo, quattuor reperio causas cur senectus
misera videatur: unam, quod avocet a rebus gerendis; alteram, quod corpus
faciat infirmius; tertiam, quod privet omnibus fere voluptatibus; quartam,
quod haud procul absit a morte. Earum, si placet, causarum quanta quamque
sit iusta una quaeque videamus.

VI. A rebus gerendis senectus abstrahit. Quibus? An eis, quae iuventute
geruntur et viribus? Nullaene igitur res sunt seniles, quae vel infirmis
corporibus animo tamen administrentur? Nihil ergo agebat Q. Maximus, nihil
L. Paulus, pater tuus, socer optimi viri fili mei? Ceteri senes, Fabricii
Curii Coruncanii, cum rem publicam consilio et auctoritate defendebant,
nihil agebant? 16 Ad Appi Claudi senectutem accedebat etiam ut caecus
esset; tamen is, cum sententia senatus inclinaret ad pacem cum Pyrrho
foedusque faciendum, non dubitavit dicere illa, quae versibus persecutus
est Ennius:

  _quo vobis mentes, rectae quae stare solebant_
  _antehac, dementis sese flexere viai?_

ceteraque gravissime, notum enim vobis carmen est, et tamen ipsius Appi
exstat oratio. Atque haec ille egit septemdecim annis post alterum
