'Blooming as thine own roses, my gentle Nydia! and how is thy fair
mistress?--recovered, I trust, from the effects of the storm?'

'I have not seen her this morning,' answered Nydia, 'but...'

'But what? draw back--the horses are too near thee.'

'But think you Ione will permit me to pass the day with Julia, the
daughter of Diomed?--She wishes it, and was kind to me when I had few
friends.'

'The gods bless thy grateful heart!  I will answer for Ione's
permission.'

'Then I may stay over the night, and return to-morrow?' said Nydia,
shrinking from the praise she so little merited.

'As thou and fair Julia please.  Commend me to her; and hark ye, Nydia,
when thou hearest her speak, note the contrast of her voice with that of
the silver-toned Ione.  Vale!'

His spirits entirely recovered from the effect of the past night, his
locks waving in the wind, his joyous and elastic heart bounding with
every spring of his Parthian steeds, a very prototype of his country's
god, full of youth and of love--Glaucus was borne rapidly to his
mistress.

Enjoy while ye may the present--who can read the future?

As the evening darkened, Julia, reclined within her litter, which was
capacious enough also to admit her blind companion, took her way to the
rural baths indicated by Arbaces.  To her natural levity of disposition,
her enterprise brought less of terror than of pleasurable excitement;
above all, she glowed at the thought of her coming triumph over the
hated Neapolitan.

A small but gay group was collected round the door of the villa, as her
litter passed by it to the private entrance of the baths appropriated to
the women.

'Methinks, by this dim light,' said one of the bystanders, 'I recognize
the slaves of Diomed.'

'True, Clodius,' said Sallust: 'it is probably the litter of his
daughter Julia.  She is rich, my friend; why dost thou not proffer thy
suit to her?'

'Why, I had once hoped that Glaucus would have married her.  She does
not disguise her attachment; and then, as he gambles freely and with
ill-success...'

'The sesterces would have passed to thee, wise Clodius.  A wife is a
good thing--when it belongs to another man!'

'But,' continued Clodius, 'as Glaucus is, I understand, to wed the
Neapolitan, I think I must even try my chance with the dejected maid.
After all, the lamp of Hymen will be gilt, and the vessel will reconcile
one to the odor of the flame.  I shall only protest, my Sallust, against
Diomed's making thee trustee to his daughter's fortune.'

'Ha! ha! let us within, my comissator; the wine and the garlands wait
us.'

Dismissing her slaves to that part of the house set apart for their
entertainment, Julia entered the baths with Nydia, and declining the
offers of the attendants, passed by a private door into the garden
behind.

'She comes by appointment, be sure,' said one of the slaves.

'What is that to thee?' said a superintendent, sourly; 'she pays for the
baths, and does not waste the saffron.  Such appointments are the best
part of the trade.  Hark! do you not hear the widow Fulvia clapping her
hands? Run, fool--run!'

Julia and Nydia, avoiding the more public part of the garden, arrived at
the place specified by the Egyptian.  In a small circular plot of grass
the stars gleamed upon the statue of Silenus--the merry god reclined
upon a fragment of rock--the lynx of Bacchus at his feet--and over his
mouth he held, with extended arm, a bunch of grapes, which he seemingly
laughed to welcome ere he devoured.

'I see not the magician,' said Julia, looking round: when, as she spoke,
the Egyptian slowly emerged from the neighboring foliage, and the light
fell palely over his sweeping robes.

'Salve, sweet maiden!--But ha! whom hast thou here? we must have no
companions!'

'It is but the blind flower-girl, wise magician,' replied Julia:
'herself a Thessalian.'

'Oh! Nydia!' said the Egyptian.  'I know her well.'

Nydia drew back and shuddered.

'Thou hast been at my house, methinks!' said he, approaching his voice
to Nydia's ear; 'thou knowest the oath!--Silence and secrecy, now as
then, or beware!'

'Yet,' he added, musingly to himself, 'why confide more than is
necessary, even in the blind--Julia, canst thou trust thyself alone with
me?  Believe me, the magician is less formidable than he seems.'

As he spoke, he gently drew Julia aside.

'The witch loves not many visitors at once,' said he: 'leave Nydia here
till your return; she can be of no assistance to us: and, for
protection--your own beauty suffices--your own beauty and your own rank;
yes, Julia, I know thy name and birth.  Come, trust thyself with me,
fair rival of the youngest of the Naiads!'

The vain Julia was not, as we have seen, easily affrighted; she was
moved by the flattery of Arbaces, and she readily consented to suffer
Nydia to await her return; nor did Nydia press her presence.  At the
sound of the Egyptian's voice all her terror of him returned: she felt a
sentiment of pleasure at learning she was not to travel in his
companionship.

She returned to the Bath-house, and in one of the private chambers
waited their return.  Many and bitter were the thoughts of this wild
girl as she sat there in her eternal darkness.  She thought of her own
desolate fate, far from her native land, far from the bland cares that
once assuaged the April sorrows of childhood--deprived of the light of
day, with none but strangers to guide her steps, accursed by the one
soft feeling of her heart, loving and without hope, save the dim and
unholy ray which shot across her mind, as her Thessalian fancies
questioned of the force of spells and the gifts of magic.

Nature had sown in the heart of this poor girl the seeds of virtue
never destined to ripen.  The lessons of adversity are not always
salutary--sometimes they soften and amend, but as often they indurate
and pervert. If we consider ourselves more harshly treated by fate than
those around us, and do not acknowledge in our own deeds the justice of
the severity, we become too apt to deem the world our enemy, to case
ourselves in defiance, to wrestle against our softer self, and to
indulge the darker passions which are so easily fermented by the sense
of injustice.  Sold early into slavery, sentenced to a sordid
taskmaster, exchanging her situation, only yet more to embitter her
lot--the kindlier feelings, naturally profuse in the breast of Nydia,
were nipped and blighted.  Her sense of right and wrong was confused by
a passion to which she had so madly surrendered herself; and the same
intense and tragic emotions which we read of in the women of the classic
age--a Myrrha, a Medea--and which hurried and swept away the whole soul
when once delivered to love--ruled, and rioted in, her breast.

Time passed: a light step entered the chamber where Nydia yet indulged
her gloomy meditations.

'Oh, thanked be the immortal gods!' said Julia, 'I have returned, I have
left that terrible cavern!  Come, Nydia! let us away forthwith!'

It was not till they were seated in the litter that Julia again spoke.

'Oh!' said she, tremblingly, 'such a scene! such fearful incantations!
and the dead face of the hag!--But, let us talk not of it.  I have
obtained the potion--she pledges its effect.  My rival shall be suddenly
indifferent to his eye, and I, I alone, the idol of Glaucus!'

'Glaucus!' exclaimed Nydia.

'Ay! I told thee, girl, at first, that it was not the Athenian whom I
loved: but I see now that I may trust thee wholly--it is the beautiful
Greek!'

What then were Nydia's emotions! she had connived, she had assisted, in
tearing Glaucus from Ione; but only to transfer, by all the power of
magic, his affections yet more hopelessly to another.  Her heart swelled
almost to suffocation--she gasped for breath--in the darkness of the
vehicle, Julia did not perceive the agitation of her companion; she went
on rapidly dilating on the promised effect of her acquisition, and on
her approaching triumph over Ione, every now and then abruptly
digressing to the horror of the scene she had quitted--the unmoved mien
of Arbaces, and his authority over the dreadful Saga.

Meanwhile Nydia recovered her self-possession: a thought flashed across
her: she slept in the chamber of Julia--she might possess herself of the
potion.

They arrived at the house of Diomed, and descended to Julia's apartment,
where the night's repast awaited them.

'Drink, Nydia, thou must be cold, the air was chill to-night; as for me,
my veins are yet ice.'

And Julia unhesitatingly quaffed deep draughts of the spiced wine.

'Thou hast the potion,' said Nydia; 'let me hold it in my hands. How
small the phial is! of what color is the draught?'

'Clear as crystal,' replied Julia, as she retook the philtre; 'thou
couldst not tell it from this water.  The witch assures me it is
tasteless.  Small though the phial, it suffices for a life's fidelity:
it is to be poured into any liquid; and Glaucus will only know what he
has quaffed by the effect.'

'Exactly like this water in appearance?'

'Yes, sparkling and colorless as this.  How bright it seems! it is as
the very essence of moonlit dews.  Bright thing! how thou shinest on my
hopes through thy crystal vase!'

'And how is it sealed?'

'But by one little stopper--I withdraw it now--the draught gives no
odor. Strange, that that which speaks to neither sense should thus
command all!'

'Is the effect instantaneous?'

'Usually--but sometimes it remains dormant for a few hours.'

'Oh, how sweet is this perfume!' said Nydia, suddenly, as she took up a
small bottle on the table, and bent over its fragrant contents.

'Thinkest thou so? the bottle is set with gems of some value.  Thou
wouldst not have the bracelet yestermorn--wilt thou take the bottle?'

'It ought to be such perfumes as these that should remind one who cannot
see of the generous Julia.  If the bottle be not too costly...'

'Oh! I have a thousand costlier ones: take it, child!'

Nydia bowed her gratitude, and placed the bottle in her vest.

'And the draught would be equally efficacious, whoever administers it?'

'If the most hideous hag beneath the sun bestowed it, such is its
asserted virtue that Glaucus would deem her beautiful, and none but
her!'

Julia, warmed by wine, and the reaction of her spirits, was now all
animation and delight; she laughed loud, and talked on a hundred
matters--nor was it till the night had advanced far towards morning that
she summoned her slaves and undressed.

When they were dismissed, she said to Nydia, 'I will not suffer this
holy draught to quit my presence till the hour comes for its use. Lie
under my pillow, bright spirit, and give me happy dreams!'

So saying, she placed the potion under her pillow.  Nydia's heart beat
violently.

'Why dost thou drink that unmixed water, Nydia?  Take the wine by its
side.'

'I am fevered,' replied the blind girl, 'and the water cools me.  I will
place this bottle by my bedside, it refreshes in these summer nights,
when the dews of sleep fall not on our lips.  Fair Julia, I must leave
thee very early--so Ione bids--perhaps before thou art awake; accept,
therefore, now my congratulations.'

'Thanks: when next we meet you may find Glaucus at my feet.'

They had retired to their couches, and Julia, worn out by the excitement
of the day, soon slept.  But anxious and burning thoughts rolled over
the mind of the wakeful Thessalian.  She listened to the calm breathing
of Julia; and her ear, accustomed to the finest distinctions of sound,
speedily assured her of the deep slumber of her companion.

'Now befriend me, Venus!' said she, softly.

She rose gently, and poured the perfume from the gift of Julia upon the
marble floor--she rinsed it several times carefully with the water that
was beside her, and then easily finding the bed of Julia (for night to
her was as day), she pressed her trembling hand under the pillow and
seized the potion.  Julia stirred not, her breath regularly fanned the
burning cheek of the blind girl.  Nydia, then, opening the phial, poured
its contents into the bottle, which easily contained them; and then
refilling the former reservoir of the potion with that limpid water
which Julia had assured her it so resembled, she once more placed the
phial in its former place.  She then stole again to her couch, and
waited--with what thoughts!--the dawning day.

The sun had risen--Julia slept still--Nydia noiselessly dressed herself,
placed her treasure carefully in her vest, took up her staff, and
hastened to quit the house.

The porter, Medon, saluted her kindly as she descended the steps that
led to the street: she heard him not; her mind was confused and lost in
the whirl of tumultuous thoughts, each thought a passion. She felt the
pure morning air upon her cheek, but it cooled not her scorching veins.

'Glaucus,' she murmured, 'all the love-charms of the wildest magic could
not make thee love me as I love thee.  Ione!--ah; away hesitation! away
remorse! Glaucus, my fate is in thy smile; and thine! hope!  O joy!  O
transport, thy fate is in these hands!'





BOOK THE FOURTH

Chapter I

REFLECTIONS ON THE ZEAL OF THE EARLY CHRISTIANS.  TWO MEN COME TO A
PERILOUS RESOLVE.  WALLS HAVE EARS, PARTICULARLY SACRED WALLS.

WHOEVER regards the early history of Christianity, will perceive how
necessary to its triumph was that fierce spirit of zeal, which, fearing
no danger, accepting no compromise, inspired its champions and sustained
its martyrs.  In a dominant Church the genius of intolerance betrays its
cause--in a weak and persecuted Church, the same genius mainly supports.
It was necessary to scorn, to loathe, to abhor the creeds of other men,
in order to conquer the temptations which they presented--it was
necessary rigidly to believe not only that the Gospel was the true
faith, but the sole true faith that saved, in order to nerve the
disciple to the austerity of its doctrine, and to encourage him to the
sacred and perilous chivalry of converting the Polytheist and the
Heathen.  The sectarian sternness which confined virtue and heaven to a
chosen few, which saw demons in other gods, and the penalties of hell in
other religions--made the believer naturally anxious to convert all to
whom he felt the ties of human affection; and the circle thus traced by
benevolence to man was yet more widened by a desire for the glory of
God.  It was for the honour of the Christian faith that the Christian
boldly forced its tenets upon the scepticism of some, the repugnance of
others, the sage contempt of the philosopher, the pious shudder of the
people--his very intolerance supplied him with his fittest instruments
of success; and the soft Heathen began at last to imagine there must
indeed be something holy in a zeal wholly foreign to his experience,
which stopped at no obstacle, dreaded no danger, and even at the
torture, or on the scaffold, referred a dispute far other than the calm
differences of speculative philosophy to the tribunal of an Eternal
Judge.  It was thus that the same fervor which made the Churchman of the
middle age a bigot without mercy, made the Christian of the early days a
hero without fear.

Of these more fiery, daring, and earnest natures, not the least ardent
was Olinthus.  No sooner had Apaecides been received by the rites of
baptism into the bosom of the Church, than the Nazarene hastened to make
him conscious of the impossibility to retain the office and robes of
priesthood. He could not, it was evident, profess to worship God, and
continue even outwardly to honour the idolatrous altars of the Fiend.

Nor was this all, the sanguine and impetuous mind of Olinthus beheld in
the power of Apaecides the means of divulging to the deluded people the
juggling mysteries of the oracular Isis.  He thought Heaven had sent
this instrument of his design in order to disabuse the eyes of the
crowd, and prepare the way, perchance, for the conversion of a whole
city.  He did not hesitate then to appeal to all the new-kindled
enthusiasm of Apaecides, to arouse his courage, and to stimulate his
zeal.  They met, according to previous agreement, the evening after the
baptism of Apaecides, in the grove of Cybele, which we have before
described.

'At the next solemn consultation of the oracle,' said Olinthus, as he
proceeded in the warmth of his address, 'advance yourself to the
railing, proclaim aloud to the people the deception they endure, invite
them to enter, to be themselves the witness of the gross but artful
mechanism of imposture thou hast described to me.  Fear not--the Lord,
who protected Daniel, shall protect thee; we, the community of
Christians, will be amongst the crowd; we will urge on the shrinking:
and in the first flush of the popular indignation and shame, I myself,
upon those very altars, will plant the palm-branch typical of the
Gospel--and to my tongue shall descend the rushing Spirit of the living
God.'

Heated and excited as he was, this suggestion was not unpleasing to
Apaecides.  He was rejoiced at so early an opportunity of distinguishing
his faith in his new sect, and to his holier feelings were added those
of a vindictive loathing at the imposition he had himself suffered, and
a desire to avenge it.  In that sanguine and elastic overbound of
obstacles (the rashness necessary to all who undertake venturous and
lofty actions), neither Olinthus nor the proselyte perceived the
impediments to the success of their scheme, which might be found in the
reverent superstition of the people themselves, who would probably be
loth, before the sacred altars of the great Egyptian goddess, to believe
even the testimony of her priest against her power.

Apaecides then assented to this proposal with a readiness which
delighted Olinthus.  They parted with the understanding that Olinthus
should confer with the more important of his Christian brethren on his
great enterprise, should receive their advice and the assurances of
their support on the eventful day.  It so chanced that one of the
festivals of Isis was to be held on the second day after this
conference.  The festival proffered a ready occasion for the design.
They appointed to meet once more on the next evening at the same spot;
and in that meeting were finally to be settled the order and details of
the disclosure for the following day.

It happened that the latter part of this conference had been held near
the sacellum, or small chapel, which I have described in the early part
of this work; and so soon as the forms of the Christian and the priest
had disappeared from the grove, a dark and ungainly figure emerged from
behind the chapel.

'I have tracked you with some effect, my brother flamen,' soliloquised
the eavesdropper; 'you, the priest of Isis, have not for mere idle
discussion conferred with this gloomy Christian.  Alas! that I could not
hear all your precious plot: enough!  I find, at least, that you
meditate revealing the sacred mysteries, and that to-morrow you meet
again at this place to plan the how and the when. May Osiris sharpen my
ears then, to detect the whole of your unheard-of audacity!  When I have
learned more, I must confer at once with Arbaces.  We will frustrate
you, my friends, deep as you think yourselves.  At present, my breast is
a locked treasury of your secret.'

Thus muttering, Calenus, for it was he, wrapped his robe round him, and
strode thoughtfully homeward.



Chapter II

A CLASSIC HOST, COOK, AND KITCHEN.  APAECIDES SEEKS IONE.  THEIR
CONVERSATION.

IT was then the day for Diomed's banquet to the most select of his
friends. The graceful Glaucus, the beautiful Ione, the official Pansa,
the high-born Clodius, the immortal Fulvius, the exquisite Lepidus, the
epicurean Sallust, were not the only honourers of his festival.  He
expected, also, an invalid senator from Rome (a man of considerable
repute and favor at court), and a great warrior from Herculaneum, who
had fought with Titus against the Jews, and having enriched himself
prodigiously in the wars, was always told by his friends that his
country was eternally indebted to his disinterested exertions!  The
party, however, extended to a yet greater number: for although,
critically speaking, it was, at one time, thought inelegant among the
Romans to entertain less than three or more than nine at their banquets,
yet this rule was easily disregarded by the ostentatious. And we are
told, indeed, in history, that one of the most splendid of these
entertainers usually feasted a select party of three hundred. Diomed,
however, more modest, contented himself with doubling the number of the
Muses.  His party consisted of eighteen, no unfashionable number in the
present day.

It was the morning of Diomed's banquet; and Diomed himself, though he
greatly affected the gentleman and the scholar, retained enough of his
mercantile experience to know that a master's eye makes a ready servant.
Accordingly, with his tunic ungirdled on his portly stomach, his easy
slippers on his feet, a small wand in his hand, wherewith he now
directed the gaze, and now corrected the back, of some duller menial, he
went from chamber to chamber of his costly villa.

He did not disdain even a visit to that sacred apartment in which the
priests of the festival prepare their offerings.  On entering the
kitchen, his ears were agreeably stunned by the noise of dishes and
pans, of oaths and commands.  Small as this indispensable chamber seems
to have been in all the houses of Pompeii, it was, nevertheless, usually
fitted up with all that amazing variety of stoves and shapes, stew-pans
and saucepans, cutters and moulds, without which a cook of spirit, no
matter whether he be an ancient or a modern, declares it utterly
impossible that he can give you anything to eat. And as fuel was then,
as now, dear and scarce in those regions, great seems to have been the
dexterity exercised in preparing as many things as possible with as
little fire.  An admirable contrivance of this nature may be still seen
in the Neapolitan Museum, viz., a portable kitchen, about the size of a
folio volume, containing stoves for four dishes, and an apparatus for
heating water or other beverages.

Across the small kitchen flitted many forms which the quick eye of the
master did not recognize.

'Oh! oh!' grumbled he to himself, 'that cursed Congrio hath invited a
whole legion of cooks to assist him.  They won't serve for nothing, and
this is another item in the total of my day's expenses. By Bacchus!
thrice lucky shall I be if the slaves do not help themselves to some of
the drinking vessels: ready, alas, are their hands, capacious are their
tunics.  Me miserum!'

The cooks, however, worked on, seemingly heedless of the apparition of
Diomed.

'Ho, Euclio, your egg-pan!  What, is this the largest? it only holds
thirty-three eggs: in the houses I usually serve, the smallest egg-pan
holds fifty, if need be!'

'The unconscionable rogue!' thought Diomed; 'he talks of eggs as if they
were a sesterce a hundred!'

'By Mercury!' cried a pert little culinary disciple, scarce in his
novitiate; 'whoever saw such antique sweetmeat shapes as these?--It is
impossible to do credit to one's art with such rude materials.  Why,
Sallust's commonest sweetmeat shape represents the whole siege of Troy;
Hector and Paris, and Helen...  with little Astyanax and the Wooden
Horse into the bargain!'

'Silence, fool!' said Congrio, the cook of the house, who seemed to
leave the chief part of the battle to his allies.  'My master, Diomed,
is not one of those expensive good-for-noughts, who must have the last
fashion, cost what it will!'

'Thou liest, base slave!' cried Diomed, in a great passion--and thou
costest me already enough to have ruined Lucullus himself!  Come out of
thy den, I want to talk to thee.'

The slave, with a sly wink at his confederates, obeyed the command.

'Man of three letters,' said Diomed, with his face of solemn anger, 'how
didst thou dare to invite all those rascals into my house?--I see thief
written in every line of their faces.'

'Yet, I assure you, master, that they are men of most respectable
character--the best cooks of the place; it is a great favor to get them.
But for my sake...'

'Thy sake, unhappy Congrio!' interrupted Diomed; and by what purloined
moneys of mine, by what reserved filchings from marketing, by what
goodly meats converted into grease, and sold in the suburbs, by what
false charges for bronzes marred, and earthenware broken--hast thou been
enabled to make them serve thee for thy sake?'

'Nay, master, do not impeach my honesty!  May the gods desert me if...'

'Swear not!' again interrupted the choleric Diomed, 'for then the gods
will smite thee for a perjurer, and I shall lose my cook on the eve of
dinner. But, enough of this at present: keep a sharp eye on thy
ill-favored assistants, and tell me no tales to-morrow of vases broken,
and cups miraculously vanished, or thy whole back shall be one pain.
And hark thee! thou knowest thou hast made me pay for those Phrygian
attagens enough, by Hercules, to have feasted a sober man for a year
together--see that they be not one iota over-roasted.  The last time, O
Congrio, that I gave a banquet to my friends, when thy vanity did so
boldly undertake the becoming appearance of a Melian crane--thou knowest
it came up like a stone from AEtna--as if all the fires of Phlegethon
had been scorching out its juices. Be modest this time, Congrio--wary
and modest.  Modesty is the nurse of great actions; and in all other
things, as in this, if thou wilt not spare thy master's purse, at least
consult thy master's glory.'

'There shall not be such a coena seen at Pompeii since the days of
Hercules.'

'Softly, softly--thy cursed boasting again!  But I say, Congrio, yon
homunculus--yon pigmy assailant of my cranes--yon pert-tongued neophyte
of the kitchen, was there aught but insolence on his tongue when he
maligned the comeliness of my sweetmeat shapes?  I would not be out of
the fashion, Congrio.'

'It is but the custom of us cooks,' replied Congrio, gravely, to
undervalue our tools, in order to increase the effect of our art. The
sweetmeat shape is a fair shape, and a lovely; but I would recommend my
master, at the first occasion, to purchase some new ones of a...'

'That will suffice,' exclaimed Diomed, who seemed resolved never to
allow his slave to finish his sentences.  'Now, resume thy
charge--shine----eclipse thyself.  Let men envy Diomed his cook--let the
slaves of Pompeii style thee Congrio the great!  Go! yet stay--thou hast
not spent all the moneys I gave thee for the marketing?'   '"All!" alas!
the nightingales' tongues and the Roman tomacula, and the oysters from
Britain, and sundry other things, too numerous now to recite, are yet
left unpaid for.  But what matter? every one trusts the Archimagirus of
Diomed the wealthy!'

'Oh, unconscionable prodigal!--what waste!--what profusion!--I am
ruined! But go, hasten--inspect!--taste!--perform!--surpass thyself!
Let the Roman senator not despise the poor Pompeian.  Away, slave--and
remember, the Phrygian attagens.'

The chief disappeared within his natural domain, and Diomed rolled back
his portly presence to the more courtly chambers.  All was to his
liking--the flowers were fresh, the fountains played briskly, the mosaic
pavements were as smooth as mirrors.

'Where is my daughter Julia?' he asked.

'At the bath.'

'Ah! that reminds me!--time wanes!--and I must bathe also.'

Our story returns to Apaecides.  On awaking that day from the broken and
feverish sleep which had followed his adoption of a faith so strikingly
and sternly at variance with that in which his youth had been nurtured,
the young priest could scarcely imagine that he was not yet in a dream;
he had crossed the fatal river--the past was henceforth to have no
sympathy with the future; the two worlds were distinct and
separate--that which had been, from that which was to be. To what a bold
and adventurous enterprise he had pledged his life!--to unveil the
mysteries in which he had participated--to desecrate the altars he had
served--to denounce the goddess whose ministering robe he wore!  Slowly
he became sensible of the hatred and the horror he should provoke
amongst the pious, even if successful; if frustrated in his daring
attempt, what penalties might he not incur for an offence hitherto
unheard of--for which no specific law, derived from experience, was
prepared; and which, for that very reason, precedents, dragged from the
sharpest armoury of obsolete and inapplicable legislation, would
probably be distorted to meet!  His friends--the sister of his
youth--could he expect justice, though he might receive compassion, from
them? This brave and heroic act would by their heathen eyes be regarded,
perhaps, as a heinous apostasy--at the best as a pitiable madness.

He dared, he renounced, everything in this world, in the hope of
securing that eternity in the next, which had so suddenly been revealed
to him. While these thoughts on the one hand invaded his breast, on the
