
"I'm willing to go," answered Joe. "But, just the same, that policeman
is a pudding head," he added, loudly.

"I'll pudding head you!" cried the bluecoat, but made no attempt to
molest Joe, whose general style he did not fancy.

Side by side Josiah Bean and our hero walked away, until the crowd was
left behind and they were practically alone.

"I'm goin' to count thet money again," said the old countryman, and did
so, to make certain that it was all there.

"We were lucky to spot the rascal, Mr. Bean."

"I didn't spot him--it was you. I'm much obliged to ye."

"Oh, that's all right."

"Seems to me you are entitled to a reward, Joe," went on the old farmer.

"I don't want any reward."

"But you're a-goin' to take it. How would five dollars strike you?"

"Not at all, sir. I don't want a cent."

"Then, maybe, ye won't even come an' take dinner with me," continued the
old man, in disappointed tones.

"Yes, I'll do that, for this chase has made me tremendously hungry."

"If ye ever come down my way, Joe, ye must stop an' call on me."

"I will, Mr. Bean."

"Nuthin' on my farm will be too good for ye, Joe. I'm goin' to tell my
wife Mirandy o' this happenin' an' she'll thank you jest as I've done."

A good restaurant was found not far away and there the two procured a
fine meal and took their time eating it.

"Have ye found work yet?" asked the old man.

"Not yet. I was looking for a job when I met you."

"Well, I hope ye strike wot ye want, lad. But it's hard to git a place
in the city, some times."

"I shall try my level best."

"Wish I could git a job fer ye. But I don't know nubuddy."

"I am going to try the hotels next. I have a strong letter of
recommendation from a hotel man."

"If ye don't git no work in Philadelphy come out on my farm. I'll board
ye all winter fer nuthin'," went on Josiah Bean, generously.

"Thank you, Mr. Bean; you are very kind."

"I mean it. We don't live very high-falutin', but we have plenty o'
plain, good victuals."

"I'll remember what you say," answered our hero.

An hour later he saw the countryman on a train bound for home, and then
he started once more to look for a situation.



CHAPTER XVII.


JOE'S NEW POSITION.


All of that afternoon Joe looked for a position among the various hotels
of the Quaker City. But at each place he visited he received the same
answer, that there was no help needed just then.

"This is discouraging," he told himself, as he retired that night.
"Perhaps I'll have to go to the country or back to Riverside after all."

Yet he was up bright and early the next day and just as eager as ever to
obtain a situation.

He had heard of a new hotel called the Grandon House and visited it
directly after breakfast.

As he entered the corridor he heard his name called and turning around
saw Andrew Mallison.

"How do you do, Mr. Mallison," said our hero, shaking hands. "I didn't
expect to meet you here."

"I've got a little special business in Philadelphia," said the hotel
man. "I came in last night and I am going back this afternoon. How are
you making out?"

"It's all out so far," and Joe smiled faintly at his own joke.

"No situation, eh?"

"That's it."

"Why don't you strike the people here. It's a new place and the
proprietor may need help."

"That is what I came for."

"I'll put in a good word for you, Joe. Come on."

Andrew Mallison led the way to the office and called up a stout,
pleasant looking man.

"Mr. Drew, this is a young friend of mine, Joe Bodley. He worked for
me this summer,--around the boats and also in the hotel. Now that the
season is at an end he is trying to find something to do in the city. If
you have an opening I can recommend him."

Mr. Arthur Drew surveyed Joe critically. The new hotel was to be run in
first-class style and he wanted his help to be of the best. He rather
liked Joe's appearance and he took note of the fact that our hero's
hands were scrupulously clean and that his shoes were blacked.

"I've got almost all the help I need, but I might take him on," he
said, slowly. "One of my present boys does not suit me at all. He is too
impudent."

"Well, Joe is never impudent and he is very reliable," answered Andrew
Mallison.

"I'll give you a trial."

"Thank you, sir."

"The wages will depend upon whether you board here or outside."

"How much will you give me if I stay at the hotel?"

"Four dollars a week."

"And what if I board outside?"

"Nine dollars a week."

"Can you give the boy a pretty fair room?" asked Andrew Mallison. "I
know yo'll like him after he has been here a while."

"He can have a room with another boy. That lad yonder," and the
proprietor of the Grandon House pointed with his hand.

Joe looked and saw that the other lad was gentlemanly looking and rather
pleasant.

"It will suit me to stay here, I think," he said. "Anyway, I am willing
to try it."

"When can you come to work?"

"Right away--or at least, as soon as I can get my suit case from where I
have been stopping."

"Then come in after dinner and I'll tell you what to do and turn you
over to my head man. Randolph, come here!"

At the call a bell boy came up.

"This is another boy who is to work here," said Arthur Drew. "He will
room with you."

"Thank you, Mr. Drew, I'll be glad to get rid of Jack Sagger," said
Frank Randolph.

"What's your name?" he went on to our hero.

"Joe Bodley."

"Mine is Frank Randolph. I guess we'll get along all right."

"I hope so, Frank," said Joe, and shook hands.

There was a little more talk and then Joe left, to get his dress suit
case and a few other things which belonged to him. By one o'clock he was
back to the Grandon House, and just in time to see Andrew Mallison going
away.

"I am much obliged, Mr. Mallison, for what you have done," said our
hero, warmly.

"You're welcome, Joe," answered the hotel man. "I take an interest in
you and I trust you do well here."

"I shall do my best."

After Andrew Mallison had gone Joe was shown around the hotel and
instructed in his various duties. Occasionally he was to do bell-boy
duty, but usually he was to be an all-around helper for the office.

"I think you'll like it here," said Frank Randolph. "It's the best hotel
I've ever worked in. Mr. Drew is a perfect gentleman."

"I am glad to hear it, Frank," answered our hero.

The room assigned to the two boys was a small one on the top floor of
the hotel. But it was clean, contained two nice cots, and Joe felt it
would suit him very well. Frank had hung up a few pictures and had a
shelf full of books and this made the apartment look quite home-like.

"I'm going to buy some books myself, this winter," said Joe. "And when I
get time I am going to do some studying."

"I'm studying myself, Joe. I never had much schooling," returned Frank.

"Are you alone in the world?"

"No, my father is living. But he is rather sickly and lives with an
uncle of mine, over in Camden. He can't work very much, and that is why
I have to support myself. Are you alone?"

"Yes. I think my father is living but I can't locate him."

The next day and for several days following Joe pitched into work in
earnest. Many things were strange to him, but he determined to master
them as speedily as possible, and this pleased Arthur Drew.

"That boy is all right," he said to his cashier. "I am glad that Andrew
Mallison brought him to me."

"Jack Sagger was awfully angry at being discharged," said the cashier.

"It was his own fault. I cannot afford to have a boy around who is
impudent."

What the cashier said about the discharged lad was true. Jack Sagger was
"mad clear through," and he attributed his discharge solely to Joe.

"I'll fix dat pill," he said to one of his chums. "He ain't going to do
me out of my job an' not suffer fer it."

"What are you going to do, Jack?" asked the companion.

"I'll mash him, dat's wot I'll do," answered Jack Sagger.

He was a big, rawboned lad, several inches taller than Joe. His face
was freckled, and his lips discolored by cigarette smoking. He was a
thoroughly tough boy and it was a wonder that he had ever been allowed
to work in the hotel at all. He had a fairly good home, but only went
there to sleep and to get his meals.

"Joe, I hear that Jack Sagger is going to make it warm for you," said
Frank, one Monday afternoon.

"I suppose he is angry because I got his position, is that it?"

"Yes."

"What is he going to do?"

"I don't know exactly, but he'll hurt you if he can."

"If he attacks me I'll do what I can to take care of myself," answered
our hero.

That afternoon he was sent out by Mr. Drew on an errand that took him
to a neighborhood occupied largely by wholesale provision houses. As Joe
left the hotel Jack Sagger saw him.

"Dere's dat country jay now," said Sagger.

"Now's your time to git square on him, Jack," said Nick Sammel, his
crony.

"Right you are, Nick. Come on."

"Going to follow him?"

"Yes, till I git him where I want him."

"Going to mash him?"

"Sure. When I git through wid him his own mother won't know him," went
on Jack Sagger, boastfully.

"Maybe he'll git the cops after you, Jack."

"I'll watch out fer dat, Nick, an' you must watch out too," answered
Jack Sagger.

"Are you sure you kin best him? He looks putty strong."

"Huh! Can't I fight? Didn't I best Sam Nolan, and Jerry Dibble?"

"That's right, Jack."

"Just let me git one chanct at him an' he'll run away, you see if he
don't. But he shan't git away until I give him a black eye an' knock out
a couple of his front teeth fer him," concluded the boaster.



CHAPTER XVIII.


JOE SHOWS HIS MUSCLE.


All unconscious that he was being followed, our hero went on his errand
to a wholesale provision house that supplied the Grandon Hotel with
meats and poultry. He felt in good spirits and so whistled lightly as he
walked.

Arriving at the place of business he transacted his errand as speedily
as possible and then started to return to the hotel.

He was just passing the entrance to a factory yard when he felt a hand
on his shoulder, and wheeling around found himself confronted by Jack
Sagger, Nick Sammel, and half a dozen others, who had gathered to see
their leader "polish off" the country boy.

"What do you want?" demanded Joe, sharply.

"You know well enough wot I want, country!" exclaimed Jack Sagger.

"I do not."

"You took my job away from me, an' I'm goin' to pay you fer doing it."

"Mr. Drew had a perfect right to discharge you, Jack Sagger. He said you
were impudent and he didn't want you around any more."

"You can't preach to me, country! Do you know wot I'm goin' ter do?"

"No."

"I'm going to make you promise to leave dat job. Will yer promise?"

"No."

"Den you have got to fight," and Jack Sagger began to pull up his rather
dirty coat sleeves.

"Supposing I don't want to fight?" went on our hero, as calmly as he
could.

"Yer got ter do it, country--or else make dat promise."

"I'll make no promise to you."

"Den take dat!"

As Jack Sagger uttered the last words he launched a blow at Joe's nose.
But our hero ducked and the blow went wide of its mark.

"Give it to him, Jack!"

"Show him what you can do!"

"Keep off," came from Joe. "If you don't, you'll get hurt!"

"Hear dat now! Jack, pitch in, quick, before anybody comes!"

Thus urged Jack Sagger struck out once more, landing on Joe's chest.
Then our hero drew back and sent in a blow with all his force. It took
the other boy squarely on the chin and sent him staggering against a
friend.

If ever there was a surprised boy that boy was Jack Sagger. He
had expected that to "polish off" Joe would be easy and he had not
anticipated such a defense as had been made. He righted himself and
gazed stupidly at our hero.

"Wot did yer hit me fer?" he gasped.

