Hessians at Bordentown with that ragged lot."

"But what can they have assembled them for within twelve miles of the
place?" Harold asked.

"It seems to me," the hunter replied, "that it's jest a trick to draw
the Germans out from Bordentown and so away from Trenton. At any rate,
it's well that the true account of the force here should be known.
These things gets magnified, and they may think that there's a hull
army here."

It was getting dusk when they entered Bordentown, and Harold was glad
when he saw the little town, for since sunset on the evening before they
had tramped nearly sixty miles. The place seemed singularly quiet. They
asked the first person they met what had become of the troops, and they
were told that Colonel Donop, who commanded, had marched an hour before
with his whole force of 2000 men toward Mount Holly, leaving only 80 men
in garrison at Bordentown.

"We are too late," Harold said. "They have gone by the road and we kept
straight through the woods and so missed them."

"Waal, I hope no harm 'ill come of it. I suppose they mean to attack at
daylight, and in course that rabble will run without fighting. I hope,
when the colonel sees as how thar's no enemy ther worth speaking of,
he'll march straight back again."

Unfortunately this was not the case. The militia, according to their
orders, at once dispersed when their outposts told them of the approach
of the British, but the German officer, instead of returning instantly,
remained for two days near Mount Holly, and so gave time to Washington
to carry out his plans.

Captain Wilson's company had gone out with the force, and Peter and his
companions had the house to themselves that night. Harold slept late,
being thoroughly fatigued by his long march the day before, carrying his
rifle, blanket, and provisions. Peter woke him at last.

"Now, young un, you've had a good sleep; it's eleven o'clock. I'm off to
Trenton to see what's doing there. Will you go with me, or will you stop
here on the chance of eating your dinner with your father?"

"Oh, it's Christmas Day," Harold said, stretching. "Well, what do you
think, Peter--are they likely to come back or not?"

"They ought to be back, there's no doubt about that, but whether they
will or not is a different affair altogether. I've never seed them hurry
themselves yet, not since the war began; things would have gone a good
deal better if they had; but time never seems of no consequence to them.
They marched twelve miles last night, and I reckon it's likely they'll
halt to-day and won't be back till to-morrow. I feel oneasy in my mind
about the whole affair, for I can't see a single reason for the enemy
sending that weak force to Mount Holly, unless it was to draw away the
troops from here, and the only motive there could be for that would be
because they intended to attack Trenton."

"Very well, Peter, I will go with you."

Accompanied by Jake they set out at once for Trenton. On arriving there
they found no particular signs of vigilance. Since the Hessians had
reached Trenton their discipline had much relaxed. A broad river
separated them from the enemy, who were known to be extremely
discontented and disorganized. They had received instruction on no
account to cross the river to attack the colonials, and the natural
consequence of this forced inactivity had manifested itself. Discipline
was lax, and but a slight watch was kept on the movements of the enemy
across the stream. Ignorant of the language of the people, they were
incapable of distinguishing between those who were friendly and those
who were hostile to the Crown, and they behaved as if in a conquered
country; taking such necessaries as they required without payment, and
even sending parties to a considerable distance on plundering
expeditions.

Peter, on his arrival, proceeded to the headquarters of Colonel Rhalle,
who was in command--an officer of great bravery and energy. One of his
officers was able to speak English, and to him Peter reported the
departure of the force from Bordentown, of which Colonel Rhalle was
already aware, and the weakness of the American force at Mount Holly.
He stated, also, his own belief that it was merely a feint to draw off
Colonel Donop, and that preparatory to an attack on Trenton. The
officer treated the information lightly, and pointing to the mass of
ice floating down the river asked whether it would be possible for
boats to cross.

"When the river freezes," he said, "there may be some chance of attack.
Till then we are absolutely safe."

Peter, shaking his head, rejoined his companions and told them of the
manner in which his advice had been received.

"But it would be difficult to cross the river," Harold said. "Look at
the masses of ice on the water."

"It would be difficult," the hunter admitted, "but not by no manner of
means impossible. Determined men could do it. Waal, I've done my duty
and can do no more. Ef the night passes off quietly we'll cross again
before daybreak and go right into the Yankee camp and see what they're
up to. Now, Harold, you can take it easy till nightfall; there's naught
to be learned till then, and as we shall be on foot all night ye may as
well sleep to-day."

Returning to a spot on the banks of the river at a short distance from
the town, they made a fire, on which Jake cooked some steaks of
venison they had procured. After smoking a pipe, the hunter set the
example by stretching himself on the ground near the fire and going to
sleep. Used as he was to night marches, he had acquired the faculty of
going to sleep at any hour at will. Jake and Harold were some time
before they followed his example, but they too were at last asleep. At
sunset they were on their feet again, and after taking supper
proceeded along the river.

The night passed off quietly, and Harold became convinced that his
companion's fears were unfounded. Toward morning he suggested that it
was time to be crossing the river.

"I'm not going yet," the hunter said. "Before I start we'll go down to
Trenton Ferry, a mile below the town. Ef they come over at all, it's
likely enough to be there. There'll be time then to get back and cross
before it's light; It's six o'clock now."

They kept along the road by the river until they were within a quarter
of a mile of the ferry. Presently they saw a dark mass ahead.

"Jerusalem!" Peter exclaimed. "There they are."

They immediately discharged their rifles and ran back at full speed to
the outposts, which were but a quarter of a mile from the town. The
Americans had also pressed forward at full speed, and the outposts, who
had been alarmed by the discharge of the rifles, were forced at once to
abandon the post and to run into the town, whither they had, on hearing
the rifles, already sent in one of their number with the news. Here all
was in confusion. The Hessian leader was trying to collect his troops,
who were hurrying in from their quarters, but many of them thought more
of storing their plunder away in the wagons than of taking their places
in the ranks.

Washington had crossed with 2500 men and a few field-pieces, and upon
gaining the Jersey side had divided his troops into two detachments, one
of which marched by the river side, the other by an upper road. Hurrying
forward they surrounded the town, and placing their field-pieces in the
road, opened fire on the astonished Hessians. Rhalle had by this time
succeeded in assembling the greater part of his force and charged the
Americans with his usual courage. He received, however, a mortal wound
as he advanced. His troops immediately lost heart, and finding their
retreat cut off at once surrendered. A body of Hessian light horse
succeeded in making their escape. The casualties were few on either
side, but 1000 prisoners were taken. Two other divisions of the
Americans had attempted to cross, the one at Bordentown, the other at
Mackenzie's Ferry, but both had failed, owing to the quantity of
floating ice. Washington retired across the Delaware the same afternoon.

The consequences of this success were great. The spirits of the
Americans, which had fallen to the lowest ebb in consequence of the
uninterrupted series of defeats, rose greatly. They found that the
British were not invincible, and that, if unable to oppose them in great
battles, they might at least inflict heavy losses on them and weary them
out with skirmishes and surprises. The greatest joy reigned throughout
the various States; fresh levies were ordered; the voices of the
moderate party, which had been gaining strength, were silenced, and the
determination to continue the war vigorously was in the ascendency.

The lesson given at Trenton was wholly lost upon the English
commander-in-chief. Instead of at once ordering General Leslie to
advance from Princeton and to hold the enemy in check by reoccupying and
fortifying Trenton, he allowed Colonel Donop to abandon Bordentown and
to fall back to Princeton--thus laying it open to Washington to cross
the Delaware again and carry the war into New Jersey. Washington, after
waiting eight days, seeing the indecision and ineptitude of the British
general, again crossed with 4000 men and occupied Trenton.

Peter Lambton and his two companions were not among the prisoners
taken at Trenton. On entering the town Harold was about to join the
Hessians assembling under Colonel Rhalle, but Peter gave a violent tug
to his coat.

"Come along, young un!" he said. "The darned fools have let themselves
be caught in a trap and they'll find there's no way out of it. In ten
minutes the Americans will be all round the place, and as I don't wish
to spend a year or two in a Yankee prison at present, I'm going to make
tracks at once. Fighting aren't no good now. Men who'll let 'emselves
be caught in a trap like this'll never be able to cut their way out of
it. Come on!"

Much against his will Harold yielded to Peter's wishes, and the three
kept straight on through the town by the river side and issued into the
country beyond before the Americans had surrounded it. A minute or two
after leaving the town the light horse galloped past.

"There are some more out of the hole, and I reckon that's about all.
There, do you hear the guns? The Yanks have brought their artillery
over--I reckon the fight won't last long."

For two or three minutes there was a roar of musketry; then this
suddenly ceased.

"I thought as much," Peter said. "They've surrendered. If they had only
kept together and fought well, they should have cut their way through
the enemy. Lord! what poor things regular soldiers are in the dark! A
frontiersman would just as soon fight in the dark as in the light; but
here are the men who climbed up the hill to Fort Washington--and that
was no child's play--no better nor a pack of women when they're attacked
half-asleep and half-awake, just as day is breaking."

The three comrades walked to Bordentown, which, they were relieved to
find, had not been attacked. A few miles beyond this place they met
Colonel Donop marching back at full speed with his corps, having
received the news of the disaster at Trenton from the horsemen who had
fled. They joined their company and marched to Princeton.

A fortnight later Lord Cornwallis, with the forces at Brunswick, under
General Grant, advanced to Princeton and then moved forward to attack
the army at Trenton. General Washington on his approach retired from the
town and, crossing a rivulet at the back of it, took post on some high
ground there, with the apparent intention of defending himself against
an attack. It was late in the afternoon, and a heavy cannonade was kept
up till night-time. Lord Cornwallis determined to attack next morning.
At two in the morning Washington retired suddenly, leaving his fires
burning. Quitting the main road he made a long circuit through Allentown
and marched with all speed toward Princeton, which place he intended to
surprise. When Lord Cornwallis advanced he had left the Seventeenth,
Fortieth, and Fifty-fifth regiments there.

On arriving at Trenton he had sent word back for the Seventeenth and
Fifty-fifth to advance to Maidenhead, a village halfway between
Princeton and Trenton. Colonel Mawhood, who commanded, marched at
daylight, but scarcely had he started when he met Washington advancing
with his army. The morning was foggy, and it was at first supposed that
the enemy were a body of British troops marching back to Princeton, but
it was soon found that the force was a hostile one. Its strength could
not be seen on account of the fog, and he determined to engage it.
Possessing himself of some high ground, he sent his wagons back to
Princeton and ordered the Fortieth Regiment to come out to his
assistance.

As the Americans advanced, the artillery on both sides opened fire. The
leading columns of the colonists soon showed signs of disorder. The
Seventeenth Regiment fixed bayonets and with great gallantry charged the
enemy in front of them, driving them back with considerable slaughter;
and so far did they advance that they were separated from the other
battalions, and cutting their way through the American force the
regiment pursued its march to Maidenhead. The Fortieth and Fifty-fifth
fought stoutly, but were unable to make their way through the American
force, and fell back to Brunswick, while the Americans occupied
Princeton. At daybreak Lord Cornwallis discovered the retreat of the
American army, and being apprehensive for the safety of Brunswick, where
great stores of the army were accumulated, marched with all haste toward
that town.

Brigadier Matthew, the officer commanding there, on hearing of the
approach of the enemy, at once dispatched the store wagons toward the
rear and drew up his small command to defend the place to the last. The
gallant resistance before Princeton had delayed the Americans so long
that the van of the army of Cornwallis was already close to their rear
as they approached Brunswick. Seeing this, Washington abandoned his
design on that town and crossed the Millstone River, breaking down the
bridge at Kingston to stop pursuit.

Washington now overran East and West Jersey, penetrated into Essex
County, and making himself master of the country opposite to Staten
Island, thus regained almost all the district which the English had
taken from him in the autumn.

All this greatly heightened the spirit and courage of the Americans,
while the loyalists and the English troops were disheartened and
disgusted at seeing an army of 30,000 fine troops kept inactive, while
the enemy, with but 4000 men, who were wholly incapable of opposing an
equal number of English troops, were allowed to wander unchecked, to
attack and harass the English pickets, and to utilize the whole of the
resources of their country. Had General Howe entertained a fixed desire
to see English authority overthrown in America he could not have acted
in a manner more calculated to carry those wishes into effect.




CHAPTER X.


A TREACHEROUS PLANTER.

It must not be supposed that the whole of the time was spent in scouting
and fighting. Between the armies lay a band of no man's land. Here, as
elsewhere, the people of the country were divided in their opinions, but
generally made very little display of these, whatever they might be. It
is true that, as a rule, non-combatants were but little interfered with;
still, a warm and open display of sympathy with one side or the other
was likely to be attended by the loss of cattle and damage to crops when
the other party got the upper hand. In some other States feeling ran
much higher. In the Carolinas the royalists were most cruelly
persecuted. Their property was destroyed and they were, in many cases,
shot down without mercy; but generally, throughout the colonies, a
considerable latitude of opinion was allowed. This was especially so in
the zone between the armies in the Jerseys. None could tell what the
positions of the armies a week hence might be, and any persecution
inflicted by the one party might lead to retaliation upon a shift of
positions a few weeks later. A general toleration therefore reigned.

Next to Peter Lambton, Harold's greatest friend in the corps was a young
man named Harvey. He was of good family and belonged to New York. Being
a strong loyalist, he had, like many other gentlemen, enlisted for
service under the old flag. He had, naturally, many acquaintances among
the county families, and Harold often accompanied him in his visits to
one or other of them.

During the winter, when things were quiet, the duties of the scouts were
light, and it was the habit among them that one-third should be on
outpost duty at a time, the rest being free to move about as they liked.
The scouts had no fixed order of position. They went out alone or in
twos or threes, as it pleased them, their duty simply being to watch
everything that was going on along the enemy's line of outposts, to
bring the earliest news of any intended movements, and to prevent
dashing parties of the enemy's horsemen from making raids into or behind
the British lines. They were not, of course, expected to check bodies of
cavalry starting on a raid, but simply to obtain information of their
having left their lines and of the direction taken, and then to hurry
back to the British posts, whence a force of cavalry would be sent out
to intercept or check the invaders. Many dashing exploits were performed
by the cavalry on both sides in the way of getting behind their
opponents' quarters, cutting off provision trains, attacking small
posts, and carrying off straggling parties.

One of the houses to which Harold used most frequently to accompany his
friend Harvey was situated nearly halfway between the rival armies, and
was about eight miles from either. The owner--Mr. Jackson--was a man of
considerable wealth, and the house was large and well appointed. He had,
before the troubles began, a fine business as a lawyer in New York; but,
as the outbreak of hostilities put a stop to all business of a legal
kind in that city, he had retired to his country house. Although himself
born in England, he professed to be entirely neutral, but his family
were undisguisedly loyal. It consisted of his wife and two daughters,
girls of seventeen and eighteen years old.

When the English army advanced to the neighborhood of his property Mr.
Jackson was always ready to offer his hospitality to the officers of the
corps which might be stationed near him, and he similarly opened his
house to the Americans when they, in turn, advanced as the British
turned back. Being, as he always made a point of saying, perfectly
neutral in the struggle, he was glad to meet gentlemen, irrespective of
the opinions they held. The line taken by Mr. Jackson was the one which
was very largely pursued among the inhabitants of the country houses and
farms scattered over what was, throughout the war, a debatable land. So
frequent were the changes of the position of the armies that none could
say who might be in possession in a week's time, and it was, therefore,
an absolute necessity for those who wished to live unmolested to abstain
from any stronger show of partisanship.

As is always the case in struggles of this kind, the female population
were more enthusiastic in their partisanship and more pronounced in
their opinions than the men; and although, upon the arrival of a troop
of cavalry or a detachment of foot belonging to the other side, the
master of the house would impartially offer what hospitality he was
capable of, it was not difficult to perceive, by the warmth or coldness
of the female welcome, what were the private sentiments of the family.

Harold was not long in discovering, from the frequency with which Harvey
proposed an excursion to the Jacksons' and from his conduct there, that
Isabelle, the eldest daughter, was the object which mainly attracted
him. The families had long been friends, and Harvey, although now
serving as a simple scout, was of a position equal to her own. The
friends were always cordially received by Mr. Jackson, and Harold was
soon as intimate there as his comrade. They usually left their quarters
a little before dusk and started back late at night. Often as Mr.
Jackson pressed them to stay, they never accepted his invitation.

The scouts, from their activity and ubiquitousness, were the
_betes-noirs_ of the Americans, whose most secret plans were constantly
detected and foiled by the sagacity and watchfulness of these men, whose
unerring rifles made frequent gaps in the ranks of the officers. They
therefore spared no pains, whenever there was a chance, of killing or
capturing any of these most troublesome foes, and Harvey and Harold knew
that a report of their presence at the Jacksons' would suffice to bring
a party of horsemen from the American lines. Their visits, therefore,
were always made after dark, and at irregular intervals, and, in spite
of their inclination to the contrary they made a point of returning at
night to their quarters.

Other visitors were often present at the Jacksons', the sons and
daughters of neighbors, and there was generally music and singing, and
sometimes the young people stood up for a dance.

The scouts wore no regular uniform, although there was a general
similarity in their attire, which was that of an ordinary backwoods
hunter. When off duty they were allowed to dress as they pleased, and at
Mr. Jackson's the two friends were attired in the ordinary dress of
colonists of position. At these little gatherings political subjects
were never discussed, and a stranger spending an evening there would not
have dreamed that the house stood between two hostile armies; that at
any moment a party of horsemen belonging to one side or other might dash
into the courtyard, and that even those laughing and talking pleasantly
