Ouvrier class.

"I tell you it is too bad, Pere Dufaure. A year ago she pretended she
liked me, and the fact that she wore good dresses and was earning lots
of money did not seem to make any difference in her. But now all that is
changed. That foreigner has turned her head. She thinks now she is
going to be a lady and has thrown me over as if I were dirt, but I won't
have it," and he struck his fist upon the table, "those cursed
aristocrats are not to have everything their own way."

"Patience, Jean. Women will be women, and the right way to win her back
is to have patience and wait. I don't say that just at present her head
is not turned with this American, who by the way is a good Republican,
and though he has money, has good notions, and holds with us that we
have too long been ground down by the bourgeois, still she may tire of
him after a while. He is not amusing, this American, and though Minette
may like being adored, she likes being amused also. Pooh, pooh, this
matter will come all right. Besides, although she likes the American at
present, she thinks more of the Commune than of any lover. Have patience
and do not quarrel with her. You know that I am on your side. But
Minette is a good deal like what her mother was. Ah, these women! A man
can do nothing with them when they make up their minds to have their own
way. What can I say to her? I can not threaten to turn her out of the
house for everything in it is hers. It is she who earns the money. She
is too old to be beaten, and if it comes to scolding, her tongue runs
faster than mine does, and you know besides she has a temper."

Jean nodded.

"She is worse than a wild-cat when her back is up," he said. "Why, when
this thing first began, and I told her to beware how she went on with
this American, for that I would kill him if he came in my way, she
caught up a knife, and if I had not run like a rabbit, she would have
stuck me, and you know how she went on, and drove me out of Montmartre.
After that affair I have not dared see her."

"Why not let her go? and take to someone else, Jean? There are plenty of
pretty girls in the quarter who would not say no to the best rising
worker in his trade."

"It is no use, Pere Dufaure, I have told myself the same a hundred
times, but I cannot do it. She has her tempers, what woman has not; but
at other times who is so bright and gay as she is?"

"Well, well, Jean, we shall see what we shall see. You don't suppose
that if things do not turn out well, as we hope they will do, I should
let her carry out this whim of hers, and go off with the American, and
leave me to shift for myself. Not such a fool. At present I say nothing.
It is always better to hold your tongue as long as you can. I make him
welcome when he comes to our house; we go together to the meetings, and
sometimes he speaks, and speaks well, though he does not go far enough
for us. Well, no one can say what may happen--he may be shot by the
Germans, or he may be shot at the barricades, who knows. At any rate it
is best to hold my peace. If I leave things alone, Minette is as likely
as not to change her mind again, but if I were to say anything against
him--first, we should have a scene; secondly, she would be more than
ever determined on this whim. You must be patient, Jean, and all will
come well in the end."

"I am not so sure of that," Jean said, sullenly. "I was as patient as I
could be, but no good came of it; then, as you know, I tried to get rid
of him, but failed, and had to move away, but one thing is certain, if I
don't marry her he never shall. However, I can wait."

"That is all right, Jean; wait till our little affairs come off and the
bourgeois are under our feet. There will be good posts for true citizens
then, and I will see that you have one, and it will be time to talk
about marriages when everything is going on well. When we once get the
Germans out of the way, we shall see what we shall see, Sapristie! we
will make short work of the capitalists, and as for the troops, they
will have had enough fighting and will be ready enough to march off and
leave us alone."

At the time they were talking, the couple they were speaking of were
standing leaning on the parapet of the wall by the river. They met there
every evening when there was no assembly of importance to attend.

"I wish it was all over, Minette," he said, "and that we could leave
the city and be off. It would be a different life for you, dear, but I
hope a pleasanter one. There would be no cold weather like this, but you
can sit all the year round in the veranda without needing wraps. There
will be servants to wait on you, and carriages, and everything you can
wish for, and when you are disposed there will be society; and as all of
our friends speak French, you will soon be quite at home with them. And,
what one thinks of a good deal at present, there will be fruits and
flowers, and plenty to eat, and no sound of cannon, and no talk of wars.
We fought out our war ten years ago."

"It sounds nice, Arnold, very nice, but it will be strange not to work."

"You won't want to work there," he said; "in the day it is so hot that
you will be glad to sit indoors in a darkened room and do nothing. I
shall paint a good deal, and when you have the fancy, you can sit as my
model again."

"And is it a large city, Arnold? It seems to me now that I could not
live in the country, I should soon get dreadfully tired of it."

"It is a large city," he said, "though, of course, not so large as
Paris. There are theatres there and amusements of all sorts."

"I should be content with you, Arnold. It does not seem to me that I
could want anything else, but after all this excitement it will seem
strange to have nothing to do."

"I shall be glad to be out of it," he said. "Your father and the others
are quite right--the rich have too much and the poor too little. The
manufacturers gain fortunes, and the men whose work enriches them remain
poor all their lives. Still I fear that they will go too far, and that
troubles me."

She made a quick movement as if about to speak, but checked herself for
a moment, and then said, quietly--

"You know the proverb, Arnold, 'One cannot make an omelette without
breaking eggs.'"

"That is true," he said, "as to an omelette, but a change of Government
can be carried out without costing life, that is unless there is
resistance, and I hope there will be none here. The incapables over
there will slink away. Why, Flourens and a few hundred men were enough
to snatch the government out of their feeble hands. If the people
declare that they will govern themselves, who is to withstand them. I
hope to see the triumph and then to go. You know I am not a coward,
Minette; our corps have shown that they can fight, but I long for my
quiet home again, with its gardens and flowers, and balmy air, and I
like handling a paint-brush much better than a rifle, and above all to
see you mistress of my home, but I know there is a good deal to go
through first. Trochu's plans may be carried out any day."

"Ah! Those Prussians!" she exclaimed, in a tone of the deepest hate,
with a gesture of defiance towards Versailles. "They will dare to fire
at you!"

"Yes, I imagine they will do that, Minette," he said with a laugh, "and
pretty hotly, too."

"Well, if they kill you," she said, passionately, "I will avenge you. I
will go out through the outposts and will find my way to Versailles, and
I will kill William or Bismarck. They may kill me afterwards, I care
nothing for that. Charlotte Corday was a reactionist, but she slew Marat
and died calmly and bravely. I could do as much and would to revenge
you."

"I hope you would not attempt anything so mad, Minette. Of course, I
must take my chance as everyone else will do, and the Prussians will be
no more to blame if one of their bullets killed me than if it had struck
anyone else. Everyone who goes into a battle has to run his chances. I
had an elder brother killed in the civil war we had in the States. I
have no great love for the North, but I do not blame them especially for
the death of my brother. There were a great number killed on both sides,
and that he should be among them was the fortune of war. But it is
bitterly cold, Minette; let us be walking. I am glad we are not on
outpost duty to-night. I put on so many flannel shirts that I can hardly
button my tunic over them, but in spite of that it is cold work standing
with one's hands on one's trigger looking out into the darkness. It is
quite a relief when a rifle rings out either from our side or the
other. Then for a bit everyone is alive and active, we think the
Prussians are advancing, and they think we are, and we both blaze away
merrily for a bit. Then there is a lull again, and perhaps an hour or
two of dreary waiting till there is a fresh alarm. As soon as we are
relieved, we hurry off to our quarter, where there is sure to be a fire
blazing. Then we heat up the coffee in our canteens, pouring in a little
spirits, and are soon warm again."

"I cannot see why they don't form corps of women, Arnold; we have just
as much at stake as the men have, and I am sure we should be quite as
brave as the most of them, a great deal braver than the National Guard."

"I have no doubt you would, dear, but it will be quite time for you to
fight when all the men are used up. What the women ought to do is to
drive the men outside the walls. If the women were to arm themselves
with mops soaked in dirty water, and were to attack every man under
forty they found lurking in the streets, they would soon make a change
in things. You should begin in your own quarter first, for although they
are always denouncing the bourgeois for not fighting, I cannot see that
there is any more eagerness to go out at Montmartre than there is in the
quarter of the Bank--in fact, a great deal less."

"Why should the ouvriers fight with the Germans, Arnold--to them it
matters little whether Paris is taken by the Germans or not--it is not
they whose houses will be sacked, it is not they who will have to pay
the indemnity."

"No, but at least they are Frenchmen. They can talk enough about the
honor of France, but it is little they do to preserve it. They shout,
'the Prussians must be destroyed,' and then go off quietly to their
cabarets to smoke and drink. I do not admire the bourgeois, but I do not
see anything more admirable among the ouvriers. They talk grandly but
they do nothing. There is no difficulty in getting volunteers for the
war companies among the National Guard of the centre, though to them the
extra pay is nothing; but at Belleville and Montmartre the war companies
don't fill up. They rail at the bourgeois but when it comes to fighting
outside the walls I will wager that the shopkeepers show the most
courage."

"They will fight when there is anything to fight for," she said,
confidently, "but they don't care to waste their time on the walls when
there is nothing to do, and the Germans are miles away."

"Well, we shall see," he replied, grimly. "Anyhow, I wish it were all
over, and that we were on our way home. You have never seen a ship yet,
Minette. You will be astonished when you go on board one of the great
liners," and as they walked along the Boulevards he told her of the
floating palaces, in one of which they were to cross the ocean, and
forgetting for a time the questions that absorbed her, she listened with
the interest of a child hearing a fairy-tale. When they neared
Montmartre they separated, for Minette would never walk with him in her
own quarter.

The next morning, November 28th, the order was issued that the gates
were to be closed and that no one was to be allowed to pass out under
any pretext whatever. No one doubted that the long-expected sally was to
be carried out. Bodies of troops marched through the streets, trains of
wagons with munitions of war moved in the same direction, and in an hour
all Paris knew that the sortie was to take place somewhere across the
loop formed by the Marne.

"It is for to-morrow," Pierre Leroux exclaimed, running into Cuthbert's
room, "we are to parade at daybreak. The gates are shut, and troops are
moving about everywhere."

"All right, Pierre; we have been looking for it for so long, that it
comes almost as a surprise at last."

Cuthbert got up, made himself a cup of coffee, drank it with a piece of
dry bread, and then sallied out. Mary would be on duty at ten o'clock.
He knew the road she took on her way to the hospital and should meet
her. In half an hour he saw the trim figure in the dark dress, and the
white band round the arm.

"I suppose you have heard that we are going to stir up the German nest
to-morrow," he said gayly.

"Yes, I have heard," she said, sadly, "it is very dreadful."

"It is what we have been waiting for and longing for for the last two
months. We are to be under arms at daybreak, and as you will be at the
ambulance for the next twenty-four hours I thought I would make an
effort to catch you on the way. I want you to come round to my
lodgings."

She looked surprised.

"Of course I will come," she said frankly, "but what do you want me to
do that for?"

"Well, there is no saying as to who will come back again tomorrow, Mary,
and I want you to see my two pictures. I have been working at them for
the last two months steadily. They are not quite finished yet, but
another week would have been enough for the finishing touches, but I
don't suppose you will miss them. Nobody has seen them yet, and nobody
would have seen them till they were quite ready, but as it is possible
they never may be finished I should like you to see them now. I am not
taking you up under any false pretences," he said, lightly, "nor to try
again to get you to change your mission. I only want you to see that I
have been working honestly. I could see when I have spoken of my
painting there was always a little incredulity in the way in which you
listened to me. You had so completely made up your mind that I should
never be earnest about anything that you could not bring yourself to
believe that I wasn't amusing myself with art here, just as I did in
London. I had intended to have brought them triumphantly in a fiacre to
your place, when they were finished, and I can't deny myself the
pleasure of disabusing your mind. It is not far out of your way, and if
we walk fast you can still arrive at your ambulance in time. If there
were any fiacres about I would call one, but they have quite
disappeared. In the first place, because no one is rich enough to be
able to pay for such luxuries, and in the second, because most of the
horses have been turned to other uses."

She did not seem to pay very much attention to what he was saying, but
broke in with the question--

"Do you think there will be much fighting?"

"It would be folly to try to persuade you that there won't," he said.
"When there are so many thousand men with guns and cannon who are
determined to get out of a place, and an equal number of men with guns
and cannon just as determined to keep them in, the chances are that, as
the Irish say, there will be wigs on the green. I do not suppose the
loss will be great in comparison to the number engaged, because
certainly a good many of the French will reconsider their determination
to get out, and will be seized with a burning desire to get back as soon
as the German shells begin to fall among them, still I do hope that they
will make a decent fight of it. I know there are some tremendously
strong batteries on the ground enclosed by the loop of the Marne, which
is where they say it is going to be, and the forts will be able to help,
so that certainly for a time we shall fight with great advantages. I do
wish that it was not so cold, fighting is bad enough in summer; but the
possibility of lying out all night on the snow wounded is one I very
strongly object to."

He continued to talk in the same light strain, until they reached his
lodgings, in order to put the girl at her ease.

"So this is your sitting-room," she said, with a laugh that had a tremor
in it, "it is just what I supposed it would be, very untidy, very dusty,
and yet in its way, comfortable. Where are the pictures?"

"Behind that screen; I keep them in strict seclusion there. Now if you
will sit down by the window I will bring the easels out."

She did as he told her. The pictures were covered when he brought them
out. He placed them where the light would fall best on them, and then
removed the cloths.

"They have not arrived at the glories of frames yet," he said, "but you
must make allowances for that. I can assure you they will look much
larger and more important when they are in their settings."

The girl sat for a minute without speaking. They were reproductions on a
larger scale and with all the improvements that his added skill and
experience could introduce of the two he had exhibited to M. Goude, when
he entered the studio.

"I had intended to do battle-pieces," he said, "and have made
innumerable sketches, but somehow or other the inspiration did not come
in that direction, so I fell back on these which are taken from smaller
ones I painted before I left London. Do you like them? You see I hang
upon your verdict. You at present represent the public to me."

There were tears standing in the girl's eyes.

"They are beautiful," she said, softly, "very beautiful. I am not a
judge of painting, though I have been a good deal in the galleries of
Dresden, and I was at Munich too; and I know enough to see they are
painted by a real artist. I like the bright one best, the other almost
frightens me, it is so sad and hopeless, I think--" and she hesitated,
"that girl in the veranda is something like me, though I am sure I never
look a bit like that, and I am nothing--nothing like so pretty."

"You never look like that, Miss Brander, because you have never felt as
that girl is supposed to be feeling; some day when the time comes that
you feel as she does you will look so. That is a woman, a woman who
loves. At present that side of your nature has not woke up. The
intellectual side of you, if I may so speak, has been forced, and your
soul is still asleep. Some day you will admit that the portrait, for I
own it to be a portrait, is a life-like one. Now--" he broke off
abruptly, "we had better be going or you will be late at your post."

She said no more until they were in the street.

"I have been very wrong," she said suddenly, after walking for some time
in silence. "You must have worked hard indeed. I own I never thought
that you would. I used to consider your sketches very pretty, but I
never thought that you would come to be a great artist."

"I have not come to that yet," he said, "but I do hope that I may come
to be a fair one some day--that is if the Germans don't forcibly
interfere--but I have worked very hard, and I may tell you that Goude,
who is one of the best judges in Paris, thinks well of me. I will ask
you to take care of this," he said, and he took out a blank envelope.
"This is my will. A man is a fool who goes into a battle without making
provision for what may happen. When I return you can hand it to me
again. If I should not come back please inclose it to your father. He
will see that its provisions are carried out. I may say that I have left
you the two pictures. You have a right to them, for if it had not been
for you I don't suppose they would ever have been painted. I only wish
that they had been quite finished."

Mary took the paper without a word, nor did she speak again until they
arrived at the ambulance, then she turned and laid her hand in his.

"Good-bye, Mary, I hope I shall ask you for that envelope back again in
a couple of days."

"God grant that it may be so," she said, "I shall suffer so till you
do."

"Yes, we have always been good friends, haven't we? Now, child, you
always used to give me a kiss before I left you then. Mayn't I have one
now?"

She held up her face, he kissed her twice, and then turned and strode
away.

"I wonder whether she will ever grow to be a woman," he said to himself,
bitterly, "and discover that there is a heart as well as brains in her
composition. There was no more of doubt or hesitation in the way in
which she held up her face to be kissed, than when she did so as a
child. Indeed, as a child, I do think she would have cried if I told her
at parting that I was going away for good. Well, it is of no use blaming
her. She can't help it if she is deficient in the one quality that is of
all the most important. Of course she has got it and will know it some
day, but at present it is latent and it is evident that I am not the man
who has the key of it. She was pleased at my pictures. It was one of her
ideas that I ought to do something, and she is pleased to find that I
have buckled to work in earnest, just as she would be pleased if
Parliament would pass a law giving to women some of the rights which she
has taken it into her head they are deprived of. However, perhaps it is
better as it is. If anything happens to me to-morrow, she will be sorry
for a week or two just as she would if she lost any other friend, while
if Arnold Dampierre goes down Minette will for a time be like a mad
woman. At any rate my five thousand will help her to carry out her
crusade. I should imagine that she won't get much aid in that direction
from her father.

"Halloa, I know that man's face," he broke off as he noticed a
well-dressed man turn in at the door of a quiet-looking residence he was
just approaching, "I know his face well; he is an Englishman, too, but I
can't think where I have seen him." He could not have told himself why
he should have given the question a second thought, but the face kept
haunting him in spite of the graver matters in his mind, and as he
reached the door of his lodgings he stopped suddenly.

"I have it," he exclaimed, "it is Cumming, the manager of the bank, the
fellow that ruined it and then absconded. I saw they were looking for
him in Spain and South America and a dozen other places, and here he is.
By Jove, he is a clever fellow. I suppose he came here as soon as the
war broke out, knowing very well that the police would have plenty of
other things to think of besides inquiring as to the antecedents of
Englishmen who took up their residence here. Of course he has been
absolutely safe since the fall of the Empire. The fellow has grown a
beard and mustache; that is why I did not recognize him at first. Of
course he has taken another name. Well, I don't know that it is any
business of mine. He got off with some money, but I don't suppose it was
any great sum. At any rate it would not be enough to make any material
difference to the creditors of the bank. However, I will think it over
later on. There is no hurry about the matter. He is here till the siege
is over, and I should certainly like to have a talk with him. I have
never been able to get it quite out of my mind that there has been
something mysterious about the whole affair as far as my father was
concerned, though where the mystery comes in is more than I can imagine.
I expect it is simply because I have never liked Brander, and have
always had a strong idea that our popular townsman was at bottom a knave
as well as a humbug."

Mary Brander went about her work very quietly all day, and more than
one of the wounded patients remarked the change in her manner.

"Mademoiselle is suffering to-day," one of them said to her, as he
missed the ring of hopefulness and cheeriness with which she generally
spoke to him.

"I am not feeling well, I have a bad headache; and moreover I have
friends in the sortie that is to be made to-night."

"Ah, yes, mademoiselle, there must be many sad hearts in Paris. As for
me, my spirits have risen since I heard it. At last we are going to
begin in earnest and it is time. I only wish I could have been well
enough to have taken my share in it. It is tiresome to think that I have
been wounded in a trifling skirmish. I should not have minded if it had
been tomorrow, so that, when I am an old man, I might tell my
grandchildren that I got that scar on the day when we drove the
Prussians from the front of Paris. That would have been something to
say. Courage, mademoiselle, after all there are twenty who get through
these things safely, to every one that is hit, and your friends will be
covered with glory."

"I hope that it will be as you think," she said, "but it may be the
other way, and that the sortie will fail."

"You must not think that," he said. "We have not had a fair chance
