He waves his arms like a bird. "Thrush, canary--I mean Stella
Starlight."

For a minute I stand with my mouth open and think of this. Then I rubber
for the ninety-seventh time at the female warbler, who is standing
talking to Frankie, the band leader. She is a thrush new to the band and
plenty cute--a blonde, with everything where it is supposed to be, and
maybe a little extra helping in a couple spots. I give her my usual
approving once-over, just in case I miss something the last ninety-six
approving once-overs I give her.

"What about her?" I say.

"It is her fault I play like I do," Hotlips Grogan tells me sadly. "Come
on. Leave us go guzzle a beer and I will tell you about it."

Just then Frankie comes over, looking nasty like as usual, and he says
to Grogan, "You are not playing too well today, Hotlips. Maybe you hurt
your lip on a beer bottle, huh?"

As usual also, his tone is pretty short on sweetness and light, and I do
not see why Grogan, who looks something like a gorilla's mother-in-law,
takes such guff from a beanpole like Frankie.

But Grogan only says, "I think something is wrong with my trumpet. I
have it fixed before tonight."

Frankie smirks. "Do that," he says, looking like a grinning weasel. "We
want you to play for dancing, not for calling in Martian moose."

Frankie walks away, and Hotlips shrugs.

"Leave us get our beer," he says simply, and we go to the ferry.

We pile into the space-ferry with the other musicians and anyone else
who is going down to dirty old terra firma, and when everybody who is
going aboard is aboard, the doors close, and the ferry drifts into
space. Hotlips and I find seats, and we look back at the gambling ship.
It is a thrill you do not get used to, no matter how many times you see
it.

The sailor boys who build the _Saturn_--they give it the handle of
_Satellite II_ then--would not know their baby now, Frankie does such a
good job of revamping it. Of course, it is not used as a gambling ship
then--at least not altogether, if you know what I mean. Way back in 1998
when they get it in the sky, they are more interested in it being useful
than pretty; anybody that got nasty and unsanitary ideas just forgot
them when they saw that iron casket floating in a sky that could be
filled with hydrogen bombs or old laundry without so much as a four-bar
intro as warning.

Frankie buys _Satellite II_ at a war surplus sale when moon flights
become as easy as commuters' trips, and he smoothes out its shape so it
looks like an egg and then puts a fin around it for ships to land on.
After that, it does not take much imagination to call it the _Saturn_.
Then he gets his Western Hemisphere license and opens for business.

My daydreaming stops, for suddenly Hotlips is grabbing my arm and
pointing out the window.

"What for are you grabbing my arm and waving your fist at the window,
Hotlips?" I inquire politely of him.

"Eddie," he whispers, all nervous and excited from something, "I see
one."

I give him a blank stare. "You see one what?"

"One flying cuspidor," he says, his face serious. "I see it hanging out
there by the _Saturn_ and then suddenly it is gone. Whoosh."

"Hallucination," I tell him. But I look out hard and try to see one too.
I don't, so I figure maybe I am right, after all.

I do not know about this "men from space" gimmick the science-fiction
people try to peddle, but lots of good substantial citizens see flying
cuspidors and I think to myself that maybe there is something to it. So
I keep looking back at the _Saturn_, but nothing unusual is going on
that I can see. My logic and super-salesmanship evidently convinces
Hotlips, for he does not say anything more about it.

Anyway, in a few minutes we joggle to a stop at Earthport, pile out,
wave our identification papers at the doorman with the lieutenant's
bars, and then take off for the _Atomic Cafe_ a block away.

Entering this gem of a drinking establishment, we make our way through
the smoke and noise to a quiet little corner table and give Mamie the
high-sign for two beers. A few minutes later she comes bouncing over
with the order and a cheery word about how invigorating it is to see us
high-class gentlemen instead of the bums that usually hang around a
joint like this trying to make time with a nice girl like her.

"That is all very nice," I say to her politely, "and we are overjoyed
beyond words to see you too, Mamie, but Hotlips and I have got strange
