reptiles and fishes, it is red but cold blood; while in the nobler animals
and man, it is the red and warm blood.

[Sidenote: 2. Importance and abundance of blood? Dependence of life? Abel?
Mosaic law? In what part of the body is blood not found? Quantity of blood
in the body?]

2. The blood is the most important, as it is the most abundant, fluid of
the body; and upon its presence, under certain definite conditions, life
depends. On this account it is frequently, and very properly, termed "the
vital fluid." The importance of the blood, as essential to life, was
recognized in the earliest writings. In the narration of the death of the
murdered Abel, it is written, "the voice of his _blood_ crieth from the
ground." In the Mosaic law, proclaimed over thirty centuries ago, the
Israelites were forbidden to eat food that contained blood, for the reason
that "the life of the flesh is in the blood." With the exception of a few
tissues, such as the hair, the nails, and the _cornea_ of the eye, blood
everywhere pervades the body, as may be proven by puncturing any part with
a {102} needle. The total quantity of blood in the body is estimated at
about one-eighth of its weight, or eighteen pounds.

[Sidenote: 3. Color of blood? Its consistence? Odor?]

3. The color of the blood, in man and the higher animals, as is well known,
is red; but it varies from a bright scarlet to a dark purple, according to
the part whence it is taken. "Blood is thicker than water," as the adage
truly states, and has a glutinous quality. It has a faint odor, resembling
that peculiar to the animal from which it is taken.

[Sidenote: 4. What is stated of the blood as viewed under the microscope?]

4. When examined under the microscope, the blood no longer appears a simple
fluid, and its color is no longer red. It is then seen to be made up of two
distinct parts: first, a clear, colorless fluid, called the _plasma_; and
secondly, of a multitude of minute solid bodies, or corpuscles, that float
in the watery plasma. The plasma, or nutritive liquid, is composed of water
richly charged with materials derived from the food, viz., albumen, which
gives it smoothness and swift motion; fibrin; certain fats; traces of
sugar; and various salts.

[Illustration: FIG 25.--THE BLOOD CORPUSCLES.]

[Sidenote: 5. State what you can of the little bodies called corpuscles.]

5. THE BLOOD CORPUSCLES.--In man, these remarkable "little bodies," as the
word _corpuscles_ signifies, are of a yellow color, but by their vast
numbers impart a red hue to the blood. They are very small, having a
diameter of about 1/3500 of an inch, and being one-fourth of that fraction
in thickness; so that if 3,500 of them were placed in line, side by side,
they would only extend one inch; or, if {103} piled one above another, it
would take at least 14,000 of them to stand an inch high. Although so small
in size, they are very regular in form. As seen under the microscope, they
are not globular or spherical, but flat, circular, and disc-like, with
central depressions on each side, somewhat like a pearl button that has not
been perforated. In freshly-drawn blood they show a disposition to arrange
themselves in little rolls like coins (Fig. 25).

[Illustration: FIG. 26.

_a_, Oval Corpuscles of a fowl. _b_, Corpuscles of a frog. _c_, Those of a
shark.

The five small ones at the upper part of the figure, represent the human
corpuscles magnified 400 times.]

[Sidenote: 6. The size and shape of corpuscles? Why is the fact important?]

6. The size and shape of the blood corpuscles vary in different animals, so
that it is possible to discriminate between those of man and the lower
animals (Fig. 26). This is a point of considerable practical importance.
For example, it is sometimes desirable to decide in a court of justice the
source, whether from man or an inferior animal, of blood stains upon the
clothing of an accused person, or upon some deadly weapon. This may be done
by a microscopical examination of a minute portion of the dried stain,
previously refreshed by means of gum-water. Certain celebrated cases are
recorded in which the guilt of criminals has been established, and they
have been condemned and punished upon the evidence which science rendered
on this single point, the detecting of the human from other blood.

[Sidenote: 7. The character of the blood of dead animals? Means of
detecting such blood?]

7. The character of the blood of dead, extinct, and even fossil animals,
such as the mastodon, has been ascertained by obtaining and examining
traces of it which had been shut up, perhaps for ages, in the circulatory
canals of bone. A means of detecting blood in minute quantities is found
{104} in the spectroscope, the same instrument by which the constitution of
the heavenly bodies has been studied. If a solution containing not more
than one-thousandth part of a grain of the coloring matter of the
corpuscle, be examined, this instrument will detect it.

[Sidenote: 8. White corpuscles? Total number of corpuscles in the body?]

8. The corpuscles, just described, are known as the red blood corpuscles.
Besides these, and floating along in the same plasma, are the white
corpuscles. These are fewer in number, but larger and globular in form.
They are colorless, and their motion is less rapid than that of the other
variety. The total number of both varieties of these little bodies in the
blood is enormous. It is calculated that in a cubic inch of that fluid
there are eighty-three millions, and at least five hundred times that
number in the whole body.

[Sidenote: 9. The blood in its natural condition in the body? Describe the
process by which the coagulation of blood takes place?]

9. COAGULATION.--The blood, in its natural condition in the body, remains
perfectly fluid; but, within a few minutes after its removal from its
proper vessels, whether by accident or design, a change takes place. It
begins to coagulate, or assume a semi-solid consistence. If allowed to
stand, after several hours it separates into two distinct parts, one of
them being a dark red jelly, the coagulum, or clot, which is heavy and
sinks; and the other, a clear, straw-colored liquid, called serum, which
covers the clot. This change is dependent upon the presence in the blood of
fibrin, which possesses the property of solidifying under certain
circumstances; one of these circumstances being when the blood is separated
from living tissues. The color of the clot is due to the entanglement of
the corpuscles with the fibrin.

[Sidenote: 10. If coagulation were impossible? How is it in fact?]

10. In this law of the coagulation of the blood is our safeguard against
death by haemorrhage, or against undue loss of blood. If coagulation were
impossible, the {105} slightest injury in drawing blood would prove fatal.
Whereas now, in vastly the larger proportion of cases, bleeding ceases
spontaneously, because the blood, as it coagulates, stops the mouths of the
injured blood-vessels. In another class of cases, where larger vessels are
cut or torn, it is simply necessary to close them by a temporary pressure;
for in a few minutes the clot will form and seal them up. In still more
serious cases, where the blood-vessel is of large size, the surgeon is
obliged to tie a "ligature" about it, and thus prevent the force of the
blood-current from washing away the clots, which, forming within and around
the vessel, would close it effectually.

[Sidenote: 11. What is worthy of remark? Coagulation of the blood of
inferior animals? Of the blood of birds?]

11. It is worthy of remark that this peculiarity is early implanted in the
blood, even before birth, and in advance of any existing necessity for it;
thus anticipating and guarding against danger. But this is not all. Of most
of the inferior animals, which, as compared with man, are quite helpless,
the blood coagulates more rapidly, and in the case of the birds, almost
instantly. The relative composition of fluid and coagulated blood may be
thus represented:

  _Fluid Blood._              _Coagulated Blood._

    Plasma----------Serum---------Serum
          \
           \
            --------Fibrin--------
                                  \
                                   \
   Corpuscles------Corpuscles-------Clot.
[Sidenote: 12. The blood, as a provider and purifier? What uses does the
blood subserve? Experiments? Transfusion?]

12. THE USES OF THE BLOOD.--The blood is the great provider and purifier of
the body. It both carries new materials to all the tissues, and removes the
worn out particles of matter. This is effected by the plasma. It both
conveys oxygen and removes carbonic acid. This is done through the
corpuscles. Some singular experiments have {106} been tried to illustrate
the life-giving power of the blood. An animal that has bled so freely as to
be at the point of dying, is promptly brought back to life by an operation
called transfusion, by which fresh blood from a living animal is injected
into the blood-vessels of his body.

[Sidenote: 13. The case of the deaf and feeble dog? Horse? Dead dog?]

13. It is related that a dog, deaf and feeble from age, had hearing and
activity restored to him by the introduction into his veins of blood taken
from a young dog; and, that a horse, twenty-six years old, having received
the blood of four lambs acquired new vigor. And further, that a dog, just
dead from an acute disease, was so far revived by transfusion, as to be
able to stand and make a few movements.

[Sidenote: 14. Transfusion, as a fashionable remedy? What further of
transfusion?]

14. Transfusion has been practised upon man. At one time, shortly after
Harvey's discovery of the "Circulation of the Blood," it became quite a
fashionable remedy, it being thought possible by it to cure all forms of
disease, and even to make the old young again. But these claims were soon
found extravagant, and many unhappy accidents occurred in its practice; so
that being forbidden by government and interdicted by the Pope, it rapidly
fell into disuse. At the present time, however, it is sometimes resorted to
in extreme cases, when there has been a great and rapid loss of blood; and
there are upon record several instances where, other means having failed,
life has been restored or prolonged by the operation of transfusion.

[Sidenote: 15. The seat of the reviving power of the blood? What further is
related?]

15. This reviving power of the blood seems to reside in the corpuscles; for
transfusion, when attempted to be performed with the serum alone, has, in
every case, proved fruitless. Now, though so much depends upon the blood
and its corpuscles, it is a mistake to suppose that in them alone is the
seat of life, or that they are, in an exclusive manner, alive. All the
organs and parts of the body are mutually dependent one upon the other; and
the complete usefulness {107} of the blood, or of any other part, flows out
of the harmonious action of all the parts.

[Sidenote: 16. Changes in the blood? What further is stated?]

16. CHANGE OF COLOR.--The blood undergoes a variety of changes in its
journey through the system. As it visits the different organs it both gives
out and takes up materials. In one place it is enriched, in another it is
impoverished. By reason of these alterations in its composition, the blood
also changes its color. In one part of the body it is bright red, or
arterial; in another it is dark blue, or venous. In the former case it is
pure and fit for the support of the tissues; in the latter, it is impure
and charged with effete materials. (The details of the change from dark to
bright will be given in the chapter on Respiration.)

[Sidenote: 17. Motion of the blood? What is meant by the circulation of the
blood? How confined? Discovery made by Harvey?]

17. CIRCULATION.--The blood is in constant motion during life. From the
heart, as a centre, a current is always setting toward the different
organs; and from these organs a current is constantly returning to the
heart. In this way a ceaseless circular movement is kept up, which is
called the Circulation of the Blood. This stream of the vital fluid is
confined to certain fixed channels, the blood-vessels. Those branching from
the heart are the arteries; those converging to it are the veins. The true
course of the blood was unknown before the beginning of the seventeenth
century. In 1619 it was discovered by the illustrious William Harvey. Like
many other great discoverers, he suffered persecution and loss, but unlike
some of them, he was fortunate enough to conquer and survive opposition. He
lived long enough to see his discovery universally accepted, and himself
honored as a benefactor of mankind.

{108}

[Illustration: FIG. 27.--THE ORGANS OF CIRCULATION.]

{109} [Illustration: FIG. 28.--THE HEART AND LARGE VESSELS.

A, Right Ventricle. B, Left Ventricle. C, Right Auricle. D, Left Auricle.
E, Aorta. F, Pulmonary Artery.]

[Sidenote: 18. Office of the heart? Location of the heart? Its beat? Its
shape? Protection to the heart? What else is said in relation to the
heart?]

18. THE HEART.--The heart is the central engine of the circulation. In this
wonderful little organ, hardly larger than a man's fist, resides that
sleepless force by which, during the whole of life, the current of the
blood is kept in motion. It is placed in the middle and front part of the
chest, inclining to the left side. The heartbeat may be felt and heard
between the fifth and sixth ribs, near the breast-bone. The shape of the
heart is conical, with the apex or point downward and in front. The base,
which is upward, is attached so as to hold it securely in its place, while
the apex is freely moveable. In order that loss of power from friction may
be obviated, the heart is enclosed between two layers of serous membrane,
which forms a kind of sac. This membrane is as smooth as satin, and itself
secretes a fluid in sufficient quantities to keep it at all times well
lubricated. The lining membrane of the heart, likewise, is extremely
delicate and smooth.

{110} [Illustration: FIG. 29.--SECTION OF THE HEART.

A, Right Ventricle. B, Left Ventricle. C, Right Auricle. D, Left Auricle.
E, F, Inlets to the Ventricles. G, Pulmonary Artery. H, Aorta.]

[Sidenote: 19. Formation of the heart? Right and left heart?]

19. THE CAVITIES OF THE HEART.--The heart is hollow, and so partitioned as
to contain four chambers or cavities; two at the base, known as the
_auricles_, from a fancied resemblance to the ear of a dog, and two at the
apex or point, called _ventricles_. An auricle and a ventricle on the same
side, communicate with each other, but there is no opening from side to
side. It is customary to regard the heart as a double organ, and to speak
of its division into the right and left heart. For while both halves act
together in point of time, each half sustains an entirely distinct portion
of the labor of the circulation. Thus, the right heart always carries the
dark or venous blood, and the left always circulates the bright or arterial
blood.

[Sidenote: 20. Capacity of the chambers of the heart? What wise provision
is mentioned? The auricles?]

20. If we examine the heart, we at once notice that though its various
chambers have about the same capacity, the walls of the ventricles are
thicker and stronger than those of the auricles. This is a wise provision,
for it is by the powerful action of the former that the blood is forced to
the most remote regions of the body. The auricles, on the contrary, need
much less power, for they simply discharge their contents into the cavities
of the heart near at hand and below them--into the ventricles. {111}

[Sidenote: 21. Substance of the heart? Its fibres? Its movements? The
advantage of such movements? Action of the heart? Its period of repose?]

21. ACTION OF THE HEART.--The substance of the heart is of a deep red
color, and its fibres resemble those of the voluntary muscles by which we
move our bodies. But the heart's movements are entirely involuntary. The
advantage of this is evident; for if it depended upon us to will each
movement, our entire attention would be thus engaged, and we would find no
time for study, pleasure, or even sleep. The action of the heart consists
in alternate contractions and dilatations. During contraction the walls
come forcibly together, and thus drive out the blood. In dilatation, they
expand and receive a renewed supply. These movements are called _systole_
and _diastole_. The latter may be called the heart's period of repose; and
although it lasts only during two-fifths of a heart-beat, or about a third
of a second, yet during the day it amounts to more than nine hours of total
rest.

[Sidenote: 22. Remarkable property of the tissue of the heart? How shown?
How interesting? In cold-blooded animals? Heart of a turtle? Of a frog?
Alligator?]

22. A remarkable property of the tissue of the heart is its intense
vitality. For while it is more constantly active than any other organ of
the body, it is the last to part with its vital energy. This is especially
interesting in view of the fact that after life is apparently extinguished,
as from drowning, or poisoning by chloroform, there yet lingers a spark of
vitality in the heart, which, by continued effort, may be fanned into a
flame so as to revivify the whole body. In cold-blooded animals this
irritability of the heart is especially remarkable. The heart of a turtle
will pulsate, and the blood circulate for a week after its head has been
cut off; and the heart will throb regularly many hours after being cut out
from the creature's chest. The heart of a frog or serpent, separated
entirely from the body, will contract at the end of ten or twelve hours:
that of an alligator has been known to beat twenty-eight hours after the
death of the animal. {112}

[Sidenote: 23. Course of the blood through the heart? Course of
heart-currents?]

23. PASSAGE OF THE BLOOD THROUGH THE HEART.--Let us now trace the course of
the blood through the several cavities of the heart. In the first place,
the venous blood, rendered dark and impure by contact with the changing
tissues of the body, returns to the right heart by the veins. It enters and
fills the right auricle during its dilatation: the auricle then contracts
and fills the right ventricle. Almost instantly, the ventricle contracts
forcibly and hurries the blood along the great artery of the lungs, to be
purified in those organs. Secondly, having completed the circuit of the
lungs, the pure and bright arterial blood enters the left auricle. This now
contracts and fills the left ventricle, which cavity, in its turn,
contracts and sends the blood forth on its journey again through the
system. This general direction from right to left is the uniform and
undeviating course of heart-currents.

[Sidenote: 24. Openings of the ventricles? How guarded? How do the valves
