cudgel.' The fellow went off, muttering and grumbling, but I have no
doubt that he and the others, for it certainly was not always the
same man, were watching for you. To-night there was no one about, or,
if there was, he did not come near me, and it may be that, finding
you never leave the house after nightfall, they have decided to give
it up for the present. But I thought I heard a footfall lower down
the street, just as we came out of the house, and it is like enough
that we are followed now."

"At any rate, they would scarce attack two of us, John, and I should
not mind if they did. It is a stab in the back that I am afraid of
more than an open quarrel."

"You may have a better swordsman to deal with next time. The fellow
himself would scarcely care to cross swords with you again, but he
would have no difficulty in getting half-a-dozen cut-throats from the
purlieus of the Temple or Westminster, professional bullies, who are
ready to use their swords to those who care to purchase them, and who
would cut a throat for a few crowns, without caring a jot whose
throat it was. Some of these fellows are disbanded soldiers. Some are
men who were ruined in the wars. Some are tavern bullies--broken men,
reckless and quarrelsome gamblers so long as they have a shilling in
their pockets, but equally ready to take to the road or to rob a
house when their pockets are empty."

By this time they had passed the Exchange into Cheapside. Many people
were hurrying in the same direction and wondering where the fire was.
Presently one of the Fire Companies, with buckets, ladders, and axes,
passed them at a run. Even in Cheapside the glow in the sky ahead
could be plainly seen, but it was not until they passed St. Paul's
and stood at the top of Ludgate Hill that the flames, shooting up
high in the air, were visible. They were almost straight ahead.

"It must be at the other end of Fleet Street," Cyril said, as they
broke into a run.

"Farther than that, lad. It must be one of the mansions along the
Strand. A fire always looks closer than it is. I have seen a ship in
flames that looked scarce a mile away, and yet, sailing with a brisk
wind, it took us over an hour to come up to it."

The crowd became thicker as they approached Temple Bar. The upper
windows of the houses were all open, and women were leaning out
looking at the sight. From every lane and alley men poured into the
street and swelled the hurrying current. They passed through the Bar,
expecting to find that the fire was close at hand. They had, however,
some distance farther to go, for the fire was at a mansion in the
Savoy. Another Fire Company came along when they were within a
hundred yards of the spot.

"Join in with them," Cyril said; and he and John Wilkes managed to
push their way into the ranks, joining in the shout, "Way there, way!
Make room for the buckets!"

Aided by some of the City watch the Company made its way through the
crowd, and hurried down the hill from the Strand into the Savoy. A
party of the King's Guard, who had just marched up, kept back the
crowd, and, when once in the open space, Cyril and his companion
stepped out from the ranks and joined a group of people who had
arrived before the constables and soldiers had come up.

The mansion from which the fire had originated was in flames from top
to bottom. The roof had fallen in. Volumes of flame and sparks shot
high into the air, threatening the safety of several other houses
standing near. The Fire Companies were working their hand-pumps,
throwing water on to the doors and woodwork of these houses. Long
lines of men were extended down to the edge of the river and passed
the buckets backwards and forwards. City officials, gentlemen of the
Court, and officers of the troops, moved to and fro shouting
directions and superintending the work. From many of the houses the
inhabitants were bringing out their furniture and goods, aided by the
constables and spectators.

"It is a grand sight," Cyril said, as, with his companion, he took
his place in a quiet corner where a projecting portico threw a deep
shadow.

"It will soon be grander still. The wind is taking the sparks and
flames westwards, and nothing can save that house over there. Do you
see the little jets of flame already bursting through the roof?"

"The house seems empty. There is not a window open."

"It looks so, Cyril, but there may be people asleep at the back. Let
us work round and have a look from behind."

They turned down an alley, and in a minute or two came out behind the
house. There was a garden and some high trees, but it was surrounded
by a wall, and they could not see the windows.

"Here, Cyril, I will give you a hoist up. If you stand on my
shoulders, you can reach to the top of the wall and pull yourself up.
Come along here to where that branch projects over. That's it. Now
drop your cloak, and jump on to my back. That is right. Now get on to
my shoulders."

Cyril managed to get up.

"I can just touch the top, but I can't get my fingers on to it."

"Put your foot on my head. I will warrant it is strong enough to bear
your weight."

Cyril did as he was told, grasped the top of the wall, and, after a
sharp struggle, seated himself astride on it. Just as he did so, a
window in a wing projecting into the garden was thrown open, and a
female voice uttered a loud scream for help. There was light enough
for Cyril to see that the lower windows were all barred. He shouted
back,--

"Can't you get down the staircase?"

"No; the house is full of smoke. There are some children here. Help!
Help!" and the voice rose in a loud scream again.

Cyril dropped down into the roadway by the side of John Wilkes.

"There are some women and children in there, John. They can't get
out. We must go round to the other side and get some axes and break
down the door."

Snatching up his cloak, he ran at full speed to his former position,
followed by Wilkes. The roof of the house was now in flames. Many of
the shutters and window-frames had also caught fire, from the heat.
He ran up to two gentlemen who seemed to be directing the operations.

"There are some women and children in a room at the back of that
house," he said. "I have just been round there to see. They are in
the second storey, and are crying for help."

"I fear the ladders are too short."

"I can tie two or three of them together," Wilkes said. "I am an old
sailor and can answer for the knots."

The firemen were already dashing water on the lower windows of the
front of the house. A party with axes were cutting at the door, but
this was so massive and solid that it resisted their efforts. One of
the gentlemen went down to them. At his orders eight or ten men
seized ladders. Cyril snatched some ropes from a heap that had been
thrown down by the firemen, and the party, with one of the gentlemen,
ran round to the back of the house. Two ladders were placed against
the wall. John Wilkes, running up one of them, hauled several of the
others up, and lowered them into the garden.

The flames were now issuing from some of the upper windows. Cyril
dropped from the wall into the garden, and, running close up to the
house, shouted to three or four women, who were screaming loudly, and
hanging so far out that he thought they would fall, that help was at
hand, and that they would be speedily rescued. John Wilkes rapidly
tied three of the short ladders together. These were speedily raised,
but it was found that they just reached the window. One of the
firemen ran up, while John set to work to prepare another long
ladder. As there was no sign of life at any other window he laid it
down on the grass when finished.

"If you will put it up at the next window," Cyril said, "I will mount
it. The woman said there were children in the house, and possibly I
may find them. Those women are so frightened that they don't know
what they are doing."

One woman had already been got on to the other ladder, but instead of
coming down, she held on tightly, screaming at the top of her voice,
until the fireman with great difficulty got up by her side, wrenched
her hands from their hold, threw her across his shoulder, and carried
her down.

The room was full of smoke as Cyril leapt into it, but he found that
it was not, as he had supposed, the one in which the women at the
next window were standing. Near the window, however, an elderly woman
was lying on the floor insensible, and three girls of from eight to
fourteen lay across her. Cyril thrust his head out of the window.

"Come up, John," he shouted. "I want help."

He lifted the youngest of the girls, and as he got her out of the
window, John's head appeared above the sill.

"Take her down quick, John," he said, as he handed the child to him.
"There are three others. They are all insensible from the smoke."

Filling his lungs with fresh air, he turned into the blinding smoke
again, and speedily reappeared at the window with another of the
girls. John was not yet at the bottom; he placed her with her head
outside the window, and was back with the eldest girl by the time
Wilkes was up again. He handed her to him, and then, taking the
other, stepped out on to the ladder and followed Wilkes down.

"Brave lad!" the gentleman said, patting him on the shoulder. "Are
there any more of them?"

"One more--a woman, sir. Do you go up, John. I will follow, for I
doubt whether I can lift her by myself."

He followed Wilkes closely up the ladder. There was a red glow now in
the smoke. Flames were bursting through the door. John was waiting at
the window.

"Which way, lad? There is no seeing one's hand in the smoke."

"Just in front, John, not six feet away. Hold your breath."

They dashed forward together, seized the woman between them, and,
dragging her to the window, placed her head and shoulders on the
sill.

"You go first, John. She is too heavy for me," Cyril gasped.

John stumbled out, half suffocated, while Cyril thrust his head as
far as he could outside the window.

"That is it, John; you take hold of her shoulder, and I will help you
get her on to your back."

Between them they pushed her nearly out, and then, with Cyril's
assistance, John got her across his shoulders. She was a heavy woman,
and the old sailor had great difficulty in carrying her down. Cyril
hung far out of the window till he saw him put his foot on the
ground; then he seized a rung of the ladder, swung himself out on to
it, and was soon down.

For a time he felt confused and bewildered, and was conscious that if
he let go the ladder he should fall. He heard a voice say, "Bring one
of those buckets of water," and directly afterwards, "Here, lad, put
your head into this," and a handful of water was dashed into his
face. It revived him, and, turning round, he plunged his head into a
bucket that a man held up for him. Then he took a long breath or two,
pressed the water from his hair, and felt himself again. The women at
the other window had by this time been brought down. A door in the
garden wall had been broken down with axes, and the women and girls
were taken away to a neighbouring house.

"There is nothing more to do here," the gentlemen said. "Now, men,
you are to enter the houses round about. Wherever a door is fastened,
break it in. Go out on to the roofs with buckets, put out the sparks
as fast as they fall. I will send some more men to help you at once."
He then put his hand on Cyril's shoulder, and walked back with him to
the open space.

"We have saved them all," he said to the other gentleman who had now
come up, "but it has been a close touch, and it was only by the
gallantry of this young gentleman and another with him that the lives
of three girls and a woman were rescued. I think all the men that can
be spared had better go round to the houses in that direction. You
see, the wind is setting that way, and the only hope of stopping the
progress of the fire is to get plenty of men with buckets out on the
roofs and at all the upper windows."

The other gentleman gave the necessary orders to an officer.

"Now, young sir, may I ask your name?" the other said to Cyril.

"Cyril Shenstone, sir," he replied respectfully; for he saw that the
two men before him were persons of rank.

"Shenstone? I know the name well. Are you any relation of Sir Aubrey
Shenstone?"

"He was my father, sir."

"A brave soldier, and a hearty companion," the other said warmly. "He
rode behind me scores of times into the thick of the fight. I am
Prince Rupert, lad."

Cyril doffed his hat in deep respect. His father had always spoken of
the Prince in terms of boundless admiration, and had over and over
again lamented that he had not been able to join the Prince in his
exploits at sea.

"What has become of my old friend?" the Prince asked.

"He died six months ago, Prince."

"I am sorry to hear it. I did hear that, while I was away, he had
been suing at Court. I asked for him, but could get no tidings of his
whereabouts. But we cannot speak here. Ask for me to-morrow at
Whitehall. Do you know this gentleman?"

"No, sir, I have not the honour."

"This is the Duke of Albemarle, my former enemy, but now my good
friend. You will like the lad no worse, my Lord, because his father
more than once rode with me into the heart of your ranks."

"Certainly not," the Duke said. "It is clear that the son will be as
gallant a gentleman as his father was before him, and, thank God! it
is not against Englishmen that he will draw his sword. You may count
me as your friend, sir, henceforth."

Cyril bowed deeply and retired, while Prince Rupert and the Duke
hurried away again to see that the operations they had directed were
properly carried out.




CHAPTER X

HOW JOHN WILKES FOUGHT THE DUTCH


After leaving Prince Rupert, Cyril returned to John Wilkes, who was
standing a short distance away.

"John! John!" he said eagerly, as he joined him. "Who do you think
those gentlemen are?"

"I don't know, lad. It is easy to see that they are men of importance
by the way they order everyone about."

"The one who went with us to the garden is Prince Rupert; the other
is the Duke of Albemarle. And the Prince has told me to call upon him
to-morrow at Whitehall."

"That is a stroke of luck, indeed, lad, and right glad am I that I
took it into my head to fetch you out to see the fire. But more than
that, you have to thank yourself, for, indeed, you behaved right
gallantly. You nearly had the Prince for your helper, for just before
I went up the ladder the last time he stepped forward and said to me,
'You must be well-nigh spent, man. I will go up this time.' However,
I said that I would finish the work, and so, without more ado, I
shook off the hand he had placed on my arm, and ran up after you.
Well, it is a stroke of good fortune to you, lad, that you should
have shown your courage under his eye--no one is more able to
appreciate a gallant action. This may help you a long way towards
bringing about the aim you were talking about the other night, and I
may live to see you Sir Cyril Shenstone yet."

"You can see me that now," Cyril said, laughing. "My father was a
baronet, and therefore at his death I came into the title, though I
am not silly enough to go about the City as Sir Cyril Shenstone when
I am but a poor clerk. It will be time enough to call myself 'Sir'
when I see some chance of buying back our estate, though, indeed, I
have thought of taking the title again when I embark on foreign
service, as it may help me somewhat in obtaining promotion. But do
not say anything about it at home. I am Cyril Shenstone, and have
been fortunate enough to win the friendship of Captain Dave, and I
should not be so comfortable were there any change made in my
position in the family. A title is an empty thing, John, unless there
are means to support it, and plain Cyril Shenstone suits my position
far better than a title without a guinea in my purse. Indeed, till
you spoke just now, I had well-nigh forgotten that I have the right
to call myself 'Sir.'"

They waited for two hours longer. At the end of that time four
mansions had been burnt to the ground, but the further progress of
the flames had been effectually stayed. The crowd had already begun
to scatter, and as they walked eastward the streets were full of
people making their way homeward. The bell of St. Paul's was striking
midnight as they entered. The Captain and his family had long since
gone off to bed.

"This reminds one of that last business," John whispered, as they
went quietly upstairs.

"It does, John. But it has been a pleasanter evening in every way
than those fruitless watches we kept in the street below."

The next morning the story of the fire was told, and excited great
interest.

"Who were the girls you saved, Cyril?" Nellie asked.

"I don't know. I did not think of asking to whom the house belonged,
nor, indeed, was there anyone to ask. Most of the people were too
busy to talk to, and the rest were spectators who had, like
ourselves, managed to make their way in through the lines of the
soldiers and watch."

"Were they ladies?"

"I really don't know," Cyril laughed. "The smoke was too thick to see
anything about them, and I should not know them if I met them to-day;
and, besides, when you only see a young person in her nightdress, it
is hard to form any opinion as to her rank."

Nellie joined in the laugh.

"I suppose not, Cyril. It might make a difference to you, though.
Those houses in the Savoy are almost all the property of noblemen,
and you might have gained another powerful friend if they had been
the daughters of one."

"I should not think they were so," Cyril said. "There seemed to be no
one else in the house but three maid servants and the woman who was
in the room with them. I should say the family were all away and the
house left in charge of servants. The woman may have been a
housekeeper, and the girls her children; besides, even had it been
otherwise, it was merely by chance that I helped them out. It was
John who tied the ladders together and who carried the girls down,
one by one. If I had been alone I should only have had time to save
the youngest, for I am not accustomed to running up and down ladders,
as he is, and by the time I had got her down it would have been too
late to have saved the others. Indeed, I am not sure that we did save
them; they were all insensible, and, for aught I know, may not have
recovered from the effects of the smoke. My eyes are smarting even
now."

"And so you are to see Prince Rupert to-day, Cyril?" Captain Dave
said. "I am afraid we shall be losing you, for he will, I should say,
assuredly appoint you to one of his ships if you ask him."

"That would be good fortune indeed," Cyril said. "I cannot but think
myself that he may do so, though it would be almost too good to be
true. Certainly he spoke very warmly, and, although he may not
himself have the appointment of his officers, a word from him at the
Admiralty would, no doubt, be sufficient. At any rate, it is a great
thing indeed to have so powerful a friend at Court. It may be that,
at the end of another two years, we may be at war with some other
foreign power, and that I may be able to enter our own army instead
of seeking service abroad. If not, much as I should like to go to sea
to fight against the Dutch, service in this Fleet would be of no real
advantage to me, for the war may last but for a short time, and as
soon as it is over the ships will be laid up again and the crews
disbanded."

"Ay, but if you find the life of a sailor to your liking, Cyril, you
might do worse than go into the merchant service. I could help you
there, and you might soon get the command of a trader. And, let me
tell you, it is a deal better to walk the decks as captain than it is
to be serving on shore with twenty masters over you; and there is
money to be made, too. A captain is always allowed to take in a
certain amount of cargo on his own account; that was the way I
scraped together money enough to buy my own ship at last, and to be
master as well as owner, and there is no reason why you should not do
the same."

"Thank you, Captain Dave. I will think it over when I find out
whether I like a sea life, but at present it seems to me that my
inclinations turn rather towards the plan that my father recommended,
and that, for the last two years, I have always had before me. You
said, the other day, you had fought the Dutch, John?"

"Ay, ay, Master Cyril; but, in truth, it was from no wish or desire
on my part that I did so. I had come ashore from Captain Dave's ship
here in the Pool, and had been with some of my messmates who had
friends in Wapping and had got three days' leave ashore, as the cargo
we expected had not come on board the ship. We had kept it up a bit,
and it was latish when I was making my way down to the stairs. I
expect that I was more intent on making a straight course down the
street than in looking about for pirates, when suddenly I found
myself among a lot of men. One of them seized me by the arm.

"'Hands off, mate!' says I, and I lifted my fist to let fly at him,
when I got a knock at the back of the head. The next thing I knew
was, I was lying in the hold of a ship, and, as I made out presently,
with a score of others, some of whom were groaning, and some cursing.

"'Hullo, mates!' says I. 'What port is this we are brought up in?'

"'We are on board the _Tartar_,' one said.

"I knew what that meant, for the _Tartar_ was the receiving hulk
where they took the pressed men.

"The next morning, without question asked, we were brought up on
deck, tumbled into a small sloop, and taken down to Gravesend, and
there put, in batches of four or five, into the ships of war lying
there. It chanced that I was put on board Monk's flagship the
_Resolution_. And that is how it was I came to fight the Dutch."

"What year was that in, John?"

"'53--in May it was. Van Tromp, at that time, with ninety-eight ships
of war, and six fire-ships, was in the Downs, and felt so much Master
of the Sea that he sailed in and battered Dover Castle."

"Then you were in the fight of the 2nd of June?"

"Ay; and in that of the 31st of July, which was harder still."

"Tell me all about it, John."

"Lor' bless you, sir, there is nothing to tell as far as I was
concerned. I was at one of the guns on the upper deck, but I might as
well have been down below for anything I saw of it. It was just load
and fire, load and fire. Sometimes, through the clouds of smoke, one
caught a sight of the Dutchman one was firing at; more often one
didn't. There was no time for looking about, I can tell you, and if
there had been time there was nothing to see. It was like being in a
big thunderstorm, with thunderbolts falling all round you, and a
smashing and a grinding and a ripping that would have made your hair
stand on end if you had only had time to think of it. But we hadn't
time. It was 'Now then, my hearties, blaze away! Keep it up, lads!
The Dutchmen have pretty near had enough of it!' And then, at last,
'They are running, lads. Run in your guns, and tend the sails.' And
then a cheer as loud as we could give--which wasn't much, I can tell
you, for we were spent with labour, and half choked with powder, and
our tongues parched up with thirst."

"How many ships had you?"

"We had ninety-five war-ships, and five fire-ships, so the game was
an equal one. They had Tromp and De Ruyter to command them, and we
had Monk and Deane. Both Admirals were on board our ship, and in the
