Project Gutenberg's Getting Acquainted with the Trees, by J. Horace McFarland

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Getting Acquainted with the Trees

Author: J. Horace McFarland

Release Date: May 12, 2009 [EBook #28764]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK GETTING ACQUAINTED WITH THE TREES ***




Produced by Marilynda Fraser-Cunliffe and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net







Getting Acquainted with the Trees

BY

J. HORACE McFARLAND


_Illustrated from Photographs by the Author_


NEW YORK THE MACMILLAN COMPANY 1914

Copyright, 1904

By The Outlook Company

       *       *       *       *       *

Published April, 1904

Reprinted April, 1904

New edition September, 1906

Reprinted August, 1913 March, 1914.




Foreword


These sketches are, I fear, very unscientific and unsystematic. They
record the growth of my own interest and information, as I have recently
observed and enjoyed the trees among which I had walked unseeing far too
many years. To pass on, as well as I can, some of the benefit that has
come into my own life from this wakened interest in the trees provided
by the Creator for the resting of tired brains and the healing of
ruffled spirits, as well as for utility, is the reason for gathering
together and somewhat extending the papers that have brought me, as they
have appeared in the pages of "The Outlook," so many letters of
fellowship and appreciation from others who have often seen more clearly
and deeply into the woods than I may hope to.

Driven out from my desk by weariness sometimes--and as often, I confess,
by a rasped temper I would fain hide from display--I have never failed
to find rest, and peace, and much to see and to love, among the common
and familiar trees, to which I hope these mere hints of some of their
features not always seen may send others who also need their silent and
beneficent message.

  J. H. McF.

  _March 17, 1904_




Contents
                                                                    PAGE

  A STORY OF SOME MAPLES                                               1

  THE GROWTH OF THE OAK                                               25

  PINES                                                               49

  APPLES                                                              73

  WILLOWS AND POPLARS                                                 95

  THE ELM AND THE TULIP                                              131

  NUT-BEARING TREES                                                  157

  SOME OTHER TREES                                                   185

  INDEX                                                              235

  BOTANICAL NAMES                                                    239





List of Illustrations
                                                                    PAGE

  Silver maple flowers                                                 4

  Young leaves of the red maple                                        7

  "The Norway maple breaks into a wonderful bloom"                     9

  Samaras of the sugar maple                                          11

  A mature sycamore maple                                             13

  Sycamore maple blossoms                                             15

  Flowers of the ash-leaved maple                                     17

  Ash-leaved maples in bloom                                          19

  Striped maple                                                       21

  The swamp white oak in winter                                       29

  Flowers of the pin-oak                                              31

  The swamp white oak in early spring                                 36

  An old post-oak                                                     39

  A blooming twig of the swamp white oak                              41

  Acorns of the English oak                                           47

  A lone pine on the Indian river                                     53

  Hemlock Hill, Arnold Arboretum                                      56

  The long-leaved pines of the South                                  61

  Fountain-like effect of the young long-leaved pines                 62

  An avenue of white pines                                            67

  Cones of the white spruce                                           71

  An apple orchard in winter                                          78

  When the apple trees blossom                                        81

  The Spectabilis crab in bloom                                       84

  Fruits of the wild crab                                             87

  The beauty of a fruiting apple branch                               91

  Bloom of double-flowering apple                                     94

  A weeping willow in early spring                                   100

  The weeping willow in a storm                                      103

  A pussy-willow in a park                                           106

  Blooms of the white willow                                    108, 109

  A white willow in a characteristic position                        112

  Clump of young white willows                                       116

  White poplars in spring-time                                       119

  Carolina poplar as a street tree                                   123

  Winter aspect of the cottonwood                                    126

  Lombardy poplar                                                    129

  A mature American elm                                              136

  The delicate tracery of the American elm in winter                 139

  The English elm in winter                                          143

  Winter effect of tulip trees                                       148

  A great liriodendron in bloom                                      150

  Flowers of the liriodendron                                        153

  The wide-spreading black walnut                                    162

  The American sweet chestnut in winter                              165

  Sweet chestnut blooms                                              167

  The chinquapin                                                     170

  A shagbark hickory in bloom                                        173

  The true nut-eater                                                 178

  The American beech in winter                                       180

  The witch-hazel                                                    181

  Sweet birch in spring                                              191

  Yellow birches                                                     192

  Flowers of the spice-bush                                          194

  Leaves and berries of the American holly                           195

  American holly tree at Trenton                                     196

  Floral bracts or involucres of the dogwood                         199

  The red-bud in bloom                                               201

  Blooms of the shad-bush                                            206

  Flowers of the American linden                                     207

  The American linden                                                209

  Flowers of the black locust                                        211

  Young trees of the black locust                                    212

  The sycamore, or button-ball                                       215

  Button-balls--fruit of the sycamore                                217

  The liquidambar                                                    220

  The leaves and fruit of the liquidambar                            222

  The papaw in bloom                                                 226

  Flowers of the papaw                                               227

  The persimmon tree in fruiting time                                231

  Berries of the spice-bush                                          234


       *       *       *       *       *


A Story of Some Maples


This is not a botanical disquisition; it is not a complete account of
all the members of the important tree family of maples. I am not a
botanist, nor a true scientific observer, but only a plain tree-lover,
and I have been watching some trees bloom and bud and grow and fruit for
a few years, using a camera now and then to record what I see--and much
more than I see, usually!

In the sweet springtime, when the rising of the sap incites some to
poetry, some to making maple sugar, and some to watching for the first
flowers, it is well to look at a few tree-blooms, and to consider the
possibilities and the pleasures of a peaceful hunt that can be made with
profit in city street or park, as well as along country roadsides and in
the meadows and the woods.

Who does not know of the maples that are all around us? Yet who has
seen the commonest of them bloom in very early spring, or watched the
course of the peculiar winged seed-pods or "keys" that follow the
flowers? The white or "silver" maple of streets or roadsides, the soft
maple of the woods, is one of the most familiar of American trees. Its
rapid and vigorous growth endears it to the man who is in a hurry for
shade, and its sturdy limbs are the joy of the tree-butcher who "trims"
them short in later years.

[Illustration: Silver maple flowers]

Watch this maple in very early spring--even before spring is any more
than a calendar probability--and a singular bloom will be found along
the slender twigs. Like little loose-haired brushes these flowers are,
coming often bravely in sleet and snow, and seemingly able to "set" and
fertilize regardless of the weather. They hurry through the bloom-time,
as they must do to carry out the life-round, for the graceful
two-winged seeds that follow them are picked up and whirled about by
April winds, and, if they lodge in the warming earth, are fully able to
grow into fine little trees the same season. Examine these seed-pods,
keys, or samaras (this last is a scientific name with such euphony to it
that it might well become common!), and notice the delicate veining in
the translucent wings. See the graceful lines of the whole thing, and
realize what an abundant provision Dame Nature makes for
reproduction,--for a moderate-sized tree completes many thousands of
these finely formed, greenish yellow, winged samaras, and casts them
loose for the wind to distribute during enough days to secure the best
chances of the season.

This same silver maple is a bone of contention among tree-men, at times.
Some will tell you it is "coarse"; and so it is when planted in an
improper place upon a narrow street, allowed to flourish unrestrained
for years, and then ruthlessly cropped off to a headless trunk! But set
it on a broad lawn, or upon a roadside with generous room, and its noble
stature and grace need yield nothing to the most artistic elm of New
England. And in the deep woods it sometimes reaches a majesty and a
dignity that compel admiration. The great maple at Eagles Mere is the
king of the bit of primeval forest yet remaining to that mountain rest
spot. It towers high over mature hemlocks and beeches, and seems well
able to defy future centuries.

But there is another very early maple to watch for, and it is one widely
distributed in the Eastern States. The red or scarlet maple is well
named, for its flowers, not any more conspicuous in form than those of
its close relation, the silver maple, are usually bright red or yellow,
and they give a joyous color note in the very beginning of spring's
overture. Not long are these flowers with us; they fade, only to be
quickly succeeded by even more brilliant samaras, a little more delicate
and refined than those of the silver maple, as well as of the richest
and warmest hue. Particularly in New England does this maple provide a
notable spring color showing.

[Illustration: Young leaves of the red maple]

The leaves of the red maple--it is also the swamp maple of some
localities--as they open to the coaxing of April sun and April
showers, have a special charm. They are properly red, but mingled with
the characteristic color is a whole palette of tints of soft yellow,
bronze and apricot. As the little baby leaflets open, they are shiny and
crinkly, and altogether attractive. One thinks of the more aristocratic
and dwarfed Japanese maples, in looking at the opening of these
red-brown beauties, and it is no pleasure to see them smooth out into
sedate greenness. Again, in fall, a glory of color comes to the leaves
of the red maple; for they illumine the countryside with their scarlet
hue, and, as they drop, form a brilliant thread in the most beautiful of
all carpets--that of the autumn leaves. I think no walk in the really
happy days of the fall maturity of growing things is quite so pleasant
as that which leads one to shuffle through this deep forest floor
covering of oriental richness of hue.

As the ground warms and the sun searches into the hearts of the buds,
the Norway maple, familiar street tree of Eastern cities, breaks into a
wonderful bloom. Very deceptive it is, and taken for the opening foliage
by the casual observer; yet there is, when these flowers first open, no
hint of leaf on the tree, save that of the swelling bud. All that soft
haze of greenish yellow is bloom, and bloom of the utmost beauty. The
charm lies not in boldness of color or of contrast, but at the other
extreme--in the delicacy of differing tints, in the variety of subtle
shades and tones. There are charms of form and of fragrance, too, in
this Norway maple--the flowers are many-rayed stars, and they emit a
faint, spicy odor, noticeable only when several trees are together in
bloom. And these flowers last long, comparatively; so long that the
greenish yellow of the young leaves begins to combine with them before
they fall. The tints of flower and of leaf melt insensibly into each
other, so that, as I have remarked before, the casual observer says,
"The leaves are out on the Norway maples,"--not knowing of the great
mass of delightful flowers that have preceded the leaves above his
unseeing eyes. I emphasize this, for I hope some of my readers may be on
the outlook for a new pleasure in early spring--the blooming of this
maple, with flowers so thoroughly distinct and so entirely beautiful.

[Illustration: "The Norway maple breaks into a wonderful bloom"]

The samaras to follow on this Norway maple are smaller than those of the
other two maples mentioned, and they hang together at a different angle,
somewhat more graceful. I have often wondered how the designers, who
work to death the pansies, the roses and the violets, have managed to
miss a form or "motive" of such value, suggesting at once the near-by
street and far-away Egypt.

[Illustration: Samaras of the sugar maple]

A purely American species, and one of as much economic importance as any
leaf-dropping tree, is the sugar maple, known also as rock maple--one
designation because we can get sweetness from its sap, the other
because of the hardness of its wood. The sugar maples of New England, to
me, are more individual and almost more essentially beautiful than the
famed elms. No saccharine life-blood is drawn from the elm; therefore
its elegance is considered. I notice that we seldom think much of beauty
when it attaches to something we can eat! Who realizes that the common
corn, the American maize, is a stately and elegant plant, far more
beautiful than many a pampered pet of the greenhouse? But this is not a
corn story--I shall hope to be heard on the neglected beauty of many
common things, some day--and we can for the time overlook the syrup of
the sugar maple for its delicate blossoms, coming long after the red and
the silver are done with their flowers. These sugar-maple blooms hang on
slender stems; they come with the first leaves, and are very different
in appearance from the flowers of other maples. The observer will have
no trouble in recognizing them after the first successful attempt, even
though he may be baffled in comparing the maple leaves by the apparent
similarity of the foliage of the Norway, the sugar and the sycamore
maples at certain stages of growth.

[Illustration: A mature sycamore maple]

After all, it is the autumn time that brings this maple most strongly
before us, for it flaunts its banners of scarlet and yellow in the
woods, along the roads, with an insouciant swing of its own. The sugar
possibility is forgotten, and it is a pure autumn pleasure to appreciate
the richness of color, to be soon followed by the more sober cognizance
of the elegance of outline and form disclosed when all the delicate
tracery of twig and bough stands revealed against winter's frosty sky.
The sugar maple has a curious habit of ripening or reddening some of its
branches very early, as if it was hanging out a warning signal to the
squirrels and the chipmunks to hurry along with their storing of nuts
against the winter's need. I remember being puzzled one August morning
as I drove along one of Delaware's flat, flat roads, to know what could
possibly have produced the brilliant, blazing scarlet banner that hung
across a distant wood as if a dozen red flags were being there
displayed. Closer approach disclosed one rakish branch on a sugar maple,
all afire with color, while every other leaf on the tree yet held the
green of summer.

Again in the mountains, one late summer, half a lusty sugar maple set up
a conflagration which, I was informed, presaged its early death. But the
next summer it grew as freely as ever, and retained its sober green
until the cool days and nights; just as if the ebullition of the season
previous was but a breaking out of extra color life, rather than a
suggestion of weakness or death.

[Illustration: Sycamore maple blossoms]

The Norway maple is botanically _Acer platanoides_, really meaning
plane-like maple, from the similarity of its leaves to those of the
European plane. The sycamore maple is _Acer Pseudo-platanus_, which,
being translated, means that old Linnaeus thought it a sort of false
plane-like maple. Both are European species, but both are far more
familiar, as street and lawn trees, to us dwellers in cities than are
many of our purely American species. There is a little difference in the
bark of the two, and the leaves of the sycamore, while almost identical
in form, are darker and thicker than those of the Norway, and they are
whitish underneath, instead of light green. The habit of the two is
twin-like; they can scarcely be distinguished when the leaves are off.
But the flowers are totally different, and one would hardly believe them
to be akin, judging only by appearances. The young leaves of the
sycamore maple are lush and vigorous when the long, grape-like
flower-clusters appear below the twigs. "Racemes" they are,
botanically--and that is another truly good scientific word--while the
beautiful Norway maple's flowers must stand the angular designation of
"corymbs." But don't miss looking for the sycamore maple's long,
pendulous racemes. They seem more grape-like than grape blossoms; and
they stay long, apparently, the transition from flower to fruit being
very gradual. I mind me of a sycamore I pass every winter day, with its
dead fruit-clusters, a reminiscence of the flower-racemes, swinging in
the frosty breeze, waiting until the spring push of the life within the
twigs shoves them off.

To be ready to recognize this maple at the right time, it is well to
observe and mark the difference between it and the Norway in the summer
time, noting the leaves and the bark as suggested above.

[Illustration: Flowers of the ash-leaved maple]

Another maple that is different is one variously known as box-elder,
ash-leaved maple, or negundo. Of rapid growth, it makes a lusty,
irregular tree. Its green-barked, withe-like limbs seem willing to grow
in any direction--down, up, sidewise--and the result is a peculiar
formlessness that has its own merit. I think of a fringe of box-elders
along Paxton Creek, decked in early spring with true maple flowers on
thread-like stems, each cluster surmounted by soft green foliage
apparently borrowed from the ash, and it seems that no other tree could
fit better into the place or the season. Then I remember another, a
single stately tree that has had a great field all to itself, and stands
up in superb dignity, dominating even the group of pin-oaks nearest to
it. 'Twas the surprising mist of bloom on this tree that took me up the
field on a run, one spring day, when the running was sweet in the air,
but sticky underfoot. The color effect of the flowers is most delicate,
and almost indescribable in ordinary chromatic terms. Don't miss the
acquaintance of the ash-leaved maple at its flowering time, in the very
flush of the springtime, my tree-loving friends!

I have not found a noticeable fragrance in the flowers of the box-elder,
such as is very apparent where there is a group of Norway maples in
bloom together. The red maples also give to the air a faint and
delightfully spicy odor, under favorable conditions. May I hint that the
lusty box-elder, when it is booming along its spring growth, furnishes
a loose-barked whistle stick about as good as those that come from the
willow? The generous growth that provides its loosening sap can also
spare a few twigs for the boys, and they will be all the better for a
melodious reason for the spring ramble.

[Illustration: The ash-leaved maples in bloom]

The striped maple of Pennsylvania, a comparatively rare and entirely
curious small tree or large shrub, is not well known, though growing
freely as "elkwood" and "moosewood" in the Alleghanies, because it is
rather hard to transplant, and thus offers no inducements to the
nurserymen. These good people, like the rest of us, move along the lines
of least resistance, wherefore many a fine tree or fruit is rare to us,
because shy or difficult of growth, or perhaps unsymmetrical. The fine
Rhode Island Greening apple is unpopular because the young tree is
crooked, while the leather-skinned and punk-fleshed Ben Davis is a model
of symmetry and rapidity of growth. Our glorious tulip tree of the
woods, because of its relative difficulty in transplanting, has had to
be insisted upon from the nurserymen by those who know its superb
beauty. For the same reason this small charming maple, with the large,
soft, comfortable leaves upon which the deer love to browse, is kept
from showing its delicate June bloom and its remarkable longitudinally
striped bark in our home grounds. I hope some maple friends will look
for it, and, finding, admire this, the aristocrat among our native
species.

