
Perhaps you had better take my word for it that without this
equation--correctly stated, mind you--mankind would be well advised not
to make a first trip to the moon. And all this talk of coefficients and
equations sits strangely, you might say, upon the tongue of a man named
Kevin Francis Houlihan. But I am, after all, a scientist. If I had not
been a specialist in my field I would hardly have found myself engaged
in vital research at the center.

Anyway, I heard these little noises in the park. They sounded like small
working sounds, blending in eerily mysterious fashion with a chorus of
small voices. I thought at first it might be children at play, but then
at the time I was a bit absent-minded. I tiptoed to the edge of the
trees, not wanting to deprive any small scalawags of their pleasure, and
peered out between the branches. And what do you suppose I saw? Not
children, but a group of little people, hard at work.

There was a leader, an older one with a crank face. He was beating the
air with his arms and piping: "Over here, now! All right, bring those
electrical connections over here--and see you're not slow as treacle
about it!"

There were perhaps fifty of the little people. I was more than startled
by it, too. I had not seen little people in--oh, close to thirty years.
I had seen them first as a boy of eight, and then, very briefly again,
on my tenth birthday. And I had become convinced they could _never_ be
seen here in America. I had never seen them so busy, either. They were
building something in the middle of the glade. It was long and shiny and
upright and a little over five feet in height.

"Come along now, people!" said this crotchety one, looking straight at
me. "Stop starin' and get to work! You'll not be needin' to mind that
man standin' there! You know he can't see nor hear us!"

Oh, it was good to hear the rich old tongue again. I smiled, and the
foreman of the leprechauns--if that's what he was--saw me smile and
became stiff and alert for a moment, as though suspecting that perhaps
I actually could see him. Then he shrugged and turned away, clearly
deeming such a thing impossible.

I said, "Just a minute, friend, and I'll beg your pardon. It so happens
I _can_ see you."

He whirled to face me again, staring open-mouthed. Then he said, "What?
What's that, now?"

"I can see you," I said.

"Ohhh!" he said and put his palms to his cheekbones. "Saints be with us!
He's a believer! Run everybody--run for your lives!"

And they all began running, in as many directions as there were little
souls. They began to scurry behind the trees and bushes, and a sloping
embankment nearby.

"No, wait!" I said. "Don't go away! I'll not be hurting you!"

They continued to scurry.

I knew what it was they feared. "I don't intend catching one of you!" I
said. "Come back, you daft little creatures!"

But the glade was silent, and they had all disappeared. They thought I
wanted their crock of gold, of course. I'd be entitled to it if I could
catch one and keep him. Or so the legends affirmed, though I've wondered
often about the truth of them. But I was after no gold. I only wanted to
hear the music of an Irish tongue. I was lonely here in America, even if
I had latched on to a fine job of work for almost shamefully generous
pay. You see, in a place as full of science as the nuclear propulsion
center there is not much time for the old things. I very much wanted to
talk to the little people.

I walked over to the center of the glade where the curious shiny object
was standing. It was as smooth as glass and shaped like a huge cigar.
There were a pair of triangular fins down at the bottom, and stubby
wings amidships. Of course it was a spaceship, or a miniature replica of
one. I looked at it more closely. Everything seemed almost miraculously
complete and workable.

I shook my head in wonder, then stepped back from the spaceship and
looked about the glade. I knew they were all hiding nearby, watching me
apprehensively. I lifted my head to them.

"Listen to me now, little people!" I called out. "My name's Houlihan of
the Roscommon Houlihans. I am descended from King Niall himself--or so
at least my father used to say! Come on out now, and pass the time o'
day!"
