had remembered it and used it to keep from losing his power of speech.

The ritual finished, he walked to the edge of the nearest canal, and
gathered a bushel or so of dried Martian moss. He returned and began
polishing the shiny exterior of the wrecked space ship. It had to really
glitter if it was to be an effective beacon in guiding the rescue ship.

Professor Pettibone knew--had known for years--that a ship would come.
It was just a matter of time, and as the years slipped by, his faith
diminished not a whit.

With his task half completed, he glanced up at the sun and quickened the
polishing. It was a long walk to the place the berry bushes grew, and if
he arrived too late, the sun would have dried out the night's crop of
fragile berries and he would wait until the morrow for nourishment.

But on this day, he was fated to arrive at the bush area not at all,
because an alien sound from above again drew the Professor's eyes from
his work, and he knew that _the day_ had arrived.

The ship was three times as large as any he had ever visualized, and its
futuristic design told him, sharply, how far he had fallen behind in his
dreaming. He smiled and said, quite calmly, "I daresay I am about to be
rescued."

And he experienced a thrill as the great ship set down and two men
emerged therefrom. A thrill tinged with a guilt-sense, because
emotional experiences were rare in an isolated life and seemed somehow
indecent.

The two men held weapons. They advanced upon Professor Pettibone, looked
up into his face, reflected a certain wary hostility. That the hostility
was tinged with instinctive respect, even awe, made it no less potent.

One of them asked, "Fella--man came in ship--sky boat--long time ago.
Him dead? Where?" Appropriate gestures accompanied the words.

Professor Pettibone smiled down at the little men and bowed. "You are of
course referring to me. I came in the ship. I am Professor Pettibone. It
was nice of you to hunt me up."

The eyes of the two Terran spacemen met and locked in startled inquiry.
One of them voiced the reaction of both when he said, "What the hell--"

"You no doubt are curious as to the fate of the other members of the
expedition. They were killed, all save Fletcher, who lasted a week."
Professor Pettibone waved a hand. "There--in the graveyard."

But their eyes remained on the only survivor of that ill-fated first
expedition. It was hard to accept him as the man they sought, but, faced
with undeniable similarity between what they expected and what they had
found, the two spacemen had no alternative.

"I hope your food supply is ample--and varied," Professor Pettibone
said.

