
       *       *       *       *       *

Free! Twenty-seven years of walls and work, bitterness and hateful,
growing, simmering revenge. Twenty-seven years for a fast-moving world
to leave him behind, far behind. He'd have to be careful about that. He
wouldn't know about things. Twenty-seven years from his life, to kill
his ambition, to take his woman, to disgrace him in the eyes of society.
But the candle had burned through. He was free, with time, free, easy,
patient time, to find Markson, search him out, kill him at last.

Hours passed it seemed, in the cold, moving water. Krenner struggled to
stay alert; loss of control now would be sure death. A few shots had
followed him from the wall behind, hopeless shots, hopeless little
spears of light cutting across the water, searching for him, a tiny dot
in the blackness. Radar could never spot him, for he wore no metal, and
the sound of his movements in the water were covered by the sighing wind
and the splashing of water against the prison walls.

Finally, after ages of pain and coldness, he dragged himself out onto
the muddy shore, close to the calculated spot. He sat on the edge and
panted, his foot swollen and throbbing. He wanted to scream in pain, but
screams would bring farmers and dogs and questions. That would not do,
until he found Sherman, somewhere back in those hills, with a 'copter,
and food, and medication, and quiet, peaceful rest.

He tried to struggle to his feet, but the pain was too much now. He half
walked, half dragged himself into the woods, and started as best he
could the trek across the hills.

       *       *       *       *       *

Jerome Markson absently snapped on the radiovisor on his desk. Sipping
his morning coffee thoughtfully as he leafed through the reports on his
desk, he listened with half an ear until the announcer's voice seeped
through to his consciousness. He tightened suddenly in his seat, and the
coffee cooled before him, forgotten.

"--Eastern Pennsylvania is broadcasting a four-state alarm with special
radiovisor pictures in an effort to pick up the trail of a convict who
escaped the Federal Prison here last night. The escaped man, who shot
and killed two guards making good his escape, dived into the river
adjoining the prison, and is believed to have headed for an outside
rendezvous somewhere in the Blue Mountain region. The prisoner is John
Krenner, age 51, gray hair, blue eyes, five-foot-nine. He is armed and
dangerous, with four unsuccessful escape attempts, and three known
murders on his record. He was serving a life term, without leniency, for
the brutal murder in July, 1967, of Florence Markson, wife of the
now-famous industrialist, Jerome Markson, president of Markson
Foundries. Any person with information of this man's whereabouts should
report--"

Markson stared unbelieving at the face which appeared in the visor.
Krenner, all right. The same cold eyes, the same cruel mouth, the same
sneer. He snapped off the set, his face white and drawn. To face the
bitter, unreasoning hate of this man, his former partner--even a prison
couldn't hold him.

A telephone buzzed, shattering the silence of the huge office.

"Hello, Jerry? This is Floyd Gunn in Pittsburgh. Krenner's escaped!"

"I know. I just heard. Any word?"

"None yet. We got some inside dope from one of the men in the prison
that he has an outside escape route, and that he's been digging up all
the information he could find in the past three months or so about the
Roads. But I wanted to warn you." The policeman's voice sounded distant
and unreal. "He promised to get you, Jerry. I'm ordering you and your
home heavily guarded--"

"Guards won't do any good," said Markson, heavily. "Krenner will get me
if you don't get him first. Do everything you can."

The policeman's voice sounded more cheerful. "At any rate, he's in the
eastern part of the state now. He has four hundred miles to travel
before he can get to you. Unless he has a 'copter, or somehow gets on
the Roads, he can't get to you for a day or so. We're doing everything
we can."

Markson hung up the receiver heavily. Twenty-seven years of peace since
that devil had finally murdered his way out of his life. And now he was
back again. A terrible mistake for a partner, a man with no reason, a
man who could not understand the difference between right and wrong. A
man with ruthless ambition, who turned on his partner when honesty got
