drill our own rifle barrels by hand, though the crossbow is quiet and
faster in the jungle. Then they don't like us to know very much, so the
only reading matter that gets to us are tech maintenance manuals, empty
of basic theory.

"The last banned category you know about--medicine. This is the one
thing I cannot understand, that makes me burn with hatred with every
death they might have prevented."

"I know their reasons," Jason said.

"Then tell me, because I can think of none."

"Survival--it's just that simple. I doubt if you realize it, but they
have a decreasing population. It is just a matter of years before they
will be gone. Whereas your people at least must have a stable--if not
slightly growing population--to have existed without their mechanical
protections. So in the city they hate you and are jealous of you at the
same time. If they gave you medicine and you prospered, you would be
winning the battle they have lost. I imagine they tolerate you as a
necessary evil, to supply them with food, otherwise they wish you were
all dead."

"It makes sense," Rhes growled, slamming his fist against the bed. "The
kind of twisted logic you expect from junkmen. They use us to feed them,
give us the absolute minimum in return, and at the same time cut us off
from the knowledge that will get us out of this hand to mouth existence.
Worse, far worse, they cut us off from the stars and the rest of
mankind." The hatred on his face was so strong that Jason unconsciously
drew back.

"Do you think we are savages here, Jason? We act and look like animals
because we have to fight for existence on an animal level. Yet we know
about the stars. In that chest over there, sealed in metal, are over
thirty books, all we have. Fiction most of them, with some history and
general science thrown in. Enough to keep alive the stories of the
settlement here and the rest of the universe outside. We see the ships
land in the city and we know that up there are worlds we can only dream
about and never see. Do you wonder that we hate these beasts that call
themselves men, and would destroy them in an instant if we could? They
are right to keep weapons from us--for sure as the sun rises in the
morning we would kill them to a man if we were able, and take over the
things they have withheld from us."

       *       *       *       *       *

It was a harsh condemnation, but essentially a truthful one. At least
from the point of view of the outsiders. Jason didn't try to explain to
the angry man that the city Pyrrans looked on their attitude as being
the only possible and logical one. "How did this battle between your two
groups ever come about?" he asked.

"I don't know," Rhes said, "I've thought about it many times, but there
are no records of that period. We do know that we are all descended from
colonists who arrived at the same time. Somewhere, at some time, the two
groups separated. Perhaps it was a war, I've read about them in the
books. I have a partial theory, though I can't prove it, that it was the
location of the city."

"Location--I don't understand."

"Well, you know the junkmen, and you've seen where their city is. They
managed to put it right in the middle of the most savage spot on this
planet. You know they don't care about any living thing except
themselves, shoot and kill is their only logic. So they wouldn't
consider where to build their city, and managed to build it in the
stupidest spot imaginable. I'm sure my ancestors saw how foolish this
was and tried to tell them so. That would be reason enough for a war,
wouldn't it?"

"It might have been--if that's really what happened," Jason said. "But I
think you have the problem turned backwards. It's a war between native
Pyrran life and humans, each fighting to destroy the other. The life
forms change continually, seeking that final destruction of the
invader."

"Your theory is even wilder than mine," Rhes said. "That's not true at
all. I admit that life isn't too easy on this planet ... if what I have
read in the books about other planets is true ... but it doesn't change.
You have to be fast on your feet and keep your eyes open for anything
bigger than you, but you can survive. Anyway, it doesn't really matter
why. The junkmen always look for trouble and I'm happy to see that they
have enough."

Jason didn't try to press the point. The effort of forcing Rhes to
change his basic attitudes wasn't worth it--even if possible. He hadn't
succeeded in convincing anyone in the city of the lethal mutations even
when they could observe all the facts. Rhes could still supply
information though.

[Illustration]

"I suppose it's not important who started the battle," Jason said for
the other man's benefit, not meaning a word of it, "but you'll have to
agree that the city people are permanently at war with all the local
life. Your people, though, have managed to befriend at least two species
that I have seen. Do you have any idea how this was done?"

"Naxa will be here in a minute," Rhes said, pointing to the door, "as
soon as he's taken care of the animals. Ask him. He's the best talker we
have."

"Talker?" Jason asked. "I had the opposite idea about him. He didn't
talk much, and what he did say was, well ... a little hard to understand
at times."

"Not that kind of talking." Rhes broke in impatiently. "The talkers look
after the animals. They train the dogs and doryms, and the better ones
like Naxa are always trying to work with other beasts. They dress
crudely, but they have to. I've heard them say that the animals don't
like chemicals, metal or tanned leather, so they wear untanned furs for
the most part. But don't let the dirt fool you, it has nothing to do
with his intelligence."

"Doryms? Are those your carrying beasts--the kind we rode coming here?"

Rhes nodded. "Doryms are more than pack animals, they're really a little
bit of everything. The large males pull the ploughs and other machines,
while the younger animals are used for meat. If you want to know more,
ask Naxa, you'll find him in the barn."

"I'd like to do that," Jason said, standing up. "Only I feel undressed
without my gun--"

"Take it, by all means, it's in that chest by the door. Only watch out
what you shoot around here."

       *       *       *       *       *

Naxa was in the rear of the barn, filing down one of the spadelike
toenails of a dorym. It was a strange scene. The fur-dressed man with
the great beast--and the contrast of a beryllium-copper file and
electroluminescent plates lighting the work.

The dorym opened its nostrils and pulled away when Jason entered; Naxa
patted its neck and talked softly until it quieted and stood still,
shivering slightly.

Something stirred in Jason's mind, with the feeling of a long unused
muscle being stressed. A hauntingly familiar sensation.

"Good morning," Jason said. Naxa grunted something and went back to his
filing. Watching him for a few minutes, Jason tried to analyze this new
feeling. It itched and slipped aside when he reached for it, escaping
him. Whatever it was, it had started when Naxa had talked to the dorym.

"Could you call one of the dogs in here, Naxa? I'd like to see one
closer up."

Without raising his head from his work, Naxa gave a low whistle. Jason
was sure it couldn't have been heard outside of the barn. Yet within a
minute one of the Pyrran dogs slipped quietly in. The talker rubbed the
beast's head, mumbling to it, while the animal looked intently into his
eyes.

The dog became restless when Naxa turned back to work on the dorym. It
prowled around the barn, sniffing, then moved quickly towards the open
door. Jason called it back.

At least he meant to call it. At the last moment he said nothing.
Nothing aloud. On sudden impulse he kept his mouth closed--only he
called the dog with his mind. Thinking the words _come here_, directing
the impulse at the animal with all the force and direction he had ever
used to manipulate dice. As he did it he realized it had been a long
time since he had even considered using his psi powers.

The dog stopped and turned back towards him.

It hesitated, looking at Naxa, then walked over to Jason.

Seen this closely the beast was a nightmare hound. The hairless
protective plates, tiny red-rimmed eyes, and countless, saliva-dripping
teeth did little to inspire confidence. Yet Jason felt no fear. There
was a rapport between man and animal that was understood. Without
conscious thought he reached out and scratched the dog along the back,
where he knew it itched.

"Didn't know y're a talker," Naxa said. As he watched them, there was
friendship in his voice for the first time.

"I didn't know either--until just now," Jason said. He looked into the
eyes of the animal before him, scratched the ridged and ugly back, and
began to understand.

The talkers must have well developed psi facilities, that was obvious
now. There is no barrier of race or alien form when two creatures share
each other's emotions. Empathy first, so there would be no hatred or
fear. After that direct communication. The talkers might have been the
ones who first broke through the barrier of hatred on Pyrrus and learned
to live with the native life. Others could have followed their
example--this might explain how the community of "grubbers" had been
formed.

Now that he was concentrating on it, Jason was aware of the soft flow
of thoughts around him. The consciousness of the dorym was matched by
other like patterns from the rear of the barn. He knew without going
outside that more of the big beasts were in the field back there.

"This is all new to me," Jason said. "Have you ever thought about it,
Naxa? What does it feel like to be a talker? I mean, do you _know_ why
it is you can get the animals to obey you while other people have no
luck at all?"

Thinking of this sort troubled Naxa. He ran his fingers through his
thick hair and scowled as he answered. "Nev'r thought about it. Just do
it. Just get t'know the beast real good, then y'can guess what they're
going t'do. That's all."

It was obvious that Naxa had never thought about the origin of his
ability to control the animals. And if he hadn't--probably no one else
had. They had no reason to. They simply accepted the powers of talkers
as one of the facts of life.

Ideas slipped towards each other in his mind, like the pieces of a
puzzle joining together. He had told Kerk that the native life of Pyrrus
had joined in battle against mankind, he didn't know why. Well--he still
didn't know why, but he was getting an idea of the "how."

"About how far are we from the city?" Jason asked. "Do you have an idea
how long it would take us to get there by dorym?"

"Half a day there--half back. Why? Y'want to go?"

"I don't want to get into the city, not yet. But I would like to get
close to it," Jason told him.

"See what Rhes say," was Naxa's answer.

       *       *       *       *       *

Rhes granted instant permission without asking any questions. They
saddled up and left at once, in order to complete the round trip before
dark.

They had been traveling less than an hour before Jason knew they were
going in the direction of the city. With each minute the feeling grew
stronger. Naxa was aware of it too, stirring in the saddle with unvoiced
feelings. They had to keep touching and reassuring their mounts which
were growing skittish and restless.

"This is far enough," Jason said. Naxa gratefully pulled to a stop.

The wordless thought beat through Jason's mind, filling it. He could
feel it on all sides--only much stronger ahead of them in the direction
of the unseen city. Naxa and the doryms reacted in the same way,
restlessly uncomfortable, not knowing the cause.

One thing was obvious now. The Pyrran animals were sensitive to psi
radiation--probably the plants and lower life forms as well. Perhaps
they communicated by it, since they obeyed the men who had a strong
control of it. And in this area was a wash of psi radiation such as he
had never experienced before. Though his personal talents specialized in
psychokinesis--the mental control of inanimate matter--he was still
sensitive to most mental phenomena. Watching a sports event he had many
times felt the unanimous accord of many minds expressing the same
thought. What he felt now was like that.

Only terribly different. A crowd exulted at some success on the field,
or groaned at a failure. The feeling fluxed and changed as the game
progressed. Here the wash of thought was unending, strong and
frightening. It didn't translate into words very well. It was part
hatred, part fear--and all destruction.

"_KILL THE ENEMY_" was as close as Jason could express it. But it was
more than that. An unending river of mental outrage and death.

"Let's go back now," he said, suddenly battered and sickened by the
feelings he had let wash through him. As they started the return trip he
began to understand many things.

His sudden unspeakable fear when the Pyrran animal had attacked him that
first day on the planet. And his recurrent nightmares that had never
completely ceased, even with drugs. Both of these were his reaction to
the hatred directed at the city. Though for some reason he hadn't felt
it directly up to now, enough had reached through to him to get a strong
emotional reaction.

Rhes was asleep when they got back and Jason couldn't talk to him until
morning. In spite of his fatigue from the trip, he stayed awake late
into the night, going over in his mind the discoveries of the day. Could
he tell Rhes what he had found out? Not very well. If he did that, he
would have to explain the importance of his discovery and what he meant
to use it for. Nothing that aided the city dwellers would appeal to Rhes
in the slightest. Best to say nothing until the entire affair was over.




XVIII.


After breakfast he told Rhes that he wanted to return to the city.

"Then you have seen enough of our barbarian world, and wish to go back
to your friends. To help them wipe us out perhaps?" Rhes said it
lightly, but there was a touch of cold malice behind his words.

"I hope you don't really think that," Jason told him. "You must realize
that the opposite is true. I would like to see this civil war ended and
your people getting all the benefits of science and medicine that have
been withheld. I'll do everything I can to bring that about."

"They'll never change," Rhes said gloomily, "so don't waste your time.
But there is one thing you must do, for your protection and ours. Don't
admit, or even hint, that you've talked to any grubbers!"

"Why not?"

"Why not! Suffering death are you that simple! They will do anything to
see that we don't rise too high, and would much prefer to see us all
dead. Do you think they would hesitate to kill you if they as much as
suspected you had contacted us? They realize--even if you don't--that
you can singlehandedly alter the entire pattern of power on this planet.
The ordinary junkman may think of us as being only one step above the
animals, but the leaders don't. They know what we need and what we want.
They could probably guess just what it is I am going to ask you.

"Help us, Jason dinAlt. Get back among those human pigs and lie. Say you
never talked to us, that you hid in the forest and we attacked you and
you had to shoot to save yourself. We'll supply some recent corpses to
make that part of your story sound good. Make them believe you, and even
after you think you have them convinced keep on acting the part because
they will be watching you. Then tell them you have finished your work
and are ready to leave. Get safely off Pyrrus, to another planet, and I
promise you anything in the universe. Whatever you want you shall have.
Power, money--_anything_.

"This is a rich planet. The junkmen mine and sell the metal, but we
could do it much better. Bring a spaceship back here and land anywhere
on this continent. We have no cities, but our people have farms
everywhere, they will find you. We will then have commerce, trade--on
our own. This is what we all want and we will work hard for it. And
_you_ will have done it. Whatever you want we will give. That is a
promise and we do not break our promises."

The intensity and magnitude of what he described rocked Jason. He knew
that Rhes spoke the truth and the entire resources of the planet would
be his, if he did as asked. For one second he was tempted, savoring the
thought of what it would be like. Then came realization that it would be
a half answer, and a poor one at that. If these people had the strength
they wanted, their first act would be the attempted destruction of the
city men. The result would be bloody civil war that would probably
destroy them both. Rhes' answer was a good one--but only half an answer.

Jason had to find a better solution. One that would stop _all_ the
fighting on this planet and allow the two groups of humans to live in
peace.

"I will do nothing to injure your people, Rhes--and everything in my
power to aid them," Jason said.

This half answer satisfied Rhes, who could see only one interpretation
of it. He spent the rest of the morning on the communicator, arranging
for the food supplies that were being brought to the trading site.

"The supplies are ready and we have sent the signal," he said. "The
truck will be there tomorrow and you will be waiting for it. Everything
