"Berlin was horrid, we thought; but the amber is better and cheaper
than anywhere else,--great strings of beads, of the largest size and
that beautiful pale yellow, for a hundred francs. You must get yourself
one, Katy."

Poor Lilly! Europe to her was all "things." She had collected trunks
full of objects to carry home, but of the other collections which do not
go into trunks, she had little or none. Her mind was as empty, her heart
as untouched as ever; the beauty and the glory and the pathos of art and
history and Nature had been poured out in vain before her closed and
indifferent eyes.

Life soon dropped into a peaceful routine at the Pension Suisse, which
was at the same time restful and stimulating. Katy's first act in the
morning, as soon as she opened her eyes, was to hurry to the window in
hopes of getting a glimpse of Corsica. She had discovered that this
elusive island could almost always be seen from Nice at the dawning, but
that as soon as the sun was fairly up, it vanished to appear no more for
the rest of the day. There was something fascinating to her imagination
in the hovering mountain outline between sea and sky. She felt as if she
were under an engagement to be there to meet it, and she rarely missed
the appointment. Then, after Corsica had pulled the bright mists over
its face and melted from view, she would hurry with her dressing, and as
soon as was practicable set to work to make the _salon_ look bright
before the coffee and rolls should appear, a little after eight o'clock.
Mrs. Ashe always found the fire lit, the little meal cosily set out
beside it, and Katy's happy untroubled face to welcome her when she
emerged from her room; and the cheer of these morning repasts made a
good beginning for the day.

Then came walking and a French lesson, and a long sitting on the beach,
while Katy worked at her home letters and Amy raced up and down in the
sun; and then toward noon Lieutenant Ned generally appeared, and some
scheme of pleasure was set on foot. Mrs. Ashe ignored his evident
_penchant_ for Lilly Page, and claimed his time and attentions as hers
by right. Young Worthington was a good deal "taken" with the pretty
Lilly; still, he had an old-time devotion for his sister and the habit
of doing what she desired, and he yielded to her behests with no audible
objections. He made a fourth in the carriage while they drove over the
lovely hills which encircle Nice toward the north, to Cimiers and the
Val de St. Andre, or down the coast toward Ventimiglia. He went with
them to Monte-Carlo and Mentone, and was their escort again and again
when they visited the great war-ships as they lay at anchor in a bay
which in its translucent blue was like an enormous sapphire.

Mrs. Page and her daughter were included in these parties more than
once; but there was something in Mrs. Ashe's cool appropriation of her
brother which was infinitely vexatious to Lilly, who before her
arrival had rather looked upon Lieutenant Worthington as her own
especial property.

"I wish _that_ Mrs. Ashe had stayed at home," she told her mother. "She
quite spoils everything. Mr. Worthington isn't half so nice as he was
before she came. I do believe she has a plan for making him fall in love
with Katy; but there she makes a miss of it, for he doesn't seem to care
anything about her."

"Katy is a nice girl enough," pronounced her mother, "but not of the
sort to attract a gay young man, I should fancy. I don't believe _she_
is thinking of any such thing. You needn't be afraid, Lilly."

"I'm not afraid," said Lilly, with a pout; "only it's so provoking."

Mrs. Page was quite right. Katy was not thinking of any such thing. She
liked Ned Worthington's frank manners; she owned, quite honestly, that
she thought him handsome, and she particularly admired the sort of
deferential affection which he showed to Mrs. Ashe, and his nice ways
with Amy. For herself, she was aware that he scarcely noticed her except
as politeness demanded that he should be civil to his sister's friend;
but the knowledge did not trouble her particularly. Her head was full of
interesting things, plans, ideas. She was not accustomed to being made
the object of admiration, and experienced none of the vexations of a
neglected belle. If Lieutenant Worthington happened to talk to her, she
responded frankly and freely; if he did not, she occupied herself with
something else; in either case she was quite unembarrassed both in
feeling and manner, and had none of the awkwardness which comes from
disappointed vanity and baffled expectations, and the need for
concealing them.

Toward the close of December the officers of the flag-ship gave a ball,
which was the great event of the season to the gay world of Nice.
Americans were naturally in the ascendant on an American frigate; and of
all the American girls present, Lilly Page was unquestionably the
prettiest. Exquisitely dressed in white lace, with bands of turquoises
on her neck and arms and in her hair, she had more partners than she
knew what to do with, more bouquets than she could well carry, and
compliments enough to turn any girl's head. Thrown off her guard by her
triumphs, she indulged a little vindictive feeling which had been
growing in her mind of late on account of what she chose to consider
certain derelictions of duty on the part of Lieutenant Worthington, and
treated him to a taste of neglect. She was engaged three deep when he
asked her to dance; she did not hear when he invited her to walk; she
turned a cold shoulder when he tried to talk, and seemed absorbed by the
other cavaliers, naval and otherwise, who crowded about her.

Piqued and surprised, Ned Worthington turned to Katy. She did not dance,
saying frankly that she did not know how and was too tall; and she was
rather simply dressed in a pearl-gray silk, which had been her best gown
the winter before in Burnet, with a bunch of red roses in the white lace
of the tucker, and another in her hand, both the gifts of little Amy;
but she looked pleasant and serene, and there was something about her
which somehow soothed his disturbed mind, as he offered her his arm for
a walk on the decks.

For a while they said little, and Katy was quite content to pace up and
down in silence, enjoying the really beautiful scene,--the moonlight on
the Bay, the deep wavering reflections of the dark hulls and slender
spars, the fairy effect of the colored lamps and lanterns, and the
brilliant moving maze of the dancers.

"Do you care for this sort of thing?" he suddenly asked.

"What sort of thing do you mean?"

"Oh, all this jigging and waltzing and amusement."

"I don't know how to 'jig,' but it's delightful to look on," she
answered merrily. "I never saw anything so pretty in my life."

The happy tone of her voice and the unruffled face which she turned upon
him quieted his irritation.

"I really believe you mean it," he said; "and yet, if you won't think me
rude to say so, most girls would consider the thing dull enough if they
were only getting out of it what you are,--if they were not dancing, I
mean, and nobody in particular was trying to entertain them."

"But everything _is_ being done to entertain me," cried Katy. "I can't
imagine what makes you think that it could seem dull. I am in it all,
don't you see,--I have my share--. Oh, I am stupid, I can't make you
understand."

"Yes, you do. I understand perfectly, I think; only it is such a
different point of view from what girls in general would take." (By
girls he meant Lilly!) "Please do not think me uncivil."

"You are not uncivil at all; but don't let us talk any more about me.
Look at the lights between the shadows of the masts on the water. How
they quiver! I never saw anything so beautiful, I think. And how warm it
is! I can't believe that we are in December and that it is nearly
Christmas."

"How is Polly going to celebrate her Christmas? Have you decided?"

"Amy is to have a Christmas-tree for her dolls, and two other dolls are
coming. We went out this morning to buy things for it,--tiny little toys
and candles fit for Lilliput. And that reminds me, do you suppose one
can get any Christmas greens here?"

"Why not? The place seems full of green."

"That's just it; the summer look makes it unnatural. But I should like
some to dress the parlor with if they could be had."

"I'll see what I can find, and send you a load."

I don't know why this very simple little talk should have made an
impression on Lieutenant Worthington's mind, but somehow he did not
forget it.

"'Don't let us talk any more about me,'" he said to himself that night
when alone in his cabin. "I wonder how long it would be before the other
one did anything to divert the talk from herself. Some time, I fancy."
He smiled rather grimly as he unbuckled his sword-belt. It is unlucky
for a girl when she starts a train of reflection like this. Lilly's
little attempt to pique her admirer had somehow missed its mark.

The next afternoon Katy in her favorite place on the beach was at work
on the long weekly letter which she never failed to send home to Burnet.
She held her portfolio in her lap, and her pen ran rapidly over the
paper, as rapidly almost as her tongue would have run could her
correspondents have been brought nearer.


    "Nice, December 22.

    "Dear Papa and everybody,--Amy and I are sitting on my old purple
    cloak, which is spread over the sand just where it was spread the
    last time I wrote you. We are playing the following game: I am a
    fairy and she is a little girl. Another fairy--not sitting on the
    cloak at present--has enchanted the little girl, and I am telling
    her various ways by which she can work out her deliverance. At
    present the task is to find twenty-four dull red pebbles of the same
    color, failing to do which she is to be changed into an owl. When we
    began to play, I was the wicked fairy; but Amy objected to that
    because I am 'so nice,' so we changed the characters. I wish you
    could see the glee in her pretty gray eyes over this infantile game,
    into which she has thrown herself so thoroughly that she half
    believes in it. 'But I needn't really be changed into an owl! 'she
    says, with a good deal of anxiety in her voice.

    "To think that you are shivering in the first snow-storm, or sending
    the children out with their sleds and india-rubbers to slide! How I
    wish instead that you were sharing the purple cloak with Amy and me,
    and could sit all this warm balmy afternoon close to the surf-line
    which fringes this bluest of blue seas! There is plenty of room for
    you all. Not many people come down to this end of the beach, and if
    you were very good we would let you play.

    "Our life here goes on as delightfully as ever. Nice is very full of
    people, and there seem to be some pleasant ones among them. Here at
    the Pension Suisse we do not see a great many Americans. The
    fellow-boarders are principally Germans and Austrians with a
    sprinkling of French. (Amy has found her twenty-four red pebbles, so
    she is let off from being an owl. She is now engaged in throwing
    them one by one into the sea. Each must hit the water under penalty
    of her being turned into a Muscovy duck. She doesn't know exactly
    what a Muscovy duck is, which makes her all the more particular
    about her shots.) But, as I was saying, our little _suite_ in the
    round tower is so on one side of the rest of the Pension that it is
    as good as having a house of our own. The _salon_ is very bright and
    sunny; we have two sofas and a square table and a round table and a
    sort of what-not and two easy-chairs and two uneasy chairs and a
    lamp of our own and a clock. There is also a sofa-pillow. There's
    richness for you! We have pinned up all our photographs on the
    walls, including Papa's and Clovy's and that bad one of Phil and
    Johnnie making faces at each other, and three lovely red and yellow
    Japanese pictures on muslin which Rose Red put in my trunk the last
    thing, for a spot of color. There are some autumn leaves too; and we
    always have flowers and in the mornings and evenings a fire.

    "Amy is now finding fifty snow-white pebbles, which when found are
    to be interred in one common grave among the shingle. If she fails
    to do this, she is to be changed to an electrical eel. The chief
    difficulty is that she loses her heart to particular pebbles. 'I
    can't bury you,' I hear her saying.

    "To return,--we have jolly little breakfasts together in the
    _salon_. They consist of coffee and rolls, and are served by a
    droll, snappish little _garcon_ with no teeth, and an Italian-French
    patois which is very hard to understand when he sputters. He told me
    the other day that he had been a _garcon_ for forty-six years, which
    seemed rather a long boyhood.

    "The company, as we meet them at table, are rather entertaining.
    Cousin Olivia and Lilly are on their best behavior to me because I
    am travelling with Mrs. Ashe, and Mrs. Ashe is Lieutenant
    Worthington's sister, and Lieutenant Worthington is Lilly's admirer,
    and they like him very much. In fact, Lilly has intimated
    confidentially that she is all but engaged to him; but I am not sure
    about it, or if that was what she meant; and I fear, if it proves
    true, that dear Polly will not like it at all. She is quite
    unmanageable, and snubs Lilly continually in a polite way, which
    makes me fidgety for fear Lilly will be offended, but she never
    seems to notice it. Cousin Olivia looks very handsome and gorgeous.
    She quite takes the color out of the little Russian Countess who
    sits next to her, and who is as dowdy and meek as if she came from
    Akron or Binghampton, or any other place where countesses are
    unknown. Then there are two charming, well-bred young Austrians. The
    one who sits nearest to me is a 'Candidat' for a Doctorate of Laws,
    and speaks eight languages well. He has only studied English for the
    past six weeks, but has made wonderful progress. I wish my French
    were half as good as his English is already.

    "There is a very gossiping young woman on the story beneath ours,
    whom I meet sometimes in the garden, and from her I hear all manner
    of romantic tales about people in the house. One little French girl
    is dying of consumption and a broken heart, because of a quarrel
    with her lover, who is a courier; and the _padrona_, who is young
    and pretty, and has only been married a few months to our elderly
    landlord, has a story also. I forget some of the details; but there
    was a stern parent and an admirer, and a cup of cold poison, and now
    she says she wishes she were dying of consumption like poor
    Alphonsine. For all that, she looks quite fat and rosy, and I often
    see her in her best gown with a great deal of Roman scarf and mosaic
    jewelry, stationed in the doorway, 'making the Pension look
    attractive to the passers-by.' So she has a sense of duty, though
    she is unhappy.

    "Amy has buried all her pebbles, and says she is tired of playing
    fairy. She is now sitting with her head on my shoulder, and
    professedly studying her French verb for to-morrow, but in reality,
    I am sorry to say, she is conversing with me about be-headings,--a
    subject which, since her visit to the Tower, has exercised a
    horrible fascination over her mind. 'Do people die right away?' she
    asks. 'Don't they feel one minute, and doesn't it feel awfully?'
    There is a good deal of blood, she supposes, because there was so
    much straw laid about the block in the picture of Lady Jane Gray's
    execution, which enlivened our walls in Paris. On the whole, I am
    rather glad that a fat little white dog has come waddling down the
    beach and taken off her attention.

    "Speaking of Paris seems to renew the sense of fog which we had
    there. Oh, how enchanting sunshine is after weeks of gloom! I shall
    never forget how the Mediterranean looked when we saw it first,--all
    blue, and such a lovely color. There ought, according to Morse's
    Atlas, to have been a big red letter T on the water about where we
    were, but I didn't see any. Perhaps they letter it so far out from
    shore that only people in boats notice it.

    "Now the dusk is fading, and the odd chill which hides under these
    warm afternoons begins to be felt. Amy has received a message
    written on a mysterious white pebble to the effect--"

Katy was interrupted at this point by a crunching step on the gravel
behind her.

"Good afternoon," said a voice. "Polly has sent me to fetch you and Amy
in. She says it is growing cool."

"We were just coming," said Katy, beginning to put away her papers.

Ned Worthington sat down on the cloak beside her. The distance was now
steel gray against the sky; then came a stripe of violet, and then a
broad sheet of the vivid iridescent blue which one sees on the necks of
