"I shall not be a party to high treason," snapped Johnson.  "The
regulations are explicit, and if the Coldwater crosses thirty it
devolves upon you to place Lieutenant Turck under arrest and
immediately exert every endeavor to bring the ship back into
Pan-American waters."

"I shall not know," replied Alvarez, "that the Coldwater passes thirty;
nor shall any other man aboard know it," and, with his words, he drew a
revolver from his pocket, and before either I or Johnson could prevent
it had put a bullet into every instrument upon the bridge, ruining them
beyond repair.

And then he saluted me, and strode from the bridge, a martyr to loyalty
and friendship, for, though no man might know that Lieutenant Jefferson
Turck had taken his ship across thirty, every man aboard would know
that the first officer had committed a crime that was punishable by
both degradation and death.  Johnson turned and eyed me narrowly.

"Shall I place him under arrest?" he asked.

"You shall not," I replied.  "Nor shall anyone else."

"You become a party to his crime!" he cried angrily.

"You may go below, Mr. Johnson," I said, "and attend to the work of
unpacking the extra instruments and having them properly set upon the
bridge."

He saluted, and left me, and for some time I stood, gazing out upon the
angry waters, my mind filled with unhappy reflections upon the unjust
fate that had overtaken me, and the sorrow and disgrace that I had
unwittingly brought down upon my house.

I rejoiced that I should leave neither wife nor child to bear the
burden of my shame throughout their lives.

As I thought upon my misfortune, I considered more clearly than ever
before the unrighteousness of the regulation which was to prove my
doom, and in the natural revolt against its injustice my anger rose,
and there mounted within me a feeling which I imagine must have
paralleled that spirit that once was prevalent among the ancients
called anarchy.

For the first time in my life I found my sentiments arraying themselves
against custom, tradition, and even government.  The wave of rebellion
swept over me in an instant, beginning with an heretical doubt as to
the sanctity of the established order of things--that fetish which has
ruled Pan-Americans for two centuries, and which is based upon a blind
faith in the infallibility of the prescience of the long-dead framers
of the articles of Pan-American federation--and ending in an adamantine
determination to defend my honor and my life to the last ditch against
the blind and senseless regulation which assumed the synonymity of
misfortune and treason.

I would replace the destroyed instruments upon the bridge; every
officer and man should know when we crossed thirty.  But then I should
assert the spirit which dominated me, I should resist arrest, and
insist upon bringing my ship back across the dead line, remaining at my
post until we had reached New York.  Then I should make a full report,
and with it a demand upon public opinion that the dead lines be wiped
forever from the seas.

I knew that I was right.  I knew that no more loyal officer wore the
uniform of the navy.  I knew that I was a good officer and sailor, and
I didn't propose submitting to degradation and discharge because a lot
of old, preglacial fossils had declared over two hundred years before
that no man should cross thirty.

Even while these thoughts were passing through my mind I was busy with
the details of my duties.  I had seen to it that a sea anchor was
rigged, and even now the men had completed their task, and the
Coldwater was swinging around rapidly, her nose pointing once more into
the wind, and the frightful rolling consequent upon her wallowing in
the trough was happily diminishing.

It was then that Johnson came hurrying to the bridge.  One of his eyes
was swollen and already darkening, and his lip was cut and bleeding.
Without even the formality of a salute, he burst upon me, white with
fury.

"Lieutenant Alvarez attacked me!" he cried.  "I demand that he be
placed under arrest.  I found him in the act of destroying the reserve
instruments, and when I would have interfered to protect them he fell
upon me and beat me.  I demand that you arrest him!"

"You forget yourself, Mr. Johnson," I said.  "You are not in command of
the ship.  I deplore the action of Lieutenant Alvarez, but I cannot
expunge from my mind the loyalty and self-sacrificing friendship which
has prompted him to his acts.  Were I you, sir, I should profit by the
example he has set.  Further, Mr. Johnson, I intend retaining command
of the ship, even though she crosses thirty, and I shall demand
implicit obedience from every officer and man aboard until I am
properly relieved from duty by a superior officer in the port of New
York."

"You mean to say that you will cross thirty without submitting to
arrest?" he almost shouted.

"I do, sir," I replied.  "And now you may go below, and, when again you
find it necessary to address me, you will please be so good as to bear
in mind the fact that I am your commanding officer, and as such
entitled to a salute."

He flushed, hesitated a moment, and then, saluting, turned upon his
heel and left the bridge.  Shortly after, Alvarez appeared.  He was
pale, and seemed to have aged ten years in the few brief minutes since
I last had seen him.  Saluting, he told me very simply what he had
done, and asked that I place him under arrest.

I put my hand on his shoulder, and I guess that my voice trembled a
trifle as, while reproving him for his act, I made it plain to him that
my gratitude was no less potent a force than his loyalty to me.  Then
it was that I outlined to him my purpose to defy the regulation that
had raised the dead lines, and to take my ship back to New York myself.

I did not ask him to share the responsibility with me.  I merely stated
that I should refuse to submit to arrest, and that I should demand of
him and every other officer and man implicit obedience to my every
command until we docked at home.

His face brightened at my words, and he assured me that I would find
him as ready to acknowledge my command upon the wrong side of thirty as
upon the right, an assurance which I hastened to tell him I did not
need.

The storm continued to rage for three days, and as far as the wind
scarce varied a point during all that time, I knew that we must be far
beyond thirty, drifting rapidly east by south.  All this time it had
been impossible to work upon the damaged engines or the gravity-screen
generators; but we had a full set of instruments upon the bridge, for
Alvarez, after discovering my intentions, had fetched the reserve
instruments from his own cabin, where he had hidden them.  Those which
Johnson had seen him destroy had been a third set which only Alvarez
had known was aboard the Coldwater.

We waited impatiently for the sun, that we might determine our exact
location, and upon the fourth day our vigil was rewarded a few minutes
before noon.

Every officer and man aboard was tense with nervous excitement as we
awaited the result of the reading.  The crew had known almost as soon
as I that we were doomed to cross thirty, and I am inclined to believe
that every man jack of them was tickled to death, for the spirits of
adventure and romance still live in the hearts of men of the
twenty-second century, even though there be little for them to feed
upon between thirty and one hundred seventy-five.

The men carried none of the burdens of responsibility.  They might
cross thirty with impunity, and doubtless they would return to be
heroes at home; but how different the home-coming of their commanding
officer!

The wind had dropped to a steady blow, still from west by north, and
the sea had gone down correspondingly.  The crew, with the exception of
those whose duties kept them below, were ranged on deck below the
bridge.  When our position was definitely fixed I personally announced
it to the eager, waiting men.

"Men," I said, stepping forward to the handrail and looking down into
their upturned, bronzed faces, "you are anxiously awaiting information
as to the ship's position.  It has been determined at latitude fifty
degrees seven minutes north, longitude twenty degrees sixteen minutes
west."

I paused and a buzz of animated comment ran through the massed men
beneath me.  "Beyond thirty.  But there will be no change in commanding
officers, in routine or in discipline, until after we have docked again
in New York."

As I ceased speaking and stepped back from the rail there was a roar of
applause from the deck such as I never before had heard aboard a ship
of peace.  It recalled to my mind tales that I had read of the good old
days when naval vessels were built to fight, when ships of peace had
been man-of-war, and guns had flashed in other than futile target
practice, and decks had run red with blood.

With the subsistence of the sea, we were able to go to work upon the
damaged engines to some effect, and I also set men to examining the
gravitation-screen generators with a view to putting them in working
order should it prove not beyond our resources.

For two weeks we labored at the engines, which indisputably showed
evidence of having been tampered with.  I appointed a board to
investigate and report upon the disaster.  But it accomplished nothing
other than to convince me that there were several officers upon it who
were in full sympathy with Johnson, for, though no charges had been
preferred against him, the board went out of its way specifically to
exonerate him in its findings.

All this time we were drifting almost due east.  The work upon the
engines had progressed to such an extent that within a few hours we
might expect to be able to proceed under our own power westward in the
direction of Pan-American waters.

To relieve the monotony I had taken to fishing, and early that morning
I had departed from the Coldwater in one of the boats on such an
excursion.  A gentle west wind was blowing.  The sea shimmered in the
sunlight.  A cloudless sky canopied the west for our sport, as I had
made it a point never voluntarily to make an inch toward the east that
I could avoid.  At least, they should not be able to charge me with a
willful violation of the dead lines regulation.

I had with me only the boat's ordinary complement of men--three in all,
and more than enough to handle any small power boat.  I had not asked
any of my officers to accompany me, as I wished to be alone, and very
glad am I now that I had not.  My only regret is that, in view of what
befell us, it had been necessary to bring the three brave fellows who
manned the boat.

Our fishing, which proved excellent, carried us so far to the west that
we no longer could see the Coldwater.  The day wore on, until at last,
about mid-afternoon, I gave the order to return to the ship.

We had proceeded but a short distance toward the east when one of the
men gave an exclamation of excitement, at the same time pointing
eastward.  We all looked on in the direction he had indicated, and
there, a short distance above the horizon, we saw the outlines of the
Coldwater silhouetted against the sky.

"They've repaired the engines and the generators both," exclaimed one
of the men.

It seemed impossible, but yet it had evidently been done.  Only that
morning, Lieutenant Johnson had told me that he feared that it would be
impossible to repair the generators.  I had put him in charge of this
work, since he always had been accounted one of the best
gravitation-screen men in the navy.  He had invented several of the
improvements that are incorporated in the later models of these
generators, and I am convinced that he knows more concerning both the
theory and the practice of screening gravitation than any living
Pan-American.

At the sight of the Coldwater once more under control, the three men
burst into a glad cheer.  But, for some reason which I could not then
account, I was strangely overcome by a premonition of personal
misfortune.  It was not that I now anticipated an early return to
Pan-America and a board of inquiry, for I had rather looked forward to
the fight that must follow my return.  No, there was something else,
something indefinable and vague that cast a strange gloom upon me as I
saw my ship rising farther above the water and making straight in our
direction.

I was not long in ascertaining a possible explanation of my depression,
for, though we were plainly visible from the bridge of the
aero-submarine and to the hundreds of men who swarmed her deck, the
ship passed directly above us, not five hundred feet from the water,
and sped directly westward.

We all shouted, and I fired my pistol to attract their attention,
though I knew full well that all who cared to had observed us, but the
ship moved steadily away, growing smaller and smaller to our view until
at last she passed completely out of sight.



2


What could it mean?  I had left Alvarez in command.  He was my most
loyal subordinate.  It was absolutely beyond the pale of possibility
that Alvarez should desert me.  No, there was some other explanation.
Something occurred to place my second officer, Porfirio Johnson, in
command.  I was sure of it but why speculate?  The futility of
conjecture was only too palpable.  The Coldwater had abandoned us in
midocean.  Doubtless none of us would survive to know why.

The young man at the wheel of the power boat had turned her nose about
as it became evident that the ship intended passing over us, and now he
still held her in futile pursuit of the Coldwater.

"Bring her about, Snider," I directed, "and hold her due east.  We
can't catch the Coldwater, and we can't cross the Atlantic in this.
Our only hope lies in making the nearest land, which, unless I am
mistaken, is the Scilly Islands, off the southwest coast of England.
Ever heard of England, Snider?"

"There's a part of the United States of North America that used to be
known to the ancients as New England," he replied.  "Is that where you
mean, sir?"

"No, Snider," I replied.  "The England I refer to was an island off the
continent of Europe.  It was the seat of a very powerful kingdom that
flourished over two hundred years ago.  A part of the United States of
North America and all of the Federated States of Canada once belonged
to this ancient England."

"Europe," breathed one of the men, his voice tense with excitement.
"My grandfather used to tell me stories of the world beyond thirty.  He
had been a great student, and he had read much from forbidden books."

"In which I resemble your grandfather," I said, "for I, too, have read
more even than naval officers are supposed to read, and, as you men
know, we are permitted a greater latitude in the study of geography and
history than men of other professions.

"Among the books and papers of Admiral Porter Turck, who lived two
hundred years ago, and from whom I am descended, many volumes still
exist, and are in my possession, which deal with the history and
geography of ancient Europe.  Usually I bring several of these books
with me upon a cruise, and this time, among others, I have maps of
Europe and her surrounding waters.  I was studying them as we came away
from the Coldwater this morning, and luckily I have them with me."

"You are going to try to make Europe, sir?" asked Taylor, the young man
who had last spoken.

"It is the nearest land," I replied.  "I have always wanted to explore
the forgotten lands of the Eastern Hemisphere.  Here's our chance.  To
remain at sea is to perish.  None of us ever will see home again.  Let
us make the best of it, and enjoy while we do live that which is
forbidden the balance of our race--the adventure and the mystery which
lie beyond thirty."

Taylor and Delcarte seized the spirit of my mood but Snider, I think,
was a trifle sceptical.

"It is treason, sir," I replied, "but there is no law which compels us
to visit punishment upon ourselves.  Could we return to Pan-America, I
should be the first to insist that we face it.  But we know that's not
possible.  Even if this craft would carry us so far, we haven't enough
water or food for more than three days.

"We are doomed, Snider, to die far from home and without ever again
looking upon the face of another fellow countryman than those who sit
here now in this boat.  Isn't that punishment sufficient for even the
most exacting judge?"

Even Snider had to admit that it was.

"Very well, then, let us live while we live, and enjoy to the fullest
whatever of adventure or pleasure each new day brings, since any day
may be our last, and we shall be dead for a considerable while."

I could see that Snider was still fearful, but Taylor and Delcarte
responded with a hearty, "Aye, aye, sir!"

They were of different mold.  Both were sons of naval officers.  They
represented the aristocracy of birth, and they dared to think for
themselves.

Snider was in the minority, and so we continued toward the east.
Beyond thirty, and separated from my ship, my authority ceased.  I held
leadership, if I was to hold it at all, by virtue of personal
qualifications only, but I did not doubt my ability to remain the
director of our destinies in so far as they were amenable to human
agencies.  I have always led.  While my brain and brawn remain
unimpaired I shall continue always to lead.  Following is an art which
Turcks do not easily learn.

It was not until the third day that we raised land, dead ahead, which I
took, from my map, to be the isles of Scilly.  But such a gale was
blowing that I did not dare attempt to land, and so we passed to the
north of them, skirted Land's End, and entered the English Channel.

I think that up to that moment I had never experienced such a thrill as
passed through me when I realized that I was navigating these historic
waters.  The lifelong dreams that I never had dared hope to see
fulfilled were at last a reality--but under what forlorn circumstances!

Never could I return to my native land.  To the end of my days I must
remain in exile.  Yet even these thoughts failed to dampen my ardor.

My eyes scanned the waters.  To the north I could see the rockbound
coast of Cornwall.  Mine were the first American eyes to rest upon it
for more than two hundred years.  In vain, I searched for some sign of
ancient commerce that, if history is to be believed, must have dotted
the bosom of the Channel with white sails and blackened the heavens
with the smoke of countless funnels, but as far as eye could reach the
tossing waters of the Channel were empty and deserted.

Toward midnight the wind and sea abated, so that shortly after dawn I
determined to make inshore in an attempt to effect a landing, for we
were sadly in need of fresh water and food.

According to my observations, we were just off Ram Head, and it was my
intention to enter Plymouth Bay and visit Plymouth.  From my map it
appeared that this city lay back from the coast a short distance, and
there was another city given as Devonport, which appeared to lie at the
mouth of the river Tamar.

However, I knew that it would make little difference which city we
entered, as the English people were famed of old for their hospitality
toward visiting mariners.  As we approached the mouth of the bay I
looked for the fishing craft which I expected to see emerging thus
early in the day for their labors.  But even after we rounded Ram Head
and were well within the waters of the bay I saw no vessel.  Neither
was there buoy nor light nor any other mark to show larger ships the
channel, and I wondered much at this.

The coast was densely overgrown, nor was any building or sign of man
apparent from the water.  Up the bay and into the River Tamar we
motored through a solitude as unbroken as that which rested upon the
waters of the Channel.  For all we could see, there was no indication
that man had ever set his foot upon this silent coast.

I was nonplused, and then, for the first time, there crept over me an
intuition of the truth.

Here was no sign of war.  As far as this portion of the Devon coast was
concerned, that seemed to have been over for many years, but neither
were there any people.  Yet I could not find it within myself to
believe that I should find no inhabitants in England.  Reasoning thus,
I discovered that it was improbable that a state of war still existed,
and that the people all had been drawn from this portion of England to
some other, where they might better defend themselves against an
invader.

But what of their ancient coast defenses?  What was there here in
Plymouth Bay to prevent an enemy landing in force and marching where
they wished?  Nothing.  I could not believe that any enlightened
military nation, such as the ancient English are reputed to have been,
would have voluntarily so deserted an exposed coast and an excellent
harbor to the mercies of an enemy.

I found myself becoming more and more deeply involved in quandary.  The
puzzle which confronted me I could not unravel.  We had landed, and I
now stood upon the spot where, according to my map, a large city should
rear its spires and chimneys.  There was nothing but rough, broken
ground covered densely with weeds and brambles, and tall, rank, grass.

Had a city ever stood there, no sign of it remained.  The roughness and
unevenness of the ground suggested something of a great mass of debris
hidden by the accumulation of centuries of undergrowth.

I drew the short cutlass with which both officers and men of the navy
are, as you know, armed out of courtesy to the traditions and memories
of the past, and with its point dug into the loam about the roots of
the vegetation growing at my feet.

The blade entered the soil for a matter of seven inches, when it struck
upon something stonelike.  Digging about the obstacle, I presently
loosened it, and when I had withdrawn it from its sepulcher I found the
thing to be an ancient brick of clay, baked in an oven.

Delcarte we had left in charge of the boat; but Snider and Taylor were
with me, and following my example, each engaged in the fascinating
sport of prospecting for antiques.  Each of us uncovered a great number
of these bricks, until we commenced to weary of the monotony of it,
when Snider suddenly gave an exclamation of excitement, and, as I
turned to look, he held up a human skull for my inspection.

I took it from him and examined it.  Directly in the center of the
forehead was a small round hole.  The gentleman had evidently come to
his end defending his country from an invader.

Snider again held aloft another trophy of the search--a metal spike and
some tarnished and corroded metal ornaments.  They had lain close
beside the skull.

With the point of his cutlass Snider scraped the dirt and verdigris
from the face of the larger ornament.

"An inscription," he said, and handed the thing to me.

They were the spike and ornaments of an ancient German helmet.  Before
long we had uncovered many other indications that a great battle had
been fought upon the ground where we stood.  But I was then, and still
am, at loss to account for the presence of German soldiers upon the
English coast so far from London, which history suggests would have
been the natural goal of an invader.

I can only account for it by assuming that either England was
temporarily conquered by the Teutons, or that an invasion of so vast
proportions was undertaken that German troops were hurled upon the
England coast in huge numbers and that landings were necessarily
