
"One can't even go and look at the sea from their cliffs without their
taking it amiss," and Ralph related the conversation he had had with
the peasant, adding that he was convinced he had been watched whenever
he went there.

"It is curious, certainly," the captain said when he had finished. "No
doubt they think you are spying after something; but that would not
trouble them unless there was something they were afraid of your
finding out. Either there has been something going on, or there is
some hiding-place down there on the face of the cliff, where maybe
they have a still at work. Anyhow, I don't think I should neglect the
warning, Conway. You might be killed and thrown over the cliff, and no
one be the wiser for it. I should certainly advise you to give up
mooning about."

"But there is nothing to do in this wretched village," Ralph said
discontentedly.

"Not if you stop in the village, I grant; but you might do as Desmond
and I do when we are off duty; go over and take lunch at the Ryans',
or Burkes', or any of the other families where we have a standing
invitation. They are always glad to see one, and there's plenty of fun
to be had."

"That's all very well for you, O'Connor. You are a captain and a
single man, and one of their countrymen, with lots to say for
yourself; but it is a different thing with me altogether. I can't drop
in and make myself at home as you do."

"Why, you are not shy, Conway?" O'Connor said in affected horror.
"Surely such a disgrace has not fallen on his majesty's Twenty-eighth
Regiment that one of its officers is shy? Such a thing is not recorded
in its annals."

"I am afraid it will have to be recorded now," laughed Ralph. "For I
own that I am shy; if you call shy, feeling awkward and uncomfortable
with a lot of strange people, especially ladies."

"Do not let it be whispered outside," O'Connor said, "or the
reputation of the regiment is gone forever among Irish girls. Desmond,
this is a sad business. What are we to do with this man? You and I
must consult together how this thing is to be cured."

"No, no, O'Connor," Ralph said earnestly, knowing how fond O'Connor
was of practical jokes, and dreading that he and the lieutenant would
be putting him in some ridiculous position or other. "You will never
cure me if you set about it. I shall get over it in time; but it's the
sort of thing that becomes ten times worse if you attempt to cure it."

"We must think it over, my lad," O'Connor said seriously. "This is a
serious defect in your character; and as your commanding officer I
consider it my bounden duty, both for your sake and that of the
regiment, to take it into serious consideration and see what is to be
done. You may never have such a chance again of being cured as you
have here; for if a man goes away from Ireland without being cured of
shyness his case is an absolutely hopeless one. Desmond, you must turn
this matter seriously over in your mind, and I will do the same. And
now it is time for us to be starting for the dance at the Regans'. I
am sorry you can't go with us, Desmond, as you are on duty."

"I shall be very glad to take your duty, Desmond," Ralph said eagerly.
"I told you so this morning, and I thought you agreed."

"As your commanding officer," O'Connor said gravely, "I cannot permit
the exchange to be made, Mr. Conway. You have your duty to perform to
the regiment as well as Mr. Desmond, and your duty clearly is to go
out and make yourself agreeable. I am surprised after what I have just
been saying that you should think of staying at home."

"Well, of course, if you want me to go I will go," Ralph said
reluctantly. "But I don't know the Regans, and don't want to."

"That is very ungracious, Conway. Mr. Regan is a retired pork merchant
of Cork. He has given up his business and bought an estate here, and
settled down as a country gentleman. They say his father was a
pig-driver in Waterford. That's why he has bought a place on this side
of the county. But people have been rather shy of them; because,
though he could buy three-fourths of them up, his money smells of
pork. Still, as the election is coming on, they have relaxed a bit.
He's got the militia band, and there will be lashings of everything;
and his girls are nice girls, whether their father sold pork or not.
And it would be nothing short of cruel if we, the representatives of
his majesty's army, did not put in an appearance; especially as we
have doubtless eaten many a barrel of his salt pork at sea. So put on
your number one coatee and let's be off."

With a sign Ralph rose to carry out his orders, and he would have been
still more reluctant to go had he observed the sly wink that passed
between his captain and lieutenant.

"He is quite refreshing, that boy," O'Connor said as the door closed
behind Ralph. "That adventure in the West Indies showed he has plenty
of pluck and presence of mind; but he is as shy as a girl. Though I
don't know why I should say that, for it's mighty few of them have any
shyness about them. He will grow out of it. I was just the same myself
when I was his age."

Lieutenant Desmond burst into a roar of laughter.

"I should have liked to have known you then, O'Connor."

O'Connor joined in the laugh.

"It's true though, Desmond. I was brought up by two maiden aunts in
the town of Dundalk, and they were always bothering me about my
manners; so that though I could hold my own in a slanging match down
by the riverside, I was as awkward as a young bear when in genteel
company. They used to have what they called tea-parties--and a fearful
infliction they were--and I was expected to hand round the tea and
cakes, and make myself useful. I think I might have managed well
enough if the old women would have let me alone; but they were always
expecting me to do something wrong, and I was conscious that whatever
they were doing they had an eye upon me.

"It's trying, you know, when you hear exclamations like this: 'The
saints presarve us! if he hasn't nearly poked his elbow into Mrs.
Fitzgerald's eye!' or, 'See now, if he isn't standing on Miss Macrae's
train!' One day I let a cup of coffee fall on to old Mrs. O'Toole's
new crimson silk dress. It was the first she had had for nine years to
my knowledge, and would have lasted her for the rest of her natural
life. And if you could have heard the squall she made, and the
exclamations of my aunts, and the general excitement over that
wretched cup of coffee, you would never have forgotten it.

"It had one good result, I was never asked to hand things round again
and was indeed never expected to put in an appearance until the
tea-things were taken away. I suffered for months for that silk dress.
My aunts got two yards of material and presented them to Mrs. O'Toole;
and for weeks and weeks I got short allowance of butter to my bread
and no sugar in my tea, and had to hear remarks as to the necessity
for being economical. As for Mrs. O'Toole she never forgave me, and
was always saying spiteful things. But I got even with her once. One
evening the doctor, who was her partner at whist, was called out, and
I was ordered to take his place. Now, I played a pretty good game at
whist, better than the doctor did by a long chalk I flattered myself;
but I didn't often play at home unless I was wanted to make up a
table, and very glad I was to get out of it, for the ill-temper of
those old harridans when they lost was something fearful.

"It was only penny points, but if they had been playing for five
pounds they couldn't have taken it more to heart; and of course if I
had the misfortune of being their partner they put it down entirely to
my bad play. Well, we held good cards, and at last we only wanted the
odd trick to win. I held the last trump. Mrs. O'Toole was beaming as
she led the best spade, and felt that the game was won. I could not
resist the temptation, but put my trump on her spade, led my small
card, and the game was lost. Mrs. O'Toole gave a scream and sank back
in her chair almost fainting, and when she recovered her breath and
her voice went on like a maniac, and had a desperate quarrel with my
aunts. I made my escape, and three days later, to my huge delight, was
sent off to Dublin and entered the university. I only stayed there
about six months, when a friend of my father's got me a commission;
but that six months cured me of my shyness."

"I am not surprised," Desmond laughed; "it can only have been skin
deep, I fancy, O'Connor."

"I will give Conway his first lesson to-night," the captain said.

Dancing had already begun when Captain O'Connor and Ralph drove up in
a dog-cart to the Regans', who lived some four miles from Ballyporrit.
O'Connor introduced Ralph to his host, and then hurried away. In a
short time he was deep in conversation with Miss Tabitha Regan, who
was some years younger than her brother, and still believed herself to
be quite a girl. She was gorgeously arrayed with a plume of nodding
feathers in her headdress.

"You are looking splendid to-night, Miss Regan," O'Connor said in a
tone of deep admiration. "You do not give your nieces a chance."

"Ah! you are flattering me, Captain O'Connor."

"Not at all, Miss Regan; it's quite a sensation you make. My young
friend Conway was tremendously struck with your appearance, and asked
me who that splendid woman was." Which was true enough, except for the
word "splendid;" for as they had walked through the room Ralph's eyes
had fallen upon her, and he had exclaimed in astonishment, "Who on
earth is that woman, O'Connor?"

"He is dying to be introduced to you. He is a little young, you know;
but of good family, and may come into a lot of money one of these
days. Only son, and all that. May I introduce him?"

"How you do go on, Captain O'Connor," Miss Tabitha said, much
flattered. "By all means introduce him."

O'Connor made his way back to Ralph.

"Come along, Ralph; I will introduce you to our host's sister, Miss
Regan. Charming creature, and lots of money. Awfully struck with your
appearance. Come on, man; don't be foolish," and, hooking his arm in
Ralph's, he led him across the room to the lady Ralph had before
noticed.

"Miss Regan, this is my brother-officer, Mr. Conway, Ralph, this is
Miss Regan, our host's sister, although you would take her for his
daughter. Miss Regan, Mr. Conway is most anxious to have the pleasure
of the next dance with you if you are not engaged."

Ralph murmured something in confirmation, and Miss Regan at once stood
up and placed her hand in his arm. Ralph gave a reproachful glance at
his captain as he moved away. Fortunately, he was not called upon to
say much, for Miss Regan burst out:

"It is too bad of you not having been here before, Mr. Conway--quite
rude of you. Captain O'Connor has spoken of you frequently, and we
girls have been quite curious to see you. There is the music striking
up. I think we had better take our places. I suppose as I am at the
head of my brother's house we had better take the place at the top."

Ralph never forgot that dance. Miss Regan danced with amazing
sprightliness, performing wonderful steps. Her ostrich plumes seemed
to whirl round and round him, he had a painful feeling that every one
was grinning, and a mad desire to rush out of the house and make
straight for his quarters.

"Your aunt is going it," Captain O'Connor remarked to one of the
daughters of the house with whom he was dancing. "She sets quite an
example to us young people."

The girl laughed. "She is very peculiar, Captain O'Connor; but it is
cruel of you to laugh at her. I do wish she wouldn't wear such
wonderful headdresses; but she once went to court a good many years
ago at Dublin, and somebody told her that her headdress became her,
and she has worn plumes ever since."

"I am not laughing at her, Miss Regan," O'Connor said gravely; "I am
admiring her. Conway is doing nobly too."

"I think he looks almost bewildered," the girl laughed. "It's a shame,
Captain O'Connor. I was standing quite close by when you introduced
him, and I could see by your face that you were playing a joke upon
him."

"I was performing a kindly action, Miss Regan. The lad's young and a
little bashful, and I ventured to insinuate to your aunt that he
admired her."

"Well, you shall introduce him to me next," the girl said. "I like his
looks."

"Shall I tell him that, Miss Regan?"

"If you do I will never speak to you again."

As soon as the dance was over Captain O'Connor strolled up with his
partner to the spot where Miss Tabitha was fanning herself violently,
Ralph standing helplessly alongside.

"That was a charming dance, Miss Regan. You surpassed yourself. Let me
recommend a slight refreshment; will you allow me to offer you my arm?
Miss Regan, allow me to introduce my brother-officer, Mr. Conway."

Ralph, who had not caught the name, bowed to the girl thus left
suddenly beside him and offered her his arm.

"Why, you look warm already, Mr. Conway," she began.

"Warm is no word for it," Ralph said bluntly. "Did you see that
wonderful old lady I have been dancing with?"

"That is my aunt, Mr. Conway; but she is rather wonderful all the
same."

Ralph had thought before that he was as hot as it was possible for a
man to be; but he found now that he was mistaken.

"I beg your pardon," he stammered. "I did not catch your name; but of
course I oughtn't to have said anything."

"I wonder you didn't see the likeness," the girl said demurely. "My
aunt considers there is a great likeness between us."

"I am sure I cannot see it the least bit in the world," Ralph said
emphatically; "not the smallest. But I hope you forgive me for that
unfortunate remark; but the fact is, I felt a little bewildered at the
time. I am not much of a dancer, and your aunt is really so energetic
that I had to exert myself to the utmost to keep up with her."

"I think you did admirably, Mr. Conway. We quite admired you both.
There," she said laughing at Ralph's confusion, "you need not be
afraid about my not forgiving you for the remark. Everyone knows that
Aunt Tabitha and we girls never get on very well together; and she
does make herself dreadfully ridiculous, and I think it was too bad of
Captain O'Connor putting you up with her."

"Thank you, Miss Regan," Ralph said earnestly. "The fact is I haven't
joined long, and I don't care much for parties. You see, I have only
left school a few months, and haven't got accustomed to talk to ladies
yet; and O'Connor--who is always up to some fun or other--did it just
to cure what he calls my shyness. However, I can quite forgive him
now."

"I don't think you are so very shy, Mr. Conway," Miss Regan said with
a smile. "That last sentence was very pretty, and if I had not hold of
your arm I should make you a courtesy."

"No, please don't do that," Ralph said, coloring hotly. "I didn't mean
anything, you know."

"Now, don't spoil it. You meant I suppose, what was quite proper you
should mean, that Captain O'Connor by introducing me to you had made
up for his last delinquency."

"Yes, that is what I did mean," Ralph agreed.

"Captain O'Connor tells me that you have been through all sorts of
adventures, Mr. Conway--been carried off by a French privateer, and
taken to a pirate island, and done all sorts of things."

"The 'all sorts of things' did not amount to much, Miss Regan. I made
myself as useful as I could, and picked up French; and at last when
the privateer sailed away I walked down to the shore and met our
sailors when they landed. There was, I can assure you, nothing in any
way heroic about the part I had to play."

"Still it was an adventure."

"Oh! yes, it was that; and upon the whole I think I liked it, except
when there was a chance of having a fight with our own people."

"That would have been dreadful. What would you have done?"

"Well, I certainly wouldn't have fought; but what I should have done
would, I suppose, have depended upon circumstances. I suppose I should
have jumped overboard if I had the chance."

"And is it true what Captain O'Connor was saying, that you had to do
like the other pirates on the island?"

"I don't know that there was anything particular they did, except to
get drunk, and I didn't do that."

"He hinted that the rule was that each man had to take a wife from the
people they captured."

"What nonsense!" Ralph exclaimed indignantly. "The idea of my taking a
wife. You mustn't believe what Captain O'Connor says, Miss Regan;
except, of course," he added slyly, "when he is saying pretty things
to you."

"I think you will do, Mr. Conway," the girl laughed, "Six months in
Ireland and you will be able to give Captain O'Connor points if you go
on as well as you are doing. You have paid two very nicely-turned
compliments in ten minutes. But there, our dance is finished."

"May I have another later on, Miss Regan?"

"Yes. Let me see; I am engaged for the next five. You can have the
sixth if you like, if you haven't secured my aunt for that."

"You are getting on, Conway," Captain O'Connor said as they drove away
from the Regans. "I have had my eye upon you. Three dances with Polly
Regan, beside taking her down to supper."

"It was too bad of you putting me on to her aunt in that way."

O'Connor laughed. "It was a capital thing for you, youngster, and
paved the way for you with Polly; who, by the way, is not such a
respectful niece as she might be. But she is a very nice little girl.
I had thought of making up in that quarter myself, but I see it's no
use now."

"None at all," Ralph said seriously. "We are not actually engaged,
you, know, but I think we understand each other."

"What!" Captain O'Connor exclaimed in a changed voice. "You are not
such a young ass as to get engaged before you have joined three
months?"

Ralph burst into a laugh. "That's good," he said. "It is not often I
get a rise out of you, O'Connor."

"Well, you did there fairly," the captain admitted, joining in the
laugh. "I thought for a moment you were serious."

"No," Ralph said. "I may make a fool of myself in other directions;
but I don't think I am likely to in that sort of way."

"Prior attachment--eh?" Captain O'Connor asked quizzically.

"Ah, that's a secret, O'Connor," Ralph laughed. "I am not going to lay
my heart bare to such a mocker as you are."

When they reached the village they found a body of twenty men drawn up
opposite their quarters.

"Is that you, O'Connor?" the lieutenant asked as the trap stopped.
"Just after you had gone the gauger came in and requested that a party
might accompany him at three o'clock this morning to hunt up a still
among the hills. I am glad you are back in time, as I did not like
going away without there being any one in charge here. It's a
nuisance; for it is just beginning to rain. However, it can't be
helped."

"I will go if you like Desmond," Ralph said, jumping down. "I should
like a good tramp this morning after that hot room."

"Are you quite sure you would like it?" the lieutenant asked.

"Quite sure. Beside, it's my turn for duty this morning; so that
really it's my place to go with them, if Captain O'Connor has no
objection."

"Not the least in the world, Conway. I don't suppose Desmond has any
fancy for tramping among the hills, and if you have, there is no
reason in the world why you should not go."

A couple of minutes sufficed to exchange the full-dress regimentals
for undress uniform, covered by military greatcoat, then Ralph hurried
out just as the excise officer came up.

"We are going to have a damp march of it, Mr. Fitzgibbon," Ralph said.

"All the better, sir. There will be a thick mist on the hills that
will hide us better even than night. There is a moon at present, and
as likely as not they will have a boy on watch. Are you ready, sir?"

"Quite ready. Attention! Form fours! March!" and the little party
started.

"How far are we going?" Ralph asked the revenue officer.

"About seven miles, sir. It's about half-past three now; we shall be
there somewhere about six. It does not begin to be light until seven,
so there is no particular hurry."

"I hope you know the way, Mr. Fitzgibbon? It is so dark here I can
