"Stop bitching."

"Hey, Major."

"What?"

"I've invented a new kind of dice."

"You would."

"What you do is take fifteen centiunit pieces and arrange them in a
four-by-four square with one corner missing. Then you take a sixteenth
one and shoot it within forty-five degrees either way of the diagonal
into the missing corner. It works out that no matter how you do it, if
all the coins in the square are touching, two coins will fly off of the
far edge. Each of those has a number and the two numbers that fly off
are like the two numbers that come up on the dice. It's better than
regular dice because the chances are up on some combinations. And
there's a certain amount of skill involved too. The guys call it
Randomax. That's for _random numbers_ and _matrix_."

"I'll play you a game someday," Tomar said. "You know, if you used a
smaller coin than a centiunit for the one you fire into the missing
corner, say a deciunit, the chances that it would hit both corner coins
would go up, that is your randomness."

"Really?"

"Sure," Tomar said. "My girl friend's a mathematician, and she was
telling me all about probability a few weeks ago. I bet she'd be
interested in the game."

"You know what, Major?"

"What?"

"I think you're the best officer in the damn army."

Such was the conversation before the first battle of the war.

       *       *       *       *       *

Such was the conversation Jon Koshar monitored in the laboratory tower
of the Palace of the Stars in Telphar. "Oh damn," he said. "Come on,
Arkor. We'd better get going. If the Duchess doesn't get here with Geryn
soon.... Well, let's not think about it." He scribbled a note, set it in
front of one visiphone and dialed the number of another that was on a
stand in front of the receiving platform of the transit ribbon.

"There," he said. "That's got instructions to follow us as soon as she
gets here. And she better not miss it." They went down the metal steps
to a double doorway that opened onto a road.

Two mechanical vehicles stood there, both with pre-controls set for
similar destinations. Jon and Arkor climbed into one, pushed the
ignition button, and the car shot forward along the elevated roadway.
White mercury lights flooded the elevated strip as it wound through the
city.

The road dipped and houses got wider and lower on each side. The horizon
glowed purple and above that, deep yellow clouds dropped into late
evening. There was a sound of planes overhead.

As the car halted at the barren limit of the last suburb of Telphar, a
sudden white streak speared from the horizon. "Uh-oh," said Jon. "That's
what I was afraid of."

Something caught fire in the air, twisted wildly through the sky, and
then began to circle down, flaming.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Major! Major! What happened to D-42?"

"Something got him. Pull over. Pull over everybody!"

"We can't spot it. Where'd it come from?"

"All right, everybody. Break formation. Break formation, I said!"

"Major, I'm going to drop a bomb. Maybe we can see where that came from
in the light. I thought you said cripple."

"Never mind what I said. Drop it."

"Major Tomar. This is B-6. We've been--" (Unintelligible static.)

Someone else gave a slow whistle through the microphone.

"Break formation, I said. Damn it, break formation."

Over the plain, a sheet of red fire flapped up, and Jon and Arkor pulled
back from the railing that edged the road. Another white streak left the
horizon, and for a moment, in the glare, their shadows on the pavement
were doubled in white and red.

The sound of the explosion reached them a moment later, as broken rocks
leapt into visibility like a rotted jaw swung up through red fire.

Another sound behind them made them turn. The lighted roadways of
Telphar looped the city like strands of pearls on skeletal fingers. A
car came toward them.

Another wailing missile took the sky, and a moment later a screaming
plane answered, tearing down the night. This one suddenly turned as its
flaming motors caught once more and careened above their heads so close
that they ducked and disappeared among the city towers: an explosion,
then falling flame drooled the side of a building. "I hope that's
nowhere near the Palace of the Stars," a voice said next to Jon. "We'll
have a great time getting back if it is."

Jon whirled. The Duchess had gotten out of the car. The red light flared
a moment in her hair, then died.

"No. That was nowhere near it," Jon said. "Am I glad to see you."

Tel and Alter, still in her cast and hospital robe, followed the Duchess
out of the car.

"Well," he said, "you brought the kids too."

"It was better than leaving them back in Toron. Jon, Geryn is dead. I
asked what to do, but I didn't get any answer. So we lugged his body
along just in case. But what do we do now?"

From the railing Arkor laughed.

"It's not funny," Jon said.

The Duchess looked overhead as another missile exploded. "I had hoped
this wouldn't happen. This means a war, Jon. A real one, and
unstoppable."

Another plane crashed, too close this time, and they ducked behind the
cars. "Gee," breathed Alter, which was the only thing anybody said.

Then Arkor cried, "Come on."

"Where to?" asked Jon.

"Follow me," Arkor repeated. "Everyone."

"What about Geryn?"

"Leave that corpse behind," Arkor told them. "He can't help."

"Look, do you know what's going on?" Jon demanded.

"More than Geryn ever did," the giant returned. "Now let's get going."
They sprinted out along the road, then ducked under the railing and made
their way across the rocky waste.

"Where are we going?" Tel whispered.

Jon called back over his shoulder, "That's a very good question."

       *       *       *       *       *

The plane got tipped, and for seven seconds, while the needles swung,
he didn't know where he was going, east or west, up or down. When the
needles stopped, he saw that it hadn't been any of the first three.
Suddenly the green detector light flashed in the half darkness of the
cabin. The generator! The radiation generator was right below him. Then
he was blinded by a white flare outside the windshield. Oh, God damn!

He felt the jerk and the air suddenly rushed in cold behind him. There
was a hell of a lot of noise and the needle quietly swung.... He was
going down!

Land lit up outside the front window; a small block house set in the
wrecked earth. There were three whirling antennae on the roof. That must
be it! That must!

It happened in his arms and fingers, not in his head. Because suddenly
he pushed the stick forward, and the plane, what was left of it, turned
over and he was staring straight down, straight ahead, straight,
straight below him. And coming closer.

It must have been his arms, because his head was thinking wildly about a
time when a girl with pearls in her black hair had asked him what he had
wanted, and he had said, 'Nothing ... nothing....' and realized he had
been wrong because suddenly he wanted very much to ... (The block house
came up and hit him.) ... Nothing.

       *       *       *       *       *

Tel and the Duchess screamed. The rest just drew breath quickly and
staggered back. "He's in there," Arkor said. "That's where your Lord of
the Flames is."

The landscape glowed with the encroaching light of the flaming torch,
and they saw the blockhouse now with its whirling antennae on the roof.
Before the plane hit, a darkness opened in the side of the blockhouse
and three figures emerged and sprinted among the rocks.

"The middle one," said Arkor. "That's him, face him, concentrate on
him...."

"What do you...?" Tel began.

"You ride along with me, kids," Arkor said, only he didn't move. Two of
the figures had fallen now, but the middle one was running toward them.
The torch hit, and his shadow was suddenly flung across the broken earth
to meet them....




CHAPTER IX


The green of beetles' wings ... the red of polished carbuncle ... a web
of silver fire, and through the drifting blue smoke Jon hurled across
the sky.

Then blackness, intense and cold. The horizon was tiny, jagged, maybe
ten feet away. He reached a metal out and crawled expertly (not
clumsily. Expertly!) across a crevice, but slowly, very slowly. The sky
was sharp with stars, though the sun was dim to his light-sensitive
rind. Like a sliding cyst, he edged over the chunk of rock that spun
somewhere between Mars and Jupiter. Now he reached out with his mind to
touch a second creature on another rock. _Petra_, he called. _Where is
he?_

_His orbit should take him between the three of us in a minute and a
half._

_Fine._

_Jon, who is the third one? I still don't understand._

Another mind joined them. _You don't understand yet? I was the third, I
always was. I was the one who directed Geryn to make the plan in the
first place for the kidnaping. What made you think that he was in
contact with the triple beings?_

_I don't know_, Jon said. _Some misunderstanding._

There was the laughter of children. Then Tel said, _Hey, everybody,
we're with Arkor._

_Shhh_, said Alter. _The misunderstanding was my fault, Jon. I told you
that Geryn talked to himself, and that made you think it was him._

_Get ready_, Petra said. _Here he comes._

Jon saw, or rather sensed the approach of another spinning asteroid,
whirling toward them through the blackness. But it was inhabited. Yes!
The three of them threw their thoughts across the rush of space.

_There...._

       *       *       *       *       *

Roaring steam swirled above him. He raised his eye-stalks another twenty
feet and looked toward the top of the cataract some four miles up. Then
he lowered his siphon into the edge of the pool of pale green liquid
methane and drank deeply. Far away in a beryl green sky, three suns
rushed madly about one another and gave a little heat to this farthest
of their six planets.

Now Jon flapped his slitherers down and began to glide away from the
methane falls and up the nearly vertical mountain slope. Someone was
coming toward him, with shiny red eye-stalks waving in greeting.
"Greetings to the new colony," the eye-stalks signaled.

Jon started to signal back. But suddenly he recognized (a feeling way at
the back of his slitherers) who this was. He leaped forward and flung
the double flaps of leathery flesh across his opponent and began to
scramble back up the rocks. Jon had his tight, but was wondering where
the hell were....

Suddenly his eye-stalk caught the great form that he knew must be Arkor
coming down over the rocks (with Alter and Tel. Yes, definitely; because
the creature suddenly did a flying leap between two crags that could
have only been under the girl-acrobat's control), and a moment later
that Petra had arrived at the other shore of the methane river. Using
her slitherers for paddles, she struck out across the foaming current.

Think at him, concentrate.... _There...._

       *       *       *       *       *

The air was water-clear. The desert was still, and he lay in the warm
sand, under the light of the crescent moon. He was growing, adding
facets; he let the pale illumination seep into his transparent body,
decreasing his polarization cross-frequencies. The light was beautiful,
too beautiful--dangerous! He began to tingle, to glow red-hot. His base
burned with white heat and another layer of sand beneath him melted,
fused, ran, and became part of his crystalline body.

He stepped up the polarization, his body clouded, and cooled once more.
Music sang through him, and his huge upper facet reflected the stars.

Once more he lessened his polarization, and the light crept further and
further into his being. His temperature rose. Vibrations suffused his
transparency and the pulsing music made the three dust particles that
had settled on his coaxial face seven hundred and thirty years ago dance
above him. He felt their reflection deep in his prismatic center.

He felt it coming, suddenly, and tried to stop it. But the polarization
index suddenly broke down completely. For one terrific moment of ecstasy
the light of the moon and the stars poured completely through him. Chord
after chord rang out in the desert night. Back and forth along his axis,
colliding, shaking his substance, jarring him, pommeling him, came the
vibrations. For one instant he was completely transparent. The next, he
was white-hot. Before he could melt, he felt the crack start.

It shot the length of his forty-two mile, super-heated body. He was in
two pieces! The radio disturbance alone covered a third of a galaxy.
Twelve pieces fell away. The chord crashed again, and the crack whipped
back and forth vivisecting him. Already he was nearly thirty-six
thousand individual crystals, all of which had to grow again, thirty-six
thousand minds. He was no more.

_Jon_, the voice sang through drumbled silicate.

_Right over here, Petra_, he hummed back. (The note was a perfect
quarter tone below A-flat. Perfect! Not clumsy. _Perfect_!)

_Where's Arkor?_

To their left the triple notes of an E-flat minor chord (Arkor, Tel, and
Alter) sounded: _Right here._
