
1. The broad teaching of the whole story, which is ever being
reiterated in Old Testament incidents, is that God works out His great
purposes through even the crimes of unconscious men. There is an irony,
if we may so say, in making the hatred of these men the very means of
their brother's advancement, and the occasion of blessing to
themselves. As coral insects work, not knowing the plan of their reef,
still less the fair vegetation and smiling homes which it will one day
carry, but blindly building from the material supplied by the ocean a
barrier against it; so even evil-doers are carrying on God's plan, and
sin is made to counterwork itself, and be the black channel through
which the flashing water of life pours. Joseph's words (Gen. 1. 20)
give the point of view for the whole story: 'Ye thought evil against
me; but God meant it unto good ... to save much people alive.' We can
scarcely forget the still more wonderful example of the same thing, in
the crime of crimes, when his brethren slew the Son of God--like
Joseph, the victim of envy--and, by their crime, God's counsel of mercy
for them and for all was fulfilled.

2. Following the narrative, verses 23, 24, and 25 show us the poisonous
fruit of brotherly hatred. The family, not the nation, is the social
unit in Genesis. From the beginning, we find the field on which sin
works is the family relation. Cain and Abel, Ishmael and Isaac, Esau
and Jacob, and now the other children of Jacob and Joseph, attest the
power of sin when it enters there, and illustrate the principle that
the corruption of the best is the worst. The children of Rachel could
not but be hated by the children of other mothers. Jacob's undisguised
partiality for Joseph was a fault too, which wrought like yeast on the
passions of his wild sons. The long-sleeved garment which he gave to
the lad probably meant to indicate his purpose to bestow on him the
right of the first-born forfeited by Reuben, and so the violent rage
which it excited was not altogether baseless. The whole miserable
household strife teaches the rottenness of the polygamous relation on
which it rested, and the folly of paternal favouritism. So it carries
teaching especially needed then, but not out of date now.

The swift passage of the purely inward sin of jealous envy into the
murderous act, as soon as opportunity offered, teaches the short path
which connects the inmost passions with the grossest outward deeds.
Like Jonah's gourd, the smallest seed of hate needs but an hour or two
of favouring weather to become a great tree, with all obscene and
blood-seeking birds croaking in its branches. 'Whosoever hateth his
brother is a murderer,' Therefore the solemn need for guarding the
heart from the beginnings of envy, and for walking in love.

The clumsy contrivance for murder without criminality, which Reuben
suggested, is an instance of the shallow pretexts with which the
sophistry of sin fools men before they have done the wrong thing. Sin's
mask is generally dropped very soon after. The bait is useless when the
hook is well in the fish's gills. 'Don't let us kill him. Let us put
him into a cistern. He cannot climb up its bottle-shaped, smooth sides.
But that is not our fault. Nobody will ever hear his muffled cries from
its depths. But there will be no blood on our hands.' It was not the
first time, nor is it the last, that men have tried to blink their
responsibility for the consequences which they hoped would come of
their crimes. Such excuses seem sound when we are being tempted; but,
as soon as the rush of passion is past, they are found to be worthless.
Like some cheap castings, they are only meant to be seen in front,
where they are rounded and burnished. Get behind them, and you find
them hollow.

'They sat down to eat bread,' Thomas Fuller pithily says: 'With what
heart could they say grace, either before or after meat?' What a grim
meal! And what an indication of their rude natures, seared consciences,
and deadened affections!

This picture of the moral condition of the fathers of the Jewish tribes
is surely a strong argument for the historical accuracy of the
narrative. It would be strange if the legends of a race, instead of
glorifying, should blacken, the characters of its founders. No motive
can be alleged which would explain such a picture; its only explanation
is its truth. The ugly story, too, throws vivid light on that thought,
which prophets ever reiterated, 'not for your sakes, but for My name's
sake.' The divine choice of Israel was grounded, not on merit, but on
sovereign purpose. And the undisguised plainness of the narrative of
their sins is but of a piece with the tone of Scripture throughout. It
never palliates the faults even of its best men. It tells its story
without comment. It never indulges in condemnation any more than in
praise. It is a perfect mirror; its office is to record, not to
criticise. Many misconceptions of Old Testament morality would have
been avoided by keeping that simple fact in view.

3. The ill-omened meal is interrupted by the sudden appearance, so
picturesquely described, of the caravan of Ishmaelites with their
loaded camels. Dothan was on or near the great trade route to Egypt,
where luxury, and especially the custom of embalming, opened a
profitable market for spices. The traders would probably not be
particular as to the sort of merchandise they picked up on their road,
and such an 'unconsidered trifle' as a slave or two would be neither
here nor there. This opportune advent of the caravan sets a thought
buzzing in Judah's brain, which brings out a new phase of the crime.
Hatred darkening to murder is bad enough; but hatred which has also an
eye to business, and makes a profit out of a brother, is a shade or two
blacker, because it means cold-blooded calculation and selfish
advantage instead of raging passion. Judah's cynical question avows the
real motive of his intervention. He prefers the paltry gain from
selling Joseph to the unprofitable luxury of killing him. It brings in
regard to brotherly ties at the end, as a kind of homage paid to
propriety, as if the obligations they involved were not broken as
really by his proposal as by murder. Certainly it is strange logic
which can say in one breath, 'Let us sell him; ... for he is our
brother,' and finds the clause between buffer enough to keep these two
contradictories from collision.

If any touch of conscience made the brothers prefer the less cruel
alternative, one can only see here another illustration of the strange
power which men have of limiting the working of conscience, and of the
fact that when a greater sin has been resolved on, a smaller one gets
to look almost like a virtue. Perhaps Judah and the rest actually
thought themselves very kind and brotherly when they put their brother
into strangers' power, and so went back to their meal with renewed
cheerfulness, both because they had gained their end without bloodshed,
and because they had got the money. They did not think that every tear
and pang which Joseph would shed and feel would be laid at their door.

We do not suppose that Joseph was meant to be, in the accurate sense of
the word, a type of Christ. But the coincidence is not to be passed by,
that these same powerful motives of envy and of greed were combined in
His case too, and that there again a Judah (Judas) appears as the agent
of the perfidy.

We may note that the appearance of the traders in the nick of time,
suggesting the sale of Joseph, points the familiar lesson that the
opportunity to do ill deeds often makes ill deeds done. The path for
entering on evil is made fatally easy at first; that gate always stands
wide. The Devil knows how to time his approaches. A weak nature, with
an evil bias in it, finds everywhere occasions and suggestions to do
wrong. But it is the evil nature which makes innocent things
opportunities for evil. Therefore we have to be on our guard, as
knowing that if we fall it is not circumstances, but ourselves, that
made stumbling-blocks out of what might have been stepping-stones.

4. Leaving Joseph to pursue his sad journey, our narrative introduces
for the first time Reuben, whose counsel, as the verses before the text
tell us, it had been to cast the poor lad into the cistern. His motive
had been altogether good; he wished to save life, and as soon as the
others were out of the way, to bring Joseph up again and get him safely
back to Jacob. In chapter xlii. 22, Reuben himself reminds his brothers
of what had passed. There he says that he had besought them not to 'sin
against the child,' which naturally implies that he had wished them to
do nothing to him, and that they 'would not hear.' In the verses before
the text he proposes the compromise of the pit, and the others 'hear.'
So there seem to have been two efforts made by him--first, to shield
Joseph from any harm, and then that half-and-half measure which was
adopted. He is absent, while they carry out the plan, and from the
cruel merriment of the feast--perhaps watching his opportunity to
rescue, perhaps in sickness of heart and protest against the deed. Well
meant and kindly motived as his action was--and self-sacrificing too,
if, as is probable, Joseph was meant by Jacob as his successor in the
forfeited birthright--his scheme breaks down, as attempts to mitigate
evil by compliance and to make compromises with sinners usually do. The
only one of the whole family who had some virtue in him, was too timid
to take up a position of uncompromising condemnation. He thought it
more polite to go part of the way, and to trust to being able to
prevent the worst. That is always a dangerous experiment. It is often
tried still; it never answers. Let a man stand to his guns, and speak
out the condemnation that is in his heart; otherwise, he will be sure
to go farther than he meant, he will lose all right of remonstrance,
and will generally find that the more daring sinners have made his
well-meant schemes to avert the mischief impossible.

5. The cruel trick by which Jacob was deceived is perhaps the most
heartless bit of the whole heartless crime. It came as near an insult
as possible. It was maliciously meant. The snarl about the coat, the
studied use of 'thy son' as if the brothers disowned the brotherhood,
the unfeeling harshness of choosing such a way of telling their
lie--all were meant to give the maximum of pain, and betray their
savage hatred of father and son, and its causes. Was Reuben's mouth
shut all this time? Evidently. From his language in chapter xlii., 'His
blood is required,' he seems to have believed until then that Joseph
had been killed in his absence. But he dared not speak. Had he told
what he did know, the brothers had but to add, 'And he proposed it
himself,' and his protestations of his good intentions would have been
unheeded. He believed his brother dead, and perhaps thought it better
that Jacob should think him slain by wild beasts than by brothers'
hands, as Reuben supposed him to be. But his shut mouth teaches again
how dangerous his policy had been, and how the only road, which it is
safe, in view of the uncertainties of the future, to take, is the plain
road of resistance to evil and non-fellowship with its doers.

6. And what of the poor old father? His grief is unworthy of God's
wrestler. It is not the part of a devout believer in God's providence
to refuse to be comforted. There was no religious submission in his
passionate sorrow. How unlike the quiet resignation which should have
marked the recognition that the God who had been his guide was working
here too! No doubt the hypocritical condolences of his children were as
vinegar upon nitre. No doubt the loss of Joseph had taken away the one
gentle and true son on whom his loneliness rested since his Rachel's
death, while he found no solace in the wild, passionate men who called
him 'father' and brought him no 'honour.' But still his grief is beyond
the measure which a true faith in God would have warranted; and we
cannot but see that the dark picture which we have just been looking at
gets no lighter or brighter tints from the demeanour of Jacob.

There are few bitterer sorrows than for a parent to see the children of
his own sin in the sins of his children. Jacob might have felt that
bitterness, as he looked round on the lovelessness and dark, passionate
selfishness of his children, and remembered his own early crimes
against Esau. He might have seen that his unwise fondness for the son
of his Rachel had led to the brothers' hatred, though he did not know
that that hatred had plunged the arrow into his soul. Whether he knew
it or not, his own conduct had feathered the arrow. He was drinking as
he had brewed; and the heart-broken grief which darkened his later
years had sprung from seed of his own sowing. So it is always.
'Whatsoever a man soweth, that shall he also reap.'

It is a miserable story of ignoble jealousy and cruel hate; and yet,
over all this foaming torrent, God's steadfast bow of peace shines.
These crimes and this 'affliction of Joseph' were the direct path to
the fulfilment of His purposes. As blind instruments, even in their
rebellion and sin, men work out His designs. The lesson of Joseph's
bondage will one day be the summing up of the world's history. 'Thou
makest the wrath of man to praise Thee: and with the remainder thereof
Thou girdest Thyself.'




GOODNESS IN A DUNGEON


    'And Joseph's master took him, and put him into the
    prison, a place where the king's prisoners were bound:
    and he was there in the prison. But the Lord was with
    Joseph, and showed him mercy, and gave him favour in
    the sight of the keeper of the prison. And the keeper
    of the prison committed to Joseph's hand all the
    prisoners that were in the prison; and whatsoever they
    did there, he was the doer of it. The keeper of the
    prison looked not to any thing that was under his hand;
    because the Lord was with him, and that which he did,
    the Lord made it to prosper.'--GENESIS xxxix. 20-23.

'And it came to pass after these things, that the butler of the king of
Egypt and his baker had offended their lord the king of Egypt. And
Pharaoh was wroth against two of his officers, against the chief of the
butlers, and against the chief of the bakers. And he put them in ward
in the house of the captain of the guard, into the prison, the place
where Joseph was bound. And the captain of the guard charged Joseph
with them, and he served them: and they continued a season in ward. And
they dreamed a dream both of them, each man his dream in one night,
each man according to the interpretation of his dream, the butler and
the baker of the king of Egypt, which were bound in the prison. And
Joseph came in unto them in the morning, and looked upon them, and,
behold, they were sad. And he asked Pharaoh's officers that were with
him in the ward of his lord's house, saying, Wherefore look ye so sadly
to day? And they said unto him, We have dreamed a dream, and there is
no interpreter of it. And Joseph said unto them, Do not interpretations
belong to God? tell me them, I pray you. And the chief butler told his
dream to Joseph, and said to him, In my dream, behold, a vine was
before me; And in the vine were three branches: and it was as though it
budded, and her blossoms shot forth; and the clusters thereof brought
forth ripe grapes: And Pharaoh's cup was in my hand: and I took the
grapes, and pressed them into Pharaoh's cup, and I gave the cup into
Pharaoh's hand. And Joseph said unto him, This is the interpretation of
it: The three branches are three days: Yet within three days shall
Pharaoh lift up thine head, and restore thee unto thy place: and thou
shalt deliver Pharaoh's cup into his hand, after the former manner when
thou wast his butler. But think on me when it shall be well with thee,
and shew kindness, I pray thee, unto me, and make mention of me unto
Pharaoh, and bring me out of this house: For indeed I was stolen away
out of the land of the Hebrews: and here also have I done nothing that
they should put me into the dungeon.'--GENESIS xl. 1-15.

Potiphar was 'captain of the guard,' or, as the title literally runs,
chief of the executioners. In that capacity he had charge of the
prison, which was connected with his house (Gen. xl. 3). It is,
therefore, quite intelligible that he should have put Joseph in
confinement on his own authority, and the distinction drawn between
such a prisoner and the 'king's prisoners,' who were there by royal
warrant or due process of law, is natural. Such high-handed treatment
of a slave was a small matter, and it was merciful as well as arrogant,
for death would have been the punishment of the crime of which Joseph
was accused. Either Potiphar was singularly lenient, or, as is perhaps
more probable, he did not quite believe his wife's story, and thought
it best to hush up a scandal. The transfer of Joseph from the house to
the adjoining prison would be quietly managed, and then no more need be
said about an ugly business.

So now we see him at the lowest ebb of his fortunes, flung down in a
moment by a lie from the height to which he had slowly been climbing,
having lost the confidence of his master, and earned the unslumbering
hatred of a wicked woman. He had wrecked his career by his goodness.
'What a fool!' says the world. 'How badly managed things are in this
life,' say doubters, 'that virtue should not be paid by prosperity!'
But the end, even the nearer end in this life, will show whether he was
a fool, and whether things are so badly arranged; and the lesson
enforced by the picture of Joseph in his dungeon, and which young
beginners in life have special need to learn, is that, come what will
of it, right is right, and sin is sin, that consequences are never to
deter from duty, and that it is better to have a clean conscience and
be in prison than do wickedness and sit at a king's table. A very
threadbare lesson, but needing to be often repeated.

'But the Lord was with Joseph.' That is one of the eloquent 'buts' of
Scripture. The prison is light when God is there, and chains do not
chafe if He wraps His love round them. Many a prisoner for God since
Joseph's time has had his experience repeated, and received tenderer
tokens from Him in a dungeon than ever before. Paul the prisoner, John
in Patmos, Bunyan in Bedford jail, George Fox in Lancaster Castle,
Rutherford in Aberdeen, and many more, have found the Lord with them,
and showing them His kindness. We may all be sure that, if ever
faithfulness to conscience involves us in difficulties, the
faithfulness and the difficulties will combine to bring to us sweet and
strong tokens of God's approval and presence, the winning of which will
make a prison a palace and a gate of heaven.

Joseph's relations to jailer and fellow-prisoners are beautiful and
instructive. The former is called 'the keeper of the prison,' and is
evidently Potiphar's deputy, in more immediate charge of the prison. Of
course, the great man had an underling to do the work, and probably
that underling was not chosen for sweetness of temper or facile
leniency to his charges. But he fell under the charm of Joseph's
character--all the more readily, perhaps, because his occupation had
not brought many good men to his knowledge. This jewel would flash all
the more brightly for the dark background of criminals, and the jailer
would wonder at a type of character so unlike what he was accustomed
to. Eastern prisons to-day present a curious mixture of cruelty and
companionship. The jailers are on intimate terms with prisoners, and
yet are ready to torture them. There is no discipline, nor any rules,
nor inspection. The jailer does as he likes. So it seems to have been
in Egypt, and there would be nothing unnatural in making a prisoner
jailer of the rest, and leaving everything in his hands. The 'keeper of
the prison' was lazy, like most of us, and very glad to shift duties on
to any capable shoulders. Such a thing would, of course, be impossible
with us, but it is a bit of true local colouring here.

Joseph won hearts because God was with him, as the story is careful to
point out. Our religion should recommend us, and therefore itself, to
those who have to do with us. It is not enough that we should be
severely righteous, as Joseph had been, or ready to meet trouble with
stoical resignation, but we are to be gentle and lovable, gracious
towards men, because we receive grace from God. We owe it to our Lord
and to our fellows, and to ourselves, to be magnets to attract to
Jesus, by showing how fair He can make a life. Joseph in prison found
work to do, and he did not shirk it. He might have said to himself:
'This is poor work for me, who had all Potiphar's house to rule. Shall
such a man as I come down to such small tasks as this?' He might have
sulked or desponded in idleness, but he took the kind of work that
offered, and did his best by it. Many young people nowadays do nothing,
because they think themselves above the small humdrum duties that lie
near them. It would do some of us good to remember Joseph in the jail,
and his cheerful discharge of what his hands found to do there.

Of course, work done 'because the Lord was with him,' in the
consciousness of His presence, and in obedience to Him, went well. 'The
Lord made it to prosper,' as He always will make such work.

  'When thou dost favour any action,
   It runs, it flies.'

And even if, sometimes, work done in the fear of the Lord does not
outwardly prosper, it does so in deepest truth, if it work in us the
peaceable fruit of righteousness. We need to have a more Christian idea
of what constitutes prosperity, and then we shall understand that there
are no exceptions to the law that, if a man does his work by God and
with God and for God, 'that which he does, the Lord makes it to
prosper.'

The help that Joseph gave by interpreting the two high officials'
dreams cannot be considered here in detail, but we note that the names
of similar officers, evidently higher in rank than we should suppose,
with our notions of bakers and butlers, are found in Egyptian
documents, and that these two were 'king's prisoners,' and put in
charge of Potiphar, who alleviated their imprisonment by detailing
Joseph as their attendant, thus showing that his feeling to the young
Hebrew was friendly still. Dreams are the usual method of divine
communication in Genesis, and belong to a certain stage in the process
of revelation. The friend of God, who is in touch with Him, can
interpret these. 'The secret of the Lord is with them that fear Him,'
and it is still true that they who live close by God have insight into
His purposes. Joseph showed sympathy with the two dreamers, and his
question, 'Why look ye so sadly?' unlocked their hearts. He was not so
swallowed up in his own trouble as to be blind to the signs of
another's sorrow, or slow to try to comfort. Grief is apt to make us
selfish, but it is meant to make us tender of heart and quick of hand
to help our fellows in calamity. We win comfort for our own sorrows by
trying to soothe those of others. Jesus stooped to suffer that He might
succour them that suffer, and we are to tread in His steps.




JOSEPH, THE PRIME MINISTER


    'And Pharaoh said unto his servants, Can we find such a
   one as this is, a man in whom the Spirit of God is? And
    Pharaoh said unto Joseph, Forasmuch as God hath shewed
    thee all this, there is none so discreet and wise as thou
    art: Thou shalt be over my house, and according unto thy
    word shall all my people be ruled: only in the throne
    will I be greater than thou. And Pharaoh said unto Joseph,
    See, I have set thee over all the land of Egypt. And
    Pharaoh took off his ring from his hand, and put it upon
    Joseph's hand, and arrayed him in vestures of fine linen,
    and put a gold chain about his neck; And he made him to
    ride in the second chariot which he had; and they cried
    before him, Bow the knee: and he made him ruler over all
    the land of Egypt. And Pharaoh said unto Joseph, I am
    Pharaoh, and without thee shall no man lift up his hand
    or foot in all the land of Egypt. And Pharaoh called
    Joseph's name Zaphnath-paaneah; and he gave him to wife
    Asenath the daughter of Poti-pherah priest of On. And
    Joseph went out over all the land of Egypt. And Joseph
    was thirty years old when he stood before Pharaoh king
    of Egypt. And Joseph went out from the presence of
    Pharaoh, and went throughout all the land of Egypt. And
    in the seven plenteous years the earth brought forth by
    handfuls. And he gathered up all the food of the seven
    years, which were in the land of Egypt, and laid up the
    food in the cities: the food of the field, which was
    round about every city, laid he up in the same.'
    GENESIS xli. 38-48.

At seventeen years of age Joseph was sold for a slave; at thirty he was
prime minister of Egypt (Gen. xxxvii, 2; xli. 46). How long his prison
life lasted is uncertain; but it was long enough for the promises
contained in his early dreams to 'try him' (Ps. cv. 19) whether his
faith would stand apparent disappointment and weary delay. Like all the
Scripture narratives, this history of Joseph has little to say about
feelings, and prefers facts. But we can read between the lines, and be
tolerably sure that the thirteen years of trial were well endured, and
that the inward life had grown so as to fit him for his advancement. We
have here a full-length portrait of the prime minister, or vizier,
which brings out three points--his elevation, his naturalisation, and
his administration.

Joseph had not only interpreted Pharaoh's dream, but had suggested a
policy in preparation for the coming famine. He had recommended the
appointment of 'a wise and discreet man,' with supreme authority over
the land. Pharaoh first consulted 'his servants,' and, with their
consent, possibly not very hearty, appointed the proposer of the plan
as its carrier-out, quoting to him his own words, 'wise and discreet.'

The sudden installing of an unknown prisoner in high office has often
been thought hard to believe, and has been pointed to as proof of the
legendary character of the story. But the ground on which Pharaoh put
it goes far to explain it. He and his servants had come to believe that
'God' spoke through this man, that 'the Spirit of God' was in him. So
here was a divinely sent messenger, whom it would be impiety and
madness to reject. Observe that Pharaoh and Joseph both speak in this
chapter of 'God.' There was a common ground of recognition of a divine
Being on which they met. The local colour of the story indicates a
period before the fuller revelation, which drew so broad a line of
demarcation between Israel and the other nations.

Joseph's sudden promotion is made the more intelligible by the
probability which the study of Egyptian history has given, that the
Pharaoh who made him his second in command was one of the Hyksos
conquerors who dominated Egypt for a long period. They would have no
prejudices against Joseph on account of his being a foreigner. A
dynasty of alien conquerors has generally an open door for talent, and
cares little who a man's father is, or where he comes from, if he can
do his work. And Joseph, by not being an Egyptian born, would be all
the fitter an instrument for carrying out the policy which he had
suggested.

His ceremonial investiture with the insignia of office is true to
Egyptian manners. The signet ring, as the emblem of full authority; the
chain, as a mark of dignity; the robe of 'fine linen' (or rather of
cotton), which was a priestly dress--all are illustrated by the
monuments. The proclamation made before him as he rode in the second
chariot has been very variously interpreted. It has been taken for a
Hebraised Egyptian word, meaning 'Cast thyself down'; and this
interpretation was deemed the most probable, until Assyrian discovery
brought to light 'that _abarakku_ is the Assyrian name of the grand
vizier' (Fr. Delitzsch, _Hebrew Language Viewed in the Light of
Assyrian Research_, p. 26). Sayce proposes another explanation, also
from the cuneiform tablets: 'There was a word _abrik_ in the Sumerian
language, which signified a seer, and was borrowed by the Semitic
Babylonians under the varying forms of _abrikku_ and _abarakku_. It is
_abrikku_ which we have in Genesis, and the title applied by the people
to the "seer" Joseph proves to be the one we should most naturally
expect.' The Tel el-Amarna tablets show that the knowledge of cuneiform
writing was common in Egypt (Sayce, _Higher Criticism and the
Monuments_, p. 214). This explanation is tempting, but it is perhaps
scarcely probable that the proclamation should have been in any other
language than Egyptian, or should have had reference to anything but
Joseph's new office. It was not as seer that he was to be obeyed, but
as Pharaoh's representative, even though he had become the latter
because he had proved himself the former.

But in any case, the whole context is accurately and strongly Egyptian.
Was there any point in the history of Israel, down to an impossibly
late date, except the time of Moses, at which Jewish writers were so
familiar with Egypt as to have been capable of producing so true a
picture?

The lessons of this incident are plain. First stands out, clear and
full, the witness it bears to God's faithfulness, and to His sovereign
sway over all events. What are all the persons concerned in the
narrative but unconscious instruments of His? The fierce brothers, the
unconcerned slave-dealers, Potiphar, his wife, the prisoners, Pharaoh,
are so many links in a chain; but they are also men, and therefore free
to act, and guilty if acting wrongly. Men execute God's purposes, even
when unconscious or rebellious, but are responsible, and often
punished, for the acts which He uses to effect His designs.

Joseph's thirteen years of trial, crowned with sudden prosperity, may
read all of us, and especially young men and women, a lesson of
patience. Many of us have to fight our way through analogous
difficulties at the outset of our career; and we are apt to lose heart
and get restive when success seems slow to come, and one hindrance
after another blocks our road. But hindrances are helps. If one of
Joseph's misfortunes had been omitted, his good fortune would never
have come. If his brethren had not hated him, if he had not been sold,
if he had not been imprisoned, he would never have ruled Egypt. Not one
thread in the tapestry could have been withdrawn without spoiling the
pattern. We cannot afford to lose one of our sorrows or trials. There
would be no summer unless winter had gone before. There is a bud or a
fruit for every snowflake, and a bird's song for every howl of the
storm.

Plainly, too, does the story read the lesson of quiet doing of the work
and accepting the circumstances of the moment. Joseph was being
prepared for the administration of a kingdom by his oversight of
Potiphar's house and of the prison. His character was matured by his
trials, as iron is consolidated by heavy hammers. To resist temptation,
to do modestly and sedulously whatever work comes to our hands, to be
content to look after a jail even though we have dreamed of sun and
moon bowing down to us, is the best apprenticeship for whatever
elevation circumstances--or, to speak more devoutly, God--intends for
us. Young men thrown into city life far away from their homes, and
whispered to by many seducing voices, have often to suffer for keeping
themselves unspotted; but they are being strengthened by rough
discipline, and will get such promotion, in due time, as is good for
them. But outward success is not God's best gift. It was better to be
the Joseph who deserved his high place, than to have the place. The
character which he had grown into was more than the trappings which
Pharaoh put on him. And such a character is always the reward of such
patience, faith, and self-control, whether chains and chariots are
added or not.

Little need be said about the other points of the story. Joseph's
naturalisation as an Egyptian was complete. His name was changed, in
token that he had completely become a subject of Pharaoh's. The meaning
of the formidable-looking polysyllable, which Egyptian lips found
easier than 'Joseph,' is uncertain. 'At present the origin of the first
syllable is still doubtful, and though the latter part of the name is
certainly the Egyptian _n-ti-pa-ankh_ ("of the life"), it is difficult
to say in which of its different senses the expression _pa-ankh_ ("the
life") is employed' (Sayce, _ut supra_, p. 213). The prevailing opinion
of Egyptian experts is that it means 'Support of life.'

The naturalising was completed by his marriage to Asenath (supposed to
mean 'One belonging to the goddess Neith'), a daughter of a high
officer of state, Poti-phera (meaning, like its shortened form,
Potiphar, 'The gift of Ra' the sun-god). Such an alliance placed him at
once in the very innermost circle of Egyptian aristocracy. It may have
been a bitter pill for the priest to swallow, to give his daughter to a
man of yesterday, and an alien; but, just as probably, he too looked to
Joseph with some kind of awe, and was not unwilling to wed Asenath to
the first man in the empire, wherever he had started up from.

But should not Joseph's religion have barred such a marriage? The
narrator gives no judgment on the fact, and we have to form our own
estimate. But it is not to be estimated as if it had occurred five or
six centuries later. The family of Jacob was not so fenced off, nor was
its treasure of revelation so complete, as afterwards. We may be fairly
sure that Joseph felt no inconsistency between his ancestral faith,
which had become his own in his trials, and this union. He was risking
a great deal; that is certain. Whether the venture ended well or ill,
we know not. Only we may be very sure that a marriage in which a common
faith is not a strong bond of union lacks its highest sanctity, and is
perilously apt to find that difference in religious convictions is a
strong separator.

Joseph's administration opens up questions as to Egyptian land tenure,
and the like, which cannot be dealt with here. 'In the earlier days of
the monarchy the country was in the hands of great feudal lords; ...
the land belonged to them absolutely.... But after the convulsion
caused by the Hyksos conquest and the war of independence, this older
system of land tenure was completely changed.... The Pharaoh is the
fountain head, not only of honour, but of property as well.... The
people ceased to have any rights of their own' (Sayce, _ut supra_, p.
216).

We may note Joseph's immediate entrance upon office and his
characteristic energy in it. He 'went out from the presence of Pharaoh,
and went throughout all the land of Egypt.' No grass grew under this
man's feet. He was ubiquitous, personally overseeing everything for
seven long years. Wasteful consumption of the abundant crops had to be
restrained, storehouses to be built, careful records of the contents to
be made, after Egyptian fashion. The people, who could not look so far
as seven years ahead, and wanted to enjoy, or make money out of, the
good harvests, had to be looked after, and an army of officials to be
kept in order. Dignity meant work for him. Like all true men, he
thought more of his duty than of his honours. Depend on it, he did not
wear his fine clothes or ride in the second chariot, when he was
hurrying about the country at his task.

He had come 'out of prison to reign,' and, as we all find, if we are
God's servants, to reign means to serve, and the higher the place the
harder the task. The long years of waiting had nourished powers which
the seven years of busy toil tested. We must make ourselves, by God's
help, ready, in obscurity, and especially in youth, for whatever may be
laid on us in after days. And if we understand what life here means, we
shall be more covetous of spheres of diligent service than of places of
shining dignity. Whatever our task, let us do it, as Joseph did his,
with strenuous concentration, knowing, as he did, that the years in
which it is possible are but few at the longest.




RECOGNITION AND RECONCILIATION


    'Then Joseph could not refrain himself before all them
    that stood by him; and he cried, Cause every man to go
    out from me. And there stood no man with him, while
    Joseph made himself known unto his brethren. And he
    wept aloud: and the Egyptians and the house of Pharaoh
    heard. And Joseph said unto his brethren, I am Joseph;
    doth my father yet live? And his brethren could not
    answer him; for they were troubled at his presence. And
    Joseph said unto his brethren, Come near to me, I pray
    you. And they came near. And he said, I am Joseph your
    brother, whom ye sold into Egypt. Now therefore be not
    grieved, nor angry with yourselves, that ye sold me
    hither: for God did send me before you to preserve life.
    For these two years hath the famine been in the land:
    and yet there are five years, in the which there shall
    neither be earing nor harvest. And God sent me before
    you to preserve you a posterity in the earth, and to
    save your lives by a great deliverance. So now it was not
    you that sent me hither, but God: and He hath made me
    a father to Pharaoh, and lord of all his house, and a
    ruler throughout all the land of Egypt. Haste ye, and
    go up to my father, and say unto him. Thus saith thy son
    Joseph, God hath made me lord of all Egypt: come down
    unto me, tarry not: And thou shalt dwell in the land of
    Goshen, and thou shalt be near unto me, thou, and thy
    children, and thy children's children, and thy flocks,
    and thy herds, and all that thou hast: And there will I
    nourish thee; for yet there are five years of famine;
    lest thou, and thy household, and all that thou hast,
    come to poverty. And, behold, your eyes see, and the
    eyes of my brother Benjamin, that it is my mouth that
    speaketh unto you. And ye shall tell my father of all
    my glory in Egypt, and of all that ye have seen; and ye
    shall haste and bring down my father hither. And he fell
    upon his brother Benjamin's neck, and wept; and Benjamin
    wept upon his neck. Moreover he kissed all his brethren,
    and wept upon them: and after that his brethren talked
    with him.'
    GENESIS xlv. 1-15.


I


If the writer of this inimitable scene of Joseph's reconciliation with
his brethren was not simply an historian, he was one of the great
dramatic geniuses of the world, master of a vivid minuteness like
Defoe's, and able to touch the springs of tears by a pathetic
simplicity like his who painted the death of Lear. Surely theories of
legend and of mosaic work fail here.

1. We have, first, disclosure. The point at which the impenetrable,
stern ruler breaks down is significant. It is after Judah's torrent of
intercession for Benjamin, and self-sacrificing offer of himself for a
substitute and a slave. Why did this touch Joseph so keenly? Was it not
because his brother's speech shows that filial and fraternal affection
was now strong enough in him to conquer self? He had sent Joseph to the
fate which he is now ready to accept. He and the rest had thought
nothing of the dagger they plunged into their father's heart by selling
Joseph; but now he is prepared to accept bondage if he may save his
father's grey head an ache. The whole of Joseph's harsh, enigmatical
treatment had been directed to test them, and to ascertain if they were
the same fierce, cruel men as of old. Now, when the doubt is answered,
he can no longer dam back the flood of forgiving love. The wisest
pardoning kindness seeks the assurance of sorrow and change in the
offender, before it can safely and wholesomely enjoy the luxury of
letting itself out in tears of reconciliation. We do not call Joseph a
type of Christ; but the plain process of forgiveness in his brotherly
heart is moulded by the law which applies to God's pardon as to ours.
All the wealth of yearning pardon is there, before contrition and
repentance; but it is not good for the offender that it should be
lavished on him, impenitent.

What a picture that is of the all-powerful ruler, choking down his
emotion, and hurriedly ordering the audience chamber to be cleared! How
many curious glances would be cast over their shoulders, by the slowly
withdrawing crowd, at the strange group--the viceroy, usually so calm,
thus inexplicably excited, and the huddled, rude shepherds, bewildered
and afraid of what was coming next, in this unaccountable country! How
eavesdroppers would linger as near as they durst, and how looks would
be exchanged as the sounds of passionate weeping rewarded their open
ears! The deepest feelings are not to be flaunted before the world. The
man who displays his tears, and the man who is too proud to shed them,
are both wrong; but perhaps it is worse to weep in public than not to
weep at all.

'I am Joseph.' Were ever the pathos of simplicity, and the simplicity
of pathos, more nobly expressed than in these two words?--(There are
but two in the Hebrew.) Has the highest dramatic genius ever winged an
arrow which goes more surely to the heart than that? The question,
which hurries after the disclosure, seems strange and needless; but it
is beautifully self-revealing, as expressive of agitation, and as
disclosing a son's longing, and perhaps, too, as meant to relieve the
brothers' embarrassment, and, as it were, to wrap the keen edge of the
disclosure in soft wool.

2. We have, next, conscience-stricken silence. No wonder his brethren
'could not answer' and 'were troubled at his presence.' They had found
their brother a ruler; they had found the ruler their brother. Their
former crime had turned what might have been a joy into a terror.
Already they had come to know and regret it. It might seem to their
startled consciences as if now they were about to expiate it. They
would remember the severity of Joseph's past intercourse; they see his
power, and cannot but be doubtful of his intentions. Had all his
strange conduct been manoeuvring to get them, Benjamin and all, into
his toils, that one blow might perfect his revenge? Our suspicions are
the reflections of our own hearts. So there they stand in open-mouthed,
but dumb, wonder and dread. It would task the pencil of him who
painted, on the mouldering refectory wall at Milan, the conflicting
emotions of the apostles, at the announcement of the betrayer, to
portray that silent company of abased and trembling criminals. They are
an illustration of the profitlessness of all crime. Sin is, as one of
its Hebrew names tells us, missing the mark--whether we think of it as
fatally failing to reach the ideal of conduct, or as always, by a
divine nemesis, failing to hit even the shabby end it aims at. 'Every
rogue is a roundabout fool.' They put Joseph in the pit, and here he is
on a throne. They have stained their souls, and embittered their
father's life for twenty-two long years, and the dreams have come true,
and all their wickedness has not turned the stream of the divine
purpose, any more than the mud dam built by a child diverts the
Mississippi. One flash has burned up their whole sinful past, and they
stand scorched and silent among the ruins. So it always is. Sooner or
later the same certainty of the futility of his sin will overwhelm
every sinful man, and dumb self-condemnation will stand in silent
acknowledgment of evil desert before the throne of the Brother, who is
now the Prince and the Judge, on whose fiat hangs life or death. To see
Christ enthroned should be joy; but it may be turned into terror and
silent anticipation of His just condemnation.

3. We have encouragement and complete forgiveness. That invitation to
come close up to him, with which Joseph begins the fuller disclosure of
his heart, is a beautiful touch. We can fancy how tender the accents,
and how, with some lightening of fear, but still hesitatingly and
ashamed, the shepherds, unaccustomed to courtly splendours, approached.
The little pause while they draw near helps him to self-command, and he
resumes his words in a calmer tone. With one sentence of assurance that
he is their brother, he passes at once into that serene region where
all passion and revenge die, unable to breathe its keen, pure air. The
comfort which he addresses to their penitence would have been
dangerous, if spoken to men blind to the enormity of their past. But it
will not make a truly repentant conscience less sensitive, though it
may alleviate the aching of the wound, to think that God has used even
its sin for His own purposes. It will not take away the sense of the
