
"No," seemingly quite conscious that she was contradicting me. For that
matter there wasn't anything offensive about her kind of frankness. "No,
Hobart. I feel too much at home to have come from any other world than
this one."

Temporarily I was floored. How could she, so ignorant of other matters,
feel so sure of this? There was no explaining it.

We went back into the house. As it happened, my eye struck first the
gramophone. And it seemed a good idea to test her knowledge with this.

"Is this apparatus familiar to you?"

"No. What is it for?"

"Do you understand what is meant by the term 'music'?"

"Yes," with instant pleasure. "This is music." She proceeded, without
the slightest self-consciousness, to sing in a sweet clear soprano, and
treated us to the chorus of "I Am Climbing Mountains!"

"Good heavens!" gasped Charlotte. "What can it mean?"

For a moment the explanation evaded me. Then I reasoned: "She must
have a sub-conscious memory of what was being played just before she
materialised."

And to prove this I picked out an instrumental piece which we had not
played all the evening. It was the finale of the overture to "Faust"; a
selection, by the way, which was a great favourite of Harry's and is one
of mine. Ariadne listened in silence to the end.

"I seem to have heard something like it before," she decided slowly.
"The melody, not the--the instrumentation. But it reminds me of
something that I like very much." Whereupon she began to sing for us.
But this time her voice was stronger and more dramatic; and as for the
composition--all I can say is it had a wild, fierce ring to it, like
"Men of Harlech"; only the notes did not correspond to the chromatic
scale. SHE SANG IN AN ENTIRELY NEW MUSICAL SYSTEM.

"By George!" when she had done. "Now we HAVE got something! For the
first time, we've heard some genuine, unadulterated Blind Spot stuff!"

"You mean," from Charlotte, excitedly, "that she has finally recovered
her memory?"

It was the girl herself who answered. She shot to her feet, and her face
became transfigured with a wonderful joy. At the same time she blinked
hurriedly, as though to shut off a sight that staggered her.

"Oh, I remember!"--she almost sobbed in her delight--"it is all plain
to me, now! I know who I am!"




XXIII

THE RHAMDA AGAIN


I could have yelled for joy. We were about to learn something of the
Blind Spot--something that might help us to save Harry, and Chick, and
the professor!

Ariadne seemed to know that a great deal depended upon what she was
about to tell us. She deliberately sat down, and rested her chin upon
her hand, as though determining upon the best way of telling something
very difficult to express.

As for Charlotte, Jerry, and myself, we managed somehow to restrain our
curiosity enough to keep silence. But we could not help glancing more or
less wonderingly at our visitor. Presently I realised this, and got up
and walked quietly about, as though intent upon a problem of my own.

Which was true enough. I had come to a very startling conclusion--I,
Hobart Fenton, had fallen in love!

What was more, this affection of the heart had come to me, a very strong
man, just as an affection of the lungs is said to strike such men--all
of a sudden and hard. One moment I had been a sturdy, independent soul,
intent upon scientific investigation, the only symptoms of sentimental
potentialities being my perfectly normal love for my sister and for my
old friend. Then, before my very eyes, I had been smitten thus!

And the worst part of it was, I found myself ENJOYING the sensation. It
made not the slightest difference to me that I had fallen in love with
a girl who was only a step removed from a wraith. Mysteriously she had
come to me; as mysteriously she might depart. I had yet to know from
what sort of country she had come!

But that made no difference. She was HERE, in the same house with me;
I had held her hands; and I knew her to be very, very real indeed just
then. And when I considered the possibility of her disappearing just as
inexplicably as she had come--well, my face went cold, I admit. But at
the same time I felt sure of this much--I should never love any other
woman.

The thought left me sober. I paused in my pacing and looked at her. As
though in answer to my gaze she glanced up and smiled so affectionately
that it was all I could do to keep from leaping forward and taking her
right into my arms.

I turned hastily, and to cover my confusion I began to hum a strain from
the part of "Faust" to which I have referred. I hummed it through, and
was beginning again, when I was startled to hear this from the girl:
"Oh, then you are Hobart!"

I wheeled, to see her face filled with a wonderful light.

"Hobart," she repeated, as one might repeat the name of a very dear one.
"That--that music you were humming! Why, I heard Harry Wendel humming
that yesterday!"

I suppose we looked very stupid, the three of us, so dumbfounded that we
could do nothing but gape incredulously at that extraordinary creature
and her equally extraordinary utterance. She immediately did her best to
atone for her sensation.

"I'm not sure that I can make it clear," she said, smiling dubiously,
"but if you will use your imaginations and try to fill in the gaps in
what I say you may get a fair idea of the place I have come from, and
where Harry is."

We leaned forward, intensely alert. I shall never forget the pitiful
eagerness in poor Charlotte's face. It meant more to her, perhaps, than
to anyone else.

At the precise instant I heard a sound, off in the breakfast room. It
seemed to be a subdued knocking, or rather a pounding at the door.

Frowning at the interruption, I stepped through the dining-room into
the breakfast room, where the sounds came from. And I was not a little
puzzled to note that the door to the basement was receiving the blows.

Now I had been the last to visit the basement and had locked the
door--from force of habit, I suppose--leaving the key in the lock.
It was still there. And there is but one way to enter that basement:
through this one door, and no other.

"Who is it?" I called out peremptorily. No answer; only a repetition of
the pounds.

"What do you want?"--louder.

"Open this door, quick!" cane a muffled reply.

The voice was unrecognisable. I stood and thought quickly; then shouted:

"Wait a minute, until I get a key!"

I motioned to Charlotte. She tip-toed to my side. I whispered something
in her ear; and she slipped off into the kitchen, there to phone Miss
Clarke and warn her to notify her colleagues at once. And so, as I
unlocked the door, I was fortified by the knowledge that I would be
assisted by the combined mind-force of a score of highly developed
intellects.

I was little surprised, a second later, to see that the intruder was
Rhamda Avec. What reason to expect anyone else?

"How did you get down there?" I demanded. "Don't you realise that you
are liable to arrest for trespass?"

I said it merely to start conversation but it served only to bring a
slight smile to the face of this professed friend of ours, for whom we
felt nothing but distrust and fear.

"Let us not waste time in trivialities, Fenton," he rejoined gently. He
brushed a fleck of cobweb from his coat. "By this time you ought to know
that you cannot deal with me in any ordinary fashion."

I made no comment as, without asking my leave or awaiting an invitation,
he stepped through into the dining-room and thence into the parlour. I
followed, half tempted to strike him down from behind, but restrained
more by the fact that I must spare him than from any compunctions.
Seemingly he knew this as well as I, he was serenely at ease.

And thus he stood before Jerome and Ariadne. The detective made a single
exclamation, and furtively shifted his coat sleeves. He was getting that
infernal breast gun into action. As for Ariadne, she stared at the new
arrival as though astonished at first.

When Charlotte returned, a moment later, she showed only mild surprise.
She quietly took her chair and as quietly moved her hand so that the gem
shone in full view of our visitor.

But he gave her and the stone only a single glance, and then rested his
eyes upon our new friend. To my anxiety, Ariadne was gazing fixedly at
him now, her expression combining both agitation and a vague fear.

It could not have been due entirely to his unusual appearance; for
there was no denying that this grey-haired yet young-faced man with the
distinguished, courteous bearing, looked even younger that night than
ever before. No; the girl's concern was deeper, more acute. I felt an
unaccountable alarm.

From Ariadne to me the Rhamda glanced, then back again; and a quick
satisfied smile came to his mouth. He gave an almost imperceptible nod.
And, keeping his gaze fixed upon her eyes, he remarked carelessly:

"Which of these chairs shall I sit in, Fenton?"

"This one," I replied instantly, pointing to the one I had just quit.

Smiling, he selected a chair a few feet away.

Whereupon I congratulated myself. The man feared me, then; yet he ranked
my mentality no higher than that! In other words, remarkably clever
though he might be, and as yet unthwarted, he could by no means be
called omnipotent.

"For your benefit, Mr. Jerome, let me say that I phoned Miss Fenton and
her brother a few days ago, and urged them to give up their notion of
occupying this house or of attempting to solve the mystery that you
are already acquainted with. And I prophesied, Mr. Jerome, that their
refusal to accept my advice would be followed by events that would
justify me.

"They refused, as you know; and I am here tonight to make a final plea,
so that they may escape the consequences of their wilfulness."

"You're a crook! And the more I see of you, Avec, the more easily I can
understand why they turned you down!"

"So you too, are prejudiced against me. I cannot understand this. My
motives are quite above question, I assure you."

"Really!" I observed sarcastically. I stole a glance at Ariadne; her
eyes were still riveted, in a rapt yet half-fearful abstraction, upon
the face of the Rhamda. It was time I took her attention away.

I called her name. She did not move her head, or reply. I said it
louder: "Ariadne!"

"What is it, Hobart?"--very softly.

"Ariadne, this gentleman possesses a great deal of knowledge of the
locality from which you came. We are interested in him, because we feel
sure that, if he chose to, he could tell us something about our friends
who--about Harry Wendel." Why not lay the cards plainly on the table?
The Rhamda must be aware of it all, anyhow. "And as this man has said,
he has tried to prevent us from solving the mystery. It occurs to me,
Ariadne, that you might recognise this man. But apparently--"

She shook her head just perceptibly. I proceeded:

"He is pleased to call his warning a prophecy; but we feel that a threat
is a threat. What he really wants is that ring."

Ariadne had already, earlier in the hour, given the gem several curious
glances. Now she stirred and sighed, and was about to turn her eyes
from the Rhamda to the ring when he spoke again; this time in a voice as
sharp as a steel blade:

"I do not enjoy being misunderstood, much less being misrepresented, Mr.
Fenton. At the same time, since you have seen fit to brand me in such
uncomplimentary terms, suppose I state what I have to say very bluntly,
so that there may be no mistake about it. If you do not either quit this
house, or give up the ring--NOW--you will surely regret it the rest of
your lives!"

From the corner of my eye I saw Jerome moving slowly in his chair, so
that he could face directly towards the Rhamda. His hands were ready for
the swift, upward jerk which, I knew, would stifle our caller.

As for my sister, she merely turned the ring so that the gem no longer
faced the Rhamda; and with the other hand she reached out and grasped
Ariadne's firmly.

Avec sat with his two hands clasping the arms of his chair. His fingers
drummed nervously but lightly on the wood. And then, suddenly, they
stopped their motion.

"Your answer, Fenton," in his usual gentle voice. "I can give you no
more time," I did not need to consult Charlotte or Jerome. I knew what
they would have said.

"You are welcome to my answer. It is--no!"

As I spoke the last word my gaze was fixed on the Rhamda's eyes. He, on
the other hand, was looking towards Ariadne. And at the very instant an
expression, as of alarm and sorrow, swept into the man's face.

My glance jumped to Ariadne. Her eyes were closed, her face suffused;
she seemed to be suffocating. She gave a queer little sound, half gasp
and half cry.

Simultaneously Jerome's hands shot into the air. The room shivered
with the stunning report of his breast gun. And every pellet struck the
Rhamda and burst.

A look of intense astonishment came into his face. He gave Jerome a
fleeting glance, almost of admiration; then his nostrils contracted with
pain as the gas attacked his lungs.

Another second, and each of us were reeling with the fumes. Jerome
started toward the window, to raise it, then sank back into his chair.
And when he turned round--

He and I and Charlotte saw an extraordinary thing. Instead of succumbing
to the gas, Rhamda Avec somehow recovered himself. And while the rest
of us remained still too numbed to move or speak, he found power to do
both.

"I warned you plainly, Fenton," as though nothing in particular had
happened. "And now see what you have brought upon the poor child!"

I could only roll my head stupidly, to stare at Ariadne's now senseless
form.

"As usual, Fenton, you will blame me for it. I cannot help that. But it
may still be possible for you to repent of your folly and escape your
fate. You are playing with terrible forces. If you do repent, just
follow these instructions"--laying a card on the table--"and I will see
what I can do for you. I wish you all good night."

And with that, pausing only to make a courtly bow to Charlotte, Rhamda
Avec turned and walked deliberately, dignifiedly from the room, while
the two men and a woman stared helplessly after him and allowed him to
go in peace.




XXIV

THE LIVING DEATH


As soon as the fresh air had revived us somewhat, we first of all
examined Ariadne. She still lay unconscious, very pale, and alarmingly
limp. I picked her up and carried her into the next room, where
there was a sofa, while Jerome went for water and Charlotte brought
smelling-salts.

Neither of these had any effect. Ariadne seemed to be scarcely
breathing; her heart beat only faintly, and there was no response to
such other methods as friction, slapping, or pinching of fingernails.

"We had better call a doctor," decided Charlotte promptly, and went to
the phone.

I picked up the card which the Rhamda had left. It contained simply his
name, together with one other word--the name of a morning newspaper.
Evidently he meant for us to insert an advertisement as soon as we were
ready to capitulate.

"Not yet!" the three of us decided, after talking it over. And we waited
as patiently as we could during the fifteen minutes that elapsed before
the telephoning got results.

It brought Dr. Hansen, who, it may be remembered, was closely identified
with the Chick Watson disappearance. He made a rapid but very careful
examination.

"It has all the appearance of a mild electric shock. What caused it,
Fenton?"

I told him. His eyes narrowed when I mentioned Avec, then widened in
astonishment and incredulity as I related the man's inexplicable effect
upon the girl, and his strange immunity to the poison gas. But the
doctor asked nothing further about our situation, proceeding at once to
apply several restoratives. All were without result. As a final resort,
he even rigged up an electrical connection, making use of some coils
which I had upstairs, and endeavoured to arouse the girl in that
fashion. Still without result.

"Good Lord, Hansen!" I finally burst out, when he stood back, apparently
baffled. "She's simply GOT to be revived! We can't allow her to succumb
to that scoundrel's power, whatever it is!"

"Why not a blood transfusion?" I asked eagerly, as an idea came to me.
"I'm in perfect condition. What about it? Go to it, doc!"

He slowly shook his head. And beyond a single searching glance into
my eyes, wherein he must have read something more than I had said, he
regretfully replied:

"This is a case for a specialist, Fenton. Everything considered, I
should say that she is suffering from a purely mental condition; but
whether it had a physical or a psychic origin, I can't say."

In short, he did not feel safe about going ahead with any really heroic
measures until a brain specialist was called in.

I had a good deal of confidence in Hansen. And what he said sounded
reasonable. So we agreed to his calling in a Dr. Higgins--the same man,
in fact, who was too late in reaching the house to save Chick on that
memorable night a year before.

His examination was swift and convincingly competent. He went over the
same ground that Hansen had covered, took the blood pressure and other
instrumental data, and asked us several questions regarding Ariadne's
mentality as we knew it. Scarcely stopping to think it over, Higgins
decided:

"The young woman is suffering from a temporary dissociation of brain
centres. Her cerebrum does not co-act with her cerebellum. In other
words, her conscious mind, for lack of means to express itself, is for
the time being dormant as in sleep.

"But it is not like ordinary sleep. Such is induced by fatigue of the
nerve channels. This young woman's condition is produced by shock; and
since there was no physical violence, we must conclude that the shock
was psychic.

"In that case, the condition will last until one of two things occurs;
either she must be similarly shocked back into sensibility--and I can't
see how this can happen, Fenton, unless you can secure the co-operation
of the man to whom you attribute the matter--or she must lie that way
indefinitely."

"Indefinitely!" I exclaimed, sensing something ominous. "You mean--"

"That there is no known method of reviving a patient in such a
condition. It might be called psychic catalepsy. To speak plainly,
Fenton, unless this man revives her, she will remain unconscious until
her death."

I shuddered. What horrible thing had come into our lives to afflict us
with so dreadful a prospect?

"Is--is there no hope, Dr. Higgins?"

"Very little"--gently but decisively. "All I can assure you is that she
will not die immediately. From the general state of her health, she will
live at least seventy-two hours. After that--you must be prepared for
the worst at any moment."

I turned away quickly, so that he could not see my face. What an awful
situation! Unless we could somehow lay hands on the Rhamda--

I hunted up Jerome. I said:

"Jerry, the thing is plainly up to you and me. Higgins gives us three
days. Day after tomorrow morning, if we haven't got results by that
time, we've got to give in and put that ad in the paper. But I
don't mean to give in, Jerry! Not until I've exhausted every other
possibility!"

"What're you going to do?" he asked thoughtfully.

"Work on that ring. I was a fool not to get busy sooner. As for the
rest, that's up to you! You've got to get yourself on the Rhamda's trail
as soon as you can, and camp there! The first chance you get, ransack
his room and belongings, and bring me every bit of data you find.
Between him and the ring, the truth ought to come out."

"All right. But don't forget that--" pointing to the unexplained spot
on the wood of the doorway. "You've got a mighty important clue there,
waiting for you to analyse it."

And he went and got his hat, and left the house. His final remark was
that we wouldn't see him back until he had something to report about our
