at the door of her house eating an apple. 'It was all in little bits,
and I took it to our sister the frog to ask her to sew it for me. But
just look at the way she has done it! You will have to take it to pieces
and fit them together properly, and I hope I shall not have to complain
again.' For as the wolverine was older than the mouse, he was accustomed
to speak to her in this manner. However, the mouse was used to it and
only answered: 'I think you had better stay here till it is done, and if
there is any alteration needed I can make it.' So the wolverine sat down
on a heap of dry ferns, and picking up the apple, he finished it without
even asking the mouse's leave.

At last the coat was ready, and the wolverine put it on.

'Yes, it fits very well,' said he, 'and you have sewn it very neatly.
When I pass this way again I will bring you a handful of corn, as
a reward'; and he ran off as smart as ever, leaving the mouse quite
grateful behind him.

He wandered about for many days, till he reached a place where food was
very scarce, and for a whole week he went without any. He was growing
desperate, when he suddenly came upon a bear that was lying asleep. 'Ah!
here is food at last!' thought he; but how was he to kill the bear, who
was so much bigger than himself? It was no use to try force, he must
invent some cunning plan which would get her into his power. At last,
after thinking hard, he decided upon something, and going up to the
bear, he exclaimed: 'Is that you, my sister?'

The bear turned round and saw the wolverine, and murmuring to herself,
so low that nobody could hear, 'I never heard before that I had a
brother,' got up and ran quickly to a tree, up which she climbed. Now
the wolverine was very angry when he saw his dinner vanishing in front
of him, especially as HE could not climb trees like the bear, so he
followed, and stood at the foot of the tree, shrieking as loud as he
could, 'Come down, sister; our father has sent me to look for you! You
were lost when you were a little girl and went out picking berries, and
it was only the other day that we heard from a beaver where you were.'
At these words, the bear came a little way down the tree, and the
wolverine, seeing this, went on:

'Are you not fond of berries? I am! And I know a place where they
grow so thick the ground is quite hidden. Why, look for yourself! That
hillside is quite red with them!'

'I can't see so far,' answered the bear, now climbing down altogether.
'You must have wonderfully good eyes! I wish I had; but my sight is very
short.'

'So was mine till my father smashed a pailful of cranberries, and rubbed
my eyes with them,' replied the wolverine. 'But if you like to go and
gather some of the berries I will do just as he did, and you will soon
be able to see as far as me.'

It took the bear a long while to gather the berries, for she was slow
about everything, and, besides, it made her back ache to stoop. But
at last she returned with a sackful, and put them down beside the
wolverine. 'That is splendid, sister!' cried the wolverine. 'Now lie
flat on the ground with your head on this stone, while I smash them.'

The bear, who was very tired, was only too glad to do as she was bid,
and stretched herself comfortably on the grass.

'I am ready now,' said the wolverine after a bit; 'just at first you
will find that the berries make your eyes smart, but you must be careful
not to move, or the juice will run out, and then it will have to be done
all over again.'

So the bear promised to lie very still; but the moment the cranberries
touched her eyes she sprang up with a roar.

'Oh, you mustn't mind a little pain,' said the wolverine, 'it will soon
be over, and then you will see all sorts of things you have never dreamt
of.' The bear sank down with a groan, and as her eyes were full of
cranberry juice, which completely blinded her, the wolverine took up a
sharp knife and stabbed her to the heart.

Then he took off the skin, and, stealing some fire from a tent, which
his sharp eyes had perceived hidden behind a rock, he set about roasting
the bear bit by bit. He thought the meat was the best he ever had
tasted, and when dinner was done he made up his mind to try that same
trick again, if ever he was hungry.

And very likely he did!

[Adapted from Bureau of Ethnology.]




The Husband of the Rat's Daughter



Once upon a time there lived in Japan a rat and his wife who came of an
old and noble race, and had one daughter, the loveliest girl in all the
rat world. Her parents were very proud of her, and spared no pains to
teach her all she ought to know. There was not another young lady in the
whole town who was as clever as she was in gnawing through the hardest
wood, or who could drop from such a height on to a bed, or run away so
fast if anyone was heard coming. Great attention, too, was paid to her
personal appearance, and her skin shone like satin, while her teeth were
as white as pearls, and beautifully pointed.

Of course, with all these advantages, her parents expected her to make a
brilliant marriage, and, as she grew up, they began to look round for a
suitable husband.

But here a difficulty arose. The father was a rat from the tip of his
nose to the end of his tail, outside as well as in, and desired that his
daughter should wed among her own people. She had no lack of lovers, but
her father's secret hopes rested on a fine young rat, with moustaches
which almost swept the ground, whose family was still nobler and more
ancient than his own. Unluckily, the mother had other views for her
precious child. She was one of those people who always despise their
own family and surroundings, and take pleasure in thinking that they
themselves are made of finer material than the rest of the world. 'HER
daughter should never marry a mere rat,' she declared, holding her head
high. 'With her beauty and talents she had a right to look for someone a
little better than THAT.'

So she talked, as mothers will, to anyone that would listen to her. What
the girl thought about the matter nobody knew or cared--it was not the
fashion in the rat world.

Many were the quarrels which the old rat and his wife had upon the
subject, and sometimes they bore on their faces certain marks which
looked as if they had not kept to words only.

'Reach up to the stars is MY motto,' cried the lady one day, when she
was in a greater passion than usual. 'My daughter's beauty places her
higher than anything upon earth,' she cried; 'and I am certainly not
going to accept a son-in-law who is beneath her.'

'Better offer her in marriage to the sun,' answered her husband
impatiently. 'As far as I know there is nothing greater than he.'

'Well, I WAS thinking of it,' replied the wife, 'and as you are of the
same mind, we will pay him a visit to-morrow.'

So the next morning, the two rats, having spent hours in making
themselves smart, set out to see the sun, leading their daughter between
them.

The journey took some time, but at length they came to the golden palace
where the sun lived.

'Noble king,' began the mother, 'behold our daughter! She is so
beautiful that she is above everything in the whole world. Naturally, we
wish for a son-in-law who, on his side, is greater than all. Therefore
we have come to you.'

'I feel very much flattered,' replied the sun, who was so busy that he
had not the least wish to marry anybody. 'You do me great honour by your
proposal. Only, in one point you are mistaken, and it would be wrong of
me to take advantage of your ignorance. There is something greater
than I am, and that is the cloud. Look!' And as he spoke a cloud spread
itself over the sun's face, blotting out his rays.

'Oh, well, we will speak to the cloud,' said the mother. And turning to
the cloud she repeated her proposal.

'Indeed I am unworthy of anything so charming,' answered the cloud; 'but
you make a mistake again in what you say. There is one thing that is
even more powerful than I, and that is the wind. Ah, here he comes, you
can see for yourself.'

And she DID see, for catching up the cloud as he passed, he threw it on
the other side of the sky. Then, tumbling father, mother and daughter
down to the earth again, he paused for a moment beside them, his foot on
an old wall.

When she had recovered her breath, the mother began her little speech
once more.

'The wall is the proper husband for your daughter,' answered the wind,
whose home consisted of a cave, which he only visited when he was not
rushing about elsewhere; 'you can see for yourself that he is greater
than I, for he has power to stop me in my flight.' And the mother, who
did not trouble to conceal her wishes, turned at once to the wall.

Then something happened which was quite unexpected by everyone.

'I won't marry that ugly old wall, which is as old as my grandfather,'
sobbed the girl, who had not uttered one word all this time. 'I would
have married the sun, or the cloud, or the wind, because it was my duty,
although I love the handsome young rat, and him only. But that horrid
old wall--I would sooner die!'

And the wall, rather hurt in his feelings, declared that he had no claim
to be the husband of so beautiful a girl.

'It is quite true,' he said, 'that I can stop the wind who can part the
clouds who can cover the sun; but there is someone who can do more than
all these, and that is the rat. It is the rat who passes through me, and
can reduce me to powder, simply with his teeth. If, therefore, you want
a son-in-law who is greater than the whole world, seek him among the
rats.'

'Ah, what did I tell you?' cried the father. And his wife, though for
the moment angry at being beaten, soon thought that a rat son-in-law was
what she had always desired.

So all three returned happily home, and the wedding was celebrated three
days after.

[Contes Populaires.]



The Mermaid and the Boy



Long, long ago, there lived a king who ruled over a country by the sea.
When he had been married about a year, some of his subjects, inhabiting
a distant group of islands, revolted against his laws, and it became
needful for him to leave his wife and go in person to settle their
disputes. The queen feared that some ill would come of it, and implored
him to stay at home, but he told her that nobody could do his work for
him, and the next morning the sails were spread, and the king started on
his voyage.

The vessel had not gone very far when she ran upon a rock, and stuck so
fast in a cleft that the strength of the whole crew could not get her
off again. To make matters worse, the wind was rising too, and it was
quite plain that in a few hours the ship would be dashed to pieces and
everybody would be drowned, when suddenly the form of a mermaid was seen
dancing on the waves which threatened every moment to overwhelm them.

'There is only one way to free yourselves,' she said to the king,
bobbing up and down in the water as she spoke, 'and that is to give me
your solemn word that you will deliver to me the first child that is
born to you.'

The king hesitated at this proposal. He hoped that some day he might
have children in his home, and the thought that he must yield up the
heir to his crown was very bitter to him; but just then a huge wave
broke with great force on the ship's side, and his men fell on their
knees and entreated him to save them.

So he promised, and this time a wave lifted the vessel clean off the
rocks, and she was in the open sea once more.

The affairs of the islands took longer to settle than the king had
expected, and some months passed away before he returned to his palace.
In his absence a son had been born to him, and so great was his joy that
he quite forgot the mermaid and the price he had paid for the safety of
his ship. But as the years went on, and the baby grew into a fine big
boy, the remembrance of it came back, and one day he told the queen
the whole story. From that moment the happiness of both their lives was
ruined. Every night they went to bed wondering if they should find his
room empty in the morning, and every day they kept him by their sides,
expecting him to be snatched away before their very eyes.

At last the king felt that this state of things could not continue, and
he said to his wife:

'After all, the most foolish thing in the world one can do is to keep
the boy here in exactly the place in which the mermaid will seek him.
Let us give him food and send him on his travels, and perhaps, if the
mermaid ever blocs come to seek him, she may be content with some other
child.' And the queen agreed that his plan seemed the wisest.

So the boy was called, and his father told him the story of the voyage,
as he had told his mother before him. The prince listened eagerly, and
was delighted to think that he was to go away all by himself to see
the world, and was not in the least frightened; for though he was now
sixteen, he had scarcely been allowed to walk alone beyond the palace
gardens. He began busily to make his preparations, and took off his
smart velvet coat, putting on instead one of green cloth, while he
refused a beautiful bag which the queen offered him to hold his food,
and slung a leather knapsack over his shoulders instead, just as he had
seen other travellers do. Then he bade farewell to his parents and went
his way.

All through the day he walked, watching with interest the strange birds
and animals that darted across his path in the forest or peeped at him
from behind a bush. But as evening drew on he became tired, and looked
about as he walked for some place where he could sleep. At length he
reached a soft mossy bank under a tree, and was just about to stretch
himself out on it, when a fearful roar made him start and tremble all
over. In another moment something passed swiftly through the air and a
lion stood before him.

'What are you doing here?' asked the lion, his eyes glaring fiercely at
the boy.

'I am flying from the mermaid,' the prince answered, in a quaking voice.

'Give me some food then,' said the lion, 'it is past my supper time, and
I am very hungry.'

The boy was so thankful that the lion did not want to eat him, that he
gladly picked up his knapsack which lay on the ground, and held out some
bread and a flask of wine.

'I feel better now,' said the lion when he had done, 'so now I shall go
to sleep on this nice soft moss, and if you like you can lie down beside
me.' So the boy and the lion slept soundly side by side, till the sun
rose.

'I must be off now,' remarked the lion, shaking the boy as he spoke;
'but cut off the tip of my ear, and keep it carefully, and if you are
in any danger just wish yourself a lion and you will become one on the
spot. One good turn deserves another, you know.'

The prince thanked him for his kindness, and did as he was bid, and the
two then bade each other farewell.

'I wonder how it feels to be a lion,' thought the boy, after he had gone
a little way; and he took out the tip of the ear from the breast of his
jacket and wished with all his might. In an instant his head had swollen
to several times its usual size, and his neck seemed very hot and heavy;
and, somehow, his hands became paws, and his skin grew hairy and yellow.
But what pleased him most was his long tail with a tuft at the end,
which he lashed and switched proudly. 'I like being a lion very much,'
he said to himself, and trotted gaily along the road.

After a while, however, he got tired of walking in this unaccustomed
way--it made his back ache and his front paws felt sore. So he wished
himself a boy again, and in the twinkling of an eye his tail disappeared
and his head shrank, and the long thick mane became short and curly.
Then he looked out for a sleeping place, and found some dry ferns, which
he gathered and heaped up.

But before he had time to close his eyes there was a great noise in the
trees near by, as if a big heavy body was crashing through them. The boy
rose and turned his head, and saw a huge black bear coming towards him.

'What are you doing here?' cried the bear.

'I am running away from the mermaid,' answered the boy; but the bear
took no interest in the mermaid, and only said: 'I am hungry; give me
something to eat.'

The knapsack was lying on the ground among the fern, but the prince
picked it up, and, unfastening the strap, took out his second flask
of wine and another loaf of bread. 'We will have supper together,' he
remarked politely; but the bear, who had never been taught manners, made
no reply, and ate as fast as he could. When he had quite finished, he
got up and stretched himself.

'You have got a comfortable-looking bed there,' he observed. 'I really
think that, bad sleeper as I am, I might have a good night on it. I can
manage to squeeze you in,' he added; 'you don't take up a great deal of
room.' The boy was rather indignant at the bear's cool way of talking;
