so as to serve as a pillow or support, leaving the hand to steady the
stock of his gun, while the right inclosed the trigger guard.

The horsemen, instead of riding side by side, were strung along in a
line, with the leader several paces in advance and mounted on a rather
large horse of a coal-black color.  Directly behind him came one upon a
bay, while a little further back rode another on a white steed.  There
could be no question that they were on their way to kill without mercy.

The situation was intensely trying to father and daughter.  The whole
party of Ghoojurs had entered the Ganges and were steadily approaching.
The water was so shallow that it could be seen as it splashed about the
bodies of the riders, who were talking and laughing, as if in
anticipation of the enjoyment awaiting them.  They preserved their
single file, like so many American Indians in crossing a stream, and
their last thought must have been of any possible danger that could
threaten them from the three on the further bank.

The situation was becoming unbearable when the rifle cracked with a
noise no louder than a Chinese cracker, and a faint puff of smoke
curled upward from the muzzle of the weapon.  At the same moment the
Ghoojur at the front, on his black horse, flung up his arms and tumbled
sideways into the water, which splashed over his animal's head.
Frightened, the horse reared, pawed the air, and, whirling about,
galloped back to the bank, sending the water flying in showers from his
hoofs.

"Score me a bull's-eye!" called Jack Everson, who in his pleasure over
his success, could not wait for the result.

"But see!" cried Mary, "you have only infuriated them.  Oh! father, how
can we save ourselves?"




CHAPTER IV.

FLIGHT.

The success of the first shot gave Jack Everson self-confidence and he
took less time in aiming the second, which was as unerring as the
first.  Another Ghoojur plunged off his horse and gave but a single
struggle when he sank from sight in the shallow water.

"Another bull's-eye!" called Jack, proceeding to reload his piece.  "I
hope, doctor, you are keeping a correct score; I must have credit for
all I do."

"Now for my distinguished friend on the milk-white steed," said Jack,
proceeding to adjust his telescopic sight to that individual.  "If they
will send over the three horses it will give us one apiece."

But the Ghoojurs had had enough of this fearful business.  They saw
that some unaccountable fatality was at work and it was madness for
them to remain.  With never a suspicion of the truth they wheeled their
animals about and sent them galloping for the bank which they had left
a short time before full of hope and anticipation.

"I'm sorry for that," reflected Jack Everson, "for it mixes things and
I can't pick out my man, but here goes."

In one sense, his opportunity was better than before; for, while he
could not select his particular target, he had but to aim at the bunch
to make sure of hitting somebody, which is precisely what he did.

The Ghoojur whom he punctured did not fall, for the reason that two of
his friends reached out and prevented him.  It was a piece of
supererogation on their part, for when the party emerged from the
Ganges upon dry land that fellow was of no further account.

Jack now showed more haste than before in reloading his weapon, fearing
that the party would get beyond his reach before he could fire for the
fourth time.  Much to his regret, they did so, for though he made the
shot, it was necessarily so hurried that it inflicted no injury, and
the whole party galloped out of sight over the slight swell without
showing any further concern for their companions left behind.  Jack now
rose to his feet with the question:

"What is my record, doctor?"

"Three bull's-eyes; your score is perfect."

"Hardly, for the last was a miss; however, three out of a possible four
is pretty fair when the circumstances are considered.  I suspect that
that particular party is not likely to give us further trouble."

"No, they will not forget the lesson."

"If we can induce our enemies to make their approach by the same ford
and when the sun is shining this will become truly amusing."

"But the Ghoojurs will not repeat that mistake.  This affair has served
another purpose," added the physician, "we must not delay our
departure."

"Do you advise our going while it is night?"

"I advised the contrary a little while ago, but I confess I am afraid
to stay in the house, even for a few hours.  However, we will take our
dinner there, gather a few belongings and then hurry off.  We shall
find some spot where it will be safe to pass the night, and where we
are not likely to be molested, because no one will know where to find
us."

All glanced in the direction of the other shore, and seeing nothing to
cause misgiving moved to the house, a low, roomy structure, though of
moderate proportions, with a broad veranda extending along two sides.
It was time for the evening meal, and there was some surprise felt that
Mustad, the servant, had not summoned them before.

This surprise turned to astonishment and alarm when it was discovered
that Mustad was not in the house.  No preparation had been made for
dinner, and though his name was called several times in a loud voice,
there was no response.

"He has left us," said the doctor.

"What does it mean?" asked Mary.

"It can have but one meaning: by some legerdemain, such as our own
Indians show in telegraphing news from one mountain top to another,
word has reached Mustad of what has taken place, and he has been called
upon to join the faithful, and has been only too glad to do it."

"I should think he would have attempted to do us harm before going."

"He is too great a coward."

"But his fanaticism will make him reckless."

"When he gets among his friends then he will be among the worst."

"But, father, he was always meek and gentle and respectful."

"Those are the kind who become directly the opposite."

"Do you think he would harm us?"

"I have no doubt of it," was the reply of the doctor.  "I know the
breed; I have twice been the means of saving his life through my
medicines, and Mary nursed him for three weeks when he was suffering
from a fever."

"Yon may be doing him an injustice," ventured Jack Everson, to whom the
judgment of his friend seemed bitter.

"I wish I could think so, but, Mary, if you can provide us with
something in the way of food, Mr. Everson and I will get the things
together that we are to take with us."

Dr. Marlowe wisely decided not to burden themselves with unnecessary
luggage.  Jack took from his trunk a few needed articles and stowed
them into a travelling bag whose supporting strap could be flung over
one shoulder.  Though a physician himself, admitted to practice, he had
brought none of his instruments with him, for the good reason that he
saw no sense in doing so.  Into the somewhat larger bag of the elder
doctor were placed his most delicate instruments and several medical
preparations, mostly the results of his experiments.  They were too
precious to be lost if there was any way of preserving them.  Mary
packed her articles in a small travelling bag, the strap of which she,
too, flung over her shoulder, though Jack asked to be allowed to
relieve her.

It was after the hurried meal had been eaten by lamplight that the
three completed their preparations for departure.  That to which they
paid the most attention was their means of defense.  Jack Everson had
brought a plentiful supply of cartridges for his superb breechloader;
and the belt was already secured around his body.  Dr. Marlowe never
allowed his supply of ammunition to run low, so that the two were well
supplied in that respect.

Jack was pleased to find that the revolver belonging to Mary Marlowe
was of the same calibre as his own, so that the cartridges could be
used indiscriminately.

"I remember," he said to her, when the parent was just beyond hearing,
"that you were quite skillful with your weapon."

"Not specially so, but what skill I gained is due to your tuition."

"Not so much to that as to the aptness of the pupil."

"Your remark is more gallant than true, but I hope I shall not be
called upon to use this weapon as you used yours awhile ago."

"Such is my prayer, but if the necessity arises do not hesitate."

"Be assured I shall not," she replied, with a flash of her fine eyes
and a compression of her lips.




CHAPTER V.

COMPANIONS IN FLIGHT.

Everything needed having been gathered, the lamps were extinguished,
and with the physician in the lead, the three passed out of the front
door to the veranda.  The doctor decided to leave the door unfastened,
since it was useless to secure it.

Suddenly, when the doctor was about to give the word to move, he saw a
shadowy figure in the direction of the river.

"Sh!" he whispered; "it looks as if we had waited too long; some one is
approaching.  Be ready to use your gun or to retreat into the house if
necessary to fight it out there."

"It is a white man," said the daughter in an undertone; "he may be a
patient."

It was clear by this time that the stranger was not a native, for he
was dressed in civilized costume and his gait was that of a European.
He did not perceive the silent figures until within a few paces of the
veranda, when he paused abruptly, as if startled.

"Good evening," he said in English.  "Is this Dr. Marlowe?"

"It is; who are you?"

"My name is Anderson; I was looking for you."

"In what way can I serve you?"

"You have heard the news, I suppose," said the man, keeping his
position, and looking up to the three, who were now all on the edge of
the veranda; "the native soldiers at Meerut mutinied yesterday, killed
most of their officers, plundered the city, slaying every white person
they could find, after which most of them hurried to Delhi."

"You bring dreadful tidings; I had heard nothing definite, but
suspected all that you have told me.  Are you alone and why do you come
to me?"

"I fled with my wife and two other families, Turner and Wharton, from
the outskirts of Meerut as soon as there seemed a chance for us.  We
made our way to the river, found a boat and paddled to this place, for
we had no sail and there was scarcely any wind."

"Where are your friends?"

"I left them by the edge of the river in the boat, promising to rejoin
them in a few minutes."

"Have you no companions, but those you named?"

"None; my wife and I buried two children last Summer; Mr. Turner has
none, and Mr. Wharton and his young wife were but recently married."

"You have not told me why you come to me?"

"Chiefly to warn you of your peril and to beseech you to fly before it
is too late."

"I thank you very much for your solicitude; it was kind on the part of
you and your friends, but it strikes me that one place is about as safe
as another."

"We are so far from the large cities and the coast that it is useless
to attempt to reach any of them.  Our first aim was to get as far from
Meerut as possible; then as we found ourselves approaching your home,
it seemed to us there was a chance for our lives by pushing to the
northward, into the wilder and less settled country, where the flames
of the insurrection may not reach."

"Your sentiments are our own; you have been wonderfully fortunate in
getting this far; my friends and I have seen enough to warn us to lose
no time, and we were on the point of starting when I saw you."

"May I ask what course you intend to take?"

"I have lived here for twenty years, so that I am acquainted with the
section.  My intention was to follow a slightly travelled road, which,
in fact, is little more than a bridle path, until several miles beyond
Akwar, when we should come back to the main highway and keep to that
for fifty or perhaps a hundred miles.  By that time, we should be safe,
if such a thing as safety is possible."

"Your plan is a good one, but is not mine better?"

"What is that?"

"I, too, am familiar with this part of the country; a stream empties
into the Ganges just eastward of your house, hardly a half mile
distant; it must have its source somewhere among the foothills of the
Himalayas.  At any rate, it is navigable for all of a hundred miles.
It seems to me that when paddling up that stream at night, between the
wooded banks, there will be less chance of being discovered by enemies
than when travelling overland, as you contemplate."

"I am favorably impressed with your plan; do I understand you to invite
us to join your party?"

"You are more than welcome; our boat will accommodate us all without
crowding, but I regret to say we have but a single gun among us.  That
is mine, which I left with my friends against my return."

"We are well supplied in that respect; we accept your invitation with
many thanks."

As the doctor spoke he stepped down from the veranda, followed by the
others, and Mr. Anderson led the way across the lawn to the river,
where his friends were awaiting his coming with many misgivings.  A
general introduction followed.  A common danger makes friends of
strangers, and in a few minutes all were as well acquainted as if they
had known one another for days and weeks.  Anderson and Turner were men
in middle life, while Wharton was of about the same age as Jack
Everson.  They had lived for several years on the outskirts of Meerut,
but it was young Wharton who discovered the impending peril, and it was
due to him that the three families escaped the fate of hundreds of
others on that woful night.  The young wife and Mary Marlowe became
intimate friends at once, while, as has been said, there was a hearty,
genuine comradeship immediately established among all.

The boat was larger than Dr. Marlowe and his companions suspected.  It
was more than twenty feet in length, with a cabin at the stern, a place
for a mast, though there was neither mast nor sail on board.  Anderson
had spoken of paddling to this point, when, had he spoken correctly, he
would have said that no paddles were used, but that the craft was
propelled by means of poles.




CHAPTER VI.

ON THE GANGES.

While all the members of the party were cheered by hope, none forgot
that a dreadful peril impended.  Enough time had passed since the
revolt at Meerut for the news to spread even beyond the little town of
Akwar, which was within a fourth of a mile of the home of Dr. Marlowe.
He was aware that some of the most fanatical Mussulmans in all India
lived there.  The action of the servant Mustad, who owed his life to
the father and child, was proof of what might be expected from these
miscreants when swept off their feet by the delirium that was spreading
with the frightful swiftness of a prairie fire.

Accordingly no time was lost.  There was a hurried scrambling on board,
the water fortunately being deep enough near shore to allow all to step
upon the boat dry shod.  The faint moon revealed the smooth surface of
the Ganges for nearly a hundred yards from land, but the further shore
was veiled in darkness.  It was at this juncture that Miss Marlowe made
an annoying discovery.

"Oh, papa, I have forgotten my pistol!"

"Wait and I'll soon get it," she added, starting to leap the short
distance from the gunwale to land, but Jack Everson caught her arm.

"You must not think of it; tell me where you left the weapon and I'll
bring it."

"I laid it on the table in the dining-room and in the hurry forgot it
when we left."

Jack turned to his friends.

"Don't wait here," he said, aware of the nervousness of the whole
party.  "Push down stream, and I'll quickly overtake you."

Without waiting for further explanation, he leaped the slight space and
started up the lawn on a loping trot.  For convenience he left his
rifle behind, but made sure that his revolver was in his hip pocket.
He did not apprehend that he would need the weapon in the short time he
expected to be absent, but if anything went awry it would be more
useful than the rifle.

In that moment of profound stillness following the disappearance of the
young man among the trees grouped about the lawn, the motionless people
on the boat felt a thrill of terror at the unmistakable sound of oars
from some point on the river not distant.

"Let us land and take refuge in your house," suggested young Wharton;
"we cannot make a decent fight in this boat."

"We shall have a better chance than in the house," was the reply of the
physician; "the bank of the river is shaded by trees a little further
down; we must lose no time in getting there, and avoid the least noise."

There were two long poles belonging to the boat, one of which was
grasped by Wharton, while Anderson swayed the other, the remainder
watching their movements, which could not have been more skillful.
Pressing the end against the bank, and afterwards against the clayey
bottom, the craft speedily swung several rods from shore.

While the two men were thus employed, the others peered off in the
gloom and listened for a repetition of the sounds that had frightened
them a few minutes before.  They were not heard again, nor could the
straining vision detect anything of the dreaded object, which could not
be far away.  Not a person on board doubted that a number of their
enemies were near and searching for them.  Dr. Marlowe would have taken
comfort from this fact had the circumstances been different; for the
men who were hunting for him would go to his house, since it was there
they must gain their first knowledge of his flight; but, as he viewed
it, it was impossible that they should be wholly ignorant of the boat
and its occupants, which must have made most of the distance before
night closed in.

It followed, therefore, that if they were looking for the doctor and
his family they were also looking for the boat and the fugitives it
contained.  The low-lying shore, with no trees fringing the bank, was
the worst place for him and his friends, and he was in a fever of
eagerness to reach the protecting shadows along shore.  The nerves of
all were keyed to the tensest point, when they caught the dim outlines
of the overhanging growth, with the leafage as exuberant as it always
is in a subtropical region at that season of the year.  The men toiled
with vigor and care, while the others glanced from the gloom of the
river to the deeper gloom of the bank, which seemed to recede as they
labored toward it.  With a relief that cannot be imagined the bulky
craft glided into the bank of deeper gloom, which so wrapped it about
that it was invisible from any point more than a dozen yards distant.

It is inconceivable how a narrower escape could have come about, for
the two men had hardly ceased poling, allowing the boat to move forward
with the momentum already gained, when their enemies were discovered.
Mary Marlowe's arm was interlocked with that of her father, when she
nervously clutched it and whispered:

"Yonder is their boat!"

All saw the terrifying sight at the same moment.  Almost opposite, and
barely fifty yards out on the river, could be traced a moving shadow,
the outlines of which showed a craft similarly shaped to their own,
except that it was somewhat smaller and sat lower in the water.  The
men were too dimly seen for their number to be counted or their motions
observed, but, as in the former instance, the sounds indicated that
they were using paddles.

Since it was certain that the natives were searching for the fugitives
