of thickly-growing pines until it ended abruptly with the forest and
opened out on a tiny sand-fringed inlet whose narrow mouth was guarded
by two little outcrops of rock half a mile to seaward.

A carriage drawn by four black horses rolled rapidly along the road,
swung out on to the beach, and stopped. Almost at the same moment a
grey-painted, six-oared boat grounded on the sandy beach. A couple of
men landed from her, and as the carriage door opened, they saluted. The
Count's two guests got out and the others entered the carriage, then one
of them got out again followed by the other, and between them they
carried a limp, motionless human form completely covered by a great rug
of dark fur. It was taken to the boat. All embarked, and the pinnace
shot away out through the little headlands. A mile out to seaward lay
the long black shape of a torpedo destroyer. The pinnace ran alongside
and they all went on board, two of the sailors carrying the body as
before.

Professor Marmion found himself accompanying them. The body was taken
into a little cabin and laid in a berth. The rug was turned down from
the face, and he recognised Prince Zastrow. A few minutes later he found
himself in the main cabin of the destroyer. The two men who had come in
the carriage were sitting at a little table with a man in mufti. This
man raised his head and said something. He did not hear the words--but,
to his amazement, he recognised the handsome face as that of Prince
Oscarovitch, whom he had never seen before he came as his guest to the
garden-party at "The Wilderness."

On the bulkhead of the cabin at the Prince's head there hung a little
block-calendar, and the exposed leaf showed the date, Monday, 6th June.
As he read it an impulse caused him to look round at the calendar
standing upon his own mantel-shelf. It showed the date, Friday, 24th
June. He turned back to the window and saw nothing but his own lawn and
the moonlit Common beyond.




CHAPTER XVII

M. NICOL HENDRY


Franklin Marmion sat down and began to think the situation over. It was
not an easy one, for, as it appeared to him, it would be very difficult,
if not impossible, for Nitocris and himself to help in the elucidation
of the Zastrow mystery, and the prevention of any European complications
that might arise out of it, on both the higher and the lower planes of
existence. Of course, it would have been perfectly easy to do so in one
sense, for now, practically nothing in human affairs was impossible of
achievement to them; but, on the other hand, it would never do to allow
people on the lower plane to become aware of their extra-human powers.
This was out of the question for many reasons, not the least of which
was that they had their lives to live under the ordinary conditions of
time and space and among their fellow-mortals, every one of whom would
shun them in fear, perhaps even horror, if they knew their secret. What,
for instance, would happen to Nitocris in her temporal state if even
only Merrill came to know it? No, the idea was certainly beyond the
possibility of consideration.

At the same time, it was to some extent necessary that they should work
on both planes if they were to reap the full advantage of their recently
acquired powers, and out of this dilemma there appeared to be only one
way open to the Professor: he must have the assistance of others to do
on the lower plane the work that he would, as it were, direct from the
higher. The question was, who? Obviously it must be some one upon whose
discretion absolute reliance could be placed. He must be highly skilled
in police work, and have a reputation to enhance or lose as the result
might decide. Suddenly a name occurred to him. A short time ago his
friend the President had been telling him the inner story of a very
intricate case which had involved a scandal of two Courts. Only the most
meagre details had obviously been permitted to appear in the papers, but
His Lordship had told him that it had been solved and settled almost
entirely by the skill and diplomacy of a M. Nicol Hendry, who held the
little advertised but highly responsible position of Head of the English
Department of the International Police Bureau.

"That's the very man," he said, "the very man, and I shouldn't wonder if
he's engaged on this particular case. It's too late to wire, and,
besides, that would look suspicious. I could telephone to Scotland Yard,
but I don't want even the police to know I want him until I've seen him.
No, I'll write a note: it will go by the early post, and no one will
know where it comes from."

Just as lunch was over the next day the front door bell tingled, and
presently the parlour-maid knocked, and came in with a card on a silver
salver:

"I have shown the gentleman into the drawing-room, sir. He says that he
has an appointment with you for half-past two."

"Very well: I will be up in a moment, Annie." Then, as she closed the
door, he gave Nitocris the card, and continued: "Our ally on the lower
plane that may be. You say you wouldn't care to be present and help me
with your opinion?"

"Oh no, Dad. I don't want any one to know that I am taking any part in
this little adventure. But if you will introduce him afterwards, I'll
tell you what I think. You know, women generally judge other people that
way."

"Very well," laughed her father, as he turned to the door, "that will be
best. If everything goes right and I think I can work with him, I shall
bring him upstairs and you can give him a cup of tea. If I don't, you
will know that he won't do."

"Good-bye, then, for the present," she smiled, "and don't frighten the
poor man, if you can help it. I dare say he's only an exaggerated
policeman, after all."

But it was a very different sort of person whom Franklin Marmion greeted
in the drawing-room. M. Nicol Hendry was a slimly but strongly-built man
of about forty. His high, somewhat narrow forehead was framed with
close-cut, crinkly, reddish-brown hair. Under well-defined brown
eyebrows shone a pair of alert steel-grey eyes of almost startling
brilliancy. His nose was a trifle long and slightly aquiline. A
carefully-trained golden-brown moustache half-concealed firm, thinly-cut
lips, and a closely-trimmed, pointed beard just revealed the strength of
the chin beneath. He was dressed in a dark grey frock-coat suit, and
wore a pinky-red wild rose, which he had plucked on the Common, in his
button-hole. As he shook hands with him the Professor made a mental note
of him as an embodiment of strength, keenness, and quiet inflexibility:
a summing-up which was pretty near the truth.

"Good afternoon, M. Hendry," he said, as the hands and eyes met.

"Good afternoon, Professor," returned the other in a gentle voice, and
almost perfect English. "May I ask to what happy circumstance--at least,
I hope it is a happy one--I owe the honour of making the acquaintance of
the gentleman who has succeeded in mystifying all the mathematicians of
Europe?"

"Well," said Franklin Marmion with a smile, "I don't know whether there
is so very much honour about that, but I do know that your time is very
valuable and that I have already taken up a good deal of it by bringing
you all the way out here, so I will come to the point at once. But wait
a moment. Come down into my study. We can talk more comfortably there."
When the Professor had given his guest a cigar and lit his pipe, he
said quite abruptly: "It is about the Zastrow affair."

If he had said it was about the last Grand Ducal plot in the Peterhof,
M. Hendry could not have been inwardly more astonished. Outwardly the
Professor might have mentioned the last commonplace murder. Only his
eyelids lifted a little as he replied:

"Ah, indeed? Well, really, Professor, you must forgive me for saying
that that is about the very last matter I should have expected you to
have brought up. All the world knows you as one of its most
distinguished men of science, now, of course, more distinguished than
ever; but I hardly think any one would have expected you to interest
yourself in political mysteries. I have a recollection of hearing or
reading somewhere that politics were your pet aversion."

"So they are," replied Franklin Marmion, with a short laugh. "I consider
ordinary politics--juggling with phrases to delude the ignorance and
flatter the prejudices of the mob, and bartering principles for place
and power--to be about the most contemptible vocation a man can descend
to, but those are low politics in more senses than one. Now high
politics, as a psychological study, to an outsider are a very different
matter. But I am digressing. I did not invite you here to discuss
trivialities like these. I want to ask you--of course, you will not
answer me unless you like--whether you are connected, professionally or
otherwise, with the Zastrow affair?"

M. Hendry looked down at the toes of his perfectly-shaped boots for a
moment or two. Then he raised his head and said good-humouredly:

"Professor, I know that there is no more honourable man in the world
than you, but even from you I must ask frankly your reasons for asking
that question?"

"You have a perfect right to do that, my dear sir," was the quiet reply.
"If you say 'yes,' I am anxious to help you: if you say 'no,' I should
like you to help me: if you don't care to answer, there is an end of the
matter. Those are my reasons."

It took a good deal to astonish Nicol Hendry, but he was considerably
astonished now. Yet it was impossible to have the remotest doubt of
Franklin Marmion's absolute earnestness. But why should he of all men on
earth want to unravel the Zastrow mystery? What interest save the merest
curiosity could he have in the matter? And yet he was by no means the
sort of man to be merely curious. The very strangeness of his
proposition half-convinced him that there must be some other very strong
reason underlying those which he had given. Again, he was to be
perfectly trusted, so no harm could be done trying to discover if this
was so, since if he could help he would do so loyally. So he told him.

"Yes, Professor," he said, looking keenly into his eyes, "I am
interested in the _affaire_, professionally interested, and, I may add,
very deeply interested, to boot."

"I am glad to hear that," said Franklin Marmion with unexpected
earnestness. "Now, the next question is: Will you accept my assistance,
whatever it may be, under my own conditions, which are these: No one but
yourself shall know that I am helping you, and you yourself will not ask
me how I help you."

Once more a puzzle. Nicol Hendry thought for a few seconds before he
replied slowly:

"Yes, Professor. As long as you do help us I don't care either why or
how, for, as I may now be quite frank with you, we certainly want help
of some sort very badly. The papers are quite right for once. Neither
here nor on the Continent have we found a single clue worth picking up.
It is humiliating, but it is true."

"Then before you go I hope I shall be able to give you some that will be
worth picking up, and keeping too," said the scientist with a faint
smile; "at any rate, I think I can put you upon certain lines of enquiry
which you will find it profitable to trace out."

Nicol Hendry was an ambitious man, and he would have given a good deal
to have known what was passing in the other's mind just then, but his
expression betrayed nothing more than interested anticipation.

"We shall be entirely grateful to you if you will, Professor," he
murmured.

"I have no doubt of that, my dear sir. Now, to begin with: I presume
that there are photographs of the persons mentioned in the newspapers
as being in the Castle of Trelitz with the Prince on the last day that
he was known to be there?"

"Certainly; we should scarcely leave a simple preliminary like that
neglected," smiled Nicol Hendry. "With the exception of the Frauelein
Hulda von Tyssen, the Princess' Lady of the Bedchamber, all have been
photographed for publication, and hers we have got through a private
source. The Chief of each of our Departments has a copy of them, and I
happen to have mine in my pocket now, if you would like to see them. The
Princess, of course, you must have seen. She is in every photographer's
window in the West End."

"Oh yes, I have seen her. Who has not? She is a singularly beautiful
woman. But I should very much like to see the others, if I may."

The Chef de Bureau looked at him sharply as he took a small square
morocco case out of his inner pocket and opened it. Going to a little
table he spread out five small unmounted photographs upon it. He put two
of them on one side, saying:

"Those, of course, you know; they are the Prince and Princess. This one
is Count Ulik von Kessner, High Chamberlain of Boravia; this, Captain
Alexis Vollmar; and this is Frauelein von Tyssen."

Franklin Marmion looked at them with much more than ordinary interest,
for he recognised all five as clearly as though he had just left them in
his own dining-room.

"There are no suspicions attaching to any of these people, I suppose?"
he said carelessly.

"My dear Professor," replied Nicol Hendry a little coldly, "those who
write stories about our profession always say that it is our invariable
rule to suspect everybody, but we have a little common-sense, and we
know the records of these ladies and gentlemen in the minutest detail
from the Prince himself to Frauelein Hulda. We have not the slightest
reason to suspect any of them."

"Ah, just so," said the other musingly; "no, of course you wouldn't
have, and, unfortunately, I cannot tell you why you should. But I'll
tell you this: if you ever do find cause to suspect any of these
persons, you will find that this group is not complete. It ought to
contain the photograph of Prince Oscar Oscarovitch."

"Prince Oscar Oscarovitch!" exclaimed Nicol Hendry, staring at him this
time with wide-open eyes. "Why on earth should you----"

"Pardon me, my dear sir," interrupted Franklin Marmion gently, "remember
that you are not supposed to care anything about the why or the how. I
have already explained that I cannot explain."

"A thousand pardons, Professor. I don't often forget myself, but I did
then. You took me so utterly by surprise."

"I fancy that you will be a good deal more surprised before you have
come to the end of this affair," was the smiling but almost exasperating
reply; "but, as I implied, I can only give you clues. I cannot even
tell you how I get them, and it is for you to follow them or not as your
judgment dictates. Now, here are one or two to go on with. Try and find
out whether or not there was a four-funnelled Russian destroyer anywhere
in the neighbourhood of Trelitz on the night of the 6th. Trace as
closely as you can the movements of Prince Oscarovitch on that and the
two preceding days. Try and find out whether or not a large closed
chariot something like a barouche, drawn by four black horses, went from
anywhere in the direction of the Castle on that day. And lastly, keep a
very close eye upon the Egyptian Adept, as he calls himself--his name is
Phadrig Amena--who worked those alleged miracles at my daughter's
garden-party the other day. The Prince practically invited himself, and
brought this fellow with him. If you can find out the true relationship
between them I think you will have found out enough to keep you rather
busy for the present. If you do think anything of these little points
and examine them, let me know how you get on. We are going abroad for a
bit of a holiday, but I will send you my address every now and then.
Now, let us go back into the drawing-room, and my daughter will give us
some tea."

When Nicol Hendry left "The Wilderness" that afternoon he was about the
most mystified man in London. After he had gone, Franklin Marmion said
to Nitocris:

"Well, Niti, what do you think of our gimlet-eyed friend? Will he do?"

"Yes, Dad; I like his manner, and he seems very clever in his own way.
Quite a gentleman, too," she replied.

"I'm glad you think that," he added; "but what a pity it is that we
could not get the world to accept fourth dimensional evidence without
turning the said world inside out. We could clear up the whole _affaire_
Zastrow in a week then."

"But we shouldn't enjoy our holiday as much, I'm afraid, it would be too
exciting," concluded Nitocris.




CHAPTER XVIII

MURDER BY SUGGESTION


Two days later the Marmions left London for Copenhagen, whence they
intended to take a trip among the Baltic Islands, now looking their
brightest and prettiest, then up along the Norwegian Fiords, just before
the tourist rush began, and finally across from Trondjem to Iceland.
They were both excellent sailors, and both disliked crowds, especially
when the said crowds were pleasure-hunting. Moreover, they had now a
particular reason for being alone that they might enjoy together--they,
the only two mortals who could do so--the countless marvels of that new
existence which had now become possible for them. Where, too, could they
do this to more advantage than in the ancient Northland, whose
marvellous past would now be to them even as the present of their own
temporal lives?

The Van Huysmans, and, of course, Lord Lester Leighton, were to remain
in London until the end of the Season. Uncle Ephraim had cabled warm
congratulations and large credits, and so Brenda, very naturally as a
newly-engaged girl and a prospective Countess, wanted all that London
and Ranelagh and Henley, Ascot and Goodwood and Cowes, could give her
before her devoted lover's yacht carried them off to the Mediterranean.
Later in the autumn they were all to go over to the States to spend the
winter in Washington and New York, whence they were to return to London
for the wedding in May: surely as pleasant a programme--I fear that Miss
Brenda spelt it "program"--as could be desired even by a fair maiden
upon whom the kindly Fates had already showered their choicest gifts.
The only bitter drop in the family cup of content was the fact that
Professor van Huysman was as far away as ever from the exposure of the
fallacy which, as he was immovably convinced, those abominable
demonstrations _must_ contain.

After due consultation between Nicol Hendry and his colleagues of
France, Germany, and Russia, it was decided to follow up the clues which
he had so mysteriously received. The others would, of course, have been
very glad to know where and how he got them, but at the outset he had
put them on their honour not to ask, and so professional etiquette made
it impossible for them to do anything but accept his assurance that he
had received them from a source which was quite beyond reproach. Once
they accepted the situation, they got to work with a quiet thoroughness
which resulted in the spreading of an invisible but unbreakable net
round the footsteps of every one of the suspects from the great
Oscarovitch himself to the humble seller of curios in Candler's Court,
and his still humbler friends Pent-Ah and Neb-Anat, who were known to
the few who knew them as Mr and Mrs Pentana, renovators, and, possibly
manufacturers, of ancient gems and relics.

But to one pair of eyes, at least, the police-net was as plainly visible
as a spider's web hanging in the sunlight.

Within three days Phadrig received a visit from a shabbily-dressed but
well-to-do Jew trader with whom he had done business before, who wanted
to know if he could put him in the way of getting some really good old
Egyptian gems and jewellery to show on approval to a wealthy patron who
wanted to give his daughter a set of rare and uncommon ornaments on her
wedding day. It was by this means, by acting as an intermediary between
those who had something to sell and those who wished to buy, that
Phadrig was supposed to make his modest living. His knowledge of Eastern
antiquities was admittedly great, though, of course, no one knew how
great, and he had often been asked why, instead of living in such a
wretched way, he did not start a little business for himself; to which
he always replied that he had no capital, and that he preferred
independence, however poor, to the cares and ties of regular trading.

When the Jew had stated his business, Phadrig looked at him with sleepy
eyes with a strange expression in them which, for some reason or other,
held his visitor's usually shifty gaze fixed, and said in a slow, gentle
voice:

"It is very kind of you, Mr Josephus, to bring me all these nice little
commissions. They are of much benefit to a poor student of antiquities
like myself, although I do not like trading in things that I love.
Still, one must live if one would study. Now, I had a gem sent to me the
other day which I would dearly love to possess, but, alas! as well might
I long for the Koh-i-Noor itself. Moreover, it is already promised--nay,
as good as sold. But what have the poor to do with such splendours save
to help the rich to buy them!"

The Jew's prominent eyes shone with an inward light at the mention of
the gem, and he said in a coaxing voice:

"My dear Phadrig, we have always been friends for ever so long, and you
say I've been a good customer to you. Might I have a look at that gem?
You know how fond I am of the pretty things. Have you got it here?"

"Yes, and you shall see it with pleasure, my good Josephus," replied
Phadrig, well knowing the thought that was in his mind when he asked if
he had the gem there in that shabby, unprotected room.

He went to the old oak secretaire, unlocked a cupboard at the side, and
then a drawer within it, followed in every motion by the gleaming eyes
of the Jew, and took from it a leather parcel. He undid this and
produced a box, about four inches long and three wide, of plain black
polished wood. It looked solid, but Phadrig made a swift motion with his
fingers, and one half of it slid off the other. He held it towards his
visitor, and said:

"What do you think of that as a specimen of ancient art, Mr Josephus?"

The Jew looked. The inside of the box seemed filled with green light
tinted with yellow. Out of the midst of it began to shine a deeper green
light which crystallised into the most glorious emerald that he had ever
even dreamt of. It was fully an inch square, flawless, and of perfect
colour. The yellow sheen came from a framework of heavy,
exquisitely-wrought gold. Phadrig took it out and held it before him,
and the green light seemed to radiate through the dull atmosphere of the
room. The Jew stared at it with bulging eyes and trembling under-lip,
and his hands went out towards it with a gesture which seemed like
worship.

"God of Israel," he gasped, "was anything so splendid ever seen before!
Mr Phadrig, is it--is it real?"

"Real?" echoed the Egyptian scornfully. "Did you ever see light like
that come out of a sham stone? You should know more about gems than
that, Mr Josephus."

"Ah yes, yes, of course. It is glorious; it is worthy to shine on the
breastplate of the High Priest--and what a price it must be! Is it
allowed to ask the name of the great millionaire for whom it is
destined?"

