"Well, run along then, and I'll get at that letter. Meanwhile get your
things packed, so you'll be ready to leave when the ship comes. And
George, my boy, I do hope you come back. It'll be mighty lonely here
without you."

"I'll certainly do my best to get back, sir. Goodnight, and thanks
again ... for everything."

Hanlon hated that seeming lie, and as he walked slowly back to his room
he determined to get the man away from those plotters, and into a better
and more legitimate position.

He would certainly so recommend to the Secret Service High Command after
this mess was cleaned up.

The next days Hanlon spent almost his entire shift-time underground
talking earnestly to Geck.

"I want to impress on the minds of you and all the natives here that
I'll be working my hardest for them every minute I'm gone," he said
impressively. "Don't let them do anything foolish unless or until it
becomes completely sure that I've failed. If I can do anything at all,
it should be within a quarter year after I leave, and probably much
sooner. If I succeed, you'll all be free, and these men either chased
off your planet or killed."

"All we understand, An-yon. We know you are true friend, know you want
to help us. We will keep working, make no attempts to escape. We know if
do we just be killed, or hunted and caught again. Condition of we before
you come so bad we had come to feel only end for us be death of race.
Now you bring hope. Now we know most humans good people, so we wait in
hope you soon succeed."

"That's the spirit. I know it's tough on all of you, but I also know
what the Inter-Stellar Corps is, and what they can and will do when they
learn of your plight."

He linked his mind with Geck's as the latter telepathed the natives in
other parts of the planet, and was thus enabled to get final
descriptions of what they could tell of what was being done at each mine
and factory and shipyard. He knew exactly how many ships had been built
or were under construction, and approximately how far along the hulls of
the big ones were completed. He was also able to get a very good general
knowledge of the size and structural description of each type of vessel.

But of their armaments or propulsive methods he had not been able to get
any information--such things were too far beyond the natives' simple
abilities to describe or picture for him.

Hanlon's ability to telepath, through Geck, was growing much stronger,
although he was still not able to telepath direct to any of the distant
Guddus. He could, however, do so to some extent to one close by.

But he still could not read anything in a human mind except the surface
thoughts. And how he could use that ability! With that, his task would
be much simpler.

But he had learned to be content with what he had, realizing it was
undoubtedly unique in human history. It had brought him this far along,
and he had collected a lot of information which he could not have gained
in any other manner--information that he could report to the Corps as
soon as he got back to Simonides and had the chance to go to the bank or
contact them in some other way.

"Liberation Day," as Hanlon had taken to calling it in his mind, finally
arrived. He was all packed and waiting for the ship. When it was sighted
he and Philander went to the field to meet it.

When the captain came out, the three stood in conversation while the
crew hurriedly unloaded the supplies they had brought, and those leaving
had gone aboard. The captain handed Philander some letters, but the
latter shoved them in his pocket for the time beings without stopping to
look at them.

Finally it was time for blast-off, and Hanlon said his last farewells to
the superintendent, then went in to stow his bags in his stateroom and
prepare for take-off. He had expected to be locked in again, and merely
tried the door out of curiosity. But to his surprise it wasn't locked,
so he went out. He was wise enough not to attempt to invade the control
room, but did hunt up a viewing-screen and strap himself into the chair
before it.

He manipulated the dials and had just got an outside view as the pilot
began activating the tubes. Hanlon saw Philander come running from the
little path through the jungle, back toward the field, waving a letter,
trying to attract attention.

But evidently neither the captain, pilot nor any watch officer saw him,
for at that moment the great wash of flame from the tubes blotted out
the scene, and Hanlon was forced deeply into his acceleration chair as
the ship lifted gravs.

The trip back was uneventful. Hanlon kept careful track of the time, and
strained all his spaceman's senses properly to evaluate their speed. As
the ship braked for the landing on Simonides he completed his
calculations, and was quite sure the distance between the two planets
was twelve and a quarter light years, plus or minus not over two
percent, and that Algon was somewhere near right ascension eighteen
hours, and declination plus fifteen degrees.

As he passed through the airlock and started down the plank, he was
surprised and a bit dismayed to see Panek and two of the other gunmen he
had seen in that back room, waiting for him, their faces impassive and
unreadable.

"A welcoming committee, eh?" he greeted them with a smile that tried to
cover his disappointment. "Hiya, Panek! Hi, fellows!"

But his heart was doing flip-flops. These men were not here just because
they were glad to see him, of that he was sure. He probed their minds
and even before Panek spoke, he knew.

"The boss sent us to bring you to see him first thing, the boss did,"
Panek's voice was gruff, yet somewhat friendly.

"That's mighty nice of him," Hanlon tried not to let his feelings show,
but to take this as a natural courtesy. But he had so much wanted to get
to the bank immediately. "I was coming to report, of course," he
commented. "Got a letter for him from Superintendent Philander. Besides,
I got a flock of credits coming. Boy, did I earn 'em! That's a stinking,
hot planet up there. It'll be good seeing the bright lights again,
besides living in a decent climate once more."

The two men grunted a mysterious laugh, but Panek merely indicated the
way to the aircar. Again Hanlon was blindfolded, but now he didn't
care--he knew the location of this crater field.

There was silence during most of the trip. Hanlon babbled away at first,
but when no one answered him he gradually slowed his words and finally
shut up entirely.

His mind probings told him he was in for a rough time, and he got the
feeling he was not supposed to be there at all, for some reason.

"Oh, oh!" he thought, almost in panic. "Something's wrong. Did I slip
somewhere? Have they got wind of what I've learned? But how ... how
could they?"

Instead of taking him to the back room of the Bacchus, Hanlon found when
the blindfold was finally removed that he was in a stone-walled room
that he sensed was a sort of cellar in some huge building. It was bare
of furniture except for two chairs and the glo-lights, one of which was
on a standard like a spotlight.

Before he had time to try to puzzle things out, the door opened and the
man he had thought of merely as "the leader" came in and sat down in one
of the chairs. He gestured, and the men pushed Hanlon into the facing
seat, and adjusted the glo-light so it shone in his eyes. Then ranged
themselves behind him.

"So, you got back?" the Leader said softly.

"Sure," Hanlon made himself act as though nothing was out of the way,
but it was an effort to smile and talk naturally when his mouth was
suddenly dry and his nerves tightened almost to the screaming point. "My
time was up, so Mr. Philander sent me back. I've got a letter for you
from him."

He started to reach into his pocket, but Panek slapped his hand down,
and snaked the letter out, handing it to the Leader, who opened it and
read it silently.

Then the man looked up, his face puzzled. "You seem to
have ... uh ... done very well there," he said almost pleasantly. "Our
superintendent reports you made an excellent guard. He seems very pleased
with you."

"I told you I'd do everything I could to make good," Hanlon answered,
but now he made his voice sound very aggrieved. "What's the big idea of
all this? Seems like a mighty funny reception, after I tried so hard.
Why that light in my eyes, and those thugs ready to slug me if I bat an
eye-lash. It's almost like you don't trust me, or something?"

"I'm still not altogether sure we do," the Leader said slowly.

"Still harping on that?" Hanlon demanded hotly. "What makes you think
I'm not on the up and up? I worked hard on that stinking hot planet. I
got out more ore'n anyone else ever did. And my suggestion about
nitrates ..."

"Ah, yes, the matter of the ... uh ... fertilizer. What made you bring
that up?"

"The minute I saw those Greenies I guessed they were animated trees.
When I saw how they fed themselves by sticking their fingers in the hut
floor, I figured the dirt would gradually lose whatever nourishment it
contained, same as a farmer's fields soon lose their fertility. All
plants I know about extract nitrogen and other minerals from the soil.
So I figured the Greenies would need fertilizer to make up for the
depleted soil in their huts. It seemed simple to me."

"Ummm. You were right, apparently. It was a great contribution to our
work, and we are grateful." He looked at Hanlon a long moment, then
asked sharply, "How did Rellos die?"

"A dog tore out his throat."

"We know that--but you said you killed him."

"Who d'you suppose sicced the dog on him? We were walking down the
street, and I kicked the dog's pup to death. When she charged, I pushed
Rellos in her path, and it was him the dog killed."

"Ah! Good! Very unusual! Most ... uh ... ingenious!" The Leader seemed
pleased, but slowly his smile died and he frowned again. "All this makes
me want to believe you, Hanlon, but somehow I can't seem to rid myself
of the belief that you still are connected with the Corps. Oh, I know,"
as Hanlon started to protest, "all about your dismissal and disgrace,
and the fight you had with some of your former classmates a few days
later. Incidentally, wasn't it rather straining coincidence that it was
an admiral who came along just in time to save you? You see, all that
could easily have been done on purpose. I'm ... uh ... not that simple,
young man."

"No, but you're nuts, figuring that way!" disgustedly.

"I think you will find out differently," the tone sent shivers through
the young SS man's nerves, and he had difficulty controlling the impulse
to wet his suddenly dry lips. "I may be wrong--I hope most sincerely
that I am--but I haven't so far been able to bring myself to feel so.
But I intend to know for sure before we leave this room. Panek, bring in
our other ... uh ... guest."

Hanlon heard the gunman leave, and in a moment return. He appeared in
Hanlon's line of vision, pushing before him a manacled man.

At sight of that other man, Hanlon had to gasp.




Chapter 19


"Oh!" the Leader said triumphantly as he saw George Hanlon's start of
surprise. "I see you recognize our guest."

"Sure I know him," Hanlon snapped, rigidly forcing himself into control.
"That's Abrams. I thought I killed him."

"Ah, now, did you so?" Again the Leader smiled, but this time grimly.
"Now we come to the meat of the matter. You say you thought you killed
him, but you know you didn't. Your pretended assassination in such a
clever manner was all a ruse--you didn't poison him at all. You merely
pretended to put something in his cup."

"That's a lie. Maybe it didn't work on him, but I did ..."

"Sorry, Mr. Hanlon," the trembling Abrams whined the interruption. "I
was forced to tell the whole story to His Highness after he found out
where I was hiding."

His Highness!

So this was the fabulous monster of whom everyone was so afraid.
Hanlon's heart sank to his knees. What chance did he have now? He would
never get out of this alive, nor get his report to the Corps.

"Yes, Mr. Hanlon," that silky voice mimicked meaningly, and venomously.
"We have ... uh ... ways of making people talk. This Abrams, like a
fool, was not content to continue working as my secretary. He had to get
foolish notions of ethics and patriotism, and try to ... uh ... object
to some of my policies. Why did you let him think you were still a
Corpsman ... if you're not?" he snapped suddenly.

Hanlon made himself stare back insolently. Maybe they would kill
him ... no, be honest, undoubtedly they would ... but by the Shade of
Snyder they weren't going to make him show the fear he felt.

"Use your head, Pal. I had to make an impression on Panek so he'd
introduce me to someone here on Sime who'd show me how to make some
fast, big money, which is all I'm after," he retorted with a bravado he
certainly didn't feel, but which he hoped would make them think he did.
"When I found Panek was going to bump off Abrams, I horned in on it. And
what easier way to make Abrams play ball with me--I had nothing against
him, and didn't want to really kill him--than to let him think I was
still a Corpsman, after he'd seen me when I was still a cadet. I didn't
know he'd turn yellow and squeal."

He looked contemptuously at Abrams, then turned back to the leader and
made his voice very earnest, very emphatic. "But I've told you the
truth! I am not still connected with that rotten outfit, and you're
wrong if you think I am!"

"Don't lie to His Highness!" Panek interjected. "He don't like to be
lied to--he don't like it."

"Aw shut up and keep out of this, small fry!" Hanlon sneered, and was
rewarded with a hard blow on the side of his head that made him wince.
But His Highness intervened.

"That will do, Panek. I'll handle this. Now, Hanlon, I think you had
better do some very serious thinking. You can see why we are still
skeptical of you. Everything points against you ... uh ... except your
own word, and the fact that you so apparently did work hard and for our
best interests at the mine. That point, I readily grant you, is very
much in your favor. I am being very patient with you because, if you are
telling the truth, you can be a very valuable man to me. You do have
real ability, and other assets. But if you are not wholly for us, you
are distinctly in our way."

"I tell you ..."

"Don't interrupt, please. I might inform you that I sent you to the
other planet both to test you and to keep you out of the way while we
investigated further and I could reach a decision. You were not supposed
to come back yet. I sent Philander a letter to that effect, but he
space-radioed you were already on the way back when he read it."

A light dawned on Hanlon as memory skipped back to that take-off.
Philander had merely stuck the mail in his pocket when it was given him,
and evidently started reading it on his way back to the mine. That
explained his running back, waving a letter and trying to attract
attention just at blast-off.

That small part of his mind that was paying attention to the men in the
room heard His Highness say "take Abrams away. He ... uh ... is of no
further use to us. And wait outside until I call--all of you."

When they had gone His Highness leaned forward, and Hanlon knew he had
better pay strict attention and keep his wits about him for any opening
to improve his perilous position.

"I'll speak more frankly, now that we are alone, Hanlon. I am impressed
with you. I think you have ... uh ... tremendous abilities, and I want
you on my side. But I have to be sure. I would advise you, for your own
good, to be honest and frank with me."

"I am being, but you won't believe me," Hanlon said earnestly. "When I
take a man's pay, sir, I give him everything I've got. You gave me a
chance at the kind of money I want to make, and I'm doing everything I
can to earn both the money and your trust. I was kicked out of the
Corps, and I'll do _anything_ I can to get even!"

"As I said before, we have ... uh ... ways of making you tell us the
truth," the Leader continued as though Hanlon had not interrupted, "but
you would not be any good either to us or the Corps or yourself if we
have to use ... uh ... persuasion. I don't want to see you broken. You
may remember you once asked me if I could 'dish it out'? Let me assure
you that I can."

"But how can I prove anything when you've already made up your mind not
to believe me?" Hanlon asked plaintively. "I'm doing my best to make you
believe. I'll admit some of those points you've brought up could look
fishy if viewed from one standpoint, but I assure you you're putting the
wrong interpretation on them. If you'll look at them from my viewpoint
you'll see they are just as true."

His Highness regarded Hanlon silently but with a steady concentration
for some minutes. "That might be true. I had about begun to believe you
when we found Abrams, and when we questioned him he ... uh ... admitted
what you had done, and why. That revived my doubts. Are you willing to
be tested under a truth drug?"

Hanlon almost gasped in dismay, but stifled it. He knew only too well
the efficacy of modern truth drugs. They would reveal every thought and
bit of knowledge he had ever had--all about the Corps, the Secret
Service and everything.

That hurt look came back into his face. "You sure are asking a lot,
sir," he said. "I haven't anything to conceal from you, but no man likes
to have his whole mind invaded that way--all his private thoughts and
feelings. I don't see why you need suggest such a thing. I've told you
the truth on matters you want to know about."

"You appear to have done so, and I honestly want to believe you. For you
see, Hanlon, I want you with me. You're my kind of a man. I like you
because you have tremendous drive and imagination and ability--yes,
and perhaps a bit because you're the only man I've ever met who
wasn't ... uh ... afraid of me. I have tremendous plans for the
future--and I would like to have you as my chief aide in them. I would
train you as you've never guessed it possible for a man to be trained.
And then, _together, Hanlon, we could rule the Universe_!"

But George Hanlon was only half-listening, even to that last, that
shocking, that totally unexpected proposition, his real goal. Here was
the plot he had been seeking, the plot the Corps needed so desperately
to know. Yet his personal crisis was, for the moment, more important if
he was ever to be of any further benefit to the Secret Service or the
Corps. To use his just-discovered knowledge, something else must come
first.

His mind, therefore, was seeking a way out. He well knew that once the
truth drug was administered--and this Highness would not now be
satisfied with anything less--he was as good as dead. They would find
out the truth in minutes, and then would have no other recourse but to
kill him.

His spirits sank to nadir with the knowledge that he had
failed ... failed the Secret Service and the Corps, failed his father,
failed the Guddus, failed himself. Curiously, perhaps, at that moment
the thought of failure was far more important to him than the imminence
of death, as such.

He had half-consciously noticed when he first glanced about this room,
that there was a small ventilator near the ceiling in one corner.
Desperately he pushed his mind through it, and could sense that it
opened onto a park-like place, probably around one of the city's
palaces.

Hanlon finally heard His Highness call, "Panek, you and the others bring
me the hypodermic. We'll have to give him the truth serum. I'm sorry,
Hanlon," he addressed himself now to the young man, "but this is the
only way. I hope we won't have to use enough to harm you, but that
depends on your co-operation. If you will tell us the truth quickly and
willingly I can, as I said ... uh ... use you, and you will profit
greatly by it."

Hanlon didn't struggle when they bound him firmly in the chair with
manacles on hands and feet. He knew it would be useless anyway. He let
his body slump into his chair, and again directed his mind through that
vent. He must not let them defeat him! He had to survive--to get
word--to the Corps!

Then his searching mind contacted another--a weak, primitive one, but a
mind. Avidly he fastened onto it, merged with it ... and found himself
inside the brain of one of those Simonidean pigeons.

Ah! This is wonderful! Pigeons seldom fly alone. Where you find one you
almost always find a number. Activating the bird's brain he sent out a
call to others of its kind that it had found food in abundance. Soon
more and more of them flew down to where the now enslaved pigeon was
standing, and as each one came, Hanlon sent into its brain all of his
mind it would hold.

Inside the cellar room His Highness rose and stepped up to Hanlon's
body, the hypodermic in his hand. "Remove his coat and roll up his
sleeve," he directed Panek, and the small part of Hanlon's mind still
remaining in his body felt the latter doing so, and an instant later,
the prick of the needle.

Slowly at first, then with increasing swiftness he felt his remaining
mind growing numb and his will weaken. His body slumped against the
