The use of that intelligence to know, to understand, instead of a denial
of it?"

Louie twisted out of Cal's embracing arm, and ran stumbling toward the
depths of the forest.




23


For another week, perhaps ten days or more, since time measurement had
lost its meaning, Cal lived among the colonists, watched their complete
retrogression into a state of unawareness. Even the speech which they
had retained seemed now to thin and falter as the simplifying of their
idea-content no longer required its use.

Only Tom and Jed seemed to retain their orientation to the past, the
clarity of awareness. These two spent much time together, seemed always
available when Cal needed them, yet did not intrude upon his thought.
Frank now seemed one with the colonists. Louie lived on the outskirts of
the herd, near the colonists but not of them. He had ceased to exhort,
warn, command, argue. His face was closed, told nothing of what he was
thinking.

And he had ceased to demand his tithe as intercessor. He was gathering
his own food, catching his own fish.

And he seldom let Cal out of his sight.

Tom and Jed helped as best they could by maintaining contact with the
old reality. They spent much of the daytime with the colonists. At night
they turned their faces to the dark sky to watch the ships, now grown to
four, bathed in the light of Ceti like a constellation of bright stars
above them. They read the intermittent flashes of light from McGinnis,
and from the E.H.Q. laboratory. McGinnis told of the police ship's
attempts to break through the barrier surrounding Eden, and its
failure. The laboratory told of Linda's presence on board, and now and
then flashed out a message to Cal from Linda of her love, her nearness,
her faith in him, her desire to be with him, her patience in waiting.

McGinnis told of the arrival of a fifth ship, carrying Gunderson in
person. He had been unable to believe his police captain. Unable to
believe that the ship could not land at will. He had come in person to
take charge, and apparently fumed his frustration in idleness, unable to
do anything with the situation, unwilling to go back to Earth and leave
it alone.

Tom and Jed told Cal the content of these messages, but to Cal the
reports of the police activity seemed noises heard from far away and
unrelated to himself. The messages from Linda seemed the haunting
strains of a song remembered from long ago.

For his mind was wholly enrapt with the problem. He had been given the
key--reality is a matter of proportion, change the concept of proportion
and you change the material form--but he had not found the lock and the
door it would open. He knew it, but he couldn't do it.

Perhaps Tom might help? Tom was well-grounded in math, had to be for his
job as pilot.

"Look, Tom," Cal said one morning after they had given him the night's
messages from the ships. He squatted on the ground and brushed away some
leaves from an area of dirt. "Watch the equals sign." He scratched a
formula in the dirt:

    "2 + 2 = 4"

The = changed to : . Then to {d}. Then through the series of variable
relationships.

Tom leaped to his feet from the log where he had been sitting.

"That's crazy," he exclaimed. "It isn't just proportionate, it isn't
variable. It equals."

Jed was looking from one to the other, obviously at a loss.

"Well," Cal said drily, "I'm much more interested in what They have to
say than in trying to convince Them that They're wrong."

"But if everything were only proportionate and variable," Tom argued,
"then you'd have nothing fixed, constant. Why the proportionate
relationship might be dependent solely upon choice. Nothing would be
solid, dependable."

"Not even the footprints under your feet," Cal answered softly. "Not a
house, nor a field of grain, nor a spaceship. Simply alter the choice of
proportion--and they aren't there anymore."




24


Throw a key at the feet of a turkey and it is useless to him. Show him
the lock it fits, and it is still useless without the knowledge of how
to insert the key and turn it. Unlock it for him, and still it is
useless without the knowledge of how to push or pull the door.

This was the essence of why so few mastered the simple steps of physical
science, the essence of why so few were able to get beyond step two of E
science. Anyone could disagree with a statement, but in answer to "What
if it not be true, how then to account for the phenomena?" most bogged
down at that point, unable to demonstrate with evidence the validity of
some other answer.

Everyone knew the equation E = MC^2, but few could implement it to build
an atomic power plant.

Perhaps the reactions of Tom, that taking away the concept of a balanced
equation destroyed all certainty, and therefore was not to be
countenanced, was a reflection of his own reaction, willing though he
might be to consider something else.

In his wanderings about the island, picking fruits and nuts, stems and
leaves, catching fish when he hungered, drinking the clear water of the
stream when he thirsted, yet so enrapt that he was unaware he was taking
care of his body's needs, Cal built up whole structures of alien
philosophies on the nature of the universe, and saw them topple of their
own weight.

Until, at last, he realized the basic flaw in all his reasoning. He was
too well-grounded in the essence of physical science, and all physical
science was built on the balanced equation. Even in trying to consider
the unbalanced equation, he had been attempting to determine the exact
nature of the unbalance, and to supply it as an X factor on the other
side of the equation to restore balance.

To restore balance was to maintain the status quo of physical reality.
To turn the key in the lock, to open the door, he must change the
physical reality to balance the equation, rather than supply the X
factor to keep reality unchanged.

But how to do it still eluded him.

At times, as if seeing partial diagrams, he seemed very close to a
solution. At times it seemed the printed card of an electronic wiring
was necessary only because the human mind could not visualize the whole
without that aid, that music did not come through because in incomplete
visualization some little part was left dangling, unconnected. And the
long history of non-science belief in the magic properties of cabalistic
signs and designs rose up to taunt him, to goad him with the possibility
that perhaps man had once come close to the answer of how to control
physical properties without the use of tools; that the development of a
physical science had taken man down a sidetrack instead of farther along
the direct route toward his goal.

Or that man had once been shown, and never understood, or forgot. Yet
kept alive the memory that physical shifts could be changed if he could
only draw the right design.

Through his wanderings, one fact gradually intruded upon his mind. It
seemed the farther inland he roamed, the closer he came to grasping the
problem; the nearer the seashore, the more it eluded him.

One morning he looked up at the glittering heights of Crystal Palace
Mountain, and suddenly he resolved to climb it. Perhaps the winds of
the mountain being stronger, the fuzziness of his thought would be blown
away? Perhaps the arrangement of the crystalline structures, the arches
and spires, might catch his brain waves, modulate them, transform them,
strengthen them, feed them back, himself a part of the design instead of
outside it?

In the framework of physical science a nonsense notion. But what harm to
try?

He sought out Tom and Jed, the two who would miss him, the two who would
care.

"There ain't no water up there, far as I know," Jed said. "And you can't
carry none, now. Me and a party scouted the mountain once. It's mighty
purty, but useless. The quartz ain't valuable enough to cover its
shipping costs back to Earth. The ground is too rocky to farm. Not much
in the way of food growing there. So we never went back."

"The scientists surveyed it when the planet was first discovered," Cal
said. "One of the first places they went because it was so outstanding.
But they found nothing interesting and useful either. Still, I think
I'll go."

"Well," Jed said with a shrug. "You can't get lost. If you should lose
your bearings, just walk downhill and you'll come to food and water.
Follow the shore line until you get back, either direction. And, I
reckon, the way things go now, you ain't goin' to hurt yourself. We
won't worry about you none. We're all gettin' along all right, so you
needn't worry about us either."

"You want me to come with you, Cal?" Tom asked.

"No," Cal answered, "I think better if I'm alone."

He left them then, went past some colonists who were picking berries and
eating them, and on up the valley that ran between two ridges.

It was only a few miles to the foothills, a gradual rise of the valley
floor, a gradual shallowing and narrowing of the stream, a gradual
drawing in of the spokelike ridges until the valley at last became a
ravine. The morning air was clear and still, the scent of flowers and
ripening fruit was sweet.

Before he left the ravine to begin his climb he ate some of the fruit,
and washed the lingering sweet taste from his mouth with a long, cool
drink of water from one of the many springs that fed the stream.

He looked up at the mountain above him, and his eye picked out the most
likely approach to its summit. It was not a high mountain, not in terms
of those tremendous, tortured skin folds of other planets. Hardly more
than a high hill in terms of those. Nor, as far as he could see, would
the climb be difficult or hazardous.

The fanciful thought of Mount Olympus on Earth came into his mind,
although this one was not so inaccessible, so parched and barren. The
gods of Greece would have found this a pleasanter place, although they
might not have lived so long in the minds of man, since the mountain was
more easily climbed, and therefore man would have been the more easily
convinced after repeated explorations that no gods lived there after
all.

Would the Greeks, as with the later religions, have placed the site of
heaven farther and farther away, retreating reluctantly, as man explored
the earlier site and found no heaven there? Retreat after retreat until
at last the whole idea was patently ridiculous?

Dead are the gods, forever dead, and yet--to what may man now turn in
rapture? In ecstasy? In communion? What, in all physical science, filled
the deep human need of these expressions?

The climb of the first slope, up to the crest of the ridge he intended
to follow, was quickly done. He turned there and looked behind him, at
the valley of the colonists below, and far down where the valley merged
into the sea, and far on out at the hazy purple line of another island.
As he started to turn back again, to resume his climb, his eye caught a
flash of something moving in the ravine below him, sunlight on brown,
bare skin.

He waited until he caught another glimpse through the trees. As he had
suspected it was Louie, still trying to keep him always in sight.

His first impulse was to call out, to wait for Louie, ask him to join in
the climb. He discarded the impulse. His need was to get away from all
others. And sympathetic and compassionate though he might be, the
confusion in Louie's mind seemed to intrude upon his own. Nor had his
earlier attempts to comfort Louie met success.

Let Louie follow if he willed. Perhaps the clean air would clear his
mind as well. He feared no physical harm, even if Louie's tortured mind
intended it. There were no tools to strike at him from a distance. Even
a boulder pushed from a height above him would not strike, for that
would be the physical use of a tool to gain an end. He feared no bodily
attack from ambush, for his own strength and knowledge were dependable.

He began his climb again, followed the crest of the ridge where it swept
upward to buttress the side of the mountain. The going was not
difficult. The trees and shrubs grew thinner here, and provided clear
spaces for him to wind among them. The stones, at first a problem to his
bare feet, bothered him less and less until he forgot them. He felt no
physical discomfort, neither from tiredness nor thirst, nor from the
branches scraping his bare skin, nor anything to drag his mind into
trivialities.

Nor tortured theories such as had plagued him in trying to reason out
the new concepts of a proportionate, variable reality.

Instead, there was a sense of well being, anticipated completeness, a
merging of the often quite separated areas of thought, intuition, and
appreciation.

Although at no great height, now the trees no longer grew so tall that
they obscured his vision of the heights above. As he climbed they were
replaced by shrubs shoulder high, then waist high, then merely low,
creeping growths which his feet avoided without mental direction.

A curve of the ridge brought him to the first outcroppings of
crystallized quartz. On them he saw no signs of scar left by the
geologist's hammer, no imperfections where nodes may have been broken
away. They were complete, singularly unweathered.

There was no path, nor hint of one, nor sign that either scientist or
colonist had ever passed this way.

The ridge swung back into line, and still he climbed, effortlessly and
without consciousness of passing time. Time and space and matter seemed
to have receded far into the background of consciousness. Man's
star-strewn civilization was no more than a dream. It was as if he,
alone and complete, occupied the whole of the universe, encompassed it
as he was encompassed by it.

Yet not alone! Their presence, which seemed so evanescent on the valley
floor, was closer now, more clearly sensed. Almost as if, at any
instant, the veil of blindness would disperse and They would stand
revealed.

Now up the final slope of the mountain he threaded his way through
higher outcroppings of a more perfectly formed quartz, with deeper
amethystine hue scintillating in the Ceti sun's light, diffracted not
only in the purples but into greens and reds and blues.

As he came around the base of one of these, there towering above he
caught his first full view of the greater spires, pinnacles, buttresses,
and arches of the mountain's crest.

It was the crystal palace.

The climb had been steep, steeper than it had appeared from below, yet
his breathing was not labored, his mouth was not dry from thirst, nor
were his muscles protesting the effort. He did not need to stop and
rest, to gather his energy for the last steep assault upon the peak.

Far below him he saw Louie toiling up a slope, then dropping with every
appearance of exhaustion when he came to each level place. Still he
would rest no more than a minute, and always his head was turned to keep
sight of Cal above him. He would push himself to his knees, then to his
feet; and slowly, step by step, begin his climb again.

As if from far away, Cal felt a pity at the uselessness of the
self-torture, the senseless need of man to punish himself for the guilt
of imagined wrongs; and felt a wonder if the strangely developed moral
sense of man had not, after all, done more harm than good. For in the
ordered universe, where everything fitted into the whole, what could be
either good or bad, right or wrong, except as a reflection of man's
inadequacies in his imaginings? Rightness and good, wrongness and evil,
these could not possibly be other than assessments of furtherance or
threat to the ascendancy of me-and-mine at the center of things, and had
no meaning beyond that context.

He turned from watching Louie, pitying him, and made the last sharp
climb with no more effort than the whole had been. Now he drew near to
the towering structures of the crest, now he was beside them. Now he
walked beneath and through an arch which seemed almost a gothic
entrance.

And stood transfixed in ecstasy.

Magnificent the dreams of man that took form in steel and stone and
glass, yet none matched the lightness, the grace, the intricacy, the
sublime simplicity of these interwoven crystalline structures where
light from the noonday sun separated prismatically until it filled the
air with myriads of living, darting, colored sparks of fire above him.
Where the breeze that blew through the vibrating spires made blended
sounds the ear could barely endure in rapture.

As once, in childhood, he had stood in a grove of giant trees that laced
their limbs in gothic splendor above him, now again he stood, lost in
time and space and being, lost in vision and in music which neither had
nor needed form nor beginning nor end.
