journal.

An agent of the Hinkley Knitting Machine Co., whose invention was
illustrated in these columns some weeks ago, writes:

It is now but ten days since its publication, yet without a single
advertisement in any paper I have been obliged to engage extra
assistance to simply inclose my circulars to parties, who are writing
and even _telegraphing_ for agencies and machines, while many
have traveled long distances to personally engage agencies. The
Superintendent of the Company makes similar _complaints_.

       *       *       *       *       *




HUNT'S IMPROVED STEAM PACKING PISTON.


Engineers are aware that there are more or less objections to the use
of the ordinary spring pistons, owing to the changing tension of the
springs, the necessity of frequent adjustment, and the impossibility of
the packing rings adapting themselves to the varying pressures of the
steam on the piston. A number of attempts have been made to produce a
self packing or steam expanding piston, which will act always with the
pressure of the steam and the velocity of the engine. The advantages
of such a piston will be readily appreciated by practical engineers,
especially drivers of locomotives, working, as they nearly all do, at a
very high pressure of steam. The general complaint against the several
packings in use on our railroads is, that they "pack too tight,"
and rapidly wear out the rings, while the only remedy has been, the
extremely uncertain one of contracting the openings by which steam is
admitted under the ring, or rings, to expand them. The obvious objection
to such an arrangement is, that it allows the steam to act on the rings
with its full force during slow motion, as when a train is starting,
while if effective under any circumstances, it will be so only at
comparatively high piston speed. The efficacy of such a remedy, if it
possesses any, is in fact inversely as the piston speed.

[Illustration: Fig.1]

Fig. 1 is a perspective of the piston itself, or the "spider," with its
follower and its rings removed, which are shown in Fig. 2. Fig. 3 is a
cross section of another form of the piston, to be presently described,
but which will serve to explain that shown in Figs. 1 and 2. Next to the
core of the spider are two narrow internal rings, A, in Figs. 1 and 3;
surrounding these two outer rings, B, the cross section of which is of
L-form, as seen in Fig. 3. The lips of these outer rings extend to the
whole thickness of the piston. The flange head of the piston, and also
the follower, are turned beveling on their edges to admit the steam
around the annular space thus formed under the rings, B. These spaces
are plainly exhibited at C, in Figs. 2 and 3. Both inner and outer rings
are adjusted to the bore of the cylinder by means of the gibs, D, and
set screws seen in Fig. 1.

[Illustration: Fig.2]

The section, Fig. 3, represents a modification intended for use in
vertical cylinders, if considered necessary. The additional center ring,
E, is intended to prevent leakage through the cut in the expanded ring
and over the face of the unexpanded one, which might occur when the
rings and cylinder should become so worn that the rings, when not
expanded, should collapse and leave the surface of the cylinder. The
rivets, F, shown by the dotted lines, are placed near the cuts in the
L-rings, and are intended to hold the outside and inside rings together
at that point, and prevent any tendency on the part of the latter
to collapse and let steam under that part of the L-rings. Probably,
however, if the packing is properly constructed and adjusted in the
first instance, these devices will be unnecessary. In horizontal
cylinders the weight of the piston, if properly supported on the set
screws and gibs, will accomplish these objects, if the cuts in the
L-rings are placed near the bottom side of the cylinder. The steam
enters the annular space between the beveled edges of the spider flange
and follower and the inner periphery of the overhanging part of the
L-rings, and acts only on that part.

[Illustration: Fig.3]

Patented by Nathan Hunt, Sept. 17, 1867. For further information address
the patentee, or Sharps, Davis & Bonsall, Salem, Ohio, who will furnish
piston heads to order on receipt of size of cylinder and piston rod.

       *       *       *       *       *




Improvement in Hand Drills.


There are frequent occasions in a machine shop where light drilling is
required on work it is inconvenient to bring to the lathe. For this the
Scotch or ratchet drill, if the job is heavy, is employed, and if
light, the breast drill. The placing and working of the former consumes
considerable time, and the labor of drilling with the breast drill is
excessive and exhausting. It is difficult also to hold the instrument so
steady as not to cramp and break the drill. The combination of the drill
with tongs and a pivoted bed piece, as seen in the engraving, obviates
these objections.

[Illustration: NEVERGOLD & STACKHOUSE'S TONGS DRILL.]

To the lower jaw, A, of a pair of tongs is pivoted a platen or bed, B,
having a hole through its center, which is continued through the jaw for
the passage of the drillings. The upper jaw is formed with a circular
flange on which is mounted the circular or disk-like base, C, of the
drill frame, D. This, with the frame, is secured on the jaw of the tongs
by means of two screw bolts--one seen in the engraving--passing through
the jaw and screwing into the base of the drill. These bolts pass
through semi-circular or segmental slots, by which the drill frame can
be swung around at different angles to the tongs, to adapt itself to the
convenience of the workman and the requirements of the work. If desired,
the crank by which the drill is driven may be used on the upright
spindle, E. It will be seen that the pivoted base or bed, B, will allow
the work to adapt itself always to the line of the drill.

In operation, the work being placed between the drill and platen, the
left hand presses the handles of the tongs together, while the right
turns the crank; the feed is thus graduated wholly by the pressure of
the hand. No further description is required for understanding the
construction or operation of this tool. Patented by F. Nevergold and
George Stackhouse, June 19, 1866. Applications for the whole right, or
for territorial rights, should be addressed to the latter at Pittsburgh,
Pa.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMISSIONER OF AGRICULTURE.--The Senate on Friday, the 29th ult.,
confirmed the nomination of the Hon. Horace Capron as Commissioner of
Agriculture to fill the position made vacant by the death of Isaac
Newton, the former head of the Department.

       *       *       *       *       *

It is estimated that 10,000,000 feet of sawed lumber is frozen up in
the docks at Bangor, Maine, three fourths of which is sold and waiting
shipment.

       *       *       *       *       *




Correspondence


_The Editors are not responsible for the opinions expressed by their
correspondents._




Improved Method of Securing Cutters on Boring Bars.


MESSRS. EDITORS:--Thinking it may be of use to some of the readers of
your invaluable paper, I have taken the liberty of sending you a sketch
of a new mode of securing the cutter in a boring bar or pin drill. Where
the cutters are secured, as usual, by a key, all mechanics know that it
is very difficult to set a cutter twice alike; and the notch, which
is filed in the cutter, to prevent it from moving endways, is a great
source of weakness, often causing the cutters to crack in hardening, as
well as after they are put to work. The inclosed sketch will explain
itself:

[Illustration]

A is a cutter, and B a collar, screwed upon the cutter bar, C. The edge
of this collar fits into a notch on either end of the cutter, as shown
at D, thus leaving the cutter as strong as possible at the center, and
giving it a solid support at the point where support is needed, and at
the same time insuring its always coming alike.

Brooklyn, N.Y.

THEODORE L. WEBSTER.

[The device seems to be eminently well calculated for the support of the
cutter on a boring bar, and is applicable, with but slight modification,
to a pin or "teat" drill. Machinists will readily perceive its operation
and excellencies.--EDS.

       *       *       *       *       *




Tides and Their Causes.


The phenomenon of the daily tides of our seacoasts and tidal rivers is
attributed to the attraction of the moon upon the earth--that the moon
draws the earth towards it, and that in drawing the earth towards it, it
bulges up the water of the ocean on the side presented towards the moon,
and drawing the earth and water thus on that side, also draws the earth
_away_ from the water on the opposite side of it, and thus leaves the
water bulged up on _that_ side, and in doing all this the effect comes
after the cause some three hours, which is termed "the tide lagging
behind." Now if we knew, _per se_, what attraction of gravitation was,
and that it produced this anomaly of force, there would be nothing to
question in the matter. But as we only know by attraction that it means
_drawing to_, it is impossible to reconcile the theory of the tides as
they run to the attraction of the moon. If the moon is so potent in
drawing up, why does it not draw a bulge on the inland seas--our
great lakes? I will not discuss the question of the moon's Apogee and
Perigee--its different velocities in different parts[1] of its orbit, as
laid down by the law of Kepler, or whether it turns once on its axis in
a month, or not, as either theory will answer for its phases, as well
as for the face of the "Man in the Moon," but I will endeavor to give a
more rational theory for the phenomenon of the daily tides.

[Transcribers note 1: typo fixed, changed from 'pasts' to 'parts']

The earth revolves on its axis and makes a revolution every twenty-four
hours, and this moves its equatorial surface nearly a thousand miles per
hour. Now the water on its surface, covering about three-fourths of it,
and being more mobile than the solid earth, is, by centrifugal force,
made to roll around the earth, the same as the water is made to move
around the grindstone when in motion, a thing familiar to every body
that uses that instrument. In the Southern Ocean this motion of the
water is so well known to mariners who double Cape Horn in sailing from
San Francisco to New York, that they now run considerably lower down in
order to ride this tide eastward, than they did in former times. Here
then we have one fact of water tide more comprehensive, at least, than
the tractive theory of the moon. We have also the fact of two great
promontories in Capes Horn and Good Hope, where this great tidal wave
must strike against, and they produce constant oscillations of the water
to and fro, and produce gurgitation and regurgitation in all the gulfs
and rivers that line the coasts of the Northern, or more properly, the
Land Hemisphere. These gurgitations swell the water highest in the
places where the seas become the narrowest, as the more northern
latitudes. In addition to these daily oscillations of the water, there
are constant eddy currents, denominated "Gulf Streams," all agreeing in
their courses and motion to this theory of the ocean tides.

When our present received tide theory of moon attraction was first laid
down, the fact of the water of the great Southern ocean rolling round
faster than the solid parts of our planets was not known. Smith in his
Physical Geography, says, "The tidal wave flows from east to west, owing
to the earth's daily rotation in a contrary direction." Here he is
unintentionally correct, because the water striking these promontories
of the two great capes, is hurled back, and not, as he assumes, that
the great ocean wave is moving from east to west. The United States
government sailing charts lay down the fact of this great ocean wave
moving from west to east, south of the capes, and the ships coming from
the Pacific to the Atlantic ocean take advantage of this and ride the
sea at the rate of over twenty knots per hour, by following the routes
laid down in Maury's charts.

The old philosophy of the crystalline spheres was not more at variance
with the correct motion of the stars and planets, than the moon theory
of the tides. In their dilemma to account for the retrograde motions of
the planets, they denominated them wanderers, stragglers, because they
would not march with the "music of the spheres." In the moon theory of
the tides the lunar satellite is made to pull and push at one and the
same time, which is entirely at variance with the philosophy of force.

There is nothing in the heavens, nor in the earth, that proves to
us positively that the sun holds the planets, and the planets their
satellites, by attraction, as we are taught that the moon attracts the
water of our world. We see that all terrestrial bodies tend toward the
center of the earth, and we call this gravitation; but we cannot see how
a body moves around the earth without falling on it, by this law. We
say in dynamic philosophy, that bodies move in the direction of least
resistance, and _that_ we can positively understand; but what force _per
se_ is, we do not know. It is always better for us to explain phenomena
by positive known laws and motions, than by any that rest merely upon
conjecture.

Lancaster, Pa. JNO. WISE.

       *       *       *       *       *




The Great Hoosac Tunnel.


Messrs. Editors:--In No. 23, Vol. XVII., of your paper, is an article
upon the Hoosac Tunnel, but made up from data nearly a year old, and
consequently not correctly representing the tunnel as it is at the
present time. Your conclusions of course were based upon the same data;
but during the past year, and especially during the past five months,
much greater progress has been made than ever before upon the work, and
a knowledge of what has been done since the last report was issued will,
I think, give you a different impression of the time required for its
final completion.

Referring to the profile in that number of the SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN, the
following are the distances to the various points where the work is
being prosecuted:

  Distance from east end to central shaft    12,837.294 feet
      "      "  central shaft to west shaft   9,747.072  "
      "      "  west shaft to new shaft         265.000  "
      "      "  new shaft to well No. 4         659.150  "
      "      "  well No. 4 to pier[1]         1,522.825  "
                                             ----------
      "      "  east end to pier[1]          25,031.341  "

[Footnote 1: The instrument pier is 4 feet west of the present west end
of the tunnel.]

The following are the lengths of the headings at the various points of
the work, Dec. 2, 1867:

  Length of east end heading                  4,608.000 feet
     "   "  west shaft, east heading          1,262.000  "
     "   "   "     "    west heading            611.000  "
     "   "  west end heading                    617.000  "
                                             ----------
  Total length of headings                    7,098.000  "
  Leaving                                    17,933.341  "

or 3,396 miles of heading yet to be made, of which 1,218.975 feet are
between the west end and the west shaft, and 16,714.366 feet between the
west shaft and east end of the tunnel.

The central shaft is down 583 feet, and well No. 4 is down 150 feet.
