of 'human' being! Then he shuddered. Wasn't he, himself, now that kind
in every way except his ability to admit it?

When he stepped onto the lushly hydroponic platform at the suburban stop
the paraNormals, ordinarily friendly, showed that they, too, already
realized what had happened. Each pair of suddenly icy eyes went past him
as if he were not there at all.

He walked up the turf-covered lane toward his house, feeling hopelessly
defeated. How would he manage to maintain a home here in the middle of
green and luxuriant beauty? More people than ever were now outside the
System for one reason or another and most of these unfortunates were
crowded in metropolitan centers which were slumhells to anyone who had
known something better.

How could he have been so thoughtless because of a little lapse in
Central's mechanism? Now that it was denied him, probably forever, he
saw more clearly the essential perfection of the system that had brought
order into the chaos following the discovery of universal paraNormal
capacities. At first there had been endless interference between minds
trying to reach each other while fighting off unwanted calls. Men had
even suggested this blessing turned curse be annulled.

The Central Synaptic Computation Receptor and Transmitter System had
ended all such negative thinking. For the past century and a half it had
neatly routed telepathic transmissions with an efficiency that made
ancient telephone exchanges look like Stone Age toys. A mind could
instantly exchange information with any other Subscribing mind and still
shut itself off through the Central machine if and when it needed
privacy. Except, he shuddered once more, if Central put that Urgent
rating on a call. Now only Rhoda could get a job to keep them from the
inner slumlands.

He turned into his garden and watched Max, the robot, spading in the
petunia bed. The chrysanthemums really needed more attention and he was
going to think the order to Max when he realized with a new shock that
all orders would have to be oral now. He gave up the idea of saying
anything and stomped gloomily into the house.

       *       *       *

As he hung his jacket in the hall closet he heard Rhoda coming
downstairs. "Queer thing happened today," he said with forced
cheerfulness, "but we'll manage." He stopped as Rhoda appeared. Her eyes
were red and puffed.

"I tried to reach you," she sobbed.

"Oh, you already know. Well, we can manage, you know, honey. You can
work two days a week and--"

"You don't understand," she screamed at him. "_I'm_ Suspended too! I
tried to tell it I hadn't done anything but it said I was guilty by
being associated with you."

Stunned, he fell back into a chair. "Not you, too, darling!" He had been
getting used to the idea of his own reduced status but this was too
brutal. "Tell Central you'll leave me and the guilt will be gone."

"You fool, I did say that and my defense was refused!"

Tears welled in his eyes. Was there no bottom to this horror? "You
yourself suggested that?"

"Why shouldn't I?" she cried. "It wasn't my fault at all."

He sat there and tried not to listen as waves of hate rolled over him.
Then the front bell rang and Rhoda answered it.

"I haven't been able to reach you," someone was saying through the door.
It was Sheila Williams who lived just down the lane. "Lately lines seem
to get tied up more and more. It's about tonight's game."

Just then Rhoda opened the door and Sheila came to an abrupt halt as she
saw her old friend's face. Her expression turned stony and she said, "I
wanted you to know the game is off." Then she strode away.

Unbelieving, Rhoda watched her go. "After forty years!" she exclaimed.
She slowly came back to her husband and stared down at him. "Forty years
of 'undying' friendship, gone like that!" Her eyes softened a little.
"Maybe I'm wrong, Connor, maybe I said too much through Central myself.
And maybe I'd have acted like Sheila if _they_ had been the ones."

He withdrew his hands from his face. "I've done the same thing to other
wretches myself. We'll just have to get used to it somehow. I've enough
social credits to hang on here a year anyway."

"Get used to it," she repeated dully. This time there was no
denunciation but she had to flee up the stairs to be alone.

He went to the big bay window and, trying to keep his mind blank,
watched Max re-spading the petunia bed. He really should go out and
tell the robot to stop, he decided, otherwise the same work would be
repeated again and again. But he just watched for the next hour as Max
kept returning to the far end of the bed and working his way up to the
window, nodding mindlessly with each neat twist of his spade attachment.

Rhoda came back downstairs and said, "It's six-thirty. The first time
since the boys left that they didn't call us at six." He thought of Ted
on Mars and Phil on Venus and sighed. "By now," she went on, "they know
what's happened. Usually colonial children just refuse to have anything
more to do with parents like us. And they're right--they have their own
futures to consider."

"They'll still write to us," he started reassuring her but she had
already gone outside where he could hear her giving Max vocal
instructions for preparing dinner. Which was just as well--she would
know the truth soon enough. Without a doubt the boys were now also
guilty by association and they'd have nothing left to lose by
maintaining contact.

At dinner, though, he felt less kindly toward her and snapped a few
times. Then it was Rhoda's turn to exercise forebearance and to try to
smooth things over. Once she looked out the picture window at the
perfect synthetic thatch of the Williams' great cottage, peeping over
the hollyhock-topped rise of ground at the end of the garden. "Well?" he
demanded. "Well?"

"Nothing, Connor."

"You sighed and I want to know what the devil--"

"Since you insist--I was thinking how lucky Sheila Williams always is.
Ten years ago the government authorized twins for her while I haven't
