another blow.

By this time Frederick, with the infantry, was now pouring over the
crest of the hill, their advance heralded by the fire of
twenty-four guns. Rapidly, in echelon, they approached the enemy.
In vain Soubise endeavoured to face round the column, thus taken in
flank, to meet the coming storm. He was seconded by Broglio and the
commander of the Confederate army, but the two columns were jammed
together, and all were in confusion at this astounding and
unexpected attack. Orders were unheard or disobeyed, and everything
was still in utter disorder, when six battalions of Prussian
infantry hurled themselves upon them.

When forty paces distant, they poured in their first terrible
volley, and then continued their fire as fast as they could load;
creating great havoc among the French troops on whom they had
fallen, while away on each flank the Prussian artillery made deep
gaps in the line. Soon the mass, helpless under this storm of fire,
wavered and shook; and then Seidlitz, who had been concealed with
his cavalry in a hollow a short distance away, hurled himself like
a thunderbolt on their rear, and in a moment they broke up in
headlong flight. In less than half an hour from the first
appearance of the Prussians on the hill, the struggle had ended,
and an army of from fifty to sixty thousand men was a mob of
fugitives; defeated by a force of but twenty-two thousand men, not
above half of whom were engaged.

The loss of the allies was three thousand killed and wounded, five
thousand prisoners, and seventy-two guns; while the Prussians lost
but one hundred and sixty-five killed, and three hundred and
seventy-six wounded. The victory was one of the most remarkable and
surprising ever gained, for these figures by no means represent the
full loss to the defeated.

The German portion of the army, after being chased for many miles,
scattered in all directions; and only one regiment reached Erfurt
in military order, and in two days the whole of the men were on
their way to their homes, in the various states composing the
Confederation. The French were in no less disgraceful a condition.
Plundering as they went, a mere disorganized rabble, they continued
their flight until fifty-five miles from the field of battle, and
were long before they gathered again in fighting order.

The joy caused in Prussia and in England, by this astonishing
victory, was shared largely by the inhabitants of the country
through which the French army had marched. Everywhere they had
plundered and pillaged, as if they had been moving through an
enemy's country instead of one they had professed to come to
deliver. The Protestant inhabitants had everywhere been most
cruelly maltreated, the churches wrecked, and the pastors treated
as criminals. The greater portion of Germany therefore regarded the
defeat of the French as a matter for gratification, rather than the
reverse.

In England the result was enormous. It had the effect of vastly
strengthening Pitt's position, and twenty thousand British troops
were, ere long, despatched to join the army under the Duke of
Brunswick, which was now called the allied army, and from this time
the French force under Richelieu ceased to be dangerous to
Frederick. France and England were old antagonists, and entered
upon a duel of their own; a duel that was to cost France Canada,
and much besides; to establish England's naval preponderance; and
to extinguish French influence in the Netherlands.

Fergus Drummond was not under fire, at the memorable battle of
Rossbach. Keith's division was not, in fact, engaged; the affair
having terminated before it arrived. Keith, however, had ridden to
the position on the brow of the hill where the king had stationed
himself; and his staff, following him, had the satisfaction of
seeing the enemy's heavy columns melt into a mass of fugitives, and
spread in all directions over the country, like dust driven before
a sudden whirlwind.

"What next, I wonder?" Fergus said to Lindsay; who had, three days
before, been promoted to the rank of captain, as much to the
satisfaction of Fergus as to his own.

"I suppose some more marching," Lindsay replied. "You may be sure
that we shall be off east again, to try conclusions with Prince
Karl. Bevern seems to be making a sad mess of it there. Of course
he is tremendously outnumbered, thirty thousand men against eighty
thousand; but he has fallen back into Silesia without making a
single stand, and suffered Prince Karl to plant himself between
Breslau and Schweidnitz; and the Prince is besieging the latter
town with twenty thousand men, while with sixty thousand he is
facing Bevern."

Four days after the victory, indeed, Frederick set out with
thirteen thousand men; leaving Prince Henry to maintain the line of
the Saale, and guard Saxony; while Marshal Keith was to go into
Bohemia, raise contributions there, and threaten as far as might be
the Austrian posts in that country.

Fergus, however, went with the king's army, the king having said to
the Marshal:

"Keith, lend me that young aide-de-camp of yours. I have seen how
he can be trusted to carry a despatch, at whatever risk to his
life. He is ingenious and full of devices; and he has luck, and
luck goes for a great deal.

"I like him, too. I have observed that he is always lively and
cheery, even at the end of the longest day's work. I notice too
that, even though your relation, he never becomes too familiar; and
his talk will be refreshing, when I want something to distract my
thoughts from weighty matters."

So Fergus went with the king, who could ill afford to lose Keith
from his side. With none was he more friendly and intimate and, now
that Schwerin had gone, he relied upon him more implicitly than
upon any other of his officers.

But Keith had been, for some time, unwell. He was suffering from
asthma and other ailments that rendered rapid travel painful to
him; and he would obtain more rest and ease, in Bohemia, than he
could find in the rapid journey the king intended to make.

On the fifth day of his march Frederick heard, to his stupefaction,
that Schweidnitz had surrendered. The place was an extremely strong
one, and the king had relied confidently upon its holding out for
two or three months. Its fortifications were constructed in the
best manner; it was abundantly supplied with cannon, ammunition,
and provisions; and its surrender was inexcusable.

The fault was doubtless, to a large degree, that of its commandant,
who was a man of no resolution or resources; but it was also partly
due to the fact that a portion of the garrison were Saxons, who had
at Pirna been obliged to enter the Prussian service. Great numbers
of these deserted; a hundred and eighty of them, in one day, going
over from an advanced post to the enemy. With troops like these,
there could be no assurance that any post would be firmly held--a
fact that might well shake the confidence of any commander in his
power of resistance.

The blow was none the less severe, to Frederick, from being partly
the result of his own mistaken step of enrolling men bitterly
hostile in the ranks of the army. Still, disastrous as the news
was, it did not alter his resolution; and at even greater speed
than before he continued his march. Sometimes of an evening he sent
for Fergus, and chatted with him pleasantly for an hour or two,
asking him many questions of his life in Scotland, and discoursing
familiarly on such matters, but never making any allusion to
military affairs.

On the tenth day of the march they arrived at Gorlitz, where
another piece of bad news reached Frederick. Prince Karl, after
taking Schweidnitz, had fallen with sixty thousand men on Bevern.
He had crossed by five bridges across the Loe, but each column was
met by a Prussian force strongly intrenched. For the space of
fifteen hours the battles had raged, over seven or eight miles of
country. Five times the Austrians had attacked, five times had they
been rolled back again; but at nine o'clock at night they were
successful, more or less, in four of their attacks, while the
Prussian left wing, under the command of Ziethen, had driven its
assailants across the river again.

During the night Bevern had drawn off, marched through Breslau, and
crossed the Oder, leaving eighty cannon and eight thousand killed
and wounded--a tremendous loss, indeed, when the army at daybreak
had been thirty thousand strong. Bevern himself rode out to
reconnoitre, in the gray light of the morning, attended only by a
groom, and fell in with an Austrian outpost. He was carried to
Vienna, but being a distant relation of the emperor, was sent home
again without ransom.

It was the opinion of Frederick that he had given himself up
intentionally, and on his return he was ordered at once to take up
his former official post at Stettin; where he conducted himself so
well, in the struggle against the Russian armies, that two years
later he was restored to Frederick's favour.

As if this misfortune was not great enough, two days later came the
news that Breslau had surrendered without firing a shot; and this
when it was known that the king was within two days' march, and
pressing forward to its relief. Here ninety-eight guns and an
immense store and magazine were lost to Prussia.

Frederick straightway issued orders that the general who had
succeeded Bevern should be put under arrest, for not having at once
thrown his army into Breslau; appointed Ziethen in his place, and
ordered him to bring the army round to Glogau and meet him at
Parchwitz on December 2nd, which Ziethen punctually did.

In spite of the terrible misfortunes that had befallen him,
Frederick was still undaunted. Increased as it was by the arrival
of Ziethen, his force was but a third of the strength of the
Austrians. The latter were flushed with success; while Ziethen's
troops were discouraged by defeat, and his own portion of the force
worn out by their long and rapid marches, and by the failure of the
object for which they had come. Calling his generals together on
the 3rd, he recounted the misfortunes that had befallen them; and
told them that his one trust, in this terrible position, was in
their qualities and valour; and that he intended to engage the
enemy, as soon as he found them, and that they must beat them or
all of them perish in the battle.

Enthusiastically, the generals declared that they would conquer or
die with him; and among the soldiers the spirit was equally strong,
for they had implicit confidence in their king, and a well-justified
trust in their own valour and determination. That evening Frederick,
eager as he was to bring the terrible situation to a final issue,
cannot but have felt that it would have been too desperate an
undertaking to have attacked the enemy; posted as they were with a
river (known as Schweidnitz Water) and many other natural difficulties
covering their front, and having their flanks strengthened, as was the
Austrian custom, with field works and batteries. Fortunately the
Austrians settled the difficulty by moving out from their stronghold.

Daun had counselled their remaining there, but Prince Karl and the
great majority of his military advisers agreed that it would be a
shameful thing that ninety thousand men should shut themselves up,
to avoid an attack by a force of but one-third their own strength;
and that it was in all respects preferable to march out and give
battle, in which case the Prussians would be entirely destroyed;
whereas, if merely repulsed in an attack on a strong position, a
considerable proportion might escape and give trouble in the
future.

The Austrians, indeed, having captured Schweidnitz and Breslau,
defeated Bevern, and in the space of three weeks made themselves
masters of a considerable portion of Silesia, were in no small
degree puffed up, and had fallen anew to despising Frederick. The
blow dealt them at Prague had been obliterated by their success at
Kolin; and Frederick's later success over the French and Federal
army was not considered, by them, as a matter affecting themselves,
although several Austrian regiments had been among Soubise's force.
The officers were very scornful over the aggressive march of
Frederick's small army, which they derisively called the Potsdam
Guards' Parade; and many were the jokes cut, at the military
messes, at its expense.

The difference, then, with which the two armies regarded the coming
battle was great, indeed. On the one side there was the easy
confidence of victory, the satisfaction that at length this
troublesome little king had put himself in their power; on the
other a deep determination to conquer or to die, a feeling that,
terrible as the struggle must be, great as were the odds against
them, they might yet, did each man do his duty, come out the
victors in the struggle.

"And what think you of this matter, lad?" Frederick said, laying
his hand familiarly on the young captain's shoulder.

"I know nothing about it, your majesty; but like the rest, I feel
confident that somehow you will pull us through. Of one thing I am
sure, that all that is possible for the men to do, your soldiers
will accomplish."

"Well, we shall see. It is well that I know all the country round
here, for many a review have I held of the garrison of Breslau, on
the very ground where we are about to fight. Their position is a
very strong one, and I am afraid that crafty old fox Daun will
here, as he did at Prague, persuade Prince Karl to hide behind his
batteries. Were it not for that, I should feel confident; whereas I
now but feel hopeful. Still, I doubt not that we shall find our way
in, somehow."



Chapter 11: Leuthen.


At four in the morning on Sunday, December 4th, Frederick marched
from Parchwitz; intending to make Neumarkt, a small town some
fourteen miles off, his quarters. When within two or three miles of
this town he learned, to his deep satisfaction, that the Austrians
had just established a great bakery there, and that a party of
engineers were marking out the site for a camp; also that there
were but a thousand Croats in the town. The news was satisfactory,
indeed, for two reasons: the first being that the bakery would be
of great use for his own troops; the second, that it was clear that
the Austrians intended to advance across the Schweidnitz Water to
give battle. It was evident that they could have had no idea that
he was pressing on so rapidly, or they would never have established
their bakery so far in advance, and protected by so small a force.

He lost no time in taking advantage of their carelessness, but sent
a regiment of cavalry to seize the hills on both sides of the town;
then marched rapidly forward, burst in the gates, and hurled the
Croats in utter confusion from Neumarkt, while the cavalry dashed
down and cut off their retreat. One hundred and twenty of them were
killed, and five hundred and seventy taken prisoners. In the town
the Austrian bakery was found to be in full work, and eighty
thousand bread rations, still hot, were ready for delivery.

This initial success, and the unexpected treat of hot bread, raised
the spirits of the troops greatly, and was looked upon as a happy
augury.

Two or three hours before Neumarkt had been captured, the Austrian
army was crossing the river, and presently received the unpleasant
news of what had happened. Surprised at the news that the Prussians
were so near, their generals at once set to work to choose a good
position. This was not a difficult task, for the country was
swampy, with little wooded rises and many villages.

They planted their right wing at the village of Nypern, which was
practically unapproachable on account of deep peat bogs. Their
centre was at a larger village named Leuthen, their left at
Sagschuetz. The total length of its front was about six miles.

The Prussians started before daybreak next morning in four columns,
Frederick riding on ahead with the vanguard. When near Borne, some
eight miles from Neumarkt, he caught sight in the dim light of a
considerable body of horse, stretching across the road in front of
him as far as he could make out the line. The Prussian cavalry were
at once ordered to charge down on their left flank.

The enemy proved to be five regiments of cavalry, placed there to
guard the army from surprise. They, however, were themselves
surprised; and were at once overthrown, and driven in headlong
flight to take shelter behind their right wing at Nypern, five
hundred and forty being taken prisoners, and a large number being
killed or wounded.

Frederick rode on through Borne, ascended a small hill called the
Scheuberg, to the right of the road, and as the light increased
could, from that point, make out the Austrian army drawn up in
battle array, and stretching from Nypern to Sagschuetz. Well was it
for him that he had reviewed troops over the same ground, and knew
all the bogs and morasses that guarded the Austrian front. For a
long time he sat there on horseback, studying the possibilities of
the situation.

The Austrian right he regarded as absolutely impregnable. Leuthen
might be attacked with some chance of success, but Sagschuetz
offered by far the most favourable opening for attack. The
formation of the ground offered special facilities for the movement
being effected without the Austrians being aware of what was taking
place, for there was a depression behind the swells and broken
ground in front of the Austrian centre, by which the Prussians
could march from Borne, unseen by the enemy, until they approached
Sagschuetz.

It was three hours after Frederick had taken up his place before
the four columns had all reached Borne. As soon as they were in
readiness there, they were ordered to march with all speed as far
as Radaxford, thence to march in oblique order against the Austrian
left.

The Austrians, all this time, could observe a group of horsemen on
the hill, moving sometimes this way sometimes that, but more than
this they could not see. The conjectures were various, as hour
passed after hour. Daun believed that the Prussians must have
marched away south, with the intention of falling upon the
magazines in Bohemia, and that the cavalry seen moving along the
hills were placed there to defend the Prussians from being taken in
flank, or in rear, while thus marching. General Lucchesi, who
commanded the Austrian right wing, was convinced that the cavalry
formed the Prussian right wing, and that the whole army, concealed
behind the slopes, was marching to fall upon him.

In the belfry of the church at Leuthen, on the tops of windmills,
and on other points of vantage, Austrian generals with their staffs
were endeavouring to obtain a glimpse beyond those tiresome swells,
and to discover what was going on behind them, but in vain. There
were the cavalry, moving occasionally from crest to crest, but
nothing beyond that.

Lucchesi got more and more uneasy, and sent message after message
to headquarters that he was about to be attacked, and must have a
large reinforcement of horse. The prince and Daun at first scoffed
at the idea, knowing that the bogs in front of Nypern were
impassable; but at last he sent a message to the effect that, if
the cavalry did not come, he would not be responsible for the
issue.

It was thought, therefore, that he must have some good ground for
his insistence; and Daun sent off the reserve of horse, and several
other regiments drawn from the left wing, and himself went off at a
trot, at their head, to see what was the matter.

It was just as he started that the Prussians--with their music
playing, and the men singing:

Gieb dass ich thu mit fleiss was mir zu thun gebuhret
(Grant that with zeal and strength this day I do)

had passed Radaxford and reached Lobetintz, and were about to
advance in an oblique line to the attack. The king saw with delight
the removal of so large a body of horse from the very point against
which his troops would, in half an hour, be hurling themselves.
Nothing could have suited his plans better.

At a rapid pace, and with a precision and order as perfect as if
upon level ground, suddenly the Prussians poured over the swells on
the flank of Sagschuetz. Nadasti, who commanded the Austrians
there, was struck with astonishment at the spectacle of the
Prussian army, which he believed to be far away, pouring down on
his flank. The heads of the four columns, the artillery, and
Ziethen's cavalry appeared simultaneously, marching swiftly and
making no pause.

Being a good general, he lost not a moment in endeavouring to meet
the storm. His left was thrown back a little, a battery of fourteen
guns at the angle so formed opened fire, and he launched his
cavalry against that of Ziethen. For the moment Ziethen's men were
pushed back, but the fire from an infantry battalion, close by,
checked the Austrian horse. They fell back out of range, and
Ziethen, making a counter charge, drove them away.

In the meantime the Prussian infantry, as they advanced, poured a
storm of fire upon the Austrian line, aided by a battery of ten
heavy guns that Prince Maurice, who commanded here, had planted on
a rise. A clump of fir trees, held by Croats in advance of the
Austrian line, was speedily cleared; and then the Prussians broke
down the abattis that protected the enemy's front, charged
furiously against the infantry, and drove these before them,
capturing Nadasti's battery.

In ten minutes after the beginning of the fight, the position of
the Austrian left was already desperate. The whole Prussian army
was concentrated against it and, being on its flank, crumpled the
line up as it advanced. Prince Karl's aides-de-camp galloped at the
top of their speed to bring Daun and the cavalry back again, and
Austrian battalions from the centre were hurried down to aid
Nadasti's, but were impeded by the retreating troops; and the
confusion thickened, until it was brought to a climax by Ziethen's
horse, which had been unable to act until now. But fir wood,
quagmire, and abattis had all been passed by the Prussians, and
they dashed into the mass, sabring and trampling down, and taking
whole battalions prisoners.

Prince Karl exerted himself to the utmost to check the Prussian
advance. Batteries were brought up and advantageously posted at
Leuthen, heavy bodies of infantry occupied the village and its
church, and took post so as to present a front to the advancing
tide. Another quarter of an hour and the battle might have been
retrieved; but long before the dispositions were all effected, the
Prussians were at hand.


[Map: Battle of Leuthen]


Nevertheless, by great diligence the Austrians had to some extent
succeeded. Leuthen was the centre of the new position. Lucchesi was
hastening up, while Nadasti swung backwards and tried, as he
arrived, to form the left flank of the new position. All this was
being done under a storm of shot from the whole of the Prussian
artillery, which was so terrible that many battalions fell into
confusion as fast as they arrived.

Leuthen, a straggling hamlet of over a mile in length, and with two
or three streets of scattered houses, barns, farm buildings, and
two churches, was crowded with troops; ready to fight but unable to
do so, line being jammed upon line until sometimes a hundred deep,
pressed constantly behind by freshly arriving battalions, and in
front by the advancing Prussians. Some regiments were almost
without officers.

Into this confused, straggling, helpless mass, prevented from
opening out by the houses and inclosures, the Prussians, ever
keeping their formation, poured their volleys with terrible effect;
in such fashion as Drake's perfectly-handled ships poured their
broadsides into the huge helpless Spanish galleons at Gravelines.
With a like dogged courage as that shown by the Spanish, the
Austrian masses suffered almost passively, while those occupying
the houses and churches facing the Prussians resisted valiantly and
desperately. From every window, every wall, their musketry fire
flashed out; the resistance round the churchyard being specially
stubborn. The churchyard had a high and strong wall, and so
terrible was the fire from the roof of the church, and other spots
of advantage, that the tide of Prussian victory was arrested for a
time.

At last they made a rush. The churchyard gate was burst in, and the
Austrians driven out. Leuthen was not yet won, but Frederick now
brought up the left wing, which had till this time been held in
reserve. These came on with levelled bayonets, and rushed into the
fight.

The king was, as always, in the thick of the battle; giving his
orders as coolly as if at a review, sending fresh troops where
required, changing the arrangements as opportunity offered, keeping
the whole machine in due order; and by his presence animating all
with the determination to win or die, and an almost equal readiness
to accept either alternative.

At last, after an hour's stubborn resistance, the Austrians were
hurled out of Leuthen, still sternly resisting, still contesting
