of Warwick and Holland. My lord had a paper of oranges, which he ate and
offered to the actresses, joking with them. And Mrs. Bracegirdle, when
my Lord Mohun said something rude, turned on him, and asked him what he
did there, and whether he and his friends had come to stab anybody else,
as they did poor Will Mountford? My lord's dark face grew darker at this
taunt, and wore a mischievous, fatal look. They that saw it remembered
it, and said so afterward.

When the play was ended the two parties joined company; and my Lord
Castlewood then proposed that they should go to a tavern and sup.
Lockit's, the "Greyhound," in Charing Cross, was the house selected.
All six marched together that way; the three lords going a-head, Lord
Mohun's captain, and Colonel Westbury, and Harry Esmond, walking behind
them. As they walked, Westbury told Harry Esmond about his old friend
Dick the Scholar, who had got promotion, and was Cornet of the Guards,
and had wrote a book called the "Christian Hero," and had all the Guards
to laugh at him for his pains, for the Christian Hero was breaking the
commandments constantly, Westbury said, and had fought one or two duels
already. And, in a lower tone, Westbury besought young Mr. Esmond to
take no part in the quarrel. "There was no need for more seconds than
one," said the Colonel, "and the Captain or Lord Warwick might easily
withdraw." But Harry said no; he was bent on going through with the
business. Indeed, he had a plan in his head, which, he thought, might
prevent my Lord Viscount from engaging.

They went in at the bar of the tavern, and desired a private room and
wine and cards, and when the drawer had brought these, they began to
drink and call healths, and as long as the servants were in the room
appeared very friendly.

Harry Esmond's plan was no other than to engage in talk with Lord Mohun,
to insult him, and so get the first of the quarrel. So when cards were
proposed he offered to play. "Psha!" says my Lord Mohun (whether wishing
to save Harry, or not choosing, to try the botte de Jesuite, it is
not to be known)--"Young gentlemen from college should not play these
stakes. You are too young."

"Who dares say I am too young?" broke out Harry. "Is your lordship
afraid?"

"Afraid!" cries out Mohun.

But my good Lord Viscount saw the move--"I'll play you for ten moidores,
Mohun," says he. "You silly boy, we don't play for groats here as you
do at Cambridge." And Harry, who had no such sum in his pocket (for his
half-year's salary was always pretty well spent before it was due), fell
back with rage and vexation in his heart that he had not money enough to
stake.

"I'll stake the young gentleman a crown," says the Lord Mohun's captain.

"I thought crowns were rather scarce with the gentlemen of the army,"
says Harry.

"Do they birch at College?" says the Captain.

"They birch fools," says Harry, "and they cane bullies, and they fling
puppies into the water."

"Faith, then, there's some escapes drowning," says the Captain, who was
an Irishman; and all the gentlemen began to laugh, and made poor Harry
only more angry.

My Lord Mohun presently snuffed a candle. It was when the drawers
brought in fresh bottles and glasses and were in the room on which my
Lord Viscount said--"The Deuce take you, Mohun, how damned awkward you
are. Light the candle, you drawer."

"Damned awkward is a damned awkward expression, my lord," says the
other. "Town gentlemen don't use such words--or ask pardon if they do."

"I'm a country gentleman," says my Lord Viscount.

"I see it by your manner," says my Lord Mohun. "No man shall say damned
awkward to me."

"I fling the words in your face, my lord," says the other; "shall I send
the cards too?"

"Gentlemen, gentlemen! before the servants?" cry out Colonel Westbury
and my Lord Warwick in a breath. The drawers go out of the room hastily.
They tell the people below of the quarrel up stairs.

"Enough has been said," says Colonel Westbury. "Will your lordships meet
to-morrow morning?"

"Will my Lord Castlewood withdraw his words?" asks the Earl of Warwick.

"My Lord Castlewood will be ---- first," says Colonel Westbury.

"Then we have nothing for it. Take notice, gentlemen, there have been
outrageous words--reparation asked and refused."

"And refused," says my Lord Castlewood, putting on his hat. "Where shall
the meeting be? and when?"

"Since my Lord refuses me satisfaction, which I deeply regret, there is
no time so good as now," says my Lord Mohun. "Let us have chairs and go
to Leicester Field."

"Are your lordship and I to have the honor of exchanging a pass or two?"
says Colonel Westbury, with a low bow to my Lord of Warwick and Holland.

"It is an honor for me," says my lord, with a profound congee, "to be
matched with a gentleman who has been at Mons and Namur."

"Will your Reverence permit me to give you a lesson?" says the Captain.

"Nay, nay, gentlemen, two on a side are plenty," says Harry's patron.
"Spare the boy, Captain Macartney," and he shook Harry's hand--for the
last time, save one, in his life.

At the bar of the tavern all the gentlemen stopped, and my Lord Viscount
said, laughing, to the barwoman, that those cards set people sadly
a-quarrelling; but that the dispute was over now, and the parties were
all going away to my Lord Mohun's house, in Bow Street, to drink a
bottle more before going to bed.

A half-dozen of chairs were now called, and the six gentlemen stepping
into them, the word was privately given to the chairmen to go to
Leicester Field, where the gentlemen were set down opposite the
"Standard Tavern." It was midnight, and the town was abed by this time,
and only a few lights in the windows of the houses; but the night was
bright enough for the unhappy purpose which the disputants came about;
and so all six entered into that fatal square, the chairmen standing
without the railing and keeping the gate, lest any persons should
disturb the meeting.

All that happened there hath been matter of public notoriety, and is
recorded, for warning to lawless men, in the annals of our country.
After being engaged for not more than a couple of minutes, as Harry
Esmond thought (though being occupied at the time with his own
adversary's point, which was active, he may not have taken a good note
of time), a cry from the chairmen without, who were smoking their pipes,
and leaning over the railings of the field as they watched the dim
combat within, announced that some catastrophe had happened, which
caused Esmond to drop his sword and look round, at which moment his
enemy wounded him in the right hand. But the young man did not heed
this hurt much, and ran up to the place where he saw his dear master was
down.

My Lord Mohun was standing over him.

"Are you much hurt, Frank?" he asked in a hollow voice.

"I believe I am a dead man," my lord said from the ground.

"No, no, not so," says the other; "and I call God to witness, Frank
Esmond, that I would have asked your pardon, had you but given me a
chance. In--in the first cause of our falling out, I swear that no one
was to blame but me, and--and that my lady--"

"Hush!" says my poor Lord Viscount, lifting himself on his elbow and
speaking faintly. "'Twas a dispute about the cards--the cursed cards.
Harry my boy, are you wounded, too? God help thee! I loved thee, Harry,
and thou must watch over my little Frank--and--and carry this little
heart to my wife."

And here my dear lord felt in his breast for a locket he wore there,
and, in the act, fell back fainting.

We were all at this terrified, thinking him dead; but Esmond and Colonel
Westbury bade the chairmen come into the field; and so my lord was
carried to one Mr. Aimes, a surgeon, in Long Acre, who kept a bath, and
there the house was wakened up, and the victim of this quarrel carried
in.

My Lord Viscount was put to bed, and his wound looked to by the surgeon,
who seemed both kind and skilful. When he had looked to my lord, he
bandaged up Harry Esmond's hand (who, from loss of blood, had fainted
too, in the house, and may have been some time unconscious); and when
the young man came to himself, you may be sure he eagerly asked what
news there were of his dear patron; on which the surgeon carried him
to the room where the Lord Castlewood lay; who had already sent for a
priest; and desired earnestly, they said, to speak with his kinsman. He
was lying on a bed, very pale and ghastly, with that fixed, fatal look
in his eyes, which betokens death; and faintly beckoning all the other
persons away from him with his hand, and crying out "Only Harry Esmond,"
the hand fell powerless down on the coverlet, as Harry came forward, and
knelt down and kissed it.

"Thou art all but a priest, Harry," my Lord Viscount gasped out, with a
faint smile, and pressure of his cold hand. "Are they all gone? Let me
make thee a death-bed confession."

And with sacred Death waiting, as it were, at the bed-foot, as an awful
witness of his words, the poor dying soul gasped out his last wishes
in respect of his family;--his humble profession of contrition for his
faults;--and his charity towards the world he was leaving. Some things
he said concerned Harry Esmond as much as they astonished him. And
my Lord Viscount, sinking visibly, was in the midst of these strange
confessions, when the ecclesiastic for whom my lord had sent, Mr.
Atterbury, arrived.

This gentleman had reached to no great church dignity as yet, but
was only preacher at St. Bride's, drawing all the town thither by his
eloquent sermons. He was godson to my lord, who had been pupil to his
father; had paid a visit to Castlewood from Oxford more than once; and
it was by his advice, I think, that Harry Esmond was sent to Cambridge,
rather than to Oxford, of which place Mr. Atterbury, though a
distinguished member, spoke but ill.

Our messenger found the good priest already at his books at five o'clock
in the morning, and he followed the man eagerly to the house where my
poor Lord Viscount lay--Esmond watching him, and taking his dying words
from his mouth.

My lord, hearing of Mr. Atterbury's arrival, and squeezing Esmond's
hand, asked to be alone with the priest; and Esmond left them there for
this solemn interview. You may be sure that his own prayers and grief
accompanied that dying benefactor. My lord had said to him that which
confounded the young man--informed him of a secret which greatly
concerned him. Indeed, after hearing it, he had had good cause for doubt
and dismay; for mental anguish as well as resolution. While the colloquy
between Mr. Atterbury and his dying penitent took place within, an
immense contest of perplexity was agitating Lord Castlewood's young
companion.

At the end of an hour--it may be more--Mr. Atterbury came out of the
room, looking very hard at Esmond, and holding a paper.

"He is on the brink of God's awful judgment," the priest whispered. "He
has made his breast clean to me. He forgives and believes, and makes
restitution. Shall it be in public? Shall we call a witness to sign it?"

"God knows," sobbed out the young man, "my dearest lord has only done me
kindness all his life."

The priest put the paper into Esmond's hand. He looked at it. It swam
before his eyes.

"'Tis a confession," he said.

"'Tis as you please," said Mr. Atterbury.

There was a fire in the room where the cloths were drying for the baths,
and there lay a heap in a corner saturated with the blood of my dear
lord's body. Esmond went to the fire, and threw the paper into it. 'Twas
a great chimney with glazed Dutch tiles. How we remember such trifles at
such awful moments!--the scrap of the book that we have read in a great
grief--the taste of that last dish that we have eaten before a duel, or
some such supreme meeting or parting. On the Dutch tiles at the Bagnio
was a rude picture representing Jacob in hairy gloves, cheating Isaac of
Esau's birthright. The burning paper lighted it up.

"'Tis only a confession, Mr. Atterbury," said the young man. He leaned
his head against the mantel-piece: a burst of tears came to his eyes.
They were the first he had shed as he sat by his lord, scared by this
calamity, and more yet by what the poor dying gentleman had told him,
and shocked to think that he should be the agent of bringing this double
misfortune on those he loved best.

"Let us go to him," said Mr. Esmond. And accordingly they went into the
next chamber, where by this time, the dawn had broke, which showed my
lord's poor pale face and wild appealing eyes, that wore that awful
fatal look of coming dissolution. The surgeon was with him. He went into
the chamber as Atterbury came out thence. My Lord Viscount turned round
his sick eyes towards Esmond. It choked the other to hear that rattle in
his throat.

"My Lord Viscount," says Mr. Atterbury, "Mr. Esmond wants no witnesses,
and hath burned the paper."

"My dearest master!" Esmond said, kneeling down, and taking his hand and
kissing it.

My Lord Viscount sprang up in his bed, and flung his arms round Esmond.
"God bl--bless--" was all he said. The blood rushed from his mouth,
deluging the young man. My dearest lord was no more. He was gone with a
blessing on his lips, and love and repentance and kindness in his manly
heart.

"Benedicti benedicentes," says Mr. Atterbury, and the young man,
kneeling at the bedside, groaned out an "Amen."

"Who shall take the news to her?" was Mr. Esmond's next thought. And
on this he besought Mr. Atterbury to bear the tidings to Castlewood.
He could not face his mistress himself with those dreadful news. Mr.
Atterbury complying kindly, Esmond writ a hasty note on his table-book
to my lord's man, bidding him get the horses for Mr. Atterbury, and ride
with him, and send Esmond's own valise to the Gatehouse prison, whither
he resolved to go and give himself up.




BOOK II.

CONTAINS MR. ESMOND'S MILITARY LIFE, AND OTHER MATTERS APPERTAINING TO
THE ESMOND FAMILY.





CHAPTER I.

I AM IN PRISON, AND VISITED, BUT NOT CONSOLED THERE.


Those may imagine, who have seen death untimely strike down persons
revered and beloved, and know how unavailing consolation is, what was
Harry Esmond's anguish after being an actor in that ghastly midnight
scene of blood and homicide. He could not, he felt, have faced his dear
mistress, and told her that story. He was thankful that kind Atterbury
consented to break the sad news to her; but, besides his grief, which
he took into prison with him, he had that in his heart which secretly
cheered and consoled him.

A great secret had been told to Esmond by his unhappy stricken kinsman,
lying on his death-bed. Were he to disclose it, as in equity and honor
he might do, the discovery would but bring greater grief upon those whom
he loved best in the world, and who were sad enough already. Should he
bring down shame and perplexity upon all those beings to whom he was
attached by so many tender ties of affection and gratitude? degrade his
father's widow? impeach and sully his father's and kinsman's honor? and
for what? for a barren title, to be worn at the expense of an innocent
boy, the son of his dearest benefactress. He had debated this matter in
his conscience, whilst his poor lord was making his dying confession. On
one side were ambition, temptation, justice even; but love, gratitude,
and fidelity, pleaded on the other. And when the struggle was over in
Harry's mind, a glow of righteous happiness filled it; and it was with
grateful tears in his eyes that he returned thanks to God for that
decision which he had been enabled to make.

"When I was denied by my own blood," thought he, "these dearest friends
received and cherished me. When I was a nameless orphan myself, and
needed a protector, I found one in yonder kind soul, who has gone to his
account repenting of the innocent wrong he has done."

And with this consoling thought he went away to give himself up at the
prison, after kissing the cold lips of his benefactor.

It was on the third day after he had come to the Gatehouse prison,
(where he lay in no small pain from his wound, which inflamed and ached
severely,) and with those thoughts and resolutions that have been just
spoke of, to depress, and yet to console him, that H. Esmond's keeper
came and told him that a visitor was asking for him, and though he could
not see her face, which was enveloped in a black hood, her whole figure,
too, being veiled and covered with the deepest mourning, Esmond knew at
once that his visitor was his dear mistress.

He got up from his bed, where he was lying, being very weak; and
advancing towards her as the retiring keeper shut the door upon him and
his guest in that sad place, he put forward his left hand (for the right
was wounded and bandaged), and he would have taken that kind one of his
mistress, which had done so many offices of friendship for him for so
many years.

But the Lady Castlewood went back from him, putting back her hood, and
leaning against the great stanchioned door which the gaoler had just
closed upon them. Her face was ghastly white, as Esmond saw it, looking
from the hood; and her eyes, ordinarily so sweet and tender, were fixed
on him with such a tragic glance of woe and anger, as caused the young
man, unaccustomed to unkindness from that person, to avert his own
glances from her face.

"And this, Mr. Esmond," she said, "is where I see you; and 'tis to this
you have brought me!"

"You have come to console me in my calamity, madam," said he (though, in
truth, he scarce knew how to address her, his emotions at beholding her
so overpowered him).

She advanced a little, but stood silent and trembling, looking out
at him from her black draperies, with her small white hands clasped
together, and quivering lips and hollow eyes.

"Not to reproach me," he continued after a pause. "My grief is
sufficient as it is."

"Take back your hand--do not touch me with it!" she cried. "Look!
there's blood on it!"

"I wish they had taken it all," said Esmond; "if you are unkind to me."

"Where is my husband?" she broke out. "Give me back my husband, Henry.
Why did you stand by at midnight and see him murdered? Why did the
traitor escape who did it? You, the champion of your house, who offered
to die for us! You that he loved and trusted, and to whom I confided
him--you that vowed devotion and gratitude, and I believed you--yes, I
believed you--why are you here, and my noble Francis gone? Why did
you come among us? You have only brought us grief and sorrow; and
repentance, bitter, bitter repentance, as a return for our love and
kindness. Did I ever do you a wrong, Henry? You were but an orphan child
when I first saw you--when HE first saw you, who was so good, and noble,
and trusting. He would have had you sent away, but, like a foolish
woman, I besought him to let you stay. And you pretended to love us, and
we believed you--and you made our house wretched, and my husband's heart
went from me: and I lost him through you--I lost him--the husband of my
youth, I say. I worshipped him: you know I worshipped him--and he was
changed to me. He was no more my Francis of old--my dear, dear soldier.
He loved me before he saw you; and I loved him. Oh, God is my witness
how I loved him! Why did he not send you from among us? 'Twas only
his kindness, that could refuse me nothing then. And, young as you
were--yes, and weak and alone--there was evil, I knew there was evil in
keeping you. I read it in your face and eyes. I saw that they boded harm
to us--and it came, I knew it would. Why did you not die when you had
the small-pox--and I came myself and watched you, and you didn't know me
in your delirium--and you called out for me, though I was there at your
side? All that has happened since, was a just judgment on my wicked
heart--my wicked jealous heart. Oh, I am punished--awfully punished!
My husband lies in his blood--murdered for defending me, my kind, kind,
generous lord--and you were by, and you let him die, Henry!"

These words, uttered in the wildness of her grief, by one who was
ordinarily quiet, and spoke seldom except with a gentle smile and a
soothing tone, rung in Esmond's ear; and 'tis said that he repeated many
of them in the fever into which he now fell from his wound, and perhaps
from the emotion which such passionate, undeserved upbraidings caused
him. It seemed as if his very sacrifices and love for this lady and her
family were to turn to evil and reproach: as if his presence amongst
them was indeed a cause of grief, and the continuance of his life but
woe and bitterness to theirs. As the Lady Castlewood spoke bitterly,
rapidly, without a tear, he never offered a word of appeal or
remonstrance: but sat at the foot of his prison-bed, stricken only with
the more pain at thinking it was that soft and beloved hand which should
stab him so cruelly, and powerless against her fatal sorrow. Her words
as she spoke struck the chords of all his memory, and the whole of
his boyhood and youth passed within him; whilst this lady, so fond
and gentle but yesterday--this good angel whom he had loved and
worshipped--stood before him, pursuing him with keen words and aspect
malign.

"I wish I were in my lord's place," he groaned out. "It was not my fault
that I was not there, madam. But Fate is stronger than all of us, and
willed what has come to pass. It had been better for me to have died
when I had the illness."

"Yes, Henry," said she--and as she spoke she looked at him with a glance
that was at once so fond and so sad, that the young man, tossing up his
arms, wildly fell back, hiding his head in the coverlet of the bed. As
he turned he struck against the wall with his wounded hand, displacing
the ligature; and he felt the blood rushing again from the wound. He
remembered feeling a secret pleasure at the accident--and thinking,
"Suppose I were to end now, who would grieve for me?"

This hemorrhage, or the grief and despair in which the luckless young
man was at the time of the accident, must have brought on a deliquium
presently; for he had scarce any recollection afterwards, save of some
one, his mistress probably, seizing his hand--and then of the buzzing
noise in his ears as he awoke, with two or three persons of the prison
around his bed, whereon he lay in a pool of blood from his arm.

It was now bandaged up again by the prison surgeon, who happened to be
in the place; and the governor's wife and servant, kind people both,
were with the patient. Esmond saw his mistress still in the room when
he awoke from his trance; but she went away without a word; though
the governor's wife told him that she sat in her room for some time
afterward, and did not leave the prison until she heard that Esmond was
likely to do well.

Days afterwards, when Esmond was brought out of a fever which he had,
and which attacked him that night pretty sharply, the honest keeper's
wife brought her patient a handkerchief fresh washed and ironed, and at
the corner of which he recognized his mistress's well-known cipher
and viscountess's crown. "The lady had bound it round his arm when he
fainted, and before she called for help," the keeper's wife said. "Poor
lady! she took on sadly about her husband. He has been buried to-day,
and a many of the coaches of the nobility went with him--my Lord
Marlborough's and my Lord Sunderland's, and many of the officers of the
Guards, in which he served in the old King's time; and my lady has been
with her two children to the King at Kensington, and asked for justice
against my Lord Mohun, who is in hiding, and my Lord the Earl of Warwick
and Holland, who is ready to give himself up and take his trial."

Such were the news, coupled with assertions about her own honesty and
that of Molly her maid, who would never have stolen a certain trumpery
gold sleeve-button of Mr. Esmond's that was missing after his fainting
fit, that the keeper's wife brought to her lodger. His thoughts followed
to that untimely grave, the brave heart, the kind friend, the gallant
gentleman, honest of word and generous of thought, (if feeble of
purpose, but are his betters much stronger than he?) who had given him
bread and shelter when he had none; home and love when he needed them;
and who, if he had kept one vital secret from him, had done that
of which he repented ere dying--a wrong indeed, but one followed by
remorse, and occasioned by almost irresistible temptation.

Esmond took his handkerchief when his nurse left him, and very likely
kissed it, and looked at the bauble embroidered in the corner. "It
has cost thee grief enough," he thought, "dear lady, so loving and so
tender. Shall I take it from thee and thy children? No, never! Keep it,
and wear it, my little Frank, my pretty boy. If I cannot make a name for
myself, I can die without one. Some day, when my dear mistress sees my
heart, I shall be righted; or if not here or now, why, elsewhere; where
Honor doth not follow us, but where Love reigns perpetual."

'Tis needless to relate here, as the reports of the lawyers already have
chronicled them, the particulars or issue of that trial which ensued
upon my Lord Castlewood's melancholy homicide. Of the two lords engaged
in that sad matter, the second, my Lord the Earl of Warwick and Holland,
who had been engaged with Colonel Westbury, and wounded by him, was
found not guilty by his peers, before whom he was tried (under the
presidence of the Lord Steward, Lord Somers); and the principal, the
Lord Mohun, being found guilty of the manslaughter, (which, indeed, was
forced upon him, and of which he repented most sincerely,) pleaded his
clergy, and so was discharged without any penalty. The widow of the
slain nobleman, as it was told us in prison, showed an extraordinary
spirit; and, though she had to wait for ten years before her son was old
enough to compass it, declared she would have revenge of her husband's
murderer. So much and suddenly had grief, anger, and misfortune appeared
to change her. But fortune, good or ill, as I take it, does not change
men and women. It but develops their characters. As there are a thousand
thoughts lying within a man that he does not know till he takes up the
pen to write, so the heart is a secret even to him (or her) who has it
in his own breast. Who hath not found himself surprised into revenge, or
action, or passion, for good or evil, whereof the seeds lay within him,
latent and unsuspected, until the occasion called them forth? With the
death of her lord, a change seemed to come over the whole conduct and
mind of Lady Castlewood; but of this we shall speak in the right season
and anon.

The lords being tried then before their peers at Westminster, according
to their privilege, being brought from the Tower with state processions
and barges, and accompanied by lieutenants and axe-men, the commoners
engaged in that melancholy fray took their trial at Newgate, as became
them; and, being all found guilty, pleaded likewise their benefit
of clergy. The sentence, as we all know in these cases, is, that the
culprit lies a year in prison, or during the King's pleasure, and is
burned in the hand, or only stamped with a cold iron; or this part of
the punishment is altogether remitted at the grace of the Sovereign. So
Harry Esmond found himself a criminal and a prisoner at two-and-twenty
years old; as for the two colonels, his comrades, they took the matter
very lightly. Duelling was a part of their business; and they could not
in honor refuse any invitations of that sort.

But the case was different with Mr. Esmond. His life was changed by
that stroke of the sword which destroyed his kind patron's. As he lay in
prison, old Dr. Tusher fell ill and died; and Lady Castlewood appointed
Thomas Tusher to the vacant living; about the filling of which she had
a thousand times fondly talked to Harry Esmond: how they never should
part; how he should educate her boy; how to be a country clergyman, like
saintly George Herbert or pious Dr. Ken, was the happiest and greatest
lot in life; how (if he were obstinately bent on it, though, for her
part, she owned rather to holding Queen Bess's opinion, that a bishop
should have no wife, and if not a bishop why a clergyman?) she would
find a good wife for Harry Esmond: and so on, with a hundred pretty
prospects told by fireside evenings, in fond prattle, as the children
played about the hall. All these plans were overthrown now. Thomas
Tusher wrote to Esmond, as he lay in prison, announcing that his
patroness had conferred upon him the living his reverend father had
held for many years; that she never, after the tragical events which had
occurred (whereof Tom spoke with a very edifying horror), could see
in the revered Tusher's pulpit, or at her son's table, the man who was
answerable for the father's life; that her ladyship bade him to say that
she prayed for her kinsman's repentance and his worldly happiness; that
he was free to command her aid for any scheme of life which he might
propose to himself; but that on this side of the grave she would see him
no more. And Tusher, for his own part, added that Harry should have his
prayers as a friend of his youth, and commended him whilst he was in
prison to read certain works of theology, which his Reverence pronounced
to be very wholesome for sinners in his lamentable condition.

And this was the return for a life of devotion--this the end of years of
affectionate intercourse and passionate fidelity! Harry would have died
for his patron, and was held as little better than his murderer: he had
sacrificed, she did not know how much, for his mistress, and she threw
him aside; he had endowed her family with all they had, and she talked
about giving him alms as to a menial! The grief for his patron's loss;
the pains of his own present position, and doubts as to the future: all
these were forgotten under the sense of the consummate outrage which he
had to endure, and overpowered by the superior pang of that torture.

He writ back a letter to Mr. Tusher from his prison, congratulating
his Reverence upon his appointment to the living of Castlewood:
sarcastically bidding him to follow in the footsteps of his admirable
father, whose gown had descended upon him; thanking her ladyship for her
offer of alms, which he said he should trust not to need; and beseeching
her to remember that, if ever her determination should change towards
him, he would be ready to give her proofs of a fidelity which had never
wavered, and which ought never to have been questioned by that house.
"And if we meet no more, or only as strangers in this world," Mr. Esmond
concluded, "a sentence against the cruelty and injustice of which I
disdain to appeal; hereafter she will know who was faithful to her,
and whether she had any cause to suspect the love and devotion of her
kinsman and servant."

After the sending of this letter, the poor young fellow's mind was more
at ease than it had been previously. The blow had been struck, and he
had borne it. His cruel goddess had shaken her wings and fled: and left
him alone and friendless, but virtute sua. And he had to bear him up, at
once the sense of his right and the feeling of his wrongs, his honor
and his misfortune. As I have seen men waking and running to arms at a
sudden trumpet, before emergency a manly heart leaps up resolute;
meets the threatening danger with undaunted countenance; and, whether
conquered or conquering, faces it always. Ah! no man knows his strength
or his weakness, till occasion proves them. If there be some thoughts
and actions of his life from the memory of which a man shrinks with
shame, sure there are some which he may be proud to own and remember;
forgiven injuries, conquered temptations (now and then) and difficulties
vanquished by endurance.

It was these thoughts regarding the living, far more than any great
poignancy of grief respecting the dead, which affected Harry Esmond
whilst in prison after his trial: but it may be imagined that he could
take no comrade of misfortune into the confidence of his feelings,
and they thought it was remorse and sorrow for his patron's loss which
affected the young man, in error of which opinion he chose to leave
them. As a companion he was so moody and silent that the two officers,
his fellow-sufferers, left him to himself mostly, liked little very
likely what they knew of him, consoled themselves with dice, cards, and
the bottle, and whiled away their own captivity in their own way. It
seemed to Esmond as if he lived years in that prison: and was changed
and aged when he came out of it. At certain periods of life we live
years of emotion in a few weeks--and look back on those times, as on
great gaps between the old life and the new. You do not know how much
you suffer in those critical maladies of the heart, until the disease is
over and you look back on it afterwards. During the time, the suffering
is at least sufferable. The day passes in more or less of pain, and the
night wears away somehow. 'Tis only in after days that we see what the
danger has been--as a man out a-hunting or riding for his life looks at
a leap, and wonders how he should have survived the taking of it. O dark
months of grief and rage! of wrong and cruel endurance! He is old now
