The Project Gutenberg EBook of Wrecked but not Ruined, by R.M. Ballantyne

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Wrecked but not Ruined

Author: R.M. Ballantyne

Release Date: November 6, 2007 [EBook #23388]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WRECKED BUT NOT RUINED ***




Produced by Nick Hodson of London, England




Wrecked but not Ruined, by R.M. Ballantyne.

________________________________________________________________________
Set in the outback of Canada this book unfolds in the area with which
Ballantyne was so familiar.  If you like to read about this area you
will find lots in this book to amuse you.  It makes a good audiobook,
too.

________________________________________________________________________
WRECKED BUT NOT RUINED, BY R.M. BALLANTYNE.



CHAPTER ONE.

THE OUTPOST.

On the northern shores of the Gulf of Saint Lawrence there stood, not
very long ago, a group of wooden houses, which were simple in
construction and lowly in aspect.  The region around them was a vast
uncultivated, uninhabited solitude.  The road that led to them was a
rude one.  It wound round a rugged cliff, under the shelter of which the
houses nestled as if for protection from the cold winds and the
snowdrifts that took special delight in revelling there.

This group of buildings was, at the time we write of, an outpost of the
fur-traders, those hardy pioneers of civilisation, to whom, chiefly, we
are indebted for opening up the way into the northern wilderness of
America.  The outpost was named the Cliff after the bold precipice, near
the base of which it stood.  A slender stockade surrounded it, a
flag-staff rose in the centre of it, and a rusty old ship's carronade
reared defiantly at its front gate.  In virtue of these warlike
appendages the place was sometimes styled "the Fort."

When first established, the Cliff Fort lay far beyond the outmost bounds
of civilised life, but the progress of emigration had sent forward wave
after wave into the northern wilderness, and the tide rose at last until
its distant murmur began to jar on the ears of the traders in their
lonely dwelling; warning them that competition was at hand, and that, if
they desired to carry on the trade in peace, they must push still
further into the bush, or be hopelessly swallowed up in the advancing
tide.

When the unwelcome sounds of advancing civilisation first broke the
stillness of this desolate region, the chief of the trading-post was
seated at breakfast with his clerk.  He was a tall, good-looking, young
Englishman, named Reginald Redding.  The clerk, Bob Smart, was a sturdy
youth, who first saw the light among the mountains of Scotland.
Doubtless he had been named Robert when baptised, but his intimates
would not have understood you had you mentioned him by that name.

Bob had just helped Reginald to the wing of a salt goose, and was about
to treat himself to a leg of the same when the cook entered.

This cook was a man.  It may also be said with truth that he was more
than most men.  At the outpost men were few, and of women there were
none.  It may be imagined, then, that the cook's occupations and duties
were numerous.  Francois Le Rue, besides being cook to the
establishment, was waiter, chambermaid, firewood-chopper, butcher,
baker, drawer-of-water, trader, fur-packer, and interpreter.  These
offices he held professionally.  When "_off duty_," and luxuriating in
tobacco and relaxation, he occupied himself as an amateur shoemaker,
tailor, musician, and stick-whittler, to the no small advantage of
himself and his fellow-outcasts, of whom there were five or six, besides
the principals already mentioned.

Le Rue's face bore an expression of dissatisfaction and perplexity as he
entered the hall.

"Oh, Monsieur Redding," he exclaimed, "dem squatters, de black
scoundrils what is be called Macklodds has bin come at last."

"Ho, ho! the McLeods have come, have they?" said Redding, laying down
his knife and fork, and looking earnestly at the man; "I had heard of
their intention."

"Oui, yis, vraiment," said Le Rue, with vehemence, "dey has come to
Jenkins Creek more dan tree veeks pass.  Von sauvage come an' tell me he
have see dem.  Got put up von hut, an' have begin de saw-mill."

"Well, well, Francois," returned Redding, with a somewhat doubtful
smile, as he resumed his knife and fork, "bring some more hot water, and
keep your mind easy.  The McLeods can't do us much harm.  Their saw-mill
will work for many a day before it makes much impression on the forests
hereabouts.  There is room for us all."

"Forests!" exclaimed the cook, with a frown and a shrug of his
shoulders, "non, dey not hurt moche timber, but dey vill trade vid de
Injins--de sauvages--an' give dem drink, an' git all de furs, an' fat
den vill come of dat?"

Without waiting for a reply the indignant cook went in quest of hot
water, leaving the traders to discuss the salt goose and the news.

"That's bad news," said Bob Smart.  "What do you propose to do in the
circumstances?"

"Something definite must be done," replied Redding, "but I don't yet see
my way as to what."

Having finished the goose between them, and turned its skeleton over
with an inquisitive glance to make sure that nothing eatable had
escaped, the two friends finished their frugal meal with a cup of tea
and a fried cake of the simplest elements--flour and water--after which
they drew their chairs to the fireplace,--a large open chimney well
filled with blazing logs,--lighted their pipes, and entered on a
discussion of the McLeods and their present position.

When their pipes were emptied, Redding arose, and, turning his back to
the fire, said:--

"Well, Bob Smart, this is the outcome of our cogitations.  I am almost
certain that these McLeods have taken up their quarters within the
boundary of our Company's reserve lands, and if so, they must be routed
out of their nest at once.  Delay in such matters is often fatal.  The
law of use and wont, Bob, is soon established; but I have a strong
objection to act in uncertainty.  I will therefore drive up to the hut
of Jonas Bellew, with whom I shall leave horse and sleigh, as the track
ends at Boulder Creek, and proceed on snow-shoes to the new settlement
in Partridge Bay, where the surveyor lives, who has the plans of our
reserve lands.  I shall examine these plans, and if I find that our
property has been invaded, then--"

"Death and confusion to the McLeods," interrupted Bob.  "Well, perhaps
that is the best thing to do; but the spring is well advanced.  The
thermometer stood high this morning.  If a thaw should set in, you will
find the walking in snow-shoes bad."

"`If' is a word to which you attach too much importance, Bob.  We have
not at present to do with what may be, but with what is."

"True, nevertheless a prudent man has regard to probabilities," replied
Bob, with an air of much wisdom, as he relighted his pipe.

"Just so," returned Redding, "and as there is every probability that I
shall be absent a good many days, I leave you in charge of this
establishment, with strict injunctions to keep aloof from the McLeods,
and at the same time to keep an eye on them.  Francois Le Rue will
accompany me.  I shall start immediately, therefore be pleased to go and
tell Le Rue to get himself and the sleigh ready while I put on my
travelling gear."

Obedient to the order, Smart left the room while his superior clothed
himself in a leathern coat and leggings, fur cap, moccasins, and
mittens.

In half an hour Redding and his man stepped into a sleigh, which was
barely large enough to hold them.  They packed themselves up to the
armpits in bearskin rugs, and then Redding gave his rough little nag a
touch of the whip, which caused him to start forward with a jerk that
set all the bells on his harness ringing merrily.  Another minute and
they dashed out at the gate, swept round the base of the beetling cliff
that frowned above the outpost, and entered the sombre shadow of the
forest.



CHAPTER TWO.

THE RECLUSE OF BOULDER CREEK.

The road along which the travellers proceeded was desolate and dreary in
the extreme.

Already darkened by clouds and snow-drift, it was rendered still more
gloomy by overhanging and snow-laden branches of stunted pines.  It was
just broad enough to permit the passage of a single vehicle, being a
mere woodman's track, which had been extended beyond the ordinary limits
of such tracks, for his personal convenience, by Jonas Bellew, a trapper
who dwelt at that part of the coast already mentioned as Boulder Creek.
The track followed the windings of a streamlet which was at that time
covered with snow, and only distinguishable by the absence of bushes
along its course.  It turned now to the right, now to the left, as
rocks, or mounds, or cliffs presented obstacles.  In some places it
dived precipitately into a hollow that necessitated careful driving; in
others it ran straight up to the brow of a hill at an angle that obliged
the travellers not only to get out and walk, but also to aid their
panting pony by putting their shoulders to the back of the sleigh.  Here
and there a level patch occurred over which they trotted briskly, and
then down they went again by a steep incline into the bed of an
ice-buried stream, to find a similarly steep ascent on the other side.
Occasionally, coming to a wall-like cliff surrounded by a tangled and
trackless forest, they were forced to seek the shores of the sea, and
there, among rocks and ice-drift, pick their way slowly along.

Fortunately this road, just opposite to Jenkins Creek, where the McLeods
had commenced their squatting operations, ran along the shore at some
distance from the entrance to the creek, so that Redding could pass
without encountering the newcomers, whom he was anxious to avoid until
the question of the invasion of the Fur Company's rights was settled.

Despite their utmost efforts, night began to close upon the travellers
before they reached Bellew's shanty in Boulder Creek.

"Take care, Monsieur, there is von portion dangereux here," said
Francois Le Rue.

"Where?" asked Redding, as he checked the pony a little and looked
earnestly ahead.

"Ah! dere!" exclaimed Le Rue.

His remark was needless, for at that moment the sleigh turned over a
ledge of rock and pitched its occupants into a snow-drift.

"Killded?" gasped the Canadian, as he emerged from the snow with eyes,
ears, and nostrils stuffed full; "no--not quite!"

Satisfying himself that no bones were broken, he turned abruptly to look
for his companion, whose motionless legs sticking out of the drift were
the only visible portions of his body.

Anxiously and swiftly did Francois drag his master out, and great was
his relief when poor Redding looked at him with a bewildered gaze and
demanded to know what had happened!

"Oh!  I see, capsized," he said, rising and pressing his hand to his
brow, "I believe I must have hit my head against a stump, for I've been
slightly stunned.  However, `all's well that ends well.'  Not hurt,
Francois?"

"No, Monsieur,--not fatever."

"That's right, lend a hand to lift the sleigh--hoop! there--jump in."

Le Rue obeyed.  The bear-rug was replaced around them, and the pony,
which had stood as quiet as a lamb during the accident, started forward
again.

"Voila! von light," exclaimed the Canadian.

At that moment they had rounded the corner of a high cliff, and come
into view of Boulder Creek.  There was just light enough to make the
chaotic grandeur of the place visible in a ghostly degree.  Great
boulders and masses of rock, which had fallen from the neighbouring
mountains and cliffs, lay piled about in the creek or gully in wildest
confusion.  Some of these masses were as large as a small hut, but they
were of all sizes as well as shapes.  It was a weird scene, and
forbidding; nevertheless some human being had seen fit to take up his
abode there, as was made apparent by the light referred to by Le Rue.

Picking their way carefully among the boulders, the travellers at last
reached a log-hut which was so small, weather-worn, and grey, that, from
a short distance, it might have easily been mistaken, even in daylight,
for one of the rocks by which it was surrounded.

The door stood wide open, and through it streamed the light of a roaring
fire of wood.  So powerful was the contrast between the ruddy light and
the cold grey scene without, that to the approaching travellers it
appeared as if the whole interior of the hut glowed with fervent heat.

In the small doorway stood the figure of a man who was so large as
almost to fill up the entrance, and so black, by contrast with the
glowing background, that neither feature nor form was distinguishable
save his sharp outline.  The outline, however, was a remarkably telling
one.  It told of a broad chest and square shoulders, of massive limbs,
and an easy air, and a sturdy attitude, and suggested difficulty in the
way of entering that hut without leave asked and obtained.

"Hallo!" exclaimed the outline, in a voice so deep that it must have
been unfathomable.

"How d'ee do, Bellew?" cried Reginald Redding, as he drove into the
stream of light, pulled up, and sprang from the sleigh.

"Hearty, sir, hearty, thank 'ee," replied the outline, advancing and
becoming a little more visible on the surface as he did so.  "Hallo!  Le
Rue, how are 'ee?  Glad to see you both.  Step in.  A good fire on a
coldish night is cheery--ain't it, Mister Redding?"

"Indeed it is, Bellew, especially when the night happens to be also
darkish."

"Ha! oui," interposed Le Rue, bustling into the hut with the bear-rug,
"it vas so darkish dat ve capsize under de cliff an' a'most knock de
whole affair to smattoms--sleigh, cheval, an' peepil."

"I'm glad to see that the `peepil' is all right, however," said Bellew,
glancing at his visitors with what may be called a grave smile; "it
might have bin worse, for that's an ugly corner under the cliff, an'
needs careful drivin' even in daylight."

"I've not come off quite scatheless, however," said Redding, rubbing the
top of his head tenderly, "for here is a bump that would perplex the
whole college of phrenologists."

"Skin broke, sir?" asked Bellew, advancing and examining the part.  "No,
all right.  A good supper will be the best cure for it.  If I was a
phrenologist now, I'd name it the bump of top-heaviness.  Sit down, sir;
sit down, Le Rue, an' look after my kettle while I see to your nag."

So saying, their host went out and left his unexpected, but evidently
welcome, guests to make themselves comfortable.

Although Jonas Bellew was a recluse, he was by no means an ascetic.  He
was marked by deep gravity of countenance coupled with a kindly humorous
disposition.  No one knew where he came from, or why he had taken up his
abode in such a lonely spot.  Many of the rough fellows who hang on the
outskirts of the wilderness had tried as they said, to "pump" him on
these points, but Jonas was either a dry well or a deep one, for pumping
brought forth nothing.  He gained a livelihood by shooting, fishing,
trapping wild animals for their skins, and, sometimes, by doing what he
called "odd jobs" in the settlements.

"Your home appears to me to grow wilder every time I see it," said
Redding, as Bellew re-entered the hut, and busied himself in spreading
on a rough deal table the materials of a plain but substantial meal.

"That seems to be the idea of most men who come here," replied the
trapper, "but it's not many that favour me with a visit."

