
 "What a strange abode these nomadic Lapps have!"                     80

 "I went outside the tent with my host."                              92

 "They were really working hard for their living."                   104

 "The Lapp passed him like a flash and gave him a terrible blow."    124

 "It was a fight for life!"                                          128

 "Suddenly I saw them fly through the air."                          132

 "I advanced cautiously."                                            160

 "The mist was so thick that I could not see ahead."                 172

 "We remained seated on the ground, back to back."                   180

 "Once in a while I gave a look towards the ugly precipice."         184

 "I am clad in the garb of a fisherman."                             190

 "I saw a big towering wave rolling towards the stern of the
         ship."                                                      194

 "It is hard work to haul in the nets."                              212

 "We sailed towards North Cape."                                     228

 "He sat on his haunches and looked at us, uttering a tremendous
         growl."                                                      262




The Land of the Long Night




CHAPTER I

 ON THE WAY TO "THE LAND OF THE LONG NIGHT."--HOMESICK.--TEMPTED TO
     RETURN.--GIRLS AND BOYS SAY "NO; GO ON, GO ON, PAUL."--DECIDE TO
     CONTINUE MY JOURNEY.--WINTER COMING ON.--DON WARMER CLOTHING.--FROM
     STOCKHOLM NORTH.


At the time when this narrative begins I was travelling on the highroad
that skirts the southern coast of Sweden, then turns northward and
follows the shores of the Baltic Sea and the Gulf of Bothnia. I had
reached that part of the highway overlooking the narrow part of the
Sound which separates Sweden from Denmark, and had just left the pretty
little city of Helsingborg, and was looking at the hundreds of vessels
and steamers which were moving towards the Baltic or coming out of that
sea. It was a most beautiful sight.

I intended to follow the road as far north as it went, and enter "The
Land of the Long Night" when the sun was below the horizon for many
weeks. I had plenty of time to spare, for it was the beginning of
October.

On that day my horse was trotting at the usual gait of post-horses,
going at the rate of six or seven miles an hour. He knew every stone,
ditch, bridge, and house on the road, for many and many a time the dear
old animal had made this journey to and fro, often twice each way in a
day. He had been a post-horse for over twelve years.

His master, my driver, was very kind to him. He always alighted when
there was a hill to ascend, and walked by his side, gently urging him to
go on. When the top of the hill was reached, he stopped to give the
animal time to take breath; then, before starting again, he would give
him a piece or two of black bread, sometimes a potato, which he had put
in his pocket before leaving. The people of Scandinavia are always kind
to their dumb animals. Believe me, dear young folks, there is something
mean and cowardly about a man who is not kind to dumb creatures. Do not
have him for a friend!

As I looked at the ships sailing from the Baltic, a sudden yearning to
go home took hold of me, and I forgot all about "The Land of the Long
Night." I thought of all my dear friends, of all the school girls and
boys whom I knew, and I wanted to see them ever so much, even if it
might be only for a day. It would have made me so happy to look upon
their faces once more. Sometimes one feels very lonely when away from
home, and that day I could not help it. I thought of dear Jeannie, of
sweet Gertrude, and Hilda, of Marie, of Pauline, of Helen, of Laura, of
Blanche, of Julia, of Melissa, of Rowena, of Beatrice, of Alice, of
Maude, of Ethel, of Evelyn, of Louise, of Iphigenia, and others that
were also dear to me. Then I thought of Charles, of Arthur, of William,
of Louis, of John, of Robert, of Frank, of George, of Anson, of
Mortimer, of Eddy, of Fred, and of many others.

Many of the girls and boys call me either "Paul," "Friend Paul," or
"Uncle Paul;" some of the girls call me "Cousin Paul." These are my
chums, and it is lovely to have chums! I thought of the fun and good
times I had had with all of them; and I felt on that day that I loved
them more than ever as the great ocean separated us.

I thought of all the young folks whom I had talked to in the public or
private schools in many of the States,--for if there is a thing Friend
Paul likes, it is to talk to the young folks at school. As I thought of
this, it seemed as if I could see them listening to me.

I suddenly became very homesick. I said to myself: "I will go to America
and see my dear friends, and then return to go to 'The Land of the Long
Night.'" I could cross the Sound, go to Copenhagen,--the city was almost
in sight, and a nice city it is,--and take one of the comfortable
steamers of the Thingvalla Line, now called Scandinavian-American Line,
for New York.

As I was thinking of this, it suddenly seemed to me that I heard voices
coming across the Atlantic,--voices from friends, from school girls and
boys, calling: "Friend Paul, go on, go on to 'The Land of the Long
Night' first, and then come and tell us how it is there. Be of good
cheer; no harm will befall you; you will be all right."

Friend Paul cheered up when in imagination he had heard the voices of
his young friends urging him to go on, and he answered back: "Girls and
boys, you are right. I am going to 'The Land of the Long Night' first,
and on my return I will tell you all that I have seen there."

The dear old horse did not know what I was thinking, and was trotting
along--until suddenly he made a sharp turn and entered the post station,
the end of his journey. There I changed horse and vehicle, took some
refreshment, and started again. During the afternoon, I came to the town
of Landskrona. There, looking towards the Sound, I saw a steamer of the
Thingvalla Line gliding over the sea on its way to New York, and I said
aloud, "Steamer, you are not going to take me home this time. I am going
to 'The Land of the Long Night' first, to the land of snow and of gales,
the land of the bear, of the wolf, of the fox, and of the ermine.
Good-bye, good-bye, dear steamer! I hope you will have a successful
passage, and also that you have on board many Scandinavians going to our
shores to make their home with us."

I thought I again heard the same voices as before cry in response, "Good
for you, Paul, good for you!"

I felt now that I was a different man. It was as if I had actually heard
the voices of the dear young people encouraging me to go forward. I
suddenly became very restless and full of energy. I wanted my horse to
go faster. The young folks wished me to go to "The Land of the Long
Night." To that country I should go.

From that day I was ready for any amount of hardships, of bumping and
knocking about in sleighs. I did not care if my ears and nose were
frozen. All I wanted was to go ahead as fast as I could until I reached
"The Land of the Long Night."

I was in splendid condition for the journey. I had been roughing it all
summer in the mountain fastnesses of Norway. I had been living on cream,
butter, cheese, and milk, and had had bacon twice a week, on Sundays and
Wednesdays.

There were about one hundred and forty or fifty post stations before I
reached Haparanda, the most northern town on the Gulf of Bothnia.

Every day's travel brought me nearer to "The Land of the Long Night,"
but it was still a very long way off. I had yet to sleep at many post
stations and to change horses and vehicles many times.

I entered and left many towns--Malmoe, Skanoer, Falsterboe,
Trelleborg,--these last three were quaint, and the most southern towns
in Sweden. How charming, clean, and neat are those little Swedish towns!
I wished I could have tarried in some of them. Then I made a sweep
eastward, following the coast, and passed the town of Ystad, and then I
gradually drove northward, for now the road skirted the shores of the
Baltic. I passed Cimbrishamn, Soelvesberg, Carlshamn, and Carlskrona.

From Carlskrona the country was very pretty, and on my way to Kalmar,
and further north, I could see the Island of Oeland with its numerous
windmills.

The continuous driving, often in vehicles without springs, was rather
hard on my trousers, and I had not many pairs with me. In a word my
outfit was very modest. To travel comfortably, one must have as little
baggage as possible; for if you have too much baggage it is as if you
were dragging a heavy log behind you; you are not your own master, all
kinds of difficulties come in the way, and you have become the slave of
your own baggage. I bought clothing as I went along. I wished I could
have found some trousers lined with leather, like those used by cavalry
soldiers and by men who ride much on horseback; these would have lasted
a long time.

The weather was getting colder every day, winter was coming, and we had
had a few falls of snow. I passed Oscarshamn and Westervik, and at last
about the middle of November I arrived in Stockholm. But I had yet to
travel more than nine hundred miles to the north before I came to the
southern border of "The Land of the Long Night."

I had to give up my New York overcoat for warmer clothing and get a new
winter outfit. I bought a long, loose overcoat coming down to my feet.
It was lined throughout with thick, hairy wolf skin, which is said by
the people of the far North to be the warmest lining after the skin of
the reindeer. I also purchased big top-boots lined inside with furry
wolf skin, and a round beaver cap with a border which, when turned down,
protected my ears and came to my eyes. I had besides a big, heavy hood,
lined with fur, to be used when it was very cold. I had a pair of
leather mittens lined inside with fur (mittens keep one's hands much
warmer than gloves, because they are not so tight and they do not impede
the circulation of the blood). The collar of my coat rose above my head
and almost hid my face, and when I wore my hood only my eyes could be
seen. In this winter costume I could drive all day long without feeling
cold.

From Stockholm I drove to Upsala by road--for I did not care for railway
travelling--changing horse and vehicle at every post station. When I
reached Gefle winter had come on in earnest. Now all the houses in the
hamlets and towns which I passed had double windows, and at the bottom,
between the two, a layer of cotton was spread to absorb the moisture.
Instead of sliding sashes, French windows opening like doors are used,
and one of the panes of each is free for ventilation. The rooms were
uncarpeted, just as in summer, but rugs were spread on the floors.

As I drove along it was pleasant to see at the windows, behind the panes
of glass, pots filled with roses, carnations, geraniums, and other
plants, all bending in the direction of the sun. The sun gave scarcely
any heat, yet all the plants in a room liked to look towards the light.

I was always so glad at the end of the day's travelling to rest at a
post station, to enter the "stuga," the every-day room, where the family
lives, and see the blazing open fireplace. How nice it was to jump into
a feather bed, and sink deep and be lost in it, and to cover myself with
a quilt filled with feathers or eider down!

When I found a pleasant station I would remain there a day or two to
rest, for it was hard to drive day after day, for ten, twelve, or
fifteen, and sometimes eighteen hours. It was interesting to see the
whole family at their daily occupations; to see the women spin, weave,
or knit; to see the men make skees, wooden shoes, etc., and the girls
and boys go to school and have fun and play together, throwing snowballs
at each other; making snow forts and defending them against other girls
and boys that came to attack them. I wished sometimes to join in the
fray, for I love fun.

The snow was deep, and the snow-ploughs, drawn by three horses, were
seen pretty often on the road. The streets in the little hamlets or
towns were often blocked.

[Illustration: "On the road were many snow-ploughs at work levelling the
snow."]




CHAPTER II

 SNOW LAND.--A GREAT SNOWSTORM.--FEARFUL ROADS.--SNOW-PLOUGHS.--LOSING
     THE WAY.--INTELLIGENCE OF THE HORSES.--UPSET IN THE SNOW.--DIFFICULTY
     OF RIGHTING OURSELVES.--PERSPIRING AT 23 DEGREES BELOW ZERO.--HOUSES
     BURIED IN SNOW.


After I left the town of Gefle the blue sky became obscured by clouds, a
few flakes of snow began to fall, then more and more came down, and soon
they covered the old snow, that was already of good depth.

I had never before had a post-horse that went so fast, and I wondered
why. The horse knew, but I did not: a big snowstorm was coming! He was
afraid of being caught in it, and wanted to reach his stable in time.
After a while the snow fell so thick that I could see nothing ahead. To
make things worse it began to blow hard. Then I dropped the reins and
let the horse go as he pleased. As he knew that the snowstorm was
coming, so he would know how to get home. Suddenly he gave three or four
loud neighs; this announced his arrival. Then he turned to the right and
entered a yard. He had reached home!

The next morning it was still snowing; nevertheless I started. On the
road were many snow-ploughs at work levelling the snow. These ploughs
were of triangular form, made of heavy timber braced with crossbeams.
They were generally from eight to ten feet in width at the back, which
was the broadest part, and above fifteen feet long. They were drawn by
four horses and attended by two men.

The ploughs were followed by heavy rollers of wood to pack the snow.

Erik, my driver, said that every farmer is obliged to furnish horses to
clear the road and level it after a snowstorm. The number of horses he
furnishes is regulated by the size of his farm. It is very important
that the road should be kept in good order, and the rules are strictly
enforced.

As we travelled along the road, it was amusing to see horses and dogs
roll in the snow; they enjoyed it! The horses that we drove would often
take a nip of the snow, and the dogs that followed us did likewise.

One day when I was looking at two horses rolling in the snow near a
farmhouse, I suddenly felt a great jerk and we were pitched out
headlong! Our horse wanted to have some fun! So he fell on his side and
was about to roll over and enjoy himself, taking the sleigh with him;
but we did not see the joke. We succeeded in putting him on his legs.
The driver gave the animal a good scolding: "Shame on you, shame on
you!" he said to him. The horse listened, and seemed to understand him.
I think he felt ashamed.

As I journeyed further north the snow got deeper and deeper every hour.
Snow-ploughs were now drawn by five horses and generally attended by
three men.

The snowstorm still continued. It had now lasted over four days, and
with no appearance of holding up. The wind at times blew very hard.

In spite of the snowstorm I continued to travel, and had passed the
towns of Soederhamn, Hudicksvall, Sundsvall, and Hernoesand, with their
streets deep in snow. On the fifth day we had great difficulty in
getting along. In some places the ploughs had not passed over the road
since two days before, for we were now going through a very sparsely
inhabited country. Some parts of the road were honeycombed with holes
about fifteen inches deep, made in this way: each horse that had passed
stepped in the tracks of the one that had preceded him, and made the
holes deeper and deeper, which made walking very difficult for the poor
animals.

The further north I went the deeper became the snow, and travelling
became tedious. Our sleigh tumbled on one side or the other, upsetting
before we could say "Boo!" At each effort the poor horse made to
extricate himself, we had either to get out of the sleigh or be thrown
out. The poor brute would often sink to his neck, and sometimes almost
to his head when he got out of the snow-plough's track! In order to make
some headway and to make up for the slowness of the horses and bad
roads, I travelled sixteen and eighteen hours a day, and when I came to
a post station I was pretty tired.

The ploughs I now met were drawn by six horses and attended by four or
five men. The struggles of the poor animals as they sank continually in
the deep soft snow and tried to extricate themselves, were sometimes
painful to behold.

We always had to be careful to drive in the middle of the road, where
the snow had been cleared and packed by the snow-ploughs and the
rollers. Sometimes we could not tell where it was, for the land around
was deeply buried and the track of the snow-ploughs was hidden by the
fresh-fallen snow.

When my driver made a mistake and drove one way or the other outside of
the track, the first intimation we had was that of the horse sinking
suddenly, being ourselves upset or nearly so. Then we had a lot of
trouble putting him on the track again.

After several of these mishaps, the driver would say to me: "Now I am
going to let the horse go by himself. He is accustomed every year to go
in deep snow on this road and he will know the way." "You are right," I
would reply.

When let alone the horse would walk very slowly, and he would hesitate
each time he put either his right or his left foot on the snow, to make
sure he was on the right track. If he thought he was on the left of the
road, it was his left foot that came down first; if he thought he was to
the right of the road, he put his right foot down, but not until he had
made sure that he was right. If he saw that he had made a mistake, he
turned quickly to one side or the other.

One day the horse suddenly dropped one leg in the soft snow, on the
right side of the track; this unbalanced him and--bang! he fell on his
side, taking the sleigh with him. We were pitched out, and as we got up
on our legs we found ourselves in snow up to our necks. Only after
frantic efforts did the horse succeed in regaining his footing.

As I looked around and saw our situation, and that our three heads were
just above the snow, with the horse's head looking at us, his eyes
seeming to say, "Are you not going to help me out of this?" I gave a
great shout of laughter, for the sight was so funny that I forgot being
pitched out--and I said to the driver, "Don't we look funny, the horse
included, with only our heads and shoulders above the snow!"

What a job we had to extricate ourselves, put the poor horse on the
track again, and afterwards right the sleigh. Then we found that the
harness was broken in several places, and we had to mend it the best way
we could with numb fingers. I had stopped laughing, for there was no fun
in that.

"At this rate of travelling," I said to the driver, "it will take a
whole day to go three or four miles. I do not know whether our poor
horse will be able to stand it. Look at him! He looks as if he were a
smoke-stack, so much steam is rising from his body. He may become so
exhausted that he will not be able to go further, and we shall have to
abandon the sleigh."

"It is so," coolly replied Lars the driver, and he remained silent
afterwards.

I felt sorry for the poor horse, and reproached myself for not having
tarried at the last post station.

Then I said to Lars, "If the horse gives out, we will try to build a
snow house for us three. You have some hay, and he will not starve. As
for ourselves, we will try to reach some farm and get some food and some
oats for our poor dear horse. I am very sorry we have no skees with us."

There was so much snow over the land that I thought I had come to "Snow
