broken lights just before the operator placed out new ones. Mr. Green
stated what he knew of the affair. Then the chief turned to Dick & Co.
He put many questions. Some of these Dick and his friends answered
promptly. They even told how they had spoken against the proposed prank,
and how they had left when they had found that the other boys couldn't
be stopped. But as to the matter of naming the other boys all six
refused.

"We're not tell-tales," Dick explained.

"Justice Lee can make you tell," warned the chief of police.

"Can he?" inquired Dick. "Can he make us testify as to our suspicions?
And wouldn't warrants have to be issued for us before we could be taken
to court?"

"No; the judge could issue summons for you all."

"But could he make us testify as to suspicions--things we didn't
actually see?" propounded Dick Prescott.

The chief chewed the ends of his moustache.

"It's a criminal act to destroy the signal lights of a railway," the
police officer went on. "You ought to tell us, to serve the ends of
justice."

"Do you know what would happen to us?" Dick demanded.

"What?"

"Every other fellow in town would point his finger at us and cry
'tell-tale!' We'd get thrashed whenever we showed our heads outdoors."

"The police can protect you," declared the chief.

"Have you ever had policemen enough yet to prevent boys from fighting in
Gridley?" challenged Dick, though his tone was respectful. "Besides, the
thrashings wouldn't be anything to the scorn and contempt that we'd meet
everywhere."

"You ought to tell us," insisted the chief of police. "You're helping to
defeat the ends of justice."

"Aren't men clever enough to catch a few boy offenders, without
demanding that other boys 'queer' themselves with every fellow in town?"
insisted Dick.

"Justice Lee will make you tell, then," promised the chief, with a shake
of his head.

"He can't!" spoke Dick with spirit. "I'll go to prison, and stay there,
before I'll turn blab. So will my friends."

"That's just what we'll do," nodded Dave, his eyes flashing.

The chief chewed his moustache thoughtfully. At last he spoke.

"You boys can go now. I know where to find you when I want you."

Dick & Co. lost no time in getting away from this uncomfortable
examination.

"Prescott and Darrin are regular little schoolboy lawyers, Green,"
laughed the chief. "We can't make them tell a thing."

"But the judge ought to be able to."

"Perhaps Justice Lee has the power, Green, but we'd only make heroes of
Prescott, Darrin and the rest if we made martyrs of them in court. It
would stir up a lot of bad feeling in the town, too, and after that
every boy would feel that he had a grudge against you railway people.
You'd be annoyed in loads of ways that the police couldn't very well
stop. Prescott scored a hit with me when he said that a lot of grown men
ought to be able to catch a lot of boy offenders. Green, the best thing
to do is to put the case up to your railway company."

"The boys who threw the stones must be found and punished!" insisted the
operator firmly.

"Yes; I agree with you on that point. But you'd better go about in a
regular way. Wire your headquarters and ask that a railway detective be
sent here on the case. My department will give your detective all proper
aid in the matter."

One of the earliest trains, the next morning, brought Detective Briscoe.
That official, however, worked very quietly. No one guessed who or what
he was until he was ready to strike.

Ned Allen, Ben Alvord, Toby Ross, Wrecker Lane and Spoff Henderson were
badly scared that same next morning. They met on the way to school and
took blood-curdling oaths as to secrecy.

Then, in the school yard, Ben Alvord hunted up Prescott.

"Dick, you didn't give our names last night, did you?"

"No," Prescott replied.

"You won't name us, either, will you?"

"No, sirree!"

So the light-smashers felt more comfortable. By the day following they
breathed easily--until they reached school.

The boys were in the yard, playing until the gong rang for morning
session. A buggy drove up, and Detective Briscoe and two policemen in
plain clothes got out.

"Trouble!" was the word whispered. Ben Alvord and his fellows turned
pale. But the gong rang. Glad of any chance to bolt, Ben, Spoff, Ned,
Toby and Wrecker fled to the basement to get into line.

Briscoe and the two policemen appeared in Old Dut's room. The detective
drew some papers from his pocket, inquiring:

"You have boys here by the names of Allen, Alvord, Ross, Lane and
Henderson, haven't you?"

"Yes," nodded Old Dut.

"Ask them to step forward, please."

Pallid and shaking a bit, the five came forward.

"Boys," announced Detective Briscoe, "I am sorry to say that Justice Lee
wants to see you about a little matter on Hallowe'en. Get your hats and
coats and come along."

An awed hush crept over the eighth grade room after the youngsters had
left.

"I hope," declared Old Dut to his class, "that the young men haven't
been doing anything very wrong."

Under Justice Lee's questioning the five broke down, one after another
and confessed.

"Young men," said Justice Lee severely, "this is a more serious offense
than probably any of you understand. Destroying railway signals is
always likely to lead to destruction of property and even loss of life.
I advise the parents of these young men to explain to them carefully and
earnestly what a criminal thing these boys have done. If any of you
young men are ever brought before me again, on such a charge, I shall
send the offenders to a reformatory, there to remain until they are
twenty-one. For this first offense I trust that the parents will act as
my allies. On this occasion, therefore, I shall let the young men off
with a fine of ten dollars each."

The fines were paid. Ben and his comrades reached school just as the
afternoon session was closing. All five of the culprits were in an
angry, defiant frame of mind.

"Whoop! There's Ben Alvord," shouted one of the eighth grade boys, as
Central Grammar "let out." "Hullo, Ben! What did they do to you?"

"How long you got to go up for, Ben?" jeered another.

The five were quickly surrounded and eagerly questioned.

"That judge was too fresh!" declared Alvord wrathfully. "He called us
criminals, and gave us a fierce scolding. He made our folks pay ten
dollars apiece."

"That don't cost you anything," grinned one of the boys.

"Don't it, though?" Ben demanded angrily. "I had ten dollars and forty
cents saved up for a bicycle. Dad said that, as long as I liked such
expensive amusements, I could just pay the fine out of my bicycle money.
So, now, I've got only forty cents left. And all because some fellows
can't keep their mouths shut!"

"What do you mean by that, Ben?" demanded three or four fellows.

"I mean that Dick Prescott and his gang had to go and blab on us!"
charged Ben Alvord. "There he is, now, the sneak!"

There was a great bobbing of heads. All eyes, and most of them accusing
eyes, were turned on Dick & Co.




CHAPTER XX

DICK'S ACCUSER GETS TWO ANSWERS


Dick took a step forward, his face grave but his eyes steady as he faced
his accuser.

"Ben, I know you're sore, but if you say that I, or any of my friends
told on you, then you're going too far."

"You did!" asserted young Alvord. "You blabbed!"

"I didn't, and we didn't; not one of us."

"That's all right to say after you're caught," flared Ben.

"Then you call us liars?" flashed Dave Darrin, pushing his way forward,
his fists clenched.

"You are, if you say you didn't blab!" panted Ben.

"Fight! fight!" chorused some of the boys.

"Get back, Dave, and keep cool," warned Dick, pushing his chum to the
rear. "This thing started with me, and it's my affair first of all. Ben
Alvord, look at me! I don't want to fight. I don't believe in fighting
when it can be helped. I know you're sore, too, for you've just had a
rough time of it after what you thought was fun on Hallowe'en. But
you're going too far when you say we blabbed on you, for we didn't."

"Who did, then?" sneered Ben.

"I don't know. I'm not the chief of police. But, just because you can't
think who told on you, you needn't come along and accuse us."

"I say you did tell--you or some of your gang!" retorted Ben.

"It sounds likely enough. No one else knew," muttered a boy on the
outskirts of the crowd.

"Of course Dick Prescott or some of his gang told on us," insisted Ben
Alvord angrily.

Dick took a step closer to his accuser.

"Then, Ben, you're a liar!" Prescott announced coolly.

"Punch him!" urged another boy, giving Ben a shove toward Dick.

"You bet I will!" snapped Alvord. "I don't allow a sneak to call me a
liar."

"You can have a fight, if you insist on it," agreed Dick promptly. "You
can have it right away, too, and it will last as long as you want. But
this is no place. Let's go up to the field where we used to practise
football."

"Whoop! Come on!" The crowd of Grammar School boys surged around the
prospective fighters. A big procession started up the road.

"See here, this whole crowd can't come. So many will get us into
trouble," shouted Dave.

"I'll name ten of Dick's friends, and Ben can name ten of his friends.
No one else will be allowed to come."

Dave quickly called off his list of boys.

"Choose me, Ben!" "Choose me!" urged two score boys whom Dave had not
named. Ben looked around, trying to select those whom he thought most
friendly to himself.

Then the procession started again, containing only the chosen ones.
Others wanted to go, but knew they would be driven back by the selected
twenty friends.

The field was quickly reached. Ben Alvord was cooling, now. He would
have drawn out of the fight, but knew that he couldn't get out without
discredit. So Ben pulled off his jacket, took off his collar and tie and
made ready.

Dick, who was almost wholly free from anger, made similar preparations.
After a good deal of disputing Hoof Sadby was agreed upon as a referee
satisfactory to both sides. Dave, of course, seconded Dick, while Alvord
chose Toby Ross.

"Get your men forward," ordered Hoof. "Want to shake hands before you
start?"

"No," growled Ben sullenly.

"Time, then! Get busy!"

Dick threw himself on guard. He was not an amazingly good boxer, but he
had been through a few schoolboy fights.

"I'll knock your head off and wind it up!" blazed Ben, darting forward.

Instead of carrying out his programme, Ben received a blow on the nose
that staggered him.

"No fair!" howled Ben, retreating. "I hadn't my guard up."

"Your fault, then," mocked Dick.

"All fair," chimed in Hoof. "Stop talking and mix it up."

Ben soon advanced once more, rather disconcerted by the wholly steady
bearing of Dick Prescott.

This time Alvord tried to foul by hitting below the belt. Dick
sidestepped and drove in a blow against Ben's left eye.

"My! That was a socker!" yelled some of the spectators.

"You're hitting too hard. It ain't fair," wailed Ben, backing off.

"If all you want is gymnastics you don't need me," mocked Dick. "Fight,
if you're going to. If you're not, then get out of this."

"Mix it up!" ordered Hoof tersely, and the crowd took up the cry.

Ben suddenly let loose. For a few moments he kept young Prescott pretty
busy. Not all of Ben's blows were fended off, either. Dick's face began
to show red spots from the hard impacts of Alvord's tough little fists.

"Good boy, Ben! Go in and wind up his clock!" came the gleeful advice.
"You've got him started. Keep him going!"

Just then a blow under the chin sent Ben down to the ground.

"Keep back, Prescott. Don't hit him while he's down," cried several. But
this Dick had no intention of doing. Panting slightly, he waited for Ben
to get to his feet. This Alvord soon did, drawing away crouchingly.

"Got enough?" hailed Dick.

"I'll show you!" raged Ben, rushing forward.

Dick met him half-way, in a leap. Now it was Prescott on the offensive,
and he forced Ben all over the field, to the tune of encouraging yells.
Ben tried to save his face, but couldn't. Then Dick hammered his body.
Young Alvord lost all his coolness, and began to windmill his hands.
That settled it, of course. Any boy who forsakes his guard to take to
windmilling is as good as whipped. Dick watched his chance, then drove
in a blow on Ben's jaw that felled him flat.

"O-o-oh!" wailed Ben, holding to his jaw with both hands.

"Do you give it up?" demanded Hoof.

"No!"

"Then get up and go on with the fight."

"I will when I'm ready."

"You will, now, or I'll decide against you," warned Hoof.

"That booby broke my jaw," groaned Ben.

"You wag it pretty well, for a broken jaw," jeered Dave.

"Get up, Ben!"

"If you don't you're thrashed!"

"Don't give up like a baby!"

"Get up and fight," ordered Hoof. "One!"

Ben lay on the ground, glaring about him in sullen silence.

"Going to get up?" demanded Hoof. "Two!"

"Oh, Ben, don't let Prescott whip you as easily as that," implored
several of Alvord's backers.

"Get up!" commanded Hoof, putting the toe of his boot lightly against
Alvord's body. "Three!"

Still Ben refused to stir.

"Dick Prescott wins the fight," announced Hoof judicially. "Ben refused
three times to get up and go on."

As soon as Prescott began to don his discarded coat, Ben got to his
feet.

"Now, I have something to say to you, Alvord," announced Dave, going
over to the worsted one. "You insulted six of us and called us liars.
Dick is only one. You'll have to fight the rest of us, one a day, or
else apologize before the crowd."

"I won't apologize," glared Ben.

"All right, then. You'll fight me after school to-morrow," Darrin
declared.

"And me the day after," challenged Greg Holmes. Reade, Dalzell and
Hazelton all put in their claims for dates.

"You think you're going to bully me, don't you?" grunted Ben.

"No," Dave answered. "But when a fellow lies about me I'm going to make
him fight or apologize."

"I don't know whether I will fight you, or not," snarled Ben.

"Then you'll get a thrashing just the same, and be called a coward by
every decent fellow in school," flared Dave.

Ben quailed a bit inwardly. He had had all the fighting he wanted for
the present.

"That Prescott fellow is no good, anyway," sniffed Ben, as he walked
homeward with Toby Ross, the only one of the late spectators who had
stood by him.

