Project Gutenberg's The Chamber of Life, by Green Peyton Wertenbaker

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Chamber of Life

Author: Green Peyton Wertenbaker

Illustrator: Austin Briggs

Release Date: June 21, 2008 [EBook #25862]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE CHAMBER OF LIFE ***




Produced by Robert Cicconetti, Annie McGuire and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









+-------------------------------------------------------+
|This etext was produced from Amazing Stories July 1962,|
|a reprint from Amazing Stories October 1929. Extensive |
|research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.    |
|copyright on this publication was renewed.             |
+-------------------------------------------------------+




  A Classic Reprint from AMAZING STORIES, October, 1929

  Illustrated by BRIGGS

  [Illustration]




  The CHAMBER of LIFE

  By G. PEYTON WERTENBAKER

  _Copyright 1929 by E. P. Inc._




A Strange Awakening


My first sensation was one of sudden and intense cold--a chill that shot
through my body and engulfed it like a charge of electricity. For a
moment I was conscious of nothing else. Then I knew that I was sinking
in cold water, and that I was fighting instinctively against the need to
gasp and breathe fresh air. I kicked weakly and convulsively. I opened
my eyes, and squeezed them as the bright green water stung them. Then I
hung for an instant as if suspended over the depths, and began to rise.
It seemed hours before I shot up into the open air again, and was
drinking it deeply and thankfully into my tortured lungs. The sun
touched my head warmly like the hand of a benign god.

Floating gently, I lay there for a long while before I even looked about
me. There was a vague confusion in my head, as if I had just awakened
from a long sleep. Some memory seemed to be fading away, something I
could still feel but couldn't understand. Then it was gone, and I was
alone and empty, riding on the water.

I glanced about, puzzled. Only a few yards away rose the gray stone side
of the embankment, with its low parapet, and behind that the Drive.
There was no one in sight--not even a car--and the open windows of the
apartment houses across the Drive seemed very quiet. People slept behind
them.

It was only a little after dawn. The sun, blazing and tinted with pink,
had hardly risen from the horizon. The lake was still lined with dark
shadows behind glittering ridges of morning sunlight, and a cool breeze
played across my face, coming in from the east. Over the city, the sound
of a street car rumbling into motion, rising and dying away, was like
the crowing of a rooster in the country.

I shivered, and began to swim. A few strokes brought me to the
embankment, and I clambered up, almost freezing as I left the water. I
was fully clothed, but without a hat. Perhaps I had lost it in the lake.
I stood there, dripping and chill, and suddenly I realized that I had
just waked up in the water. I had no recollection of falling in, nor
even of being there. I could remember nothing of the previous night.

A glance along the Drive told me where I was, at the corner of
Fifty-third street. My apartment was only a few blocks away. Had I been
walking in my sleep? My mind was a blank, with turbulent, dim
impressions moving confusedly under the surface.

       *       *       *       *       *

Trembling in the chill air, I started up the Drive. I must go home and
change at once. Something came back to me--a memory of talking to some
friends at the Club. But was that last night? Or months ago? It was as
though I had slept for months. We had had a few drinks--could I have
been drunk, and fallen into the lake on my way home? But I never took
more than two or three drinks. Something had happened.

Then I remembered the stranger. We had all been sitting about the
lounge, talking of something. What had we been discussing? Franklin had
mentioned Einstein's new theory--we had played with that for a while,
none of us with the least idea what it was about. Then the conversation
had shifted slowly from one topic to another, all having to do with
scientific discoveries.

Somewhere in the midst of it, Barclay had come in. He brought with him a
guest--a straight, fine-looking man with a military carriage, about
fifty years old. Barclay had introduced him as Mr. Melbourne. He spoke
with a slight southern accent.

In some way Melbourne and I gravitated into a corner. We went on with
the conversation while the others left it. They drifted into politics,
drawing together about the table where the whisky stood, leaving us
alone.

Melbourne had been a fascinating man to talk to. He discussed topics
ranging from theories of matter to the early Cretan culture, and related
them all to one dominant scientific thread. He spoke like a man of wide
knowledge and experience.... As I walked up the Drive, bits of his
conversation came disjointedly back to me with the clarity and
significance of sentences from Spengler.

An early-morning taxi went by slowly as I crossed the Drive to my
apartment. The driver stopped a moment, and looked at me in
astonishment.

"What's the matter, buddy," he said, "you look all wet. Fall in the
lake?" I smiled, embarrassed.

"Looks that way, doesn't it?" I answered.

"Can I take you anywhere?"

"No," I said, "I live here." He grinned, and started off again.

"Wish I'd been in on that party!" he called back, as he drove away.

I frowned, once more with that puzzled feeling, and went in.




Melbourne's Story


Glimpses of last night came back to me and pieced themselves together
slowly while I undressed and drew the water for my bath.

Melbourne had been interested to know that I worked for Bausch, the
motion picture producer.

"Perhaps you could be of aid to me some time," he said thoughtfully.

"In what way, Mr. Melbourne?" I asked him.
