the houses, set fire to the town, and burned down all the most beautiful
buildings.

The Persians were so delighted at having attained their purpose, and
reduced the proud city to ashes, that they sent messengers to bear the
glad tidings to the Persian capital. Here the people became almost wild
with joy, and the whole city rang with their cries of triumph for many a
day.

As you will remember, Themistocles had allowed the Spartans to command
both the army and the navy. It was therefore a Spartan king,
Eu-ry-bi'a-des, who was head of the fleet at Salamis. He was a careful
man, and was not at all in favor of attacking the Persians.

Themistocles, on the contrary, felt sure that an immediate attack, being
unexpected, would prove successful, and therefore loudly insisted upon
it. His persistency in urging it finally made Eurybiades so angry that
he exclaimed, "Those who begin the race before the signal is given are
publicly scourged!"

Themistocles, however, would not allow even this remark to annoy him,
and calmly answered, "Very true, but laggards never win a crown!" The
reply, which Eurybiades thought was meant for an insult, so enraged him
that he raised his staff to strike the bold speaker. At this, the brave
Athenian neither drew back nor flew into a passion: he only cried,
"Strike if you will, but hear me!"

Once more Themistocles explained his reasons for urging an immediate
attack; and his plans were so good, that Eurybiades, who could but
admire his courage, finally yielded, and gave orders to prepare for
battle.




LIII. THE BATTLES OF SALAMIS AND PLATAEA.


The fleets soon came face to face; and Xerxes took up his post on a
mountain, where he sat in state upon a hastily built throne to see his
vessels destroy the enemy. He had made very clever plans, and, as his
fleet was far larger than that of the Greeks, he had no doubt that he
would succeed in defeating them.

His plans, however, had been found out by Aristides, who was in the
Island of AEgina; and this noble man rowed over to the fleet, at the risk
of being caught by the enemy, to warn his fellow-citizens of their
danger.

He first spoke to Themistocles, saying, "Rivals we have always been; let
us now set all other rivalry aside, and only strive which can best serve
his native country."

Themistocles agreed to this proposal, and managed affairs so wisely and
bravely that the Greeks won a great victory. When they came home in
triumph with much spoil, the women received them with cries of joy, and
strewed flowers under their feet.

From his high position, Xerxes saw his fleet cut to pieces; and he was
so discouraged by this check, that he hastened back to Persia, leaving
his brother-in-law Mar-do'ni-us with an army of three hundred thousand
men to finish the conquest of Greece.

The Greeks were so happy over their naval victory at Salamis, that they
all flew to arms once more; and Pau-sa'ni-as, the Spartan king, the
successor of Leonidas, was soon able to lead a large army against
Mardonius.

The two forces met at Pla-tae'a, and again the Greeks won, although
fighting against foes who greatly outnumbered them. Strange to relate,
while Pausanias was winning one battle at Plataea, the other Spartan
king, Eurybiades, defeated a new Persian fleet at Myc'a-le.

These two victories finished the rout of the greatest army ever seen.
Mardonius fled with the remnant of his host, leaving his tents, baggage,
and slaves to the Greeks, who thus got much booty.

We are told that the Spartans, entering the Persian camp, were greatly
amazed at the luxury of the tents. Pausanias stopped in the one that had
been occupied by Mardonius, and bade the slaves prepare a meal such as
they had been wont to lay before their master.

[Illustration: Return of the Victorious Greeks.]

Then, calling his own Helots, he gave orders for his usual supper. When
both meals were ready, they made the greatest contrast. The Persian tent
was all decked with costly hangings, the table was spread with many
kinds of rich food served in dishes of solid gold, and soft couches were
spread for the guests.

The Spartan supper, on the contrary, was of the plainest description,
and was served in ordinary earthenware. Pausanias called his officers
and men, and, after pointing out the difference between the Spartan and
the Persian style of living, he showed how much he liked plain food by
eating his usual supper.

To reward Pausanias for his bravery and for defeating the enemy, the
Greeks gave him a part of all that was best in the spoil. Next they set
aside one tenth of it for Apollo, and sent it to his priests at Delphi
as a token of gratitude for the favor of the god.

To show that they were grateful also to Zeus and Poseidon,--the gods
who, they thought, had helped them to win their battles by land and by
sea,--they sent statues to Olympia and Corinth; and they erected a
temple in honor of Athene, the goddess of defensive war, on the
battlefield of Plataea.




LIV. THE REBUILDING OF ATHENS.


The Persians had been driven out of Greece, and the war with them was
now carried on in Asia Minor instead of nearer home. The Greek army won
many battles here also, and even managed to free the city of Miletus
from the Persian yoke.

These triumphs encouraged all the Ionian cities, and they soon formed a
league with the other Greeks, promising to help them against the
Persians should the war ever be renewed. As soon as this alliance was
made, the Greek fleet returned home, bringing back to Athens as a trophy
the chains with which Xerxes had pretended to bind the rebellious sea.

In the mean while the Athenians, who had taken refuge on the
Peloponnesus, had returned to their native city, where, alas! they found
their houses and temples in ruins. The desolation was great; yet the
people were so thankful to return, that they prepared to rebuild the
town.

They were greatly encouraged in this purpose by an event which seemed to
them a good omen. Near the temple of the patron goddess of Athens stood
a sacred olive tree, supposed to have been created by her at the time
when the city received her name.

This place had been burned by the invaders, and the returning Athenians
sorrowfully gazed upon the blackened trunk of the sacred tree. Imagine
their delight, therefore, when a new shoot suddenly sprang up from the
ashes, and put forth leaves with marvelous speed.

The people all cried that the goddess had sent them this sign of her
continued favor to encourage them to rebuild the city, and they worked
with such energy that they were soon provided with new homes.

As soon as the Athenians had secured shelter for their families, they
began to restore the mighty walls which had been the pride of their
city. When the Spartans heard of this, they jealously objected, for they
were afraid that Athens would become more powerful than Sparta.

Of course, they did not want to own that they were influenced by so mean
a feeling as jealousy, so they tried to find a pretext to hinder the
work. This was soon found, and Spartan messengers came and told the
Athenians that they should not fortify the town, lest it should fall
again into the hands of the enemy, and serve them as a stronghold.

Themistocles suspected the real cause of these objections, and made up
his mind to use all his talents to help his fellow-citizens. He
therefore secretly assembled the most able men, and told them to go on
with the work as fast as possible, while he went to Sparta to talk over
the matter with the Lacedaemonians.

When he arrived at Sparta, he artfully prolonged the discussions until
the walls were built high enough to be defended. Of course, there was
now nothing to be done; but the Spartans were very angry, and waited
anxiously for an opportunity to punish the Athenians. This came after a
time, as you will see in the following chapters.




LV. DEATH OF PAUSANIAS.


Pausanias, the Spartan king, was very proud of the great victory he had
won over the Persians at Plataea, and of the praise and booty he had
received. He was so proud of it, that he soon became unbearable, and
even wanted to become ruler of all Greece.

Although he had at first pretended to despise the luxury which he had
seen in the tent of Mardonius, he soon began to put on the Persian dress
and to copy their manners, and demanded much homage from his subjects.
This greatly displeased the simple Greeks, and he soon saw that they
would not help him to become sole king.

In his ambition to rule alone, he entirely forgot all that was right,
and, turning traitor, secretly offered to help the Persians if they
would promise to make him king over all Greece.

This base plot was found out by the ephors, the officers whose duty it
was to watch the kings, and they ordered his own guards to seize him.
Before this order could be carried out, however, Pausanias fled, and
took refuge in a neighboring temple, where, of course, no one could lay
violent hands upon him.

As the ephors feared he might even yet escape to Persia, and carry out
his wicked plans, they ordered that the doors and windows of the temple
should all be walled up.

It is said that as soon as this command had been given, Pausanias'
mother brought the first stone, saying she preferred that her son should
die, rather than live to be a traitor.

Thus walled in, Pausanias slowly starved to death, and the barriers were
torn down only just in time to allow him to be carried out, and breathe
his last in the open air. The Spartans would not let him die in the
temple, because they thought his dying breath would offend the gods.

As Themistocles had been a great friend of Pausanias, he was accused of
sharing his plans. The Athenians therefore rose up against him in anger,
ostracized him, and drove him out of the country to end his life in
exile.

After wandering aimlessly about for some time, Themistocles finally went
to the court of Ar-tax-erx'es, the son and successor of Xerxes.

The Persian monarch, we are told, welcomed him warmly, gave him a
Persian wife, and set aside three cities to supply him with bread, meat,
and wine. Themistocles soon grew very rich, and lived on the fat of the
land; and a traveler said that he once exclaimed, "How much we should
have lost, my children and I, had we not been ruined by the Athenians!"

Artaxerxes, having thus provided for all Themistocles' wants, and helped
him to pile up riches, fancied that his gratitude would lead him to
perform any service the king might ask. He therefore sent for
Themistocles one day, and bade him lead a Persian army against the
Greeks.

But, although Themistocles had been exiled from his country, he had not
fallen low enough to turn traitor. He proudly refused to fight; and it
is said that he preferred to commit suicide, rather than injure the
people he had once loved so dearly.




LVI. CIMON IMPROVES ATHENS.


As soon as Themistocles had been banished from Athens, Aristides again
became the chief man of the city, and he was also made the head and
leader of the allies. He was so upright and just that all were ready to
honor and obey him, and they gladly let him take charge of the money of
the state.

In reward for his services, the Athenians offered him a large salary and
many rich gifts; but he refused them all, saying that he needed nothing,
and could afford to serve his country without pay.

He therefore went on seeing to all the public affairs until his death,
when it was found that he was so poor that there was not enough money
left to pay for his funeral. The Athenians, touched by his virtues, gave
him a public burial, held his name in great honor, and often regretted
that they had once been so ungrateful as to banish their greatest
citizen, Aristides the Just.

As Aristides had watched carefully over the money of the allied states,
and had ruled the Athenians very wisely, it is no wonder that Athens had
little by little risen above Sparta, which had occupied the first place
ever since the battle of Thermopylae.

The Athenians, as long as Aristides lived, showed themselves just and
liberal; but as soon as he was dead, they began to treat their former
allies unkindly. The money which all the Greek states furnished was now
no longer used to strengthen the army and navy, as first agreed, but was
lavishly spent to beautify the city.

Now, while it was a good thing to make their town as fine as possible,
it was certainly wrong to use the money of others for this purpose, and
the Athenians were soon punished for their dishonesty.

Cimon, the son of Miltiades, was made the head of the army, and won
several victories over the Persians in Asia Minor. When he returned to
Athens, he brought back a great deal of spoil, and generously gave up
all his share to improve the city and strengthen the walls.

[Illustration: The Theseum.]

It is said that Cimon also enlarged the beautiful gardens of the
A-cad'e-my; and the citizens, by wandering up and down the shady walks,
showed that they liked this as well as the Lyceum, which, you will
remember, Pisistratus had given them.

They also went in crowds to these gardens to hear the philosophers, who
taught in the cool porticoes or stone piazzas built all around them, and
there they learned many good things.

Cimon showed his patriotism in still another way by persuading the
people that the remains of Theseus, their ancient king, should rest in
the city. Theseus' bones were therefore brought from Scyros, the island
where he had been killed so treacherously, and were buried near the
center of Athens, where the resting-place of this great man was marked
by a temple called the The-se'um. A building of this name is still
standing in the city; and, although somewhat damaged, it is now used as
a museum, and contains a fine statue of Theseus.




LVII. THE EARTHQUAKE.


Cimon, as you have already seen, was very wealthy, and as generous as he
was rich. Besides spending so much for the improvement of the city, he
always kept an open house. His table was bountifully spread, and he
gladly received as guests all who chose to walk into his home.

Whenever he went out, he was followed by servants who carried full
