there were small lights mounted at intervals about the camp and along
the edge of the ledge. A spider ladder, with tiny platforms some
twenty feet one above the other, hung precariously to the cliff-face.
It descended the five hundred feet to the crater floor; and, behind
the camp, it mounted the jagged cliff-face to the upper rim height,
where a small observatory platform was placed.

Such was the outer aspect of the Grantline Treasure Camp near the
beginning of this Lunar night, when, unknown to Grantline and his men,
the _Planetara_ with its brigands was approaching. The night was
perhaps a sixth advanced. Full night. No breath of cloud to mar the
brilliant starry heavens. The quadrant Earth hung poised like a giant
mellow moon over Grantline's crater. A bright Earth, yet no air was
here on this Lunar surface to spread its light. Only a glow, mingling
with the spots of blue tube light on the poles along the cliff, and
the radiance from the lighted buildings.

No evidence of movement showed about the silent camp. Then a pressure
door in an end of the main building opened its tiny series of locks. A
bent figure came out. The lock closed. The figure straightened and
gazed about the camp. Grotesque, bloated semblance of a man! Helmeted,
with rounded dome hood, suggestion of an ancient sea diver, yet
goggled and trunked like a gas-masked fighter of the twentieth
century.

He stopped presently and disconnected metal weights which were upon
his shoes.

Then he stood erect again, and with giant strides bounded along the
cliff. Fantastic figure in the blue lit gloom! A child's dream of
crags and rocks and strange lights with a single monstrous figure in
seven league boots.

He went the length of the ledge with his twenty foot strides,
inspected the lights, and made adjustments. Came back, and climbed
with agile, bounding leaps up the spider ladder to the dome of the
crater top. A light flashed on up there. Then it was extinguished.

The goggled, bloated figure came leaping down after a moment.
Grantline's exterior watchman making his rounds. He came back to the
main building. Fastened the weights on his shoes. Signaled.

The lock opened. The figure went inside.

It was early evening. After the dinner hour and before the time of
sleep according to the camp routine Grantline was maintaining. Nine
P.M. of Earth Eastern American time, recorded now upon his Earth
chronometer. In the living room of the main building Johnny Grantline
sat with a dozen of his men dispersed about the room, whiling away as
best they could the lonesome hours.

"All as usual. This cursed Moon! When I get home--if I ever do--"

"Say your say, Wilks. But you'll spend your share of the gold leaf and
thank your constellations that you had your chance to make it."

"Let him alone! Come on, Wilks, take a hand here. This game is not any
good with three."

The man who had been outside flung his hissing helmet recklessly to
the floor and unsealed his suit. "Here, get me out of this. No, I
won't play. I can't play your cursed game with nothing at stake!"

A laugh went up at the sharp look Johnny Grantline flung from where he
sat reading in a corner of the room.

"Commander's orders. No gambling gold leafers tolerated here."

"Play the game, Wilks," Grantline said quietly. "We all know it's
infernal--this doing nothing."

"He's been struck by Earthlight," another man laughed. "Commander, I
told you not to let that guy Wilks out at night."

A rough but good-natured lot of men. Jolly and raucous by nature in
their leisure hours. But there was too much leisure here now. Their
mirth had a hollow sound. In older times, explorers of the frozen
Polar zones had to cope with inactivity, loneliness and despair. But
at least they were on their native world. The grimness of the Moon was
eating into the courage of Grantline's men. An unreality here. A
weirdness. These fantastic crags. The deadly silence. The nights,
almost two weeks of Earth time in length, congealed by the deadly
frigidity of space. The days of black sky, blazing stars and flaming
Sun, with no atmosphere to diffuse the Sun's heat radiating so swiftly
from the naked Lunar surface that the outer temperature still was
cold. And day and night, always the beloved Earth disc hanging poised
up near the zenith. From thinnest crescent to full Earth, then back to
crescent.

All so abnormal, irrational, disturbing to human senses.

With the mining work over, an irritability grew upon Grantline's men.
And perhaps since the human mind is so wonderful, elusive a thing,
there lay upon these men an indefinable sense of disaster. Johnny
Grantline felt it. He thought about it now as he sat in the room
corner watching Wilks being forced into the plaget game, and he found
the premonition strong within him. Unreasonably, ominous depression!
Barring the accident which had disabled his little spaceship when they
reached this small crater hole, his expedition had gone well. His
instruments, and the information he had from the former explorers, had
enabled him to pick up the catalyst vein with only one month of
search.

The vein had now been exhausted; but the treasure was here--enough to
supply every need on his Earth! Nothing was left but to wait for the
_Planetara_. The men were talking of that now.

"She ought to be well midway from Ferrok-Shahn by now. When do you
figure she'll be back here and signal us?"

"Twenty days. Give her another five now to Mars, and five in port.
That's ten. We'll pick her signals in three weeks, mark me!"

"Three weeks. Just give me three weeks of reasonable sunrise and
sunset! This cursed Moon! You mean, Williams, next daylight."

"Ha! He's inventing a Lunar language. You'll be a Moon man yet."

Olaf Swenson, the big blond fellow from the Scandia fiords, came and
flung himself down beside Grantline.

"Ay tank they bane without enough to do, Commander ----"

"Three weeks isn't very long, Ole."

"No. Maybe not."

From across the room somebody was saying, "If the _Comet_ hadn't
smashed on us, damn me but I'd ask the Commander to let some of us
take her back."

"Shut up, Billy. She _is_ smashed."

"You all agreed to things as they are," Johnny said shortly. "We all
took the same chances--voluntarily."

A dynamic little fellow, this Johnny Grantline. Short of temper
sometimes, but always just, and a perfect leader of men. In stature he
was almost as small as Snap. But he was thick-set, with a
smooth-shaven, keen-eyed, square-jawed face; and a shock of brown
tousled hair. A man of thirty-five, though the decision of his manner,
the quiet dominance of his voice made him seem older. He stood up now,
surveying the blue lit glassite room with its low ceiling close
overhead. He was bow-legged; in movement he seemed to roll with a
stiff-legged gait like some sea captains of former days on the deck of
his swaying ship. Odd looking figure! Heavy flannel shirt and
trousers, boots heavily weighted, and bulky metal-loaded belt strapped
about his waist.

He grinned at Swenson. "When the time comes to divide this treasure,
everyone will be happy, Ole."

The treasure was estimated to be the equivalent of ninety millions in
gold leaf. A hundred and ten millions in the gross as it now stood,
with twenty millions to be deducted by the Federated Refiners for
reducing it to the standard purity for commercial use. Ninety
millions, with only a million and a half to come off for expedition
expenses, and the _Planetara's_ share another million. A nice little
stake.

Grantline strode across the room with his rolling gait.

"Cheer up, boys. Who's winning there? I say, you fellows--"

An audiphone buzzer interrupted him, a call from the duty man in the
instrument room of the nearby building.

Grantline clicked the receiver. The room fell into silence. Any call
was unusual--nothing ever happened here in the camp.

The duty man's voice sounded over the room.

"Signals coming! Not clear. Will you come over, Commander?"

Signals!

It was never Grantline's way to enforce needless discipline. He
offered no objection when every man in the camp rushed through the
connecting passages. They crowded the instrument room where the tense
duty man sat bending over his radio receivers. The mirrors were
swaying.

The duty man looked up and met Grantline's gaze.

"I ran it up to the highest intensity, Commander. We ought to get
it--"

"Low scale, Peter?"

"Yes. Weakest infra-red. I'm bringing it up, even though it uses too
much of our power."

"Get it," said Grantline shortly.

"I got one slight television swing a minute ago--then it faded. I
think it's the _Planetara_."

"_Planetara_!" The crowding group of men chorused. How could it be the
_Planetara_?

But it was. The call came in presently. Unmistakably the _Planetara_,
turned back now from her course to Ferrok-Shahn.

"How far away, Peter?"

The duty man consulted the needles of his dial scale. "Close! Very
weak infra-red. But close. Around thirty thousand miles, maybe. It's
Snap Dean calling."

The _Planetara_ here within thirty thousand miles! Excitement and
pleasure swept the room. The _Planetara_ had for so long been awaited
eagerly!

The excitement communicated to Grantline. It was unlike him to be
incautious; yet now with no thought save that some unforeseen and
pleasing circumstance had brought the _Planetara_ ahead of time;
incautious, Grantline certainly was!

"Raise the barrage."

"I'll go. My suit is here."

A willing volunteer rushed out to the shed.

"Can you send, Peter?" Grantline demanded.

"Yes. With more power."

"Use it."

Johnny dictated the message of his location which we received. In his
incautious excitement he ignored the secret code.

An interval passed. No message had come from us--just Snap's routine
signal in the weak infra-red, which we hoped Grantline would not get.

The men crowding Grantline's instrument room waited in tense silence.
Then Grantline tried the television again. Its current weakened the
lights with the drain upon the distributors, and cooled the room with
a sudden deadly chill as the Erentz insulating system slowed down.

The duty man looked frightened. "You'll bulge out our walls,
Commander. The internal pressure--"

"We'll chance it."

They picked up the image of the _Planetara_. It shone clear on the
grid--the segment of star-field with a tiny cigar-shaped blob. Clear
enough to be unmistakable. The _Planetara_! Here now, over the Moon,
almost directly overhead, poised at what the altimeter scale showed to
be a fraction under thirty thousand miles.

The men gazed in awed silence. The _Planetara_ coming....

But the altimeter needle was motionless. The _Planetara_ was hanging
poised.

A sudden gasp went about the room. The men stood with whitening faces,
gazing at the _Planetara's_ image. And at the altimeter's needle. It
was moving now. The _Planetara_ was descending. But not with an
orderly swoop.

The grid showed the ship clearly. The bow tilted up, then dipped down.
But then in a moment it swung up again. The ship turned partly over.
Righted itself. Then swayed again, drunkenly.

The watching men were stricken in horrified silence. The _Planetara's_
image momentarily, horribly, grew larger. Swaying. Then turning
completely over, rotating slowly end over end.

The _Planetara_, out of control, was falling!




XXI


On the _Planetara_, in the radio room, Snap and I stood with Moa's
weapon upon us. Miko held Anita. Triumphant, possessive. Then as she
struggled, a gentleness came to this strange Martian giant. Perhaps he
really loved her. Looking back on it, I sometimes think so.

"Anita, do not fear me." He held her away from him. "I would not harm
you. I want your love." Irony came to him. "And I thought I had killed
you. But it was only your brother."

He partly turned. I was aware of how alert was his attention. He
grinned. "Hold them, Moa. Don't let them do anything foolish.... So,
little Anita, you were masquerading to spy on me? That was wrong of
you."

Anita had not spoken. She held herself tensely away from Miko. She had
flashed me a look, just one. What horrible mischance to have brought
on this catastrophe!

The completion of Grantline's message had come unnoticed by us all. We
remained tense.

"Look! Grantline again!" Snap said abruptly.

But the mirrors were steadying. We had no recording mechanism; the
rest of the message was lost.

No further message came. There was an interval while Miko waited. He
held Anita in the hollow of his great arm.

"Quiet, little bird. Do not fear me. I have work to do, Anita, this is
our great adventure. We will be rich, you and I. All the luxuries
these worlds can offer--all for us when this is over. Careful, Moa!
This Haljan has no wit."

Well could he say it. I, who had been so witless as to let this come
upon us! Moa's weapon prodded me. Her voice hissed at me with all the
venom of a reptile enraged. "So that was your game, Gregg Haljan! And
I was so graceless as to admit love for you!"

Snap murmured in my ear, "Don't move, Gregg! She's reckless."

She heard it. She whirled on him. "We have lost George Prince, it
seems. Well, we will survive without his scientific knowledge. And
you, Dean--and this Haljan, mark me--I will kill you both if you cause
trouble!"

Miko was gloating. "Don't kill them yet, Moa. What was it Grantline
said? Near the crater of Archimedes. Ring us down, Haljan. We'll
land."

He signaled the turret, gave Coniston the Grantline message, and
audiphoned it below to Hahn. The news spread about the ship. The
bandits were jubilant.

"We'll land now, Haljan. Come, Anita and I will go with you to the
turret."

I found my voice. "To what destination?"

"Near Archimedes. The Apennine side. Keep well away from the Grantline
camp. We will probably sight it as we descend."

