      brow was fixed and white;
    He met at last his father's eyes--but in
      them was no sight!

    Up from the ground he sprang, and gazed,
      but who could paint that gaze?
    They hushed their very hearts, that saw
      its horror and amaze;
    They might have chained him, as before
      that stony form he stood,
    For the power was stricken from his arm,
      and from his lip the blood.

    "Father!" at length he murmured low, and
      wept like childhood, then--
    Talk not of grief till thou hast seen
      the tears of warlike men!--
    He thought on all his glorious hopes,
      and all his young renown,--
    He flung the falchion from his side,
      and in the dust sat down.

    Then, covering with his steel-gloved
      hands his darkly mournful brow,
    "No more, there is no more," he said,
      "to lift the sword for now.
    My king is false, my hope betrayed, my
      father--oh! the worth,
    The glory and the loveliness, are passed
      away from earth!

    "I thought to stand where banners waved,
      my sire! beside thee yet--
    I would that _there_ our kindred
      blood on Spain's free soil had met!
    Thou wouldst have known my spirit then--for
      thee my fields were won,--
    And thou hast perished in thy chains, as
      though thou hadst no son!"

    Then, starting from the ground once more,
      he seized the monarch's rein,
    Amidst the pale and wildered looks of all
      the courtier train;
    And with a fierce, o'ermastering grasp,
      the rearing war-horse led,
    And sternly set them face to face--the
      king before the dead!--

    "Came I not forth upon thy pledge, my
      father's hand to kiss?--
    Be still, and gaze thou on, false king!
      and tell me what is this!
    The voice, the glance, the heart I
      sought--give answer, where are they?--
    If thou wouldst clear thy perjured soul,
      send life through this cold clay!

    "Into these glassy eyes put light--be
      still! keep down thine ire,--
    Bid these white lips a blessing speak--this
      earth is _not_ my sire!
    Give me back him for whom I strove, for
      whom my blood was shed,--
    Thou canst not--and a king! His dust be
      mountains on thy head!"

    He loosed the steed; his slack hand
      fell--upon the silent face
    He cast one long, deep, troubled look--then
      turned from that sad place:
    His hope was crushed, his after-fate untold
      in martial strain,--
    His banner led the spears no more amidst
      the hills of Spain.

Felicia Hemans




               --To thine own self be true;
    And it must follow, as the night the day,
    Thou canst not then be false to any man.

Shakespeare




MOSES' BARGAINS

"My second boy, Moses, whom I designed for business," says the vicar,
"received a sort of miscellaneous education at home."


As we were now to hold up our heads a little higher in the world, it
would be proper to sell the colt, which was grown old, at a neighbouring
fair, and buy us a horse that would carry single or double upon an
occasion, and make a pretty appearance at church or upon a visit. This
at first I opposed stoutly; but it was as stoutly defended. However, as
I weakened, my antagonists gained strength, till at last it was resolved
to part with him.

As the fair happened on the following day, I had intentions of going
myself; but my wife persuaded me that I had got a cold, and nothing
could prevail upon her to permit me from home.

"No, my dear," said she, "our son Moses is a discreet boy and can buy
and sell to very good advantage; you know all our great bargains are of
his purchasing. He always stands out and higgles, and actually tires
them till he gets a bargain."

As I had some opinion of my son's prudence, I was willing enough to
intrust him with this commission; and the next morning I perceived his
sisters mighty busy in fitting out Moses for the fair--trimming his
hair, brushing his buckles, and cocking his hat with pins.

The business of the toilet being over, we had at last the satisfaction
of seeing him mounted upon the colt, with a deal box before him to bring
home groceries in. He had on a coat made of that cloth they call thunder
and lightning, which, though grown too short, was much too good to be
thrown away. His waistcoat was of gosling green, and his sisters had
tied his hair with a broad black ribbon. We all followed him several
paces from the door, bawling after him: "Good luck, good luck!" till we
could see him no longer.

As night came on, I began to wonder what could keep our son so long at
the fair.

"Never mind our son," cried my wife, "depend upon it, he knows what he
is about. I'll warrant we'll never see him sell his hen of a rainy day.
I have seen him buy such bargains as would amaze one. I'll tell you a
good story about that, that will make you split your sides with
laughing. But, as I live, yonder comes Moses, without a horse, and the
box at his back."

As she spoke, Moses came slowly on foot, and sweating under the deal
box, which he had strapped round his shoulders like a pedlar.

"Welcome, welcome, Moses; well, my boy, what have you brought us from
the fair?"

"I have brought you myself," cried Moses, with a sly look, and resting
the box on the dresser.

"Ah, Moses," cried my wife, "that we know, but where is the horse?"

"I have sold him," cried Moses, "for three pounds, five shillings, and
twopence."

"Well done, my good boy," returned she, "I knew you would touch them
off. Between ourselves, three pounds, five shillings, and twopence is no
bad day's work. Come, let us have it then."

"I have brought back no money," cried Moses again. "I have laid it all
out in a bargain, and here it is," pulling out a bundle from his breast:
"here they are, a gross of green spectacles, with silver rims and
shagreen cases."

"A gross of green spectacles!" repeated my wife, in a faint voice. "And
you have parted with the colt and brought us back nothing but a gross of
green paltry spectacles!"

"Dear mother," cried the boy, "why won't you listen to reason? I had
them a dead bargain, or I should not have bought them. The silver rims
will sell for double the money."

"A fig for the silver rims!" cried my wife, in a passion. "I dare swear
they won't sell for above half the money at the rate of broken silver,
five shillings an ounce."

"You need be under no uneasiness," cried I, "about selling the rims; for
they are not worth sixpence, for I perceive they are only copper
varnished over."

"What," cried my wife, "not silver, the rims not silver!"

"No," cried I, "no more silver than your sauce-pan."

"And so," returned she, "we have parted with the colt, and have only got
a gross of green spectacles, with copper rims and shagreen cases! A
murrain take such trumpery! The blockhead has been imposed upon, and
should have known his company better."

"There, my dear," cried I, "you are wrong; he should not have known them
at all."

"Marry, hang the idiot," returned she, "to bring me such stuff; if I had
them, I would throw them into the fire."

"There again you are wrong, my dear," cried I; "for though they be
copper, we will keep them by us, as copper spectacles, you know, are
better than nothing."

By this time the unfortunate Moses was undeceived. He now saw that he
had been imposed upon by a prowling sharper, who, observing his figure,
had marked him for an easy prey. I therefore asked the circumstances of
his deception. He sold the horse, it seems, and walked the fair in
search of another. A reverend-looking man brought him to a tent, under
pretence of having one to sell.

"Here," continued Moses, "we met another man, very well dressed, who
desired to borrow twenty pounds upon these, saying that he wanted money
and would dispose of them for a third of the value. The first gentleman,
who pretended to be my friend, whispered me to buy them, and cautioned
me not to let so good an offer pass. I sent for Mr. Flamborough, and
they talked him up as finely as they did me, and so at last we were
persuaded to buy the two gross between us."

Goldsmith: "The Vicar of Wakefield."




THE MAPLE


    Oh, tenderly deepen the woodland glooms,
      And merrily sway the beeches;
    Breathe delicately the willow blooms,
      And the pines rehearse new speeches;
    The elms toss high till they reach the sky,
      Pale catkins the yellow birch launches,
    But the tree I love all the greenwood above
      Is the maple of sunny branches.

    Let who will sing of the hawthorn in spring,
      Or the late-leaved linden in summer;
    There's a word may be for the locust tree,
      That delicate, strange new-comer;
    But the maple it glows with the tint of the rose
      When pale are the spring-time regions,
    And its towers of flame from afar proclaim
      The advance of Winter's legions.

    And a greener shade there never was made
      Than its summer canopy sifted,
    And many a day, as beneath it I lay,
      Has my memory backward drifted
    To a pleasant lane I may walk not again,
      Leading over a fresh, green hill,
    Where a maple stood just clear of the wood--
      And oh! to be near it still!

Charles G. D. Roberts




THE GREENWOOD TREE


        Under the greenwood tree
        Who loves to lie with me,
        And tune his merry note
        Unto the sweet bird's throat,
    Come hither, come hither, come hither;
        Here shall he see
        No enemy
    But winter and rough weather.

        Who doth ambition shun
        And loves to live i' the sun;
        Seeking the food he eats,
        And pleased with what he gets,
    Come hither, come hither, come hither;
        Here shall he see
        No enemy
    But winter and rough weather.

Shakespeare




Believe me, thrift of time will repay you in after life with a usury of
profit beyond your most sanguine dreams, and the waste of it will make
you dwindle, alike in intellectual and moral stature, beyond your
darkest reckonings.

Gladstone




LAKE SUPERIOR


Before turning our steps westward from this inland ocean, Lake Superior,
it will be well to pause a moment on its shore and look out over its
bosom. It is worth looking at, for the world possesses not its equal.
Four hundred English miles in length, one hundred and fifty miles in
breadth, six hundred feet above Atlantic level, nine hundred feet in
depth; one vast spring of purest crystal water, so cold that during
summer months its waters are like ice itself, and so clear that hundreds
of feet below the surface the rocks stand out as distinctly as though
seen through plate-glass. Follow in fancy the outpourings of this
wonderful basin; seek its future course in Huron, Erie, and Ontario--in
that wild leap from the rocky ledge which makes Niagara famous through
the world. Seek it farther still--in the quiet loveliness of the
Thousand Isles, in the whirl and sweep of the Cedar Rapids, in the
silent rush of the great current under the rocks at the foot of Quebec.
Ay, and even farther away still--down where the lone Laurentian Hills
come forth to look again upon that water whose earliest beginnings they
cradled along the shores of Lake Superior. There, close to the sounding
billows of the Atlantic, two thousand miles from Superior, these
hills--the only ones that ever last--guard the great gate by which the
St. Lawrence seeks the sea.

There are rivers whose currents, running red with the silt and mud of
their soft alluvial shores, carry far into the ocean the record of their
muddy progress; but this glorious river system, through its many lakes
and various names, is ever the same crystal current, flowing pure from
the fountain-head of Lake Superior. Great cities stud its shores; but
they are powerless to dim the transparency of its waters. Steam-ships
cover the broad bosom of its lakes and estuaries; but they change not
the beauty of the water, no more than the fleets of the world mark the
waves of the ocean. Any person looking at a map of the region bounding
the great lakes of North America will be struck by the absence of rivers
flowing into Lakes Superior, Michigan, or Huron, from the south--in
fact, the drainage of the States bordering these lakes on the south is
altogether carried off by the valley of the Mississippi. It follows that
this valley of the Mississippi is at a much lower level than the surface
of the lakes. These lakes, containing an area of some seventy-three
thousand square miles, are therefore an immense reservoir held high over
the level of the great Mississippi valley, from which they are separated
by a barrier of slight elevation and extent.

Major W. F. Butler: "The Great Lone Land."




THE RED RIVER PLAIN


The plain through which Red River flows is fertile beyond description.
At a little distance it seems one vast level plain, through which the
windings of the river are marked by a dark line of woods fringing the
whole length of the stream. Each tributary has also its line of
forest,--a line visible many miles away over the great sea of grass. As
one travels on, there first rise above the prairie the tops of the
trees; these gradually grow larger, until finally, after many hours, the
river is reached. Nothing else breaks the uniform level. Standing upon
the ground, the eye ranges over many miles of grass; standing on a
wagon, one doubles the area of vision; and to look over the plains from
an elevation of twelve feet above the earth, is to survey at a glance a
space so vast that distance alone seems to bound its limits. The effect
of sunset over these oceans of verdure is very beautiful. A thousand
hues spread themselves upon the grassy plains, a thousand tints of gold
are cast along the heavens, and the two oceans of the sky and of the
earth intermingle in one great blaze of glory at the very gates of the
setting sun. But to speak of sunsets now is only to anticipate. Here, at
the Red River, we are only at the threshold of the sunset; its true home
lies yet many days' journey to the west--there, where the long shadows
of the vast herds of bison (used to) trail slowly over the immense
plains, huge and dark against the golden west--there, where the red man
still sees, in the glory of the setting sun, the realization of his
dream of heaven.
