The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Cash Boy, by Horatio Alger Jr.

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Cash Boy

Author: Horatio Alger Jr.

Release Date: March 14, 2006 [EBook #296]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE CASH BOY ***




Produced by An Anonymous Volunteer and David Widger





THE CASH BOY

By Horatio Alger, Jr.




PREFACE


"The Cash Boy," by Horatio Alger, Jr., as the name implies, is a story
about a boy and for boys.

Through some conspiracy, the hero of the story when a baby, was taken
from his relatives and given into the care of a kind woman.

Not knowing his name, she gave him her husband's name, Frank Fowler.
She had one little daughter, Grace, and showing no partiality in the
treatment of her children, Frank never suspected that she was not his
sister. However, at the death of Mrs. Fowler, all this was related to
Frank.

The children were left alone in the world. It seemed as though they
would have to go to the poorhouse but Frank could not become reconciled
to that.

A kind neighbor agreed to care for Grace, so Frank decided to start out
in the world to make his way.

He had many disappointments and hardships, but through his kindness to
an old man, his own relatives and right name were revealed to him.



CHAPTER I

A REVELATION


A group of boys was assembled in an open field to the west of the public
schoolhouse in the town of Crawford. Most of them held hats in their
hands, while two, stationed sixty feet distant from each other, were
"having catch."

Tom Pinkerton, son of Deacon Pinkerton, had just returned from Brooklyn,
and while there had witnessed a match game between two professional
clubs. On his return he proposed that the boys of Crawford should
establish a club, to be known as the Excelsior Club of Crawford, to play
among themselves, and on suitable occasions to challenge clubs belonging
to other villages. This proposal was received with instant approval.

"I move that Tom Pinkerton address the meeting," said one boy.

"Second the motion," said another.

As there was no chairman, James Briggs was appointed to that position,
and put the motion, which was unanimously carried.

Tom Pinkerton, in his own estimation a personage of considerable
importance, came forward in a consequential manner, and commenced as
follows:

"Mr. Chairman and boys. You all know what has brought us together. We
want to start a club for playing baseball, like the big clubs they have
in Brooklyn and New York."

"How shall we do it?" asked Henry Scott.

"We must first appoint a captain of the club, who will have power to
assign the members to their different positions. Of course you will want
one that understands about these matters."

"He means himself," whispered Henry Scott, to his next neighbor; and
here he was right.

"Is that all?" asked Sam Pomeroy.

"No; as there will be some expenses, there must be a treasurer to
receive and take care of the funds, and we shall need a secretary to
keep the records of the club, and write and answer challenges."

"Boys," said the chairman, "you have heard Tom Pinkerton's remarks.
Those who are in favor of organizing a club on this plan will please
signify it in the usual way."

All the boys raised their hands, and it was declared a vote.

"You will bring in your votes for captain," said the chairman.

Tom Pinkerton drew a little apart with a conscious look, as he supposed,
of course, that no one but himself would be thought of as leader.

Slips of paper were passed around, and the boys began to prepare their
ballots. They were brought to the chairman in a hat, and he forthwith
took them out and began to count them.

"Boys," he announced, amid a universal stillness, "there is one vote for
Sam Pomeroy, one for Eugene Morton, and the rest are for Frank Fowler,
who is elected."

There was a clapping of hands, in which Tom Pinkerton did not join.

Frank Fowler, who is to be our hero, came forward a little, and spoke
modestly as follows:

"Boys, I thank you for electing me captain of the club. I am afraid I am
not very well qualified for the place, but I will do as well as I can."

The speaker was a boy of fourteen. He was of medium height for his age,
strong and sturdy in build, and with a frank prepossessing countenance,
and an open, cordial manner, which made him a general favorite. It was
not, however, to his popularity that he owed his election, but to the
fact that both at bat and in the field he excelled all the boys, and
therefore was the best suited to take the lead.

The boys now proceeded to make choice of a treasurer and secretary.
For the first position Tom Pinkerton received a majority of the votes.
Though not popular, it was felt that some office was due him.

For secretary, Ike Stanton, who excelled in penmanship, was elected, and
thus all the offices were filled.

The boys now crowded around Frank Fowler, with petitions for such places
as they desired.

"I hope you will give me a little time before I decide about positions,
boys," Frank said; "I want to consider a little."

"All right! Take till next week," said one and another, "and let us have
a scrub game this afternoon."

The boys were in the middle of the sixth inning, when some one called
out to Frank Fowler: "Frank, your sister is running across the field. I
think she wants you."

Frank dropped his bat and hastened to meet his sister.

"What's the matter, Gracie?" he asked in alarm.

"Oh, Frank!" she exclaimed, bursting into tears. "Mother's been bleeding
at the lungs, and she looks so white. I'm afraid she's very sick."

"Boys," said Frank, turning to his companions, "I must go home at once.
You can get some one to take my place, my mother is very sick."

When Frank reached the little brown cottage which he called home, he
found his mother in an exhausted state reclining on the bed.

"How do you feel, mother?" asked our hero, anxiously.

"Quite weak, Frank," she answered in a low voice. "I have had a severe
attack."

"Let me go for the doctor, mother."

"I don't think it will be necessary, Frank. The attack is over, and I
need no medicines, only time to bring back my strength."

But three days passed, and Mrs. Fowler's nervous prostration continued.
She had attacks previously from which she rallied sooner, and her
present weakness induced serious misgivings as to whether she would
ever recover. Frank thought that her eyes followed him with more than
ordinary anxiety, and after convincing himself that this was the case,
he drew near his mother's bedside, and inquired:

"Mother, isn't there something you want me to do?"

"Nothing, I believe, Frank."

"I thought you looked at me as if you wanted to say something." "There
is something I must say to you before I die."

"Before you die, mother!" echoed Frank, in a startled voice.

"Yes. Frank, I am beginning to think that this is my last sickness."

"But, mother, you have been so before, and got up again."

"There must always be a last time, Frank; and my strength is too far
reduced to rally again, I fear."

"I can't bear the thought of losing you, mother," said Frank, deeply
moved.

"You will miss me, then, Frank?" said Mrs. Fowler.

"Shall I not? Grace and I will be alone in the world."

"Alone in the world!" repeated the sick woman, sorrowfully, "with
little help to hope for from man, for I shall leave you nothing. Poor
children!"

"That isn't what I think of," said Frank, hastily.

"I can support myself."

"But Grace? She is a delicate girl," said the mother, anxiously. "She
cannot make her way as you can."

"She won't need to," said Frank, promptly; "I shall take care of her."

"But you are very young even to support yourself. You are only
fourteen."

"I know it, mother, but I am strong, and I am not afraid. There are a
hundred ways of making a living."

"But do you realize that you will have to start with absolutely nothing?
Deacon Pinkerton holds a mortgage on this house for all it will bring in
the market, and I owe him arrears of interest besides."

"I didn't know that, mother, but it doesn't frighten me."

"And you will take care of Grace?"

"I promise it, mother."

"Suppose Grace were not your sister?" said the sick woman, anxiously
scanning the face of the boy.

"What makes you suppose such a thing as that, mother? Of course she is
my sister."

"But suppose she were not," persisted Mrs. Fowler, "you would not recall
your promise?"

"No, surely not, for I love her. But why do you talk so, mother?" and
a suspicion crossed Frank's mind that his mother's intellect might be
wandering.

"It is time to tell you all, Frank. Sit down by the bedside, and I will
gather my strength to tell you what must be told."

"Grace is not your sister, Frank!"

"Not my sister, mother?" he exclaimed. "You are not in earnest?"

"I am quite in earnest, Frank."

"Then whose child is she?"

"She is my child."

"Then she must be my sister--are you not my mother?"

"No, Frank, I am not your mother!"



CHAPTER II

MRS. FOWLER'S STORY


"Not my mother!" he exclaimed. "Who, then, is my mother?"

"I cannot tell you, Frank. I never knew. You will forgive me for
concealing this from you for so long."

"No matter who was my real mother since I have you. You have been a
mother to me, and I shall always think of you as such."

"You make me happy, Frank, when you say that. And you will look upon
Grace as a sister also, will you not?"

"Always," said the boy, emphatically. "Mother, will you tell all you
know about me? I don't know what to think; now that I am not your son I
cannot rest till I learn who I am."

"I can understand your feelings, Frank, but I must defer the explanation
till to-morrow. I have fatigued myself with talking, but to-morrow you
shall know all that I can tell you."

"Forgive me for not thinking of your being tired, mother," and he bent
over and pressed his lips upon the cheek of the sick woman. "But don't
talk any more. Wait till to-morrow."

In the afternoon Frank had a call from Sam Pomeroy.

"The club is to play to-morrow afternoon against a picked nine, Frank,"
he said. "Will you be there?"

"I can't, Sam," he answered. "My mother is very sick, and it is my duty
to stay at home with her."

"We shall miss you--that is, all of us but one. Tom Pinkerton said
yesterday that you ought to resign, as you can't attend to your duties.
He wouldn't object to filling your place, I fancy."

"He is welcome to the place as soon as the club feels like electing
him," said Frank. "Tell the boys I am sorry I can't be on hand. They had
better get you to fill my place."

"I'll mention it, but I don't think they'll see it in that light.
They're all jealous of my superior playing," said Sam, humorously.
"Well, good-bye, Frank. I hope your mother'll be better soon."

"Thank you, Sam," answered Frank, soberly. "I hope so, too, but she is
very sick."

The next day Mrs. Fowler again called Frank to the bedside.

"Grace is gone out on an errand," she said, "and I can find no better
time for telling you what I know about you and the circumstances which
led to my assuming the charge of you."

"Are you strong enough, mother?"

"Yes, Frank. Thirteen years ago my husband and myself occupied a
small tenement in that part of Brooklyn know as Gowanus, not far from
Greenwood Cemetery. My husband was a carpenter, and though his wages
were small he was generally employed. We had been married three years,
but had no children of our own. Our expenses were small, and we got on
comfortably, and should have continued to do so, but that Mr. Fowler
met with an accident which partially disabled him. He fell from a high
scaffold and broke his arm. This was set and he was soon able to work
again, but he must also have met with some internal injury, for his full
strength never returned. Half a day's work tired him more than a
whole day's work formerly had done. Of course our income was very much
diminished, and we were obliged to economize very closely. This preyed
upon my husband's mind and seeing his anxiety, I set about considering
how I could help him, and earn my share of the expenses.

"One day in looking over the advertising columns of a New York paper I
saw the following advertisement:

"'For adoption--A healthy male infant. The parents are able to pay
liberally for the child's maintenance, but circumstances compel them to
delegate the care to another. Address for interview A. M.'

"I had no sooner read this advertisement than I felt that it was just
what I wanted. A liberal compensation was promised, and under our
present circumstances would be welcome, as it was urgently needed. I
mentioned the matter to my husband, and he was finally induced to give
his consent.

"Accordingly, I replied to the advertisement.

"Three days passed in which I heard nothing from it. But as we were
sitting at the supper table at six o'clock one afternoon, there came a
knock at our front door. I opened it, and saw before me a tall stranger,
a man of about thirty-five, of dark complexion, and dark whiskers. He
was well dressed, and evidently a gentleman in station.

"'Is this Mrs. Fowler?' he asked.

"'Yes, sir,' I answered, in some surprise

"'Then may I beg permission to enter your house for a few minutes? I
have something to say to you.'

"Still wondering, I led the way into the sitting-room, where your
father--where Mr. Fowler----"

"Call him my father--I know no other," said Frank.

"Where your father was seated.

"'You have answered an advertisement,' said the stranger.

"'Yes, sir,' I replied.

"'I am A. M.,' was his next announcement. 'Of course I have received
many letters, but on the whole I was led to consider yours most
favorably. I have made inquiries about you in the neighborhood, and the
answers have been satisfactory. You have no children of your own?'

"'No, sir.'

"'All the better. You would be able to give more attention to this
child.'

"'Is it yours, sir?' I asked

"'Ye-es,' he answered, with hesitation. 'Circumstances,' he continued,
'circumstances which I need not state, compel me to separate from it.
Five hundred dollars a year will be paid for its maintenance.'

"Five hundred dollars! I heard this with joy, for it was considerably
more than my husband was able to earn since his accident. It would make
us comfortable at once, and your father might work when he pleased,
without feeling any anxiety about our coming to want.

"'Will that sum be satisfactory?' asked the stranger.

"'It is very liberal,' I answered.

"'I intended it to be so,' he said. 'Since there is no difficulty on
this score, I am inclined to trust you with the care of the child. But I
must make two conditions.'

"'What are they, sir?'

"'In the first place, you must not try to find out the friends of the
child. They do not desire to be known. Another thing, you must move from
Brooklyn.'

"'Move from Brooklyn?' I repeated.

"'Yes,' he answered, firmly. 'I do not think it necessary to give you a
reason for this condition. Enough that it is imperative. If you decline,
our negotiations are at an end.'

"I looked at my husband. He seemed as much surprised as I was.

"'Perhaps you will wish to consult together,' suggested our visitor.
'If so, I can give you twenty minutes. I will remain in this room while
you go out and talk it over.'

"We acted on this hint, and went into the kitchen. We decided that
though we should prefer to live in Brooklyn, it would be worth our while
to make the sacrifice for the sake of the addition to our income. We
came in at the end of ten minutes, and announced our decision. Our
visitor seemed to be very much pleased.

"'Where would you wish us to move?' asked your father.

"'I do not care to designate any particular place. I should prefer some
small country town, from fifty to a hundred miles distant. I suppose you
will be able to move soon?'

"'Yes, sir; we will make it a point to do so. How soon will the child
be placed in our hands? Shall we send for it?'

"'No, no,' he said, hastily. 'I cannot tell you exactly when, but it
will be brought here probably in the course of a day or two. I myself
shall bring it, and if at that time you wish to say anything additional
you can do so.'

"He went away, leaving us surprised and somewhat excited at the change
that was to take place in our lives. The next evening the sound of
wheels was heard, and a hack stopped at our gate. The same gentleman
descended hurriedly with a child in his arms--you were the child,
Frank--and entered the house.

"'This is the child,' he said, placing it in my arms, 'and here is the
first quarterly installment of your pay. Three months hence you will
receive the same sum from my agent in New York. Here is his address,'
and he placed a card in my hands. 'Have you anything to ask?'
