attack was possible. Schwerin would fain have waited until the next
morning, since his troops were fatigued by their long marches, and
had been on foot since midnight. The Austrians, however, were
expecting a reinforcement of thirty thousand men, under Daun, to
join them hourly; and the king therefore decided on an attack, the
terrible obstacles presented by the swamps being altogether
unnoticed.

With incredible speed the Prussians moved away to their left, and
by eleven o'clock were in readiness to attack the right flank of
the Austrian position. Browne, however, was in command here and, as
soon as the intention of the Prussians was perceived, he swung back
the right wing of the army at right angles to its original
position, so that he presented a front to the Prussian attack;
massing thickly at Sterbold, a village at the edge of the swamps.
Rapidly the whole of the artillery and cavalry were formed up on
this face and, quick as had been the advance of the Prussians, the
Austrians were perfectly ready to meet them.

Led by General Winterfeld, the Prussians rushed forward; but as
they advanced, a terrific artillery fire was opened upon them.
Winterfeld was wounded severely, and the troops fell back.

The main body now advanced, under Schwerin, and the whole again
pressed forward. In spite of the incessant rain of grape and case
shot, the Prussians advanced until they reached the pleasant green
meadows they had seen in the distance. Then the real nature of the
ground was at once disclosed.

The troops sunk to the knee, and in many cases to the waist, in the
treacherous mud. Soldiers less valiant and less disciplined would
have shrunk, appalled at the obstacle; but the Prussians struggled
on, dragging themselves forward with the greatest difficulty
through mud, through slush, through a rain of grape from upwards of
two hundred cannon, and through a storm of musketry fire from the
infantry. Regiment after regiment, as it reached the edge of the
dismal swamp, plunged in unhesitatingly, crawling and struggling
onward.

Never in the annals of warfare was there a more terrible fight. For
three hours it continued, without a moment's interval. Thousands of
the assailants had fallen, and their bodies had been trodden deep
into the swamp, as their comrades pressed after them. Sometimes a
regiment struggled back out of the mire, thinking it beyond mortal
power to win victory under such terms; but the next moment they
reformed and flung themselves into the fight again. Schwerin,
seeing the regiment named after him recoil, placed himself at their
head; and shouting, "Follow me, my sons!" led them till he fell
dead, struck by five grape shot.

The Austrians fought as stoutly, Marshal Browne leading them till a
cannonball took off his foot, and he was carried into Prague, to
die there six weeks later.

While this terrible struggle was going on, the Prussian cavalry had
made a very wide circuit round the ponds and lakelets, and charged
the Austrian horse on Browne's extreme right. The first lines were
broken by it, but so many and strong were they that the Prussians
were brought to a standstill. Then they drew back and charged a
second, and a third time.

The Austrians gave way. Prince Karl himself, brave if incapable,
did his best to rally them, but in vain; and at last they fled in
headlong rout, pursued for many miles by Ziethen's horsemen.

Still the infantry struggle was maintained. At last the Prussian
right wing, hitherto not engaged, though suffering from the
artillery fire on the heights, had their turn. General Mannstein
discovered that, at the angle where Browne threw back the right
wing of the army to face the Prussians, there was a gap. The troops
there had gradually pressed more to their right, to take part in
the tremendous conflict; and the elbow was, therefore, defended
only by a half-moon battery.

Through the fish tanks he led the way, followed by Princes Henry
and Ferdinand. The whole division struggled through the mud, drove
back the Austrians hastily brought up to oppose them, captured the
battery, and poured into the gap; thereby cutting the Austrian army
in two, and taking both halves in flank.

This was the deciding point of the battle. The Austrian right,
already holding its own with difficulty, was crumpled up and forced
to fall back hastily. The other half of the army, isolated by the
irruption, threw itself back and endeavoured to make a fresh stand
at spots defended by batteries and stockades.

But all was in vain. The Prussians pressed forward exultingly, the
fresh troops leading the way. In spite of the confusion occasioned
by the loss of their commanders, and of the surprise caused by the
sudden breakup of their line by the inrush of Mannstein and the
princes, the Austrians fought stoutly. Four times they made a
stand, but the Prussians were not to be denied. The Austrian guns
that had been captured were turned against them and, at last giving
way they fled for Prague, where some 40,000 of them rushed for
shelter, while 15,000 fled up the valley of the Moldau.

Had it not been that an accident upset Frederick's calculations,
the greater portion of the Austrians would have been obliged to lay
down their arms. Prince Maurice of Dessau had been ordered to move
with the right wing of Keith's army, 15,000 strong, to take up a
position in the Austrian rear. This position he should have reached
hours before, but in his passage down a narrow lane, some of the
pontoons for bridging the river were injured. When the bridge was
put together, it proved too short to reach the opposite bank.

The cavalry in vain endeavoured to swim the river. The stream was
too strong, and Frederick's masterly combination broke down; and
the bulk of the Austrians, instead of being forced to surrender,
were simply shut up in Prague with its garrison.

The battle of Prague was one of the fiercest ever fought. The
Austrian army had improved wonderfully, since the Silesian war.
Their artillery were specially good, their infantry had adopted
many of the Prussian improvements and, had Browne been in sole
command, and had he escaped unwounded, the issue of the day might
have been changed. The Prussians lost 12,500 men, killed and
wounded; the Austrians, including prisoners, 13,300. Frederick
himself put the losses higher, estimating that of the Austrians at
24,000, of whom 5000 were prisoners, that of the Prussians at
18,000, "without counting Marshal Schwerin, who alone was worth
about 10,000."

It is evident that the king's estimate of the loss of the Austrians
must have been excessive. They had the advantage of standing on the
defensive. The Prussian guns did but comparatively little service,
while their own strong batteries played with tremendous effect upon
the Prussians, struggling waist deep in the mud. There can
therefore be little doubt that the latter must have suffered, in
killed and wounded, a much heavier loss than the Austrians.

Impassive as he was, and accustomed to show his feelings but
little, Frederick was deeply affected at the loss of his trusted
general, and of the splendid soldiers who had been so long and
carefully trained; and even had Prague fallen, the victory would
have been a disastrous one for him; for, threatened as he was by
overwhelming forces, the loss of 5000 men, to him, was quite as
serious as that of 20,000 men to the Confederates.

In Keith's army there had been considerable disappointment, when it
became known that they were to remain impassive spectators of the
struggle, and that while their comrades were fighting, they had
simply to blockade the northern side of the city.

"You will have plenty of opportunities," the marshal said quietly
to his aides-de-camp, on seeing their downcast look. "This war is
but beginning. It will be our turn, next time. For it is a great
task the king has set himself, in attempting to carry the strong
position that the Austrians have taken up; and he will not do it
without very heavy loss. Tomorrow you may have reason to
congratulate yourselves that we have had no share in the business."

Nevertheless, as the day went on, and the tremendous roar of battle
rolled down upon them--terrible, continuous, and never ceasing, for
three hours--even Keith walked, in a state of feverish anxiety,
backwards and forwards in front of his tent; while the troops stood
in groups, talking in low tones, and trying to pierce with their
eyes the dun-coloured cloud of smoke that hung over the combatants
on the other side of Prague.

When at last the din of battle went rolling down towards that city, the
feeling of joy was intense. In many, the relief from the tension and the
long excitement was so great that they burst into tears. Some shook hands
with each other, others threw their caps into the air, and then a few
voices burst into the well-known verse of the church hymn:

Nun danket alle Gott,
Mit herzen, mund und haenden.
Of which our English translation runs:
Now thank we all our God,
With hands and hearts and voices.

And in a moment it was taken up by 30,000 deep voices, in a solemn
chorus, the regimental bands at once joining in the jubilant
thanksgiving. Pious men were these honest, Protestant, hard-fighting
soldiers; and very frequently, on their long marches, they beguiled
the way by the stirring hymns of the church. Keith and those around
him stood bare-headed, as the hymn was sung, and not a word was
spoken for some time after the strains had subsided.

"That is good to listen to," Keith said, breaking the silence. "We
have often heard the psalm singing of Cromwell's Ironsides spoken
of, with something like contempt; but we can understand, now, how
men who sing like that, with all their hearts, should be almost
invincible."

"It is the grandest thing that I have ever heard, marshal," Fergus
said. "Of course, I have heard them when they were marching, but it
did not sound like this."

"No, Fergus; it was the appropriateness of the occasion, and
perhaps the depth of the feelings of the men, and our own sense of
immense relief, that made it so striking.

"Listen! There is a fresh outburst of firing. The Austrians have
fallen back, but they are fighting stoutly."

The chief effect of this great battle was of a moral, rather than
material kind. Prague was not a strong place, but with a garrison
of 50,000 men it was too well defended to assault; and until it was
taken Frederick could not march on, as he had intended, and leave
so great a force in the rear.

The moral effect was, however, enormous. The allies had deemed that
they had a ridiculously easy task before them, and that Frederick
would have to retreat before their advancing armies, and must at
last see that there was nothing but surrender before him. That he
should have emerged from behind the shelter of the Saxon hills, and
have shattered the most formidable army of those that threatened
him, on ground of their own choosing, intrenched and fortified,
caused a feeling of consternation and dismay. The French army, the
Russians, and the united force of the French with the German
Confederacy were all arrested on their march, and a month elapsed
before they were again set in motion.

Marshal Daun, who had arrived at Erdwise, fell back at once when
the news reached him and, taking post at the entrance of the
defile, he made the greatest efforts to increase his army.
Reinforcements were sent to him from Vienna and all the adjacent
country. The Duke of Bevern was posted with 20,000 men to watch
him; and Frederick sat down, with all his force, to capture Prague.

The siege train was hurried up from Dresden, and on the 9th of May
his batteries on the south side of the city, and those of Keith on
the north, opened fire on the city. For a month missiles were
poured into the town. Magazines were blown up, and terrible
destruction done, but the garrison held out firmly. At times they
made sorties, but these were always driven in again, with much
loss. But 50,000 men behind fortifications, however weak, were not
to be attacked. Every approach to the city was closely guarded, but
it became at last evident that, as long as the provisions held out,
Prague was not to be taken.

The cannonade became less incessant, and after a month almost died
away; for Daun had by this time gathered a large army, and it was
evident that another great battle would have to be fought. If this
was won by the Prussians, Prague would be forced to surrender. If
not, the city was saved.

It was not until the 12th of June that Daun, a cautious and careful
general, in accordance with urgent orders from Vienna prepared to
advance. His force had now grown to 60,000; 40,000 of the garrison
of Prague could be spared, to issue out to help him. Frederick had
under 70,000, and of these a great portion must remain to guard
their siege works. Thus, then, all the advantages lay with the
relieving army.

Several officers in disguise were despatched, by Daun, to carry
into Prague the news of his advance; and to warn Prince Karl to
sally out, with the whole of his force, and fall upon the Prussians
as soon as he attacked them in the rear. So vigilant, however, were
the besiegers that none of these messengers succeeded in entering
Prague.

On the 13th Frederick set out, with 10,000 men--to be followed by
4000 more under Prince Maurice, two days later, these being all
that could be spared from the siege works--to join Bevern, who had
fallen back as Daun advanced. The junction effected, Frederick
joined Bevern and approached Daun, who was posted in a strong
position near Kolin, thirty-five miles from Prague. On the 17th
Prince Maurice arrived, and after several changes of position the
armies faced each other on the 18th, within a short distance of
Kolin.

Daun's new position was also a strong one, and was, in fact, only
to be assailed on its right; and the Prussian army was moved in
that direction, their order being to pay no attention to the
Austrian batteries or musketry fire, but to march steadily to the
spot indicated. This was done. Ziethen dashed with his hussars upon
the Austrian cavalry, drawn up to bar the way; defeated them, and
drove them far from the field; while Hulsen's division of infantry
carried the village of Preezer, on the Austrian flank, in spite of
the Austrian batteries. So far Frederick's combination had worked
admirably.

Hulsen then attacked a wood behind it, strongly held by the
Austrians. Here a struggle commenced which lasted the whole day,
the wood being several times taken and lost. He was not supported,
owing to a mistake that entirely upset Frederick's plan of battle.

While three miles away from the point where the attack was to be
delivered, Mannstein, whose quickness of inspiration had largely
contributed to the victory of Prague, now ruined Frederick's plan
by his impetuosity. The corn fields, through which his division was
marching towards the assault of the Austrian left, were full of
Croats; who kept up so galling a fire that, losing all patience, he
turned and attacked them.

The regiment to which he gave the order cleared the Croats off; but
these returned, strongly reinforced. The regiments coming behind,
supposing that fresh orders had arrived, also turned off; and in a
short time the whole division, whose support was so sorely needed
by Hulsen, were assaulting the almost impregnable Austrian position
in front.

Another mistake--this time arising from a misconception of a too
brief and positive order, given by Frederick himself--led Prince
Maurice, who commanded the Prussian centre, to hurl himself in like
manner against the Austrians.

For four hours the battle raged. In spite of their disadvantages,
the Prussians fought so desperately that Daun believed the day to
be lost, and sent orders to the troops to retreat to Suchdol; but
the commander of the Saxon cavalry considered the order premature
and, gathering a large body of Austrian infantry, charged with them
and his own cavalry so furiously upon Hulsen that the latter was
forced to retreat.

The movement spread, the attack slackened, and the other division
moved down the hill. They had all but won. Frederick in vain tried
to rally and lead them afresh to the attack. They had done all that
men could do, and the battle ceased. Daun scarcely attempted to
pursue, and the Prussians marched away, unmolested even by cavalry;
some of the regiments remaining firm in their position until
nightfall, repulsing with great loss the one attempt of the
Austrians at pursuit; and Ziethen's cavalry did not draw off until
ten at night.

The Austrians had 60,000 men in the field, of whom they lost in
killed and wounded 8114. The Prussians, who began the day 34,000
strong, lost 13,773; of whom the prisoners, including all the
wounded, amounted to 5380.

The news of the disaster, and with it Frederick's order to prepare
to raise the siege of Prague at once, came like a thunderclap upon
the Prussian camp. Frederick himself, and the remnant of his army,
arrived there in good order, with all their baggage train, a day
later. The cannon were removed from the batteries, the magazines
emptied; and in good order, and without any attempt on the part of
the Austrian garrison to molest them, the Prussian army marched
away and took up their post at Leitmeritz.

The news that an Austrian army had at last beaten Frederick, and
that Prague was saved, caused an exultation and joy, among the
allies, equal to the dismay that had been aroused by the defeat at
Prague; although there was nothing remarkable, or worth much
congratulation, in the fact that an army, in an almost impregnable
position, had repulsed the attack of another of little over half
its strength.



Chapter 9: In Disguise.


Leitmeritz, lying as it did but a short distance beyond the mouth
of the defiles leading into Saxony, was an admirably chosen
position. Supplies for the army could be brought up by the Elbe,
and a retreat was assured, should an overwhelming force advance to
the attack; while from this spot Frederick could march, at once,
either to the defence of Silesia, or to check an enemy approaching
from the west towards the defiles through the mountains.

The news of the defeat at Kolin set all the enemies of Prussia in
movement. The Russian army entered East Prussia, where there was no
adequate force to oppose it; the Swedes issued from Stralsund; the
French pressed hard upon the so-called British column of
observation, and forced the Duke of Cumberland to retreat before
them. Another French army, in conjunction with that of the German
Confederacy, threatened the western passes into Saxony.

As yet, it was impossible to say where Marshal Daun and Prince Karl
would deliver their blow, and great efforts were made to fill up
the terrible gaps created at Prague and Kolin, in the regiments
most hotly engaged, with fresh troops; who were speedily rendered,
by incessant drills and discipline, fit to take their places in the
ranks with the veterans.

The king was lodged in the cathedral close of the city. Keith with
his division occupied the other side of the river, across which a
bridge was at once thrown. Prince Maurice and Bevern had gone to
Bunzlau, at the junction of the Iser and Elbe; but when, upon a
crowd of light Austrian horse approaching, the Prince sent to the
king to ask whether he should retreat, he was at once recalled, and
the Prince of Prussia appointed in his stead.

On the 2nd of July came news which, on the top of his other
troubles, almost prostrated Frederick. This was of the death of his
mother, to whom he was most fondly attached. He retired from public
view for some days; for although he was as iron in the hour of
battle, he was a man of very sensitive disposition, and fondly
attached to his family.

His chief confidant during this sad time was the English
ambassador, Mitchell; a bluff, shrewd, hearty man, for whom the
king had conceived a close friendship. He had accompanied Frederick
from the time he left Berlin, and had even been near him on the
battlefields; and it was in no small degree due to his despatches
and correspondence that we have obtained so close a view of
Frederick, the man, as distinct from Frederick the king and
general.

The Prince of Prussia, however, did no better than Prince Maurice.
The main Austrian army, after much hesitation, at last crossed the
Elbe and moved against him; thinking, doubtless, that he was a less
formidable antagonist than the king. The prince fell back, but in
such hesitating and blundering fashion that he allowed the
Austrians to get between him and his base, the town of Zittau,
where his magazines had been established.

Zittau stood at the foot of the mountain, and was a Saxon town. The
Austrians had come to deliver Saxony, and they began the work by
firing red-hot balls into Zittau, thereby laying the whole town in
ashes, rendering 10,000 people homeless, and doing no injury
whatever to the Prussian garrison or magazines.

The heat, however, from the ruins was so terrible that the five
battalions in garrison there were unable to support it and,
evacuating the town, joined the prince's army; which immediately
retired to Bautzen on the other side of the mountains, leaving the
defiles to Saxony and Silesia both unguarded.

As messenger after messenger arrived at Leitmeritz, with reports of
the movements of the troops, the astonishment and indignation of
Frederick rose higher and higher. The whole fruits of the campaign
were lost, by this astounding succession of blunders; and on
hearing that Zittau had been destroyed, and that the army had
arrived at Bautzen in the condition of a beaten and disheartened
force, he at once started, with the bulk of the army, by the Elbe
passes for that town; leaving Maurice of Dessau, with 10,000 men,
to secure the passes; and Keith to follow more slowly with the
baggage train and magazines.

On his arrival at Bautzen Frederick refused to speak to his
brother, but sent him a message saying that he deserved to be
brought before a court martial, which would sentence him and all
his generals to death; but that he should not carry the matter so
far, being unable to forget that the chief offender was his
brother. The prince resigned his command, and the king, in answer
to his letter to that effect, said that, in the situation created
by him, nothing was left but to try the last extremity.

"I must go and give battle," he wrote, "and if we cannot conquer,
we must all of us get ourselves killed."

Frederick, indeed, as his letters show, had fully made up his mind
that he would die in battle, rather than live beaten. The animosity
of his enemies was, to a large extent, personal to himself; and he
believed that they would, after his death, be inclined to give
better terms to Prussia than they would ever grant, while he lived.
For three weeks the king vainly tried to get the Austrians to give
battle, but Prince Karl and Daun remained on the hill from which
they had bombarded Zittau, and which they had now strongly
fortified.

Their barbarous and most useless bombardment of Zittau had done
their cause harm; for it roused a fierce cry of indignation
throughout Europe, even among their allies; excited public feeling
in England to the highest point in favour of Frederick; and created
a strong feeling of hostility to the Austrians throughout Saxony.

As soon as Keith and the waggon train arrived, bringing up the
Prussian strength to 56,000, the king started, on the 15th August
(1757), for Bernstadt; and then, to the stupefaction of the
Austrians--who had believed that they had either Saxony or Silesia
at their mercy, whenever they could make up their mind which ought
first to be gobbled up--so rapidly did the Prussian cavalry push
forward that Generals Beck and Nadasti were both so taken by
surprise that they had to ride for their lives, leaving baggage
coaches, horses, and all their belongings behind them.

On the 16th, Frederick with the army marched and offered battle to
the Austrians; but although so superior in numbers, they refused to
be beguiled from their fortified hill. At last, after tempting them
in vain, Frederick was forced to abandon the attempt and return to
Saxony, bitterly disappointed. He had wanted, above all things, to
finish with the Austrians; so as to be able to move off to the
other points threatened.

He now arranged that Bevern and Winterfeld should take the command
in his absence, watch the Austrians, and guard Silesia; while he,
with 23,000 men, marched on the 31st of August from Dresden, with
the intention of attacking the combined French and German
Confederacy force, under Soubise, that had already reached Erfurt.
Keith accompanied the king on his harassing march.

Since the arrival of the army at Leitmeritz, Fergus had been
incessantly engaged in carrying despatches between that town and
Dresden; and worked even harder while the king was trying, but in
vain, to bring about an engagement with the Austrians. For the
first few days after starting for Erfurt, he had a comparatively
quiet time of it. The marshal was now constantly the king's
