
They dashed to the structure at the rear and a short distance from
the dwelling, into which they ran their horses, slipped off their
trappings, and hurried back to the house.

Every one was inside and not a shot fired, nor was a rustler seen. It
was beyond explanation.

But the stockmen were wise enough to turn to the best account the
grace thus given to them.

They stationed themselves at the front and rear doors and windows with
loaded weapons, on the alert to wing the first rustler who showed
himself.

Sterry found time to exchange a few words with Jennie and her mother.

"It is too bad," he said, "to put you to this trouble and danger; but
the rustlers outnumber us more than two to one, and it was the only
hope that offered itself."

"And glad am I that it _did_ present itself. O, if my poor husband had
been here when they attacked him!"

"When do you expect the return of Fred?"

"Not before night, and the hands may not come with him. He does not
dream of anything like this."

"Nor did we, a little while ago. Had any other refuge presented itself
we would have seized it; but I never suspected we were near your home
until we came over the ridge and saw it but a few rods away."

"But, where are they?" asked the wondering Jennie.

"That's something I don't understand, for they were near enough for
their bullets to whistle about our ears."

"They have seen where you took shelter and are afraid to attack you."

"That may be; but why don't they show themselves?"

At this moment Capt. Asbury approached. Repeating his regrets that
they should place their friends in such danger, he said:

"As there is no saying how long we shall have to stay here, we ought
to learn the nature of our defences. Our horses are in the stables,
where, if the rustlers choose, they can get them, and they will be
pretty sure to choose to do it. They can steal to the rear of the
sheds and take them out without risk. Now, Mrs. Whitney, we have
enough rations with us to last, in a pinch, for three or four days;
how are you fixed?"

"We have but a small quantity of food in the house--none worth
mentioning."

"No matter how slight, it is worth mentioning. Under the
circumstances, I think we can say we are provisioned for the whole
time of the siege, which must be over in less than a week."

"But how will it end?" asked the lady.

The captain shrugged his shoulders.

"Take no thought of the morrow; but what worries me is the question of
water--how about that?"

A hurried examination disclosed that there was not quite two pailfuls
in the house. Even that was more than usual. The small stream from
which the supply was obtained was beyond the stables in which the
horses were sheltered. Water from that source was out of the question
while the siege continued.

Several of the men had a small quantity in their canteens, but,
inasmuch as no such contingency as this was anticipated, little
preparation had been made.

Still Capt. Asbury expressed himself gratified at the result of his
investigation. The weather was so cool that a moderate amount of
the precious fluid would prevent suffering, and he decided that,
dispensing with what ordinarily was used for cooking purposes, they
could get along quite well for three days, and possibly longer.

The lower part of the flat building consisted of two parts, used
respectively for the kitchen and the dining and sitting-room. There
were four apartments above--one for the parents, one each for the son
and daughter, and one for visitors. These, of course, would be held
sacred for the members of the family, while the others found sleep, as
opportunity presented, below stairs.

There were windows on all sides of the house; and the structure, while
not strong, was, of course, bullet-proof.

Before all this was ascertained the rustlers showed themselves. But
instead of appearing on the ridge, over which the cattlemen had
ridden, half of them showed themselves on the other side, having
circled around back of the stables.

A moment later the rest were observed on top of the ridge. Thus, with
the exception of the broad level plain stretching in the direction of
the Big Horn Mountains, it may be said that the ranch was surrounded
by the rustlers, who held the stockmen at bay.

What would be the result? None could foresee.

Hawkridge drew Sterry aside and said, in a guarded undertone:

"There is only one thing to be feared."

"What is that?"

"It is easy for them to burn this building."

"Do you think they will do that, when they know a couple of women are
inside?"

"It doesn't follow that there is any necessity of their being burned,
nor indeed of any of us suffering from fire. When you touch off a barn
the rats get out, and that's what we shall have to do."

"But they will give us a chance, first."

"Yes, a chance to surrender, and we might have done that without
putting ourselves to all this trouble."

"And suppose we _do_ surrender, after making the best fight we
can--what are likely to be the terms offered?"

"They will treat the majority, including myself, as prisoners of war;
but Capt. Asbury, and probably you, will be excepted--he because
of the killing of Perkins last night, and you because you have
disregarded the warning to leave the country when ordered to do so."

"All of which is mighty interesting to the captain and myself,"
remarked Sterry, with little evidence of fear; "but we will hope for
better things."




CHAPTER XXV.

THE FLAG OF TRUCE.


In one important respect the combatants showed commendable discretion.
Although there had been considerable firing on the part of the
rustlers, none of the cattlemen were hurt. It is not unlikely that the
bullets were intended to frighten them, since such excellent marksmen
otherwise could not have discharged their weapons without execution.

Capt. Asbury and his men had not returned a shot. When their enemies
appeared on more than one side of the building it would have been easy
to pick off several without risk to those sheltered within the house,
but he gave orders that nothing of that sort should be done.

The bitterness between the parties was already intense. There were
hot-heads on both sides eager to open the lamentable conflict, but
were it done, there was no saying where it would end. It was wise,
therefore, that the leaders forbore from active hostilities at this
early stage of the business.

From the front of the structure the plain stretched in the direction
of the Big Horn Mountains. It was across this that Jennie Whitney
descried, two days before, the return of her friends with the body of
her father. She now ascended to the second story and peered long and
frequently in the same direction, in the hope of catching sight of her
brother.

Meanwhile Capt. Asbury disposed of the members of his party as best
he could. They needed no instructions from him to avoid in every way
possible annoying the ladies, who were considerate and kind.

About midday, excitement was caused among the besieged by the
appearance of a flag of truce. A man rode over the ridge, down which
the cattlemen had come in such haste, holding a white handkerchief
fluttering over his head. His horse walked slowly and the rider
kept his gaze on the front of the house, as though in doubt of the
reception awaiting him. A hundred feet away he came to a halt, still
flourishing the peace signal above his hat.

Capt. Asbury was the first to discover the messenger and hurriedly
arranged for the interview.

"Inasmuch as that fellow is neither Inman, Cadmus, nor anyone of the
leaders, it is not the thing for me to meet him."

"You have recognized him?" was the inquiring remark of Hawkridge,
glancing with a smile at the officer.

"No. Who is he?"

"Duke Vesey, who does not feel particularly amiable toward you."

"I will meet him," volunteered Monteith Sterry. The captain shook his
head.

"While that fellow is friendly to you, perhaps, others of the company
are very resentful; it isn't best to tempt them. Hawkridge, you are
the best one to act."

"Very well; I will do so."

The horseman had come to a stop and was gazing fixedly at the
building, as if waiting for a response to his advance.

Jennie Whitney descended the stairs at this moment.

"I think I see Fred coming," she said, with some agitation; "will they
do him any harm?"

"No," replied Sterry, "they have nothing against him."

"But the other day--" she ventured, doubtfully.

"Was a scrimmage, likely to take place at any time; that is ended, but
they will probably hold him prisoner."

During this brief conversation a brisk search was going on among the
three men for a white pocket-handkerchief. None of them possessed such
an article, the hue in each case being different. Hawkridge appealed
to Miss Whitney, and she produced a linen handkerchief of snowy
whiteness.

"Just the thing," he said, drawing back the door sufficiently to allow
him to pass out. "I don't think I will be detained long. It is
understood," he added, turning to the captain, "that we don't consider
the question of surrender under any terms."

"It will be better to report, and then decide what to do."

Hawkridge bowed and passed out. He waved the spotless linen in front
of his face as he walked toward the horseman, and both smiled when
they recognized each other.

"Well, Duke, what is it?" asked the footman, as though he were asking
an ordinary question of a friend.

"I reckon you can guess. Since the two companies came together Ira
Inman is at the head of the army. Some of the boys are wild to begin
shooting, and they'll do it pretty soon. Before that, Inman decided to
offer you folks a chance to give in. That's my business."

"You simply demand our surrender, as I understand it?"

"You've guessed it the first time," replied Vesey, with a nod of his
head.

"What terms do you offer?"

"You'll be treated as prisoners of war; but," added the rustler, "it
is hardly right to say that. It's Inman's idea to hold you as hostages
for the right treatment of any of our boys that may fall into the
hands of the stockmen."

"That is quite different. Let me ask, Duke, whether this treatment is
guaranteed to all of our folks?"

"I wish I could say it was, Dick, but I can't; Inman makes two
exceptions--Capt. Asbury and Mont Sterry. That Sterry showed himself
so much of a man and was so square toward me when I was caught that I
would do anything I could for him. I appealed to Inman to let up on
him, but he won't; some of the boys are so mad they will shoot him on
sight."

"And Capt. Asbury?"

Vesey's face became hard.

"He ought to be hanged because of the way he acted last night."

"But what is proposed to do with him and Sterry?"

"Give them a fair trial."

Hawkridge shook his head with a meaning smile.

"It won't work, Duke; there isn't a man in our company who would
consent to anything of the kind. There could be but one issue to such
a trial, and it would be nothing less than the betrayal of our leader
or a comrade by us."

"Inman declares he will burn down the house if you refuse his terms."

"Let him try it as soon as he pleases; you can tell him for Capt.
Asbury that his terms are rejected."




CHAPTER XXVI.

THE UNDERGROUND MISSIVE.


Dick Hawkridge, standing on the ground, looked up in the bronzed face
of Duke Vesey, sitting in the saddle.

At every window on the lower floor were faces watching the two men
that had thus met under a flag of truce. From the ridge on the right,
and the undulating ground to the left, peered the rustlers, intensely
interested in the actions of the couple, whose words were spoken in
tones too low to reach the ears of any on either side. No actors ever
had a more attentive audience than they.

When Hawkridge announced to Vesey that his proffer was rejected (for
it was useless to report first to Capt. Asbury, as he had been told to
do), the horseman said:

"Dick, you would have been a cur to accept such terms, though I would
do anything to even matters with that Asbury; but I want to get a
message to Mont Sterry."

"You can trust me to carry it."

"It is for him alone; I have it in writing. Well, good-by."

He leaned over from the saddle and extended his hand. As Hawkridge
took it he felt something in his palm.

"I understand," he said; "it shall be delivered."

No one watching the couple, as nearly all were doing, suspected this
little by-play. They saluted, and Vesey spurred his pony to a gallop,
passing up the ridge and joining his friends to report, while
Hawkridge was admitted through the door, which was immediately closed
and secured behind him.

To the captain and the others who crowded around he quickly told what
had passed.

"Your order was to let you know the terms before giving an answer," he
added, addressing the leader, "but you see it wasn't necessary."

A buzz of commendation left no doubt of the wisdom of his course.

"But what about his threat to burn the building?" asked Sterry,
addressing no one in particular.

"He will do it, or at least will try it," replied Hawkridge, "for he
doesn't intend any one shall have time to interfere, as may be the
case if he delays too long."

"To set fire to the house," remarked the captain, who had given much
thought to the question, "they must first reach it, and that manoeuvre
will prove a costly one to them. I suspect that some other firing will
take place about that time--eh, boys?"

The response revealed the feelings of the men, who were chafing under
their restraint.

"But, surely," continued Sterry, "they do not mean to burn the
building while Mrs. Whitney and her daughter are within?"

"As was said some time ago," replied Hawkridge, "that makes little
difference, since it is not to be supposed that even we will stay
inside during the conflagration. The firing is meant to drive us out,
and it will do it."

"But there must be considerable shooting, and the ladies will be in
danger."

"I think Inman will order us to send them out, so as to prevent harm
to them."

"If they were Sioux or Crows they might launch burning arrows and
fire-balls; but they can't do that, and will have to run some risk in
getting the flames under way."

"There are signs of a storm, and if the night proves dark it will be
much in their favor and against us."

"Suppose they fire the stables," suggested one of the men.

"They are too far off to place us in danger, unless a strong wind
should blow directly this way."

