included a treatment of arithmetic.

[33] A[h.]med ibn `Abdall[=a]h, Suter, _Die Mathematiker_, etc., p. 12.

[34] _India_, Vol. II, p. 15.

[35] See H. Suter, "Das Mathematiker-Verzeichniss im Fihrist,"
_Abhandlungen zur Geschichte der Mathematik_, Vol. VI, Leipzig, 1892. For
further references to early Arabic writers the reader is referred to H.
Suter, _Die Mathematiker und Astronomen der Araber und ihre Werke_. Also
"Nachtraege und Berichtigungen" to the same (_Abhandlungen_,  Vol. XIV,
1902, pp. 155-186).

[36] Suter, loc. cit., note 165, pp. 62-63.

[37] "Send Ben Ali,... tum arithmetica scripta maxime celebrata, quae
publici juris fecit." [Loc. cit., p. 440.]

[38] _Scritti di Leonardo Pisano_, Vol. I, _Liber Abbaci_ (1857); Vol. II,
_Scritti_ (1862); published by Baldassarre Boncompagni, Rome. Also _Tre
Scritti Inediti_, and _Intorno ad Opere di Leonardo Pisano_, Rome, 1854.

[39] "Ubi ex mirabili magisterio in arte per novem figuras indorum
introductus" etc. In another place, as a heading to a separate division, he
writes, "De cognitione novem figurarum yndorum" etc. "Novem figure indorum
he sunt 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1."

[40] See _An Ancient English Algorism_, by David Eugene Smith, in
_Festschrift Moritz Cantor_, Leipzig, 1909. See also Victor Mortet, "Le
plus ancien traite francais d'algorisme," _Bibliotheca Mathematica_, Vol.
IX (3), pp. 55-64.

[41] These are the two opening lines of the _Carmen de Algorismo_ that the
anonymous author is explaining. They should read as follows:

  Haec algorismus ars praesens dicitur, in qua
  Talibus Indorum fruimur bis quinque figuris.

What follows is the translation.

[42] Thibaut, _Astronomie, Astrologie und Mathematik_, Strassburg, 1899.

[43] Gustave Schlegel, _Uranographie chinoise ou preuves directes que
l'astronomie primitive est originaire de la Chine, et qu'elle a ete
empruntee par les anciens peuples occidentaux a la sphere chinoise; ouvrage
accompagne d'un atlas celeste chinois et grec_, The Hague and Leyden, 1875.

[44] E. W. Hopkins, _The Religions of India_, Boston, 1898, p. 7.

[45] R. C. Dutt, _History of India_, London, 1906.

[46] W. D. Whitney, _Sanskrit Grammar_, 3d ed., Leipzig, 1896.

[47] "Das [=A]pastamba-['S]ulba-S[=u]tra," _Zeitschrift der deutschen
Morgenlaendischen Gesellschaft_, Vol. LV, p. 543, and Vol. LVI, p. 327.

[48] _Geschichte der Math._, Vol. I, 2d ed., p. 595.

[49] L. von Schroeder, _Pythagoras und die Inder_, Leipzig, 1884; H. Vogt,
"Haben die alten Inder den Pythagoreischen Lehrsatz und das Irrationale
gekannt?" _Bibliotheca Mathematica_, Vol. VII (3), pp. 6-20; A. Buerk, loc.
cit.; Max Simon, _Geschichte der Mathematik im Altertum_, Berlin, 1909, pp.
137-165; three S[=u]tras are translated in part by Thibaut, _Journal of the
Asiatic Society of Bengal_, 1875, and one appeared in _The Pandit_, 1875;
Beppo Levi, "Osservazioni e congetture sopra la geometria degli indiani,"
_Bibliotheca Mathematica_, Vol. IX (3), 1908, pp. 97-105.

[50] Loc. cit.; also _Indiens Literatur und Cultur_, Leipzig, 1887.

[51] It is generally agreed that the name of the river Sindhu, corrupted by
western peoples to Hindhu, Indos, Indus, is the root of Hindustan and of
India. Reclus, _Asia_, English ed., Vol. III, p. 14.

[52] See the comments of Oppert, _On the Original Inhabitants of
Bharatavar[s.]a or India_, London, 1893, p. 1.

[53] A. Hillebrandt, _Alt-Indien_, Breslau, 1899, p. 111. Fragmentary
records relate that Kh[=a]ravela, king of Kali[.n]ga, learned as a boy
_lekh[=a]_ (writing), _ga[n.]an[=a]_ (reckoning), and _r[=u]pa_ (arithmetic
applied to monetary affairs and mensuration), probably in the 5th century
B.C. [Buehler, _Indische Palaeographie_, Strassburg, 1896, p. 5.]

[54] R. C. Dutt, _A History of Civilization in Ancient India_, London,
1893, Vol. I, p. 174.

[55] The Buddha. The date of his birth is uncertain. Sir Edwin Arnold put
it c. 620 B.C.

[56] I.e. 100.10^7.

[57] There is some uncertainty about this limit.

[58] This problem deserves more study than has yet been given it. A
beginning may be made with Comte Goblet d'Alviella, _Ce que l'Inde doit a
la Grece_, Paris, 1897, and H. G. Keene's review, "The Greeks in India," in
the _Calcutta Review_, Vol. CXIV, 1902, p. 1. See also F. Woepeke,
_Propagation_, p. 253; G. R. Kaye, loc. cit., p. 475 seq., and "The Source
of Hindu Mathematics," _Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society_, July, 1910,
pp. 749-760; G. Thibaut, _Astronomie, Astrologie und Mathematik_, pp. 43-50
and 76-79. It will be discussed more fully in Chapter VI.

[59] I.e. to 100,000. The lakh is still the common large unit in India,
like the myriad in ancient Greece and the million in the West.

[60] This again suggests the _Psammites_, or _De harenae numero_ as it is
called in the 1544 edition of the _Opera_ of Archimedes, a work in which
the great Syracusan proposes to show to the king "by geometric proofs which
you can follow, that the numbers which have been named by us ... are
sufficient to exceed not only the number of a sand-heap as large as the
whole earth, but one as large as the universe." For a list of early
editions of this work see D. E. Smith, _Rara Arithmetica_, Boston, 1909, p.
227.

[61] I.e. the Wise.

[62] Sir Monier Monier-Williams, _Indian Wisdom_, 4th ed., London, 1893,
pp. 144, 177. See also J. C. Marshman, _Abridgment of the History of
India_, London, 1893, p. 2.

[63] For a list and for some description of these works see R. C. Dutt, _A
History of Civilization in Ancient India_, Vol. II, p. 121.

[64] Professor Ramkrishna Gopal Bhandarkar fixes the date as the fifth
century B.C. ["Consideration of the Date of the Mah[=a]bh[=a]rata," in the
_Journal of the Bombay Branch of the R. A. Soc._, Bombay, 1873, Vol. X, p.
2.].

[65] Marshman, loc. cit., p. 2.

[66] A. C. Burnell, _South Indian Palaeography_, 2d ed., London, 1878, p. 1,
seq.

[67] This extensive subject of palpable arithmetic, essentially the history
of the abacus, deserves to be treated in a work by itself.

[68] The following are the leading sources of information upon this
subject: G. Buehler, _Indische Palaeographie_, particularly chap. vi; A. C.
Burnell, _South Indian Palaeography_, 2d ed., London, 1878, where tables of
the various Indian numerals are given in Plate XXIII; E. C. Bayley, "On the
Genealogy of Modern Numerals," _Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society_, Vol.
XIV, part 3, and Vol. XV, part 1, and reprint, London, 1882; I. Taylor, in
_The Academy_, January 28, 1882, with a repetition of his argument in his
work _The Alphabet_, London, 1883, Vol. II, p. 265, based on Bayley; G. R.
Kaye, loc. cit., in some respects one of the most critical articles thus
far published; J. C. Fleet, _Corpus inscriptionum Indicarum_, London, 1888,
Vol. III, with facsimiles of many Indian inscriptions, and _Indian
Epigraphy_, Oxford, 1907, reprinted from the _Imperial Gazetteer of India_,
Vol. II, pp. 1-88, 1907; G. Thibaut, loc. cit., _Astronomie_ etc.; R.
Caldwell, _Comparative Grammar of the Dravidian Languages_, London, 1856,
p. 262 seq.; and _Epigraphia Indica_ (official publication of the
government of India), Vols. I-IX. Another work of Buehler's, _On the Origin
of the Indian Br[=a]hma Alphabet_, is also of value.

[69] The earliest work on the subject was by James Prinsep, "On the
Inscriptions of Piyadasi or A['s]oka," etc., _Journal of the Asiatic
Society of Bengal_, 1838, following a preliminary suggestion in the same
journal in 1837. See also "A['s]oka Notes," by V. A. Smith, _The Indian
Antiquary_, Vol. XXXVII, 1908, p. 24 seq., Vol. XXXVIII, pp. 151-159, June,
1909; _The Early History of India_, 2d ed., Oxford, 1908, p. 154; J. F.
Fleet, "The Last Words of A['s]oka," _Journal of the Royal Asiatic
Society_, October, 1909, pp. 981-1016; E. Senart, _Les inscriptions de
Piyadasi_, 2 vols., Paris, 1887.

[70] For a discussion of the minor details of this system, see Buehler, loc.
cit., p. 73.

[71] Julius Euting, _Nabataeische Inschriften aus Arabien_, Berlin, 1885,
pp. 96-97, with a table of numerals.

[72] For the five principal theories see Buehler, loc. cit., p. 10.

[73] Bayley, loc. cit., reprint p. 3.

[74] Buehler, loc. cit.; _Epigraphia Indica_, Vol. III, p. 134; _Indian
Antiquary_, Vol. VI, p. 155 seq., and Vol. X, p. 107.

[75] Pandit Bhagav[=a]nl[=a]l Indr[=a]j[=i], "On Ancient N[=a]g[=a]ri
Numeration; from an Inscription at N[=a]negh[=a]t," _Journal of the Bombay
Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society_, 1876, Vol. XII, p. 404.

[76] Ib., p. 405. He gives also a plate and an interpretation of each
numeral.

[77] These may be compared with Buehler's drawings, loc. cit.; with Bayley,
loc. cit., p. 337 and plates; and with Bayley's article in the
_Encyclopaedia Britannica_, 9th ed., art. "Numerals."

[78] E. Senart, "The Inscriptions in the Caves at Nasik," _Epigraphia
Indica_, Vol. VIII, pp. 59-96; "The Inscriptions in the Cave at Karle,"
_Epigraphia Indica_, Vol. VII, pp. 47-74; Buehler, _Palaeographie_, Tafel
IX.

[79] See Fleet, loc. cit. See also T. Benfey, _Sanskrit Grammar_, London,
1863, p. 217; M. R. Kale, _Higher Sanskrit Grammar_, 2d ed., Bombay, 1898,
p. 110, and other authorities as cited.

[80] Kharo[s.][t.]h[=i] numerals, A['s]oka inscriptions, c. 250 B.C.
Senart, _Notes d'epigraphie indienne_. Given by Buehler, loc. cit., Tafel I.

[81] Same, ['S]aka inscriptions, probably of the first century B.C. Senart,
loc. cit.; Buehler, loc. cit.

[82] Br[=a]hm[=i] numerals, A['s]oka inscriptions, c. 250 B.C. _Indian
Antiquary_, Vol. VI, p. 155 seq.

[83] Same, N[=a]n[=a] Gh[=a]t inscriptions, c. 150 B.C. Bhagav[=a]nl[=a]l
Indr[=a]j[=i], _On Ancient N[=a]gar[=i] Numeration_, loc. cit. Copied from
a squeeze of the original.

[84] Same, Nasik inscription, c. 100 B.C. Burgess, _Archeological Survey
Report, Western India_; Senart, _Epigraphia Indica_, Vol. VII, pp. 47-79,
and Vol. VIII, pp. 59-96.

[85] K[s.]atrapa coins, c. 200 A.D. _Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society_,
1890, p. 639.

[86] Ku[s.]ana inscriptions, c. 150 A.D. _Epigraphia Indica_, Vol. I, p.
381, and Vol. II, p. 201.

[87] Gupta Inscriptions, c. 300 A.D. to 450 A.D. Fleet, loc. cit., Vol.
III.

[88] Valhab[=i], c. 600 A.D. _Corpus_, Vol. III.

[89] Bendall's Table of Numerals, in _Cat. Sansk. Budd. MSS._, British
Museum.

[90] _Indian Antiquary_, Vol. XIII, 120; _Epigraphia Indica_, Vol. III, 127
ff.

[91] Fleet, loc. cit.

[92] Bayley, loc. cit., p. 335.

[93] From a copper plate of 493 A.D., found at K[=a]r[=i]tal[=a][=i],
Central India. [Fleet, loc. cit., Plate XVI.] It should be stated, however,
that many of these copper plates, being deeds of property, have forged
dates so as to give the appearance of antiquity of title. On the other
hand, as Colebrooke long ago pointed out, a successful forgery has to
imitate the writing of the period in question, so that it becomes evidence
well worth considering, as shown in Chapter III.

[94] From a copper plate of 510 A.D., found at Majhgaw[=a]in, Central
India. [Fleet, loc. cit., Plate XIV.]

[95] From an inscription of 588 A.D., found at B[=o]dh-Gay[=a], Bengal
Presidency. [Fleet, loc. cit., Plate XXIV.]

[96] From a copper plate of 571 A.D., found at M[=a]liy[=a], Bombay
Presidency. [Fleet, loc. cit., Plate XXIV.]

[97] From a Bijayaga[d.]h pillar inscription of 372 A.D. [Fleet, loc. cit.,
Plate XXXVI, C.]

[98] From a copper plate of 434 A.D. [_Indian Antiquary_, Vol. I, p. 60.]

[99] Gadhwa inscription, c. 417 A.D. [Fleet, loc. cit., Plate IV, D.]

[100] K[=a]r[=i]tal[=a][=i] plate of 493 A.D., referred to above.

[101] It seems evident that the Chinese four, curiously enough called
"eight in the mouth," is only a cursive [4 vertical strokes].

[102] Chalfont, F. H., _Memoirs of the Carnegie Museum_, Vol. IV, no. 1; J.
Hager, _An Explanation of the Elementary Characters of the Chinese_,
London, 1801.

[103] H. V. Hilprecht, _Mathematical, Metrological and Chronological
Tablets from the Temple Library at Nippur_, Vol. XX, part I, of Series A,
Cuneiform Texts Published by the Babylonian Expedition of the University of
Pennsylvania, 1906; A. Eisenlohr, _Ein altbabylonischer Felderplan_,
Leipzig, 1906; Maspero, _Dawn of Civilization_, p. 773.

[104] Sir H. H. Howard, "On the Earliest Inscriptions from Chaldea,"
_Proceedings of the Society of Biblical Archaeology_, XXI, p. 301, London,
1899.

[105] For a bibliography of the principal hypotheses of this nature see
Buehler, loc. cit., p. 77. Buehler (p. 78) feels that of all these hypotheses
that which connects the Br[=a]hm[=i] with the Egyptian numerals is the most
plausible, although he does not adduce any convincing proof. Th. Henri
Martin, "Les signes numeraux et l'arithmetique chez les peuples de
l'antiquite et du moyen age" (being an examination of Cantor's
_Mathematische Beitraege zum Culturleben der Voelker_), _Annali di matematica
pura ed applicata_, Vol. V, Rome, 1864, pp. 8, 70. Also, same author,
"Recherches nouvelles sur l'origine de notre systeme de numeration ecrite,"
_Revue Archeologique_, 1857, pp. 36, 55. See also the tables given later in
this work.

[106] _Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society, Bombay Branch_, Vol. XXIII.

[107] Loc. cit., reprint, Part I, pp. 12, 17. Bayley's deductions are
generally regarded as unwarranted.

[108] _The Alphabet_; London, 1883, Vol. II, pp. 265, 266, and _The
Academy_ of Jan. 28, 1882.

[109] Taylor, _The Alphabet_, loc. cit., table on p. 266.

[110] Buehler, _On the Origin of the Indian Br[=a]hma Alphabet_, Strassburg,
1898, footnote, pp. 52, 53.

[111] Albrecht Weber, _History of Indian Literature_, English ed., Boston,
1878, p. 256: "The Indian figures from 1-9 are abbreviated forms of the
initial letters of the numerals themselves...: the zero, too, has arisen
out of the first letter of the word _[s.]unya_ (empty) (it occurs even in
Pingala). It is the decimal place value of these figures which gives them
significance." C. Henry, "Sur l'origine de quelques notations
mathematiques," _Revue Archeologique_, June and July, 1879, attempts to
derive the Boethian forms from the initials of Latin words. See also J.
Prinsep, "Examination of the Inscriptions from Girnar in Gujerat, and
Dhauli in Cuttach," _Journal of the Asiatic Society of Bengal_, 1838,
especially Plate XX, p. 348; this was the first work on the subject.

[112] Buehler, _Palaeographie_, p. 75, gives the list, with the list of
letters (p. 76) corresponding to the number symbols.

[113] For a general discussion of the connection between the numerals and
the different kinds of alphabets, see the articles by U. Ceretti, "Sulla
origine delle cifre numerali moderne," _Rivista di fisica, matematica e
scienze naturali_, Pisa and Pavia, 1909, anno X, numbers 114, 118, 119, and
120, and continuation in 1910.

[114] This is one of Buehler's hypotheses. See Bayley, loc. cit., reprint p.
4; a good bibliography of original sources is given in this work, p. 38.

[115] Loc. cit., reprint, part I, pp. 12, 17. See also Burnell, loc. cit.,
p. 64, and tables in plate XXIII.

[116] This was asserted by G. Hager (_Memoria sulle cifre arabiche_, Milan,
1813, also published in _Fundgruben des Orients_, Vienna, 1811, and in
_Bibliotheque Britannique_, Geneva, 1812). See also the recent article by
Major Charles E. Woodruff, "The Evolution of Modern Numerals from Tally
Marks," _American Mathematical Monthly_, August-September, 1909.
Biernatzki, "Die Arithmetik der Chinesen," _Crelle's Journal fuer die reine
und angewandte Mathematik_, Vol. LII, 1857, pp. 59-96, also asserts the
priority of the Chinese claim for a place system and the zero, but upon the
flimsiest authority. Ch. de Paravey, _Essai sur l'origine unique et
hieroglyphique des chiffres et des lettres de tous les peuples_, Paris,
1826; G. Kleinwaechter, "The Origin of the Arabic Numerals," _China Review_,
Vol. XI, 1882-1883, pp. 379-381, Vol. XII, pp. 28-30; Biot, "Note sur la
connaissance que les Chinois ont eue de la valeur de position des
chiffres," _Journal Asiatique_, 1839, pp. 497-502. A. Terrien de
Lacouperie, "The Old Numerals, the Counting-Rods and the Swan-Pan in
China," _Numismatic Chronicle_, Vol. III (3), pp. 297-340, and Crowder B.
Moseley, "Numeral Characters: Theory of Origin and Development," _American
Antiquarian_, Vol. XXII, pp. 279-284, both propose to derive our numerals
from Chinese characters, in much the same way as is done by Major Woodruff,
in the article above cited.

[117] The Greeks, probably following the Semitic custom, used nine letters
