fire if I go to work on that hill, and, I'll probably melt enough water
to put out most of the fires I start. Detail me a couple of ships to
drop your fire-foam bombs on any little blazes that may spread, and I'll
give them so much to worry about at home, that they'll forget all about
Titania."

The _Forlorn Hope_ darted toward the crater, followed closely by two of
the dazzling globes. They circled the mountain until Stevens found a
favorable point of attack--a stupendous vertical cliff of mingled rock
and crystal, upon the base of which he trained his terrific infra-red
projector.

"I'm going to draw a lot of power," he warned the Titanians then. "I'm
giving this gun everything she'll take."

He drove the massive switches in, and as that dull red beam struck the
cliff's base there was made evident the awful effect of a concentrated
beam of real and pure heat upon such an utterly frigid world. Vast
columns of fire roared aloft, helping Stevens, melting and destroying
the very ground as the bodies of the Sedlor in that gigantic ant-heap
burst into flames. Clouds of superheated steam roared upward, condensing
into a hot rain which descended in destructive torrents upon the
fastnesses of the centipedes. As the raging beam ate deeper and deeper
into the base of the cliff, the mountain itself began to disintegrate;
block after gigantic block breaking off and crashing down into the
flaming, boiling, seething cauldron which was the apex of that ravening
beam.

Hour after hour Stevens drove his intolerable weapon into the great
mountain, teeming with Sedlorean life; and hour after hour a group of
Titanian spheres stood by, deluging the surrounding plain with a flood
of heavy fumes, through which the holocaust could not spread for lack of
oxygen. Not until the mountain was gone--not until in its stead there
lay a furiously boiling lake, its flaming surface hundreds of feet below
the level of the plain--did Stevens open his power circuits and point
the deformed prow of the _Forlorn Hope_ toward Titania.




CHAPTER VII

The Return to Ganymede


"Must you you go back to Ganymede?" Barkovis asked, slowly and
thoughtfully. He was sitting upon a crystal bench beside the fountain,
talking with Stevens, who, dressed in his bulging space-suit, stood near
an airlock of the _Forlorn Hope_. "It seems a shame that you should face
again those unknown, monstrous creatures who so inexcusably attacked us
both without provocation."

"I'm not so keen on it myself, but I can't see any other way out of it,"
the Terrestrial replied. "We left a lot of our equipment there, you
know; and even if I should build duplicates here, it wouldn't do us any
good. These ten-nineteens are the most powerful transmitting tubes known
when we left Tellus, but even their fields, dense as they are, can't
hold an ultra-beam together much farther than about six astronomical
units. So you see we can't possibly reach our friends from here with
this tube; and your system of beam transmission won't hold anything
together even that far, and won't work on any wave shorter than Roeser's
Rays. We may run into some more of those little spheres, though, and I
don't like the prospect. I wonder if we couldn't plate a layer of that
mirror of yours upon the _Hope_ and carry along a few of those bombs? By
the way, what is that explosive--or is it something beyond Tellurian
chemistry?"

"Its structure should be clear to you, although you probably could not
prepare it upon Tellus because of your high temperature. It is nothing
but nitrogen--twenty-six atoms of nitrogen combined to form one molecule
of what you would call--N-twenty-six?"

"Wow!" Stevens whistled. "Crystalline, pentavalent nitrogen--no wonder
it's violent!"

"We could, of course, cover your vessel with the mirror, but I am afraid
that it would prove of little value. The plates are so hot that it would
soon volatilize."

"Not necessarily," argued Stevens. "We could live in number one
life-boat, and shut off the heat everywhere else. The life-boats are
insulated from the structure proper, and the inner and outer walls of
the structure are insulated from each other. With only the headquarters
lifeboat warm, the outer wall could be held pretty close to zero
absolute."

"That is true. The bombs, of course, are controlled by radio, and
therefore may be attached to the outer wall of your vessel. We shall be
glad to do these small things for you."

The heaters of the _Forlorn Hope_ were shut off, and as soon as the
outer shell had cooled to Titanian temperature, a corps of mechanics set
to work. A machine very like a concrete mixer was rolled up beside the
steel vessel, and into its capacious maw were dumped boxes and barrels
of dry ingredients and many cans of sparkling liquid. The resultant
paste was pumped upon the steel plating in a sluggish, viscid stream,
which spread out into a thick and uniform coating beneath the flying
rollers of the skilled Titanian workmen. As it hardened, the paste
smoothed magically into the perfect mirror which covered the
space-vessels of the satellite; and a full dozen of the mirror explosive
bombs of this strange people were hung in the racks already provided.

"Once again I must caution you concerning those torpedoes," Barkovis
warned Stevens. "If you use them all, very well, but do not try to take
even one of them into any region where it is very hot, for it will
explode and demolish your vessel. If you do not use them, destroy them
before you descend into the hot atmosphere of Ganymede. The mirror will
volatilize harmlessly at the temperature of melting mercury, but the
torpedoes must be destroyed. Once more, Tellurians, we thank you for
what you have done, and wish you well."

"Thanks a lot for _your_ help--we still owe you something," replied
Stevens. "If either of your power-plants go sour on you again, or if
you need any more built, be sure to let us know--you can come close
enough to the inner planets now on your own beam to talk to us on the
ultra-communicator. We'll be glad to help you any way we can--and we may
call on you for help again. Goodbye, Barkovis--goodbye, all Titania!"

He made his way through the bitterly cold shop into the control-room of
their lifeboat, and while he was divesting himself of his heavy suit,
Nadia lifted the _Forlorn Hope_ into the blue-green sky of Titan,
accompanied by an escort of the mirrored globes. Well clear of the
atmosphere of the satellite, the terrestrial cruiser shot forward at
normal acceleration, while the Titanian vessels halted and wove a
pattern of blue and golden rays in salute to the departing guests.

"Well, Nadia, we're off--on a long trek, too."

"Said Wun Long Hop, the Chinese pee-lo," Nadia agreed. "Sure
everything's all x, big boy?"

"To nineteen decimals," he declared. "You couldn't squeeze another frank
into our accumulators with a proof-bar, and since they're sending us all
the power we want to draw, we won't need to touch our batteries or tap
our own beam until we're almost to Jupiter. To cap the climax, what it
takes to make big medicine on those spherical friends of ours, we've
got. We're not sitting on top of the world, ace--we've perched exactly
at the apex of the entire universe!"

"How long is it going to take?"

"Don't know. Haven't figured it yet, but it'll be _beaucoup_ days," and
the two wanderers from far-distant Earth settled down to the routine of
a long and uneventful journey.

They gave Saturn and his spectacular rings a wide berth and sped on,
with ever-increasing velocity. Past the outer satellites, on and on,
the good ship _Forlorn Hope_ flew into the black-and-brilliant depths of
interplanetary space. Saturn was an ever-diminishing disk beneath them:
above them was Jupiter's thin crescent, growing ever larger and more
bright, and the Monarch of the Solar System, remaining almost stationary
day after day, increasing steadily in apparent diameter and in
brilliance.

       *       *       *       *       *

Although the voyage from Titan to Ganymede was long, it was not
monotonous, for there was much work to be done in the designing and
fabrication of the various units which were to comprise the ultra-radio
transmitting station. In the various compartments of the _Forlorn Hope_
there were sundry small motors, blowers, coils, condensers, force-field
generators, and other items which Stevens could use with little or no
alteration; but for the most part he had to build everything himself.
Thus it was that time passed quickly; so quickly that Jupiter loomed
large and the Saturnian beam of power began to attenuate almost before
the Terrestrials realized that their journey was drawing to an end.

"Our beam's falling apart fast," Stevens read his meters carefully, then
swung his communicator beam toward Jupiter. "We aren't getting quite
enough power to hold our acceleration at normal--think I'll cut now,
while we're still drawing enough to let the Titanians know we're off
their beam. We've got lots of power of our own now; and we're getting
pretty close to enemy territory, so they may locate that heavy beam.
Have you found Ganymede yet?"

"Yes, it will be on the other side of Jupiter by the time we get there.
Shall I detour, or put on a little more negative and wait for it to come
around to this side?"

"Better wait, I think. The farther away we stay from Jupiter and the
major satellites, the better."

"All x--it's on. Suppose we'd better start standing watches, in case
some of them show up?"

"No use," he dissented. "I've been afraid to put out our
electro-magnetic detectors, as they could surely trace them in use.
Without them, we couldn't spot an enemy ship even if we were looking
right at it, except by accident; since they won't be lighted up and
it's awfully hard to see anything out here, anyway. We probably won't
know they're within a million kilometers until they put a beam on us.
Barkovis says that this mirror will reflect any beam they can use, and
I've already got a set of photo-cells in circuit to ring an alarm at
the first flash off of our mirror plating. I'd like to get in the first
licks myself, but I haven't been able to dope out any way of doing it.
So you might as well sleep in your own room, as usual, and I'll camp
here right under the panel until we get to Ganymede. There's a couple
of little things I just thought of, though, that may help some; and
I'm going to do 'em right now."

Putting on his space-suit, he picked up a power drill and went out into
the bitter cold of the outer structure. There he attacked the inner
wall of their vessel, and the carefully established inter-wall vacuum
disappeared in a screaming hiss of air as the tempered point bit through
plate after plate.

"What's the idea, Steve?" Nadia asked, when he had re-entered the
control room. "Now you'll have all that pumping to do over again."

"Protection for the mirrors," he explained. "You see, they aren't
perfect reflectors. There's a little absorption, so that some stuff
comes through. Not much, of course; but enough to kill some of those
Titanians and almost enough to ruin their ship got through in about ten
minutes, and only one enemy was dealing it out. We can stand more than
they could, of course, but the mirror itself won't stand much more heat
than it was absorbing then. But with air in those spaces instead of
vacuum, and with the whole mass of the _Hope_, except this one lifeboat,
as cold as it is, I figure that there'll be enough conduction and
convection through them to keep the outer wall and the mirror cold--cool
enough, at least, to hold the mirror on for an hour. If only one ship
tackles us, it won't be bad--but I figure that if there's only one,
we're lucky."

       *       *       *       *       *

Stevens' fears were only too well grounded, for during the "evening" of
the following day, while he was carefully scanning the heavens for some
sign of enemy craft, the alarm bell over his head burst into its brazen
clamor. Instantly he shot out the detectors and ultra-lights and saw not
one, but six of the deadly globes--almost upon them, at point-blank
range! One was already playing a beam of force upon the _Forlorn Hope_,
and the other five went into action immediately upon feeling the
detector impulses and perceiving that the weapon of their sister ship
had encountered an unusual resistance in the material of that peculiarly
mirrored wedge. As those terrific forces struck her, the terrestrial
cruiser became a vast pyrotechnic set piece, a dazzling fountain of
coruscant brilliance: for the mirror held. The enemy beams shot back
upon themselves and rebounded in all directions, in the same spectacular
exhibition of frenzied incandescence which had marked the resistance of
the Titanian sphere to a similar attack.

But Stevens was not idle. In the instant of launching his detectors,
as fast as he could work the trips, four of the frightful nitrogen
bombs of Titan--all that he could handle at once--shot out into space,
their rocket-tubes flaring viciously. The enemy detectors of course
located the flying torpedoes immediately, but, contemptuous of material
projectiles, the spheres made no attempt to dodge, but merely lashed out
upon them with their ravening rays. So close was the range that they
had no time to avoid the radio-directed bombs after discovering that
their beams were useless against the unknown protective covering of
those mirrored shells. There were four practically simultaneous
detonations--silent, but terrific explosions as the pent-up internal
energy of solid pentavalent nitrogen was instantaneously released--and
the four insensately murderous spheres disappeared into jagged fragments
of wreckage, flying wildly away from the centers of explosion. One great
mass of riven and twisted metal was blown directly upon the fifth globe,
and Nadia stared in horrified fascination at the silent crash as the
entire side of the ship crumpled inward like a shell of cardboard under
the awful impact. That vessel was probably out of action, but Stevens
was taking no chances. As soon as he had clamped a pale blue tractor rod
upon the sixth and last of the enemy fleet, he drove a torpedo through
the gaping wall and into the interior of the helpless war-vessel. There
he exploded it, and the awful charge, detonated in that confined space,
literally tore the globular space-ship to bits.

"We'll show these jaspers what kind of trees make shingles!" he gritted
between clenched teeth; and his eyes, hard now as gray iron, fairly
emitted sparks as he launched four torpedoes upon the sole remaining
globe of the squadron of the void. "I've had a lot of curiosity to know
just what kind of unnatural monstrosities can possibly have such
fiendish dispositions as they've got--but beasts, men or devils, they'll
find they've grabbed something this time they can't let go of," and
fierce blasts of energy ripped from the exhausts as he drove his
missiles, at their highest possible acceleration, toward the captive
sphere so savagely struggling at the extremity of his tractor beam.

But that one remaining vessel was to prove no such easy victim as had
its sister ships. Being six to one, and supposedly invincible, the
squadron had been overconfident and had attacked carelessly, with only
its crippling slicing beams instead of its more deadly weapons of total
destruction; and so fierce and hard had been Stevens' counter-attack
that five of its numbers had been destroyed before they realized what
powerful armament was mounted by that apparently crude, helpless,
and innocuous wedge. The sixth, however, was fully warned, and every
resource at the command of its hellish crew was now being directed
against the _Forlorn Hope_.

Sheets, cones, and gigantic rods of force flashed and crackled. Space
was filled with silent, devastating tongues of flame. The _Forlorn
Hope_ was dragged about erratically as the sphere tried to dodge those
hurtling torpedoes; tried to break away from the hawser of energy
anchoring her so solidly to her opponent. But the linkage held, and
closer and closer Stevens drove the fourfold menace of his frightful
dirigible bombs. Pressor beams beat upon them in vain. Hard driven as
those pushers were, they could find no footing, but were reflected at
many angles by that untouchable mirror and their utmost force scarcely
impeded the progress of the rocket-propelled missiles. Comparatively
small as the projectiles were, however, they soon felt the effects of
the prodigious beams of heat enveloping them, and torpedo after torpedo
exploded harmlessly in space as their mirrors warmed up and volatilized.
But for each bomb that was lost, Stevens launched another, and each one
came closer to its objective than had its predecessor.

Made desperate by the failure of his every beam, the enemy commander
thought to use material projectiles himself--weapons abandoned long
since by his race as antiquated and inefficient, but a few of which were
still carried by the older types of vessels. One such shell was found
and launched--but in the instant of its launching Stevens' foremost bomb
struck its mark and exploded. So close were the other three bombs, that
they also let go at the shock; and the warlike sphere, hemmed in by four
centers of explosions, flew apart--literally pulverized. Its projectile,
so barely discharged, did not explode--it was loaded with material which
could be detonated only by the warhead upon impact or by a radio signal.
It was, however, deflected markedly from its course by the force of the
blast, so that instead of striking the _Forlorn Hope_ in direct central
impact, its head merely touched the apex of the mirror-plated wedge.
That touch was enough. There was another appalling concussion, another
blinding glare, and the entire front quarter of the terrestrial vessel
had gone to join the shattered globes.

Between the point of explosion and the lifeboats there had been many
channels of insulation, many bulkheads, many air-breaks, and compartment
after compartment of accumulator cells. These had borne the brunt of the
explosion, so that the control room was unharmed, and Stevens swung his
communicator rapidly through the damaged portions of the vessels.

"How badly are we hurt, Steve--can we make it to Ganymede?"

Nadia was quietly staring over his shoulder into the plate, studying
with him the pictures of destruction there portrayed as he flashed the
projector from compartment to compartment.

