The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Sun Of Quebec, by Joseph A. Altsheler

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Sun Of Quebec
       A Story of a Great Crisis

Author: Joseph A. Altsheler

Release Date: July 6, 2006 [EBook #18774]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SUN OF QUEBEC ***




Produced by Chris Nash, Suzanne Shell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                           THE SUN OF QUEBEC

                       A STORY OF A GREAT CRISIS


                                   BY

                          JOSEPH A. ALTSHELER

                               AUTHOR OF
           "LORDS OF THE WILD," "THE GREAT SIOUX TRAIL," ETC.


                     APPLETON-CENTURY-CROFTS, INC.
                                NEW YORK


                          COPYRIGHT, 1919, BY
                        D. APPLETON AND COMPANY


     _All rights reserved. This book, or parts thereof, must not
     be reproduced in any form without permission of the
     publishers._


                Copyright, 1947, by Sallie B. Altsheler

                Printed in the United States of America




FOREWORD


"The Sun of Quebec" is the sixth and closing volume of the French and
Indian War Series of which the predecessors have been "The Hunters of
the Hills," "The Shadow of the North," "The Rulers of the Lakes," "The
Masters of the Peaks," and "The Lords of the Wild." The important
characters in the earlier books reappear, and the mystery in the life of
Robert Lennox, the central figure in all the romances, is solved.




CHARACTERS IN THE FRENCH AND INDIAN WAR SERIES


ROBERT LENNOX                    A lad of unknown origin

TAYOGA                           A young Onondaga warrior

DAVID WILLET                     A hunter

RAYMOND LOUIS DE ST. LUC         A brilliant French officer

AGUSTE DE COURCELLES             A French officer

FRANCOIS DE JUMONVILLE           A French officer

LOUIS DE GALISONNIERE            A young French officer

JEAN DE MEZY                     A corrupt Frenchman

ARMAND GLANDELET                 A young Frenchman

PIERRE BOUCHER                   A bully and bravo

PHILIBERT DROUILLARD             A French priest

THE MARQUIS DUQUESNE             Governor-General of Canada

MARQUIS DE VAUDREUIL             Governor-General of Canada

FRANCOIS BIGOT                   Intendant of Canada

MARQUIS DE MONTCALM              French commander-in-chief

DE LEVIS                         A French general

BOURLAMAQUE                      A French general

BOUGAINVILLE                     A French general

ARMAND DUBOIS                    A follower of St. Luc

M. DE CHATILLARD                 An old French Seigneur

CHARLES LANGLADE                 A French partisan

THE DOVE                         The Indian wife of Langlade

TANDAKORA                        An Ojibway chief

DAGANOWEDA                       A young Mohawk chief

HENDRICK                         An old Mohawk chief

BRADDOCK                         A British general

ABERCROMBIE                      A British general

WOLFE                            A British general

COL. WILLIAM JOHNSON             Anglo-American leader

MOLLY BRANT                      Col. Wm. Johnson's Indian wife

JOSEPH BRANT                     Young brother of Molly Brant, afterward
                                 the great Mohawk chief, Thayendanegea

ROBERT DINWIDDIE                 Lieutenant-Governor of Virginia

WILLIAM SHIRLEY                  Governor of Massachusetts

BENJAMIN FRANKLIN                Famous American patriot

JAMES COLDEN                     A young Philadelphia captain

WILLIAM WILTON                   A young Philadelphia lieutenant

HUGH CARSON                      A young Philadelphia lieutenant

JACOBUS HUYSMAN                  An Albany burgher

CATERINA                         Jacobus Huysman's cook

ALEXANDER MCLEAN                 An Albany schoolmaster

BENJAMIN HARDY                   A New York merchant

JOHNATHAN PILLSBURY              Clerk to Benjamin Hardy

ADRIAN VAN ZOON                  A New York merchant

THE SLAVER                       A nameless rover

ACHILLE GARAY                    A French spy

ALFRED GROSVENOR                 A young English officer

JAMES CABELL                     A young Virginian

WALTER STUART                    A young Virginian

BLACK RIFLE                      A famous "Indian fighter"

ELIHU STRONG                     A Massachusetts colonel

ALAN HERVEY                      A New York financier

STUART WHITE                     Captain of the British sloop, _Hawk_

JOHN LATHAM                      Lieutenant of the British sloop, _Hawk_

EDWARD CHARTERIS                 A young officer of the Royal Americans

ZEBEDEE CRANE                    A young scout and forest runner

ROBERT ROGERS                    Famous Captain of American Rangers




CONTENTS


CHAPTER                                  PAGE

   I  OLD FRIENDS                           1

  II  THE CHEST OF DRAWERS                 22

 III  THE PURSUIT OF GARAY                 46

  IV  OUT TO SEA                           66

   V  MUSIC IN THE MOONLIGHT               85

  VI  THE ISLAND                          104

 VII  THE PIRATE'S WARNING                123

VIII  MAKING THE BEST OF IT               142

  IX  THE VOICE IN THE AIR                158

   X  THE SLOOP OF WAR                    176

  XI  BACK TO THE WORLD                   193

 XII  THE WILDERNESS AGAIN                217

XIII  THE REUNION                         238

 XIV  BEFORE QUEBEC                       263

  XV  THE LONE CHATEAU                    284

 XVI  THE RECKONING                       303




THE SUN OF QUEBEC




CHAPTER I

OLD FRIENDS


Mynheer Jacobus Huysman walked to the window and looked out at the neat
red brick houses, the grass, now turning yellow, and the leaves, more
brown than green. He was troubled, in truth his heart lay very heavy
within him. He was thinking over the terrible news that had come so
swiftly, as evil report has a way of doing. But he had cause for
satisfaction, too, and recalling it, he turned to gaze once more upon
the two lads who, escaping so many perils, had arrived at the shelter of
his home.

Robert and Tayoga were thin and worn, their clothing was soiled and
torn, but youth was youth and they were forgetting dangers past in a
splendid dinner that the fat Caterina was serving for them while Mynheer
Jacobus, her master, stood by and saw the good deed well done.

The dining room, large and furnished solidly, was wonderful in its
neatness and comfort. The heavy mahogany of table, sideboard and chairs
was polished and gleaming. No trace of dirt was allowed to linger
anywhere. When the door to the adjoining kitchen opened, as Caterina
passed through, pleasant odors floated in, inciting the two to fresh
efforts at the trencher. It was all as it had been when they were young
boys living there, attending the school of Alexander McLean and
traveling by painful steps along the road to knowledge. In its snugness,
its security and the luxury it offered it was a wonderful contrast to
the dark forest, where death lurked in every bush. Robert drew a long
sigh of content and poured himself another cup of coffee.

"And you escaped from the French after the great battle?" said Mynheer
Jacobus, asking the same question over and over again.

"Yes, sir," replied Robert, "and it was not a difficult thing to do at
all. The victory of the French was so remarkable, and I think so
unexpected, that they were paying little attention to me. I just walked
out of their camp, and the only man I met was the Chevalier de St. Luc,
who did not seem at all interested in stopping me--a curious fact, but a
fact all the same."

"A great leader and a fine man iss the Chevalier de St. Luc," said Mr.
Huysman.

"He's both, as I've had many chances to learn, and I intend to know more
about him some day."

"It may be that you will know even more than you think."

Robert looked sharply at the burgher, and he was about to ask questions,
but he reflected that Mynheer Jacobus, if he were able to answer, would
be evasive like all the others and so he checked the words at his lips.

"I suppose that time will disclose everything," he contented himself
with saying. "Meanwhile, I want to tell you, sir, that Tayoga and I
appreciate to the full your hospitality. It is noble, it always was
noble, as we've had ample occasion to discover."

The full red face of Mynheer Jacobus bloomed into a smile. The corners
of his mouth turned up, and his eyes twinkled.

"I must have had a premonition that you two were coming," he said, "and
so I stocked the larder. I remembered of old your appetites, a hunger
that could be satisfied only with great effort, and then could come back
again an hour later, as fresh and keen as ever. You are strong and
healthy boys, for which you should be grateful."

"We are," said Robert, with great emphasis.

"And you do not know whether Montcalm iss advancing with his army?"

"We don't, sir, but is Albany alarmed?"

"It iss! It iss alarmed very greatly. It wass not dreamed by any of us
that our army could be defeated, that magnificent army which I saw go
away to what I thought was certain victory. Ah, how could it have
happened? How could it have happened, Robert?"

"We simply threw away our chances, sir. I saw it all. We underrated the
French. If we had brought up our big guns it would have been easy. There
was no lack of courage on the part of our men. I don't believe that
people of British blood ever showed greater bravery, and that means
bravery equal to anybody's."

Mynheer Jacobus Huysman sighed heavily.

"What a waste! What a waste!" he said. "Now the army hass retreated and
the whole border iss uncovered. The tomahawk and scalping knife are at
work. Tales of slaughter come in efery day, and it iss said that
Montcalm iss advancing on Albany itself."

"I don't believe, sir, that he will come," said Robert. "The French
numbers are much fewer than is generally supposed, and I can't think he
will dare to attack Albany."

"It does not seem reasonable, but there iss great alarm. Many people are
leaving on the packets for New York. Who would have thought it? Who
could have thought it! But I mean to stay, and if Montcalm comes I will
help fight in the defense."

"I knew you wouldn't leave, sir. But despite our defeat we've a powerful
army yet, and England and the Colonies will not sit down and just weep."

"What you say iss so, Robert, my boy. I am not of English blood, but
when things look worst iss the time when England shows best, and the
people here are of the same breed. I do not despair. What did you say
had become of Willet?"

"Shortly before we reached Albany he turned aside to see Sir William
Johnson. We had, too, with us, a young Englishman named Grosvenor, a
fine fellow, but he went at once to the English camp here to report for
duty. He was in the battle at Ticonderoga and he also will testify that
our army, although beaten, could have brought up its artillery and have
fought again in a day or two. It would have gained the victory, too."

"I suppose so! I suppose so! But it did not fight again, and what might
have been did not happen. It means a longer war in this country and a
longer war all over the world. It spreads! It iss a great war, extending
to most of the civilized lands, the greatest war of modern times and
many think it will be the last war, but I know not. The character of
mankind does not change. What do you two boys mean to do?"

"We have not decided yet," replied Robert, speaking for both. "We'll go
back to the war, of course, which means that we'll travel once more
toward the north, but we'll have to rest a few days."

"And this house iss for you to rest in--a few days or many days, as you
please, though I hope it will be many. Caterina shall cook for you four,
five meals a day, if you wish, and much at every meal. I do not forget
how when you were little you raided the fruit trees, and the berry
bushes and the vines. Well, the fruit will soon be ripe again und I will
turn my back the other way. I will make that fat Caterina do the same,
