paused irresolutely and finally sat down, biting her lips in anger,
while the other girl went on.

"That's better. She doesn't need any help to whip that yellow dog. He's
whipped already. He never would think of fighting unless the odds were
three to one in his favor."

       *       *       *       *       *

When Margaret had returned from a fruitless search of Perkins' room and
had assured herself that he had no more weapons concealed about his
person, she thrust the pistol back into her pocket and sat down.

"That ends that," she declared. "I guess you will be good now, won't
you, Mr. Perkins?"

"Yes," that worthy muttered. "I have to be, now that you've got the drop
on me and DuQuesne's gone back on me. But wait until we get back! I'll
get you then, you...."

"Stop right there!" sharply. "There's nothing I would rather do than
shoot you right now, if you give me the slightest excuse, such as that
name you were about to call me. Now go ahead!"

DuQuesne broke the silence that followed.

"Well, now that the battle is over, and since we are fed and rested, I
suggest that we slow down a bit and get ready to start back. Pick out
comfortable seats, everybody, and I'll shoot a little more juice through
that bar."

Seating himself before the instrument board, he advanced the speed lever
slowly until nearly three-quarters of the full power was on, as much as
he thought the others could stand.

For sixty hours he drove the car, reducing the acceleration only at
intervals during which they ate and walked about their narrow quarters
in order to restore the blood to circulation in their suffering bodies.
The power was not reduced for sleep; everyone slept as best he could.

Dorothy and Margaret talked together at every opportunity, and a real
intimacy grew up between them. Perkins was for the most part sullenly
quiet, knowing himself despised by all the others and having no outlet
here for his particular brand of cleverness. DuQuesne was always
occupied with his work and only occasionally addressed a remark to one
or another of the party, except during meals. At those periods of
general recuperation, he talked easily and well upon many topics. There
was no animosity in his bearing nor did he seem to perceive any directed
toward himself, but when any of the others ventured to infringe upon his
ideas of how discipline should be maintained, DuQuesne's reproof was
merciless. Dorothy almost liked him, but Margaret insisted that she
considered him worse than ever.

When the bar was exhausted, DuQuesne lifted the sole remaining cylinder
into place.

"We should be nearly stationary with respect to the earth," he remarked.
"Now we will start back."

"Why, it felt as though we were picking up speed for the last three
days!" exclaimed Margaret.

"Yes, it feels that way because we have nothing to judge by. Slowing
down in one direction feels exactly like starting up in the opposite
one. There is no means of knowing whether we are standing still, going
away from the earth, or going toward it, since we have nothing
stationary upon which to make observations. However, since the two bars
were of exactly the same size and were exerted in opposite directions
except for a few minutes after we left the earth, we are nearly
stationary now. I will put on power until this bar is something less
than half gone, then coast for three or four days. By the end of that
time we should be able to recognize our solar system from the appearance
of the fixed stars."

He again advanced the lever, and for many hours silence filled the car
as it hurtled through space. DuQuesne, waking up from a long nap, saw
that the bar no longer pointed directly toward the top of the ship,
perpendicular to the floor, but was inclined at a sharp angle. He
reduced the current, and felt the lurch of the car as it swung around
the bar, increasing the angle many degrees. He measured the angle
carefully and peered out of all the windows on one side of the car.
Returning to the bar after a time, he again measured the angle, and
found that it had increased greatly.

"What's the matter, Doctor DuQuesne?" asked Dorothy, who had also been
asleep.

"We are being deflected from our course. You see the bar doesn't point
straight up any more? Of course the direction of the bar hasn't changed,
the car has swung around it."

"What does that mean?"

"We have come close enough to some star so that its attraction swings
the bottom of the car around. Normally, you know, the bottom of the car
follows directly behind the bar. It doesn't mean much yet except that we
are being drawn away from our straight line, but if the attraction gets
much stronger it may make us miss our solar system completely. I have
been looking for the star in question, but can't see it yet. We'll
probably pull away from it very shortly."

       *       *       *       *       *

He threw on the power, and for some time watched the bar anxiously,
expecting to see it swing back into the vertical, but the angle
continually increased. He again reduced the current and searched the
heavens for the troublesome body.

"Do you see it yet?" asked Dorothy with concern.

"No, there's apparently nothing near enough to account for all this
deflection."

He took out a pair of large night-glasses and peered through them for
several minutes.

"Good God! It's a dead sun, and we're nearly onto it! It looks as large
as our moon!"

Springing to the board, he whirled the bar into the vertical. He took
down a strange instrument, went to the bottom window, and measured the
apparent size of the dark star. Then, after cautioning the rest of the
party to sit tight, he advanced the lever farther than it had been
before. After half an hour he again slackened the pace and made another
observation, finding to his astonishment that the dark mass had almost
doubled its apparent size! Dorothy, noting his expression, was about to
speak, but he forestalled her.

"We lost ground, instead of gaining, that spurt," he remarked, as he
hastened to his post. "It must be inconceivably large, to exert such an
enormous attractive force at this distance. We'll have to put on full
power. Hang onto yourselves as best you can."

He then pushed the lever out to its last notch and left it there until
the bar was nearly gone, only to find that the faint disk of the monster
globe was even larger than before, being now visible to the unaided eye.
Revived, the three others saw it plainly--a great dim circle, visible as
is the dark portion of the new moon--and, the power shut off, they felt
themselves falling toward it with sickening speed. Perkins screamed with
mad fear and flung himself grovelling upon the floor. Margaret, her
nerves still unstrung, clutched at her heart with both hands. Dorothy,
though her eyes looked like great black holes in her white face, looked
DuQuesne in the eye steadily.

"This is the end, then?"

"Not yet," he replied in a calm and level voice. "The end will not come
for a good many hours, as I have calculated that it will take at least
two days, probably more, to fall the distance we have to go. We have all
that time in which to think out a way of escape."

"Won't the outer repulsive shell keep us from striking it, or at least
break the force of our fall?"

"No. It was designed only as protection from meteorites and other small
bodies. It is heavy enough to swing us away from a small planet, but it
will be used up long before we strike."

He lighted a cigarette and sat at case, as though in his own study, his
brow wrinkled in thought as he made calculations in his notebook.
Finally he rose to his feet.

"There's only one chance that I can see. That is to gather up every
scrap of copper we have and try to pull ourselves far enough out of line
so that we will take an hyperbolic orbit around that body instead of
falling into it."

"What good will that do us?" asked Margaret, striving for self-control.
"We will starve to death finally, won't we?"

"Not necessarily. That will give us time to figure out something else."

"You won't have to figure out anything else, Doctor," stated Dorothy
positively. "If we miss that moon, Dick and Martin will find us before
very long."

"Not in this life. If they tried to follow us, they're both dead before
now."

"That's where even you are wrong!" she flashed at him. "They knew you
were wrecking our machine, so they built another one, a good one. And
they know a lot of things about this new metal that you have never
dreamed of, since they were not in the plans you stole."

       *       *       *       *       *

DuQuesne went directly to the heart of the matter, paying no attention
to her barbed shafts.

"Can they follow us through space without seeing us?" he demanded.

"Yes--or at least, I think they can."

"How do they do it?"

"I don't know--I wouldn't tell you if I did."

"You'll tell if you know," he declared, his voice cutting like a knife.
"But that can wait until after we get out of this. The thing to do now
is to dodge that world."

He searched the vessel for copper, ruthlessly tearing out almost
everything that contained the metal, hammering it flat and throwing it
into the power-plant. He set the bar at right angles to the line of
their fall and turned on the current. When the metal was exhausted, he
made another series of observations upon the body toward which they were
falling, and reported quietly:

"We made a lot of distance, but not enough. Everything goes in, this
time."

He tore out the single remaining light-wire, leaving the car in darkness
save for the diffused light of his electric torch, and broke up the only
remaining motor. He then took his almost priceless Swiss watch, his
heavy signet ring, his scarf pin, and the cartridges from his pistol,
and added them to the collection. Flashing his lamp upon Perkins, he
relieved him of everything he had which contained copper.

"I think I have a few pennies in my pocketbook," suggested Dorothy.

"Get 'em," he directed briefly, and while she was gone he searched
Margaret, without result save for the cartridges in her pistol, as she
had no jewelry remaining after her imprisonment. Dorothy returned and
handed him everything she had found.

"I would like to keep this ring," she said slowly, pointing to a slender
circlet of gold set with a solitaire diamond, "if you think there is any
chance of us getting clear."

"Everything goes that has any copper in it," he said coldly, "and I am
glad to see that Seaton is too good a chemist to buy any platinum
jewelry. You may keep the diamond, though," as he wrenched the jewel out
of its setting and returned it to her.

He threw all the metal into the central chamber and the vessel gave a
tremendous lurch as the power was again applied. It was soon spent,
however, and after the final observation, the others waiting in
breathless suspense for him to finish his calculations, he made his curt
announcement.

"Not enough."

Perkins, his mind weakened by the strain of the last few days, went
completely insane at the words. With a wild howl he threw himself at the
unmoved scientist, who struck him with the butt of his pistol as he
leaped, the mighty force of DuQuesne's blow crushing his skull like an
eggshell and throwing him backward to the opposite side of the vessel.
Margaret lay in her seat in a dead faint. Dorothy and DuQuesne looked at
each other in the feeble light of the torch. To the girl's amazement,
the man was as calm as though he were safe in his own house, and she
made a determined effort to hold herself together.

"What next, Doctor DuQuesne?"

"I don't know. We have a couple of days yet, at least. I'll have to
study awhile."

"In that time Dick will find us, I know."

"Even if they do find us in time, which I doubt, what good will it do?
It simply means that they will go with us instead of saving us, for of
course they can't pull away, since we couldn't. I hope they don't find
us, but locate this star in time to keep away from it."

"Why?" she gasped. "You have been planning to kill both of them! I
should think you would be delighted to take them with us?"

"Far from it. Please try to be logical. I intended to remove them
because they stood in the way of my developing this new metal. If I am
to be out of the way--and frankly, I see very little chance of getting
out of this--I hope that Seaton goes ahead with it. It is the greatest
discovery the world has ever known, and if both Seaton and I, the only
two men in the world who know how to handle it, drop out, it will be
lost for perhaps hundreds of years."

"If Dick's finding us means that he must go, too, of course I hope that
he won't find us, but I don't believe that. I simply know that he could
get us away from here."

She continued more slowly, almost speaking to herself, her heart sinking
with her voice:

"He is following us, and he won't stop even if he does see this dead
star and knows that he can't get away. We will die together."

"There's no denying the fact that our situation is critical, but you
know a man isn't dead until after his heart stops beating. We have two
whole days yet, and in that time, I can probably dope out some way of
getting away from here."

"I hope so," she replied, keeping her voice from breaking only by a
great effort. "But go ahead with your doping. I'm worn out." She drew
herself down upon one of the seats and stared at the ceiling, fighting
to restrain an almost overpowering impulse to scream.

Thus the hours wore by--Perkins dead; Margaret still unconscious;
Dorothy lying in her seat, her thoughts a formless prayer, buoyed up
only by her faith in God and in her lover; DuQuesne self-possessed,
smoking innumerable cigarettes, his keen mind grappling with its most
desperate problem, grimly fighting until the very last instant of
life--while the powerless space-car fell with an appalling velocity,
faster and faster; falling toward that cold and desolate monster of the
heaven.




CHAPTER X

The Rescue


Seaton and Crane drove the Skylark in the direction indicated by the
unwavering object-compass with the greatest acceleration they could
stand, each man taking a twelve-hour watch at the instrument board.

Now, indeed, did the Skylark justify the faith of her builders, and the
two inventors, with an exultant certainty of their success, flew out
beyond man's wildest imaginings. Had it not been for the haunting fear
for Dorothy's safety, the journey would have been one of pure triumph,
and even that anxiety did not prevent a profound joy in the enterprise.

"If that misguided mutt thinks he can pull off a stunt like that and get
away with it, he's got another think coming," asserted Seaton, after
making a reading on the other car after several days of the flight. "He
went off half-cocked this time, for sure, and we've got him foul. We'd
better put on some negative pretty soon hadn't we, Mart? Only a little
over a hundred light-years now."

Crane nodded agreement and Seaton continued:

"It'll take as long to stop, of course, as it has taken to get out here,
and if we ram them--GOOD NIGHT! Let's figure it out as nearly as we
can."

They calculated their own speed, and that of the other vessel, as shown
by the various readings taken, and applied just enough negative
acceleration to slow the Skylark down to the speed of the other
space-car when they should come up with it. They smiled at each other in
recognition of the perfect working of the mechanism when the huge vessel
had spun, with a sickening lurch, through a complete half-circle, the
instant the power was reversed. Each knew that they were actually
traveling in a direction that to them seemed "down," but with a
constantly diminishing velocity, even though they seemed to be still
going "up" with an increasing speed.
