any help from me. You say you know all about it,--then go on and finish
your nests by yourselves. Much luck may you have!" And away she flew to
her own cosy nest in the elm tree, where she was soon fast asleep,
forgetting all about the matter.

But oh! What a pickle the other birds were in! The lesson was but half
finished, and most of them had not the slightest idea what to do next.
That is why to this day many of the birds have never learned to build a
perfect nest. Some do better than others, but none build like Mother
Magpie.

But the Wood-Pigeon was in the worst case of them all. For she had only
the foundation laid criss-cross as the Magpie had shown her. And so, if
you find in the woods the most shiftless, silly kind of nest that you
can imagine--just a platform of sticks laid flat across a branch, with
no railing to keep the eggs from rolling out, no roof to keep the rain
from soaking in--when you see that foolishness, you will know that it is
the nest of little Mistress Wood-Pigeon, who was too stupid to learn the
lesson which Mother Magpie was ready to teach.

And the queerest part of all is that the birds blamed the Magpie for the
whole matter, and have never liked her since. But, as you may have
found out for yourselves, that is often the fate of wise folk who make
discoveries or who do things better than others.




THE GORGEOUS GOLDFINCH


The Goldfinch who lives in Europe is one of the gaudiest of the little
feathered brothers. He is a very Joseph of birds in his coat of many
colors, and folk often wonder how he came to have feathers so much more
gorgeous than his kindred. But after you have read this tale you will
wonder no longer.

You must know that when the Father first made all the birds they were
dressed alike in plumage of sober gray. But this dull uniform pleased
Him no more than it did the birds themselves, who begged that they might
wear each the particular style which was most becoming, and by which
they could be recognized afar.

So the Father called the birds to Him, one by one, as they stood in
line, and dipping His brush in the rainbow color-box painted each
appropriately in the colors which it wears to-day. (Except, indeed, that
some had later adventures which altered their original hues, as you
shall hear in due season.)

But the Goldfinch did not come with the other birds. That tardy little
fellow was busy elsewhere on his own affairs and heeded not the Father's
command to fall in line and wait his turn for being made beautiful.

So it happened that not until the painting was finished and all the
birds had flown away to admire themselves in the water-mirrors of the
earth, did the Goldfinch present himself at the Father's feet out of
breath.

"O Father!" he panted, "I am late. But I was so busy! Pray forgive me
and permit me to have a pretty coat like the others."

"You are late indeed," said the Father reproachfully, "and all the
coloring has been done. You should have come when I bade you. Do you not
know that it is the prompt bird who fares best? My rainbow color-box has
been generously used, and I have but little of each tint left. Yet I
will paint you with the colors that I have, and if the result be ill you
have only yourself to blame."

The Father smiled gently as He took up the brush which He had laid down,
and dipped it in the first color which came to hand. This He used until
there was no more, when He began with another shade, and so continued
until the Goldfinch was completely colored from head to foot. Such a
gorgeous coat! His forehead and throat were of the most brilliant
crimson. His cap and sailor collar were black. His back was brown and
yellow, his breast white, his wings golden set off with velvet black,
and his tail was black with white-tipped feathers. Certainly there was
no danger of his being mistaken for any other bird.

When the Goldfinch looked down into a pool and saw the reflection of his
gorgeous coat, he burst out into a song of joy. "I like it, oh, I like
it!" he warbled, and his song was very sweet. "Oh, I am glad that I was
late, indeed I am, dear Father!"

But the kind Father sighed and shook His head as He put away the brush,
exclaiming, "Poor little Goldfinch! You are indeed a beautiful bird. But
I fear that the gorgeous coat which you wear, and which is the best that
I could give you, because you came so late, will cause you more sorrow
than joy. Because of it you will be chased and captured and kept in
captivity; and your life will be spent in mourning for the days when you
were a plain gray bird."

And so it happened. For to this day the Goldfinch is persecuted by human
folk who admire his wonderful plumage and his beautiful song. He is
kept captive in a cage, while his less gorgeous brothers fly freely in
the beautiful world out of doors.

[Illustration: _Such a gorgeous coat!_]




KING OF THE BIRDS


Once upon a time, when the world was very new and when the birds had
just learned from Mother Magpie how to build their nests, some one said,
"We ought to have a king. Oh, we need a king of the birds very much!"

For you see, already in the Garden of Birds trouble had begun. There
were disputes every morning as to which was the earliest bird who was
entitled to the worm. There were quarrels over the best places for
nest-building and over the fattest bug or beetle; and there was no one
to settle these difficulties. Moreover, the robber birds were growing
too bold, and there was no one to rule and punish them. There was no
doubt about it; the birds needed a king to keep them in order and peace.

So the whisper went about, "We must have a king. Whom shall we choose
for our king?"

They decided to hold a great meeting for the election. And because the
especial talent of a bird is for flying, they agreed that the bird who
could fly highest up into the blue sky, straight toward the sun, should
be their king, king of all the feathered tribes of the air.

Therefore, after breakfast one beautiful morning, the birds met in the
garden to choose their king. All the birds were there, from the largest
to the smallest, chirping, twittering, singing on every bush and tree
and bit of dry grass, till the noise was almost as great as nowadays at
an election of two-legged folk without feathers. They swooped down in
great clouds, till the sky was black with them, and they were dotted on
the grass like punctuation marks on a green page. There were so many
that not even wise Mother Magpie or old Master Owl could count them, and
they all talked at the same time, like ladies at an afternoon tea, which
was very confusing.

Little Robin Redbreast was there, hopping about and saying pleasant
things to every one, for he was a great favorite. Gorgeous Goldfinch was
there, in fine feather; and little Blackbird, who was then as white as
snow. There were the proud Peacock and the silly Ostrich, the awkward
Penguin and the Dodo, whom no man living has ever seen. Likewise there
were the Jubjub Bird and the Dinky Bird, and many other curious
varieties that one never finds described in the wise Bird Books,--which
is very strange, and sad, too, I think. Yes, all the birds were there
for the choosing of their king, both the birds who could fly, and those
who could not. (But for what were they given wings, if not to fly? How
silly an Ostrich must feel!)

Now the Eagle expected to be king. He felt sure that he could fly higher
than any one else. He sat apart on a tall pine tree, looking very
dignified and noble, as a future king should look. And the birds glanced
at one another, nodded their heads, and whispered, "He is sure to be
elected king. He can fly straight up toward the sun without winking, and
his great wings are so strong, so strong! He never grows tired. He is
sure to be king."

Thus they whispered among themselves, and the Eagle heard them, and was
pleased. But the little brown Wren heard also, and he was not pleased.
The absurd little bird! He wanted to be king himself, although he was
one of the tiniest birds there, who could never be a protector to the
others, nor stop trouble when it began. No, indeed! Fancy him stepping
as a peacemaker between a robber Hawk and a bloody Falcon. It was they
who would make pieces of him. But he was a conceited little creature,
and saw no reason why he should not make a noble sovereign.

"I am cleverer than the Eagle," he said to himself, "though he is so
much bigger. I will be king in spite of him. Ha-ha! We shall see what we
shall see!" For the Wren had a great idea in his wee little head--an
idea bigger than the head itself, if you can explain how that could be.
He ruffled up his feathers to make himself as huge as possible, and
hopped over to the branch where the Eagle was sitting.

"Well, Eagle," said the Wren pompously, "I suppose you expect to be
king, eh?"

The Eagle stared hard at him with his great bright eyes. "Well, if I do,
what of that?" he said. "Who will dispute me?"

"I shall," said the Wren, bobbing his little brown head and wriggling
his tail saucily.

"You!" said the Eagle. "Do _you_ expect to fly higher than I?"

"Yes," chirped the Wren, "I do. Yes, I do, do, do!"

"Ho!" said the Eagle scornfully. "I am big and strong and brave. I can
fly higher than the clouds. You, poor little thing, are no bigger than a
bean. You will be out of breath before we have gone twice this tree's
height."

"Little as I am, I can mount higher than you," said the Wren.

"What will you wager, Wren?" asked the Eagle. "What will you give me if
I win?"

"If you win you will be king," said the Wren. "But beside that, if you
win I will give you my fat little body to eat for your breakfast. But if
I win, Sir, I shall be king, and you must promise never, never, never,
to hurt me or any of my people."

"Very well. I promise," said the Eagle haughtily. "Come now, it is time
for the trial, you poor little foolish creature."

The birds were flapping their wings and singing eagerly, "Let us
begin--begin. We want to see who is to be king. Come, birds, to the
trial. Who can fly the highest? Come!"

Then the Eagle spread his great wings and mounted leisurely into the
air, straight toward the noonday sun. And after him rose a number of
other birds who wanted to be king,--the wicked Hawk, the bold Albatross,
and the Skylark singing his wonderful song. The long-legged Stork
started also, but that was only for a joke. "Fancy me for a king!" he
cried, and he laughed so that he had to come down again in a minute. But
the Wren was nowhere to be seen. The truth was, he had hopped ever so
lightly upon the Eagle's head, where he sat like a tiny crest. But the
Eagle did not know he was there.

Soon the Hawk and the Albatross and even the brave little Skylark fell
behind, and the Eagle began to chuckle to himself at his easy victory.
"Where are you, poor little Wren?" he cried very loudly, for he fancied
that the tiny bird must be left far, far below.

"Here I am, here I am, away up above you, Master Eagle!" piped the Wren
in a weak little voice. And the Eagle fancied the Wren was so far up in
the air that even his sharp eyes could not spy the tiny creature. "Dear
me!" said he to himself. "How extraordinary that he has passed me." So
he redoubled his speed and flew on, higher, higher.

Presently he called out again in a tremendous voice, "Well, where are
you now? Where are you now, poor little Wren?"

Once more he heard the tiny shrill voice from somewhere above piping,
"Here I am, here I am, nearer the sun than you, Master Eagle. Will you
give up now?"

Of course the Eagle would not give up yet. He flew on, higher and
higher, till the garden and its flock of patient birds waiting for their
king grew dim and blurry below. And at last even the mighty wings of the
Eagle were weary, for he was far above the clouds. "Surely," he thought,
"now the Wren is left miles behind." He gave a scream of triumph and
cried, "Where are you now, poor little Wren? Can you hear me at all,
down below there?"

But what was his amazement to hear the same little voice above his head
shrilling, "Here I am, here I am, Sir Eagle. Look up and see me, look!"
And there, sure enough, he was fluttering above the Eagle's head. "And
now, since I have mounted so much higher than you, will you agree that I
have won?"

"Yes, you have won, little Wren. Let us descend together, for I am weary
enough," cried the Eagle, much mortified; and down he swooped, on heavy,
discouraged wings.

"Yes, let us descend together," murmured the Wren, once more perching
comfortably on the Eagle's head. And so down he rode on this convenient
elevator, which was the first one invented in this world.

When the Eagle nearly reached the ground, the other birds set up a cry
of greeting.

"Hail, King Eagle!" they sang. "How high you flew! How near the sun! Did
he not scorch your Majesty's feathers? Hail, mighty king!" and they made
a deafening chorus. But the Eagle stopped them.

"The Wren is your king, not I," he said. "He mounted higher than I did."

"The Wren? Ha-ha! The _Wren_! We can't believe that The Wren flew
higher than you? No, no!" they all shouted. But just then the Eagle
lighted on a tree, and from the top of his head hopped the little Wren,
cocking his head and ruffling himself proudly.

"Yes, I mounted higher than he," he cried, "for I was perched on his
head all the while, ha-ha! And now, therefore, I am king, small though I
be."

Now the Eagle was very angry when he saw the trick that had been played
upon him, and he swooped upon the sly Wren to punish him. But the Wren
screamed, "Remember, remember your promise never to injure me or mine!"
Then the Eagle stopped, for he was a noble bird and never forgot a
promise. He folded his wings and turned away in disgust.

"Be king, then, O cheat and trickster!" he said.

"Cheat and trickster!" echoed the other birds. "We will have no such
fellow for our king. Cheat and trickster he is, and he shall be
punished. You shall be king, brave Eagle, for without your strength he
could never have flown so high. It is you whom we want for our
protector and lawmaker, not this sly fellow no bigger than a bean."

So the Eagle became their king, after all; and a noble bird he is, as
you must understand, or he would never have been chosen to guard our
nation's coat of arms. And besides this you may see his picture on many
a banner and crest and coin of gold or silver, so famous has he become.

But the Wren was to be punished. And while the birds were trying to
decide what should be done with him, they put him in prison in a
mouse-hole and set Master Owl to guard the door. Now while the judges
were putting their heads together the lazy Owl fell fast asleep, and out
of prison stole the little Wren and was far away before any one could
catch him. So he was never punished after all, as he richly deserved to
be.

The birds were so angry with old Master Owl for his carelessness that he
has never since dared to show his face abroad in daytime, but hides away
in his hollow tree. And only at night he wanders alone in the woods,
sorry and ashamed.




HALCYONE


The story of the first Kingfisher is a sad one, and you need not read it
unless for a very little while you wish to feel sorry.

Long, long ago when the world was new, there lived a beautiful princess
named Halcyone. She was the daughter of old AEolus, King of the Winds,
and lived with him on his happy island, where it was his chief business
to keep in order the four boisterous brothers, Boreas, the North Wind,
Zephyrus, the West Wind, Auster, the South Wind, and Eurus, the East
Wind. Sometimes, indeed, AEolus had a hard time of it; for the Winds
would escape from his control and rush out upon the sea for their
terrible games, which were sure to bring death and destruction to the
sailors and their ships. Knowing them so well, for she had grown up with
these rough playmates, Halcyone came to dread more than anything else
the cruelties which they practiced at every opportunity.

One day the Prince Ceyx came to the island of King AEolus. He was the son
of Hesperus, the Evening Star, and he was the king of the great land of
Thessaly. Ceyx and Halcyone grew to love each other dearly, and at last
with the consent of good King AEolus, but to the wrath of the four Winds,
the beautiful princess went away to be the wife of Ceyx and Queen of
Thessaly.

For a long time they lived happily in their peaceful kingdom, but
finally came a day when Ceyx must take a long voyage on the sea, to
visit a temple in a far country. Halcyone could not bear to have him go,
for she feared the dangers of the great deep, knowing well the cruelty
of the Winds, whom King AEolus had such difficulty in keeping within
bounds. She knew how the mischievous brothers loved to rush down upon
venturesome sailors and blow them into danger, and she knew that they
especially hated her husband because he had carried her away from the
island where she had watched the Winds at their terrible play. She
begged Ceyx not to go, but he said that it was necessary. Then she
prayed that if he must go he would take her with him, for she could not
bear to remain behind dreading what might happen.

But Ceyx was resolved that Halcyone should not go. The good king longed
to take her with him; no more than she could he smile at the thought of
separation. But he also feared the sea, not on his own account, but for
his dear wife. In spite of her entreaties he remained firm. If all went
well he promised to return in two months' time. But Halcyone knew that
she should never see him again as now he spoke.

The day of separation came. Standing heart-broken upon the shore,
Halcyone watched the vessel sail away into the East, until as a little
speck it dropped below the horizon; then sobbing bitterly she returned
to the palace.

Now the king and his men had completed but half their journey when a
terrible storm arose. The wicked Winds had escaped from the control of
good old AEolus and were rushing down upon the ocean to punish Ceyx for
carrying away the beautiful Halcyone. Fiercely they blew, the lightning
flashed, and the sea ran high; and in the midst of the horrible tumult
the good ship went to the bottom with all on board. Thus the fears of
Halcyone were proved true, and far from his dear wife poor Ceyx perished
in the cruel waves.

That very night when the shipwreck occurred, the sad and fearful
Halcyone, sleeping lonely at home, knew in a dream the very calamity
which had happened. She seemed to see the storm and the shipwreck, and
the form of Ceyx appeared, saying a sad farewell to her. As soon as it
was light she rose and hastened to the seashore, trembling with a
horrible dread. Standing on the very spot whence she had last seen the
fated ship, she looked wistfully over the waste of stormy waters. At
last she spied a dark something tossing on the waves. The object floated
nearer and nearer, until a huge breaker cast before her on the sand the
body of her drowned husband.

"O dearest Ceyx!" she cried. "Is it thus that you return to me?"
Stretching out her arms toward him, she leaped upon the sea wall as if
she would throw herself into the ocean, which advanced and retreated,
seething around his body. But a different fate was to be hers. As she
leaped forward two strong wings sprouted from her shoulders, and before
she knew it she found herself skimming lightly as a bird over the water.
From her throat came sounds of sobbing, which changed as she flew into
the shrill piping of a bird. Soft feathers now covered her body, and a
crest rose above the forehead which had once been so fair. Halcyone was
become a Kingfisher, the first Kingfisher who ever flew lamenting above
the waters of the world.

The sad bird fluttered through the spray straight to the body that was
tossed upon the surf. As her wings touched the wet shoulders, and as her
horny beak sought the dumb lips in an attempt to kiss what was once so
dear, the body of Ceyx began to receive new life. The limbs stirred, a
faint color returned to the cheeks. At the same moment a change like
that which had transformed Halcyone began to pass over her husband. He
too was becoming a Kingfisher. He too felt the thrill of wings upon his
shoulders, wings which were to bear him up and away out of the sea which
had been his death. He too was clad in soft plumage with a kingly crest
upon his kingly head. With a faint cry, half of sorrow for what had
happened, half of joy for the future in which these two loving ones were
at least to be together, Ceyx rose from the surf-swept sand where his
lifeless limbs had lain and went skimming over the waves beside Halcyone
his wife.

So those unhappy mortals became the first kingfishers, happy at last in
being reunited. So we see them still, flying up and down over the waters
of the world, royal forms with royal crests upon their heads.

They built their nest of the bones of fish, a stout and well-joined
basket which floated on the waves as safely as any little boat. And
while their children, the baby Halcyons, lay in this rocking cradle, for
seven days in the heart of winter, no storms ever troubled the ocean
and mariners could set out upon their voyages without fear.

For while his little grandchildren rocked in their basket, the good King
AEolus, pitying the sorrows of his daughter Halcyone, was always
especially careful to chain up in prison those wicked brothers the
Winds, so that they could do no mischief of any kind.

And that is why a halcyon time has come to mean a season of peace and
safety.




THE FORGETFUL KINGFISHER


In these days the Kingfisher is a sad and solitary bird, caring not to
venture far from the water where she finds her food. Up and down the
river banks she goes, uttering a peculiar plaintive cry. What is she
saying, and why is she so restless? The American Kingfisher is gray, but
her cousin of Europe is a bird of brilliant azure with a breast of rusty
red. Therefore it must have been the foreign Kingfisher who was
forgetful, as you shall hear.

Long, long after the sorrows of Halcyone, the first Kingfisher, were
ended, came the great storm which lasted forty days and forty nights,
causing the worst flood which the world has ever known. That was a
terrible time. When Father Noah hastened to build his ark, inviting the
animals and birds to take refuge with him, the Kingfisher herself was
glad to go aboard. For even she, protected by AEolus from the fury of
winds and waters, was not safe while there was no place in all the world
for her to rest foot and weary wing. So the Kingfisher fluttered in with
the other birds and animals, a strange company! And there they lived
all together, Noah and his arkful of pets, for many weary days, while
the waters raged and the winds howled outside, and all the earth was
covered fathoms deep out of sight below the waves.

But after long weeks the storm ceased, and Father Noah opened the little
window in the ark and sent forth the Dove to see whether or not there
was land visible on which the ark might find rest. Now after he had sent
out the Dove, Noah looked about him at the other birds and animals which
crowded around him eagerly, for they were growing very restless from
their long confinement, and he said, "Which of you is bravest, and will
dare follow our friend the Dove out into the watery world? Ah, here is
the Kingfisher. Little mother, you at least, reared among the winds and
waters, will not be afraid. Take wing, O Kingfisher, and see if the
earth be visible. Then return quickly and bring me faithful word of what
you find out yonder."

Day was just beginning to dawn when the Kingfisher, who was then as gray
as gray, flew out from the little window of the ark whence the Dove had
preceded her. But hardly had she left the safe shelter of Father Noah's
floating home, when there came a tremendous whirlwind which blew her
about and buffeted her until she was almost beaten into the waves,
which rolled endlessly over the face of the whole earth, covering the
high hills and the very mountains. The Kingfisher was greatly
