labor, but the claim of the workman to just and considerate treatment
is backed by the whole power of the nation. The officer commands and
the private obeys, but no officer is so high that he would dare display
an overbearing manner toward a workman of the lowest class. As for
churlishness or rudeness by an official of any sort, in his relations
to the public, not one among minor offenses is more sure of a prompt
penalty than this. Not only justice but civility is enforced by our
judges in all sorts of intercourse. No value of service is accepted as
a set-off to boorish or offensive manners."

It occurred to me, as Dr. Leete was speaking, that in all his talk I
had heard much of the nation and nothing of the state governments. Had
the organization of the nation as an industrial unit done away with the
states? I asked.

"Necessarily," he replied. "The state governments would have interfered
with the control and discipline of the industrial army, which, of
course, required to be central and uniform. Even if the state
governments had not become inconvenient for other reasons, they were
rendered superfluous by the prodigious simplification in the task of
government since your day. Almost the sole function of the
administration now is that of directing the industries of the country.
Most of the purposes for which governments formerly existed no longer
remain to be subserved. We have no army or navy, and no military
organization. We have no departments of state or treasury, no excise or
revenue services, no taxes or tax collectors. The only function proper
of government, as known to you, which still remains, is the judiciary
and police system. I have already explained to you how simple is our
judicial system as compared with your huge and complex machine. Of
course the same absence of crime and temptation to it, which make the
duties of judges so light, reduces the number and duties of the police
to a minimum."

"But with no state legislatures, and Congress meeting only once in five
years, how do you get your legislation done?"

"We have no legislation," replied Dr. Leete, "that is, next to none. It
is rarely that Congress, even when it meets, considers any new laws of
consequence, and then it only has power to commend them to the
following Congress, lest anything be done hastily. If you will consider
a moment, Mr. West, you will see that we have nothing to make laws
about. The fundamental principles on which our society is founded
settle for all time the strifes and misunderstandings which in your day
called for legislation.

"Fully ninety-nine hundredths of the laws of that time concerned the
definition and protection of private property and the relations of
buyers and sellers. There is neither private property, beyond personal
belongings, now, nor buying and selling, and therefore the occasion of
nearly all the legislation formerly necessary has passed away.
Formerly, society was a pyramid poised on its apex. All the
gravitations of human nature were constantly tending to topple it over,
and it could be maintained upright, or rather upwrong (if you will
pardon the feeble witticism), by an elaborate system of constantly
renewed props and buttresses and guy-ropes in the form of laws. A
central Congress and forty state legislatures, turning out some twenty
thousand laws a year, could not make new props fast enough to take the
place of those which were constantly breaking down or becoming
ineffectual through some shifting of the strain. Now society rests on
its base, and is in as little need of artificial supports as the
everlasting hills."

"But you have at least municipal governments besides the one central
authority?"

"Certainly, and they have important and extensive functions in looking
out for the public comfort and recreation, and the improvement and
embellishment of the villages and cities."

"But having no control over the labor of their people, or means of
hiring it, how can they do anything?"

"Every town or city is conceded the right to retain, for its own public
works, a certain proportion of the quota of labor its citizens
contribute to the nation. This proportion, being assigned it as so much
credit, can be applied in any way desired."



Chapter 20

That afternoon Edith casually inquired if I had yet revisited the
underground chamber in the garden in which I had been found.

"Not yet," I replied. "To be frank, I have shrunk thus far from doing
so, lest the visit might revive old associations rather too strongly
for my mental equilibrium."

"Ah, yes!" she said, "I can imagine that you have done well to stay
away. I ought to have thought of that."

"No," I said, "I am glad you spoke of it. The danger, if there was any,
existed only during the first day or two. Thanks to you, chiefly and
always, I feel my footing now so firm in this new world, that if you
will go with me to keep the ghosts off, I should really like to visit
the place this afternoon."

Edith demurred at first, but, finding that I was in earnest, consented
to accompany me. The rampart of earth thrown up from the excavation was
visible among the trees from the house, and a few steps brought us to
the spot. All remained as it was at the point when work was interrupted
by the discovery of the tenant of the chamber, save that the door had
been opened and the slab from the roof replaced. Descending the sloping
sides of the excavation, we went in at the door and stood within the
dimly lighted room.

Everything was just as I had beheld it last on that evening one hundred
and thirteen years previous, just before closing my eyes for that long
sleep. I stood for some time silently looking about me. I saw that my
companion was furtively regarding me with an expression of awed and
sympathetic curiosity. I put out my hand to her and she placed hers in
it, the soft fingers responding with a reassuring pressure to my clasp.
Finally she whispered, "Had we not better go out now? You must not try
yourself too far. Oh, how strange it must be to you!"

"On the contrary," I replied, "it does not seem strange; that is the
strangest part of it."

"Not strange?" she echoed.

"Even so," I replied. "The emotions with which you evidently credit me,
and which I anticipated would attend this visit, I simply do not feel.
I realize all that these surroundings suggest, but without the
agitation I expected. You can't be nearly as much surprised at this as
I am myself. Ever since that terrible morning when you came to my help,
I have tried to avoid thinking of my former life, just as I have
avoided coming here, for fear of the agitating effects. I am for all
the world like a man who has permitted an injured limb to lie
motionless under the impression that it is exquisitely sensitive, and
on trying to move it finds that it is paralyzed."

"Do you mean your memory is gone?"

"Not at all. I remember everything connected with my former life, but
with a total lack of keen sensation. I remember it for clearness as if
it had been but a day since then, but my feelings about what I remember
are as faint as if to my consciousness, as well as in fact, a hundred
years had intervened. Perhaps it is possible to explain this, too. The
effect of change in surroundings is like that of lapse of time in
making the past seem remote. When I first woke from that trance, my
former life appeared as yesterday, but now, since I have learned to
know my new surroundings, and to realize the prodigious changes that
have transformed the world, I no longer find it hard, but very easy, to
realize that I have slept a century. Can you conceive of such a thing
as living a hundred years in four days? It really seems to me that I
have done just that, and that it is this experience which has given so
remote and unreal an appearance to my former life. Can you see how such
a thing might be?"

"I can conceive it," replied Edith, meditatively, "and I think we ought
all to be thankful that it is so, for it will save you much suffering,
I am sure."

"Imagine," I said, in an effort to explain, as much to myself as to
her, the strangeness of my mental condition, "that a man first heard of
a bereavement many, many years, half a lifetime perhaps, after the
event occurred. I fancy his feeling would be perhaps something as mine
is. When I think of my friends in the world of that former day, and the
sorrow they must have felt for me, it is with a pensive pity, rather
than keen anguish, as of a sorrow long, long ago ended."

"You have told us nothing yet of your friends," said Edith. "Had you
many to mourn you?"

"Thank God, I had very few relatives, none nearer than cousins," I
replied. "But there was one, not a relative, but dearer to me than any
kin of blood. She had your name. She was to have been my wife soon. Ah
me!"

"Ah me!" sighed the Edith by my side. "Think of the heartache she must
have had."

Something in the deep feeling of this gentle girl touched a chord in my
benumbed heart. My eyes, before so dry, were flooded with the tears
that had till now refused to come. When I had regained my composure, I
saw that she too had been weeping freely.

"God bless your tender heart," I said. "Would you like to see her
picture?"

A small locket with Edith Bartlett's picture, secured about my neck
with a gold chain, had lain upon my breast all through that long sleep,
and removing this I opened and gave it to my companion. She took it
with eagerness, and after poring long over the sweet face, touched the
picture with her lips.

"I know that she was good and lovely enough to well deserve your
tears," she said; "but remember her heartache was over long ago, and
she has been in heaven for nearly a century."

It was indeed so. Whatever her sorrow had once been, for nearly a
century she had ceased to weep, and, my sudden passion spent, my own
tears dried away. I had loved her very dearly in my other life, but it
was a hundred years ago! I do not know but some may find in this
confession evidence of lack of feeling, but I think, perhaps, that none
can have had an experience sufficiently like mine to enable them to
judge me. As we were about to leave the chamber, my eye rested upon the
great iron safe which stood in one corner. Calling my companion's
attention to it, I said:

"This was my strong room as well as my sleeping room. In the safe
yonder are several thousand dollars in gold, and any amount of
securities. If I had known when I went to sleep that night just how
long my nap would be, I should still have thought that the gold was a
safe provision for my needs in any country or any century, however
distant. That a time would ever come when it would lose its purchasing
power, I should have considered the wildest of fancies. Nevertheless,
here I wake up to find myself among a people of whom a cartload of gold
will not procure a loaf of bread."

As might be expected, I did not succeed in impressing Edith that there
was anything remarkable in this fact. "Why in the world should it?" she
merely asked.



Chapter 21

It had been suggested by Dr. Leete that we should devote the next
morning to an inspection of the schools and colleges of the city, with
some attempt on his own part at an explanation of the educational
system of the twentieth century.

"You will see," said he, as we set out after breakfast, "many very
important differences between our methods of education and yours, but
the main difference is that nowadays all persons equally have those
opportunities of higher education which in your day only an
infinitesimal portion of the population enjoyed. We should think we had
gained nothing worth speaking of, in equalizing the physical comfort of
men, without this educational equality."

"The cost must be very great," I said.

"If it took half the revenue of the nation, nobody would grudge it,"
replied Dr. Leete, "nor even if it took it all save a bare pittance.
But in truth the expense of educating ten thousand youth is not ten nor
five times that of educating one thousand. The principle which makes
all operations on a large scale proportionally cheaper than on a small
scale holds as to education also."

"College education was terribly expensive in my day," said I.

"If I have not been misinformed by our historians," Dr. Leete answered,
"it was not college education but college dissipation and extravagance
which cost so highly. The actual expense of your colleges appears to
have been very low, and would have been far lower if their patronage
had been greater. The higher education nowadays is as cheap as the
lower, as all grades of teachers, like all other workers, receive the
same support. We have simply added to the common school system of
compulsory education, in vogue in Massachusetts a hundred years ago, a
half dozen higher grades, carrying the youth to the age of twenty-one
and giving him what you used to call the education of a gentleman,
instead of turning him loose at fourteen or fifteen with no mental
equipment beyond reading, writing, and the multiplication table."

"Setting aside the actual cost of these additional years of education,"
I replied, "we should not have thought we could afford the loss of time
from industrial pursuits. Boys of the poorer classes usually went to
work at sixteen or younger, and knew their trade at twenty."

"We should not concede you any gain even in material product by that
plan," Dr. Leete replied. "The greater efficiency which education gives
to all sorts of labor, except the rudest, makes up in a short period
for the time lost in acquiring it."

"We should also have been afraid," said I, "that a high education,
while it adapted men to the professions, would set them against manual
labor of all sorts."

"That was the effect of high education in your day, I have read,"
replied the doctor; "and it was no wonder, for manual labor meant
association with a rude, coarse, and ignorant class of people. There is
no such class now. It was inevitable that such a feeling should exist
then, for the further reason that all men receiving a high education
were understood to be destined for the professions or for wealthy
leisure, and such an education in one neither rich nor professional was
a proof of disappointed aspirations, an evidence of failure, a badge of
inferiority rather than superiority. Nowadays, of course, when the
highest education is deemed necessary to fit a man merely to live,
without any reference to the sort of work he may do, its possession
conveys no such implication."

"After all," I remarked, "no amount of education can cure natural
dullness or make up for original mental deficiencies. Unless the
average natural mental capacity of men is much above its level in my
day, a high education must be pretty nearly thrown away on a large
element of the population. We used to hold that a certain amount of
susceptibility to educational influences is required to make a mind
worth cultivating, just as a certain natural fertility in soil is
required if it is to repay tilling."

"Ah," said Dr. Leete, "I am glad you used that illustration, for it is
just the one I would have chosen to set forth the modern view of
education. You say that land so poor that the product will not repay
the labor of tilling is not cultivated. Nevertheless, much land that
does not begin to repay tilling by its product was cultivated in your
day and is in ours. I refer to gardens, parks, lawns, and, in general,
to pieces of land so situated that, were they left to grow up to weeds
and briers, they would be eyesores and inconveniencies to all about.
They are therefore tilled, and though their product is little, there is
yet no land that, in a wider sense, better repays cultivation. So it is
with the men and women with whom we mingle in the relations of society,
whose voices are always in our ears, whose behavior in innumerable ways
affects our enjoyment--who are, in fact, as much conditions of our
lives as the air we breathe, or any of the physical elements on which
we depend. If, indeed, we could not afford to educate everybody, we
should choose the coarsest and dullest by nature, rather than the
brightest, to receive what education we could give. The naturally
refined and intellectual can better dispense with aids to culture than
those less fortunate in natural endowments.

"To borrow a phrase which was often used in your day, we should not
consider life worth living if we had to be surrounded by a population
of ignorant, boorish, coarse, wholly uncultivated men and women, as was
the plight of the few educated in your day. Is a man satisfied, merely
because he is perfumed himself, to mingle with a malodorous crowd?
Could he take more than a very limited satisfaction, even in a palatial
apartment, if the windows on all four sides opened into stable yards?
And yet just that was the situation of those considered most fortunate
as to culture and refinement in your day. I know that the poor and
ignorant envied the rich and cultured then; but to us the latter,
living as they did, surrounded by squalor and brutishness, seem little
better off than the former. The cultured man in your age was like one
up to the neck in a nauseous bog solacing himself with a smelling
bottle. You see, perhaps, now, how we look at this question of
universal high education. No single thing is so important to every man
as to have for neighbors intelligent, companionable persons. There is
nothing, therefore, which the nation can do for him that will enhance
so much his own happiness as to educate his neighbors. When it fails to
do so, the value of his own education to him is reduced by half, and
many of the tastes he has cultivated are made positive sources of pain.

"To educate some to the highest degree, and leave the mass wholly
uncultivated, as you did, made the gap between them almost like that
between different natural species, which have no means of
communication. What could be more inhuman than this consequence of a
partial enjoyment of education! Its universal and equal enjoyment
leaves, indeed, the differences between men as to natural endowments as
marked as in a state of nature, but the level of the lowest is vastly
raised. Brutishness is eliminated. All have some inkling of the
humanities, some appreciation of the things of the mind, and an
admiration for the still higher culture they have fallen short of. They
have become capable of receiving and imparting, in various degrees, but
all in some measure, the pleasures and inspirations of a refined social
life. The cultured society of the nineteenth century--what did it
consist of but here and there a few microscopic oases in a vast,
unbroken wilderness? The proportion of individuals capable of
intellectual sympathies or refined intercourse, to the mass of their
contemporaries, used to be so infinitesimal as to be in any broad view
of humanity scarcely worth mentioning. One generation of the world
to-day represents a greater volume of intellectual life than any five
centuries ever did before.

"There is still another point I should mention in stating the grounds
on which nothing less than the universality of the best education could
now be tolerated," continued Dr. Leete, "and that is, the interest of
the coming generation in having educated parents. To put the matter in
a nutshell, there are three main grounds on which our educational
system rests: first, the right of every man to the completest education
the nation can give him on his own account, as necessary to his
enjoyment of himself; second, the right of his fellow-citizens to have
him educated, as necessary to their enjoyment of his society; third,
the right of the unborn to be guaranteed an intelligent and refined
parentage."

I shall not describe in detail what I saw in the schools that day.
Having taken but slight interest in educational matters in my former
life, I could offer few comparisons of interest. Next to the fact of
the universality of the higher as well as the lower education, I was
most struck with the prominence given to physical culture, and the fact
that proficiency in athletic feats and games as well as in scholarship
had a place in the rating of the youth.

"The faculty of education," Dr. Leete explained, "is held to the same
responsibility for the bodies as for the minds of its charges. The
highest possible physical, as well as mental, development of every one
is the double object of a curriculum which lasts from the age of six to
that of twenty-one."

The magnificent health of the young people in the schools impressed me
strongly. My previous observations, not only of the notable personal
endowments of the family of my host, but of the people I had seen in my
walks abroad, had already suggested the idea that there must have been
something like a general improvement in the physical standard of the
race since my day, and now, as I compared these stalwart young men and
fresh, vigorous maidens with the young people I had seen in the schools
of the nineteenth century, I was moved to impart my thought to Dr.
Leete. He listened with great interest to what I said.

"Your testimony on this point," he declared, "is invaluable. We believe
that there has been such an improvement as you speak of, but of course
it could only be a matter of theory with us. It is an incident of your
unique position that you alone in the world of to-day can speak with
authority on this point. Your opinion, when you state it publicly,
will, I assure you, make a profound sensation. For the rest it would be
strange, certainly, if the race did not show an improvement. In your
day, riches debauched one class with idleness of mind and body, while
poverty sapped the vitality of the masses by overwork, bad food, and
pestilent homes. The labor required of children, and the burdens laid
on women, enfeebled the very springs of life. Instead of these
maleficent circumstances, all now enjoy the most favorable conditions
of physical life; the young are carefully nurtured and studiously cared
for; the labor which is required of all is limited to the period of
greatest bodily vigor, and is never excessive; care for one's self and
one's family, anxiety as to livelihood, the strain of a ceaseless
battle for life--all these influences, which once did so much to wreck
the minds and bodies of men and women, are known no more. Certainly, an
