his chair back, eyes squinting out of a reddening face that seemed on
the point of bursting. "Why, Walker?"

Once again Walker thought about how he had hated the army when he was a
bright young physics student. That was a long time ago--So much had
happened. The doors had closed around him, one at a time, doors closing
on the scientific mind. And so now, instead of a research scientist in
white smock with textbook, he was a military administrator in smart
greys with glittering stars of military rank.

"I'll say this, Walker," Meriwether shouted, his voice breaking again.
"We'd better catch up quick. Mighty quick. Let's put it this way. It
might mean your rank and your job, Walker. But you won't give a damn.
Because we'll have lost the war. We'll have lost the colonies. And you
know what that would mean, Walker?" He bent forward across the desk, his
face exploding into Walker's eyes. "Only a fool believes that United
Terra can survive in an economy without tri-planetary hegemony.

"Walker, you've all the authority within my power to grant. You'll have
no trouble getting money. But--get the answer. _Quick._"

Walker blinked after him as he strode to the door. "I'll try to hold off
a federal investigation as long as I can," Meriwether added, turning
from the half-opened door. "But I can't guarantee a thing."

                                  ----

Walker sat alone in a cubicle of light in the darkened city and gulped
down his twentieth cup of coffee. It had grown cold in the cup and with
a grimace he pushed it aside.

There was no doubt about it. He thumbed through the sheaf of scribbled
notes he had transcribed from stacks of documents and racks of spools
from Security files. Clearly, he had the answer to Meriwether's
questions. But, having it, he did not quite know what to do with it.

There was, however, no doubt at all: United Terra had been on the track
of the neural weapon--ten years earlier. Could have had it--and had lost
the chance.

He rubbed his thumbs hard against his tired eyes and tried to remember
back that ten years: at that time he had been Chief of Weapons
Development for perhaps three years. His own name, though, had appeared
in none of the files he had examined, so apparently he had not been
directly involved in the security hearings. But he _should_ remember.

Dr. Otto Millet. _Otto Millet._ He let the name roll around his brain,
until shortly an image began to form--an image of a smiling man, greying
at the temples, wearing a flamboyant sports shirt and affecting a very
close haircut. A man perhaps forty. In the image, he was a laughing man.

He remembered now. Dr. Otto Millet: into government service on the
inertia of a fantastic reputation as a research physicist specializing
in magnetic field studies. A man he had instantly disliked.

He bent forward and reread what he had scrawled in his last notes, a
verbatim extract from the report of the security committee.

"It is clear that Dr. Millet's conversations and letters with Professor
Greyman, together with his unrepentant attitude, render him a security
risk. His various security clearances are therefore revoked, and he is
hereafter prohibited access to all classified files and to any
government research and development laboratory."

Since virtually all laboratories were government supported, that was to
all intents and purposes the end of Millet's career as an experimental
physicist.

Where had Millet gone? What had he done since? Walker scraped a
cigarette out of the half-empty pack in his pocket. More important: what
was he doing now?

He inhaled deeply and sent clouds of smoke skewing across the room. Had
the man really been a traitor? Walker tried to place himself in the time
of Millet's hearing. He'd been not too many years out of school then,
with the bitterness of his frustrated ambition to be a research
physicist still rankling him; perhaps this had colored his view of
Millet. He stared at his desk, almost shocked that this thought should
have occurred to him. It shook him, for it told him something about
himself which he did not particularly care to know.

Nowhere had he been able to find any evidence as to what had happened to
Millet since. Banished, the government seemed to forget him. But one
thing was clear to Walker, and he pondered it deeply as he sucked on the
last quarter-inch of his cigarette and poured himself another cup of
cold black coffee. One big thing: Millet had been directing development
along lines that would have led to the neural weapon; he had even signed
a report, early in his project effort, which had referred to the
possibility of "a neural device."

Had he gone over to the Confederation? It would account for their
possession of the weapon now. But surely--_surely_, this fact would have
