render them this tribute? Lo! it is only because they do order you in
bands and lead you out and in and set your tasks and afterward give you a
little of the water yourselves have brought and not they. Now, behold the
way out of this bondage! Do ye for yourselves that which is done by the
capitalists--namely, the ordering of your labor, and the marshaling of
your bands, and the dividing of your tasks. So shall ye have no need at
all of the capitalists and no more yield to them any profit, but all the
fruit of your labor shall ye share as brethren, every one having the
same; and so shall the tank never overflow until every man is full, and
would not wag the tongue for more, and afterward shall ye with the
overflow make pleasant fountains and fish ponds to delight yourselves
withal even as did the capitalists; but these shall be for the delight of
all."

"'And the people answered, "How shall we go about to do this thing, for
it seemeth good to us?"

"'And the agitators answered: "Choose ye discreet men to go in and out
before you and to marshal your bands and order your labor, and these men
shall be as the capitalists were; but, behold, they shall not be your
masters as the capitalists are, but your brethren and officers who do
your will, and they shall not take any profits, but every man his share
like the others, that there may be no more masters and servants among
you, but brethren only. And from time to time, as ye see fit, ye shall
choose other discreet men in place of the first to order the labor."

"'And the people hearkened, and the thing was very good to them. Likewise
seemed it not a hard thing. And with one voice they cried out, "So let it
be as ye have said, for we will do it!"

"'And the capitalists heard the noise of the shouting and what the people
said, and the soothsayers heard it also, and likewise the false priests
and the mighty men of war, who were a defense unto the capitalists; and
when they heard they trembled exceedingly, so that their knees smote
together, and they said one to another, "It is the end of us!"

"'Howbeit, there were certain true priests of the living God who would
not prophesy for the capitalists, but had compassion on the people; and
when they heard the shouting of the people and what they said, they
rejoiced with exceeding great joy, and gave thanks to God because of the
deliverance.

"'And the people went and did all the things that were told them of the
agitators to do. And it came to pass as the agitators had said, even
according to all their words. And there was no more any thirst in that
land, neither any that was ahungered, nor naked, nor cold, nor in any
manner of want; and every man said unto his fellow, "My brother," and
every woman said unto her companion, "My sister," for so were they with
one another as brethren and sisters which do dwell together in unity. And
the blessing of God rested upon that land forever.'"




CHAPTER XXIV.

I AM SHOWN ALL THE KINGDOMS OF THE EARTH.

The boys and girls of the political-economy class rose to their feet at
the teacher's word of dismissal, and in the twinkling of an eye the scene
which had been absorbing my attention disappeared, and I found myself
staring at Dr. Leete's smiling countenance and endeavoring to imagine how
I had come to be where I was. During the greater part and all the latter
part of the session of the class so absolute had been the illusion of
being actually present in the schoolroom, and so absorbing the interest
of the theme, that I had quite forgotten the extraordinary device by
which I was enabled to see and hear the proceedings. Now, as I recalled
it, my mind reverted with an impulse of boundless curiosity to the
electroscope and the processes by which it performed its miracles.

Having given me some explanation of the mechanical operation of the
apparatus and the way in which it served the purpose of a prolonged optic
nerve, the doctor went on to exhibit its powers on a large scale. During
the following hour, without leaving my chair, I made the tour of the
earth, and learned by the testimony of my senses that the transformation
which had come over Boston since my former life was but a sample of that
which the whole world of men had undergone. I had but to name a great
city or a famous locality in any country to be at once present there so
far as sight and hearing were concerned. I looked down on modern New
York, then upon Chicago, upon San Francisco, and upon New Orleans,
finding each of these cities quite unrecognizable but for the natural
features which constituted their setting. I visited London. I heard the
Parisians talk French and the Berlinese talk German, and from St.
Petersburg went to Cairo by way of Delhi. One city would be bathed in the
noonday sun; over the next I visited, the moon, perhaps, was rising and
the stars coming out; while over the third the silence of midnight
brooded. In Paris, I remember, it was raining hard, and in London fog
reigned supreme. In St. Petersburg there was a snow squall. Turning from
the contemplation of the changing world of men to the changeless face of
Nature, I renewed my old-time acquaintance with the natural wonders of
the earth--the thundering cataracts, the stormy ocean shores, the lonely
mountain tops, the great rivers, the glittering splendors of the polar
regions, and the desolate places of the deserts.

Meanwhile the doctor explained to me that not only the telephone and
electroscope were always connected with a great number of regular
stations commanding all scenes of special interest, but that whenever in
any part of the world there occurred a spectacle or accident of
particular interest, special connections were instantly made, so that all
mankind could at once see what the situation was for themselves without
need of actual or alleged special artists on the spot.

With all my conceptions of time and space reduced to chaos, and well-nigh
drunk with wonder, I exclaimed at last:

"I can stand no more of this just now! I am beginning to doubt seriously
whether I am in or out of the body."

As a practical way of settling that question the doctor proposed a brisk
walk, for we had not been out of the house that morning.

"Have we had enough of economics for the day?" he asked as we left the
house, "or would you like to attend the afternoon session the teacher
spoke of?"

I replied that I wished to attend it by all means.

"Very good," said the doctor; "it will doubtless be very short, and what
do you say to attending it this time in person? We shall have plenty of
time for our walk and can easily get to the school before the hour by
taking a car from any point. Seeing this is the first time you have used
the electroscope, and have no assurance except its testimony that any
such school or pupils really exist, perhaps it would help to confirm any
impressions you may have received to visit the spot in the body."




CHAPTER XXV.

THE STRIKERS.

Presently, as we were crossing Boston Common, absorbed in conversation, a
shadow fell athwart the way, and looking up, I saw towering above us a
sculptured group of heroic size.

"Who are these?" I exclaimed.

"You ought to know if any one," said the doctor. "They are contemporaries
of yours who were making a good deal of disturbance in your day."

But, indeed, it had only been as an involuntary expression of surprise
that I had questioned what the figures stood for.

Let me tell you, readers of the twentieth century, what I saw up there on
the pedestal, and you will recognize the world-famous group. Shoulder to
shoulder, as if rallied to resist assault, were three figures of men in
the garb of the laboring class of my time. They were bareheaded, and
their coarse-textured shirts, rolled above the elbow and open at the
breast, showed the sinewy arms and chest. Before them, on the ground, lay
a pair of shovels and a pickaxe. The central figure, with the right hand
extended, palm outward, was pointing to the discarded tools. The arms of
the other two were folded on their breasts. The faces were coarse and
hard in outline and bristled with unkempt beards. Their expression was
one of dogged defiance, and their gaze was fixed with such scowling
intensity upon the void space before them that I involuntarily glanced
behind me to see what they were looking at. There were two women also in
the group, as coarse of dress and features as the men. One was kneeling
before the figure on the right, holding up to him with one arm an
emaciated, half-clad infant, while with the other she indicated the
implements at his feet with an imploring gesture. The second of the women
was plucking by the sleeve the man on the left as if to draw him back,
while with the other hand she covered her eyes. But the men heeded the
women not at all, or seemed, in their bitter wrath, to know that they
were there.

"Why," I exclaimed, "these are strikers!"

"Yes," said the doctor, "this is The Strikers, Huntington's masterpiece,
considered the greatest group of statuary in the city and one of the
greatest in the country."

"Those people are alive!" I said.

"That is expert testimony," replied the doctor. "It is a pity Huntington
died too soon to hear it. He would have been pleased."

Now, I, in common with the wealthy and cultured class generally, of my
day, had always held strikers in contempt and abhorrence, as blundering,
dangerous marplots, as ignorant of their own best interests as they were
reckless of other people's, and generally as pestilent fellows, whose
demonstrations, so long as they were not violent, could not unfortunately
be repressed by force, but ought always to be condemned, and promptly put
down with an iron hand the moment there was an excuse for police
interference. There was more or less tolerance among the well-to-do, for
social reformers, who, by book or voice, advocated even very radical
economic changes so long as they observed the conventionalities of
speech, but for the striker there were few apologists. Of course, the
capitalists emptied on him the vials of their wrath and contempt, and
even people who thought they sympathized with the working class shook
their heads at the mention of strikes, regarding them as calculated
rather to hinder than help the emancipation of labor. Bred as I was in
these prejudices, it may not seem strange that I was taken aback at
finding such unpromising subjects selected for the highest place in the
city.

"There is no doubt as to the excellence of the artist's work," I said,
"but what was there about the strikers that has made you pick them out of
our generation as objects of veneration?"

"We see in them," replied the doctor, "the pioneers in the revolt against
private capitalism which brought in the present civilization. We honor
them as those who, like Winkelried, 'made way for liberty, and died.' We
revere in them the protomartyrs of co-operative industry and economic
equality."

"But I can assure you, doctor, that these fellows, at least in my day,
had not the slightest idea of revolting against private capitalism as a
system. They were very ignorant and quite incapable of grasping so large
a conception. They had no notion of getting along without capitalists.
All they imagined as possible or desirable was a little better treatment
by their employers, a few cents more an hour, a few minutes less working
time a day, or maybe merely the discharge of an unpopular foreman. The
most they aimed at was some petty improvement in their condition, to
attain which they did not hesitate to throw the whole industrial machine
into disorder."

"All which we moderns know quite well," replied the doctor. "Look at
those faces. Has the sculptor idealized them? Are they the faces of
philosophers? Do they not bear out your statement that the strikers, like
the working-men generally, were, as a rule, ignorant, narrow-minded men,
with no grasp of large questions, and incapable of so great an idea as
the overthrow of an immemorial economic order? It is quite true that
until some years after you fell asleep they did not realize that their
quarrel was with private capitalism and not with individual capitalists.
In this slowness of awakening to the full meaning of their revolt they
were precisely on a par with the pioneers of all the great liberty
revolutions. The minutemen at Concord and Lexington, in 1775, did not
realize that they were pointing their guns at the monarchical idea. As
little did the third estate of France, when it entered the Convention in
1789, realize that its road lay over the ruins of the throne. As little
did the pioneers of English freedom, when they began to resist the will
of Charles I, foresee that they would be compelled, before they got
through, to take his head. In none of these instances, however, has
posterity considered that the limited foresight of the pioneers as to the
full consequences of their action lessened the world's debt to the crude
initiative, without which the fuller triumph would never have come. The
logic of the strike meant the overthrow of the irresponsible conduct of
industry, whether the strikers knew it or not, and we can not rejoice in
the consequences of that overthrow without honoring them in a way which
very likely, as you intimate, would surprise them, could they know of it,
as much as it does you. Let me try to give you the modern point of view
as to the part played by their originals." We sat down upon one of the
benches before the statue, and the doctor went on:

"My dear Julian, who was it, pray, that first roused the world of your
day to the fact that there was an industrial question, and by their
pathetic demonstrations of passive resistance to wrong for fifty years
kept the public attention fixed on that question till it was settled? Was
it your statesmen, perchance your economists, your scholars, or any other
of your so-called wise men? No. It was just those despised, ridiculed,
cursed, and hooted fellows up there on that pedestal who with their
perpetual strikes would not let the world rest till their wrong, which
was also the whole world's wrong, was righted. Once more had God chosen
the foolish things of this world to confound the wise, the weak things to
confound the mighty.

"In order to realize how powerfully these strikes operated to impress
upon the people the intolerable wickedness and folly of private
capitalism, you must remember that events are what teach men, that deeds
have a far more potent educating influence than any amount of doctrine,
and especially so in an age like yours, when the masses had almost no
culture or ability to reason. There were not lacking in the revolutionary
period many cultured men and women, who, with voice and pen, espoused the
workers' cause, and showed them the way out; but their words might well
have availed little but for the tremendous emphasis with which they were
confirmed by the men up there, who starved to prove them true. Those
rough-looking fellows, who probably could not have constructed a
grammatical sentence, by their combined efforts, were demonstrating the
necessity of a radically new industrial system by a more convincing
argument than any rhetorician's skill could frame. When men take their
lives in their hands to resist oppression, as those men did, other men
are compelled to give heed to them. We have inscribed on the pedestal
yonder, where you see the lettering, the words, which the action of the
group above seems to voice:

"'We can bear no more. It is better to starve than live on the terms you
give us. Our lives, the lives of our wives and of our children, we set
against your gains. If you put your foot upon our neck, we will bite your
heel!'

"This was the cry," pursued the doctor, "of men made desperate by
oppression, to whom existence through suffering had become of no value.
It was the same cry that in varied form but in one sense has been the
watchword of every revolution that has marked an advance of the
race--'Give us liberty, or give us death!' and never did it ring out with
a cause so adequate, or wake the world to an issue so mighty, as in the
mouths of these first rebels against the folly and the tyranny of private
capital.

"In your age, I know, Julian," the doctor went on in a gentler tone, "it
was customary to associate valor with the clang of arms and the pomp and
circumstance of war. But the echo of the fife and drum comes very faintly
up to us, and moves us not at all. The soldier has had his day, and
passed away forever with the ideal of manhood which he illustrated. But
that group yonder stands for a type of self-devotion that appeals to us
profoundly. Those men risked their lives when they flung down the tools
of their trade, as truly as any soldiers going into battle, and took odds
as desperate, and not only for themselves, but for their families, which
no grateful country would care for in case of casualty to them. The
soldier went forth cheered with music, and supported by the enthusiasm of
the country, but these others were covered with ignominy and public
contempt, and their failures and defeats were hailed with general
acclamation. And yet they sought not the lives of others, but only that
they might barely live; and though they had first thought of the welfare
of themselves, and those nearest them, yet not the less were they
fighting the fight of humanity and posterity in striking in the only way
they could, and while yet no one else dared strike at all, against the
economic system that had the world by the throat, and would never relax
its grip by dint of soft words, or anything less than disabling blows.
The clergy, the economists and the pedagogues, having left these ignorant
men to seek as they might the solution of the social problem, while they
themselves sat at ease and denied that there was any problem, were very
voluble in their criticisms of the mistakes of the workingmen, as if it
were possible to make any mistake in seeking a way out of the social
chaos, which could be so fatuous or so criminal as the mistake of not
trying to seek any. No doubt, Julian, I have put finer words in the
mouths of those men up there than their originals might have even
understood, but if the meaning was not in their words it was in their
deeds. And it is for what they did, not for what they said, that we honor
them as protomartyrs of the industrial republic of to-day, and bring our
children, that they may kiss in gratitude the rough-shod feet of those
who made the way for us."

My experiences since I waked up in this year 2000 might be said to have
consisted of a succession of instantaneous mental readjustments of a
revolutionary character, in which what had formerly seemed evil to me had
become good, and what had seemed wisdom had become foolishness. Had this
conversation about the strikers taken place anywhere else, the entirely
new impression I had received of the part played by them in the great
social revolution of which I shared the benefit would simply have been
one more of these readjustments, and the process entirely a mental one.
But the presence of this wondrous group, the lifelikeness of the figures
growing on my gaze as I listened to the doctor's words, imparted a
peculiar personal quality--if I may use the term--to the revulsion of
feeling that I experienced. Moved by an irresistible impulse, I rose to
my feet, and, removing my hat, saluted the grim forms whose living
originals I had joined my contemporaries in reviling.

The doctor smiled gravely.

"Do you know, my boy," he said, "it is not often that the whirligig of
Time brings round his revenges in quite so dramatic a way as this?"




CHAPTER XXVI.

FOREIGN COMMERCE UNDER PROFITS; PROTECTION AND FREE TRADE, OR BETWEEN THE
DEVIL AND THE DEEP SEA.

We arrived at the Arlington School some time before the beginning of the
recitation which we were to attend, and the doctor took the opportunity
to introduce me to the teacher. He was extremely interested to learn that
I had attended the morning session, and very desirous to know something
of my impressions. As to the forthcoming recitation, he suggested that if
the members of the class were aware that they had so distinguished an
auditor, it would be likely to embarrass them, and he should therefore
say nothing about my presence until the close of the session, when he
should crave the privilege of presenting his pupils to me personally. He
hoped I would permit this, as it would be for them the event of a
lifetime which their grandchildren would never tire of hearing them
describe. The entrance of the class interrupted our conversation, and the
doctor and myself, having taken our seats in a gallery, where we could
hear and see without being seen, the session at once began.

"This morning," said the teacher, "we confined ourselves for the sake of
clearness to the effects of the profit system upon a nation or community
considered as if it were alone in the world and without relations to
other communities. There is no way in which such outside relations
operated to negative any of the laws of profit which were brought out
this morning, but they did operate to extend the effect of those laws in
many interesting ways, and without some reference to foreign commerce our
review of the profit system would be incomplete.

"In the so-called political economies of our forefathers we read a vast
deal about the advantages to a country of having an international trade.
It was supposed to be one of the great secrets of national prosperity,
and a chief study of the nineteenth-century statesmen seems to have been
to establish and extend foreign commerce.--Now, Paul, will you tell us
the economic theory as to the advantages of foreign commerce?"

"It is based on the fact," said the lad Paul, "that countries differ in
climate, natural resources, and other conditions, so that in some it is
wholly impossible or very difficult to produce certain needful things,
while it is very easy to produce certain other things in greater
abundance than is needed. In former times also there were marked
differences in the grade of civilization and the condition of the arts in
different countries, which still further modified their respective powers
in the production of wealth. This being so, it might obviously be for the
mutual advantage of countries to exchange with one another what they
could produce against what they could not produce at all or only with
difficulty, and not merely thus secure many things which otherwise they
must go without, but also greatly increase the total effectiveness of
their industry by applying it to the sorts of production best fitted to
their conditions. In order, however, that the people of the respective
countries should actually derive this advantage or any advantage from
foreign exchange, it would be necessary that the exchanges should be
carried on in the general interest for the purpose of giving the people
at large the benefit of them, as is done at the present day, when foreign
commerce, like other economic undertakings, is carried on by the
governments of the several countries. But there was, of course, no
national agency to carry on foreign commerce in that day. The foreign
trade, just like the internal processes of production and distribution,
was conducted by the capitalists on the profit system. The result was
that all the benefits of this fair sounding theory of foreign commerce
were either totally nullified or turned into curses, and the
international trade relations of the countries constituted merely a
larger field for illustrating the baneful effects of the profit system
and its power to turn good to evil and 'shut the gates of mercy on
mankind.'"

HOW PROFITS NULLIFIED THE BENEFIT OF COMMERCE.

"Illustrate, please, the operation of the profit system in international
trade."

"Let us suppose," said the boy Paul, "that America could produce grain
and other food stuffs with great cheapness and in greater quantities than
the people needed. Suppose, on the contrary, that England could produce
food stuffs only with difficulty and in small quantities. Suppose,
however, that England, on account of various conditions, could produce
clothing and hardware much more cheaply and abundantly than America. In
such a case it would seem that both countries would be gainers if
Americans exchanged the food stuffs which it was so easy for them to
produce for the clothing and hardware which it was so easy for the
English to produce. The result would appear to promise a clear and equal
gain for both people. But this, of course, is on the supposition that the
exchange should be negotiated by a public agency for the benefit of the
respective populations at large. But when, as in those days, the exchange
was negotiated wholly by private capitalists competing for private
profits at the expense of the communities, the result was totally
different.

"The American grain merchant who exported grain to the English would be
impelled, by the competition of other American grain merchants, to put
his price to the English as low as possible, and to do that he would beat
down to the lowest possible figure the American farmer who produced the
grain. And not only must the American merchant sell as low as his
American rivals, but he must also undersell the grain merchants of other
grain-producing countries, such as Russia, Egypt, and India. And now let
us see how much benefit the English people received from the cheap
American grain. We will say that, owing to the foreign food supply, the
cost of living declined one half or a third in England. Here would seem a
great gain surely; but look at the other side of it. The English must pay
for their grain by supplying the Americans with cloth and hardware. The
English manufacturers of these things were rivals just as the American
grain merchants were--each one desirous of capturing as large a part of
the American market as he could. He must therefore, if possible,
undersell his home rivals. Moreover, like the American grain merchant,
the English manufacturer must contend with foreign rivals. Belgium and
Germany made hardware and cloth very cheaply, and the Americans would
exchange their grain for these commodities with the Belgians and the
Germans unless the English sold cheaper. Now, the main element in the
cost of making cloth and hardware was the wages paid for labor. A
pressure was accordingly sure to be brought to bear by every English
manufacturer upon his workmen to compel them to accept lower wages so
that he might undersell his English rivals, and also cut under the German
and Belgian manufacturers, who were trying to get the American trade. Now
can the English workman live on less wages than before? Plainly he can,
for his food supply has been greatly cheapened. Presently, therefore, he
finds his wages forced down by as much as the cheaper food supply has
cheapened his living, and so finds himself just where he was to start
with before the American trade began. And now look again at the American
farmer. He is now getting his imported clothing and tools much cheaper
than before, and consequently the lowest living price at which he can
afford to sell grain is considerably lower than before the English trade
began--lower by so much, in fact, as he has saved on his tools and
clothing. Of this, the grain merchant, of course, took prompt advantage,
for unless he put his grain into the English market lower than other
grain merchants, he would lose his trade, and Russia, Egypt, and India
stood ready to flood England with grain if the Americans could not bid
below them, and then farewell to cheap cloth and tools! So down presently
went the price the American farmer received for his grain, until the
reduction absorbed all that he had gained by the cheaper imported fabrics
and hardware, and he, like his fellow-victim across the sea--the English
iron worker or factory operative--was no better off than he was before
English trade had been suggested.

"But was he as well off? Was either the American or the English worker as
well off as before this interchange of products began, which, if rightly
conducted, would have been so greatly beneficial to both? On the
contrary, both alike were in important ways distinctly worse off. Each
had indeed done badly enough before, but the industrial system on which
they depended, being limited by the national borders, was comparatively
simple and uncomplex, self-sustaining, and liable only to local and
transient disturbances, the effect of which could be to some extent
estimated, possibly remedied. Now, however, the English operatives and
the American farmer had alike become dependent upon the delicate balance
of a complex set of international adjustments liable at any moment to
derangements that might take away their livelihood, without leaving them
even the small satisfaction of understanding what hurt them. The prices
of their labor or their produce were no longer dependent as before upon
established local customs and national standards of living, but had
become subject to determination by the pitiless necessities of a
world-wide competition in which the American farmer and the English
artisan were forced into rivalship with the Indian ryot, the Egyptian
fellah, the half-starved Belgian miner, or the German weaver. In former
ages, before international trade had become general, when one nation was
down another was up, and there was always hope in looking over seas; but
the prospect which the unlimited development of international commerce
upon the profit system was opening to mankind the latter part of the
nineteenth century was that of a world-wide standard of living fixed by
the rate at which life could be supported by the worst-used races.
International trade was already showing itself to be the instrumentality
by which the world-wide plutocracy would soon have established its sway
if the great Revolution had tarried."

"In the case of the supposed reciprocal trade between England and
America, which you have used as an illustration," said the teacher, "you
have assumed that the trade relation was an exchange of commodities on
equal terms. In such a case it appears that the effect of the profit
system was to leave the masses of both countries somewhat worse off than
they would have been without foreign trade, the gain on both the American
and English side inuring wholly to the manufacturing and trading
capitalists. But in fact both countries in a trade relation were not
usually on equal terms. The capitalists of one were often far more
powerful than those of another, and had a stronger or older economic
organization at their service. In that case what was the result?"

"The overwhelming competition of the capitalists of the stronger country
crushed out the enterprises of the capitalists of the weaker country, the
people of which consequently became wholly dependent upon the foreign
capitalists for many productions which otherwise would have been produced
at home to the profit of home capitalists, and in proportion as the
capitalists of the dependent country were thus rendered economically
incapable of resistance the capitalists of the stronger country regulated
at their pleasure the terms of trade. The American colonies, in 1776,
were driven to revolt against England by the oppression resulting from
