The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Adventurer, by Cyril M. Kornbluth

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Adventurer

Author: Cyril M. Kornbluth

Illustrator: Kelly Freas

Release Date: September 4, 2009 [EBook #29908]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ADVENTURER ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









    THE
 Adventurer

 BY C. M. KORNBLUTH

 ILLUSTRATED BY FREAS


 For every evil under the sun, there's an answer.
 It may be a simple, direct answer; it may be one
 that takes years, and seems unrelated to the
 problem. But there's an answer--of a kind....


President Folsom XXIV said petulantly to his Secretary of the Treasury:
"Blow me to hell, Bannister, if I understood a single word of that.
_Why_ can't I buy the Nicolaides Collection? And don't start with the
rediscount and the Series W business again. Just tell me _why_."

The Secretary of the Treasury said with an air of apprehension and a
thread-like feeling across his throat: "It boils down to--no money, Mr.
President."

The President was too engrossed in thoughts of the marvelous collection
to fly into a rage. "It's _such_ a bargain," he said mournfully. "An
archaic Henry Moore figure--really too big to finger, but I'm no
culture-snob, thank God--and fifteen early Morrisons and I can't begin
to tell you what else." He looked hopefully at the Secretary of Public
Opinion: "Mightn't I seize it for the public good or something?"

The Secretary of Public Opinion shook his head. His pose was gruffly
professional. "Not a chance, Mr. President. We'd never get away with it.
The art-lovers would scream to high Heaven."

[Illustration]

"I suppose so.... _Why_ isn't there any money?" He had swiveled
dangerously on the Secretary of the Treasury again.

"Sir, purchases of the new Series W bond issue have lagged badly because
potential buyers have been attracted to--"

"Stop it, stop it, _stop_ it! You know I can't make head or tail of that
stuff. Where's the money _going_?"

The Director of the Budget said cautiously: "Mr. President, during the
biennium just ending, the Department of Defense accounted for 78 per
cent of expenditures--"

The Secretary of Defense growled: "Now wait a minute, Felder! We were
voted--"

The President interrupted, raging weakly: "Oh, you rascals! My father
would have known what to do with you! But don't think I can't handle it.
_Don't_ think you can hoodwink me." He punched a button ferociously; his
silly face was contorted with rage and there was a certain tension on
all the faces around the Cabinet table.

Panels slid down abruptly in the walls, revealing grim-faced Secret
Servicemen. Each Cabinet officer was covered by at least two automatic
rifles.

"Take that--that traitor away!" the President yelled. His finger pointed
at the Secretary of Defense, who slumped over the table, sobbing. Two
Secret Servicemen half-carried him from the room.

President Folsom XXIV leaned back, thrusting out his lower lip. He told
the Secretary of the Treasury: "_Get_ me the money for the Nicolaides
Collection. Do you understand? I don't care how you do it. _Get_ it." He
