United States.'[27] He declares his conviction that, had you been
alone in the universe, you would soon have discovered that you cannot
long make progress in practical science without cultivating theoretic
science at the same time. But, according to De Tocqueville, you are
not thus alone. He refuses to separate America from its ancestral
home; and it is there, he contends, that you collect the treasures of
the intellect, without taking the trouble to create them.

De Tocqueville evidently doubts the capacity of a democracy to foster
genius as it was fostered in the ancient aristocracies. 'The future,'
he says, 'will prove whether the passion for profound knowledge, so
rare and so fruitful, can be born and developed as readily in
democratic societies as in aristocracies. For my part,' he continues,
'I can hardly believe it.' He speaks of the unquiet feverishness of
democratic communities, not in times of great excitement, for such
times may give an extraordinary impetus to ideas, but in times of
peace. There is then, he says, 'a small and uncomfortable agitation, a
sort of incessant attrition of man against man, which troubles and
distracts the mind without imparting to it either loftiness or
animation.' It rests with you to prove whether these things are
necessarily so--whether scientific genius cannot find, in the midst of
you, a tranquil home.

I should be loth to gainsay so keen an observer and so profound a
political writer, but, since my arrival in this country, I have been
unable to see anything in the constitution of society, to prevent a
student, with the root of the matter in him, from bestowing the most
steadfast devotion on pure science. If great scientific results are
not achieved in America, it is not to the small agitations of society
that I should be disposed to ascribe the defect, but to the fact that
the men among you who possess the endowments necessary for profound
scientific inquiry, are laden with duties of administration, or
tuition, so heavy as to be utterly incompatible with the continuous
and tranquil meditation which original investigation demands. It may
well be asked whether Henry would have been transformed into an
administrator, or whether Draper would have forsaken science to write
history, if the original investigator had been honoured as he ought to
be in this land. I hardly think they would. Still I do not imagine
this state of things likely to last. In America there is a willingness
on the part of individuals to devote their fortunes, in the matter of
education, to the service of the commonwealth, which is probably
without a parallel elsewhere; and this willingness requires but wise
direction to enable you effectually to wipe away the reproach of De
Tocqueville.

Your most difficult problem will be, not to build institutions, but to
discover men. You may erect laboratories and endow them; you may
furnish them with all the appliances needed for inquiry; in so doing
you are but creating opportunity for the exercise of powers which come
from sources entirely beyond your reach. You cannot create genius by
bidding for it. In biblical language, it is the gift of God; and the
most you could do, were your wealth, and your willingness to apply it,
a million-fold what they are, would be to make sure that this glorious
plant shall have the freedom, light, and warmth necessary for its
development. We see from time to time a noble tree dragged down by
parasitic runners. These the gardener can remove, though the vital
force of the tree itself may lie beyond him: and so, in many a case
you men of wealth can liberate genius from the hampering toils which
the struggle for existence often casts around it.

Drawn by your kindness, I have come here to give these lectures, and
now that my visit to America has become almost a thing of the past, I
look back upon it as a memory without a single stain. No lecturer was
ever rewarded as I have been. From this vantage-ground, however, let
me remind you that the work of the lecturer is not the highest work;
that in science, the lecturer is usually the distributor of
intellectual wealth amassed by better men. And though lecturing and
teaching, in moderation, will in general promote their moral health,
it is not solely or even chiefly, as lecturers, but as investigators,
that your highest men ought to be employed. You have scientific genius
amongst you--not sown broadcast, believe me, it is sown thus
nowhere--but still scattered here and there. Take all unnecessary
impediments out of its way. Keep your sympathetic eye upon the
originator of knowledge. Give him the freedom necessary for his
researches, not overloading him, either with the duties of tuition or
of administration, nor demanding from him so-called practical
results--above all things, avoiding that question which ignorance so
often addresses to genius: 'What is the use of your work?' Let him
make truth his object, however unpractical for the time being it may
appear. If you cast your bread thus upon the waters, be assured it
will return to you, though it be after many days.




APPENDIX.

ON THE SPECTRA OF POLARIZED LIGHT.


Mr. William Spottiswoode introduced some years ago to the members of
the Royal Institution, in a very striking form, a series of
experiments on the spectra of polarized light. With his large Nicol
prisms he in the first place repeated and explained the experiments of
Foucault and Fizeau, and subsequently enriched the subject by very
beautiful additions of his own. I here append a portion of the
abstract of his discourse:--

    'It is well known that if a plate of selenite sufficiently thin be
    placed between two Nicol's prisms, or, more technically speaking,
    between a polarizer and analyzer, colour will be produced. And the
    question proposed is, What is the nature of that colour? is it
    simply a pure colour of the spectrum, or is it a compound, and if
    so, what are its component parts? The answer given by the wave
    theory is in brief this: In its passage through the selenite plate
    the rays have been so separated in the direction of their vibrations
    and in the velocity of their transmission, that, when re-compounded
    by means of the analyzer, they have in some instances neutralized
    one another. If this be the case, the fact ought to be visible when
    the beam emerging from the analyzer is dispersed by the prism; for
    then we have the rays of all the different colours ranged side by
    side, and, if any be wanting, their absence will be shown by the
    appearance of a dark band in their place in the spectrum. But not
    only so; the spectrum ought also to give an account of the other
    phenomena exhibited by the selenite when the analyzer is turned
    round, viz. that when the angle of turning amounts to 45 deg., all trace
    of colour disappears; and also that when the angle amounts to 90 deg.,
    colour reappears, not, however, the original colour, but one
    complementary to it.

    'You see in the spectrum of the reddish light produced by the
    selenite a broad but dark band in the blue; when the analyzer is
    turned round the band becomes less and less dark, until when the
    angle of turning amounts to 45 deg. it has entirely disappeared. At this
    stage each part of the spectrum has its own proportional intensity,
    and the whole produces the colourless image seen without the
    spectroscope. Lastly, as the turning of the analyzer is continued, a
    dark band appears in the red, the part of the spectrum complementary
    to that occupied by the first band; and the darkness is most
    complete when the turning amounts to 90 deg.. Thus we have from the
    spectroscope a complete account of what has taken place to produce
    the original colour and its changes.

    'It is further well known that the colour produced by a selenite, or
    other crystal plate, is dependent upon the thickness of the plate.
    And, in fact, if a series of plates be taken, giving different
    colours, their spectra are found to show bands arranged in different
    positions. The thinner plates show bands in the parts of the
    spectrum nearest to the violet, where the waves are shorter, and
    consequently give rise to redder colours; while the thicker show
    bands nearer to the red, where the waves are longer and consequently
    supply bluer tints.

    'When the thickness of the plate is continually increased, so that
    the colour produced has gone through the complete cycle of the
    spectrum, a further increase of thickness causes a reproduction of
    the colours in the same order; but it will be noticed that at each
    recurrence of the cycle the tints become paler, until when a number
    of cycles have been performed, and the thickness of the plate is
    considerable, all trace of colour is lost. Let us now take a series
    of plates, the first two of which, as you see, give colours; with
    the others which are successively of greater thickness the tints are
    so feeble that they can scarcely be distinguished. The spectrum of
    the first shows a single band; that of the second, two; showing that
    the second series of tints is not identical with the first, but that
    it is produced by the extinction of two colours from the components
    of white light. The spectra of the others show series of bands more
    and more numerous in proportion to the thickness of the plate, an
    array which may be increased indefinitely. The total light, then, of
    which the spectrum is deprived by the thicker plates is taken from a
    greater number of its parts; or, in other words, the light which
    still remains is distributed more and more evenly over the spectrum;
    and in the same proportion the sum total of it approaches more and
    more nearly to white light.

    'These experiments were made more than thirty years ago by the
    French philosophers, MM. Foucault and Fizeau.

    'If instead of selenite, Iceland spar, or other ordinary crystals,
    we use plates of quartz cut perpendicularly to the axis, and turn
    the analyzer round as before, the light, instead of exhibiting only
    one colour and its complementary with an intermediate stage in which
    colour is absent, changes continuously in tint; and the order of the
    colour depends partly upon the direction in which the analyzer is
    turned, and partly upon the character of the crystal, _i.e._ whether
    it is right-handed or left-handed. If we examine the spectrum in
    this case we find that the dark band never disappears, but marches
    from one end of the spectrum to another, or _vice versa_, precisely
    in such a direction as to give rise to the tints seen by direct
    projection.

    'The kind of polarization effected by the quartz plates is called
    circular, while that effected by the other class of crystals is
    called plane, on account of the form of the vibrations executed by
    the molecules of aether; and this leads us to examine a little more
    closely the nature of the polarization of different parts of these
    spectra of polarized light.

    'Now, two things are clear: first, that if the light be
    plane-polarized--that is, if all the vibrations throughout the
    entire ray are rectilinear and in one plane--they must in all their
    bearings have reference to a particular direction in space, so that
    they will be differently affected by different positions of the
    analyzer. Secondly, that if the vibrations be circular, they will be
    affected in precisely the same way (whatever that may be) in all
    positions of the analyzer. This statement merely recapitulates a
    fundamental point in polarization. In fact, plane-polarized light is
    alternately transmitted and extinguished by the analyzer as it is
    turned through 90 deg.; while circularly polarized light [if we could
    get a single ray] remains to all appearance unchanged. And if we
    examine carefully the spectrum of light which has passed through a
    selenite, or other ordinary crystal, we shall find that, commencing
    with two consecutive bands in position, the parts occupied by the
    bands and those midway between them are plane-polarized, for they
    become alternately dark and bright; while the intermediate parts,
    _i.e._ the parts at one-fourth of the distance from one band to the
    next, remain permanently bright. These are, in fact, circularly
    polarized. But it would be incorrect to conclude from this
    experiment alone that such is really the case, because the same
    appearance would be seen if those parts were unpolarized, _i.e._ in
    the condition of ordinary lights. And on such a supposition we
    should conclude with equal justice that the parts on either side of
    the parts last mentioned (e.g. the parts separated by eighth parts
    of the interval between two bands) were partially polarized. But
    there is an instrument of very simple construction, called a
    "quarter-undulation plate," a plate usually of mica, whose thickness
    is an odd multiple of a quarter of a wave-length, which enables us
    to discriminate between light unpolarized and circularly polarized.
    The exact mechanical effect produced upon the ray could hardly be
    explained in detail within our present limits of time; but suffice
    it for the present to say that, when placed in a proper position,
    the plate transforms plane into circular and circular into plane
    polarization. That being so, the parts which were originally banded
    ought to remain bright, and those which originally remained bright
    ought to become banded during the rotation of the analyzer. The
    general effect to the eye will consequently be a general shifting of
    the bands through one-fourth of the space which separates each pair.

    'Circular polarization, like circular motion generally, may of
    course be of two kinds, which differ only in the direction of the
    motion. And, in fact, to convert the circular polarization produced
    by this plate from one of these kinds to the other (say from
    right-handed to left-handed, or _vice versa_), we have only to turn
    the plate round through 90 deg.. Conversely, right-handed circular
    polarization will be changed by the plate into plane-polarization in
    one direction, while left-handed will be changed into plane at right
    angles to the first. Hence if the plate be turned round through 90 deg.
    we shall see that the bands are shifted in a direction opposite to
    that in which they were moved at first. In this therefore we have
    evidence not only that the polarization immediately on either side
    of a band is circular; but also that that immediately on the one
    side is right-handed, while that immediately on the other is
    left-handed[28].

    'If time permitted, I might enter still further into detail, and
    show that the polarization between the plane and the circular is
    elliptical, and even the positions of the longer and shorter axes
    and the direction of motion in each case. But sufficient has,
    perhaps, been said for our present purpose.

    'Before proceeding to the more varied forms of spectral bands,
    which I hope presently to bring under your notice, I should like to
    ask your attention for a few minutes to the peculiar phenomena
    exhibited when two plates of selenite giving complementary colours
    are used. The appearance of the spectrum varies with the relative
    position of the plates. If they are similarly placed--that is, as if
    they were one plate of crystal--they will behave as a single plate,
    whose thickness is the sum of the thicknesses of each, and will
    produce double the number of bands which one alone would give; and
    when the analyzer is turned, the bands will disappear and re-appear
    in their complementary positions, as usual in the case of
    plane-polarization. If one of them be turned round through 45 deg., a
    single band will be seen at a particular position in the spectrum.
    This breaks into two, which recede from one another towards the red
    and violet ends respectively, or advance towards one another
    according to the direction in which the analyzer is turned. If the
    plate be turned through 45 deg. in the opposite direction, the effects
    will be reversed. The darkness of the bands is, however, not equally
    complete during their whole passage. Lastly, if one of the plates be
    turned through 90 deg., no bands will be seen, and the spectrum will be
    alternately bright and dark, as if no plates were used, except only
    that the polarization is itself turned through 90 deg..

    'If a wedge-shaped crystal be used, the bands, instead of being
    straight, will cross the spectrum diagonally, the direction of the
    diagonal (dexter or sinister) being determined by the position of
    the thicker end of the wedge. If two similar wedges be used with
    their thickest ends together, they will act as a wedge whose angle
    and whose thickness is double of the first. If they be placed in the
    reverse position they will act as a flat plate, and the bands will
    again cross the spectrum in straight lines at right angles to its
    length.

    'If a concave plate be used the bands will dispose themselves in a
    fanlike arrangement, their divergence depending upon the distance of
    the slit from the centre of concavity.

    'If two quartz wedges, one of which has the optic axis parallel to
    the edge of the refractory angle, and the other perpendicular to it,
    but in one of the planes containing the angle (Babinet's
    Compensator), the appearances of the bands are very various.

    'The diagonal bands, besides sometimes doubling themselves as with
    ordinary wedges, sometimes combine so as to form longitudinal
    (instead of transverse) bands; and sometimes cross one another so as
    to form a diaper pattern with bright compartments in a dark
    framework, and _vice versa_, according to the position of the
    plates.

    'The effects of different dispositions of the interposed crystals
    might be varied indefinitely; but enough has perhaps been said to
    show the delicacy of the method of spectrum analysis as applied to
    the examination of polarized light.'

       *       *       *       *       *

The singular and beautiful effect obtained with a circular plate of
selenite, thin at the centre, and gradually thickening towards the
circumference, is easily connected with a similar effect obtained with
Newton's rings. Let a thin slice of light fall upon the glasses which
show the rings, so as to cover a narrow central vertical zone passing
through them all. The image of this zone upon the screen is crossed by
portions of the iris-rings. Subjecting the reflected beam to prismatic
analysis, the resultant spectrum may be regarded as an indefinite
number of images of the zone placed side by side. In the image before
dispersion we have _iris-rings_, the extinction of the light being
nowhere complete; but when the different colours are separated by
dispersion, each colour is crossed transversely by its own system of
dark interference bands, which become gradually closer with the
increasing refrangibility of the light. The complete spectrum,
therefore, appears furrowed by a system of continuous dark bands,
crossing the colours transversely, and approaching each other as they
pass from red to blue.

In the case of the plate of selenite, a slit is placed in front of the
polarizer, and the film of selenite is held close to the slit, so that
the light passes through the central zone of the film. As in the case
of Newton's rings, the image of the zone is crossed by iris-coloured
bands; but when subjected to prismatic dispersion, the light of the
zone yields a spectrum furrowed by bands of complete darkness exactly
as in the case of Newton's rings and for a similar reason. This is the
beautiful effect described by Mr. Spottiswoode as the fanlike
arrangement of the bands--the fan opening out at the red end of the
spectrum.

       *       *       *       *       *

_MEASUREMENT OF THE WAVES OF LIGHT._

The diffraction fringes described in Lecture II., instead of being
formed on the retina, may be formed on a screen, or upon ground glass,
when they can be looked at through a magnifying lens from behind, or
they can be observed in the air when the ground glass is removed.
Instead of permitting them to form on the retina, we will suppose them
formed on a screen. This places us in a condition to understand, even
without trigonometry, the solution of the important problem of
measuring _the length_ of a wave of light.

We will suppose the screen so distant that the rays falling upon it
from the two margins of the slit are sensibly parallel. We have
learned in Lecture II. that the first of the dark bands corresponds to
a difference of marginal path of one undulation; the second dark band
to a difference of path of two undulations; the third dark band to a
difference of three undulations, and so on. Now the angular distance
of the bands from the centre is capable of exact measurement; this
distance depending, as already stated, on the width of the slit. With
a slit 1.35 millimeter wide,[29] Schwerd found the angular distance of
the first dark band from the centre of the field to be 1'38"; the
angular distances of the second, third, fourth dark bands being twice,
three times, four times this quantity.

[Illustration: Fig. 57.]

Let A B, fig. 57, be the plate in which the slit is cut, and C D the
grossly exaggerated width of the slit, with the beam of red light
proceeding from it at the obliquity corresponding to the first dark
band. Let fall a perpendicular from one edge, D, of the slit on the
marginal ray of the other edge at _d_. The distance, C _d_, between
the foot of this perpendicular and the other edge is the length of a
wave of the light. The angle C D _d_, moreover, being equal to R C R',
is, in the case now under consideration, 1'38". From the centre D,
with the width D C as radius, describe a semicircle; its radius D C
being 1.35 millimeter, the length of this semicircle is found by an
easy calculation to be 4.248 millimeters. The length C _d_ is so small
