ball.

"Now, I say, Fletcher," remarked Young, rising, and placing himself
nearer his friend, "it's all very well for you and me to waste our time
and make fools of ourselves here; but I didn't merely come to show off
my Polly.  I came to ask what you think of that rumour we heard last
night, that there has been some sort of plotting going on among the
Otaheitan men."

"I don't think anything of it at all," replied Christian, whose
countenance at once assumed that look of gravity which had become
habitual to him since the day of the mutiny.  "They have had too good
reason to plot, poor fellows, but I have such faith in their native
amiability of disposition, that I don't believe they will ever think of
anything beyond a brief show of rebellion."

"I also have had faith in their amiability," rejoined Young; "but some
of us, I fear, have tried them too severely.  I don't like the looks
they sometimes give us now.  We did wrong at the first in treating them
as servants."

"No doubt we did, but it would have been difficult to do otherwise,"
said Christian; "they fell so naturally into the position of servants of
their own accord, regarding us, as they did, as superior beings.  We
should have considered their interests when we divided the land, no
doubt.  However, that can't well be remedied now."

"Perhaps not," remarked Young, in an absent tone.  "It would be well,
however, to take some precautions."

"Come, we can discuss this matter as we go home," said Christian,
rising.  "I have to work in my yam-plot to-day, and must deliver Molly
to her mother."

They both rose and descended the slope that led to the village, chatting
as they went.

Now, although the native men were of one mind as to the slaying of the
Englishmen, they seemed to have some difference of opinion as to the
best method of putting their bloody design in execution.  Menalee,
especially, had many objections to make to the various proposals of his
countrymen.  In fact, this wily savage was deceitful.  Like Quintal and
McCoy among the whites, he was among the blacks a bad specimen of
humanity.

The consequence was that Timoa and Nehow, being resolved to submit no
longer to the harsh treatment they had hitherto received, ran away from
their persecutors, and took refuge in the bush.

To those who have travelled much about this world, it may sound absurd
to talk of hiding away in an island of such small size; but it must be
borne in mind that the miniature valleys and hills of the interior were,
in many places, very rugged and densely clothed with jungle, so that it
was, in reality, about as difficult to catch an agile native among them
as to catch a rabbit in a whin-field.

Moreover, the two desperate men carried off two muskets and ammunition,
so that it was certain to be a work of danger to attempt their
recapture.  In these circumstances, Christian and Young thought it best
to leave them alone for a time.

"You may be sure," said the former, as they joined their comrades, "that
they'll soon tire of rambling, especially when their ammunition is
spent."

Quintal, who stood with all the other men by the forge watching John
Williams as he wrought at a piece of red-hot iron, and overheard the
remark, did not, he said, feel so sure of that.  Them niggers was fond
o' their liberty, and it was his opinion they should get up a grand
hunt, and shoot 'em down off-hand.  There would be no peace till that
was done.

"There would be no peace even after that was done," said Isaac Martin,
with a leer, "unless we shot you along wi' them."

"It's impossible either to shoot or drown Matt Quintal, for he's born to
be hanged," said McCoy, sucking viciously at his cocoa-nut-loaded pipe,
which did not seem to draw well.

"That's true," cried Mills, with a laugh, in which all the party except
Christian joined more or less sarcastically according to humour.

"Oh, mother," exclaimed Otaheitan Sally, going into her hut on tiptoe a
few minutes later, with her great eyes dilated in horror, "the white
mens is talkin' of shootin' Timoa and Nehow!"

"Never mind, dear," replied her mother in her own language, "it's only
talk.  They'll never do such a thing.  I'm sure Mr Young did not agree
to help in such a deed, did he?"

"O no, mother," answered Sally, with tremendous emphasis; "he said it
would be very _very_, wicked to do such tings."

"So it would, dear.  No fear.  It's only talk."

Satisfied with this assurance, Sally went off with a cleared visage to
superintend some operation in connection with her ever-increasing
infantry charge, probably to pay some special attention to her favourite
Charlie, or to chaff "that booby" Thursday October, though, to say
truth, Thursday was no booby, but a smart intelligent fellow.

The very next day after that, Timoa and Nehow came down to Edward Young
as he was at work alone in his yam-field.  This field was at a
considerable distance from the settlement, high up on the mountain-side.
The two men had left their weapons behind them.

"We's comed for give you a helpin' hand, Missr Yong, if you no lay hands
on us," said Nehow.

"I have no wish to lay hands on you," replied Young; "besides, I have no
right to do so.  You know I never regarded you as slaves, nor did I
approve of your bad treatment.  But let me advise you to rejoin us
peaceably, and I promise to do what I can to make things go easier."

"Nebber!" exclaimed Nehow, fiercely.

"Well, it will be the worse for yourselves in the long-run," said Young,
"for Quintal and McCoy will be sure to go after you at last and shoot
you."

The two men looked at each other when he said that, and smiled
intelligently.

"However, if you choose to help me now," continued Young, "I'll be
obliged to you, and will pay you for what you do."

The men set to work with a will, for they were fond of the kindly
midshipman; but they kept a bright look-out all the time, lest any of
the other Englishmen should come up and find them there.

For two or three evenings in succession Timoa and Nehow came to Young's
field and acted in this way.  Young made no secret of the fact, and
Quintal, on hearing of it, at once suggested that he and McCoy should go
up and lie in ambush for them.

"If you do," said Young, with indignation, "I'll shoot you both.  I
don't jest.  You may depend on it, if I find either of you fellows
skulking near my field when these men are at work there, your lives
won't be worth a sixpence."

At this Quintal and McCoy both laughed, and said they were jesting.
Nevertheless, while walking home together after that conversation, they
planned the carrying out of their murderous intention.

Thus, with plot and counterplot, did the mutineers and Otaheitans render
their lives wretched.  What with the bitter enmity existing between the
whites and blacks, and the mutual jealousies among themselves, both
parties were kept in a state of perpetual anxiety, and the beautiful
isle, which was fitted by its Maker to become a paradise, was turned
into a place of torment.

Sometimes the other native men, Tetaheite and Menalee, joined Nehow and
Timoa in working in Young's garden, and afterwards went with them into
the bush, where they planned the attack which was afterwards made.

At last the lowering cloud was fully charged, and the thunderbolt fell.



CHAPTER FIFTEEN.

MURDER!

The planting time came round at Pitcairn, and all was busy activity in
the little settlement at Bounty Bay.  The women, engaged in household
work and in the preparation of food, scarcely troubled themselves to
cast an anxious eye on the numerous children who, according to age and
capacity, rolled, tumbled, staggered, and jumped about in noisy play.
The sun, streaming through the leaves of the woods, studded shady places
with balls of quivering light, and blazed in fierce heat in the open
where the men were at work, each in his respective garden.  We have said
that those gardens lay apart, at some distance from each other, and were
partially concealed by shrubs or undulating knolls.

The garden of John Williams was farthest off from the settlement.  He
wrought in it alone on the day of which we write.  Next to it was that
of Fletcher Christian.  He also worked alone that day.

About two hundred yards from his garden, and screened from it by a
wooded rising ground, was a piece of plantation, in which John Mills,
William McCoy, and Menalee were at work together.  John Adams, William
Brown, and Isaac Martin were working in their own gardens near their
respective houses, and Quintal was resting in his hut.  So was Edward
Young, who, having been at work since early morning, had lain down and
fallen into a deep slumber.

The three native men, Timoa, Nehow, and Tetaheite, were still away in
the woods.  If the unfortunate Englishmen had known what these men were
about, they would not have toiled so quietly on that peaceful morning!

The Otaheitans met in a cocoa-nut grove at some distance to the eastward
of the settlement.  Each had a musket, which he loaded with ball.  They
did not speak much, and what they did say was uttered in a suppressed
tone of voice.

"Come," said Timoa, leading the way through the woods.

The others followed in single file, until they reached the garden where
Williams was at work.  Here their movements were more cautious.  As they
advanced, they crept along on their knees with the motion of cats, and
with as little noise.  They could hear the sound of the armourer's
spade, as he turned up the soil.  Presently they came to an opening in
the bushes, through which they could see him, not thirty yards off.

Timoa drew himself together, and in a crouching attitude levelled his
musket.

During their absence in the woods, these men had practised shooting at a
mark, doubtless in preparation for the occasion which had now arrived.
The woods and cliffs rang to the loud report, and Williams fell forward
without a cry or groan, shot through the heart.

The murderers rose and looked at each other, but uttered not a word,
while Timoa recharged his gun.

The report had, of course, been heard by every one in the settlement,
but it was a familiar sound, and caused neither surprise nor alarm.
McCoy merely raised himself for a moment, remarked to Mills that some
one must have taken a fancy for a bit of pork to supper, and then
resumed his work.

Christian also heard the shot, but seemed to pay no regard to it.
Ceasing his labour in a few minutes, he raised himself, wiped his
forehead, and resting both hands on his spade, looked upwards at the
bright blue sky.  Fleecy clouds passed across it now and then,
intensifying its depth, and apparently riveting Christian's gaze, for he
continued motionless for several minutes, with his clear eye fixed on
the blue vault, and a sad, wistful expression on his handsome face, as
if memory, busy with the past and future, had forgotten the present.  It
was his last look.  A bullet from the bushes struck him at that moment
on the breast.  Uttering one short, sharp cry, he threw both hands high
above his head, and fell backwards.  The spasm of pain was but
momentary.  The sad, wistful look was replaced by a quiet smile.  He
never knew who had released his spirit from the prison-house of clay,
for the eyes remained fixed on the bright blue sky, clear and steadfast,
until death descended.  Then the light went out, just as his murderers
came forward, but the quiet smile remained, and his spirit returned to
God who gave it.

It seemed as if the murderers were, for a few moments, awestruck and
horrified by what they had done; but they quickly recovered.  What they
had set their faces to accomplish must now be done at all hazards.

"Did you hear that cry?" said McCoy, raising himself from his work in
the neighbouring garden.

"Yes; what then?" demanded Quintal.

"It sounded to me uncommon like the cry of a wounded man," said McCoy.

"Didn't sound like that to me," returned Quintal; "more like Mainmast
callin' her husband to dinner."

As he spoke, Tetaheite appeared at the edge of the garden with a musket
in his hand, the other two natives remaining concealed in the bushes.

"Ho, Missr Mills," he called out, in his broken English, "me have just
shoot a large pig.  Will you let Menalee help carry him home?"

"Yes;--you may go," said Mills, turning to Menalee.

The Otaheitan threw down his tools, and joined his comrades in the bush,
where he was at once told what had been done.

Menalee did not at first seem as much pleased as his comrades had
expected, nevertheless, he agreed to go with them.

"How shall we kill Mills and McCoy?" asked Timoa, in a low whisper.

"Shoot them," answered Menalee; "you have three muskets."

"But they also have muskets," objected Tetaheite, "and are good shots.
If we miss them, some of us shall be dead men at once."

"I'll tell you what we'll do," said Nehow, who thereupon hastily
detailed a plan, which they proceeded at once to carry out.

Creeping round through the woods, they managed to get into McCoy's house
by a back window, unobserved.  Menalee then ran down to the garden, as
if in a state of great excitement.

"Oh, Missr McCoy, Timoa and Nehow hab come down from mountain, an' is
robbin' you house!"

The bait took.  McCoy ran up to his house.  As soon as he reached the
door there was a volley from within, but McCoy remained untouched.

Seeing this, and, no doubt, supposing that he must be badly wounded,
Menalee, who had followed him, seized him from behind.  But McCoy, being
the stronger man, twisted himself suddenly round, grasped Menalee by the
waist with both hands, and flung him headlong into a neighbouring
pig-sty.  He then turned and ran back to his garden to warn Mills.

"Run for it, Mills," he cried; "run and take to the bush.  All the black
scoundrels have united to murder us."

He set the example by at once disappearing in the thick bush.  But Mills
did not believe him.  He and Menalee had always been good friends, and
he seemed to think it impossible that they would kill him.  He
hesitated, and the hesitation cost him his life, for next moment a
bullet laid him low.

Meanwhile McCoy ran to warn Christian.  Reaching his garden, he found
him there, dead, with the tranquil smile still on his cold lips, and the
now glazed eyes still gazing upwards.  One glance sufficed.  He turned
and ran back to Christian's house to tell his wife what he had seen, but
the poor woman was sick in bed at the time and could not move.  Running
then to Quintal's garden, he found him alive, but quite ignorant of what
was going on.

"They seem to be wastin' a deal of powder to-day," he growled, without
raising himself, as McCoy came up; "but--hallo! you're blowing hard.
What's wrong?"

As soon as he heard the terrible story he ran to his wife, who chanced
to be sitting near the edge of his garden.

"Up, old girl," he cried, "your nigger countrymen are murderin' us all.
If you want to see any of us escape you'd better go and warn 'em.  I
shall look after number one."

Accordingly, with his friend of kindred spirit, he sought refuge in the
bush.

Mrs Quintal had no desire to see all the white men slaughtered by her
countrymen.  She therefore started off at once, and in passing the
garden of John Adams, called to him to take to the bush without delay,
and ran on.

Unfortunately Adams did not understand what she meant.  He, like the
others, had heard the firing, but had only thought of it as a foolish
waste of ammunition.  Nothing was further from his thoughts on that
peaceful day and hour than deeds of violence and bloodshed.  He
therefore continued at work.

The four murderers, meanwhile, ran down to Isaac Martin's house, found
him in the garden, and pointing their muskets at him, pulled the
triggers.  The pieces missed fire, and poor Martin, thinking probably
that it was a practical joke, laughed at them.  They cocked again,
however, and fired.  Martin, although he fell mortally wounded, had
strength to rise again and fly towards his house.  The natives followed
him into it.  There was one of the sledge-hammers of the _Bounty_ there.
One of them seized it, and with one blow beat in the poor man's skull.

Roused, apparently, to madness by their bloody work, the Otaheitans now
rushed in a body to Brown's garden.  The botanist had been somewhat
surprised at the frequent firing, but like his unfortunate
fellow-countrymen, appeared to have not the remotest suspicion of what
was going on.  The sight of the natives, however, quickly opened his
eyes.  He turned as if to fly, but before he could gain the bushes, a
well-aimed volley killed him.

