"He is dead," whispered Ellen. "I shall never forget him. There was
something great, something even better than human about him, Lee! Oh,
I know that he was you--but where would all three of us have been had
it not been for the powerful body of Manape, the great ape? Manape is
dead, and in the jungle hereabouts the great apes mourn his passing.
They've been wailing almost like human beings for a week.
Manape--well, Professor Barter told me that you too would have died,
had Manape reached his door five minutes later. As it was, he, and
you, were just in time!"

"It's amazing," whispered Bentley, "that the great apes stay around
here now that Manape is dead."

"Yes. It's strange--and terrible I think. There have been times when I
felt they were waiting for something, for Professor Barter, perhaps.
I've had the feeling they believe he killed their leader."

Now the two became silent, and Ellen held the bruised and broken hands
of Bentley in both her own, and their eyes said things, one to the
other, which eyes say so much better than lips do. They kissed each
other softly, and Ellen crooned with ecstasy, her cheek against
Bentley's.

       *       *       *       *       *

Then Caleb Barter entered.

"Well, well," he said, "when a man is in condition to make love to a
woman, he is well on the road to recovery. It won't hurt you to talk
now, Bentley, and before I begin asking questions, let me assure you
that you will suffer no ill effects from your experience."

"What of my memories?" asked Bentley softly.

"Forget them!" snapped Barter tartly. "That is, after you have told me
everything that has happened. Miss Estabrook has already told me her
angle of the experiment. Now, talk please--and then I shall make you
well, and you shall both go into the world with me, and tell people
that what I have to tell is true!"

So Bentley talked. Barter wrote like a man possessed. His fingers
raced over the paper, repeating the words which fell from the lips of
Lee Bentley, beside whom Ellen sat, holding his hands. Now and again
Barter uttered an ejaculation of fierce joy. He was like a child with
a toy that pleased him beyond words. He could scarcely wait for the
words to spill from the lips of Lee Bentley.

When Bentley paused for breath, Barter exclaimed impatiently, and
urged him to greater speed. He thought of but one thing, his
experiment.

And so at last Bentley had finished.

"That's all, Professor Barter!" he said softly.

"All!" cried Barter. "Everything! Fame! Wealth! Adulation! There is
nothing in the world Caleb Barter may not have when this story is
told! I can scarcely contain myself. You must hurry to be well in
order that the world may be told at once."

Laughing immoderately, Barter piled the manuscript he had written, and
weighted it with a piece of rock. His face was a constant grin. His
fingers trembled with eagerness. He could not contain himself.

Finally, as though from sheer joy of what he had accomplished, he
raced from the cabin, and out across the clearing. Ellen and Bentley
smiled at each other. Moments passed. Still came to their ears the
mourning wails of the great apes.

       *       *       *       *       *

Then suddenly there broke a sound so utterly appalling that the two
were frozen with terror for a moment. First it was the laughter of
Caleb Barter. Then, mingled with the laughter, the bellowing,
frightful and paralyzing, of man apes challenging a hated enemy. The
drumming of ape fists on huge barrel chests. Then the laughter of
Barter, dying away, ironic, terrible, into silence. Immediately
afterward, high-pitched, mighty as the jungle itself, the concerted
cries of half a dozen apes, as if bellowing their joy of the kill.

"They--they--" began Ellen in a choked voice. "The apes must have got
Professor Barter!"

Silently Bentley nodded, and pointed.

Coiled on a nail near the door was Barter's whip. In his excitement he
had gone into the jungle without it for the first--and last--time.

"There is one thing to do," whispered Ellen, "before we prepare to get
you fully well. I shall care for you, and we shall both try to forget.
And then we shall return to our own people."

"And the one thing?" asked Bentley.

The strained silence was suddenly broken by the bellowing of the great
apes, which now charged into the cabin. Bentley and Ellen cringed back
from the murderous brutes to no avail. There was no denying them.
Their slavering jaws, drooled below flaring nostrils, their eyes
emitted sparks of animal fury. Bentley leaped to the girl and
interposed his body between hers and the vanguard of the apes, who now
were surging into the room through the open door, and spreading apart
within like water released from a dam.

The apes were bent on murder, there could be no doubt.

A very monster towered over Bentley. His jaws were wide, his little
red eyes fixed on the white man's neck. His great arms were coming
forward to gather in both Ellen and Bentley--whom he could crush as
easily as he crushed the grubs which were his food.

Bentley was helpless and knew it. This was the end for Ellen and
himself. He must meet it unafraid. He tensed, awaiting the descent of
bestial destruction. His eyes met the murderous gleam in the eyes of
the ape leader unflinchingly. And then the miracle happened.

The brute became suddenly and inexplicably hesitant. His bellow died
away to a gurgling murmur in which there seemed somehow a hint of
apology. The fire went out of his eyes. His jaws closed with a snap.
His great arms, already about Bentley, slid harmlessly over Bentley's
shoulders; dropped to his shaggy side.

The brute's little eyes looked long and in puzzled fashion into the
eyes of Bentley. Then he began to chatter, and in a moment the other
apes ambled grotesquely toward the door and out. Ellen and Bentley
were alone together once more, unharmed--though numbed by realization
of the near passing of disaster.

"I don't understand it," muttered Bentley, brushing the beads of
perspiration from his brow. "It was a miracle!"

"Lee," Ellen answered, "I think I know, and it _is_ a sort of miracle.
Somehow the apes felt that you were--whatever your guise--Manape. They
did not recognize you by any of their means of recognition; yet that
beast knew! How? Only God Himself might answer. But the beasts knew,
and did not slay us. The inner voice which whispers inside us in times
of crises, whispers also to the great apes! Barter, then must have
understood their somehow spiritual kinship with us. His experiments--"

Her words reminded Bentley of what she had been saying when the great
apes had charged in upon them, murder bent. He interrupted her,
gently.

"And the one thing we must do?" he rallied her.

Ellen rose, and her face was white and strained as she gathered
together Barter's manuscript. This she carried to the fireplace. She
applied a match and returned to Bentley's bedside. Then, side by side,
the two who would never forget in any case watched the record of
Barter's unholy experiment burn slowly to ashes, while the screams of
the great apes died away second by second, proof that they were
leaving this section of the jungle--going deeper and deeper into the
forest gloom which was their rightful heritage, and from which no man
had a right to take them.

[Advertisement]




Holocaust

_By Charles Willard Diffin_

[Illustration: It passed beneath the planes, that were motionless by
contrast.]

[Sidenote: The extraordinary story of "Paul," who for thirty days was
Dictator of the World.]

I am more accustomed to the handling of steel ingots and the
fabrication of ships than to building with words. But, if I cannot
write history as history is written, perhaps I can write it the way it
is lived, and that must suffice.

This account of certain events must have a title, I am told. I have
used, as you see: "Holocaust." Inadequate!--but what word can tell
even faintly of that reign of terror that engulfed the world, of those
terrible thirty days in America when dread and horror gripped the
nation and the red menace, like a wall of fire, swept downward from
the north? And, at last--the end!

It was given to me to know something of that conflict and of its
ending and of the man who, in that last day, took command of Earth's
events and gave battle to Mars, the God of War himself. It was against
the background of war that he stood out; I must tell it in that way;
and perhaps my own experience will be of interest. Yet it is of the
man I would write more than the war--the most hated man in the whole
world--that strange character, Paul Stravoinski.

You do not even recognize the name. But, if I were to say instead the
one word, "Paul"--ah, now I can see some of you start abruptly in
sudden, wide-eyed attention, while the breath catches in your throats
and the memory of a strange dread clutches your hearts.

'Straki,' we called him at college. He was never "Paul," except to me
alone; there was never the easy familiarity between him and the crowd
at large, whose members were "Bill" and "Dick" and other nicknames
unprintable.

But "Straki" he accepted. "_Bien, mon cher ami_," he told me--he was
as apt to drop into French as Russian or any of a dozen other
languages--"a name--what is it? A label by which we distinguish one
package of goods from a thousand others just like it! I am unlike: for
me one name is as good as another. It is what is here that
counts,"--he tapped his broad forehead that rose high to the tangle of
black hair--"and here,"--and this time he placed one hand above his
heart.

"It is for what I give to the world of my head and my heart that I
must be remembered. And, if I give nothing--then the name, it is less
than nothing."

       *       *       *       *       *

Dreamer--poet--scientist--there were many Paul Strakis in that one
man. Brilliant in his work--he was majoring in chemistry--he was a
mathematician who was never stopped. I've seen him pause, puzzled by
some phase of a problem that, to me, was a blank wall. Only a moment's
hesitation and he would go way down to the bed-rock of mathematics and
come up with a brand new formula of his own devising. Then--"_Voila!
C'est fini!_ let us go for a walk, friend Bob; there is some poetry
that I have remembered--" And we would head out of town, while he
spouted poetry by the yard--and made me like it.

I wish you could see the Paul Straki of those days. I wish I could
show him to you; you would understand so much better the "Paul" of
these later times.

Tall, he seemed, though his eyes were only level with mine, for his
real height was hidden beneath an habitual stoop. It let him conceal,
to some extent, his lameness. He always walked with a noticeable limp,
and here was the cause of the only bitterness that, in those days, was
ever reflected in his face.

"Cossacks!" he explained when he surprised a questioning look upon my
face. "They went through our village. I was two years old--and they
rode me down!"

But the hard coldness went from his eyes, and again they crinkled
about with the kindly, wise lines that seemed so strange in his young
face. "It is only a reminder to me," he added, "that such things are
all in the past; that we are entering a new world where savage
brutality shall no longer rule, and the brotherhood of man will be the
basis upon which men shall build."

And his face, so homely that it was distinctive, had a beauty all its
own when he dared to voice his dreams.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was this that brought about his expulsion from college. That was in
1935 when the Vornikoff faction brought off their coup d'etat and
secured a strangle hold on Russia. We all remember the campaign of
propaganda that was forced into the very fibre of every country, to
weaken with its insidious dry-rot the safe foundations of our very
civilization. Paul was blinded by his idealism, and he dared to speak.

He was conducting a brilliant research into the structure of the atom;
it ended abruptly with his dismissal. And the accepted theories of
science went unchallenged, while men worked along other lines than
Paul's to attempt the release of the tremendous energy that is latent
in all matter.

I saw him perhaps three times in the four years that followed. He had
a laboratory out in a God-forsaken spot where he carried on his
research. He did enough analytical work to keep him from actual
starvation, though it seemed to me that he was uncomfortably close to
that point.

"Come with me," I urged him; "I need you. You can have the run of our
laboratories--work out the new alloys that are so much needed. You
would be tremendously valuable."

He had mentioned Maida to me, so I added: "And you and Maida can be
married, and can live like a king and queen on what my outfit can pay
you."

He smiled at me as he might have done toward a child. "Like a king and
queen," he said. "But, friend Bob, Maida and I do not approve of kings
and queens, nor do we wish to follow them in their follies.

"It is hard waiting,"--I saw his eyes cloud for a moment--"but Maida
is willing. She is working, too--she is up in Melford as you know--and
she has faith in my work. She sees with me that it will mean the
release of our fellow-men and women from the poverty that grinds out
their souls. I am near to success; and when I give to the world the
secret of power, then--" But I had to read in his far-seeing eyes the
visions he could not compass in words.

       *       *       *       *       *

That was the first time. I was flying a new ship when next I dropped
in on him. A sweet little job I thought it then, not like the old
busses that Paul and I had trained in at college, where the top speed
was a hundred and twenty. This was an A. B. Clinton cruiser, and the
"A.B.C.'s" in 1933 were good little wagons, the best there were.

I asked Paul to take a hop with me and fly the ship. He could fly
beautifully; his lameness had been no hindrance to him. In his
slender, artist hands a ship became a live thing.

"Are you doing any flying?" I asked, but the threadbare suit made his
answer unnecessary.

"I'll do my flying later," he said, "and when I do,"--he waved
contemptuously toward my shining, new ship--"you'll scrap that piece
of junk."

The tone matched the new lines in his face--deep lines and bitter.
This practical world has always been hard on the dreamers.

Poverty; and the grinding struggle that Maida was having; the
expulsion from college when he was assured of a research scholarship
that would have meant independence and the finest of equipment to work
with--all this, I found, was having its effect. And he talked in a way
I didn't like of the new Russia and of the time that was near at hand
when her communistic government should sweep the world of its curse of
capitalistic control. Their propaganda campaign was still going on,
and I gathered that Paul had allied himself with them.

I tried to tell him what we all knew; that the old Russia was gone,
that Vornikoff and his crowd were rapacious and bloodthirsty, that
their real motives were as far removed from his idealism as one pole
from the other. But it was no use. And I left when I saw the light in
his eyes. It seemed to me then that Paul Stravoinski had driven his
splendid brain a bit beyond its breaking point.

       *       *       *       *       *

