The Rev. Edward Mote was born in London, 1797. According to his own
testimony his parents were not God-fearing people, and he "went to a
school where no Bible was allowed;" but at the age of sixteen he
received religious impressions from a sermon of John Hyatt in Tottenham
Court Chapel, was converted two years later, studied for the ministry,
and ultimately became a faithful preacher of the gospel. Settled as
pastor of the Baptist Church in Horsham, Sussex, he remained there
twenty-six years--until his death, Nov. 13, 1874. The refrain of his
hymn came to him one Sabbath when on his way to Holborn to exchange
pulpits:

    On Christ the solid rock I stand,
    All other ground is sinking sand.

There were originally six stanzas, the first beginning:

    Nor earth, nor hell, my soul can move,
    I rest upon unchanging love.

The refrain is a fine one, and really sums up the whole hymn, keeping
constantly at the front the corner-stone of the poet's trust.

    My hope is built on nothing less
    Than Jesus' blood and righteousness.
    I dare not trust the sweetest frame,
    But only lean on Jesus' name.
    On Christ the solid Rock I stand
    All other ground is sinking sand.

    When darkness veils His lovely face
    I trust in His unchanging grace,
    In every high and stormy gale
    My anchor holds within the veil.
    On Christ the solid Rock, etc.

Wm. B. Bradbury composed the tune (1863). It is usually named "The Solid
Rock."


"ABIDE WITH ME! FAST FALLS THE EVENTIDE."

The Rev. Henry Francis Lyte, author of this melodious hymn-prayer, was
born at Ednam, near Kelso, Scotland, June first, 1793. A scholar,
graduated at Trinity College, Dublin; a poet and a musician, the
hard-working curate was a man of frail physique, with a face of almost
feminine beauty, and a spirit as pure and gentle as a little child's.
The shadow of consumption was over him all his life. His memory is
chiefly associated with the district church at Lower Brixham,
Devonshire, where he became "perpetual curate" in 1823. He died at Nice,
France, Nov. 20, 1847.

On the evening of his last Sunday preaching and communion service he
handed to one of his family the manuscript of his hymn, "Abide with me,"
and the music he had composed for it. It was not till eight years later
that Henry Ward Beecher introduced it, or a part of it, to American
Congregationalists, and fourteen years after the author's death it began
to be sung as we now have it, in this country and England.

    Abide with me! Fast falls the eventide,
    The darkness deepens,--Lord with me abide!
    When other helpers fail, and comforts flee,
    Help of the helpless, O abide with me!

       *       *       *       *       *

    Hold Thou Thy cross before my closing eyes;
    Shine through the gloom, and point me to the skies;
    Heaven's morning breaks, and earth's vain shadows flee;
    In life, in death, O Lord, abide with me!


_THE TUNE_

There is a pathos in the neglect and oblivion of Lyte's own tune set by
himself to his words, especially as it was in a sense the work of a
dying man who had hoped that he might not be "wholly mute and useless"
while lying in his grave, and who had prayed--

      O Thou whose touch can lend
    Life to the dead. Thy quickening grace supply,
    And grant me swan-like my last breath to spend
      In song that may not die!

His prayer was answered in God's own way. Another's melody hastened his
hymn on its useful career, and revealed to the world its immortal
value.

By the time it had won its slow recognition in England, it was probably
tuneless, and the compilers of _Hymns Ancient and Modern_ (1861)
discovering the fact just as they were finishing their work, asked Dr.
William Henry Monk, their music editor, to supply the want. "In ten
minutes," it is said, "Dr. Monk composed the sweet, pleading chant that
is wedded permanently to Lyte's swan song."

William Henry Monk, Doctor of Music, was born in London, 1823. His
musical education was early and thorough, and at the age of twenty-six
he was organist and choir director in King's College, London. Elected
(1876) professor of the National Training School, he interested himself
actively in popular musical education, delivering lectures at various
institutions, and establishing choral services.

His hymn-tunes are found in many song-manuals of the English Church and
in Scotland, and several have come to America.

Dr. Monk died in 1889.


"COME, YE DISCONSOLATE."

By Thomas Moore--about 1814. The poem in its original form differed
somewhat from the hymn we sing. Thomas Hastings--whose religious
experience, perhaps, made him better qualified than Thomas Moore for
spiritual expression--changed the second line,--

    Come, at God's altar fervently kneel,

--to--

    Come to the mercy seat,

--and in the second stanza replaced--

    Hope when all others die,

--with--

    Hope of the penitent;

--and for practically the whole of the last stanza--

    Go ask the infidel what boon he brings us,
    What charm for aching hearts he can reveal.
    Sweet as that heavenly promise hope sings us,
    "Earth has no sorrow that heaven cannot heal,"

--Hastings substituted--

    Here see the Bread of life, see waters flowing
    Forth from the throne of God, pure from above!
    Come to the feast Love, come ever knowing
    Earth has no sorrow but heaven can remove.

Dr. Hastings was not much of a poet, but he could make a _singable_
hymn, and he knew the rhythm and accent needed in a hymn-tune. The
determination was to make an evangelical hymn of a poem "too good to
lose," and in that view perhaps the editorial liberties taken with it
were excusable. It was to Moore, however, that the real hymn-thought and
key-note first came, and the title-line and the sweet refrain are his
own--for which the Christian world has thanked him, lo these many
years.


_THE TUNE._

Those who question why Dr. Hastings' interest in Moore's poem did not
cause him to make a tune for it, must conclude that it came to him with
its permanent melody ready made, and that the tune satisfied him.

The "German Air" to which Moore tells us he wrote the words, probably
took his fancy, if it did not induce his mood. Whether Samuel Webbe's
tune now wedded to the hymn is an arrangement of the old air or wholly
his own is immaterial. One can scarcely conceive a happier yoking of
counterparts. Try singing "Come ye Disconsolate" to "Rescue the
Perishing," for example, and we shall feel the impertinence of divorcing
a hymn that has found its musical affinity.


"JESUS, I MY CROSS HAVE TAKEN."

This is another well-known and characteristic hymn of Henry Francis
Lyte--originally six stanzas. We have been told that, besides his bodily
affliction, the grief of an unhappy division or difference in his church
weighed upon his spirit, and that it is alluded to in these lines--

    Man may trouble and distress me,
   'Twill but drive me to Thy breast,
    Life with trials hard may press me,
      Heaven will bring me sweeter rest.

    O, 'tis not in grief to harm me
      While Thy love is left to me,
    O, 'tis not in joy to charm me
      Were that joy unmixed with Thee.

Tunes, "Autumn," by F.H. Barthelemon, or "Ellesdie," (formerly called
"Disciple") from Mozart--familiar in either.


"FROM EVERY STORMY WIND THAT BLOWS."

This is the much-sung and deeply-cherished hymn of Christian peace that
a pious Manxman, Hugh Stowell, was inspired to write nearly a hundred
years ago. Ever since it has carried consolation to souls in both
ordinary and extraordinary trials.

It was sung by the eight American martyrs, Revs. Albert Johnson, John E.
Freeman, David E. Campbell and their wives, and Mr. and Mrs. McMullen,
when by order of the bloody Nana Sahib the captive missionaries were
taken prisoners and put to death at Cawnpore in 1857. Two little
children, Fannie and Willie Campbell, suffered with their parents.

    From every stormy wind that blows,
    From every swelling tide of woes
    There is a calm, a sure retreat;
   'Tis found beneath the Mercy Seat.

    Ah, whither could we flee for aid
    When tempted, desolate, dismayed,
    Or how the hosts of hell defeat
    Had suffering saints no Mercy Seat?

    There, there on eagle wings we soar,
    And sin and sense molest no more,
    And heaven comes down our souls to greet
    While glory crowns the Mercy Seat.

[Illustration: John B. Dykes]

Rev. Hugh Stowell was born at Douglas on the Isle of Man, Dec. 3, 1799.
He was educated at Oxford and ordained to the ministry 1823, receiving
twelve years later the appointment of Canon to Chester Cathedral.

He was a popular and effective preacher and a graceful writer.
Forty-seven hymns are credited to him, the above being the best known.
To presume it is "his best," leaves a good margin of merit for the
remainder.

"From every stormy wind that blows" has practically but one tune. It has
been sung to Hastings "Retreat" ever since the music was made.


"CHILD OF SIN AND SORROW."

    Child of sin and sorrow, filled with dismay,
    Wait not for tomorrow, yield thee today.
    Heaven bids thee come, while yet there's room,
    Child of sin and sorrow, hear and obey.

Words and music by Thomas Hastings.


"LEAD, KINDLY LIGHT."

John Henry Newman, born in London, Feb. 21, 1801--known in religious
history as Cardinal Newman--wrote this hymn when he was a young
clergyman of the Church of England. "Born within the sound of Bow
bells," says Dr. Benson, "he was an imaginative boy, and so
superstitious, that he used constantly to cross himself when going into
the dark." Intelligent students of the fine hymn will note this habit of
its author's mind--and surmise its influence on his religious musings.

The agitations during the High Church movement, and the persuasions of
Hurrell Froude, a Romanist friend, while he was a tutor at Oxford,
gradually weakened his Protestant faith, and in his unrest he travelled
to the Mediterranean coast, crossed to Sicily, where he fell violently
ill, and after his recovery waited three weeks in Palermo for a return
boat. On his trip to Marseilles he wrote the hymn--with no thought that
it would ever be called a hymn.

When complimented on the beautiful production after it became famous he
modestly said, "It was not the hymn but the _tune_ that has gained the
popularity. The tune is Dykes' and Dr. Dykes is a great master."

Dr. Newman was created a Cardinal of the Church of Rome in the Catholic
Cathedral of London, 1879. Died Aug. 11, 1890.


_THE TUNE._

"Lux Benigna," by Dr. Dykes, was composed in Aug. 1865, and was the tune
chosen for this hymn by a committee preparing the Appendix to _Hymns
Ancient and Modern_. Dr. Dykes' statement that the tune came into his
head while walking through the Strand in London "presents a striking
contrast with the solitary origin of the hymn itself" (Benson).

    Lead, kindly Light, amid th' encircling gloom,
      Lead Thou me on.
    The night is dark and I am far from home;
      Lead Thou me on.
    Keep Thou my feet; I do not ask to see
    The distant scene,--one step enough for me.

       *       *       *       *       *

    So long Thy power hath bless'd me, sure it still
      Will lead me on,
    O'er moor and fen, o'er crag and torrent, till
      The night is gone,
    And with the morn those angel faces smile
    Which I have loved long since, and lost awhile.


"I HEARD THE VOICE OF JESUS SAY."

Few if any Christian writers of his generation have possessed tuneful
gifts in greater opulence or produced more vital and lasting treasures
of spiritual verse than Horatius Bonar of Scotland. He inherited some of
his poetic faculty from his grandfather, a clergyman who wrote several
hymns, and it is told of Horatius that hymns used to "come to" him while
riding on railroad trains. He was educated in the Edinburgh University
and studied theology with Dr. Chalmers, and his life was greatly
influenced by Dr. Guthrie, whom he followed in the establishment of the
Free Church of Scotland.

Born in 1808 in Edinburgh, he was about forty years old when he came
back from a successful pastorate at Kelso to the city of his home and
Alma Mater, and became virtually Chalmers' successor as minister of the
Chalmers Memorial Church.

The peculiar richness of Bonar's sacred songs very early created for
them a warm welcome in the religious world, and any devout lyric or poem
with his name attached to it is sure to be read.

Dr. Bonar died in Edinburgh, July 31, 1889. Writing of the hymn, "I
heard the voice," etc., Dr. David Breed calls it "one of the most
ingenious hymns in the language," referring to the fact that the
invitation and response exactly halve each stanza between them--song
followed by countersong. "Ingenious" seems hardly the right word for a
division so obviously natural and almost automatic. It is a simple art
beauty that a poet of culture makes by instinct. Bowring's "Watchman,
tell us of the night," is not the only other instance of similar
countersong structure, and the regularity in Thomas Scott's little hymn,
"Hasten, sinner, to be wise," is only a simpler case of the way a poem
plans itself by the compulsion of its subject.

    I heard the voice of Jesus say,
      Come unto me and rest,
    Lay down, thou weary one, lay down
      Thy head upon My breast:

    I came to Jesus as I was,
      Weary and worn and sad,
    I found in Him a resting-place,
      And He has made me glad.


_THE TUNE._

The old melody of "Evan," long a favorite; and since known everywhere
through the currency given to it in the _Gospel Hymns_, has been in many
collections connected with the words. It is good congregational
psalmody, and not unsuited to the sentiment, taken line by line, but it
divides the stanzas into quatrains, which breaks the happy continuity.
"Evan" was made by Dr. Mason in 1850 from a song written four years
earlier by Rev. William Henry Havergal, Canon of Worcester Cathedral,
Eng. He was the father of Frances Ridley Havergal.

The more ancient "Athens," by Felice Giardini (1716-1796), author of the
"Italian Hymn," has clung, and still clings lovingly to Bonar's hymn in
many communities. Its simplicity, and the involuntary accent of its
sextuple time, exactly reproducing the easy iambic of the verses,
inevitably made it popular, and thousands of older singers today will
have no other music with "I heard the voice of Jesus say."

"Vox Jesu," from the andante in one of the quartets of Louis Spohr
(1784-1859), is a psalm-tune of good harmony, but too little feeling.

An excellent tune for all the shades of expression in the hymn, is the
arrangement by Hubert P. Main from Franz Abt--in A flat, triple time.
Gentle music through the first fifteen bars, in alternate duet and
quartet, utters the Divine Voice with the true accent of the lines, and
the second portion completes the harmony in glad, full chorus--the
answer of the human heart.

"Vox Dilecti," by Dr. Dykes, goes farther and writes the Voice in B flat
_minor_--which seems a needless substitution of divine sadness for
divine sweetness. It is a tune of striking chords, but its shift of key
to G natural (major) after the first four lines marks it rather for
trained choir performance than for assembly song.

It is possible to make too much of a dramatic perfection or a supposed
indication of structural design in a hymn. Textual equations, such as
distinguish Dr. Bonar's beautiful stanzas, are not necessarily
technical. To emphasize them as ingenious by an ingenious tune seems,
somehow, a reflection on the spontaneity of the hymn.

Louis Spohr was Director of the Court Theatre Orchestra in Cassel,
Prussia, in the first half of the last century. He was an eminent
composer of both vocal and instrumental music, and one of the greatest
violinists of Europe.

Hubert Platt Main was born in Ridgefield, Ct., Aug. 17, 1839. He read
music at sight when only ten years old, and at sixteen commenced writing
hymn-tunes. Was assistant compiler with both Bradbury and Woodbury in
their various publications, and in 1868 became connected with the firm
of Biglow and Main, and has been their book-maker until the present
time. As music editor in the partnership he has superintended the
publication of more than five hundred music-books, services, etc.


"I LOVE TO STEAL AWHILE AWAY."

The burdened wife and mother who wrote this hymn would, at the time,
have rated her history with "the short and simple annals of the poor."
But the poor who are "remembered for what they have done," may have a
larger place in history than many rich who did nothing.

Phebe Hinsdale Brown, was born in Canaan, N.Y., in 1783. Her father,
George Hinsdale, who died in her early childhood, must have been a man
of good abilities and religious feeling, being the reputed composer of
the psalm-tune, "Hinsdale," found in some long-ago collections.

Left an orphan at two years of age, Phebe "fell into the hands of a
relative who kept the county jail," and her childhood knew little but
the bitter fare and ceaseless drudgery of domestic slavery. She grew up
with a crushed spirit, and was a timid, shrinking woman as long as she
lived. She married Timothy H. Brown, a house-painter of Ellington, Ct.,
and passed her days there and in Monson, Mass., where she lived some
twenty-five years.

In her humble home in the former town her children were born, and it was
while caring for her own little family of four, and a sick sister, that
the incident occurred (August 1818), which called forth her tender hymn.
She was a devout Christian, and in pleasant weather, whenever she could
find the leisure, she would "steal away" at sunset from her burdens a
little while, to rest and commune with God. Her favorite place was a
wealthy neighbor's large and beautiful flower garden. A servant reported
her visits there to the mistress of the house, who called the "intruder"
to account.

"If you want anything, why don't you come in?" was the rude question,
followed by a plain hint that no stealthy person was welcome.

Wounded by the ill-natured rebuff, the sensitive woman sat down the next
evening with her baby in her lap, and half-blinded by her tears, wrote
"An Apology for my Twilight Rambles," in the verses that have made her
celebrated.

She sent the manuscript (nine stanzas) to her captious neighbor--with
what result has never been told.

Crude and simple as the little rhyme was, it contained a germ of lyric
beauty and life. The Rev. Dr. Charles Hyde of Ellington, who was a
neighbor of Mrs. Brown, procured a copy. He was assisting Dr. Nettleton
to compile the _Village Hymns_, and the humble bit of devotional verse
was at once judged worthy of a place in the new book. Dr. Hyde and his
daughter Emeline giving it some kind touches of rhythmic amendment,

    I love to steal awhile away
      From little ones and care,

--became,--

    I love to steal awhile away
      From _every cumb'ring_ care.

In the last line of this stanza--

    In gratitude and prayer

--was changed to--

    In humble, grateful prayer,

--and the few other defects in syllabic smoothness or literary grace
were affectionately repaired, but the slight furbishing it received did
not alter the individuality of Mrs. Brown's work. It remained
_hers_--and took its place among the immortals of its kind, another
illustration of how little poetry it takes to make a good hymn. Only
five stanzas were printed, the others being voted redundant by both
author and editor. The second and third, as now sung, are--

    I love in solitude to shed
      The penitential tear,
    And all His promises to plead
      Where none but God can hear.

    I love to think on mercies past
      And future good implore,
    And all my cares and sorrows cast
      On Him whom I adore.

Phebe Brown died at Henry, Ill., in 1861; but she had made the church
and the world her debtor not only for her little lyric of pious trust,
but by rearing a son, the Rev. Samuel Brown, D.D., who became the
pioneer American missionary to Japan--to which Christian calling two of
her grandchildren also consecrated themselves.


_THE TUNE._

Mrs. Brown's son Samuel, who, besides being a good minister, inherited
his grandfather's musical gift, composed the tune of "Monson," (named in
his mother's honor, after her late home), and it may have been the first
music set to her hymn. It was the fate of his offering, however, to lose
its filial place, and be succeeded by different melodies, though his own
still survives in a few collections, sometimes with Collyer's "O Jesus
in this solemn hour." It is good music for a hymn of _praise_ rather
than for meditative verse. Many years the hymn has been sung to
"Woodstock," an appropriate and still familiar tune by Deodatus Dutton.

Dutton's "Woodstock" and Bradbury's "Brown," which often replaces it,
are worthy rivals of each other, and both continue in favor as fit
choral interpretations of the much-loved hymn.

Deodatus Dutton was born Dec. 22, 1808, and educated at Brown University
and Washington College (now Trinity) Hartford Ct. While there he was a
student of music and played the organ at Dr. Matthews' church. He
studied theology in New York city, and had recently entered the ministry
when he suddenly died, Dec. 16, 1832, a moment before rising to preach a
sermon. During his brief life he had written several hymn-tunes, and
published a book of psalmody. Mrs. Sigourney wrote a poem on his death.


"THERE'S A WIDENESS IN GOD'S MERCY."

Frederick William Faber, author of this favorite hymn-poem, had a
peculiar genius for putting golden thoughts into common words, and
making them sing. Probably no other sample of his work shows better than
this his art of combining literary cleverness with the most reverent
piety. Cant was a quality Faber never could put into his religious
verse.

He was born in Yorkshire, Eng., June 28, 1814, and received his
education at Oxford. Settled as Rector of Elton, in Huntingdonshire, in
1843, he came into sympathy with the "Oxford Movement," and followed
Newman into the Romish Church. He continued his ministry as founder and
priest for the London branch of the Catholic congregation of St. Philip
Neri for fourteen years, dying Sept. 26, 1863, at the age of forty-nine.

His godly hymns betray no credal shibboleth or doctrinal bias, but are
songs for the whole earthly church of God.

    There's a wideness in God's mercy
      Like the wideness of the sea;
    There's a kindness in His justice
      Which is more than liberty.
    There is welcome for the sinner
      And more graces for the good;
    There is mercy with the Saviour,
      There is healing in His blood.

    There's no place where earthly sorrows
      Are more felt than up in heaven;
    There's no place where earthly failings
      Have such kindly judgment given.
    There is plentiful redemption
      In the blood that has been shed,
    There is joy for all the members
      In the sorrows of the Head.

    For the love of God is broader
      Than the measure of man's mind,
    And the heart of the Eternal
      Is most wonderfully kind.
    If our love were but more simple
      We should take Him at His word,
    And our lives would be all sunshine
      In the sweetness of the Lord.

No tone of comfort has breathed itself more surely and tenderly into
grieved hearts than these tuneful and singularly expressive sentences of
Frederick Faber.


_THE TUNE._

The music of S.J. Vail sung to Faber's hymn is one of that composer's
best hymn-tunes, and its melody and natural movement impress the
meaning as well as the simple beauty of the words.

Silas Jones Vail, an American music-writer, was born Oct., 1818, and
died May 20, 1883. Another charming tune is "Wellesley," by Lizzie S.
Tourjee, daughter of the late Dr. Eben Tourjee.


"HE LEADETH ME! OH, BLESSED THOUGHT."

Professor Gilmore, of Rochester University, N.Y., when a young Baptist
minister (1861) supplying a pulpit in Philadelphia "jotted down this
hymn in Deacon Watson's parlor" (as he says) and passed it to his wife,
one evening after he had made "a conference-room talk" on the 23d Psalm.

Mrs. Gilmore, without his knowledge, sent it to the _Watchman and
Reflector_ (now the _Watchman_).

Years after its publication in that paper, when a candidate for the
pastorate of the Second Baptist Church in Rochester, he was turning the
leaves of the vestry hymnal in use there, and saw his hymn in it. Since
that first publication in the _Devotional Hymn and Tune Book_ (1865) it
has been copied in the hymnals of various denominations, and steadily
holds its place in public favor. The refrain added by the tunemaker
emphasizes the sentiment of the lines, and undoubtedly enhances the
effect of the hymn.

"He leadeth me" has the true hymn quality, combining all the simplicity
of spontaneous thought and feeling with perfect accent and liquid
rhythm.

    He leadeth me! Oh, blessed thought,
    Oh, words with heavenly comfort fraught;
    Whate'er I do, where'er I be,
    Still 'tis God's hand that leadeth me!

       *       *       *       *       *

    Lord, I would clasp Thy hand in mine,
    Nor ever murmur nor repine--
    Content, whatever lot I see,
    Since 'tis my God that leadeth me.

Professor Joseph Henry Gilmore was born in Boston, April 29, 1834. He
was graduated at Phillips Academy, Andover, at Brown University, and at
the Newton Theological Institution, where he was afterwards Hebrew
instructor.

After four years of pastoral service he was elected (1867) professor of
the English Language and Literature in Rochester University. He has
published _Familiar Chats on Books and Reading_, also several college
text-books on rhetoric, logic and oratory.


_THE TUNE._

The little hymn of four stanzas was peculiarly fortunate in meeting the
eye of Mr. William B. Bradbury, (1863) and winning his musical sympathy
and alliance. Few composers have so exactly caught the tone and spirit
of their text as Bradbury did when he vocalized the gliding measures of
"He leadeth me."




CHAPTER VI.

CHRISTIAN BALLADS.


Echoes of Hebrew thought, if not Hebrew psalmody, may have made their
way into the more serious pagan literature. At least in the more
enlightened pagans there has ever revealed itself more or less the
