The door-porter spoke to a black man, he spoke to someone else. There
was a whispering, waiting pause. Then a big man, with a cleanly-shaven
face, beckoned them from the top of a flight of red marble steps.

They went up; the boots of Robert clattering more than usual because he
was so nervous. A door swung open, a curtain was drawn back. A double
line of bowing forms in gorgeous raiment formed a lane that led to the
steps of the throne, and as the children advanced hurriedly there came
from the throne a voice very sweet and kind.

'Three children from the land where the sun never sets! Let them draw
hither without fear.'

In another minute they were kneeling at the throne's foot, saying,
'O Queen, live for ever!' exactly as the woman had taught them. And a
splendid dream-lady, all gold and silver and jewels and snowy drift of
veils, was raising Anthea, and saying--

'Don't be frightened, I really am SO glad you came! The land where
the sun never sets! I am delighted to see you! I was getting quite too
dreadfully bored for anything!'

And behind Anthea the kneeling Cyril whispered in the ears of the
respectful Robert--

'Bobs, don't say anything to Panther. It's no use upsetting her, but we
didn't ask for Jane's address, and the Psammead's with her.'

'Well,' whispered Robert, 'the charm can bring them to us at any moment.
IT said so.'

'Oh, yes,' whispered Cyril, in miserable derision, 'WE'RE all right, of
course. So we are! Oh, yes! If we'd only GOT the charm.'

Then Robert saw, and he murmured, 'Crikey!' at the foot of the throne of
Babylon; while Cyril hoarsely whispered the plain English fact--

'Jane's got the charm round her neck, you silly cuckoo.'

'Crikey!' Robert repeated in heart-broken undertones.



CHAPTER 7. 'THE DEEPEST DUNGEON BELOW THE CASTLE MOAT'

The Queen threw three of the red and gold embroidered cushions off the
throne on to the marble steps that led up to it.

'Just make yourselves comfortable there,' she said. 'I'm simply dying
to talk to you, and to hear all about your wonderful country and how you
got here, and everything, but I have to do justice every morning. Such a
bore, isn't it? Do you do justice in your own country?'

'No, said Cyril; 'at least of course we try to, but not in this public
sort of way, only in private.' 'Ah, yes,' said the Queen, 'I should
much prefer a private audience myself--much easier to manage. But public
opinion has to be considered. Doing justice is very hard work, even when
you're brought up to it.'

'We don't do justice, but we have to do scales, Jane and me,' said
Anthea, 'twenty minutes a day. It's simply horrid.'

'What are scales?' asked the Queen, 'and what is Jane?'

'Jane is my little sister. One of the guards-at-the-gate's wife is
taking care of her. And scales are music.'

'I never heard of the instrument,' said the Queen. 'Do you sing?'

'Oh, yes. We can sing in parts,' said Anthea.

'That IS magic,' said the Queen. 'How many parts are you each cut into
before you do it?'

'We aren't cut at all,' said Robert hastily. 'We couldn't sing if we
were. We'll show you afterwards.'

'So you shall, and now sit quiet like dear children and hear me do
justice. The way I do it has always been admired. I oughtn't to say that
ought I? Sounds so conceited. But I don't mind with you, dears. Somehow
I feel as though I'd known you quite a long time already.'

The Queen settled herself on her throne and made a signal to her
attendants. The children, whispering together among the cushions on the
steps of the throne, decided that she was very beautiful and very kind,
but perhaps just the least bit flighty.

The first person who came to ask for justice was a woman whose brother
had taken the money the father had left for her. The brother said it
was the uncle who had the money. There was a good deal of talk and the
children were growing rather bored, when the Queen suddenly clapped her
hands, and said--

'Put both the men in prison till one of them owns up that the other is
innocent.'

'But suppose they both did it?' Cyril could not help interrupting.

'Then prison's the best place for them,' said the Queen.

'But suppose neither did it.'

'That's impossible,' said the Queen; 'a thing's not done unless someone
does it. And you mustn't interrupt.'

Then came a woman, in tears, with a torn veil and real ashes on her
head--at least Anthea thought so, but it may have been only road-dust.
She complained that her husband was in prison.

'What for?' said the Queen.

'They SAID it was for speaking evil of your Majesty,' said the woman,
'but it wasn't. Someone had a spite against him. That was what it was.'

'How do you know he hadn't spoken evil of me?' said the Queen.

'No one could,' said the woman simply, 'when they'd once seen your
beautiful face.'

'Let the man out,' said the Queen, smiling. 'Next case.'

The next case was that of a boy who had stolen a fox. 'Like the Spartan
boy,' whispered Robert. But the Queen ruled that nobody could have any
possible reason for owning a fox, and still less for stealing one. And
she did not believe that there were any foxes in Babylon; she, at any
rate, had never seen one. So the boy was released.

The people came to the Queen about all sorts of family quarrels and
neighbourly misunderstandings--from a fight between brothers over the
division of an inheritance, to the dishonest and unfriendly conduct of
a woman who had borrowed a cooking-pot at the last New Year's festival,
and not returned it yet.

And the Queen decided everything, very, very decidedly indeed. At last
she clapped her hands quite suddenly and with extreme loudness, and
said--

'The audience is over for today.'

Everyone said, 'May the Queen live for ever!' and went out.

And the children were left alone in the justice-hall with the Queen of
Babylon and her ladies.

'There!' said the Queen, with a long sigh of relief. 'THAT'S over! I
couldn't have done another stitch of justice if you'd offered me the
crown of Egypt! Now come into the garden, and we'll have a nice, long,
cosy talk.'

She led them through long, narrow corridors whose walls they somehow
felt, were very, very thick, into a sort of garden courtyard. There were
thick shrubs closely planted, and roses were trained over trellises, and
made a pleasant shade--needed, indeed, for already the sun was as hot as
it is in England in August at the seaside.

Slaves spread cushions on a low, marble terrace, and a big man with a
smooth face served cool drink in cups of gold studded with beryls. He
drank a little from the Queen's cup before handing it to her.

'That's rather a nasty trick,' whispered Robert, who had been carefully
taught never to drink out of one of the nice, shiny, metal cups that are
chained to the London drinking fountains without first rinsing it out
thoroughly.

The Queen overheard him.

'Not at all,' said she. 'Ritti-Marduk is a very clean man. And one has
to have SOME ONE as taster, you know, because of poison.'

The word made the children feel rather creepy; but Ritti-Marduk
had tasted all the cups, so they felt pretty safe. The drink was
delicious--very cold, and tasting like lemonade and partly like penny
ices.

'Leave us,' said the Queen. And all the Court ladies, in their
beautiful, many-folded, many-coloured, fringed dresses, filed out
slowly, and the children were left alone with the Queen.

'Now,' she said, 'tell me all about yourselves.'

They looked at each other.

'You, Bobs,' said Cyril.

'No--Anthea,' said Robert.

'No--you--Cyril,' said Anthea. 'Don't you remember how pleased the Queen
of India was when you told her all about us?'

Cyril muttered that it was all very well, and so it was. For when he had
told the tale of the Phoenix and the Carpet to the Ranee, it had been
only the truth--and all the truth that he had to tell. But now it
was not easy to tell a convincing story without mentioning the
Amulet--which, of course, it wouldn't have done to mention--and without
owning that they were really living in London, about 2,500 years later
than the time they were talking in.

Cyril took refuge in the tale of the Psammead and its wonderful power of
making wishes come true. The children had never been able to tell anyone
before, and Cyril was surprised to find that the spell which kept them
silent in London did not work here. 'Something to do with our being in
the Past, I suppose,' he said to himself.

'This is MOST interesting,' said the Queen. 'We must have this Psammead
for the banquet tonight. Its performance will be one of the most popular
turns in the whole programme. Where is it?'

Anthea explained that they did not know; also why it was that they did
not know.

'Oh, THAT'S quite simple,' said the Queen, and everyone breathed a deep
sigh of relief as she said it.

'Ritti-Marduk shall run down to the gates and find out which guard your
sister went home with.'

'Might he'--Anthea's voice was tremulous--'might he--would it interfere
with his meal-times, or anything like that, if he went NOW?'

'Of course he shall go now. He may think himself lucky if he gets his
meals at any time,' said the Queen heartily, and clapped her hands.

'May I send a letter?' asked Cyril, pulling out a red-backed penny
account-book, and feeling in his pockets for a stump of pencil that he
knew was in one of them.

'By all means. I'll call my scribe.'

'Oh, I can scribe right enough, thanks,' said Cyril, finding the pencil
and licking its point. He even had to bite the wood a little, for it was
very blunt.

'Oh, you clever, clever boy!' said the Queen. 'DO let me watch you do
it!'

Cyril wrote on a leaf of the book--it was of rough, woolly paper, with
hairs that stuck out and would have got in his pen if he had been using
one, and ruled for accounts.

'Hide IT most carefully before you come here,' he wrote, 'and don't
mention it--and destroy this letter. Everything is going A1. The Queen
is a fair treat. There's nothing to be afraid of.'

'What curious characters, and what a strange flat surface!' said the
Queen. 'What have you inscribed?'

'I've 'scribed,' replied Cyril cautiously, 'that you are fair, and
a--and like a--like a festival; and that she need not be afraid, and
that she is to come at once.'

Ritti-Marduk, who had come in and had stood waiting while Cyril wrote,
his Babylonish eyes nearly starting out of his Babylonish head, now took
the letter, with some reluctance.

'O Queen, live for ever! Is it a charm?' he timidly asked. 'A strong
charm, most great lady?'

'YES,' said Robert, unexpectedly, 'it IS a charm, but it won't hurt
anyone until you've given it to Jane. And then she'll destroy it,
so that it CAN'T hurt anyone. It's most awful strong!--as strong
as--Peppermint!' he ended abruptly.

'I know not the god,' said Ritti-Marduk, bending timorously.

'She'll tear it up directly she gets it,' said Robert, 'That'll end the
charm. You needn't be afraid if you go now.'

Ritti-Marduk went, seeming only partly satisfied; and then the Queen
began to admire the penny account-book and the bit of pencil in so
marked and significant a way that Cyril felt he could not do less than
press them upon her as a gift. She ruffled the leaves delightedly.

'What a wonderful substance!' she said. 'And with this style you make
charms? Make a charm for me! Do you know,' her voice sank to a whisper,
'the names of the great ones of your own far country?'

'Rather!' said Cyril, and hastily wrote the names of Alfred the Great,
Shakespeare, Nelson, Gordon, Lord Beaconsfield, Mr Rudyard Kipling, and
Mr Sherlock Holmes, while the Queen watched him with 'unbaited breath',
as Anthea said afterwards.

She took the book and hid it reverently among the bright folds of her
gown.

'You shall teach me later to say the great names,' she said. 'And the
names of their Ministers--perhaps the great Nisroch is one of them?'

'I don't think so,' said Cyril. 'Mr Campbell Bannerman's Prime Minister
and Mr Burns a Minister, and so is the Archbishop of Canterbury, I
think, but I'm not sure--and Dr Parker was one, I know, and--'

'No more,' said the Queen, putting her hands to her ears. 'My head's
going round with all those great names. You shall teach them to me
later--because of course you'll make us a nice long visit now you have
come, won't you? Now tell me--but no, I am quite tired out with your
being so clever. Besides, I'm sure you'd like ME to tell YOU something,
wouldn't you?'

'Yes,' said Anthea. 'I want to know how it is that the King has gone--'

'Excuse me, but you should say "the King may-he-live-for-ever",' said
the Queen gently.

'I beg your pardon,' Anthea hastened to say--'the King
may-he-live-for-ever has gone to fetch home his fourteenth wife? I don't
think even Bluebeard had as many as that. And, besides, he hasn't killed
YOU at any rate.'

The Queen looked bewildered.
