patience had her perfect work; casting all our care on Him, who surely 
cares for us still, if He cared for us once, enough to die for us on the 
cross; caring for God's opinion and not for the opinion of the world.  
And then we shall be among the truly humble, to whom God gives grace--
first grace in their own hearts, that they may live gracious lives, 
modest and contented, dignified and independent, trusting in God and not 
in man; and then, grace in the eyes of their fellow-men, for what is more 
graceful, what is more gracious, pleasant to see, pleasant to deal with, 
than the humble man, the modest man?  I do not mean the cringing man, the 
flattering man, the man who apes humility for his own ends, because he 
wants to climb high, by pretending to be lowly.  He is neither graceful 
or gracious.  He is only contemptible, and he punishes himself.  He 
spoils his own game.  He defeats his own purpose.  For men despise him, 
and use him, and throw him away when they have done with him, as they 
throw away a dirty worn-out tool.

Not him do I mean by the humble man, the modest man.  I mean the man who, 
like a good soldier, knows his place and keeps it, knows his duty, and 
does it; who expects to be treated as a man should be, with fairness, 
consideration, respect, kindness--and God will always treat him so, 
whether man does or not:  but who, beyond that, does not trouble his mind 
with whether he be private or sergeant, lieutenant or colonel, but with 
whether he can do his duty as private, his duty as sergeant, his duty as 
lieutenant, his duty as colonel; who has learnt the golden lesson, which 
so few learn in these struggling, envious, covetous, ambitious days, 
namely, to abide in the calling to which he is called, and in whatsoever 
state he is, therewith to be content.  To be sure that in God's world, 
the only safe way to become ruler over many things is to be a good ruler 
over a few things; that if he is fit for better work than he is doing 
now, God will find that out, sooner and more surely than he, or any man 
will, and will set him about it; and that, meanwhile, God has set him 
about work which he can do, and that the true wisdom is to do that and do 
it well, and so approve himself alike to man and God, humbling himself 
under the mighty hand of God, that He may exalt him in good time, by 
giving him grace and strength to do great things, as He has given him 
grace and strength to do small things.

Am I speaking almost to deaf ears?  I fear that few here will take my 
advice.  I fear that many here will have excellent excuses and plain 
reasons, why they should not take it.  Be it so.  They cannot alter 
eternal fact.  In one word, they cannot alter Theology.  They cannot 
alter the laws of God.  They cannot alter the character of God.  And 
sooner or later, in this world or in the next, they will find out that 
Theology is right:  and St Peter is right:  that God DOES resist the 
proud, that God DOES give grace to the humble.



SERMON XXIV.  WORSHIP



Eversley, September 4, 1870.

Revelation xi. 16, 17.  "And the four and twenty elders, which sat before 
God on their seats, fell upon their faces, and worshipped God, saying, We 
give thee thanks, O Lord God Almighty, which art, and wast, and art to 
come; because thou hast taken to thee thy great power, and hast reigned."

My dear friends,--I wish to speak a few plain words to you this morning, 
on a matter which has been on my mind ever since I returned from Chester, 
namely,--The duty of the congregation to make the responses in Church.

Now I am not going to scold--even to blame.  To do so would be not only 
unjust, but ungrateful in me, to a congregation which is as attentive and 
as reverent as you are.  Indeed, I am the only person to blame, for I 
ought to have spoken on the subject long ago.

As it is, coming fresh from Chester, and accustomed to hear 
congregations, in that city and in the country round, reading the 
responses aloud throughout the service with earnestness, and reverence, I 
was painfully struck by the silence in this church.  I had before grown 
so accustomed to it that I did not perceive it, just as one grows 
accustomed to a great many things which ought not to be, till one forgets 
that, however usual they may be, wrong they are, and ought to be amended.

Now, it is always best to begin at the root of a matter.  So to begin at 
the root of this.  Why do we come to church at all?

Some will say, to hear the sermon.  That is often too true.  Some folks 
do come to church to hear a man get up and preach, just as they go to a 
concert to hear a man get up and sing, to amuse and interest them for 
half-an-hour.  Some go to hear sermons, doubtless, in order that they may 
learn from them.  But are there not, especially in these days of cheap 
printing, books of devotion, tracts, sermons, printed, which contain 
better preaching than any which they are likely to hear in church?  If 
TEACHING is all that they come to church for, they can get that in plenty 
at home.  Moreover, nine people out of ten who come to church need no 
teaching at all.  They know already, just as well as the preacher, what 
is right and what is wrong; they know their duty; they know how to do it.  
And if they do not intend to do it, all the talking in the world (as far 
as I have seen) will not make them do it.  Moreover, if the teaching in 
the sermon be what we come to church for, why have we prayer-books full 
of prayers, thanksgivings, psalms, and so forth, which are not sermons at 
all?  What is the use of the service, as we call it, if the sermon is the 
only or even the principal object for which we come?  I trust there are 
many of you here who agree with me so fully, that you would come 
regularly to church, as I should, even if there were no sermon, knowing 
that God preaches to every man, in the depths of his own heart and 
conscience, far more solemn and startling sermons than any mortal man can 
utter.

Others will answer that they come to church to say their prayers.  Well:  
that is a wiser answer than the last.  But if that be all, why can they 
not say their prayers at home?  God is everywhere.  God is all-seeing, 
all-hearing, about our path and about our bed, and spying out all our 
ways.  Is He not as ready to hear in the field, and in the workshop and 
in the bed-chamber, as in the church?  "When thou prayest," says our 
Lord, "enter into thy closet, and when thou hast shut thy door, pray to 
thy Father which is in secret; and thy Father which seeth in secret shall 
reward thee openly."  Those are not my words, they are the words of our 
Lord Jesus Christ Himself; and none can gainsay them.  None dare take 
from them or add to them; and our coming to church, therefore, must be 
for more reasons than for the mere saying of our prayers.

Others will answer--very many, indeed, will answer--we come to church 
because--because, we hardly know why, but because we ought to come to 
church.

Some may call that a silly answer, only fit for children:  but I do not 
think so.  It seems to me a very rational answer:  perhaps a very 
reverent and godly answer.  A man comes to church for reasons which he 
cannot explain to himself:  just so--and many of the deepest and best 
feelings of our hearts, are just those that we cannot explain to 
ourselves, though we believe in them, would fight for them, die for them.  
The man who frankly confesses that he does not quite know why he comes to 
church is most likely to know at last why he does come; most likely to 
understand the answer which Scripture gives to the question why we come 
to church.  And what answer is that?  Strange to say, one which people 
now-a-days, with their Bibles in their hands, have almost forgotten.  We 
come to church, according to the Bible, to worship God.

To worship.  Think awhile what that ancient and deep and noble word 
signifies.  So ancient is it, that man learnt to worship even before he 
learnt to till the ground.  So deep, that even to this day no man 
altogether understands what worshipping means.  So noble, that the 
noblest souls on earth delight most in worshipping; that the angels, and 
archangels, and the spirits of just men made perfect, find no nobler 
occupation, no higher enjoyment, in the heavenly world than worshipping 
for ever Him whose glory fills all earth and heaven.  To worship.  That 
power of worship, that longing to worship, that instinct that it is his 
duty to worship something, is--if you will receive it--the true 
distinction between men and brutes.  Philosophers have tried to define 
man as this sort of animal and that sort of animal.  The only sound 
definition is this:  man is THE one animal who worships; and he worships, 
just because he is NOT merely an animal, but a man, with an immortal soul 
within him.  Just in as far as man sinks down again to the level of the 
brute--whether in some savage island of the South Seas, or in some 
equally savage alley of our own great cities--God forgive us that such 
human brutes should exist here in Christian England--just so far he feels 
no need to worship.  He thinks of no unseen God or powers above him.  He 
cares for nothing but what his five senses tell him of; he feels no need 
to go to church and worship.  Just in as far as a man rises to the true 
standard of a man; just in as far as his heart and his mind are truly 
cultivated, truly developed, just so far does he become more and more 
aware of an unseen world about him; more and more aware that in God he 
lives and moves and has his being--and so much the more he feels the 
longing and the duty to worship that unseen God on whom he and the whole 
universe depend.

I know what seeming exceptions there are to this rule, especially in 
these days.  But I say that they are only seeming exceptions.  I never 
knew yet (and I have known many of them) a virtuous and high-minded 
unbeliever:  but what there was in him the instinct of worshipping--the 
longing to worship--he knew not what, the spirit of reverence, which 
confesses its own ignorance and weakness, and is ready to set up, like 
the Athenians of old, an altar--in the heart at least--to the unknown 
God.

But how to worship Him?  The word itself, if we consider what it means, 
will tell us that.  Worship, without doubt, is the same word as worth-
ship.  It signifies the worth of Him whom we worship, that He is worthy,-
-a worthy God, not merely because of what He has done, but because of 
what He is worth in Himself.  Good, excellent, and perfect in Himself, 
and therefore to be admired, praised, reverenced, adored, worshipped--
even if He had never done a kindness to you or to any human being.  
Remember this last truth.  For true it is; and we remember it too little.  
Of course we know that God is good; first and mainly by His goodness to 
us.  Because He is good enough to give us life and breath and all things, 
we conclude that He is a good being.  Because He is good enough to have 
not spared His only begotten Son, but freely given Him for us, when we 
were still sinners and rebels, we conclude Him to be the best of all 
beings, a being of boundless goodness.  But it is because God is so 
perfectly and gloriously good in Himself, and not merely because He has 
done US kindnesses, yea, heaped us with undeserved benefits, that we are 
to worship Him.  For His kindnesses we owe Him gratitude, and gratitude 
without end.  But for His excellent and glorious goodness, we owe Him 
worship, and worship without end.

There are some hearts, surely, among you here who know what I mean:  some 
here who have felt reverence and admiration for some great and good human 
being, and who have felt, too, that that reverence and admiration is one 
of the most elevating and unselfish of all feelings, and quite distinct 
from any gratitude, however just, for favours done; who can say, in their 
hearts, of some noble human being:  "If he never did me a kindness, never 
spoke to me, never knew of my existence, I should honour him and love him 
just the same, for the noble and good personage that he is, irrespective 
of little me, and my paltry wants."  Then, even such ought to be our 
feeling toward God, our worship of God.  Even so should we adore Him who 
alone is worthy of glory, and honour, and praise, and thanksgiving, 
because He is good, and beautiful, and wise Himself, and the cause and 
source of all goodness, and beauty, and wisdom, in all created beings, 
and in the whole universe, past, present, and to come.  Consider, I 
beseech you, those glimpses of the Eternal Worship in heaven which St 
John gives us in the Book of Revelation--How he saw the elders fall down 
before Him who sat upon the throne, and worship Him that liveth for ever, 
and cast their crowns before the throne, saying:  "Thou art worthy, O 
Lord, to receive glory, and honour, and power; for Thou hast created all 
things, and for Thy pleasure they are and were created."

Consider that--Those blessed spirits of just men made perfect, confessing 
that they are nothing, but that Christ is all; that they have nothing, 
but that they owe all to Christ; and declaring Him worthy--not merely for 
any special mercies and kindnesses to themselves, not even for that 
crowning mercy of His incarnation, His death, His redemption; even that 
seems to have vanished from their minds at the sight of Him as He is.  
They glorify Him and worship Him simply for what He is in Himself, for 
what He would have been even if--which God forbid--He had never stooped 
from heaven to live and die on earth--for what He is and was and will be 
through eternity, the Creator and the Ruler, who has made all things, and 
for whose pleasure they are and were created.  Consider that one text.  
The more I consider it, the more awful and yet most blessed depths of 
teaching do I find therein:  and consider this text also, another glimpse 
of the worship which is in heaven.

"I heard a great voice of much people in heaven, singing Alleluia; 
salvation, and glory, and honour, and power, unto the Lord our God; for 
true and righteous are His judgments."  What the special judgment was, 
for which these blessed souls worshipped God, I shall not argue here.  It 
is enough for us that they worshipped God, as we should worship Him, 
because His judgments were righteous and true, were like Himself, proved 
Him to be what He was, worthy in Himself, because He is righteous and 
true.  And consider then, again--the text.  Before Him, the righteous and 
true Being who has created all things for His pleasure, and therefore has 
made them wisely and well; before Him who reigns, and will reign till He 
has put all His enemies under His foot; before Him, I say, bow down 
yourselves, and find true nobleness in confessing your own paltriness, 
true strength in confessing your own weakness, true wisdom in confessing 
your own ignorance, true holiness in confessing your own sins.

And not alone merely, each in your own chamber, or in your own heart.  
That is the place for private confessions of sin, for private prayers for 
help; for all the secrets which we dare not, and need not tell to any 
human being.  They indeed are not out of place here in church.  Those who 
composed our Prayer Book felt that, and have filled our services, the 
Litany especially, with prayers in which each of us can offer up his own 
troubles to God, if he but remember that he is offering up to God his 
neighbour's troubles also, and the troubles of all mankind.  For this is 
the reason why we pray together in church; why all men, in all ages, 
heathen as well as Christian, have had the instinct of assembling 
together for public worship.  They may have fancied often that their 
deity dwelt in one special spot, and that they must go thither to find 
him.  They may have fancied that he or she dwelt in some particular 
image, and that they must visit, and pray to that particular image, if 
they wished their prayers to be heard.  All this, however, have men done 
in their foolishness; but beneath that foolishness there have been always 
more rational ideas, sounder notions.  They felt that it was God who had 
made them into families, and therefore whole families met together to 
worship in common Him of whom every family in heaven and earth is named.  
That God had formed them into societies whether into tribes, as of old, 
or into parishes, as here now; and therefore whole parishes came together 
to worship God, whose laws they were bound to obey in their parochial 
society.  They felt that it was God who had made them into Nations (as 
the psalm says which we repeat every Sunday morning), and not they 
themselves; and therefore they conceived the grand idea of National 
churches, in which the whole nation should, if possible, worship Sunday 
after Sunday, at the same time, and in the same words, that God to whom 
they owed their order, their freedom, their strength, their safety, their 
National unity and life.  And not in silence merely.  These blessed souls 
in heaven are not silent.  They in heaven follow out the human instinct 
which they had on earth, which all men (when they recollect themselves, 
will have), when they feel a thing deeply, when they believe a thing 
strongly, to speak it--to speak it aloud.  They do not fancy in heaven, 
as the priests of Baal did on earth, that they must cry aloud, or God 
could not hear them.  They do not fancy, as the heathen do, that they 
must make vain repetitions, and say the same words over and over again by 
rote, because they will be heard for their much speaking; neither need 
you and I.  But yet they spoke aloud, because out of the fulness of the 
heart the mouth speaketh; and so should you and I.

And this brings me to the special object of my sermon.  I have told you 
what (as it seems to me) Worship means; why we worship; why we worship 
together; and why we ought to worship aloud.  Believe me, this last is 
your duty just as much as mine.  The services of the Church of England 
are so constructed that the whole congregation may take part in them, 
that they may answer aloud in the responses, that they may say Amen at 
the end of each prayer, just as they read or chant aloud the alternate 
verses of the Psalms.  The minister does not say prayers for them, but 
with them.  He is only their leader, their guide.  And if they are not to 
join in with their voices, there is really no reason why he should use 
his voice, why he should not say the prayers in silence and to himself, 
if the congregation are to say Amen in silence and to themselves.  Each 
person in the congregation ought to join aloud, first for the sake of his 
neighbours, and then for his own sake.

For the sake of his neighbours:  for to hear each other's voices stirs up 
earnestness, stirs up attention, keeps off laziness, inattention, and by 
a wholesome infection, makes all the congregation of one mind, as they 
are of one speech, in glorifying God.  And for his own sake, too.  For, 
believe me, when a man utters the responses aloud, he awakens his own 
thoughts and his own feelings, too.  He speaks to himself, and he hears 
himself remind himself of God, and of his duty to God, and acknowledge 
himself openly (as in confirmation) bound to believe and do what he, by 
his own confession, has assented unto.

Believe me, my dear friends, this is no mere theory.  It is to me a 
matter of fact and experience.  I cannot, I have long found, keep my 
attention steady during a service, if I do not make the responses aloud;-
-if I do not join in with my voice, I find my thoughts wandering; and I 
am bound to suppose that the case is the same with you.  Do not, 
therefore, think me impertinent or interfering, if I ask you all to take 
your due share in worshipping God in this church with your voices, as 
well as with your hearts.  Let these services be more lively, more 
earnest, more useful to us all than they have been, by making them more a 
worship of the whole congregation, and not of the minister alone.  I have 
read of a great church in the East, in days long, long ago, in which the 
responses of the vast congregation were so unanimous, so loud, that they 
sounded (says the old writer) like a clap of thunder.  That is too much 
to expect in our little country church:  but at least, I beg you, take 
such an open part in the responses, that you shall all feel that you are 
really worshipping together the same God and Christ, with the same heart 
and mind; and that if a stranger shall come in, he may say in his heart:  
Here are people who are in earnest, who know what they are about, and are 
not ashamed of trying to do it; people who evidently mean what they say, 
and therefore say what they mean.



SERMON XXV.  THE PEACE OF GOD



Baltimore, U.S., 1874.  Westminster Abbey.  November 8, 1874.

Colossians. iii 15.  "Let the peace of God rule in your hearts."

The peace of God.  That is what the priest will invoke for you all, when 
you leave this abbey.  Do you know what it is?  Whether you do or not, 
let me tell you in a few words, what I seem to myself to have learned 
concerning that peace.  What it is? how we can obtain it? and why so many 
do not obtain it, and are, therefore, not at peace?

It is worth while to do so.  For these are not peaceful times.  The peace 
of God is rare among us.  Some say that it is rarer than it was.  I know 
not how that may be; but I see all manner of causes at work around us 
which should make it rare.  We live faster than our forefathers.  We 
hurry, we bustle, we travel, we are eager for daily, almost for hourly 
news from every quarter, as if the world could not get on without us, or 
we without knowing a hundred facts which merely satisfy the curiosity of 
the moment; and as if the great God could not take excellent care of us 
all meanwhile.  We are eager, too, to get money, and get more money 
