    From his burnt socket, mad with anguish, cast
    The implement all bloody far away.
    Then, bellowing, he sounded forth the name
    Of ev'ry Cyclops dwelling in the caves
    Around him, on the wind-swept mountain-tops;                     470
    They, at his cry flocking from ev'ry part,
    Circled his den, and of his ail enquired.
      What grievous hurt hath caused thee, Polypheme!
    Thus yelling to alarm the peaceful ear
    Of night, and break our slumbers? Fear'st thou lest
    Some mortal man drive off thy flocks? or fear'st
    Thyself to die by cunning or by force?
      Them answer'd, then, Polypheme from his cave.
    Oh, friends! I die! and Outis gives the blow.
      To whom with accents wing'd his friends without.               480
    If no man[35] harm thee, but thou art alone,
    And sickness feel'st, it is the stroke of Jove,
    And thou must bear it; yet invoke for aid
    Thy father Neptune, Sovereign of the floods.
      So saying, they went, and in my heart I laugh'd
    That by the fiction only of a name,
    Slight stratagem! I had deceived them all.
      Then groan'd the Cyclops wrung with pain and grief,
    And, fumbling, with stretch'd hands, removed the rock
    From his cave's mouth, which done, he sat him down               490
    Spreading his arms athwart the pass, to stop
    Our egress with his flocks abroad; so dull,
    It seems, he held me, and so ill-advised.
    I, pondering what means might fittest prove
    To save from instant death, (if save I might)
    My people and myself, to ev'ry shift
    Inclined, and various counsels framed, as one
    Who strove for life, conscious of woe at hand.
    To me, thus meditating, this appear'd
    The likeliest course. The rams well-thriven were,                500
    Thick-fleeced, full-sized, with wool of sable hue.
    These, silently, with osier twigs on which
    The Cyclops, hideous monster, slept, I bound,
    Three in one leash; the intermediate rams
    Bore each a man, whom the exterior two
    Preserved, concealing him on either side.
    Thus each was borne by three, and I, at last,
    The curl'd back seizing of a ram, (for one
    I had reserv'd far stateliest of them all)
    Slipp'd underneath his belly, and both hands                     510
    Enfolding fast in his exub'rant fleece,
    Clung ceaseless to him as I lay supine.
    We, thus disposed, waited with many a sigh
    The sacred dawn; but when, at length, aris'n,
    Aurora, day-spring's daughter rosy-palm'd
    Again appear'd, the males of all his flocks
    Rush'd forth to pasture, and, meantime, unmilk'd,
    The wethers bleated, by the load distress'd
    Of udders overcharged. Their master, rack'd
    With pain intolerable, handled yet                               520
    The backs of all, inquisitive, as they stood,
    But, gross of intellect, suspicion none
    Conceiv'd of men beneath their bodies bound.
    And now (none left beside) the ram approach'd
    With his own wool burthen'd, and with myself,
    Whom many a fear molested. Polypheme
    The giant stroak'd him as he sat, and said,
      My darling ram! why latest of the flock
    Com'st thou, whom never, heretofore, my sheep
    Could leave behind, but stalking at their head,                  530
    Thou first was wont to crop the tender grass,
    First to arrive at the clear stream, and first
    With ready will to seek my sheep-cote here
    At evening; but, thy practice chang'd, thou com'st,
    Now last of all. Feel'st thou regret, my ram!
    Of thy poor master's eye, by a vile wretch
    Bored out, who overcame me first with wine,
    And by a crew of vagabonds accurs'd,
    Followers of Outis, whose escape from death
    Shall not be made to-day? Ah! that thy heart                     540
    Were as my own, and that distinct as I
    Thou could'st articulate, so should'st thou tell,
    Where hidden, he eludes my furious wrath.
    Then, dash'd against the floor his spatter'd brain
    Should fly, and I should lighter feel my harm
    From Outis, wretch base-named and nothing-worth.
      So saying, he left him to pursue the flock.
    When, thus drawn forth, we had, at length, escaped
    Few paces from the cavern and the court,
    First, quitting my own ram, I loos'd my friends,                 550
    Then, turning seaward many a thriven ewe
    Sharp-hoof'd, we drove them swiftly to the ship.
    Thrice welcome to our faithful friends we came
    From death escaped, but much they mourn'd the dead.
    I suffer'd not their tears, but silent shook
    My brows, by signs commanding them to lift
    The sheep on board, and instant plow the main.
    They, quick embarking, on the benches sat
    Well ranged, and thresh'd with oars the foamy flood;
    But distant now such length as a loud voice                      560
    May reach, I hail'd with taunts the Cyclops' ear.
      Cyclops! when thou devouredst in thy cave
    With brutal force my followers, thou devour'dst
    The followers of no timid Chief, or base,
    Vengeance was sure to recompense that deed
    Atrocious. Monster! who wast not afraid
    To eat the guest shelter'd beneath thy roof!
    Therefore the Gods have well requited thee.
      I ended; he, exasp'rate, raged the more,
    And rending from its hold a mountain-top,                        570
    Hurl'd it toward us; at our vessel's stern
    Down came the mass, nigh sweeping in its fall
    The rudder's head. The ocean at the plunge
    Of that huge rock, high on its refluent flood
    Heav'd, irresistible, the ship to land.
    I seizing, quick, our longest pole on board,
    Back thrust her from the coast and by a nod
    In silence given, bade my companions ply
    Strenuous their oars, that so we might escape.
    Procumbent,[36] each obey'd, and when, the flood                 580
    Cleaving, we twice that distance had obtain'd,[37]
    Again I hail'd the Cyclops; but my friends
    Earnest dissuaded me on ev'ry side.
      Ah, rash Ulysses! why with taunts provoke
    The savage more, who hath this moment hurl'd
    A weapon, such as heav'd the ship again
    To land, where death seem'd certain to us all?
    For had he heard a cry, or but the voice
    Of one man speaking, he had all our heads
    With some sharp rock, and all our timbers crush'd                590
    Together, such vast force is in his arm.
      So they, but my courageous heart remain'd
    Unmoved, and thus again, incensed, I spake.
      Cyclops! should any mortal man inquire
    To whom thy shameful loss of sight thou ow'st,
    Say, to Ulysses, city-waster Chief,
    Laertes' son, native of Ithaca.
      I ceas'd, and with a groan thus he replied.
    Ah me! an antient oracle I feel
    Accomplish'd. Here abode a prophet erst,                         600
    A man of noblest form, and in his art
    Unrivall'd, Telemus Eurymedes.
    He, prophesying to the Cyclops-race,
    Grew old among us, and presaged my loss
    Of sight, in future, by Ulysses' hand.
    I therefore watch'd for the arrival here,
    Always, of some great Chief, for stature, bulk
    And beauty prais'd, and cloath'd with wond'rous might.
    But now--a dwarf, a thing impalpable,
    A shadow, overcame me first by wine,                             610
    Then quench'd my sight. Come hither, O my guest!
    Return, Ulysses! hospitable cheer
    Awaits thee, and my pray'rs I will prefer
    To glorious Neptune for thy prosp'rous course;
    For I am Neptune's offspring, and the God
    Is proud to be my Sire; he, if he please,
    And he alone can heal me; none beside
    Of Pow'rs immortal, or of men below.
      He spake, to whom I answer thus return'd.
    I would that of thy life and soul amerced,                       620
    I could as sure dismiss thee down to Hell,
    As none shall heal thine eye--not even He.
      So I; then pray'd the Cyclops to his Sire
    With hands uprais'd towards the starry heav'n.
      Hear, Earth-encircler Neptune, azure-hair'd!
    If I indeed am thine, and if thou boast
    Thyself my father, grant that never more
    Ulysses, leveller of hostile tow'rs,
    Laertes' son, of Ithaca the fair,
    Behold his native home! but if his fate                          630
    Decree him yet to see his friends, his house,
    His native country, let him deep distress'd
    Return and late, all his companions lost,
    Indebted for a ship to foreign aid,
    And let affliction meet him at his door.
      He spake, and Ocean's sov'reign heard his pray'r.
    Then lifting from the shore a stone of size
    Far more enormous, o'er his head he whirl'd
    The rock, and his immeasurable force
    Exerting all, dismiss'd it. Close behind                         640
    The ship, nor distant from the rudder's head,
    Down came the mass. The ocean at the plunge
    Of such a weight, high on its refluent flood
    Tumultuous, heaved the bark well nigh to land.
      But when we reach'd the isle where we had left
    Our num'rous barks, and where my people sat
    Watching with ceaseless sorrow our return,
    We thrust our vessel to the sandy shore,
    Then disembark'd, and of the Cyclops' sheep
    Gave equal share to all. To me alone                             650
    My fellow-voyagers the ram consign'd
    In distribution, my peculiar meed.
    Him, therefore, to cloud-girt Saturnian Jove
    I offer'd on the shore, burning his thighs
    In sacrifice; but Jove my hallow'd rites
    Reck'd not, destruction purposing to all
    My barks, and all my followers o'er the Deep.
    Thus, feasting largely, on the shore we sat
    Till even-tide, and quaffing gen'rous wine;
    But when day fail'd, and night o'ershadow'd all,                 660
    Then, on the shore we slept; and when again
    Aurora rosy daughter of the Dawn,
    Look'd forth, my people, anxious, I enjoin'd
    To climb their barks, and cast the hawsers loose.
    They all obedient, took their seats on board
    Well-ranged, and thresh'd with oars the foamy flood.
    Thus, 'scaping narrowly, we roam'd the Deep
    With aching hearts and with diminish'd crews.


FOOTNOTES:

[32] So the Scholium interprets in this place, the word +hyperthialos+.

[33] +Linos+

[34] Clarke, who has preserved this name in his marginal version,
contends strenuously, and with great reason, that Outis ought not to be
translated, and in a passage which he quotes from the _Acta eruditorum_,
we see much fault found with Giphanius and other interpreters of Homer
for having translated it. It is certain that in Homer the word is
declined not as +outis-tinos+ which signifies no man, but as
+outis-tidos+ making +outin+ in the accusative, consequently as a proper
name. It is sufficient that the ambiguity was such as to deceive the
friends of the Cyclops. Outis is said by some (perhaps absurdly) to have
been a name given to Ulysses on account of his having larger ears than
common.

[35] Outis, as a _name_ could only denote him who bore it; but as a
_noun_, it signifies _no man_, which accounts sufficiently for the
ludicrous mistake of his brethren.

[36]
                      +propesontes+
         ------Olli certamine summo
    Procumbunt.

    VIRGIL

[37] The seeming incongruity of this line with line 560, is reconciled by
supposing that Ulysses exerted his voice, naturally loud, in an
extraordinary manner on this second occasion. See Clarke.




BOOK X

ARGUMENT

Ulysses, in pursuit of his narrative, relates his arrival at the island
of AEolus, his departure thence, and the unhappy occasion of his return
thither. The monarch of the winds dismisses him at last with much
asperity. He next tells of his arrival among the Laestrygonians, by whom
his whole fleet, together with their crews, are destroyed, his own ship
and crew excepted. Thence he is driven to the island of Circe. By her the
half of his people are transformed into swine. Assisted by Mercury, he
resists her enchantments himself, and prevails with the Goddess to
recover them to their former shape. In consequence of Circe's
instructions, after having spent a complete year in her palace, he
prepares for a voyage to the infernal regions.


    We came to the AEolian isle; there dwells
    AEolus, son of Hippotas, belov'd
    By the Immortals, in an isle afloat.
    A brazen wall impregnable on all sides
    Girds it, and smooth its rocky coast ascends.
    His children, in his own fair palace born,
    Are twelve; six daughters, and six blooming sons.
    He gave his daughters to his sons to wife;
    They with their father hold perpetual feast
    And with their royal mother, still supplied                       10
    With dainties numberless; the sounding dome
    Is fill'd with sav'ry odours all the day,
    And with their consorts chaste at night they sleep
    On stateliest couches with rich arras spread.
    Their city and their splendid courts we reach'd.
    A month complete he, friendly, at his board
    Regaled me, and enquiry made minute
    Of Ilium's fall, of the Achaian fleet,
    And of our voyage thence. I told him all.
    But now, desirous to embark again,                                20
    I ask'd dismission home, which he approved,
    And well provided for my prosp'rous course.
    He gave me, furnish'd by a bullock slay'd
    In his ninth year, a bag; ev'ry rude blast
    Which from its bottom turns the Deep, that bag
    Imprison'd held; for him Saturnian Jove
    Hath officed arbiter of all the winds,
    To rouse their force or calm them, at his will.
    He gave me them on board my bark, so bound
    With silver twine that not a breath escaped,                      30
    Then order'd gentle Zephyrus to fill
    Our sails propitious. Order vain, alas!
    So fatal proved the folly of my friends.
      Nine days continual, night and day we sail'd,
    And on the tenth my native land appear'd.
    Not far remote my Ithacans I saw
    Fires kindling on the coast; but me with toil
    Worn, and with watching, gentle sleep subdued;
    For constant I had ruled the helm, nor giv'n
    That charge to any, fearful of delay.                             40
    Then, in close conference combined, my crew
    Each other thus bespake--He carries home
    Silver and gold from AEolus received,
    Offspring of Hippotas, illustrious Chief--
    And thus a mariner the rest harangued.
      Ye Gods! what city or what land soe'er
    Ulysses visits, how is he belov'd
    By all, and honour'd! many precious spoils
    He homeward bears from Troy; but we return,
    (We who the self-same voyage have perform'd)                      50
    With empty hands. Now also he hath gain'd
    This pledge of friendship from the King of winds.
    But come--be quick--search we the bag, and learn
    What stores of gold and silver it contains.
      So he, whose mischievous advice prevailed.
    They loos'd the bag; forth issued all the winds,
    And, caught by tempests o'er the billowy waste,
    Weeping they flew, far, far from Ithaca.
    I then, awaking, in my noble mind
    Stood doubtful, whether from my vessel's side                     60
    Immersed to perish in the flood, or calm
    To endure my sorrows, and content to live.
    I calm endured them; but around my head
    Winding my mantle, lay'd me down below,
    While adverse blasts bore all my fleet again
    To the AEolian isle; then groan'd my people.
      We disembark'd and drew fresh water there,
    And my companions, at their galley's sides
    All seated, took repast; short meal we made,
    When, with an herald and a chosen friend,                         70
    I sought once more the hall of AEolus.
    Him banqueting with all his sons we found,
    And with his spouse; we ent'ring, on the floor
    Of his wide portal sat, whom they amazed
    Beheld, and of our coming thus enquired.
      Return'd? Ulysses! by what adverse Pow'r
    Repuls'd hast thou arrived? we sent thee hence
    Well-fitted forth to reach thy native isle,
    Thy palace, or what place soe'er thou would'st.
      So they--to whom, heart-broken, I replied.                      80
    My worthless crew have wrong'd me, nor alone
    My worthless crew, but sleep ill-timed, as much.
    Yet heal, O friends, my hurt; the pow'r is yours!
      So I their favour woo'd. Mute sat the sons,
    But thus their father answer'd. Hence--be gone--
    Leave this our isle, thou most obnoxious wretch
    Of all mankind. I should, myself, transgress,
    Receiving here, and giving conduct hence
    To one detested by the Gods as thou.
    Away--for hated by the Gods thou com'st.                          90
      So saying, he sent me from his palace forth,
    Groaning profound; thence, therefore, o'er the Deep
    We still proceeded sorrowful, our force
    Exhausting ceaseless at the toilsome oar,
    And, through our own imprudence, hopeless now
    Of other furth'rance to our native isle.
    Six days we navigated, day and night,
    The briny flood, and on the seventh reach'd
    The city erst by Lamus built sublime,
    Proud Laestrygonia, with the distant gates.                       100
    The herdsman, there, driving his cattle home,[38]
    Summons the shepherd with his flocks abroad.
    The sleepless there might double wages earn,
    Attending, now, the herds, now, tending sheep,
    For the night-pastures, and the pastures grazed
    By day, close border, both, the city-walls.
    To that illustrious port we came, by rocks
    Uninterrupted flank'd on either side
    Of tow'ring height, while prominent the shores
    And bold, converging at the haven's mouth                        110
    Leave narrow pass. We push'd our galleys in,
    Then moor'd them side by side; for never surge
    There lifts its head, or great or small, but clear
    We found, and motionless, the shelter'd flood.
    Myself alone, staying my bark without,
    Secured her well with hawsers to a rock
    At the land's point, then climb'd the rugged steep,
    And spying stood the country. Labours none
    Of men or oxen in the land appear'd,
    Nor aught beside saw we, but from the earth                      120
    Smoke rising; therefore of my friends I sent
    Before me two, adding an herald third,
    To learn what race of men that country fed.
    Departing, they an even track pursued
    Made by the waggons bringing timber down
    From the high mountains to the town below.
    Before the town a virgin bearing forth
    Her ew'r they met, daughter of him who ruled
    The Laestrygonian race, Antiphatas.
    Descending from the gate, she sought the fount                   130
    Artacia; for their custom was to draw
    From that pure fountain for the city's use.
    Approaching they accosted her, and ask'd
    What King reign'd there, and over whom he reign'd.
    She gave them soon to know where stood sublime
    The palace of her Sire; no sooner they
    The palace enter'd, than within they found,
    In size resembling an huge mountain-top,
    A woman, whom they shudder'd to behold.
    She forth from council summon'd quick her spouse                 140
    Antiphatas, who teeming came with thoughts
    Of carnage, and, arriving, seized at once
    A Greecian, whom, next moment, he devoured.
    With headlong terrour the surviving two
    Fled to the ships. Then sent Antiphatas
    His voice through all the town, and on all sides,
    Hearing that cry, the Laestrygonians flock'd
    Numberless, and in size resembling more
    The giants than mankind. They from the rocks
    Cast down into our fleet enormous stones,                        150
    A strong man's burthen each; dire din arose
    Of shatter'd galleys and of dying men,
    Whom spear'd like fishes to their home they bore,
    A loathsome prey. While them within the port
    They slaughter'd, I, (the faulchion at my side
    Drawn forth) cut loose the hawser of my ship,
    And all my crew enjoin'd with bosoms laid
    Prone on their oars, to fly the threaten'd woe.
    They, dreading instant death tugg'd resupine
    Together, and the galley from beneath                            160
    Those beetling[39] rocks into the open sea
    Shot gladly; but the rest all perish'd there.
      Proceeding thence, we sigh'd, and roamed the waves,
    Glad that we lived, but sorrowing for the slain.
    We came to the AEaean isle; there dwelt
    The awful Circe, Goddess amber-hair'd,
    Deep-skill'd in magic song, sister by birth
    Of the all-wise AEaetes; them the Sun,
    Bright luminary of the world, begat
    On Perse, daughter of Oceanus.                                   170
    Our vessel there, noiseless, we push'd to land
    Within a spacious haven, thither led
    By some celestial Pow'r. We disembark'd,
    And on the coast two days and nights entire
    Extended lay, worn with long toil, and each
    The victim of his heart-devouring woes.
    Then, with my spear and with my faulchion arm'd,
    I left the ship to climb with hasty steps
    An airy height, thence, hoping to espie
    Some works of man, or hear, perchance, a voice.                  180
    Exalted on a rough rock's craggy point
    I stood, and on the distant plain, beheld
    Smoke which from Circe's palace through the gloom
    Of trees and thickets rose. That smoke discern'd,
    I ponder'd next if thither I should haste,
    Seeking intelligence. Long time I mused,
    But chose at last, as my discreter course,
    To seek the sea-beach and my bark again,
    And, when my crew had eaten, to dispatch
    Before me, others, who should first enquire.                     190
    But, ere I yet had reach'd my gallant bark,
    Some God with pity viewing me alone
    In that untrodden solitude, sent forth
    An antler'd stag, full-sized, into my path.
    His woodland pastures left, he sought the stream,
    For he was thirsty, and already parch'd
    By the sun's heat. Him issuing from his haunt,
    Sheer through the back beneath his middle spine,
    I wounded, and the lance sprang forth beyond.
    Moaning he fell, and in the dust expired.                        200
    Then, treading on his breathless trunk, I pluck'd
    My weapon forth, which leaving there reclined,
    I tore away the osiers with my hands
    And fallows green, and to a fathom's length
    Twisting the gather'd twigs into a band,
    Bound fast the feet of my enormous prey,
    And, flinging him athwart my neck, repair'd
    Toward my sable bark, propp'd on my lance,
    Which now to carry shoulder'd as before
    Surpass'd my pow'r, so bulky was the load.                       210
    Arriving at the ship, there I let fall
    My burthen, and with pleasant speech and kind,
    Man after man addressing, cheer'd my crew.
      My friends! we suffer much, but shall not seek
    The shades, ere yet our destined hour arrive.
    Behold a feast! and we have wine on board--
    Pine not with needless famine! rise and eat.
      I spake; they readily obey'd, and each
    Issuing at my word abroad, beside
    The galley stood, admiring, as he lay,                           220
    The stag, for of no common bulk was he.
    At length, their eyes gratified to the full
    With that glad spectacle, they laved their hands,
    And preparation made of noble cheer.
    That day complete, till set of sun, we spent
    Feasting deliciously without restraint,
    And quaffing generous wine; but when the sun
    Went down, and darkness overshadow'd all,
    Extended, then, on Ocean's bank we lay;
    And when Aurora, daughter of the dawn,                           230
    Look'd rosy forth, convening all my crew
    To council, I arose, and thus began.
      My fellow-voyagers, however worn
    With num'rous hardships, hear! for neither West
    Know ye, nor East, where rises, or where sets
    The all-enlight'ning sun. But let us think,
    If thought perchance may profit us, of which
    Small hope I see; for when I lately climb'd
    Yon craggy rock, plainly I could discern
    The land encompass'd by the boundless Deep.                      240
    The isle is flat, and in the midst I saw
    Dun smoke ascending from an oaken bow'r.
      So I, whom hearing, they all courage lost,
    And at remembrance of Antiphatas
    The Laestrygonian, and the Cyclops' deeds,
    Ferocious feeder on the flesh of man,
    Mourn'd loud and wept, but tears could nought avail.
    Then numb'ring man by man, I parted them
    In equal portions, and assign'd a Chief
    To either band, myself to these, to those                        250
    Godlike Eurylochus. This done, we cast
    The lots into the helmet, and at once
    Forth sprang the lot of bold Eurylochus.
    He went, and with him of my people march'd
    Twenty and two, all weeping; nor ourselves
    Wept less, at separation from our friends.
    Low in a vale, but on an open spot,
    They found the splendid house of Circe, built
    With hewn and polish'd stones; compass'd she dwelt
    By lions on all sides and mountain-wolves                        260
    Tamed by herself with drugs of noxious pow'rs.
    Nor were they mischievous, but as my friends
    Approach'd, arising on their hinder feet,
    Paw'd them in blandishment, and wagg'd the tail.
    As, when from feast he rises, dogs around
    Their master fawn, accustom'd to receive
    The sop conciliatory from his hand,
    Around my people, so, those talon'd wolves
    And lions fawn'd. They, terrified, that troop
    Of savage monsters horrible beheld.                              270
    And now, before the Goddess' gates arrived,
    They heard the voice of Circe singing sweet
    Within, while, busied at the loom, she wove
    An ample web immortal, such a work
    Transparent, graceful, and of bright design
    As hands of Goddesses alone produce.
    Thus then Polites, Prince of men, the friend
    Highest in my esteem, the rest bespake.
      Ye hear the voice, comrades, of one who weaves
    An ample web within, and at her task                             280
    So sweetly chaunts that all the marble floor
    Re-echoes; human be she or divine
    I doubt, but let us call, that we may learn.
      He ceas'd; they call'd; soon issuing at the sound,
    The Goddess open'd wide her splendid gates,
    And bade them in; they, heedless, all complied,
    All save Eurylochus, who fear'd a snare.
    She, introducing them, conducted each
    To a bright throne, then gave them Pramnian wine,
    With grated cheese, pure meal, and honey new,                    290
    But medicated with her pois'nous drugs
    Their food, that in oblivion they might lose
    The wish of home. She gave them, and they drank,--
    When, smiting each with her enchanting wand,
    She shut them in her sties. In head, in voice,
    In body, and in bristles they became
    All swine, yet intellected as before,
    And at her hand were dieted alone
    With acorns, chestnuts, and the cornel-fruit,
    Food grateful ever to the grovelling swine.                      300
      Back flew Eurylochus toward the ship,
    To tell the woeful tale; struggling to speak,
    Yet speechless, there he stood, his heart transfixt
    With anguish, and his eyes deluged with tears.
    Me boding terrours occupied. At length,
    When, gazing on him, all had oft enquired,
    He thus rehearsed to us the dreadful change.
      Renown'd Ulysses! as thou bad'st, we went
    Through yonder oaks; there, bosom'd in a vale,
    But built conspicuous on a swelling knoll                        310
    With polish'd rock, we found a stately dome.
    Within, some Goddess or some woman wove
    An ample web, carolling sweet the while.
    They call'd aloud; she, issuing at the voice,
    Unfolded, soon, her splendid portals wide,
    And bade them in. Heedless they enter'd, all,
    But I remain'd, suspicious of a snare.
    Ere long the whole band vanish'd, none I saw
