
"_Yak, yah, yah, thou gallows-bird!_"

"Yet I must tell thee, Nick."

"_Yah, yah, dangle-rope!_"

"Stay! would Will Shakspere come? Why, here, I'll send him word. He'll
come--Will Shakspere never bore a grudge; and I shall so soon go where
are no grudges, envy, storms, or noise, but silence and the soft lap of
everlasting sleep. He'll come--Nick, bid him come, upon his life, to
the Old Bailey when I am taken up."

Nick nodded. It was strange to have his master beg.

Carew was looking up at a thin streak of light that came in through the
narrow window at the stair. "Nick," said he, huskily, "last night I
dreamed I heard thee singing; but 'twas where there was a sweet, green
field and a stream flowing through a little wood. Methought 'twas on the
road past Warwick toward Coventry. Thou'lt go there some day and
remember Gaston Carew, wilt not, lad? And, Nick, for thine own mother's
sake, do not altogether hate him; he was not so bad a man as he might
easily have been."

"Come," growled the turnkey, who was pacing up and down like a surly
bear; "have done. 'Tis a fat shilling's worth."

"'Twas there I heard thee sing first, Nick," said Carew, holding to the
boy's hands through the bars. "I'll never hear thee sing again."

"Why, sir, I'll sing for thee now," said Nick, choking.

The turnkey was coming back when Nick began suddenly to sing. He looked
up, staring. Such a thing dumfounded him. He had never heard a song like
that in Newgate. There were rules in prison. "Here, here," he cried, "be
still!" But Nick sang on.

The groaning, quarreling, and cursing were silent all at once. The guard
outside, who had been sharpening his pike upon the window-ledge, stopped
the shrieking sound. Silence like a restful sleep fell upon the weary
place. Through dark corridors and down the mildewed stairs the quaint
old song went floating as a childhood memory into an old man's dream;
and to Gaston Carew's ear it seemed as if the melody of earth had all
been gathered in that little song--all but the sound of the voice of his
daughter Cicely.

It ceased, and yet a gentle murmur seemed to steal through the mouldy
walls, of birds and flowers, sunlight and the open air, of once-loved
mothers, and of long-forgotten homes. The renegade had ceased his
cursing, and was whispering a fragment of a Spanish prayer he had not
heard for many a day.

Carew muttered to himself. "And now old cares are locked in charmed
sleep, and new griefs lose their bitterness, to hear thee sing--to hear
thee sing. God bless thee, Nick!"

"'Tis three good shillings' worth o' time," the turnkey growled, and
fumbled with the keys. "All for one shilling, too," said he, and kicked
the door-post sulkily. "But a plague, I say, a plague! 'Tis no one's
business but mine. I've a good two shillings' worth in my ears. 'Tis
thirty year since I ha' heard the like o' that. But what's a gaol
for?--man's delight? Nay, nay. Here, boy, time's up! Come out o' that."
But he spoke so low that he scarcely heard himself; and going to the end
of the corridor, he marked at random upon the wall.

"Oh, Nick, I love thee," said the master-player, holding the boy's hands
with a bitter grip. "Dost thou not love me just a little? Come, lad, say
that thou lovest me."

[Illustration: "'WHY, SIR, I'LL SING FOR THEE NOW.' SAID NICK,
CHOKING."]  "Nay, Master Carew," Nick answered soberly, "I do na love
thee, and I will na say I do, sir; but I pity thee with all my heart.
And, sir, if thy being out would keep me stolen, still I think I'd wish
thee out--for Cicely. But, Master Carew, do na break my hands."

The master-player loosed his grasp. "I will not seek to be excused to
thee," he said huskily. "I've prisoned thee as that clod prisons me;
but, Nick, the play is almost out, down comes the curtain on my heels,
and thy just blame will find no mark. Yet, Nick, now that I am fast and
thou art free, it makes my heart ache to feel that 'twas not I who set
thee free. Thou canst go when pleaseth thee, and thank me nothing for
it. And, Nick, as my sins be forgiven me, I truly meant to set thee free
and send thee home. I did, upon my word, and on the remnant of
mine honour!"

"Time's good and up, sirs," said the turnkey, coming back.

Carew thrust his hand into his breast.

"I must be going, sir," said Nick.

"Ay, so thou must--all things must go. Oh, Nick, be friendly with me
now, if thou wert never friendly before. Kiss me, lad. There--now thy
hand." The master-player clasped it closely in his own, and pressing
something into the palm, shut down the fingers over it. "Quick! Keep it
hid," he whispered. "'Tis the chain I had from Stratford's burgesses, to
some good usage come at last."

"Must I come and fetch thee out?" growled the turnkey.

"I be coming, sir."

"Thou'lt send Will Shakspere? And, oh, Nick," cried Carew, holding him
yet a little longer, "thou'lt keep my Cicely from harm?"

"I'll do my best," said Nick, his own eyes full.

The turnkey raised his heavy bunch of keys. "I'll ding thee out o' this"
said he.

And the last Nick Attwood saw of Gaston Carew was his wistful eyes
hunting down the stairway after him, and his hand, with its torn fine
laces, waving at him through the bars.

And when he came to the Mermaid Inn Master Shakspere's comedy was done,
and Master Ben Jonson was telling a merry tale that made the tapster
sick with laughing.




CHAPTER XXXIII


CICELY DISAPPEARS

That Master Will Shakspere should be so great seemed passing strange to
Nick, he felt so soon at home with him. It seemed as if the master-maker
of plays had a magic way of going out to and about the people he met,
and of fitting his humor to them as though he were a glover with their
measure in his hand.

With Nick he was nothing all day long but a jolly, wise, and
gentle-hearted boy, wearing his greatness like an old cloth coat, as if
it were a long-accustomed thing, and quite beyond all pride, and went
about his business in a very simple way. But in the evening when the
wits were met together at his house, and Nick sat on the hindmost bench
and watched the noble gentlemen who came to listen to the sport, Master
Will Shakspere seemed to have the knack of being ever best among them
all, yet of never too much seeming to be better than the rest.

And though, for the most part, he said but little, save when some pet
fancy moved him, when he did speak his conversation sparkled like a
little meadow brook that drew men's best thoughts out of them like
water from a spring.

And when they fell to bantering, he could turn the fag-end of another
man's nothing to good account in a way so shrewd that not even Master
Ben Jonson could better him--and Master Ben Jonson set up for a wit. But
Master Shakspere came about as quickly as an English man-of-war, dodged
here and there on a breath of wind, and seemed quite everywhere at once;
while Master Jonson tacked and veered, and loomed across the elements
like a great galleon, pouring forth learned broadsides with a most
prodigious boom, riddling whatever was in the way, to be sure, but often
quite missing the point--because Master Shakspere had come about, hey,
presto, change! and was off with the argument, point and all, upon a
totally different tack.

Then "Tush!" and "Fie upon thee, Will!" Master Jonson would cry with his
great bluff-hearted laugh, "thou art a regular flibbertigibbet! I'll
catch thee napping yet, old heart, and fill thee so full of pepper-holes
that thou wilt leak epigrams. But quits--I must be home, or I shall
catch it from my wife. Faith, Will, thou shouldst see my little Ben!"

"I'll come some day," Master Shakspere would say; "give him my love";
and his mouth would smile, though his eyes were sad, for his own son
Hamnet was dead.

Then, when the house was still again, and all had said good-by, Nick
doffed his clothes and laid him down to sleep in peace. Yet he often
wakened in the night, because his heart was dancing so.

In the morning, when the world began to stir outside, and the early
light came in at the window, he slipped out of bed across the floor, and
threw the casement wide. Over the river, and over the town, and over the
hills that lay blue in the north, was Stratford!

The damp, cool air from the garden below seemed a primrose whiff from
the lane behind his father's house. He could hear the cocks crowing in
Surrey, and the lowing of the kine. There was a robin singing in a bush
under the window, and there was some one in the garden with a pair of
pruning-shears. Snip-snip! snip-snip! he heard them going. The light in
the east was pink as a peach-bloom and too intense to bear.

"Good-morrow, Master Early-bird!" a merry voice called up to him, and a
nosegay dropped on the window-ledge at his side. He looked down. There
in the path among the rose-trees was Master Will Shakspere, laughing. He
had on an ancient leathern jacket and a hat with a hole in its crown;
and the skirts of the jacket were dripping with dew from the bushes.

"Good-morrow, sir," said Nick, and bowed. "It is a lovely day."

"Most beautiful indeed! How comes the sun?"

"Just up, sir; the river is afire with it now. O-oh!" Nick held his
breath, and watched the light creep down the wall, darting long bars of
rosy gold through the snowy bloom of the apple-trees, until it rested
upon Master Shakspere's face, and made a fleeting glory there.

Then Master Shakspere stretched himself a little in the sun, laughing
softly, and said, "It is the sweetest music in the world--morning,
spring, and God's dear sunshine; it starteth kindness brewing in the
heart, like sap in a withered bud. What sayest, lad? We'll fetch the
little maid to-day; and then--away for Stratford town!"

       *       *       *       *       *

But when Master Shakspere and Nicholas Attwood came to Gaston Carew's
house, the constables had taken charge, the servants were scattering
hither and thither, and Cicely Carew was gone.

The bandy-legged man, the butler said, had come on Sunday in great
haste, and packing up his goods, without a word of what had befallen his
master, had gone away, no one knew whither, and had taken Cicely with
him. Nor had they questioned what he did, for they all feared the rogue,
and judged him to have authority.

Nick caught a moment at the lintel of the door. The house was full of
voices, and the sound of trampling feet went up and down from room to
room; but all he heard was Gaston Carew's worn voice saying, "Thou'lt
keep my Cicely from harm?"




CHAPTER XXXIV


THE BANDY-LEGGED MAN

Until night fell they sought the town over for a trace of Cicely; but
all to no avail. The second day likewise.

The third day passed, and still there were no tidings. Master
Shakspere's face grew very grave, and Nick's heart sickened till he
quite forgot that he was going home.

But on the morning of the fourth day, which chanced to be the 1st of
May, as he was standing in the door of a printer's stall in St. Paul's
Churchyard, watching the gaily dressed holiday crowds go up and down,
while Robin Dexter's apprentices bound white-thorn boughs about the
brazen serpent overhead, he spied the bandy-legged man among the rout
that passed the north gate by St. Martin's le Grand.

He had a yellow ribbon in his ear, and wore a bright plum-colored cloak,
at sight of which Nick cried aloud, for it was the very cloak which
Master Gaston Carew wore when he first met him in the Warwick road. The
rogue was making for the way which ran from Cheapside to the river, and
was walking very fast.

"Master Shakspere! Master Shakspere!" Nick called out. But Master
Shakspere was deep in the proofs of a newly published play, and did
not hear.

The yellow ribbon fluttered in the sun--was gone behind the churchyard
wall.

"Quick, Master Shakspere! quick!" Nick cried; but the master-writer
frowned at the inky page; for the light in the printer's shop was dim,
and the proof was very bad.

The ribbon was gone down the river-way--and with it the hope of finding
Cicely. Nick shot one look into the stall. Master Shakspere, deep in his
proofs, was deaf to the world outside. Nick ran to the gate at the top
of his speed. In the crowd afar off a yellow spot went fluttering like a
butterfly along a country road. Without a single second thought, he
followed it as fast as his legs could go.

Twice he lost it in the throng. But the yellow patch bobbed up again in
the sunlight far beyond, and led him on, and on, and on, a breathless
chase, down empty lanes and alley-ways, through unfrequented courts,
among the warehouses and wharf-sheds along the river-front, into the
kennels of Billingsgate, where the only sky was a ragged slit between
the leaning roofs. His heart sank low and lower as they went, for only
thieves and runagates who dared not face the day in honest streets were
gathered in wards like these.

In a filthy purlieu under Fish-street Hill, where mackerel-heads and
herrings strewed the drains, and sour kits of whitebait stood
fermenting in the sun, the bandy-legged man turned suddenly into a dingy
court, and when Nick reached the corner of the entry-way was gone as
though the earth had swallowed him.

Nick stopped dismayed, and looked about, His forehead was wet and his
breath was gone. He had no idea where they were, but it was a dismal
hole. Six forbidding doorways led off from the unkempt court, and a
rotting stairway sagged along the wall. A crop-eared dog, that lay in
the sun beside a broken cart, sprang up with its hair all pointing to
its head, and snarled at him with a vicious grin. "Begone, thou cur!" he
cried, and let drive with a stone. The dog ran under the cart, and
crouched there barking at him.

Through an open door beyond there came a sound of voices as of people in
some further thoroughfare. Perchance the bandy-legged man had passed
that way? He ran across the court, and up the steps; but came back
faster than he went, for the passageway there was blind and black, a
place unspeakable for dirt, and filled with people past description. A
woman peered out after him with red eyes blinking in the sun. "Ods
bobs!" she croaked, "a pretty thing! Come hither, knave; I want the
buckle off thy cloak."

Nick, shuddering, started for the street. But just as he reached the
entry-port a door in the courtyard opened, and the bandy-legged man came
out with a bag upon his back, leading Cicely by the hand.

Seeing Nick, he gave a cry, believing himself pursued, and made for the
open door again; but almost instantly perceiving the boy to be alone,
slammed shut the door and followed him instead, dragging Cicely over the
stones, and shouting hoarsely, "Stop there! stop!"

Nick's heart came up in his very throat. His legs went water-weak. He
ran for the open thoroughfare without once looking back. Yet while he
ran he heard Cicely cry out suddenly in pain, "Oh, Gregory, Gregory,
thou art hurting me so!" and at the sound the voice of Gaston Carew rang
like a bugle in his ears: "Thou'lt keep my Cicely from harm?" He stopped
as short as if he had butted his head against a wall, whirled on his
heel, stood fast, though he was much afraid; and standing there, his
head thrown back and his fists tight clenched, as if some one had struck
him in the face, he waited until they came to where he was. "Thou
hulking, cowardly rogue!" said he to the bandy-legged man.

But the bandy-legged man caught him fast by the arm, and hurried on into
the street, scanning it swiftly up and down. "Two birds with one stone,
by hen!" he chuckled, when he saw that the coast was clear. "They'll
fetch a pretty penny by and by."

Poor Cicely smiled through her tears at Nick. "I knew thou wouldst come
for me soon," said she. "But where is my father?"

"He's dead as a herring," snarled Gregory.

"That's a lie," said Nick; "he is na dead."

"Don't call me liar, knave--by hen, I'll put a stopper on thy voice!"

"Thou wilt na put a stopper on a jug!" cried Nick, his heart so hot for
Cicely that he quite forgot himself. "I'd sing so well without a
voice--it would butter thy bread for thee! Loose my arm, thou rogue."

"Not for a thousand golden crowns! I'm no tom-noddy, to be gulled. And,
hark 'e, be less glib with that 'rogue' of thine, or I'll baste thy back
for thee."

"Oh, don't beat Nick!" gasped Cicely.

"Do na fret for me," said Nick; "I be na feared of the cowardly rogue!"

Crack! the man struck him across the face. Nick's eyes flashed hot as a
fire-coal. He set his teeth, but he did not flinch. "Do na thou strike
me again, _thou rogue!_" said he.

As he spoke, on a sudden his heart leaped up and his fear was utterly
gone. In its place was a something fierce and strange--a bitter
gladness, a joy that stung and thrilled him like great music in the
night. A tingling ran from head to foot; the little hairs of his flesh
stood up; he trampled the stones as he hurried on. In his breast his
heart was beating like a bell; his breath came hotly, deep and slow; the
whole world widened on his gaze. Oh, what a thing is the heart of a boy!
how quickly great things are done therein! One instant, put him to the
touch--the thing is done, and he is nevermore the same. Like a keen,
cold wind that blows through a window in the night, life's courage had
breathed on Nick Attwood's heart; the _man_ that slept in the heart of
the boy awoke and was aware. The old song roared in Nick's ears:

     Sir Francis Drake sailed round the world,
       Round the world, round the world;
     John Hawkins fought the "Victory,"
       And we ha' beaten Spain!

Whither they were going he did not know. Whither they were going he did
not care. He was English: this was England still! He set his teeth and
threw back his shoulders. "I be na feared of him!" said he.

"But my father will come for us soon, won't he, Nick?" faltered Cicely.

"Eigh! just don't he wish that he might!" laughed Goole.

"Oh, ay," said she, and nodded bravely to herself; "he may be very busy
now, and so he cannot come. But presently he will come for me and fetch
me home again." She gave a joyous little skip. "To fetch me home
again--ay, surely, my father will come for me anon."

A lump came up in Nick Attwood's throat. "But what hath he done to thee,
Cicely, and where is thy pretty gown?" he asked, as they hurried on
through the crooked way; for the gown she wore was in rags.

Cicely choked down a sob. "He hath kept me locked up in a horrible
place, where an old witch came in the night and stole my clothes away.
And he says that if money doth not come for me soon he will turn me out
to starve."

"To starve? Nay, Cicely; I will na leave thee starve. I'll go with thee
wherever he taketh thee; I'll fend for thee with all my might and main,
and none shall harm thee if I can help. So cheer up--we will get away!
Thou needst na gripe me so, thou rogue; I am going wherever she goes."

"I'll see that ye do," growled the bandy-legged man. "But take the other
hand of her, thou jackanapes, and fetch a better pace than this--I'll
not be followed again."

His tone was bold, but his eyes were not; for they were faring through
the slums toward Whitechapel way, and the hungry crowd eyed Nick's silk
cloak greedily. One burly rascal with a scar across his face turned back
and snatched at it. For his own safety's sake, the bandy-legged man
struck up into a better thoroughfare, where he skulked along like a fox
overtaken by dawn, fearing to meet some dog he knew.

"Oh, Gregory, go slow!" pleaded Cicely, panting for breath, and
stumbling over the cobblestones. Goole's only answer was a scowl. Nick
trotted on sturdily, holding her hand, and butting his shoulder against
the crowd so that she might not be jostled; for the press grew thick and
thicker as they went. All London was a-Maying, and the foreigners from
Soho, too. Up in the belfries, as they passed, the bells were clanging
until the whole town rang like a smithy on the eve of war, for madcap
apprentices had the ropes, and were ringing for exercise.

Thicker and thicker grew the throng, as though the sea were sweeping
through the town. Then, at the corner of Mincing Lane, where the
cloth-workers' shops were thick, all at once there came an uproarious
din of men's voices singing together:

     "Three merry boys, and three merry boys,
        And three merry boys are we,
     As ever did sing in a hempen string
        Beneath the gallows-tree!"

And before the bandy-legged man could chance upon a doorway in which to
stand out of the rush, they were pressed against the wall flat as cakes
by a crowd of bold apprentices in holiday attire going out to a wager of
archery to be shot in Finsbury Fields.

At first all Nick could see was legs: red legs, yellow legs, blue legs,
green legs, long legs, strong legs--in truth, a very many of all sorts
of legs, all stepping out together like a hundred-bladed shears; for
these were the Saddlers of Cheapside and the Cutters of Mincing Lane,
tall, ruddy-faced fellows, all armed with clubs, which they twirled and
tossed and thwacked one another with in sport. Some wore straw hats with
steeple-crowns, and some flat caps of green and white, or red and
orange-tawny. Some had long yew bows and sheaves of arrows decked with
garlands; and they were all exceedingly daubed in the face with dripping
cherry-juice and with cheese, which they munched as they strode along.

"What, there, Tom Webster, I say," cried one, catching sight of Cicely's
face, "here is a Queen o' the May for thee!"

His broad-shouldered comrade stopped in the way, and with him all the
rest. "My faith, Jem Armstrong, 'tis the truth, for once in thy life!"
