"Was it Gunnhild who helped you thus?" I said, for I remembered now
my last words to him, that he should seek her.

"I may say that it was Gunnhild. There she and Hertha and I were
safe till the worst was over," he answered, and looked in my face.

Then I must say what was in my mind all the while, and I asked him
plainly:

"Where is Hertha now, father? Is she yet well and safe?"

"Both well and safe with Gunnhild," he said.

"Where is she--can I seek her?"

The old man looked at me meaningly for a minute, and I grew hot
under his kindly gaze.

"What remember you of Hertha, my son?" he said gently.

"All, father," I answered; "but does she remember aught?"

"She remembers--she has never forgotten," he said.

And I had forgotten for so long. I think the old priest, who was so
used to deal with men, saw what was written in my face, for he
smiled a little and said:

"Women have time to think, but a warrior of today has had none.
What think you of your meeting with Hertha?"

Then I said, being sure that Ailwin understood the puzzle that was
in my mind:

"Father, I know not what to think. We are bound--but now it is
likely that we should not know one another if we met; in truth, I
think I fear to meet her."

"Is there any other maiden?" he asked, still smiling.

"Once I thought there was--and not so long ago either," I said
honestly, "but I remembered in time. Now I will say truly that
there is not."

I had no longing for Penhurst now.

Then there came across me a strange feeling that one might hardly
call jealousy--though it was near it--and I said:

"Has she seen any other who would make her wish to forget?"

"Truly she has not," Ailwin laughed; "how should she?"

"I know not where she has been, father," I said with a lighter
heart, although but an hour ago I thought that I should have been
glad to hear that it was so.

"Ah--I forgot," Ailwin said in some little confusion as I thought,
and he was silent. But now I would say more.

"Well, then, father, both of us are heart whole, as it seems. But I
know not if she would be pleased with me as I am now."

Ailwin looked up quickly at me, and then said:

"One cannot tell. Maybe she thinks the same concerning you and your
thought of her."

Then I told the good man of that plan which the lady of Penhurst
had made when we spoke of the same doubt, and he laughed thereat,
which did not please me. So I said:

"Well, then, let me see her."

"Not yet," he said after a little thought. "This is not the first
time that I have gone over this matter. Gunnhild has spoken with me
more than once, and yesterday she gave me a message for you, and I
was but to give it if I found that you longed to see Hertha again."

"What is it, then?"

"She says that the troubles are not over yet. Cnut will be back
shortly, and then you have warriors' work to do. When that is done
there will be peace, for England or Denmark, or both, will be worn
out. It will not be long ere that is so, she says, and she is very
wise. Then come and find Hertha if you will. But now there will be
less trouble for both if you meet not."

Then I grew impatient, for I hate concealments of any kind.

"Better break the betrothal at once, then," I said, "for if I must
wait I cannot say that I may not meet with a maiden whom I shall
love."

"Then shall you let me know," said Ailwin coolly, "and it shall be
broken. Thus will be no sorrow to Hertha."

"So be it," said I. "But I think you are hard on me."

"No so, my son," said the good man, "not so. Redwald and Hertha of
today are strangers. I do not altogether hold with these early
betrothals; but what is, must be. Wait a little, and then when
peace comes, and you can dwell, one at Bures and one at Wormingford
in the old way--seeing one another and learning what shall be best
for both--all will be well. Be content. Your place and hers lie in
ruins. Why, Redwald, what home have you to give her?"

Now that word of common sense was the best that he could have
spoken, for I was waxing angry at being thus played with, as I
thought. But at that moment Olaf and Ottar came in with clang and
ring of mail and sword, and so no more was said, and soon Ailwin
rose to depart. But I followed him out, and asked him for the last
time:

"Will you not tell me where Hertha bides?"

"No, my son--not yet. Believe me it is best."

"Well, then," I answered, "I shall try to find her; but if I
cannot, you mind what I said."

"I will not forget. But I will add this--that there are many fair
maidens, and but one Hertha."

Then he turned away into the dark, and was gone with an uplifting
of his hand in parting blessing. I knew the good man loved me, and
now I was sorry that I had spoken harshly to him, yet I had a
feeling that I had been treated ill. Maybe that was foolish, but
one acts on foolish thoughts often enough.

There was a man sitting on the settle in the porch of the house as
I turned back. I had not noticed him as we came out. Now the
firelight from the half-open door fell on his face, and I saw that
it was one of those two thralls of mine.

"Ho, Brand," I said, "answer me truly. Know you where bides Dame
Gunnhild the witch?"

"No, lord. We know not where she bides but it is not far hence, for
we see her at times in the village, though not often."

"How did she escape when the Danes came?"

"She and the lady Hertha took boat--it was but three days after you
had gone. All the men had fled as she bade them, but her brother
came and helped her with the boat. They went into the mere, and
that was the last we saw of them."

Now I remembered to have heard of Gunnhild's brother, but I had
never seen him.

"Where does her brother live?" I asked.

"I know not. I have not seen him again," answered the man.

"Whence comes Dame Gunnhild into the village?" I went on, thinking
that I might learn somewhat in that way.

"Master," said Brand, "she comes at twilight, nor will she have
anyone follow her. Ill would it fare with the man who did so. I do
not know whence she comes."

Now it seemed to me that the man had more in his mind than that,
and at least that there must be some talk about the place, which is
small enough to make the doings of everyone the talk of each one
else.

"Where do men say she lives?" I asked therefore.

The man looked doubtfully at me, but he could see that I was not
angry. So he smiled foolishly, and answered:

"We say nought, lord. Danes hear everything in some way."

"Well, you can tell me safely enough."

"We think it is witchcraft of the old dame's, and that she and the
lady Hertha live with the White Lady in the mere of Wormingford."

Then I was fain to laugh, for it was witchcraft more than even
Gunnhild could compass, by which she might find refuge in the
depths of that bottomless mere where the White Lady dwells. The
place has an ill name enough among our folk, and even on a bright
summer day, when all the margin of the wide circle of water is
starred with the white lilies, I have known silence fall on those
laughing ones who plucked the flowers, so still and dark are the
waters, and so silent the thick woods that hem the mere round under
the shadow of the westward hill that hides the sunset. No man cares
to go near the mere when darkness has fallen, so much do our people
fear to see the White Lady of whom Brand spoke.

I feared her not, for she was a lady of our own race, who was
drowned there by the wild Welsh folk in some raid of theirs when we
Angles first came from the land beyond the seas and drove them out.
Ours was the clan of the Wormings--I bore the badge of the twining
snake myself today, marked on my left arm, as had all my fathers
before me--so ford and mere were named after us, and we were proud
of the long descent, as I have said. Once had my mother seen the
Lady, and that was on the day that my father was slain. Therefore
had she seen unmoved the coming of Grinkel, for she knew already
what had befallen. I had not seen the Lady, but I know that many
others of my race had done so, and ever before the coming to them
of somewhat great that was not always ill. But she never spoke to
them, but floated, white robed, over the mere, singing at times, or
silent.

Now it came into my mind that the thrall was not so far wrong, and
that there was a chance that Gunnhild might have some hiding place
among those woods about the mere, for no man willingly searches
them, and Danes fear these places more than we, being heathenish
altogether. So I asked Brand if the Danes knew about the White
Lady.

"Ay, master, they soon learned that. They call her 'Uldra', though
why I know not."

That was the name of the water spirit they believed in. So I became
all the more sure that Gunnhild was there. It would be easy for her
to feign to be the White Lady and so terrify any man who sought
her. A man is apt to shape aught he sees into what he fears he may
see.

"Has the White Lady been seen of late?" I asked therefore.

"I have heard that the Danes say that they have seen her," he
answered. "They have seen also bale fires burning on the mound
where the great queen lies."

That last was an old tale among us also, but I had never seen any
light above the great mound. Ottar had many sagas that told of the
fires that burnt, unearthly, above buried heroes, and the Danes
would watch for them, and so, as I have said, would certainly see
them, or deem that they did so. Yet I suppose that these strange
fires may have burnt on the tombs of heathen men, else would not
the tales have been told thereof so certainly. But Christian
warriors rest in peace, and about their last bed is no unquiet. Nor
may Christian folk be frighted by the bale fires of the long-ago
heathen's mounds. For their sakes they have been quenched, as I
think.

So I stood and mused for a while, turning over in my mind how best
to find Gunnhild at the mere without leading others to her hiding
place. And at last I laughed to myself, the thing was so simple. I
had but to go into the mere woods at twilight or in the dusk, and
wander about until she heard and feared my coming. Then she would
play the White Lady's part on me to fray me away, and all was done.
She could not tell who I was, nor would she think it likely that I
would seek her there, and would easily forgive me for doing so,
when we met.

I bade Brand the thrall goodnight, and went back into the great
room of the house, where Olaf sat with Ottar resting and talking
together. There was no one else in the place, for we had no fear of
aught, and Olaf cared not to have many men about him. Some of his
men would come presently and sleep across the doorway, but the
evening was young yet.

"You seem as if you had heard somewhat pleasant," Olaf said when I
came in.

I suppose that my certainty of finding Gunnhild and Hertha pleased
me well enough to make my face bright.

Now both Olaf and Ottar knew of my wish to search for Hertha, and
who she was, for I had told them as we sailed to Maldon on the way
to my own country again, and they were eager to help me to take her
from hiding into what we thought would be greater safety. So when
the king said this, at first I thought of saying only that I had
surely found out where she was hidden. But then I would not keep
back what Ailwin had said, for Olaf might have advice for me.

Therefore I sat down and told them all the story of my talks with
the priest and the thrall, adding that I was the more sure that
Gunnhild was hard by, because Ailwin had said that it was but
yesterday she had given him the message for me.

Then Olaf said:

"Cousin, I think these two old folk are right. Better wait for
peace, as they say."

"It is not so sure that Cnut will come back," I said.

"Is it not?" said Olaf. "Why--seeing that he has left his host of
thingmen in the towns, and we had Thorkel's foster brother to fight
but the other day, and that these Danes do not yield at once and so
gain peace and hold what they have, but will rather fight than own
Ethelred--I think that none can well doubt that word has gone round
the Danes in the kingdom that he will return, and that they need
not fear to hold out till he comes."

Then the last doubt of trouble to come passed from me, for it was
plain that these thingmen looked for help presently. But Olaf was
thinking of my affairs again.

"Four years is overlong for anyone to play ghost on a whole
countryside," he said laughing. "I cannot think that Gunnhild, even
if she be a witch, can have bided in sight of the village all this
time without being found."

"No man dares go near the place," I said.

"Well, whence has she her food unless from the village? I think she
cannot be so near," he replied, and there was reason in his
question.

I was cast down at this, for I had made so sure that I had found
out the secret that was so carefully kept from me. When there is
mystery made, which is, or seems, needless, there is pleasure and a
feeling of mastery in finding it out unaided, and I was losing
that.

I will say this, however, that I was more vexed in this way than
with the thought that I should not find Hertha, for in my own mind
I began already to own that Ailwin and Gunnhild were in the right
about our not meeting yet.

Olaf saw that I was vexed now, and put forward a plan which he
thought would be pleasant to me, for he was certain that I should
not be satisfied until I had seen if I was right.

"There is no reason why we should not go to the mere and see if
Gunnhild is there," he said. "If she is, maybe it will be well for
you to speak with her. And if not--why, then we know at least that
she has a good hiding place elsewhere."

That was a plan that pleased me well, for though I had no fear of
going to that lonely place so long as I had made myself certain
that I should meet Gunnhild, now that it seemed not quite so sure
but that I should find myself alone there, the thought of the quest
was not quite so pleasant to me.

"Then we may as well go at once," Olaf said. "How like you the
thought, Ottar?"

"I like not such places, my king," the scald answered honestly.
"There are chills that come over one, and rising of the hair."

"Aye, there are," answered Olaf. "I have a fear of this White Lady
myself. Therefore am I going with Redwald, because I want to see if
there is aught to be feared of."

"I will come with you," the scald said, hardening his heart, for
his mind was full of the wild tales of the old heathen days which
he sang, and he feared more than we.

"It is but a lady after all," said Olaf, laughing at Ottar's face.

"I have a sort of fear of living ladies," the scald said, "how much
more, therefore, of their ghosts! I had rather meet Danes. For when
one sees them there comes a stiffening of back and knees and
fists--whereas--"

"Aye, Redwald and I know somewhat of what you mean," laughed Olaf,
and then Ottar laughed, and we took our cloaks and were going, but
first must seek Rani, and tell him that we were now about to leave
the village for an hour or so.

Now no man questioned Olaf as to his lonely walks, as I saw in
Normandy, and Rani said nought but:

"Take your arms, for there may be wandering Danes about."

But we were armed already, though without mail, and as we went not
far it seemed unlikely that we should need any. It was but a
half-hour's walk from the house.

Now the mere lies on the south side of the river, which runs into
it only by a narrow inlet, and this inlet is so overshadowed by the
trees of the thick woodland that when one has passed through the
opening it is lost to sight very quickly. So heavy is the growth of
timber round the mere that one can see the water from no place,
save for a glimpse as this inlet is passed in going down the river,
and many a stranger has passed by all unknowing that such a mere
could be near him. Hardly can the wind reach the wide waters to
ruffle them even when a gale blows, and so the place is more
silent, and its terror falls more heavily on a man's mind.

It was two hours after sunset when we started, but the fringe of
the woodland is but a mile and a half from the village, and we were
soon there. The night was bright enough, with a clear sky and stars
overhead, though there was no moon as yet.

As we went Olaf was very cheerful, and railed pleasantly at Ottar
for his fears, while I said little, not knowing if I wanted to find
Gunnhild or not.

