rebuked, for, while they were out in the boat rowing towards one of the
fishing-banks with several of their comrades, they discovered a living
giant-cuttlefish.

"What's that, boys?" cried the Irishman, pointing to the object which
was floating in the water not far ahead of them.

"Seaweed," growled Blazer.

Blazer always growled.  His voice was naturally low and harsh--so was
his spirit.  Sometimes a grunt supplanted the growl, suggesting that he
was porcine in nature--as not a few men are.

But it was not seaweed.  The thing showed signs of life as the boat drew
near.

"Starboard! starboard hard!" shouted Little Stubbs, starting up.

But the warning came too late.  Next moment the boat ran with a thud
into a monster cuttlefish.  Grummidge seized a boat-hook, shouted,
"Stern all!" and hit the creature with all his might, while Stubbs made
a wild grasp at a hatchet which lay under one of the thwarts.

Instantly the horny parrot-like beak, the size of a man's fist, reared
itself from among the folds of the body and struck the boat a violent
blow, while a pair of saucer-like eyes, fully four inches in diameter,
opened and glared ferociously.  This was terrifying enough, but when, a
moment later, two tremendous arms shot out from the body near the eyes,
flung themselves around the boat and held on tight, a yell of fear
escaped from several of the men, and with good reason, for if the
innumerable suckers on those slimy arms once fairly attached themselves
to the boat there seemed to be no chance of escape from the deadly
embrace.  In that moment of danger Little Stubbs proved himself equal to
the occasion.  With the hatchet he deftly severed the two limbs as they
lay over the gunwale of the boat, and the monster, without cry or sign
of pain, fell back into the sea, and moved off, ejecting such a quantity
of inky fluid, as it went, that the water was darkened for two or three
hundred yards around.

"Well done, Little Stubbs!" cried Grummidge, as he watched the creature
disappearing.  "You've often worried our lives in time past, but this
time you've saved 'em.  Coil away the limbs, boys.  We'll measure 'em
and enter 'em in the log when we go ashore."

It may interest the reader to know that the measurements were as
follows:--

The longer and thinner arm was nineteen feet in length; about three and
a half inches in circumference; of a pale pinkish colour, and
exceedingly strong and tough.  As all the men agreed that more than ten
feet of the arm were left attached to the monster's body, the total
length must have been little short of thirty feet.  Towards the
extremity it broadened out like an oar, and then tapered to a fine
tongue-like point.  This part was covered with about two hundred
suckers, having horny-toothed edges, the largest of the suckers being
more than an inch in diameter, the smallest about the size of a pea.
The short arm was eleven feet long, and ten inches in circumference.  It
was covered on the under side throughout its entire length with a double
row of suckers.  Grummidge, who was prone to observe closely, counted
them that night with minute care, and came to the conclusion that the
creature must have possessed about eleven hundred suckers altogether.
There was also a tail to the fish--which Squill called a "divil-fish"--
shaped like a fin.  It was two feet in width.

Lest any reader should imagine that we are romancing here, we turn aside
to refer him to a volume entitled _Newfoundland, the oldest British
Colony_, written by Joseph Hatton and the Reverend M. Harvey, in which
(pages 238 to 242) he will find an account of a giant-cuttlefish,
devil-fish, or squid, very similar to that which we have now described,
and in which it is also stated that Mr Harvey, in 1873, obtained
possession of one cuttlefish arm nineteen feet long, which he measured
and photographed, and described in various newspapers and periodicals,
and, finally, sent to the Geological Museum in St. John's, where it now
lies.  The same gentleman afterwards obtained an uninjured specimen of
the fish, and it is well known that complete specimens, as well as
fragments, of the giant cephalopod now exist in several other museums.

Can any one wonder that marvellous tales of the sea were told that night
round the fires at supper-time? that Little Stubbs became eloquently
fabulous, and that Squill, drawing on his imagination, described with
graphic power a monster before whose bristling horrors the great
sea-serpent himself would hide his diminished head, and went into
particulars so minute and complex that his comrades set him down as "one
o' the biggest liars" that ever lived, until he explained that the
monster in question had only appeared to him "wance in wan of his owld
grandmother's dreams!"

In fishing, and hunting with bows and arrows made by themselves, as well
as with ingenious traps and weirs and snares of their own invention, the
crew spent their time pleasantly, and the summer passed rapidly away.
During this period the rude tents of spars and sailcloth were supplanted
by ruder huts of round logs, caulked with hay and plastered with mud.
Holes in the walls thereof did service as windows during the day, and
bits of old sails or bundles of hay stuffed into them formed shutters at
night.  Sheds were also put up to guard provisions and stores from the
weather, and stages were erected on which to dry the cod-fish after
being split and cleaned; so that our shipwrecked crew, in their new
home, which they named Wagtail Bay, had thus unwittingly begun that
great industry for which Newfoundland has since become celebrated all
the world over.

It is not to be supposed that among such men in such circumstances
everything went harmoniously.  At first, indeed, what with having plenty
to do in fishing, hunting, building, splitting and drying fish,
etcetera, all day, and being pretty well tired out at nights, the peace
was kept pretty easily; all the more that Big Swinton had been quelled
and apparently quite subdued.  But as the stores became full of food and
the days shortened, while the nights proportionately lengthened, time
began to hang heavy on their hands, and gradually the camp became
resolved into the two classes which are to be found everywhere--the
energetically industrious and the lazily idle.  Perhaps we should say
that those two extreme phases of human nature began to show themselves,
for between them there existed all shades and degrees, so that it was
difficult to tell, in some cases, to which class the men belonged.

The proverbial mischief, of course, was soon found, for the latter class
to do, and Grummidge began to discover that the ruling of his subjects,
which sat lightly enough on his shoulders during the summer, became a
matter of some trouble and anxiety in autumn.  He also found, somewhat
to his surprise, that legislation was by no means the easy--we might say
free-and-easy--business which he had supposed it to be.  In short, the
camp presented the interesting spectacle of a human society undergoing
the process of mushroom growth from a condition of chaotic
irresponsibility to that of civilised order.

The chaotic condition had been growing worse and worse for some time
before Grummidge was forced to take action, for Grummidge was a man of
long-suffering patience.  One night, however, he lost all patience, and,
like most patient people when forced out of their natural groove, he
exploded with surprising violence and vigour.

It happened thus:--

The crew had built for themselves a hut of specially large dimensions,
in which they nightly assembled all together round the fires, of which
there were two--one at either end.  Some of the men told stories, some
sang songs, others played at draughts of amateur construction, and a
good many played the easy but essential part of audience.

The noise, of course, was tremendous, but they were used to that, and
minded it not.  When, however, two of the men began to quarrel over
their game, with so much anger as to interrupt all the others, and draw
general attention to themselves, the thing became unbearable, and when
one called the other "a liar," and the other shouted with an oath,
"You're another," the matter reached a climax.

"Come, come, Dick Swan and Bob Crow," cried Grummidge, in a stern voice;
"you stop that.  Two liars are too much in this here ship.  One is one
too many.  If you can't keep civil tongues in your heads, we'll pitch
you overboard."

"You mind your own business," gruffly replied Dick Swan, who was an
irascible man and the aggressor.

"That's just what I'll do," returned Grummidge, striding up to Swan,
seizing him by the collar, and hurling him to the other end of the room,
where he lay still, under the impression, apparently, that he had had
enough.  "My business," said Grummidge, "is to keep order, and I mean to
attend to it.  Isn't that so, boys?"

"No--yes--no," replied several voices.

"Who said `No'?" demanded Grummidge.

Every one expected to see Big Swinton step forward, but he did not.  His
revenge was not to be gratified by mere insubordination.  The man who
did at last step forward was an insignificant fellow, who had been
nicknamed Spitfire, and whose chief characteristics were self-will and
ill-nature.  He did not lack courage, however, for he boldly faced the
angry ruler and defied him.  Every one expected to see Spitfire follow
Dick Swan, and in similar fashion, but they were mistaken.  They did not
yet understand Grummidge.

"Well, Spitfire, what's your objection to my keeping order?" he said, in
a voice so gentle that the other took heart.

"My objection," he said, "is that when you was appinted capting there
was no vote taken.  You was stuck up by your own friends, an' that ain't
fair, an' I, for one, refuse to knuckle under to 'ee.  You may knock me
down if you like, for I ain't your match by a long way, but you'll not
prove wrong to be right by doin' that."

"Well spoken, Master Spitfire!" exclaimed a voice from the midst of the
crowd that encircled the speakers.

"Well spoken, indeed," echoed Grummidge, "and I thank _you_, Master
Spitfire, for bringin' this here matter to a head.  Now, lads," he
added, turning to the crowd, "you have bin wrong an' informal, so to
speak, in your proceedin's when you appinted me governor o' this here
colony.  There's a right and a wrong in everything, an' I do believe,
from the bottom of my soul, that it's--that it's--that--well, I ain't
much of a dab at preaching as _you_ know, but what I would say is this--
it's right to do right, an' it ain't right for to do wrong, so we'll
krect this little mistake at once, for I have no wish to rule, bless
you!  Now then, all what's in favour o' my bein' gov'nor, walk to the
end o' the room on my right hand, an' all who wants somebody else to
be--Spitfire, for instance--walk over to where Dick Swan is a-sittin'
enjo'in' of hisself."

Immediately three-fourths of the crew stepped with alacrity to the
right.  The remainder went rather slowly to the left.  "The Grummidges
has won!" cried Squill, amid hearty laughter.

The ruler himself made no remark whatever, but, seating himself in a
corner of the hut, resumed the game which had been interrupted, quite
assured that the game of insubordination was finally finished.

The day following that on which the reign of King Grummidge was
established, a new member of considerable interest was added to the
colony.  Blaze, Stubbs, and Squill chanced to be out that day along the
shore.  Squill, being in a meditative mood, had fallen behind his
comrades.  They had travelled further than usual, when the attention of
the two in front was attracted by what seemed to them the melancholy
howling of a wolf.  Getting their bows ready, they advanced with
caution, and soon came upon a sad sight--the dead body of a native,
beside which crouched a large black dog.  At first they thought the dog
had killed the man, and were about to shoot it, when Stubbs exclaimed,
"Hold on! don't you see he must have tumbled over the cliff?"

A brief examination satisfied them that the Indian, in passing along the
top of the cliffs, had fallen over, and that the accident must have been
recent, for the body was still fresh.  The dog, which appeared to be
starving, showed all its formidable teeth when they attempted to go near
its dead master.  Presently Squill came up.

"Ah, boys," he said, "ye don't onderstand the natur' o' the baste--see
here."

Taking a piece of dried fish from his pocket, he went boldly forward and
presented it.  The dog snapped it greedily and gulped it down.  Squill
gave him another and another piece; as the fourth offering was presented
he patted the animal quietly on its head.  The victory was gained.  The
dog suffered them to bury its master, but for four days it refused to
leave his grave.  During that time Squill fed it regularly.  Then he
coaxed it to follow him, and at last it became, under the name of
Blackboy, a general favourite, and a loving member of the community.



CHAPTER SEVENTEEN.

HAS REFERENCE TO FOOD AND A GREAT FIGHT.

There is always a certain amount of pleasure to be derived from the
tracing of any subject of interest back to its origin.  We have already
seen how--like a noble river, which has its fountain-head in some
mountain lakelet that would scarcely serve as a washing-basin for a
Cyclops--the grand cod-fishing industry, which has enriched the world,
and found employment for thousands of men for centuries, had its
commencement in the crew of the _Water Wagtail_! we shall now show that
another great industry, namely, the Newfoundland seal-fishery, had its
origin in the same insignificant source.

King Grummidge was walking one morning along the shore of Wagtail Bay,
with hands in pockets, hat on back of head, and that easy roll of gait
so characteristic of nautical men and royalty.  He was evidently
troubled in mind, for a frown rested on his brow, and his lips were
compressed.  It might have been supposed that the cares of state were
beginning to tell upon him, but such was not the case: food was the
cause of his trouble.

"Fish, fish, fish," he growled, to Little Stubbs, who was his companion
in the walk.  "I'm sick tired o' fish.  It's my opinion that if we go on
eatin' fish like we've bin doin' since we was cast away here, we will
turn into fish, or mermaids, if not somethin' worse.  What are ye
laughin' at?"

"At the notion o' you turnin' into a _maid_ of any sort," replied
Stubbs.

"That's got nothin' to do wi' the argiment," returned Grummidge sternly,
for his anxieties were too serious to permit of his indulging in levity
at the time.  "What we've got to do is to find meat, for them auks are
nigh as dry as the fish.  _Meat_, lad, meat, wi' plenty o' fat, that's
the question o' the hour."

"Yes, it's _our_ question, no doubt," rejoined Stubbs.

He might as well have bestowed his bad pun on a rabbit, for Grummidge
was essentially dense and sober-minded.

"But we've had a few rabbits of late, an' ducks an' partridges," he
added.

"Rabbits! ducks! partridges!" repeated his companion, with contempt.
"How many of them delicacies have we had?  That's what I wants to know."

"Not many, I admit for there's none of us got much to boast of as
shots."

"Shots!" echoed Grummidge.  "You're right, Stubbs.  Of all the blind
bats and helpless boys with the bow, there's not I believe, in the whole
world such a lot as the popilation of Wagtail Bay.  Why, there's not two
of ye who could hit the big shed at sixty paces, an' all the fresh meat
as you've brought in yet has bin the result o' chance.  Now look 'ee
here, Stubbs, a notion has entered my head, an' when a notion does that,
I usually grab that notion an' hold 'im a fast prisoner until I've made
somethin' useful an' ship-shape of 'im.  If it works properly we'll soon
have somethin' better to eat than fish, an' more substantial than
rabbits, ducks, partridges, or auks."

We may remark in passing that the animals which those wrecked sailors
called rabbits were in reality hares.  Moreover, the men took an easy,
perhaps unscientific, method of classifying feathered game.  Nearly
everything with wings that dwelt chiefly on lake, river, or sea they
called ducks, and all the feathered creatures of the forest they styled
partridges.  From this simple classification, however, were excepted
swans, geese, eagles, and hawks.

"Well, Grummidge, what may be your notion?" asked Stubbs.

"My notion is--seals!  For all our hard rowin' and wastin' of arrows
we've failed to catch or kill a single seal, though there's such swarms
of 'em all about.  Now this is a great misfortin', for it's well known
that seals make first-rate beef--leastwise to them as ain't partic'lar--
so we'll set about catchin' of 'em at once."

"But how?" asked Stubbs, becoming interested under the influence of his
comrade's earnest enthusiasm.

"This is how.  Look there, d'ye see that small island lyin' close to the
shore with several seals' heads appearin' in the channel between?"

"Yes--what then?"

"Well, then, what I mean to do is to have nets made with big meshes, an'
set 'em between that island an' the shore, and see what comes of it."

"But where's the twine to come from?" objected Stubbs.

"Twine!  Ain't there no end o' cordage swashin' about the _Water
Wagtail_ ever since she went ashore?  An' haven't we got fingers?  Can't
we undo the strands an' make small cord?  Surely some of ye have picked
oakum enough to understand what that means!"

Stubbs was convinced.  Moreover, the rest of the men were so convinced
that the plan promised well, when it was explained to them, that they
set to work with alacrity, and, in a brief space of time, made a strong
net several fathoms in length, and with meshes large enough to permit of
a seal's head squeezing through.

No sooner was it ready than the whole community went down to see it set.
Then, with difficulty, they were prevented from waiting on the shore to
watch the result.  In the afternoon, when Grummidge gave permission,
they ran down again with all the eagerness of children, and were
