selfishness. However, the sun sometimes visits me. I will, besides, try
to convert everything into an artificial help, even the heat and the
ashes of my pipe, and lastly, we, or rather you, will keep in reserve
the third sucker as our last resource, in case our first two experiments
should prove a failure. In this manner, my dear Rosa, it is impossible
that we should not succeed in gaining the hundred thousand guilders
for your marriage portion; and how dearly shall we enjoy that supreme
happiness of seeing our work brought to a successful issue!"

"I know it all now," said Rosa. "I will bring you the soil to-morrow,
and you will choose it for your bulb and for mine. As to that in which
yours is to grow, I shall have several journeys to convey it to you, as
I cannot bring much at a time."

"There is no hurry for it, dear Rosa; our tulips need not be put into
the ground for a month at least. So you see we have plenty of time
before us. Only I hope that, in planting your bulb, you will strictly
follow all my instructions."

"I promise you I will."

"And when you have once planted it, you will communicate to me all
the circumstances which may interest our nursling; such as change of
weather, footprints on the walks, or footprints in the borders. You will
listen at night whether our garden is not resorted to by cats. A couple
of those untoward animals laid waste two of my borders at Dort."

"I will listen."

"On moonlight nights have you ever looked at your garden, my dear
child?"

"The window of my sleeping-room overlooks it."

"Well, on moonlight nights you will observe whether any rats come out
from the holes in the wall. The rats are most mischievous by their
gnawing everything; and I have heard unfortunate tulip-growers complain
most bitterly of Noah for having put a couple of rats in the ark."

"I will observe, and if there are cats or rats----"

"You will apprise me of it,--that's right. And, moreover," Van Baerle,
having become mistrustful in his captivity, continued, "there is an
animal much more to be feared than even the cat or the rat."

"What animal?"

"Man. You comprehend, my dear Rosa, a man may steal a guilder, and risk
the prison for such a trifle, and, consequently, it is much more likely
that some one might steal a hundred thousand guilders."

"No one ever enters the garden but myself."

"Thank you, thank you, my dear Rosa. All the joy of my life has still to
come from you."

And as the lips of Van Baerle approached the grating with the same ardor
as the day before, and as, moreover, the hour for retiring had struck,
Rosa drew back her head, and stretched out her hand.

In this pretty little hand, of which the coquettish damsel was
particularly proud, was the bulb.

Cornelius kissed most tenderly the tips of her fingers. Did he do so
because the hand kept one of the bulbs of the great black tulip, or
because this hand was Rosa's? We shall leave this point to the decision
of wiser heads than ours.

Rosa withdrew with the other two suckers, pressing them to her heart.

Did she press them to her heart because they were the bulbs of the great
black tulip, or because she had them from Cornelius?

This point, we believe, might be more readily decided than the other.

However that may have been, from that moment life became sweet, and
again full of interest to the prisoner.

Rosa, as we have seen, had returned to him one of the suckers.

Every evening she brought to him, handful by handful, a quantity of
soil from that part of the garden which he had found to be the best, and
which, indeed, was excellent.

A large jug, which Cornelius had skilfully broken, did service as a
flower-pot. He half filled it, and mixed the earth of the garden with
a small portion of dried river mud, a mixture which formed an excellent
soil.

Then, at the beginning of April, he planted his first sucker in that
jug.

Not a day passed on which Rosa did not come to have her chat with
Cornelius.

The tulips, concerning whose cultivation Rosa was taught all the
mysteries of the art, formed the principal topic of the conversation;
but, interesting as the subject was, people cannot always talk about
tulips.

They therefore began to chat also about other things, and the
tulip-fancier found out to his great astonishment what a vast range of
subjects a conversation may comprise.

Only Rosa had made it a habit to keep her pretty face invariably six
inches distant from the grating, having perhaps become distrustful of
herself.

There was one thing especially which gave Cornelius almost as much
anxiety as his bulbs--a subject to which he always returned--the
dependence of Rosa on her father.

Indeed, Van Baerle's happiness depended on the whim of this man. He
might one day find Loewestein dull, or the air of the place unhealthy,
or the gin bad, and leave the fortress, and take his daughter with him,
when Cornelius and Rosa would again be separated.

"Of what use would the carrier pigeons then be?" said Cornelius to Rosa,
"as you, my dear girl, would not be able to read what I should write to
you, nor to write to me your thoughts in return."

"Well," answered Rosa, who in her heart was as much afraid of a
separation as Cornelius himself, "we have one hour every evening, let us
make good use of it."

"I don't think we make such a bad use of it as it is."

"Let us employ it even better," said Rosa, smiling. "Teach me to read
and write. I shall make the best of your lessons, believe me; and, in
this way, we shall never be separated any more, except by our own will."

"Oh, then, we have an eternity before us," said Cornelius.

Rosa smiled, and quietly shrugged her shoulders.

"Will you remain for ever in prison?" she said, "and after having
granted you your life, will not his Highness also grant you your
liberty? And will you not then recover your fortune, and be a rich man,
and then, when you are driving in your own coach, riding your own horse,
will you still look at poor Rosa, the daughter of a jailer, scarcely
better than a hangman?"

Cornelius tried to contradict her, and certainly he would have done so
with all his heart, and with all the sincerity of a soul full of love.

She, however, smilingly interrupted him, saying, "How is your tulip
going on?"

To speak to Cornelius of his tulip was an expedient resorted to by her
to make him forget everything, even Rosa herself.

"Very well, indeed," he said, "the coat is growing black, the sprouting
has commenced, the veins of the bulb are swelling, in eight days hence,
and perhaps sooner, we may distinguish the first buds of the leaves
protruding. And yours Rosa?"

"Oh, I have done things on a large scale, and according to your
directions."

"Now, let me hear, Rosa, what you have done," said Cornelius, with as
tender an anxiety as he had lately shown to herself.

"Well," she said, smiling, for in her own heart she could not help
studying this double love of the prisoner for herself and for the black
tulip, "I have done things on a large scale; I have prepared a bed as
you described it to me, on a clear spot, far from trees and walls, in a
soil slightly mixed with sand, rather moist than dry without a fragment
of stone or pebble."

"Well done, Rosa, well done."

"I am now only waiting for your further orders to put in the bulb, you
know that I must be behindhand with you, as I have in my favour all the
chances of good air, of the sun, and abundance of moisture."

"All true, all true," exclaimed Cornelius, clapping his hands with
joy, "you are a good pupil, Rosa, and you are sure to gain your hundred
thousand guilders."

"Don't forget," said Rosa, smiling, "that your pupil, as you call me,
has still other things to learn besides the cultivation of tulips."

"Yes, yes, and I am as anxious as you are, Rosa, that you should learn
to read."

"When shall we begin?"

"At once."

"No, to-morrow."

"Why to-morrow?"

"Because to-day our hour is expired, and I must leave you."

"Already? But what shall we read?"

"Oh," said Rosa, "I have a book,--a book which I hope will bring us
luck."

"To-morrow, then."

"Yes, to-morrow."

On the following evening Rosa returned with the Bible of Cornelius de
Witt.




Chapter 17. The First Bulb


On the following evening, as we have said, Rosa returned with the Bible
of Cornelius de Witt.

Then began between the master and the pupil one of those charming scenes
which are the delight of the novelist who has to describe them.

The grated window, the only opening through which the two lovers were
able to communicate, was too high for conveniently reading a book,
although it had been quite convenient for them to read each other's
faces.

Rosa therefore had to press the open book against the grating edgewise,
holding above it in her right hand the lamp, but Cornelius hit upon the
lucky idea of fixing it to the bars, so as to afford her a little
rest. Rosa was then enabled to follow with her finger the letters
and syllables, which she was to spell for Cornelius, who with a straw
pointed out the letters to his attentive pupil through the holes of the
grating.

The light of the lamp illuminated the rich complexion of Rosa, her blue
liquid eyes, and her golden hair under her head-dress of gold brocade,
with her fingers held up, and showing in the blood, as it flowed
downwards in the veins that pale pink hue which shines before the light
owing to the living transparency of the flesh tint.

Rosa's intellect rapidly developed itself under the animating influence
of Cornelius, and when the difficulties seemed too arduous, the sympathy
of two loving hearts seemed to smooth them away.

And Rosa, after having returned to her room, repeated in her solitude
the reading lessons, and at the same time recalled all the delight which
she had felt whilst receiving them.

One evening she came half an hour later than usual. This was too
extraordinary an instance not to call forth at once Cornelius's
inquiries after its cause.

"Oh! do not be angry with me," she said, "it is not my fault. My father
has renewed an acquaintance with an old crony who used to visit him at
the Hague, and to ask him to let him see the prison. He is a good sort
of fellow, fond of his bottle, tells funny stories, and moreover is very
free with his money, so as always to be ready to stand a treat."

"You don't know anything further of him?" asked Cornelius, surprised.

"No," she answered; "it's only for about a fortnight that my father has
taken such a fancy to this friend who is so assiduous in visiting him."

"Ah, so," said Cornelius, shaking his head uneasily as every new
incident seemed to him to forebode some catastrophe; "very likely some
spy, one of those who are sent into jails to watch both prisoners and
their keepers."

"I don't believe that," said Rosa, smiling; "if that worthy person is
spying after any one, it is certainly not after my father."

"After whom, then?"

"Me, for instance."

"You?"

"Why not?" said Rosa, smiling.

"Ah, that's true," Cornelius observed, with a sigh. "You will not always
have suitors in vain; this man may become your husband."

"I don't say anything to the contrary."

"What cause have you to entertain such a happy prospect?"

"Rather say, this fear, Mynheer Cornelius."

"Thank you, Rosa, you are right; well, I will say then, this fear?"

"I have only this reason----"

"Tell me, I am anxious to hear."

"This man came several times before to the Buytenhof, at the Hague. I
remember now, it was just about the time when you were confined there.
When I left, he left too; when I came here, he came after me. At the
Hague his pretext was that he wanted to see you."

"See me?"

"Yes, it must have undoubtedly been only a pretext for now, when he
could plead the same reason, as you are my father's prisoner again, he
does not care any longer for you; quite the contrary,--I heard him say
to my father only yesterday that he did not know you."

"Go on, Rosa, pray do, that I may guess who that man is, and what he
wants."

"Are you quite sure, Mynheer Cornelius, that none of your friends can
interest himself for you?"

"I have no friends, Rosa; I have only my old nurse, whom you know,
and who knows you. Alas, poor Sue! she would come herself, and use no
roundabout ways. She would at once say to your father, or to you, 'My
good sir, or my good miss, my child is here; see how grieved I am; let
me see him only for one hour, and I'll pray for you as long as I live.'
No, no," continued Cornelius; "with the exception of my poor old Sue, I
have no friends in this world."

"Then I come back to what I thought before; and the more so as last
evening at sunset, whilst I was arranging the border where I am to
plant your bulb, I saw a shadow gliding between the alder trees and the
aspens. I did not appear to see him, but it was this man. He concealed
himself and saw me digging the ground, and certainly it was me whom he
followed, and me whom he was spying after. I could not move my rake, or
touch one atom of soil, without his noticing it."

"Oh, yes, yes, he is in love with you," said Cornelius. "Is he young? Is
he handsome?"

Saying this he looked anxiously at Rosa, eagerly waiting for her answer.

"Young? handsome?" cried Rosa, bursting into a laugh. "He is hideous to
look at; crooked, nearly fifty years of age, and never dares to look me
in the face, or to speak, except in an undertone."

"And his name?"

"Jacob Gisels."

"I don't know him."

"Then you see that, at all events, he does not come after you."

"At any rate, if he loves you, Rosa, which is very likely, as to see you
is to love you, at least you don't love him."

"To be sure I don't."

"Then you wish me to keep my mind easy?"
