We have made them our study. Art, with us, has never attempted to
supercede nature."

The sense of smell was also exceedingly sensitive with the Mizora
people. They detected odors so refined that I was not aware of them. I
have often seen a chemist take a bottle of perfumery and name its
ingredients from the sense of smell only. No one appeared surprised at
the bluntness of my senses. When I spoke of this Wauna tried to explain
it.

"We are a more delicately organized race of beings than you are. Our
intellects, and even sense that we possess, is of a higher and finer
development. We have some senses that you do not possess, and are unable
to comprehend their exquisite delicacy. One of them I shall endeavor to
explain to you by describing it as impression. We possess it in a highly
refined state, both mentally and physically. Our sensitiveness to
changes of temperature, I have noticed, is more marked than yours. It is
acute with all of my people. For this reason, although we are free from
disease, our bodies could not sustain, as readily as yours could, a
sudden and severe shock to their normal temperature, such as a marked
change in the atmosphere would occasion. We are, therefore, extremely
careful to be always appropriately clothed. That is a physical
impression. It is possessed by you also, but more obtusely.

"Our sensitiveness to mental pleasure and pain you would pronounce
morbid on account of its intensity. The happiness we enjoy in the
society of those who are congenial, or near and dear to us through
family ties, is inconceivable to you. The touch of my mother's hand
carries a thrill of rapture with it.

"We feel, intuitively, the happiness or disappointment of those we are
with. Our own hopes impress us with their fulfillment or frustration,
before we know what will actually occur. This feeling is entirely
mental, but it is evidence of a highly refined mentality. We could not
be happy unless surrounded, as we are, by cultivated and elegant
pleasures. They are real necessities to us.

"Our appreciation of music, I notice, has a more exquisite delicacy than
yours. You desire music, but it is the simpler operas that delight you
most. Those fine and delicate harmonies that we so intensely enjoy, you
appear incapable of appreciating."

I have previously spoken of their elegance in dress, and their fondness
for luxury and magnificence. On occasions of great ceremony their
dresses were furnished with very long trains. The only prominent
difference that I saw in their state dresses, and the rare and costly
ones I had seen in my own and other countries, was in the waist. As the
women of Mizora admired a large waist, their dresses were generally
loose and flowing. Ingenuity, however, had fashioned them into graceful
and becoming outlines. On occasions of great state and publicity,
comfortably fitting girdles confined the dress at the waist.

I attended the Inaugural of a Professor of Natural History in the
National College. The one who had succeeded to this honor was widely
celebrated for her erudition. It was known that the ceremony would be a
grand affair, and thousands attended it.

I there witnessed another of these marvelous achievements in science
that were constantly surprising me in Mizora. The inauguration took
place in a large hall, the largest I had ever seen. It would accommodate
two hundred thousand people, and was filled to repletion. I was seated
far back in the audience, and being a little short-sighted anyway, I
expected to be disappointed both in seeing and hearing the ceremonies.
What was my astonishment then, when they began, to discover that I could
see distinctly every object upon the stage, and hear with perfect
accuracy every word that was uttered.

Upon expressing myself to Wauna as being greatly pleased that my
eyesight and hearing had improved so wonderfully and unexpectedly, she
laughed merrily, and asked me if I had noticed a curious looking band of
polished steel that curved outward from the proscenium, and encircled
its entire front? I had noticed it, but supposed it to be connected with
some different arrangement they might have made concerning the
footlights. Wauna informed me that I owed my improved hearing to that.

"But my eyesight," I asked, "how do you account for its unusual
penetrativeness?"

"Have you ever noticed some seasons of the year display a noticeably
marked transparency of the atmosphere that revealed objects at great
distances with unusual clearness? Well, we possess a knowledge of air
that enables us to qualify it with that peculiar magnifying condition.
On occasions like this we make use of it. This hall was built after the
discovery, and was specially prepared for its use. It is seldom employed
in smaller halls."

Just then a little flutter of interest upon the stage attracted my
attention, and I saw the candidate for the professorship entering,
accompanied by the Faculty of the National College.

She wore a sea-green velvet robe with a voluminous train. The bottom of
the dress was adorned with a wreath or band of water lilies, embroidered
in seed pearls. A white lace overdress of filmiest texture fell over the
velvet, almost touching the wreath of lilies, and looked as though it
was made of sea foam. A girdle of large pink pearls confined the robe at
the waist. Natural flowers were on her bosom and in her hair.

The stage was superbly decorated with flowers and shells. A large chair,
constructed of beautiful shells and cushioned with green velvet, rested
upon a dais of coral. It was the chair of honor. Behind it was a curtain
of sea-moss. I afterward learned that the moss was attached to a film of
glass too delicate to detect without handling.

In the midst of these charming surroundings stood the applicant for
honor. Her deep blue eyes glowed with the joy of triumph. On the
delicate cheek and lip burned the carmine hue of perfect health. The
golden hair even seemed to have caught a brighter lustre in its coiled
masses. The uplifted hand and arm no marble goddess could have matched,
for this had the color and charm of life. As she stood revealed by the
strong light that fell around her, every feature ennobled with the glory
of intellect, she appeared to me a creature of unearthly loveliness, as
something divine.

I spoke to Wauna of the rare beauty and elegance of her dress.

"She looks like a fabled Naiad just risen from the deep," was my
criticism on her.

"Her dress," answered Wauna, "is intended to be emblematical of Nature.
The sea-green robe, the water lilies of pearls, the foamy lace are all
from Nature's Cradle of Life."

"How poetical!" I exclaimed.

But then Mizora is full of that charming skill that blends into perfect
harmony the beautiful and useful in life.




CHAPTER XIII.


On my return to college, after the close of vacation, I devoted myself
exclusively to history. It began with their first President; and from
the evidence of history itself, I knew that the Nation was enjoying a
high state of culture when its history began.

No record of a more primitive race was to be found in all the Library,
assiduously as I searched for it. I read with absorbing interest their
progress toward perfect enlightenment, their laborious searchings into
science that had resulted in such marvelous achievements. But earnestly
as I sought for it, and anxiously as I longed for it, I found and heard
no mention of a race of men. From the most intimate intercourse with the
people of Mizora, I could discover no attempt at concealment in
anything, yet the inquiry _would_ crowd itself upon me. "Where are the
men?" And as constantly would I be forced to the conclusion that Mizora
was either a land of mystery beyond the scope of the wildest and
weirdest fancy, or else they were utterly oblivious of such a race. And
the last conclusion was most improbable of all.

Man, in my country, was a necessity of government, law, and protection.
His importance, (as I viewed it from inherited ideas) was incalculable.
It _could_ not be possible that he had no existence in a country so
eminently adapted to his desires and ability.

The expression, "domestic misery," that the Preceptress made use of one
day in conversation with me, haunted my imagination with a persistent
suspicion of mystery. It had a familiar sound to me. It intimated
knowledge of a world _I_ knew so well; where ill-nature, malice, spite,
envy, deceit, falsehood and dishonesty, made life a continual anxiety.

Locks, bolts and bars shut out the thief who coveted your jewels; but no
bolts nor bars, however ingeniously constructed or strongly made, could
keep out the thief who coveted your character. One little word from a
pretended friend might consummate the sorrow of your whole life, and be
witnessed by the perpetrator without a pang--nay, even with exultation.

There were other miseries I thought of that were common in my country.
There were those we love. Some who are woven into our lives and
affections by the kinship of blood; who grow up weak and vacillating,
and are won away, sometimes through vice, to estrangement. Our hearts
ache not the less painfully that they have ceased to be worthy of a
throb; or that they have been weak enough to become estranged, to
benefit some selfish alien.

There were other sorrows in that world that I had come from, that
brought anguish alike to the innocent and the guilty. It was the sorrow
of premature death. Diseases of all kinds made lives wretched; or tore
them asunder with death. How many hearts have ached with cankering pain
to see those who are vitally dear, wasting away slowly, but surely, with
unrelievable suffering; and to know that life but prolongs their misery,
and death relieves it only with inconsolable grief for the living.

Who has looked into a pair of youthful eyes, so lovely that imagination
could not invent for them another charm, and saw the misty film of death
gather over them, while your heart ached with regret as bitter as it was
unavailing. The soft snows of winter have fallen--a veil of purity--over
the new made graves of innocence and youth, and its wild winds have been
the saddest requiem. The dews of summer have wept with your tears, and
its zephyrs have sighed over the mouldering loveliness of youth.

I had known no skill in my world that could snatch from death its
unlawful prey of youth. But here, in this land so eminently blessed, no
one regarded death as a dreaded invader of their household.

"_We cannot die until we get old_," said Wauna, naively.

And looking upon their bounding animal spirits, their strong supple
frames, and the rich, red blood of perfect health, mantling their cheeks
with its unsurpassable bloom, one would think that disease must have
strong grasp indeed that could destroy them.

But these were not all the sorrows that my own country knew. Crimes,
with which we had no personal connection, shocked us with their horrible
details. They crept, like noxious vapors, into the moral atmosphere of
the pure and good; tainting the weak, and annoying the strong.

There were other sorrows in my country that were more deplorable still.
It was the fate of those who sought to relieve the sufferings of the
many by an enforced government reform. Misguided, imprudent and
fanatical they might be, but their aim at least was noble. The wrongs
and sufferings of the helpless and oppressed had goaded them to action
for their relief.

But, alas! The pale and haggard faces of thousands of those patriot
souls faded and wasted in torturing slowness in dungeons of rayless
gloom. Or their emaciated and rheumatic frames toiled in speechless
agony amid the horrors of Siberia's mines.

In _this_ land they would have been recognized as aspiring natures,
spreading their wings for a nobler flight, seeking a higher and grander
life. The smile of beauty would have urged them on. Hands innumerable
would have given them a cordial and encouraging grasp. But in the land
they had sought to benefit and failed, they suffered in silence and
darkness, and died forgotten or cursed.

My heart and my brain ached with memory, and the thought again occurred:
"_Could_ the Preceptress ever have known such a race of people?"

I looked at her fair, calm brow, where not a wrinkle marred the serene
expression of intellect, although I had been told that more than a
hundred years had touched with increasing wisdom its broad surface. The
smile that dwelt in her eyes, like the mystic sprite in the fountain,
had not a suspicion of sadness in them. A nature so lofty as hers, where
every feeling had a generous and noble existence and aim, could not have
known without anguish the race of people _I_ knew so well. Their sorrows
would have tinged her life with a continual sadness.

The words of Wauna had awakened a new thought. I knew that their mental
life was far above mine, and that in all the relations of life, both
business and social, they exhibited a refinement never attained by my
people. I had supposed these qualities to be an endowment of nature, and
not a development sought and labored for by themselves. But my
conversation with Wauna had given me a different impression, and the
thought of a future for my own country took possession of me.

"Could it ever emerge from its horrors, and rise through gradual but
earnest endeavor to such perfection? Could a higher civilization crowd
its sufferings out of existence and, in time, memory?"

I had never thought of my country having a claim upon me other than what
I owed to my relatives and society. But in Mizora, where the very
atmosphere seemed to feed one's brain with grander and nobler ideas of
life and humanity, my nature had drank the inspiration of good deeds and
impulses, and had given the desire to work for something beside myself
and my own kindred. I resolved that if I should ever again behold my
native country, I would seek the good of all its people along with that
of my nearest and dearest of kin. But how to do it was a matter I could
not arrange. I felt reluctant to ask either Wauna or her mother. The
guileless frankness of Wauna's nature was an impassable barrier to the
confidence of crimes and wretchedness. One glance of horror from her
dark, sweet eyes, would have chilled me into painful silence and
sorrowful regret.

The mystery that had ever surrounded these lovely and noble blonde women
had driven me into an unnatural reserve in regard to my own people and
country. I had always perceived the utter absence of my allusion to the
masculine gender, and conceiving that it must be occasioned by some more
than ordinary circumstances, I refrained from intruding my curiosity.

That the singular absence of men was connected with nothing criminal or
ignoble on their part I felt certain; but that it was associated with
something weird and mysterious I had now become convinced. My efforts to
discover their whereabouts had been earnest and untiring. I had visited
a number of their large cities, and had enjoyed the hospitality of many
private homes. I had examined every nook and corner of private and
public buildings, (for in Mizora nothing ever has locks) and in no place
had I ever discovered a trace or suggestion of man.

Women and girls were everywhere. Their fair faces and golden heads
greeted me in every town and city. Sometimes a pair of unusually dark
blue eyes, like the color of a velvet-leaved pansy, looked out from an
exquisitely tinted face framed in flossy golden hair, startling me with
its unnatural loveliness, and then I would wonder anew:

"Why is such a paradise for man so entirely devoid of him?"

I even endeavored to discover from the conversation of young girls some
allusion to the male sex. But listen as attentively and discreetly as I
could, not one allusion did I hear made to the mysteriously absent
beings. I was astonished that young girls, with cheeks like the downy
bloom of a ripe peach, should chatter and laugh merrily over every
conversational topic but that of the lords of society. The older and the
wiser among women might acquire a depreciating idea of their worth, but
innocent and inexperienced girlhood was apt to surround that name with a
halo of romance and fancied nobility that the reality did not always
possess. What, then, was my amazement to find _them_ indifferent and
wholly neglectful of that (to me) very important class of beings.

Conjecture at last exhausted itself, and curiosity became indifferent.
Mizora, as a nation, or an individual representative, was incapable of
dishonor. Whatever their secret I should make no farther effort to
discover it. Their hospitality had been generous and unreserved. Their
influence upon my character--morally--had been an incalculable benefit.
I had enjoyed being among them. The rhythm of happiness that swept like
a strain of sweet music through all their daily life, touched a chord in
my own nature that responded.

