
"What did you say, Malone?"

"Nothing," Malone said hastily. "Nothing at all." After a second another
query occurred to him. "You mean to tell me that only bars were robbed?
Nothing else?"

"Oh, no," Fernack said. "Bars are only part of it. Malone, why are you
asking me to tell you this?"

"Because I want to know," Malone said patiently.

"I still think--" Fernack began, and then said: "Never mind. But it
hasn't been only bars. Supermarkets. Homes. Cleaning and tailoring
shops. Jewelers. Malone, you name it, and it's been hit."

Malone tried valiantly to resist temptation, but he was not at his best,
and he lost. "All right," he said. "I will name it. Here's a list of
places that haven't even been touched by the rising crime wave: Banks,
for one."

"Malone!"

"Safes that have been locked, for another," Malone went on. "Homes with
wall safes--though that's not quite accurate. The homes may have been
robbed, but the safes won't have been touched."

"Malone, how much do you know?" Fernack said.

"I'll make a general rule for you," Malone said. "Any place that fits
the following description is safe: It's got a secure lock on it, and
it's too small for a human being to get into."

Fernack opened his mouth, shut it and stared downward, obviously
scanning some papers lying on the desk in front of him. Malone waited
patiently for the explosion--but it never came.

Instead, Fernack said: "You know, Malone, you remind me of an old friend
of mine."

"Really?" Malone said pleasantly.

"You certainly do," Fernack said. "There's just one small difference.
You're an FBI man, and he's a crook. If that's a difference."

"It is," Malone said. "And on behalf of the FBI, I resent the
allegation. And, as a matter of fact, defy the allegator. But that's
neither here nor there," he continued. "If that's the difference, what
are the similarities?"

Fernack drew in a deep, hissing breath, and when he spoke his voice was
as calm and quiet as a coiled cobra. "The both of you come up with the
damnedest answers to things. Things I never knew about or even cared
about before. Things I wish I'd never heard of. Things that don't have
any explanations. And--" He stopped, his face dark in the screen. Malone
wondered what color it was going to turn, and decided on purple as a
good choice.

"Well?" Malone said at last.

"And you're always so right it makes me sick," Fernack finished flatly.
He rubbed a hand through his hair and stared into the screen at Malone.
"How did you know all this stuff?" he said.

Malone waited one full second, while Fernack got darker and darker on
the screen. When he judged that the color was right, he said quietly:
"I'm prescient. And thanks a lot, John Henry; just send the reports to
me personally, at Sixty-ninth Street. By messenger. So long."

He cut the circuit just as Fernack started: "Now, Malone--"

       *       *       *       *       *

With a satisfied, somewhat sheepish smile, Malone dialed another number.
This time a desk sergeant told him politely that Lynch wasn't at the
precinct, and wouldn't arrive until noon.

Malone had Lynch's home number. He dialed it.

It was a long wait before the lieutenant answered, and he didn't look
much like a police officer when his face finally showed up on the
screen. His hair was uncombed and he was unshaven. His eyes were
slightly bleary, but he was definitely awake.

"Oh," Malone said. "Hello."

"Hi, there," Lynch said with enormous cheerfulness. "Old buddy-boy. Old
pal. Old friend."

"What's wrong?" Malone said.

"Wrong?" Lynch said. "Nothing. Nothing. Nothing at all. I just wanted to
thank you for not waking me up last night. I only waited for your call
until midnight. Then I decided I just wasn't very important to you. You
obviously had much bigger things on your mind."

"As a matter of fact," Malone said, eying Lynch's figure, dressed in a
pair of trousers and a T-shirt, speculatively, "you're right."

"That's what I thought," Lynch said. "And I decided that, since you were
so terribly busy, it could wait until I woke up. Or even until I got
down to the station. How about it--buddy-boy?"

"Listen, Lynch," Malone said, "we made a bet. Ten to one. I just want to
know if I can come down to collect or not."

There was a second of silence.

"All right," Lynch said at last, looking crestfallen. "I owe you a buck.
Every last one of those kids has skipped out on us."

"Good," Malone said. He wondered briefly just what was good about it,
and decided he'd rather have lost the money to Lynch. But facts, he
reflected, were facts. Thoroughly nasty facts.

"I spent all night tracing them," Lynch said. "Got nowhere. Nowhere at
all. Tell me, Malone, how did you know--"

"Classified," Malone said. "Very classified. But you're sure they're all
gone? Vanished?"

Lynch's face reddened. "Sure I'm sure," he said. "Every last one of them
is gone. And what more do you want me to do about it?" He paused, then
added: "What do you expect, Malone? Miracles?"

Malone shook his head gently. "No," he said. "I--"

"Oh, never mind," Lynch said.

"But I--"

"Look, Malone," Lynch said, "there's a guy who wants to talk to you."

"One of the Silent Spooks?" Malone said hopefully.

Lynch shook his head and made a growling noise. "Don't be silly," he
said. "It's just that this guy might have some information--but he won't
say anything to me about it. He's a social worker or something like
that."

"Social worker?" Malone said. "He works with the kids, right?"

"I guess," Lynch said. "His name's Kettleman. Albert Kettleman."

Malone nodded. "O.K.," he said. "I'll be right over."

"Hey," Lynch said, "hold on. He's not here now. What do you think this
is--my house or a reception center?"

"Sorry," Malone said wearily. "Where and when?"

"How about three o'clock at the precinct station?" Lynch said, "I can
have him there by then, and you can get together and talk." He paused.
"Nobody likes the cops," he said. "People hear the FBI's mixed up in
this, and they figure the cops are all second-stringers or something."

"Sorry to hear it," Malone said.

"I'll bet you are," Lynch told him bitterly.

Malone shrugged. "Anyway," he said, "I'll see you at three, right?"

"Right," Lynch said, and Malone flipped off.

He sat there for a few seconds grinning quietly. His brain throbbed like
an overheated motor, but he didn't really mind any more. His theory had
been justified, and that was the most important thing.

The Silent Spooks were all teleports.

Eight of them--eight kids on the loose, stealing everything they could
lay their hands on, and completely safe. How could you catch a boy who
just disappeared when you started for him? No wonder their names hadn't
appeared on the police blotter, Malone thought.

The Spooks didn't get into trouble.

They didn't have to.

They could get into any place big enough to hold them, take what they
wanted and just disappear. They'd been doing it for about eight months,
according to the figures Malone had received from Fernack; maybe
teleportative ability didn't develop until you were around fourteen or
fifteen.

But it had developed in these kids--and they were using it in the most
obvious way. They had a sure method of getting away from the cops, and a
sure method of taking anything they wanted. No wonder they had so much
money.

Malone got up, feeling slightly dazed, and left the hotel.




X.


By three o'clock, he was again among the living. Maybe his occupations
had had something to do with it; he'd spent about four hours supervising
Operation Dismemberment, and then listening to the reports on the
dismantled Cadillacs. It was nice, peaceful, unimportant work, but there
just wasn't anything else to do. FBI work was ninety-five per cent
marking time, anyway; Malone felt grateful that there was any action at
all in what he was doing.

Dr. Leibowitz had found all sorts of things in the commandeered
Caddies--everything from guns and narcotics to pornographic pictures in
lots of three hundred, for shipment into New York City from the suburbs
where the processing plants probably were. Of course, there had been
personal effects, too--maps and lucky dolls and, just once, a single
crutch.

Malone wondered about that for quite a while. Who'd just walk off and
leave one crutch in a car? But people did things like that all the time,
he finally told himself heavily. There wasn't any explanation for it,
and there probably never would be.

But in spite of the majestic assortment of valuables found in the cars,
there was no sign of anything remotely resembling an electro-psionic
brain. Dr. Leibowitz had found just about everything--except what he was
looking for.

At a quarter of three, Malone gave up. The search wasn't quite finished,
but he'd heard enough to last him for a long time. He grabbed a cab
downstairs and went over to Lynch's office to meet Kettleman.

The "social worker or something" was a large, balding man about six feet
tall. Malone estimated his weight as close to two hundred and fifty
pounds, and he looked every pound of it; his face was round without
being chubby, and his body was stocky and hard. He wore black-rimmed
glasses, and he was going bald in front. His face was like a mask: it
was held in a gentle, almost eager expression that Malone would have
sworn had nothing to do with the way Kettleman felt underneath.

Lynch performed the introductions, escorted the two of them to one of
the interrogation rooms at the rear of the station, and left them there,
with: "If either of you guys comes up with anything, let me know," for a
parting shot.

Kettleman blinked slowly behind his glasses. "Mr. Malone," he said, "I
understand that the FBI is interested in one of the ... ah ...
adolescent social groups with which I work."

"Well, the Silent Spooks," Malone said. "That's right."

"The Spooks," Kettleman said. His voice was rather higher than Malone
would have expected, oddly breathy without much depth to it. "My, yes. I
did want to talk to somebody about it, and I thought you might be the
man."

"I'll be interested in anything you have to say," Malone said
diplomatically. He was beginning to doubt whether he'd get any real
information out of Kettleman. But it was impossible to tell. He sat back
in a hard wooden chair and tried to look fascinated.

"Well," Kettleman said tentatively, "the boys themselves have sort of a
word for it. They'd say that there was something ... ah ... 'oddball'
about the Spooks. Do you understand? Not just the fact that they never
drink liquor, you understand, but--"

"Something strange," Malone said. "Is that what you mean."

"Ah," Kettleman said. "_Strange._ Of course." He acted, Malone thought,
as if he had never heard the word before, and was both pleased and
startled by its sound. "Perhaps I had better explain my position a
little more clearly," he said. "That will give you an idea of just where
I ... ah ... 'fit in' to this picture."

"Whatever you think best," Malone said, resigning himself to a very dull
hour. He tried to picture Kettleman in the midst of a gang of juvenile
delinquents. It was very hard to do.

"I'm a social worker," Kettleman said, "working on an individual basis
with these--social groups that the adolescents have formed. It's my job
to make friends with them, become accepted by them, and try to turn
their hostile impulses toward society into more useful, more acceptable
channels."

"I see," Malone said, feeling that something was expected of him.
"That's fine."

"Oh, we don't expect praise, we social workers," Kettleman said
instantly. "The worth of a good job well done, that's enough for us." He
smiled. The effect was a little unsettling, as if a hippopotamus had
begun to laugh like a hyena. "But to continue, Mr. Malone," he said.

"Of course," Malone said. "Certainly."

"I've worked with many of the organizations in this neighborhood,"
Kettleman said. "And I've been quite successful in getting to know
them, and in being accepted by them. Of course, the major part of my job
is more difficult, but ... well, I'm sure that's enough about my own
background. That isn't what you're interested in, now, is it?"

He looked penitent. Malone said: "It's all right. I don't mind." He
shifted positions on the hard chair.

"Well, then," Kettleman said, with the air of a man suddenly getting
down to business. He leaned forward eagerly, his eyes big and bright
behind the lenses. "There's something very peculiar about those boys,"
he said in a whisper.

"Really?" Malone said.

"Very peculiar indeed," Kettleman said. "My, yes. All of the other ...
ah ... social groups are afraid of them."

"Big, huh?" Malone said. "Big, strong boys who--"

"Oh, my no," Kettleman said. "My goodness, no. All of the Spooks are
rather slight, as a matter of fact. They've got _something,_ but it
isn't strength."

"My goodness," Malone said tiredly.

"I doubt if--in the language of my own groups--any one of the Spooks
could punch his way out of a paper bag," Kettleman said. "It's more than
that."

"Frankly," Malone said, "I'm inclined to agree with you. But what is
this something that frightens everyone else?"

Kettleman leaned even closer. "I'm not sure," he said softly. "I can't
say for certain, Mr. Malone. I've only heard rumors."

"Well," Malone said, "rumors might--"

"Rumors are a very powerful force among my groups, Mr. Malone,"
Kettleman said. "I've learned, over the years, to keep my ear to the
ground, as it were, and pay very close attention to rumors."

"I'm sure," Malone said patiently. "But what did this particular rumor
say?"

"Well," Kettleman said, and stopped. "Well," he said again. And at last
he gulped and got it out: "Magicians, Mr. Malone. They say the Spooks
are magicians--that they can come and go at will. Make themselves
invisible. All sorts of things. Of course, I don't believe that, but--"

"Oh, it's quite true," Malone said, solemn-faced.

"It's ... what?"

"Perfectly true," Malone said. "We've known all that."

"Oh, my," Kettleman said. His face took on a whitish cast. "Oh, my
goodness," he said. "Isn't that ... isn't that amazing?" He swallowed
hard. "True all the time," he said. "Magicians. I--"

"You see, this information isn't new to us," Malone said.

"Oh," Kettleman said. "No. Of course not. My. It's ... rather
disconcerting to think about, isn't it?"

"There," Malone said, "I agree with you."

       *       *       *       *       *

Kettleman fell silent. Malone offered him a cigarette, but the social
worker refused with a pale smile, and Malone lit one for himself. He
took a couple of puffs in the silence, and then Kettleman said: "Well,
Mr. Malone, Lieutenant Lynch did say that I was to tell you everything I
could about these boys."

"I'm sure we all appreciate that," Malone said at random, wondering
exactly what he meant.

"There is ... well, there is one more thing," Kettleman said.
"Ordinarily, of course, I wouldn't say anything about this to anyone. In
my line of work, Mr. Malone, you learn the need for confidence. For
being able to keep one's word."

"Certainly," Malone said, wondering what startling new fact was on its
way now.

"And we certainly try to keep the confidence of the boys," Kettleman
said maddeningly. "We wouldn't betray them to the police in any way
unless it were absolutely necessary."

"Betray them--? Mr. Kettleman," Malone said, "just what are you trying
to tell me?"

"It's about their meeting place," Kettleman said. "Oh, my. I'm not at
all sure I ought to tell you this." He wrung his pale fat hands together
and looked at Malone appealingly.

"Now, now," Malone said, feeling foolish. "It's perfectly all right. We
don't want to hurt the Spooks. Not any more than we have to. You can
tell me, Mr. Kettleman."

"Oh," Kettleman said. "Well. I--The Spooks do have a sort of secret
meeting place, you know. And they meet there."

He stopped. Malone said: "Where is it?"

"Oh, it's a big empty warehouse," Kettleman said. "I really feel
terrible about this. They're meeting there tonight some time, or that's
what the rumors say. I shouldn't be telling you--"

"Of course you should," Malone said, trying to sound reassuring. "Don't
worry about a thing, Mr. Kettleman. Tonight?"

"That's right," Kettleman said eagerly. He grinned and then looked
morosely down at his hands.

"Do you know where this warehouse is?" Malone said. "If any of the other
