you."

"I'm not a baby."

"Yes, you are--a great calf! What are you afraid of?"

"I'm not afraid; I didn't think you meant to have any murder in your
Chain."

"I don't; no fellow will think of such a thing as betraying one of the
secrets."

"Then what's the use of having such a penalty?"

"It will prevent any fellow from opening his mouth when he ought to keep
it shut."

"I don't want anything to do with a concern that means murder. I'm not
any better than I should be, but I'm too good for that."

"Suit yourself; but remember, if you should happen to say a word, you
will fall overboard accidentally, some night when you are on the
lookout, or out on the yard-arm."

"Two bells," said Wilton, greatly relieved to hear them, for he did not
like to stand any longer on the top-gallant forecastle, where there was
no railing, with such a dangerous fellow as Shuffles proved to be.

Two other members of the watch were sent forward to take their places.
Wilton and Shuffles went down and mingled with their shipmates, who were
talking about what they should do and what they should see in Ireland,
where the ship would first make a harbor. Wilton breathed easier, and
the topic was a more agreeable one than the dark and terrible matter
which had been under discussion on the top-gallant forecastle.

Shuffles was disappointed by the scruples of his generally unscrupulous
companion. He regarded the machinery of the plot, the clap-trap of the
secret league, as decidedly attractive; and he depended largely upon it
to influence his companions. Though he claimed that his plan was
original, it was suggested by a secret political organization in
Europe, of which he had read in a pamphlet; and the idea had doubtless
been modified by his more extensive readings in the department of
fiction, in which midnight juntos laid out robbery, treason, and murder;
Venetian tales in which bravos, assassins, and decayed princes in
disguise largely figured; in which mysterious passwords opened
mysterious dungeons beneath ruined castles; in which bravo met bravo,
and knew him by some mysterious sign, or cabalistic word.

Shuffles had a taste for these things, and out of his lively imagination
he had coined a similar association to be recruited from the crew of the
Young America, which was to redress fancied wrongs, and even take the
ship out of the hands of the principal. He could think of nothing but
this brilliant enterprise; and while his shipmates were talking of the
future, and indulging in the old salts' vocation of "spinning yarns," he
was busy maturing the details of "The Chain League." He did not, for
reasons best known to himself attempt to make any more proselytes that
night.

The ship continued to go along easily on her course till morning. It was
a clear night, and though the wind was fresh, the sea was not rough, and
the Young America behaved very handsomely. The programme for the watches
was carried out to the letter, but on the first night out, the boys were
too much excited by the novelty of the situation to be able to sleep
much.

At eight bells in the morning, after the port watch had breakfasted, all
the students off duty attended prayers. Then the starboard watch had
their morning meal, after which all hands were piped to muster.

Mr. Lowington mounted the hatch, and it was understood that the case of
discipline which had come up the day before was to be settled now.

"Shuffles!" called the principal.

The culprit came forward.

"Are you still of the same mind as when I saw you last evening?"
continued Mr. Lowington.

"I am, sir," replied Shuffles, with a becoming exhibition of meekness.

"You will step upon the hatch, then."

Shuffles took position by the side of the principal.

"You will repeat after me," added Mr. Lowington.

The culprit was startled at these words, and began to suspect that
Wilton had betrayed him in spite of his fear of falling overboard
accidentally. It looked just then as though the principal intended to
"toggle" him.

"I acknowledge that I have done wrong," Mr. Lowington continued.

Shuffles repeated the words, happy to find that he was not to take the
obligation of "The Chain League."

"And I will hereafter endeavor to do my duty faithfully."

The promise was repeated with the lips, but of course it had no meaning,
and did not reach the heart.

"That is all, Shuffles," added the principal.--"Young gentlemen, you are
dismissed from muster."

This was certainly a very mild atonement for the grave offence which
Shuffles had committed, and the lenity of the principal was generally
commented upon by the boys. The starboard watch was piped below to
study and recite, while the port watch were to be off and on during the
forenoon. The first part now had the deck, while the second was off
duty, and the boys belonging to it were permitted to remain on deck or
to spend their time in the mess rooms. They were not allowed to linger
in the steerage where the recitations were going on, but might pass
directly through on their way to their apartments.

At ten o'clock the first part of the port watch was relieved, and the
second part went on duty. Shuffles and Wilton were at liberty now, but
there appeared to be a coldness between them, and Wilton sought another
companion for his leisure hours. Sanborn and Adler belonged to his part
of the watch, and he soon joined them.

"There isn't much difference between being off duty and being on," said
Adler, as they seated themselves on the main hatch.

"There will be a difference when we have to make and take in sail every
half hour. We had a big job taking in the studding sails last night."

"They don't drive the ship," added Sanborn. "I suppose if we were a
merchantman, they would crack on all the sail she would carry."

"She goes along beautifully," said Wilton.

"She was only making five knots the last time the log was heaved."

"And the sea is as smooth as a mill-pond. We shall not get to Queenstown
for two months at this rate."

"Stand by to set studding sails!" shouted Pelham, the officer of the
deck.

"I wondered why they didn't do that before," said Sanborn.

The fore and main studding sails were set, two at a time, by the part of
the watch on duty, the wind still being well aft.

"What shall we do?" asked Wilton, with a long yawn, after they had
watched the operation of setting the studding sails for a time. "This is
stupid business, and I'm getting sleepy."

"Let us go below," suggested Sanborn.

"What for? The professors won't let you speak out loud while the
recitations are going on," added Adler.

"We don't want to speak out loud. What do you say to shaking a little?"
continued Wilton.

"I'm with you," replied Wilton. "Can either of you change me a half
sovereign?"

Neither of them could, but they were willing to take Wilton's due bills,
till his indebtedness amounted to ten shillings. The boys had already
begun to talk the language of sterling currency, and many of them were
supplied with English silver coins as well as gold. The three boys went
down at the fore hatch, and removing their caps as they entered the
steerage, walked silently to Gangway D, from which they went into mess
room No. 8, which had thus far been the headquarters of the gamblers.
Seating themselves on the stools, they used one of the beds as a table,
and in a few moments were deeply absorbed in the exciting game. They
spoke in whispers, and were careful not to rattle the props too loudly.

After they had played a few moments, Shuffles came in. They invited him
to join them in the play, but he declined, and soon left the mess room,
returning to the deck. In the waist he met Paul Kendall, who was the
officer of his watch, and, like him, was off duty. They had generally
been on good terms while in the after cabin together, for then Shuffles
was on his best behavior.

"How do things go on in the after cabin now, Kendall--I beg your
pardon--Mr. Kendall?" said Shuffles, in his most gentlemanly tones.

"About as usual, Mr. Shuffles," replied Paul.

"I am not a 'mister' now," laughed Shuffles.

"Well, it's all the same to me. I am sorry you are not with us now."

"So am I," added Shuffles. "I did not expect to be on board this year,
or I should have been there now."

"You can be, next term, if you like."

"This thing yesterday has ruined all my prospects."

"That was rather bad. I never was so sorry for anything in my life
before," answered Paul, warmly. "You and I were always good friends
after we got well acquainted, though I did vote for another at the
election a year ago."

"You did what you thought was right, and I don't blame you for that. I
always did my duty when I was an officer."

"That you did, Shuffles; and we always agreed first rate. Isn't it a
little strange that I have not lived in the steerage since the ship's
company were organized?"

"That's because you were always a good boy, and a smart scholar. I think
you would not like it."

"If it wasn't for losing my rank, I should like to try it," replied
Paul. "I should like to get better acquainted with the fellows."

"You wouldn't like them in the steerage. You would see a great many
things there which you never see in the cabin; a great many things which
Mr. Lowington and the professors know nothing about."

"Why, what do you mean, Shuffles?" demanded Paul, astonished at this
revelation.

"I ought not to say anything about it; but I believe these things will
break up the Academy Ship one of these days, for the boys are growing
worse instead of better in her, and their folks will find it out sooner
or later."

"You surprise me!" exclaimed Paul, sadly, for he held the honor of the
ship and her crew as the apple of his eye. "If there is anything wrong
there, you ought to make it known."

"I suppose I ought; but you know I'm not a tell-tale."

"You have told me, and I'm an officer."

"Well, I blundered into saying what I have. What you said about going
into the steerage made me let it out. I am sorry I said anything."

"You have raised my curiosity."

"I will tell you; or rather I will put you in the way of seeing for
yourself, if you will not mention my name in connection with the
matter, even to Mr. Lowington, and certainly not to any one else."

"I will not, Shuffles."

"The fellows are gambling in the steerage at this very moment," added
Shuffles, in a low tone. "Don't betray me."

"I will not. Gambling!" exclaimed Paul, with natural horror.

"You will find them in No. 8," continued Shuffles, walking away, and
leaving the astonished officer to wonder how boys could gamble.




CHAPTER XII.

THE ROOT OF ALL EVIL.


Paul Kendall, who had not occupied a berth in the steerage since the
first organization of the ship, was greatly surprised and grieved to
learn that some of the crew were addicted to vicious practices. Gambling
was an enormous offence, and he was not quite willing to believe that
such a terrible evil had obtained a foothold in the ship. He could
hardly conceive of such a thing as boys engaging in games of chance;
only the vilest of men, in his estimation, would do so. Shuffles had
told him so, apparently without malice or design, and there was no
reason to doubt the truth of his statement, especially as he had given
the particulars by which it could be verified.

The second lieutenant went down into the steerage. Classes were reciting
to the professors, and studying their lessons at the mess tables. There
was certainly no appearance of evil, for the place was still, and no
sound of angry altercation or ribald jest, which his fancy connected
with the vice of gambling, saluted his ears. He cautiously entered
Gangway D, and paused where he could hear what was said in mess room No.
8.

"I'm five shillings into your half sovereign," said one of the
gamblers; and then Paul distinctly heard the rattling of the props.

"There's the half sovereign," added another, whose voice the officer
recognized as that of Wilton. "You own five shillings in it, and I own
five shillings."

"That's so," replied Sanborn, who appeared to be the lucky one.

"Let us shake for the coin," added Wilton. "It's my throw."

"That's rather steep."

"We get along faster--that's all. If I throw a nick, or a browner, it's
mine; if an out, it's yours."

"I am agreed--throw away," replied Sanborn, without perceiving that the
one who held the props had two chances to his one.

The props rattled, and dropped on the bed.

"A browner!" exclaimed Wilton, thereby winning all he had lost at one
throw.

"Hush! don't talk so loud," interposed Adler. "You'll have the profs
down upon us."

"I'll go you another five shillings on one throw," said Sanborn,
chagrined at his loss.

"Put down your money."

The reckless young gambler put two half crowns, or five shillings, upon
the bed, and Wilton shook again.

"A nick!" said he, seizing the two half crowns.

"Try it again," demanded Sanborn.

Paul Kendall was filled with horror as he listened to this conversation.
When he had heard enough to satisfy him that the speakers were actually
gambling, he hastened to inform Mr. Lowington of the fact. Paul was an
officer of the ship, and this was so plainly his duty that he could not
avoid it, disagreeable as it was to give testimony against his
shipmates. It seemed to him that the ship could not float much longer if
such iniquity were carried on within her walls of wood; she must be
purged of such enormities, or some fearful retribution would overtake
her. There was no malice or revenge in the bosom of the second
lieutenant; he was acting solely and unselfishly for the good of the
institution and the students.

He went on deck again. Shuffles was still there, and they met in the
waist.

"You told me the truth," said Paul.

"You did not think I was joking about so serious a matter--did you?"
replied Shuffles.

"No; but I hoped you might be mistaken."

"How could I be mistaken, when I have seen, at one time and another, a
dozen fellows engaged in gambling? Of course such things as these will
ruin the boys, and bring the ship into disrepute."

"You are right. My father, for one, wouldn't let me stay on board a
single day, if he knew any of the boys were gamblers."

"It can be easily stopped, now you know about it," added Shuffles.

"Perhaps it can. I will inform Mr. Lowington at once."

"Remember, if you please, what I said, Mr. Kendall. I am willing to do a
good thing for the ship; but you know how much I should have to suffer,
if it were known that I gave the information. I didn't mean to blow on
my shipmates; but you and I have been so intimate in the after cabin,
that I spoke before I was aware what I was about," continued Shuffles.

"I shall not willingly betray you."

"Willingly! What do you mean by that?" demanded the conspirator,
startled by the words of the officer.

"Suppose Mr. Lowington should ask me where I obtained my information,"
suggested Paul.

"Didn't you see for yourself in No. 8?"

"He might ask what led me to examine the matter so particularly. But,
Shuffles, I will tell him honestly that I do not wish to inform him who
gave me the hint; and I am quite sure he will not press the matter, when
he finds that the facts are correct."

