Project Gutenberg's A Text-Book of Astronomy, by George C. Comstock

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: A Text-Book of Astronomy

Author: George C. Comstock

Release Date: January 3, 2011 [EBook #34834]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A TEXT-BOOK OF ASTRONOMY ***




    Transcriber's Note: The angle symbol has been replaced
    with [angle]. Greek letters have been replaced with their
    transliterations in brackets, e. g. [a] for alpha. The
    upside-down Omega symbol has been replaced with [mho].




                      TWENTIETH CENTURY TEXT-BOOKS


                                EDITED BY
                     A. F. NIGHTINGALE, PH.D., LL.D.
            FORMERLY SUPERINTENDENT OF HIGH SCHOOLS, CHICAGO



                 [Illustration: A TOTAL SOLAR ECLIPSE.
    After Burckhalter's photographs of the eclipse of May 28, 1900.]



                      TWENTIETH CENTURY TEXT-BOOKS


                             A TEXT-BOOK OF
                               ASTRONOMY

                                   BY
                           GEORGE C. COMSTOCK


                DIRECTOR OF THE WASHBURN OBSERVATORY AND
                     PROFESSOR OF ASTRONOMY IN THE
                        UNIVERSITY OF WISCONSIN


                             [Illustration]


                                NEW YORK
                        D. APPLETON AND COMPANY
                                  1903



                            COPYRIGHT, 1901
                       BY D. APPLETON AND COMPANY




PREFACE


The present work is not a compendium of astronomy or an outline course
of popular reading in that science. It has been prepared as a text-book,
and the author has purposely omitted from it much matter interesting as
well as important to a complete view of the science, and has endeavored
to concentrate attention upon those parts of the subject that possess
special educational value. From this point of view matter which permits
of experimental treatment with simple apparatus is of peculiar value and
is given a prominence in the text beyond its just due in a well-balanced
exposition of the elements of astronomy, while topics, such as the
results of spectrum analysis, which depend upon elaborate apparatus, are
in the experimental part of the work accorded much less space than their
intrinsic importance would justify.

Teacher and student are alike urged to magnify the observational side of
the subject and to strive to obtain in their work the maximum degree of
precision of which their apparatus is capable. The instruments required
are few and easily obtained. With exception of a watch and a protractor,
all of the apparatus needed may be built by any one of fair mechanical
talent who will follow the illustrations and descriptions of the text.
In order that proper opportunity for observations may be had, the study
should be pursued during the milder portion of the year, between April
and November in northern latitudes, using clear weather for a direct
study of the sky and cloudy days for book work.

The illustrations contained in the present work are worthy of as careful
study as is the text, and many of them are intended as an aid to
experimental work and accurate measurement, e. g., the star maps, the
diagrams of the planetary orbits, pictures of the moon, sun, etc. If the
school possesses a projection lantern, a set of astronomical slides to
be used in connection with it may be made of great advantage, if the
pictures are studied as an auxiliary to Nature. Mere display and scenic
effect are of little value.

A brief bibliography of popular literature upon astronomy may be found
at the end of this book, and it will be well if at least a part of these
works can be placed in the school library and systematically used for
supplementary reading. An added interest may be given to the study if
one or more of the popular periodicals which deal with astronomy are
taken regularly by the school and kept within easy reach of the
students. From time to time the teacher may well assign topics treated
in these periodicals to be read by individual students and presented to
the class in the form of an essay.

The author is under obligations to many of his professional friends who
have contributed illustrative matter for his text, and his thanks are in
an especial manner due to the editors of the Astrophysical Journal,
Astronomy and Astrophysics, and Popular Astronomy for permission to
reproduce here plates which have appeared in those periodicals, and to
Dr. Charles Boynton, who has kindly read and criticised the proofs.

                                                  GEORGE C. COMSTOCK.

  UNIVERSITY OF WISCONSIN, _February, 1901_.




CONTENTS


 CHAPTER                                                        PAGE
    I.--DIFFERENT KINDS OF MEASUREMENT                             1
          The measurement of angles and time.

   II.--THE STARS AND THEIR DIURNAL MOTION                        10
          Finding the stars--Their apparent motion--
          Latitude--Direction of the meridian--Sidereal
          time--Definitions.

  III.--FIXED AND WANDERING STARS                                 29
          Apparent motion of the sun, moon, and
          planets--Orbits of the planets--How to find
          the planets.

   IV.--CELESTIAL MECHANICS                                       46
          Kepler's laws--Newton's laws of motion--The law
          of gravitation--Orbital motion--Perturbations--
          Masses of the planets--Discovery of Neptune--
          The tides.

    V.--THE EARTH AS A PLANET                                     70
          Size--Mass--Precession--The warming of the
          earth--The atmosphere--Twilight.

   VI.--THE MEASUREMENT OF TIME                                   86
          Solar and sidereal time--Longitude--The
          calendar--Chronology.

  VII.--ECLIPSES                                                 101
          Their cause and nature--Eclipse limits--Eclipse
          maps--Recurrence and prediction of eclipses.

 VIII.--INSTRUMENTS AND THE PRINCIPLES INVOLVED IN THEIR USE     121
          The clock--Radiant energy--Mirrors and lenses--
          The telescope--Camera--Spectroscope--Principles
          of spectrum analysis.

   IX.--THE MOON                                                 150
          Numerical data--Phases--Motion--Librations--Lunar
          topography--Physical condition.

    X.--THE SUN                                                  178
          Numerical data--Chemical nature--Temperature--
          Visible and invisible parts--Photosphere--Spots--
          Faculæ--Chromosphere--Prominences--Corona--The
          sun-spot period--The sun's rotation--Mechanical
          theory of the sun.

   XI.--THE PLANETS                                              212
          Arrangement of the solar system--Bode's law--
          Physical condition of the planets--Jupiter--
          Saturn--Uranus and Neptune--Venus--Mercury--
          Mars--The asteroids.

  XII.--COMETS AND METEORS                                       251
          Motion, size, and mass of comets--Meteors--Their
          number and distribution--Meteor showers--Relation
          of comets and meteors--Periodic comets--Comet
          families and groups--Comet tails--Physical nature
          of comets--Collisions.

 XIII.--THE FIXED STARS                                          291
          Number of the stars--Brightness--Distance--Proper
          motion--Motion in line of sight--Double stars--
          Variable stars--New stars.

  XIV.--STARS AND NEBULÆ                                         330
          Stellar colors and spectra--Classes of stars--
          Clusters--Nebulæ--Their spectra and physical
          condition--The Milky Way--Construction of the
          heavens--Extent of the stellar system.

   XV.--GROWTH AND DECAY                                         358
          Logical bases and limitations--Development of the
          sun--The nebular hypothesis--Tidal friction--Roche's
          limit--Development of the moon--Development of stars
          and nebulæ--The future.

        APPENDIX                                                 383

        INDEX                                                    387




LIST OF LITHOGRAPHIC PLATES


                                                         FACING PAGE
    I.--Northern Constellations                                  124
   II.--Equatorial Constellations                                190
  III.--Map of Mars                                              246
   IV.--The Pleiades                                             344
        Protractor                       _In pocket at back of book_




LIST OF FULL-PAGE ILLUSTRATIONS


                                                         FACING PAGE
  A Total Solar Eclipse                               _Frontispiece_
  The Harvard College Observatory, Cambridge, Mass.               24
  Isaac Newton                                                    46
  Galileo Galilei                                                 52
  The Lick Observatory, Mount Hamilton, Cal.                      60
  The Yerkes Observatory, Williams Bay, Wis.                     100
  The Moon, one day after First Quarter                          150
  William Herschel                                               234
  Pierre Simon Laplace                                           364




ASTRONOMY




CHAPTER I

DIFFERENT KINDS OF MEASUREMENT


1. ACCURATE MEASUREMENT.--Accurate measurement is the foundation of
exact science, and at the very beginning of his study in astronomy the
student should learn something of the astronomer's kind of measurement.
He should practice measuring the stars with all possible care, and
should seek to attain the most accurate results of which his instruments
and apparatus are capable. The ordinary affairs of life furnish abundant
illustration of some of these measurements, such as finding the length
of a board in inches or the weight of a load of coal in pounds and
measurements of both length and weight are of importance in astronomy,
but of far greater astronomical importance than these are the
measurement of angles and the measurement of time. A kitchen clock or a
cheap watch is usually thought of as a machine to tell the "time of
day," but it may be used to time a horse or a bicycler upon a race
course, and then it becomes an instrument to measure the amount of time
required for covering the length of the course. Astronomers use a clock
in both of these ways--to tell the time at which something happens or is
done, and to measure the amount of time required for something; and in
using a clock for either purpose the student should learn to take the
time from it to the nearest second or better, if it has a seconds hand,
or to a small fraction of a minute, by estimating the position of the
minute hand between the minute marks on the dial. Estimate the fraction
in tenths of a minute, not in halves or quarters.

EXERCISE 1.--If several watches are available, let one person tap
sharply upon a desk with a pencil and let each of the others note the
time by the minute hand to the nearest tenth of a minute and record the
observations as follows:

    2h. 44.5m.  First tap.   2h. 46.4m.  1.9m.
    2h. 44.9m.  Second tap.  2h. 46.7m.  1.8m.
    2h. 46.6m.  Third tap.   2h. 48.6m.  2.0m.

The letters h and m are used as abbreviations for hour and minute. The
first and second columns of the table are the record made by one
student, and second and third the record made by another. After all the
observations have been made and recorded they should be brought together
and compared by taking the differences between the times recorded for
each tap, as is shown in the last column. This difference shows how much
faster one watch is than the other, and the agreement or disagreement of
these differences shows the degree of accuracy of the observations. Keep
up this practice until tenths of a minute can be estimated with fair
precision.

2. ANGLES AND THEIR USE.--An angle is the amount of opening or
difference of direction between two lines that cross each other. At
twelve o'clock the hour and minute hand of a watch point in the same
direction and the angle between them is zero. At one o'clock the minute
hand is again at XII, but the hour hand has moved to I, one twelfth part
of the circumference of the dial, and the angle between the hands is one
twelfth of a circumference. It is customary to imagine the circumference
of a dial to be cut up into 360 equal parts--i. e., each minute space of
an ordinary dial to be subdivided into six equal parts, each of which
is called a degree, and the measurement of an angle consists in finding
how many of these degrees are included in the opening between its sides.
At one o'clock the angle between the hands of a watch is thirty degrees,
which is usually written 30°, at three o'clock it is 90°, at six o'clock
180°, etc.

A watch may be used to measure angles. How? But a more convenient
instrument is the protractor, which is shown in Fig. 1, applied to the
angle _A B C_ and showing that _A B C_ = 85° as nearly as the protractor
scale can be read.

The student should have and use a protractor, such as is furnished with
this book, for the numerous exercises which are to follow.

[Illustration: FIG. 1.--A protractor.]

EXERCISE 2.--Draw neatly a triangle with sides about 100 millimeters
long, measure each of its angles and take their sum. No matter what may
be the shape of the triangle, this sum should be very nearly
180°--exactly 180° if the work were perfect--but perfection can seldom
be attained and one of the first lessons to be learned in any science
which deals with measurement is, that however careful we may be in our
work some minute error will cling to it and our results can be only
approximately correct. This, however, should not be taken as an excuse
for careless work, but rather as a stimulus to extra effort in order
that the unavoidable errors may be made as small as possible. In the
present case the measured angles may be improved a little by adding
(algebraically) to each of them one third of the amount by which their
sum falls short of 180°, as in the following example:

            Measured angles.    Correction.  Corrected angles.
                 °                   °              °
  A            73.4               + 0.1           73.5
  B            49.3               + 0.1           49.4
  C            57.0               + 0.1           57.1
              -----                              -----
  Sum         179.7                              180.0
  Defect      + 0.3

This process is in very common use among astronomers, and is called
"adjusting" the observations.

[Illustration: FIG. 2.--Triangulation.]

3. TRIANGLES.--The instruments used by astronomers for the measurement
of angles are usually provided with a telescope, which may be pointed at
different objects, and with a scale, like that of the protractor, to
measure the angle through which the telescope is turned in passing from
one object to another. In this way it is possible to measure the angle
between lines drawn from the instrument to two distant objects, such as
two church steeples or the sun and moon, and this is usually called the
angle between the objects. By measuring angles in this way it is
possible to determine the distance to an inaccessible point, as shown in
Fig. 2. A surveyor at _A_ desires to know the distance to _C_, on the
opposite side of a river which he can not cross. He measures with a tape
line along his own side of the stream the distance _A B_ = 100 yards and
then, with a suitable instrument, measures the angle at _A_ between the
points _C_ and _B_, and the angle at _B_ between _C_ and _A_, finding _B
A C_ = 73.4°, _A B C_ = 49.3°. To determine the distance _A C_ he draws
upon paper a line 100 millimeters long, and marks the ends _a_ and _b_;
with a protractor he constructs at _a_ the angle _b a c_ = 73.4°, and at
_b_ the angle _a b c_ = 49.3°, and marks by _c_ the point where the two
lines thus drawn meet. With the millimeter scale he now measures the
distance _a c_ = 90.2 millimeters, which determines the distance _A C_
across the river to be 90.2 yards, since the triangle on paper has been
made similar to the one across the river, and millimeters on the one
correspond to yards on the other. What is the proposition of geometry
upon which this depends? The measured distance _A B_ in the surveyor's
problem is called a base line.

EXERCISE 3.--With a foot rule and a protractor measure a base line and
the angles necessary to determine the length of the schoolroom. After
the length has been thus found, measure it directly with the foot rule
and compare the measured length with the one found from the angles. If
any part of the work has been carelessly done, the student need not
expect the results to agree.

[Illustration: FIG. 3.--Finding the moon's distance from the earth.]

In the same manner, by sighting at the moon from widely different parts
of the earth, as in Fig. 3, the moon's distance from us is found to be
