All at once, as they rounded a thick grove, a bright object glistened
before their eyes.  It was a blazing fire under the shadow of some tall
trees!  Marengo made straight for it.  Fearing it might be an encampment
of Indians, Basil galloped forward; and, alighting from his horse,
intercepted the dog.  A halt was made to determine what was best to be
done.  At that moment the fire blazed up, and a spotted object was seen
near it.  Hurrah!  It was Francois' mustang!  Basil and Lucien now
advanced rapidly; and, to their great joy, beheld Francois sitting by
the fire holding something over the blaze.  The next moment the brothers
were in each other's arms, all three weeping with joy as they embraced!

Francois soon related his adventures.  He had killed his turkey, and
then lost himself; but instead of going back upon his own trail, as
Basil had done, he had wandered about until night-fall, at intervals
shouting and firing his gun.  At times his spirit failed him; and he
rode for long stretches without touching the bridle, or in any way
guiding his horse.  Wearied at length, he dismounted, and tied the
animal to a tree.  It was night when he did so; and feeling cold and
hungry, he took courage and kindled a fire.  Fortunately the gobbler
still hung from the cantle of his saddle; and he had just singed, and
was roasting it over the fire, when so agreeably interrupted by the
approach of his brothers.  At sight of the fine broiling turkey, Basil
and Lucien became as hungry as a pair of wolves--for, in consequence of
their anxiety, they had not thought of dining.  The roast was soon
ready; and, after a plentiful supper--which Marengo shared--the young
hunters staked their horses upon the grass, wrapped themselves in their
blankets, and went to sleep.



CHAPTER SIXTEEN.

JEANETTE AND THE JAVALIES.

Next morning they were astir at an early hour; and, after giving the
remains of the gobbler a hurried "devilling," they ate them, and rode
off on the back trail.  They did not put the dog upon it to guide them--
as the scent was now cold, and they feared that Marengo, keen as he was,
might get astray upon it.  They trusted to find it from their own
tracks, and the "blazes" they had made.  It was a slow process, and they
were obliged to make frequent halts; but it was a sure one, and they
preferred it on that account, as they knew the importance of getting
back to Jeanette.  The tent, with all their provisions and implements,
was in her keeping.

They were in high spirits--as most people are who have just escaped from
a perilous adventure--and joked each other as they rode along.  Lucien
was without a shirt--for Marengo had torn it, and it was now draggled,
wet, and worthless.  This was a staple joke for Francois.  Jeanette came
in for a share of their badinage, as Lucien now remembered that he had
tied her head within a foot of the tree, and of course she would be all
this time without eating a morsel.  Moreover, in their hurry, the pack
had been left upon her back; and that was not likely to improve her
temper.

It was near mid-day when they came within sight of her.

"Hilloa!" exclaimed Francois, who first caught a glimpse of her round a
point of timber.  "What's going on yonder?"

All three halted, and looked across the plain with astonishment depicted
in their faces; and no wonder, for a sight it was to astonish anybody.
It was Jeanette, to be sure; but Jeanette in most singular attitudes.
Her heels were flying in the air--now her fore-feet, now her hind ones--
not in single flings, but in constant and rapid kicking.  Sometimes the
whole set appeared to bounce up at once; and the white canvas of the
tent, which had got loosened, was flapping up and down, as her body rose
and fell.

The boys looked on for a moment, with feelings of curiosity, not
unmingled with fear.  "It might be Indians," thought they.

"No," said Basil.  "It is wolves--she is attacked by wolves!  Let us
hasten to her rescue!"

All three spurred their horses into a gallop, and soon got within a few
hundred yards.  They could now see the ground by the mule's feet, which
was covered, not with wolves, but with animals of a far different
species.  They were hog-shaped, with small, dark bodies, and long
pointed snouts.  They had no tails--only knobs in their place; and their
tapering snouts opened into a pair of long jaws, with white tusks, that
could be seen even in the distance.

"_Javalies_!" cried Lucien, who, although he had never seen the animal,
knew them from description.  Javalies they were in fact--the wild-hogs
of Mexico.

All three had pulled up, as soon as they saw the animals were not
wolves.  They did not halt long, for Jeanette was in danger.  She was
still kicking and squealing like a cat; while the javalies, although
several of them lay stretched behind her heels, were uttering their
shrill grunts, and rushing at her shanks whenever these rested for a
moment upon the earth.  There were more than a hundred of them around
her feet.  The ground was literally covered with their dark forms,
crowding each other, and springing nimbly about.

Without waiting to consider the danger, Basil dashed into their midst,
followed by Francois and Lucien.  It was well they were mounted, else
they never would have come out of that crowd again.  All three had fired
as they rode up.  They believed that this would have scattered the
drove; but they found their mistake, for although each of them shot down
a victim, it had no effect; and the next moment, their three horses were
hopping about, plunging and pitching as badly as Jeanette.  The javalies
surrounded them with shrill gruntings, driving their tusks into the
horses' shanks, and leaping up almost high enough to reach the riders
themselves.  It was well for them they were good riders.  Had any of
them been unhorsed at that moment, his fate would have been sealed.
They kept their saddles, however, but without being able to reload their
pieces.  Marengo, who was an old Texas hound, had seen javalies before;
and having wisely shied off upon the prairie, stood looking on.

The young hunters soon saw that it was no use keeping their ground, and
prepared to retreat.  Basil urged his horse forward to the tree, and
with his hunting-knife cut the lasso that fastened Jeanette; then,
shouting to his brothers to follow, started in a gallop across the
prairie.

Perhaps never was a mule more pleased at getting loose from a fastening
than was that she-mule Jeanette; and never did a mule make better use of
the heels that had been left her.  She galloped over the prairie, as if
the very deuce had been after her.  But if he _was not_, the javalies
_were_; for on came the whole drove, scores of them, grunting and
screaming as they ran.

The horses easily distanced them.  So, too, did Marengo--but there was
still danger for Jeanette.  She had been now nearly two days without
either food or water, and was weak in consequence.  Her legs, too, were
much torn by the tusks of the wild-hogs.  Moreover, the tent that had
got loose, trailing on one side to the ground, considerably impeded her
flight.  This last circumstance in the end proved her salvation; for the
javalies, overtaking her, seized the hanging canvas in their jaws, and
pulled it from the pack.  It fell spreading over the grass like a
blanket; and the herd, now coming up and mistaking it for their real
enemy, commenced stamping upon it with their hoofs, and tearing it with
their teeth.  This gave Jeanette time; and she was just the mule at that
moment to profit by it.  Lightened of her load, she struck out into a
fleet gallop, and soon overtook the horses; and the whole cavalcade now
kept on, until they had placed several miles between themselves and the
javalies.  Here they halted with the intention of pitching their camps,
as their animals were not only wearied, but Jeanette was hardly able to
travel at all.  The process of "pitching camp" was now considerably
simplified, as they had lost not only their tent, but several of their
camp utensils.

What had induced the javalies to attack the mule?  This was the subject
of conversation with our adventurers, as soon as they had fairly cooled
from their race.  They knew that these creatures rarely make an assault
in such a manner without provocation.  But it was likely Jeanette had
given them this.  No doubt they had been wandering about in search of
food, and lighted upon the turkeys, that Lucien and Basil in their haste
had left lying upon the ground.  The wild-hogs are not particular as to
their food.  They will eat fish, flesh, or fowl, snakes, or vegetables;
and, finding the brace of birds, had commenced devouring them.  In doing
so they had come within reach of Jeanette's heels; who, at that moment
not being in the best temper had no doubt let fly, and kicked one of
them over, and this of course had led to a general onslaught from the
whole herd.

It was well for Jeanette that her masters arrived when they did, else
her old ribs would soon have cracked under the sharp tusks of the
enraged animals.

The javalies, or _peccaries_--as they are more often termed by
naturalists--are in general of a harmless disposition; and, if not
interfered with, will rarely make an attack upon man.  When provoked,
however--by one of their number being wounded, or even when their haunt
is invaded--they become both fierce and dangerous.  Though small
creatures, they possess extreme courage; and their powerful jaws and
large tusks render them formidable assailants.  Like all animals of the
hog species when enraged, they seem to be unconscious of danger; and a
herd of them will battle with an enemy until every one has fallen.  Not
unfrequently the Mexican hunter is "treed" by javalies, and compelled to
remain on his perch for hours, and sometimes for days, before his
besiegers retire, and leave him to descend with safety.



CHAPTER SEVENTEEN.

A CUNNING CAT AND A SLY OLD 'POSSUM.

The place where our adventurers now encamped was in a large grove of
white oaks and shell-bark hickory-trees.  There was a spring near the
centre of the grove, and near this spring the horses were tied, as there
grew around it plenty of grass of the mezquite species.  The dried meat,
which formed the staple of their own provisions, had been scattered by
Jeanette in her flight, and of course lost.  What were they to have for
dinner?  This was an important question; and by way of answer to it,
Basil and Francois took up their guns and walked out to see whether they
could fall in with a squirrel or some other eatable creature.  But the
sun was yet high, and no squirrels could be seen--for these little
creatures hide themselves during mid-day, coming out only in the
mornings and evenings to feed and play.

Failing to start any game in the thick shady grove, the young hunters
bethought them of making trial around its edge; and, after walking a
hundred yards or so, they came near the border of the prairie.  They did
not show themselves suddenly, as they were in hopes they might discover
deer, partridges, or some other game in--what is usually a favourite
resort--the open ground along the edge of the woods.  They stole
silently forward, therefore, using the large tree-trunks to screen them.

The prairie was a clear one--that is, without timber-islands, only here
and there a tree, and these but small ones, mostly black-jacks and
shell-barks.  They could see over its surface to a great extent, as it
was quite level and covered with short spring buffalo-grass.  No deer
was upon it.  Not an animal of any sort.  Yes, there was.  On looking
more carefully, at no great distance--about two hundred yards out--they
beheld two small creatures running over the sward, and at intervals
squatting upon their haunches like monkeys, as if conversing with each
other.

"Prairie-dogs," suggested Francois.

"No," said Basil, "they are not that, for I see no tails.  The
prairie-dogs have long tails."

"What can they be, then?"

"Hares, I take it," replied Basil, looking through his fingers.

"Hares!" ejaculated Francois, in some surprise.  "Why, they are not
bigger than rats!  Do you mean that they are young hares?"

"No, indeed, full-grown hares of their species."

"Ha! ha! ha!" laughed Francois.  "Why, brother, what are your eyes good
for?  You think they are far off, don't you?  I tell you they are not
two hundred yards from us, and a grey squirrel would be a giant beside
them.  Hares, indeed!"

"I am still of that opinion," answered Basil, as he continued to gaze
intently at the animals.  "I am not certain, though.  I wish Lucien were
here.  Perhaps he could tell us what they are."

"Here he is, then," said Francois, as the footstep of Lucien was heard
behind them.  "Look yonder, Luce!" continued he.  "See what Basil calls
a pair of full-grown hares!"

"And Basil is right," replied Lucien, after having examined them for a
moment.  "They _are_ full-grown hares."

Francois looked confounded.

"If I mistake not," continued Lucien, "they are the species known among
the Indians of the prairie as the `little chief hare.'  They may be a
different variety, though, for there are several species of these small
hares found in the Rocky Mountains, and the prairies that lie around
them.  They are very rare.  I wish we could get the skin of one.  I am
sure papa would prize it highly."

"That we may soon get," said Francois.  "Can I not step forward, and
shoot one of them?"

"No," replied Lucien, "they would be off like the wind, before you could
get within range."

"What about Marengo?  Can he not catch one?"

"I think not; besides, he would tear it in pieces.  No.  Our only chance
is to remain here.  They appear to be making this way."

The three now took their stations behind the trunks of large trees, so
as not to be observed by the timid little animals.

The latter, as they fed and sported over the grass, were still getting
nearer to the edge of the grove; but as they advanced in an oblique
direction, they were not likely to approach the point where the young
hunters were stationed.  These thought of moving farther along, so as to
meet them; and were about starting to do so, when an object appeared
that caused them to remain where they were.

Silently moving among the weeds and brambles, now trotting quickly
behind the covering of a prostrate log, now slowly crawling over the
more open ground, went a strange animal.  At intervals it stopped,
squatted low along the earth, and looked eagerly out upon the prairie.
It did not see the young hunters.  Its yellow eyes were bent upon the
innocent little creatures that gambolled over the grass beyond.

It was an odd-looking animal--about the size of a terrier-dog, but,
otherwise, altogether unlike one.  It was of a reddish yellow colour,
with brown spots upon its sides, and stripes or bands of the same along
its back.  These gave it the appearance of the leopard or tiger species,
and it resembled these animals in the rounded, cat-like form of its
head.  Its erect tufted ears, however, and short tail showed that it
differed, in some respects, from the tiger kind.  The tail, indeed, was
the oddest thing about it.  It was not over five inches in length,
curving stiffly upward, and looking as if it had been "stumped," as the
tails of terriers usually are.  It was not so, however.  Five inches was
all the tail it ever had; and this shortness of tail, with the thick
clumsy legs--but, above all, the high tufted ears, approaching each
other at their tips,--enabled the young hunters to tell what it was--_a
lynx_.  It was that species known as the "bay lynx" (_lynx rufus_),
commonly called in America the "wild cat," and sometimes the
"catamount."  It was the Texas variety of this animal--which is deeper
in colour than the common bay lynx, and, I think, a different species.
It was evidently doing its best to get near the little hares, and seize
one or both of them.  It knew it was not swift enough to run them down,
but it might get close enough to spring upon them.  It was favoured to
some extent by the ground; for, although it was open prairie, the white
withered grass of the previous year rose here and there over the new
growth in tufts, large enough to conceal its body as it squatted.

Nearly in a direct line between the lynx and the hares grew a solitary
tree, of the _pecan_ species, with spreading limbs; and almost under it
was a little patch or thicket of briars, weeds, and high grass--no doubt
where some old log, or the carcass of an animal, had mouldered away, and
fertilised the soil.  For this the lynx was making on one side, and
towards it the hares were feeding on the other.

The latter had got very near it, and near, too, to the boys, who could
now distinguish their long, erect ears, slender limbs, and graceful
motions--resembling, in fact, those of the common hare.  Their colour,
however, was different.  It was a rusty fern, lighter underneath, but in
no part--not even under the tail--did any white appear.  It was a
beautiful sight to behold these innocent little creatures, now nibbling
at the blades of grass, now leaping a few feet over the sward, and then
settling comically upon their haunches.  The young hunters thought it a
beautiful sight; and so would you, boy reader, had you witnessed the
manoeuvres of these miniature hares.

An odd-looking object now presented itself directly in front of them,
and close to the briars.  It was of a round shape, and looked like a
large clew of hair or wool of a greyish colour, half-buried in the
ground.  Whether it had been there before, neither Basil, nor Lucien,
nor Francois, could tell.  It might have been without their noticing it,
as their attention was so occupied with the hares and the lynx.
Francois said he _had_ noticed it a little before; but it had only
