Where the devil did you spend the last thirty-six hours?"

She tried a grin. "In the little room where the things are that pump the
air. I sneaked in the galley once, when you were asleep. Did you miss
anything?"

"No," he admitted, thinking back.

"See? I'm not enough trouble to be noticed!"

Dudley eyed her sourly. There was trouble behind this somewhere, he was
willing to bet, or else why had she stowed away? Running from a family
fight? When the port checkers at Ericsson saw her--!

"How old are you, kid?" he asked.

"Twenty-one."

The answer was too pat and quickly given. Even the girl seemed to
realize that, and she continued talking. "My name's Kathi Foster. You're
the next Mars pilot, according to the schedule, aren't you?"

"What about it?"

She let go of the cable and pushed her weightless body across the
control room to his chair.

"What's it like on Mars?" she asked breathlessly.

_What does she expect me to tell her?_ Dudley wondered cynically. _That
the whole population of the colony is only about four thousand? That
they still live mostly on hope, dreams, and regular rocket service? That
every one of them represents such a fantastic transportation expense
that the Commission only sends top-notch people?_

"It's pretty tough," he said.

She hesitated over his unhelpful reply, then plunged ahead.

"How about taking me along to see for myself?"

Dudley smiled with one corner of his mouth.

"You're not going anywhere except back to Terra on the next rocket," he
predicted flatly. "And I hope your father still has enough hair on his
head to own a hair-brush!"

"My father is dead."

"Then your--." He paused as she shook her head. "Well, don't you have
any family? Jobs on Luna are ... limited. The settlements just aren't
very big. You're better off down home."

Kathi's half-defiant, half-wheedling mask cracked. Her over-painted lips
twitched.

"What do you know about where I'm better off? If you knew the kind of
family I have--."

"Oh, calm down!" grunted Dudley, somewhat discomforted by the sight of
tears spilling from her blue eyes. "Things are never as bad as you think
when you're just a ... when you're young. When we land, we can say you
got left aboard by mistake. They'll just send you back without any
trouble."

"Like hell they will! I won't go!"

Dudley stared hard at her, until she dropped her gaze.

"You don't understand," she said more quietly. "I ... my family has been
kicking me around the law courts all my life just because my grandfather
left me his money. They're all trying to get their hands on it, or on me
to back up their claims. Do you realize I'm eight--I'm twenty-one and I
never lived a happy day in my life? I'd rather _die_ than go back!"

"Yeah, sure," said Dudley. "What did you really do to make you so scared
of going back? Smack up grandpop's helicopter, maybe, or flunk out of
school?"

"No, I got sick and tired of being shoved around. I wanted to get away
someplace where I could be myself."

"Why didn't you buy a ticket on a passenger rocket, if you had such an
urge to visit Luna?"

"My aunts and uncles and cousins have all my money tied up in suits."

He leaned back by pushing the edge of the control desk.

"Pretty fast with the answers, aren't you?" he grinned. "I wonder what
you'll think up for the spaceport police when _they_ ask you?"

"You don't believe--," she began.

He shook his head and to avoid further argument he picked up his
sliderule, muttering something about checking his landing curve.
Actually, he was not as convinced as he pretended that her story was all
lies.

_But what the hell?_ he thought. _I have my own troubles without
worrying because some blonde little spiral thinks she can go dramatic
over a family spat. She'd better learn that life is full of give and
take._

"You better get attached to something around here," he warned her when
the time came for serious deceleration.

"I ... I could go back where I was," she stammered. He suddenly realized
that for the past hour she had silently accepted his ignoring her. She
asked now, "What happens next?"
