experiments. If he left any of his records there--and I'm thinking of
some in particular--they might go a long way toward solving the problem
we've all be working on for so long. So now I know what to do next: I'm
going to Ultra Vires."

Old Beard smiled sadly.

"Have you forgotten we can't get out of this place?" he reminded. "We
can't get at either the marsuits or the groundcars."

It was Dark's turn to smile.

"I believe you said there aren't any guards on the airlocks to stop one
from walking out at night?" he said.

"That's true, but--"

"There's something you don't know," continued Dark. "You were wondering
at the basis of the regenerative power that permitted me to revive here
after being shot in the stomach with a heatgun. I don't know what it is,
but whatever it is, it's something that also permits me to live without
oxygen.

"Happy can testify that I was fully alive and conscious underwater. I
discovered, before I was shot, that I can operate just as well outside,
in the Martian atmosphere, without a helmet. And that's why Goat's
records may solve our problem.

"So tonight I'll leave this place and go to Ultra Vires. If there are
any marsuits and groundcars left there, I'll come back here with them,
and you and Happy and Shadow can escape with me. If not, you may have to
wait a while longer.

"But I'll be back!"




13


Brute Hennessey plodded westward through the Xanthe Desert, naked,
wearing no marsuit, his head bare to the thin, oxygen-poor Martian air.
The two small moons shone in the star-spangled sky above the lone
figure, casting fantastic shadows on the sands.

But this was not the stupid, shambling Brute Hennessey of a few months
past. He walked surely and proudly, and the light of intelligence shone
in his eyes.

He called himself, now, Dark Kensington.

Dark's muscular body had not regained, quite, the firmness and tone it
had had before he was shot down at Solis Lacus, but he had recovered
greatly from the bloated flabbiness of a few days ago. Most of that had
been water in his tissues, and resumption of normal physical activity
had wrung it out in short order.

As he plodded through the Martian night toward Ultra Vires, Dark was
remembering, with something of awe, that emotional explosion within him
that had occurred on his first sight of Goat Hennessey at the Canfell
Hydroponic Farm. It was this sudden, overwhelming recognition that had
wrung from his lips the cry: "_Father!_"

In that moment, memory had returned with terrible impact and he had been
overwhelmed by the re-experience of those moments when he had stood
before the man he admired and loved as his father and had seen the
bitter realization of rejection by that man written with the point of a
knife.

Now he remembered it all. He remembered his childhood at Ultra Vires, he
remembered Adam and their experiences together, he remembered their
treks through the desert at Goat Hennessey's command, he remembered his
slaying of Adam and his acceptance of death at Goat's hands. He
remembered that he, Dark Kensington, was Brute Hennessey, somehow
brought to life once before in the Icaria Desert even as he had himself
regained life a second time in the vats of the Canfell Hydroponic Farm.

So Goat Hennessey was his father, apparently. And Old Beard, the real
Dark Kensington, vowed vengeance on Goat. Dark was able to view this
with equanimity. He no longer felt any admiration or affection for Goat,
whatever relationship might exist between them.

But, since he was Brute Hennessey and thus not old enough to be the real
Dark Kensington, how and why had he acquired the memories of Dark
Kensington? That question remained unanswered.

Phobos was setting for the first time that night when Dark reached the
great hulk of Ultra Vires, manipulated one of the airlocks and entered
its dark corridors. There was no light, and a test of the light switch
proved that the electrical system was no longer operating. But Dark knew
every inch of this place from early childhood. He felt his way through
the pitch darkness to Goat Hennessey's old bedroom.

Probing about in the darkness, he discovered that Goat's bed was still
supplied with mattress and crumpled blankets. This surprised him
somewhat, as any item of cloth on Mars had to be imported from Earth and
was far too valuable to abandon. But, apparently, these things had been
left temporarily in Goat's abandonment of Ultra Vires and would be
picked up by truck later.

Deriving a certain humorous satisfaction from taking over the master's
chamber, Dark curled up on Goat's bed and went to sleep.

He awoke the next morning with the glare of the desert sunlight
reflected into the room. He arose, stretched and yawned. The room was a
mess. Goat had left the bed clothing intact, but he had turned
everything else upside down in packing his personal effects to leave the
place.

There was still water in the reservoir, and Ultra Vires' plumbing system
was still in operation. Dark bathed. He felt ruefully at the thick
stubble of beard that had overgrown his face in the past few days, but
Goat had left no shaving equipment behind.

Dark made his way down to the big kitchen. There were supplies of canned
food there, and he found utensils and ate. He was hungry, but not
ravenous, and this surprised him a little, because he had had no food
since he started out afoot from the Canfell Hydroponic Farm, four nights
ago. But he was no hungrier than he would normally be after a night's
sleep.

As he ate, his eye fell on dishes stacked beside the sink. He was
startled to notice that water still sparkled on them.

He arose and checked them. Yes, they were still wet.

There were remnants of fresh food in the garbage can.

People, here? Camping out? Or, more likely, someone passing through the
desert who had taken shelter here for the night? But he thought he would
have heard the roar of a groundcar leaving.

Thoughtfully, Dark finished his breakfast. It occurred to him that
perhaps some members of the Phoenix had taken refuge here after fleeing
Mars City. But most of them did not even know of the existence of Ultra
Vires, much less its location.

At any rate, there was no reason to assume that anyone who happened to
be here would be unfriendly to him, in case they met by chance. He saw
no reason to worry about it.

Finishing breakfast, Dark went down to the storeroom and picked out
three marsuits, for Old Beard, Happy and Shadow. There was a large-sized
suit there that he thought might accommodate Happy's bulk, but he
wondered how Shadow, with his flat build, was going to manage one.

Nakedness felt quite natural to Dark, especially since he remembered his
identity as Brute, but it occurred to him that it would look peculiar
to anyone he might meet before leaving Ultra Vires--or, for that matter,
on his way back to the Canfell Hydroponic Farm. So he donned a marsuit
himself, leaving off the helmet.

Carrying the other three marsuits, he went down the corridor to the
motor pool.

Dark remembered that Goat had always kept four groundcars on hand. There
were three here now, all in advanced stages of dismantlement.

At one of them, a small figure in black tunic and loose trousers was
bending over, head and arms plunged into the bowels of the engine.

Dark hesitated. He had found his intruder, perhaps a traveler who had
run into engine trouble in the desert and had fortuitously been near
enough to take shelter here while making repairs. But, again, there was
no reason to anticipate unfriendliness.

Carrying his marsuits, Dark walked up to the groundcar, overhearing a
muffled bit of profanity as he approached. The unfortunate mechanic
evidently heard his footsteps, because he was greeted with:

"I wish to Phobos you'd stay down here and _try_ to help me, instead of
spending all your time snooping around this deserted shack!"

The voice was muffled, but it was definitely feminine and definitely
irritated. Dark grinned and replied drolly:

"I'm sorry, but this is the first time you've asked me to help you."

With an audible gasp, the woman disentangled herself, in dangerous
haste, from the groundcar engine and faced Dark.

They stared at each other, in mutual shocked recognition.

There was Dark Kensington, bearded, his arms full of marsuits, and there
was Maya Cara Nome, sleeves rolled up, her lovely face streaked with
grease.

Dark's jaw dropped. Maya's lips formed a round, astonished O.

Then, with a squeal, she hurled herself on him, throwing her arms around
his neck. Dark staggered back, overwhelmed by marsuits, an abundance of
wriggling femininity and a babble of happy and-completely unintelligible
words gushed against his bearded cheek.

He managed to disentangle himself by the dual process of dropping the
marsuits and holding Maya forcibly at arm's length. She gazed up into
his face, her own awed and radiant, and was able to reduce her own words
to connected sentences.

"You're not here," she said positively. "You can't be here. You're dead.
I saw you killed. You must be one of the ghosts of Ultra Vires."

She wriggled free and threw her arms around his neck again, announcing
happily, "But you're a solid, _comfortable_ ghost, and I love you!"

Again, Dark managed to get her at arm's length and looked down seriously
into her face.

"Did I hear you correctly?" he asked soberly. "Did you say you love me?"

"I did. And I mean it. Oh, Dark, how I mean it!"

He pulled her to him. He kissed her gravely. Then he held her close in
his arms, while she rested her head contentedly against his shoulder.

"What," he asked at last, "are you doing here, tinkering with a
groundcar?"

"Nuwell and I were on our way to Mars City by helicopter, when it failed
and crashed," she explained. "This was the only place near enough for us
to make it afoot, and the marsuit radios don't have the range to call
for help. We've been here more than two weeks now, trying to repair
these groundcars."

She looked at the machine she had been working on and shook her head
ruefully.

"I don't think any of them can be fixed," she said. "Nuwell, it turns
out, doesn't know a damn thing about machinery, but I was taught a good
deal about mechanics when I was trained as a terrestrial agent. Even
with three groundcars to supply parts, there are some things missing
that I don't think I can jury-rig substitutes for."

She turned back to Dark.

"But you're dead!" she exclaimed. "I know you are, because we carried
your body with us to the Canfell Hydroponic Farm. How in space can you
be here, alive and kissing, when you made such a beautiful corpse?"

Dark explained the circumstances to her; how he had awakened in the vat,
how he had been able to breathe underwater, how the sight of Goat
Hennessey had revived in him the memory of his identity as Brute, how he
had been able to walk across the desert without a marsuit.

"If you're Brute Hennessey, I know why you aren't dead," she said when
he had finished. "We fell in with a party of Martians on our way here,
and they told me about certain embryonic changes they made on you and
Adam before Goat kidnapped your mothers and brought them to Ultra Vires.
Qril--he's the Martian I talked to--said that these alterations not only
permit you to live in a free Martian environment, but give you
extraordinary regenerative powers."

"They must be extraordinary, if they permit me to come to life again
after being stabbed in the heart and having my belly burned out with a
heatgun," observed Dark.

"That's because your tissues aren't dependent on oxygen-carbon
combustion," explained Maya. "According to Qril, when oxygen is no
longer available to you, your cells utilize direct solar energy. That
would prevent your tissues from dying while the damaged area of your
body is under repair."

She looked at him in sudden awed realization.

"It would seem, darling, that you're virtually indestructible!" she
said.

Dark laughed.

"Perhaps so," he said. "But I don't hanker to experiment along those
lines any more than necessary. Dying is a very unpleasant experience,
even if I do come to life again."

"Oh, Dark," said Maya, remembering. "I'd like for Qril to see you, and
maybe he'll give us some more information. They came back here three
days ago and, for some reason, have just been hanging around outside,
under the walls. Let me get on a marsuit, and I'll take you to him."

"Here, put on one of these," suggested Dark, picking up the one he had
selected for Old Beard.

Maya wriggled into it. The Martians, she said, were on the other side of
Ultra Vires, so they left the motor pool and walked down one of the long
corridors together, Maya clinging to Dark's arm with one hand and
carrying her marshelmet under her other arm.

They were halfway across the big building when Nuwell Eli appeared
around a corner about thirty feet ahead of them. He stopped, staring, at
the sight of Maya's companion.

"Maya," he began, as they neared him. "Who ...?"

Then he recognized Dark.

With a terrified yelp, Nuwell turned and raced back down the side
corridor at top speed. They heard the clack-clack of his heels on the
stone floor, fading in the distance.

Dark and Maya stopped and looked at each other.

"It must have been quite a shock to him, too, to see you risen from the
dead," she said. "I don't believe he's as happy to see you as I was,
Dark."

"No, his joy seemed considerably mitigated," replied Dark gravely. "But,
Maya, this raises a rather serious question which hadn't occurred to me
before, in the happiness of our reunion."

"What's that, darling?"

"You're a terrestrial agent and, as such, you put me under arrest. It's
true, you tried to free me later. But didn't you tell me that night that
you were engaged to marry this man, Nuwell Eli?"

"Yes," she admitted in a small voice. "But--"

"I haven't had the pleasure of meeting the gentleman before," continued
Dark, still in the same grave tone. "But you and he were going back to
Mars City together, and, for some reason, it occurs to me that you and
he planned to be married as soon as you could get there."

Maya was somewhat stunned at this evidence of mind reading.

"That's true," she said in a very small voice.
