yards upon its leg; and if it ascended still higher, a greater amount in
proportion.

It was natural to suppose that the bearcoot in going out would choose
the lowest part of the precipice--especially when feeling his flight
impeded by the strange attachment upon his leg; and if this conjecture
should prove correct, there would be all the less weight to be
sustained.  But, indeed, by the cord itself they could guide the
bearcoot to the lowest part--since by holding it in their hands, they
could hinder him taking flight in any other direction.

Considering all these circumstances, and rather cheered by the many
points that appeared to be in their favour, they proceeded to make trial
of the eagle's strength.

It would not take long to decide; but conscious of the great importance
of the result, they set about it with due deliberation.

A log of wood was procured, and chopped down, till it was exactly the
weight of the rope to be used.  To this the piece of twenty yards--
already employed for a different purpose--was attached at one end--the
other being tightly knotted around the shank of the eagle.

When all was ready, the bird was stripped of his other fastenings; and
then all retired to a distance to give him space for the free use of his
wings.

Fancying himself no longer under restraint, the bearcoot sprang up from
the rock on which he had been placed; and, spreading his broad wings,
rose almost vertically into the air.

For the first twenty yards he mounted with a vigorous velocity; and the
hopes of the spectators found utterance in joyful ejaculations.

Alas! these hopes were short-lived, ending almost on the instant of
their conception.  The rope, carried to its full length, became suddenly
taut--jerking the eagle several feet back towards the earth.  At the
same time the log was lifted only a few inches from the ground.  The
bird fluttered a moment, taken aback by this unexpected interruption;
and, after recovering its equilibrium, again essayed a second flight
towards the sky.

Once more the rope tightened--as before raising the log but very little
from the ground--while the eagle, as if this time expecting the pluck,
suffered less derangement of its flight than on the former occasion.
For all that, it was borne back, until its anchor "touched bottom."
Then after making another upward effort, with the like result, it
appeared to become convinced of its inability to rise vertically, and
directed its flight in a horizontal line along the cliffs.  The log was
jerked over the ground, bounding from point to point, occasionally
swinging in the air, but only for a few seconds at a time.

At length the conviction forced itself upon the minds of the
spectators--as it seemed also to have done upon that of the performer--
that to reach the top of the cliff--with a cord upon its leg, equal in
weight to that log--was more than a bearcoot could accomplish.

In short, the plan had proved a failure; and, no longer hoping for
success, our adventurers turned their disappointed looks upon each
other--leaving the eagle free to drag his wooden anchor whithersoever he
might wish.



CHAPTER THIRTY EIGHT.

FURTHER EXPERIMENTS.

The usual silence which succeeds a disappointment was for some time
preserved by the three individuals who had been spectators of the
unsuccessful attempt of the eagle.  Caspar seemed less cast down than
the others; but why it was so, neither of them thought of asking him.

It was not a silence of very long duration, nor was the chagrin that had
caused it of much longer continuance.  Both were evanescent as the
summer cloud that for a moment darkens the sky, and then glides off--
leaving it bright and serene as ever.

It was to Caspar the party was indebted for this happy change of
feeling.  An idea had occurred to the young hunter--or rather a new
scheme--which was at once communicated to his companions.

Strictly speaking, Caspar's scheme could not be termed a _new_ one.  It
was only supplementary to that already set before them by Karl; and the
bearcoot, as before, was to be the chief actor in it.

While calculating the length of rope it would take to reach to the top
of the cliff, Caspar had already bethought him of a way by which it
might be shortened--in other words, how it might be arranged, that a
shorter rope would suffice.  He had for some time carried this idea in
his mind; but had declined communicating it, to the others, until after
witnessing the test of the eagle's strength.  Now that the bearcoot had
been "weighed and found wanting," you might suppose that the creature
would be no longer cared for--excepting to furnish them with a meal.
This was the reflection of Karl and Ossaroo; but Caspar thought
differently.  He was impressed with a belief, that the bird might still
do them a service--the very one which he had undertaken so
unsuccessfully.

Caspar reflected, and very correctly: that it was the extra weight that
had hindered the eagle from ascending.  It was not so much beyond his
strength neither.  Perhaps had it been only half as heavy, or even a
little more, he might have succeeded in carrying it over the cliff.

What if the weight should be reduced?

To make the rope more slender did not enter into Caspar's calculations.
He knew this could not be done: since it was a point already discussed
and decided upon.

But how if the rope were to be _shorter_, than that which had been
theoretically considered?  How if it were to be only fifty yards,
instead of one hundred and fifty?  Of course, then the eagle might fly
with it, to whatever height its length would allow.

Caspar felt satisfied of this fact; nor did either of the others
question its truth--but what then?

"What," inquired Karl, "would be the use of a rope of fifty yards,
though the eagle might carry it up to the moon?  Even at the lowest part
of the cliffs--should the bearcoot take one end over, the other would be
fifty yards above our heads?"

"Not a yard, brother--not a foot.  The other end would be in our hands--
in our hands, I tell you."

"Well, Caspar," calmly rejoined the philosopher, "you appear to be
confident enough; though I can't guess what you are driving at.  You
know this hideous precipice is at no point less than a hundred yards in
sheer height?"

"I do," replied Caspar, still speaking in the same tone of confidence;
"but a rope of only fifty--ay, of not more than half that length--may be
held in our hands, while the other end is over the top of the cliff."

Karl looked perplexed; but the shikaree, on this occasion quicker of
perception than the philosopher, catching at Caspar's meaning, cried
out:--

"Ha, ha! young sahib meanee from top ob da ladder!  Dat meanee he."

"Exactly so," said Caspar; "you've guessed right, Ossy.  I mean just
that very thing."

"Oh! then, indeed," said Karl, in a drawling tone, at the same time
lapsing into a reflective silence.

"Perhaps you are right, brother," he added, after a pause.  "At all
events, it will be easy to try.  If your scheme succeed, we shall not
require to make any more cord.  What we have will be sufficient.  Let us
make trial at once!"

"Where is the bearcoot?" asked Caspar, looking around to discover the
bird.

"Yonner be he, young sahib," answered Ossaroo, pointing towards the
precipice; "yonner sitee he--ober da rock."

The eagle was perceived, perched, or rather crouching, on a low ledge of
the cliff,--upon which it had dropped down after its unsuccessful
attempt at flight.  It looked crestfallen, and as if it would suffer
itself to be caught by the hand.  But as Ossaroo approached it with this
intention, the bird seemed to fancy itself free, and once more rose,
with a bold swoop, into the air.

It was only to feel the check-string tighten afresh upon his leg.  It
came fluttering down again, first drawn back by the weight of the log,
and afterwards by the strong arm of the shikaree.

The log was now removed; and the whole rope they had on hand--a length
of rather more than fifty yards--was knotted in its place.

The bearcoot was again set free--Ossaroo taking care to keep the leash
well in hand; and now the beautiful bird of Jove rose into the air, as
if not the summit of the cliff, but the proud peak of Chumulari, was to
be the limit of its flight.

At the height of fifty yards its soaring ambition was suddenly curbed,
by the check-string of Ossaroo, reminding it that it was still a
captive.

The experiment had proved successful.  Caspar's plan promised well; and
they at once proceeded to take the necessary steps for carrying it into
practical effect.



CHAPTER THIRTY NINE.

THE EAGLE'S ESCAPE.

The first thing to be done, was to look to the quality of the rope, and
test its strength.  The ladders were already in place, just as they had
been left.  The rope once _proved_, there would be nothing further to
do, but make it secure to the shank of the bearcoot; ascend the cliff to
the highest ledge, reached by the ladders; and then fly the bird.

Should they succeed in getting the creature to go over the cliff--and by
some means entangle the cord at the top--they might consider themselves
free.  The very thought of such a result--now apparently certain--once
more raised their spirits to the highest pitch.

They did not count on being able to "swarm" up a piece of slender cord
of nearly fifty yards in length--a feat that would have baffled the most
agile tar that ever "slung the monkey" from a topgallant stay.  They had
no thoughts of climbing the rope in that way; but in another, long
before conceived and discussed.  They intended--once they should be
assured that the cord was secure above--to make steps upon it, by
inserting little pieces of wood between the "strands;" and these, which
they could fix at long distances, one after the other, would form
supports, upon which they might rest their feet in the ascent.

As we have said, all this had been settled beforehand; and no longer
occupied their attention--now wholly absorbed in contriving some way to
prove the reliability of the rope, upon which their lives were about to
be imperilled.

It was not deemed sufficient to tie the rope to a tree, and pull upon it
with all their united strength.  Karl and Caspar thought this would be a
sufficient test; but Ossaroo was of a different opinion.  A better
plan--according to the shikaree's way of thinking--was one which had
generated in his oriental brain; and which, without heeding the
remonstrances of the others, he proceeded to make trial of.  Taking one
end of the rope with him, he climbed into a tall tree; and, after
getting some way out on a horizontal branch--full fifty feet from the
ground--he there fastened the cord securely.  By his directions the
young sahibs laid hold below; and, both together, raising their feet
from the ground, remained for some seconds suspended in the air.

As the rope showed no symptoms either of stretching or breaking under
the weight of both, it was evident that it might, under any
circumstances, be trusted to carry the weight of one; and in this
confidence, the shikaree descended from the tree.

With the eagle carried under his right arm, and the coil of rope
swinging over his left, Ossaroo now proceeded towards the place where
the ladders rested against the cliff.  Karl and Caspar walked close
after, with Fritz following in the rear--all four moving in silence, and
with a certain solemnity of look and gesture--as befitted the important
business upon which they were bent.

The new experiment, like the trial of the eagle's strength, did not
occupy any great length of time.  Had it proved successful, our
adventurers would have been longer occupied, and in the end would have
been seen triumphantly standing upon the summit of the cliff--with Fritz
frisking up the snowy slope beyond, as if he intended to chase the great
_ovis ammon_ upon the heaven-kissing crest of Chumulari.

Ah! how different was the spectacle presented on the evening of that
eventful day!  A little before sunset the three adventurers were seen
slowly and sadly returning to their hut--that despised hovel, under
whose homely roof they had hoped never to seek shelter again!

Alas! in the now lengthened list of their unsuccessful struggles, they
had once more to record a failure!

Ossaroo, bearing the bearcoot under his arm, had climbed the ladders up
to the highest ledge that could be attained.  From it he had "flown" the
eagle--freely dealing out all the cord in his possession.  That was a
perilous experiment for the shikaree to make; and came very near proving
the last act in the drama of his life.

Thinking that the bearcoot would rise upward into the air, he had not
thought of anything else; and as he stood balancing himself on that
narrow shelf, he was but ill prepared for what actually came to pass.
Instead of soaring upwards, the eagle struck out in a horizontal
direction, not changing its course till it had reached the end of its
tether; and then not changing it, nor even pausing in its flight, but
with the fifty yards of rope trailing behind it--which, fortunately for
Ossaroo, he was himself no longer at the end of--it continued on across
the valley towards the cliffs on the opposite side--the summit of which
it would have no difficulty in attaining by following the diagonal line
in which it was making that unexpected escape from the clutches of the
shikaree.

Not without chagrin did Karl and Caspar behold the spectacle of the
bearcoot's departure; and for a while they were under the impression
that Ossaroo had bungled the business with which he had been entrusted.

Ossaroo's explanations, however, were soon after received; and proved
satisfactory.  It was evident from these, that had he not let go in the
right time, he would have been compelled to make a leap, that would have
left him no opportunity for explaining the nature of the eagle's escape.



CHAPTER FORTY.

FRITZ AND THE FALCONS.

With feelings of sad and bitter disappointment did our adventurers turn
their backs upon these ladders--that had once more deluded them--and
make their way towards the hut.

As upon the former occasion, they walked with slow steps and downcast
mien.  Fritz, by his slouching gait and drooped tail, showed that he
shared the general despondency.

They had arrived nearly at the hut, before any of the three thought of
speaking; when the sight of that rude homestead, to which they had so
often fancied themselves on the eve of bidding farewell--and to which as
often had they been compelled to return--suggested a theme to Karl:
causing him to break silence as they advanced towards the doorway.

"Our true friend," said he, pointing to the hovel, "a friend, when all
else fails us.  Rough it is--like many a friend that is nevertheless
worthy.  I begin to like its honest look, and feel regard for it as one
should for a home."

Caspar said nothing in reply.  He only sighed.  The young chamois-hunter
of the Bavarian Alps thought of another home--far away towards the
setting sun; and, so long as that thought was in his mind, he could
never reconcile himself to a forced residence in the Himalayas.

The thoughts of Ossaroo were equally absent from that spot.  He was
thinking of a bamboo hut by the borders of some crystal stream,
overshadowed by palms and other tropical trees.  He was thinking still
more of rice curry and chutnee; but above all, of his beloved "betel,"
for which the "bang" of the _cannabis sativa_ was but a poor substitute.

But Caspar had another thought in his mind; one which proved that he had
not yet abandoned all hope of returning to the home of his nativity;
and, after they had finished eating their supper of broiled venison, he
gave utterance to it.

He had not volunteered to break the silence.  It was done in obedience
to a request of Karl who, having noticed the abstracted air of his
brother, had asked for an explanation.

"I've been thinking," said Caspar, "ever since the eagle has escaped us,
of another bird I know something about--one that might perform the
service we want quite as well, if not better, than a bearcoot."

"Another bird!" inquired Karl; "of what bird are you speaking?  Do you
mean one of those Brahminy geese upon the lake?  We might catch one
alive, it is true; but let me tell you, brother, that their wings are
constructed just strong enough to carry their own ponderous bodies; and
if you added another pound or two, by tying a cord to their legs, they
could no more mount out of this valley than we can.  No--no.  I fancy we
may as well give up that idea.  There's no bird but an eagle with wing
strong enough to do what you wish."

"The bird I was thinking of," rejoined Caspar, "is of the same _genus_
as the eagle.  I believe that's correctly scientific language.  Isn't
it, my Buffon of a brother?  Ha! ha!  Well, shall I name it?  Surely,
you have already divined the sort of bird to which I allude?"

"No, indeed," replied Karl.  "There are no other birds in this valley of
the same genus as the eagle--except hawks; and according to the closet
naturalists, they are not of the same genus--only of the same _family_.
If you mean a hawk, there are several species in this place; but the
largest of them could not carry anything over the cliff heavier than a
string of twine.  See, there's a brace of them now!" continued Karl,
pointing to two birds that were circling in the air, some twenty yards
overhead.  "`Churk' falcons they are called.  They are the largest of
the Himalayan hawks.  Are these your birds, brother?"

"A couple of kites, are they not?" interrogated Caspar, turning his eyes
upward, and regarding the two winged creatures circling above, and
quartering the air as if in search of prey.

"Yes," answered the naturalist, "they are of that species; and,
correctly described, of the same genus as the eagles.  You don't mean
them, I suppose?"

"No--not exactly," replied Caspar, in a drawling tone, and smiling
significantly as he spoke; "but if they be _kites_--Ho! what now?"
exclaimed the speaker, his train of thought, as well as speech, suddenly
interrupted by a movement on the part of the falcons.  "What the
mischief are the birds about?  As I live, they seem to be making an
attack upon Fritz!  Surely they don't suppose they have the strength to
do any damage to our brave old dog?"

As Caspar spoke, the two falcons were seen suddenly to descend--from the
elevation at which they had been soaring--and then sweep in quick short
circles around the head of the Bavarian boar-hound--where he squatted on
the ground, near a little copse, some twenty yards from the hut.

"Perhaps their nest is there--in the copse?" suggested Karl; "That's why
they are angry with the dog: for angry they certainly appear to be."

So any one might have reasoned, from the behaviour of the birds, as they
continued their attack upon the dog--now rising some feet above him, and
then darting downward in a sort of parabolic curve--at each swoop
drawing nearer and nearer, until the tips of their wings were almost
flapped in his face.  These movements were not made in silence: for the
falcons, as they flew, kept uttering their shrill cries--that sounded
like the voice of a pair of angry vixens.

"Their young must be near?" suggested Karl.

"No, sahib," said Ossaroo, "no nest--no chickee.  Fritz he hab suppa--de
piece ob meat ob da ibex.  Churk wantee take de dog suppa away."

"Oh!  Fritz is eating something, is he?" said Caspar.  "That explains it
then.  How very stupid of these birds, to fancy they could steal his
supper from our valiant Fritz: more especially since he seems to relish
it so much himself!  Why he takes no notice of them!"

It was quite true that Fritz, up to this time, had scarcely noticed the
brace of winged assailants; and their hostile demonstrations had only
drawn from him an occasional "yir."  As they swooped nearer, however,
and the tips of their wings were "wopped" into his very eyes, the thing
was growing unbearable; and Fritz began to lose temper.  His "yirs"
became more frequent; and once or twice he rose from his squatting
attitude, and made a snap at the feathers that were nearest.

For more than five minutes this curious play was kept up between the
boar-hound and the birds; and then the episode was brought to a somewhat
singular--and in Fritz's estimation, no doubt--a very unpleasant
termination.

From the first commencement of their attack, the two falcons had
followed a separate course of action.  One appeared to make all its
approaches from the front; while the other confined its attacks
exclusively to Fritz's rear.  In consequence of these tactics on the
part of his assailants, the dog was compelled to defend himself both
before and behind: and to do this, it became necessary for him to look
"two ways at once."  Now, he would snarl and snap at the assailant in
front--anon, he must sieve himself round, and in like manner menace the
more cowardly "churk" that was attacking him in the rear.  Of the two,
however, the latter was the more demonstrative and noisy; and at length,
not content with giving Fritz an occasional "wop" with its wing, it had
the daring audacity to strike its sharp talons into a part of his
posteriors approximate to the seat of honour.

This was something more than canine flesh and blood could bear; and
Fritz determined not to submit to it any longer.  Dropping the "quid" he
had been chewing, he started up on all fours; wheeled suddenly towards
