chromosphere, composed of gases less easily liquefied, hydrogen is the
chief one, while between photosphere and chromosphere is a thin layer of
metallic vapors, perhaps indistinguishable from the top crust of the
photosphere itself, which by absorbing the light given off from the
liquid photosphere produces the greater part of the Fraunhofer lines in
the solar spectrum.

From time to time the hot matter struggling up from below breaks through
the photosphere and, carrying with it a certain amount of the metallic
vapors, is launched into the upper and cooler regions of the sun,
where, parting with its heat, it falls back again upon the photosphere
and is absorbed into it. It is altogether probable that the corona is
chiefly composed of fine particles ejected from the sun with velocities
sufficient to carry them to a height of millions of miles, or even
sufficient to carry them off never to return. The matter of the corona
must certainly be in a state of the most lively agitation, its particles
being alternately hurled up from the photosphere and falling back again
like fireworks, the particles which make up the corona of to-day being
quite a different set from those of yesterday or last week. It seems
beyond question that the prominences and faculæ too are produced in some
way by this up-and-down circulation of the sun's matter, and that any
mechanical explanation of the sun must be worked out along these lines;
but the problem is an exceedingly difficult one, and must include and
explain many other features of the sun's activity of which only a few
can be considered here.

129. THE SUN-SPOT PERIOD.--Sun spots come and go, and at best any
particular spot is but short-lived, rarely lasting more than a month or
two, and more often its duration is a matter of only a few days. They
are not equally numerous at all times, but, like swarms of locusts, they
seem to come and abound for a season and then almost to disappear, as if
the forces which produced them were of a periodic character alternately
active and quiet. The effect of this periodic activity since 1870 is
shown in Fig. 81, where the horizontal line is a scale of times, and the
distance of the curve above this line for any year shows the relative
number of spots which appeared upon the sun in that year. This indicates
very plainly that 1870, 1883, and 1893 were years of great sun-spot
activity, while 1879 and 1889 were years in which few spots appeared.
The older records, covering a period of two centuries, show the same
fluctuations in the frequency of sun spots and from these records
curves (which may be found in Young's, The Sun) have been plotted,
showing a succession of waves extending back for many years.

[Illustration: FIG. 81.--The curve of sun-spot frequency.]

The sun-spot period is the interval of time from the crest or hollow of
one wave to the corresponding part of the next one, and on the average
this appears to be a little more than eleven years, but is subject to
considerable variation. In accordance with this period there is drawn in
broken lines at the right of Fig. 81 a predicted continuation of the
sun-spot curve for the first decade of the twentieth century. The
irregularity shown by the three preceding waves is such that we must not
expect the actual course of future sun spots to correspond very closely
to the prediction here made; but in a general way 1901 and 1911 will
probably be years of few sun spots, while they will be numerous in 1905,
but whether more or less numerous than at preceding epochs of greatest
frequency can not be foretold with any approach to certainty so long as
we remain in our present ignorance of the causes which make the sun-spot
period.

Determine from Fig. 81 as accurately as possible the length of the
sun-spot period. It is hard to tell the exact position of a crest or
hollow of the curve. Would it do to draw a horizontal line midway
between top and bottom of the curve and determine the length of the
period from its intersections with the curve--e. g., in 1874 and 1885?

[Illustration: FIG. 82.--Illustrating change of the sun-spot zones.]

130. THE SUN-SPOT ZONES.--It has been already noted that sun spots are
found only in certain zones of latitude upon the sun, and that faculæ
and eruptive prominences abound in these zones more than elsewhere,
although not strictly confined to them. We have now to note a
peculiarity of these zones which ought to furnish a clew to the sun's
mechanism, although up to the present time it has not been successfully
traced out. Just before a sun-spot minimum the few spots which appear
are for the most part clustered near the sun's equator. As these spots
die out two new groups appear, one north the other south of the sun's
equator and about 25° or 30° distant from it, and as the period advances
toward a maximum these groups shift their positions more and more toward
the equator, thus approaching each other but leaving between them a
vacant lane, which becomes steadily narrower until at the close of the
period, when the next minimum is at hand, it reaches its narrowest
dimensions, but does not altogether close up even then. In Fig. 82 these
relations are shown for the period falling between 1879 and 1890, by
means of the horizontal lines; for each year one line in the northern
and one in the southern hemisphere of the sun, their lengths being
proportional to the number of spots which appeared in the corresponding
hemisphere during the year, and their positions on the sun's disk
showing the average latitude of the spots in question. It is very
apparent from the figure that during this decade the sun's southern
hemisphere was much more active than the northern one in the production
of spots, and this appears to be generally the case, although the
difference is not usually as great as in this particular decade.

131. INFLUENCE OF THE SUN-SPOT PERIOD.--Sun spots are certainly less hot
than the surrounding parts of the sun's surface, and, in view of the
intimate dependence of the earth upon the solar radiation, it would be
in no way surprising if their presence or absence from the sun's face
should make itself felt in some degree upon the earth, raising and
lowering its temperature and quite possibly affecting it in other ways.
Ingenious men have suggested many such kinds of influence, which,
according to their investigations, appear to run in cycles of eleven
years. Abundant and scanty harvests, cyclones, tornadoes, epidemics,
rainfall, etc., are among these alleged effects, and it is possible that
there may be a real connection between any or all of them and the
sun-spot period, but for the most part astronomers are inclined to hold
that there is only one case in which the evidence is strong enough to
really establish a connection of this kind. The magnetic condition of
the earth and its disturbances, which are called magnetic storms, do
certainly follow in a very marked manner the course of sun-spot
activity, and perhaps there should be added to this the statement that
auroras (northern lights) stand in close relation to these magnetic
disturbances and are most frequent at the times of sun-spot maxima.

Upon the sun, however, the influence of the spot period is not limited
to things in and near the photosphere, but extends to the outermost
limits of the corona. Determine from Fig. 81 the particular part of the
sun-spot period corresponding to the date of each picture of the corona
and note how the pictures which were taken near times of sun-spot minima
present a general agreement in the shape and extent of the corona, while
the pictures taken at a time of maximum activity of the sun spots show a
very differently shaped and much smaller corona.

132. THE LAW OF THE SUN'S ROTATION.--We have seen in a previous part of
the chapter how the time required by the sun to make a complete rotation
upon its axis may be determined from photographs showing the progress of
a spot or group of spots across its disk, and we have now to add that
when this is done systematically by means of many spots situated in
different solar latitudes it leads to a very peculiar and extraordinary
result. Each particular parallel of latitude has its own period of
rotation different from that of its neighbors on either side, so that
there can be no such thing as a fixed geography of the sun's surface.
Every part of it is constantly taking up a new position with respect to
every other part, much as if the Gulf of Mexico should be south of the
United States this year, southeast of it next year, and at the end of a
decade should have shifted around to the opposite side of the earth from
us. A meridian of longitude drawn down the Mississippi Valley remains
always a straight line, or, rather, great circle, upon the surface of
the earth, while Fig. 83 shows what would become of such a meridian
drawn through the equatorial parts of the sun's disk. In the first
diagram it appears as a straight line running down the middle of the
sun's disk. Twenty-five days later, when the same face of the sun comes
back into view again, after making a complete revolution about the axis,
the equatorial parts will have moved so much faster and farther than
those in higher latitudes that the meridian will be warped as in the
second diagram, and still more warped after another and another
revolution, as shown in the figure.

[Illustration: FIG. 83.--Effect of the sun's peculiar rotation in
warping a meridian, originally straight.]

At least such is the case if the spots truly represent the way in which
the sun turns round. There is, however, a possibility that the spots
themselves drift with varying speeds across the face of the sun, and
that the differences which we find in their rates of motion belong to
them rather than to the photosphere. Just what happens in the regions
near the poles is hard to say, for the sun spots only extend about
halfway from the equator to the poles, and the spectroscope, which may
be made to furnish a certain amount of information bearing upon the
case, is not as yet altogether conclusive, nor are the faculæ which have
also been observed for this purpose.

The simple theory that the solar phenomena are caused by an interchange
of hotter and cooler matter between the photosphere and the lower strata
of the sun furnishes in its present shape little or no explanation of
such features as the sun-spot period, the variations in the corona, the
peculiar character of the sun's rotation, etc., and we have still
unsolved in the mechanical theory of the sun one of the noblest problems
of astronomy, and one upon which both observers and theoretical
astronomers are assiduously working at the present time. A close watch
is kept upon sun spots and prominences, the corona is observed at every
total eclipse, and numerous are the ingenious methods which are being
suggested and tried for observing it without an eclipse in ordinary
daylight. Attempts, more or less plausible, have been made and are now
pending to explain photosphere, spots and the reversing layer by means
of the refraction of light within the sun's outer envelope of gases, and
it seems altogether probable, in view of these combined activities, that
a considerable addition to our store of knowledge concerning the sun may
be expected in the not distant future.




CHAPTER XI

THE PLANETS


133. PLANETS.--Circling about the sun, under the influence of his
attraction, is a family of planets each member of which is, like the
moon, a dark body shining by reflected sunlight, and therefore
presenting phases; although only two of them, Mercury and Venus, run
through the complete series--new, first quarter, full, last
quarter--which the moon presents. The way in which their orbits are
grouped about the sun has been considered in Chapter III, and Figs. 16
and 17 of that chapter may be completed so as to represent all of the
planets by drawing in Fig. 16 two circles with radii of 7.9 and 12.4
centimeters respectively, to represent the orbits of the planets Uranus
and Neptune, which are more remote from the sun than Saturn, and by
introducing a little inside the orbit of Jupiter about 500 ellipses of
different sizes, shapes, and positions to represent a group of minor
planets or asteroids as they are often called. It is convenient to
regard these asteroids as composing by themselves a class of very small
planets, while the remaining 8 larger planets fall naturally into two
other classes, a group of medium-sized ones--Mercury, Venus, Earth, and
Mars--called inner planets by reason of their nearness to the sun; and
the outer planets--Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, Neptune--each of which is
much larger and more massive than any planet of the inner group. Compare
in Figs. 84 and 85 their relative sizes. The earth, _E_, is introduced
into Fig. 85 as a connecting link between the two figures.

Some of these planets, like the earth, are attended by one or more
moons, technically called satellites, which also shine by reflected
sunlight and which move about their respective planets in accordance
with the law of gravitation, much as the moon moves around the earth.

[Illustration: FIG. 84.--The inner planets and the moon.]

[Illustration: FIG. 85.--The outer planets.]

134. DISTANCES OF THE PLANETS FROM THE SUN.--It is a comparatively
simple matter to observe these planets year after year as they move
among the stars, and to find from these observations how long each one
of them requires to make its circuit around the sun--that is, its
periodic time, _T_, which figures in Kepler's Third Law, and when these
periodic times have been ascertained, to use them in connection with
that law to determine the mean distance of each planet from the sun.
Thus, Jupiter requires 4,333 days to move completely around its orbit;
and comparing this with the periodic time and mean distance of the earth
we find--

    a^{3} / (4333^{2}) = (93,000,000^{3}) / (365.25^{2}),

which when solved gives as the mean distance of Jupiter from the sun,
483,730,000 miles, or 5.20 times as distant as the earth. If we make a
similar computation for each planet, we shall find that their distances
from the sun show a remarkable agreement with an artificial series of
numbers called Bode's law. We write down the numbers contained in the
first line of figures below, each of which, after the second, is
obtained by doubling the preceding one, add 4 to each number and point
off one place of decimals; the resulting number is (approximately) the
distance of the corresponding planet from the sun.

 Mercury.  Venus.  Earth.  Mars.    Jupiter.  Saturn.  Uranus.  Neptune.
    0        3       6      12   24   48        96       192      384
    4        4       4       4    4    4         4         4        4
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
   0.4      0.7     1.0    1.6  2.8  5.2      10.0      19.6     38.8
   0.4      0.7     1.0    1.5  2.8  5.2       9.5      19.2     30.1

The last line of figures shows the real distance of the planet as
determined from Kepler's law, the earth's mean distance from the sun
being taken as the unit for this purpose. With exception of Neptune, the
agreement between Bode's law and the true distances is very striking,
but most remarkable is the presence in the series of a number, 2.8, with
no planet corresponding to it. This led astronomers at the time Bode
published the law, something more than a century ago, to give new heed
to a suggestion made long before by Kepler, that there might be an
unknown planet moving between the orbits of Mars and Jupiter, and a
number of them agreed to search for such a planet, each in a part of the
sky assigned him for that purpose. But they were anticipated by Piazzi,
an Italian, who found the new planet, by accident, on the first day of
the nineteenth century, moving at a distance from the sun represented by
the number 2.77.

This planet was the first of the asteroids, and in the century that has
elapsed hundreds of them have been discovered, while at the present time
no year passes by without several more being added to the number. While
some of these are nearer to the sun than is the first one discovered,
and others are farther from it, their average distance is fairly
represented by the number 2.8.

Why Bode's law should hold true, or even so nearly true as it does, is
an unexplained riddle, and many astronomers are inclined to call it no
law at all, but only a chance coincidence--an illustration of the
"inherent capacity of figures to be juggled with"; but if so, it is
passing strange that it should represent the distance of the asteroids
and of Uranus, which was also an undiscovered planet at the time the law
was published.

135. THE PLANETS COMPARED WITH EACH OTHER.--When we pass from general
considerations to a study of the individual peculiarities of the
planets, we find great differences in the extent of knowledge concerning
them, and the reason for this is not far to seek. Neptune and Uranus, at
the outskirts of the solar system, are so remote from us and so feebly
illumined by the sun that any detailed study of them can go but little
beyond determining the numbers which represent their size, mass,
density, the character of their orbits, etc. The asteroids are so small
that in the telescope they look like mere points of light, absolutely
indistinguishable in appearance from the fainter stars. Mercury,
although closer at hand and presenting a disk of considerable size,
always stands so near the sun that its observation is difficult on this
account. Something of the same kind is true for Venus, although in much
less degree; while Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn are comparatively easy
objects for telescopic study, and our knowledge of them, while far from
complete, is considerably greater than for the other planets.

Figs. 84 and 85 show the relative sizes of the planets composing the
inner and outer groups respectively, and furnish the numerical data
concerning their diameters, masses, densities, etc., which are of most
importance in judging of their physical condition. Each planet, save
Saturn, is represented by two circles, of which the outer is drawn
proportional to the size of the planet, and the inner shows the amount
of material that must be subtracted from the interior in order that the
remaining shell shall just float in water. Note the great difference in
thickness of shell between the two groups. Saturn, having a mean density
less than that of water, must have something loaded upon it, instead of
removed, in order that it should float just submerged.


JUPITER

136. APPEARANCE.--Commencing our consideration of the individual planets
with Jupiter, which is by far the largest of them, exceeding both in
bulk and mass all the others combined, we have in Fig. 86 four
representations of Jupiter and his family of satellites as they may be
seen in a very small telescope--e. g., an opera glass--save that the
little dots which here represent the satellites are numbered _1_, _2_,
_3_, _4_, in order to preserve their identity in the successive
pictures.

The chief interest of these pictures lies in the satellites, but,
reserving them for future consideration, we note that the planet itself
resembles in shape the full moon, although in respect of brightness it
sends to us less than 1/6000 part as much light as the moon. From a
consideration of the motion of Jupiter and the earth in Fig. 16, show
that Jupiter can not present any such phases as does the moon, but that
its disk must be at all times nearly full. As seen from Saturn, what
kind of phases would Jupiter present?

137. THE BELTS.--Even upon the small scale of Fig. 86 we detect the most
characteristic feature of Jupiter's appearance in the telescope, the two
bands extending across his face parallel to the line of the satellites,
and in Fig. 87 these same dark bands may be recognized amid the
abundance of detail which is here brought out by a large telescope.
Photography does not succeed as a means of reproducing this detail, and
for it we have to rely upon the skill of the artist astronomer. The
lettering shows the Pacific Standard time at which the sketches were
made, and also the longitude of the meridian of Jupiter passing down the
center of the planet's disk.

[Illustration: FIG. 86.--Jupiter and his satellites.]

[Illustration: FIG. 87.--Drawings of Jupiter made at the 36-inch
telescope of the Lick Observatory.--KEELER.]

The dark bands are called technically the belts of Jupiter; and a
comparison of these belts in the second and third pictures of the group,
in which nearly the same face of the planet is turned toward us, will
show that they are subject to considerable changes of form and position
even within the space of a few days. So, too, by a comparison of such
markings as the round white spots in the upper parts of the disks, and
the indentations in the edges of the belts, we may recognize that the
planet is in the act of turning round, and must therefore have an axis
about which it turns, and poles, an equator, etc. The belts are in fact
parallel to the planet's equator; and generalizing from what appears in
the pictures, we may say that there is always a strongly marked belt on
each side of the equator with a lighter colored streak between them,
and that farther from the equator are other belts variable in number,
less conspicuous, and less permanent than the two first seen. Compare
the position of the principal belts with the position of the zones of
sun-spot activity in the sun. A feature of the planet's surface, which
can not be here reproduced, is the rich color effect to be found upon
it. The principal belts are a brick-red or salmon color, the intervening
spaces in general white but richly mottled, and streaked with purples,
browns, and greens.

The drawings show the planet as it appeared in the telescope, inverted,
and they must be turned upside down if we wish the points of the compass
to appear as upon a terrestrial map. Bearing this in mind, note in the
last picture the great oval spot in the southern hemisphere of Jupiter.
This is a famous marking, known from its color as the _great red spot_,
which appeared first in 1878 and has persisted to the present day
(1900), sometimes the most conspicuous marking on the planet, at others
reduced to a mere ghost of itself, almost invisible save for the
indentation which it makes in the southern edge of the belt near it.

138. ROTATION AND FLATTENING AT THE POLES.--One further significant fact
with respect to Jupiter may be obtained from a careful measurement of
the drawings; the planet is flattened at the poles, so that its polar
diameter is about one sixteenth part shorter than the equatorial
diameter. The flattening of the earth amounts to only one
three-hundredth part, and the marked difference between these two
numbers finds its explanation in the greater swiftness of Jupiter's
rotation about its axis, since in both cases it is this rotation which
makes the flattening.

It is not easy to determine the precise dimensions of the planet, since
this involves a knowledge both of its distance from us and of the angle
subtended by its diameter, but the most recent determinations of this
kind assign as the equatorial diameter 90,200 miles, and for the polar
diameter 84,400 miles. Determine from either of these numbers the size
of the great red spot.

The earth turns on its axis once in 24 hours but no such definite time
can be assigned to Jupiter, which, like the sun, seems to have different
rotation periods in different latitudes--9h. 50m. in the equatorial belt
