So Hanlon stepped back in quickly. While Gorton was out of position from
that abortive mighty swing, he drove his fist to the wrist into the big
man's soft belly. As Gorton doubled up with an explosive grunt, Hanlon
swung from the heels. His uppercut caught the big fellow flush on the
jaw, and staggered him.

But Gorton could take it, and charged again, roaring curses. By sheer
weight he bore Hanlon back across the floor, and got in a couple of
heavy blows. Hanlon's right cheek was badly bruised, and that eye almost
closed. But he was fighting methodically, almost viciously. He was in
and out, slashing and ripping Gorton's face to shreds.

The other guards had been yelling their delight at the fight, and their
hatred of the brash newcomer who was destroying their easy set-up. It
was plain they were all on Gorton's side, and hoped to see Hanlon get
thoroughly whipped.

"Bat his ears off, Gort!"

"Pound some sense inta him!"

"Show him who's top man aroun' here!"

One of them was not content with yelling. As Hanlon stepped to one side
to avoid another of Gorton's rushes, this guard stuck out his leg and
tripped Hanlon, who fell backward. Instantly Gorton was on him, and a
great heavy-shod foot shot out in a kick that would have broken Hanlon's
every rib. But the SS man was watching for just such tricks. His feet
snaked out and hoisted Gorton so high and so far that when he landed he
crashed like a great falling tree. Hanlon jumped to his feet and swung
to confront his foe. But Gorton's head was bleeding badly, his eyes were
closed, his face contorted. He was out like a burnt match.

Instantly Hanlon sank to his knees by the fallen man, gently raising the
head and yelling for cold water and a towel. When the cook came running
with them, Hanlon worked as swiftly to revive the guard as he would have
done for his friend.

The other guards were so surprised at this act of mercy they sat like
dull clods. But a couple of the engineers rose and came swiftly to help
Hanlon. One of the checkers ran to Philander's office for the first aid
kit.

The men were working desperately to stanch the flow of blood when
Superintendent Philander came running in with the clerk and the kit.
Taking in the situation at a glance, he demanded an explanation.

"Th' punk jumped Gort an' tried t' kill 'im!" one of the guards yelled,
but was shouted down by the engineers, the checkers and the cook before
the other slow-witted guards came to their senses enough to corroborate
their fellow's mendacious claim.

The senior engineer explained fully and concisely what had actually
happened. "Yet after all that, the kid was the first to help him, even
though Gorton started the fight for no reason."

Just then the fallen guard groaned and began to regain his senses. The
men helped him to his feet. He blinked for some moments, as though
trying to figure out what had happened to him, then remembrance came.

"Why, that little squirt, hittin' me wit' a chair!" he yelled, and
straggled to get at Hanlon again, nor did the men have an easy time
holding him back.

Philander planted himself squarely in front of the angry man. "Shut up!"
he blazed, and the tone of command halted the big fellow; he stared
stupidly at his boss, as though disbelieving his ears. "You keep your
hands off Hanlon!" the super emphasized his words by tapping Gorton not
gently on the chest. "I hear of any more of this, and it's the jug 'til
the next ship comes, then back to Sime."

He whirled to face the table. "That goes for all the rest of you rats,
too! If Hanlon does his job better'n you, it's 'cause he's a better man.
Try to match him--don't go gunning for him!"

"He your pet, Pete?" one asked mockingly.

"No, he's not my pet, Pete," the super's voice mimicked the tone,
although his face went red at the accusation. "I just don't want this
camp messed up with any feuds. That'd cut down production, and the Big
Boy wants this ore out fast. If Hanlon can work his crew faster'n
harder'n the rest of you, you'd a blasted sight better find out how he
does it, not try to cut down his take. How'd you like to go back to Sime
and try explaining to His Highness why you're not getting out as much
stuff as's been proved possible?"

That stopped them cold. Hanlon, watching their faces and reading their
minds, saw them shiver at thought of having to face that feared
individual--whoever he was. They were more scared of him than of the
Devil--that was evident.

The men resumed their eating without another word--that threat had cowed
them as no amount of physical chastisement or other punishment could
possibly have done. Philander set about sewing up and binding Gorton's
head-wound and his cut and bleeding face.

Hanlon resumed his own seat after washing up and treating his own
bruises with the cook's help. As he ate he sought mind after mind in the
vain endeavor to discover any possible scrap of information about this
enigmatic, unknown Highness.

But he drew blank after blank, as far as definite data was
concerned--just as he had always done. The surface thoughts of each man
there showed plainly their fear of that implacably cold and vicious
brain, but none of them held a picture of him.

They knew no excuses for failure were ever accepted. They knew terrible
punishments were certain to follow when anyone was luckless enough to
incur that monster's displeasure.

But Hanlon shivered, himself, as he saw how clearly those hardened
criminals feared that mysterious man's displeasure. He quailed
momentarily at thought of what would happen to him if he were caught
trying to locate that man and his plot.

Hanlon knew a long moment of utter discouragement. There was so much he
had to know before he could lead the Corps in clearing up this mess.
There had been so many mentions of a "main plot" that he knew this
illegal mining and slavery was but a small part of what was ... what
must be ... going on.

No, he would just have to keep on trying, keep on working. On second
thought, he had done pretty well so far, at that--he felt he had a right
to feel good about that.

But he wasn't done yet, by a whole tankful of fuel.

The problem stayed with him even in sleep, but in the morning he had an
idea.

As soon as he got his crew down into the mine and working, he got out
the frequency-transformer, and called Geck to him.

"Can you find out what is happening on other parts of Guddu?"

The native's answers stunned him.

"Yes, An-yon, all we can mind-talk with any Guddu anywhere. What you
wish to know?"




Chapter 16


The knowledge that these Guddus of Algon were telepathic rocked George
Hanlon back on his heels. That was a thing he had never even imagined.
They were such a simple, almost childlike race, that such an ability was
farthest from his thoughts.

"If you can talk with your minds?" he asked Geck in wonder, "why do you
bother to speak with the voice to each other?"

"Because mind-talk more tiring to we," came the simple explanation. "It
take much of we's forces. Us grow weak after much of them."

"That makes me hesitate to ask you to do any of it, then," the young SS
man said. "I was hoping you could find out for me how many mines are
operated on the planet, and if all of them are using you Guddus as
slaves."

"Oh, yes, An-yon, me know that already," Geck's peculiar little face,
which had become so friendly to Hanlon through long association, broke
out into a smile that was quickly shadowed by sorrow at thought of the
plight of his people. "There is nine mines. Human masters make Guddu
work in all of they."

"Nine, eh?" Hanlon thought swiftly for a moment. "Do they all produce
the same ores as this one?"

"Will have to find that for you, An-yon. You wait short space of time."

The Greenie grew silent and strained with concentration. Hanlon probed
into the native's mind, wondering if he could follow it. And haltingly
at first, but with growing ability as he learned the pattern, he found
he could ride along on that telepathic beam.

The thoughts were far too swift for him to catch more than an occasional
concept, but he was thrilled to realize he was actually telepathing,
even though at second-hand.

One after another mind he could feel joining in that conference. There
was much hostility and great fear when Geck first tried to explain about
the human who was their friend, and had learned to talk with them. The
Guddus on the other end of that "line" were tremendously skeptical,
afraid, and very, very suspicious of the motives of any human being.

But Geck was eloquent and persuasive. Before long their fears began to
lessen, and later they seemed to accept his assurance that "An-yon" was,
indeed, both friendly and anxious to help them escape their slavery.

"The human An-yon is but one of the most of humans who are kind and just
and ethical," he was surprised to hear Geck telepathing when he got so
he could understand. "It is the few, such as those others who are here,
who are not. These are bad men who come here just to get things for own
selfish ends, and the good men, who are most, will stop them as soon as
they can. An-yon come here just for that, to find out what those bad men
do, and to stop them."

That speech was another shock to Hanlon--he had never told Geck all
that.

The distant natives finally bowed to Geck's importunings, and gave him
the specific information for which he was asking because the friendly
human wanted to know it.

There were two other mines that produced the same uraninite ore as the
one at which Hanlon was stationed. There were three iron mines, and
Hanlon was not too surprised to learn that at each of these mines
smelters had been erected. He learned that humans were used mostly in
the mills, the natives being used only for outside labor because they
could not stand the heat.

"We burn quickly," was the sad, horrified thought.

There were three other mines, but the natives did not know the English
or Greek names for the metals found there. Even after considerable
questioning by the roundabout "Hanlon to Geck to the Guddus back to Geck
back to Hanlon" method, he still couldn't get that specific information.

"If it isn't tiring you too much, Geck, please ask them if there is any
building going on besides the smelters at the iron mines?" Hanlon
requested.

Soon other minds about the planet were coming in, and the story began to
unfold--there were several factories making many machines. But none of
the natives had the least idea what kind, or for what purpose they were
being made.

"Think they are going to be put in great metal huts humans are making,"
one thought ran, and Hanlon quickly grabbed onto that.

"What sort of metal huts?"

"Things that look like huge eggs."

"Space ships, you mean?"

Another thought broke in. "Yes, they like ships human come in, but much
greater."

Hanlon fumed. Oh, if only he could see ... but wait, maybe he could get
the information he needed. "Ask if anyone is looking at one of those
'eggs' right now," he commanded Geck through the transformer.

"Yes, An-yon, many Guddu right at edge of great place of making. Brother
of me, Nock, him there."

"Ask him, please, to describe what he sees. Maybe that will give me a
good picture of what it is."

"Will be glad to try, but not knowing your language and having no
compare your measurement to ours, am not sure can do what you wish," he
felt Nock say.

This, too, surprised Hanlon. That native certainly had a real mind, to
grasp that difficulty so well, and to realize the limitations of
telepathic communications with one alien to his race.

"Please picture it in your mind as you see it, and use some common
objects of the planet for comparison of their sizes," Hanlon urged
through Geck's mind. "That way I think we can get along."

Almost instantly a picture of a gigantic egg formed in his mind, but
with enough variations from an actual egg so that Hanlon realized it
was, indeed, a space ship the native was viewing. Soon Hanlon saw a
great tree pictured beside the ship, and at the base of the tree a
native was standing.

Quickly Hanlon estimated. The adult natives he had seen were almost all
about six feet tall. As nearly as he could judge that tree was a good
fifteen times the height of the Guddu, and the ship was the same height
as the tree, and nearly three times as long.

Wow! What a ship! But it must be wrong. Even the largest Corps' warships
were nowhere near that huge. Nor were even any of the biggest freighters
he had ever seen. He must be getting his measurements wrong.

He called Geck, using the transformer. "Are you seeing what I am in
Nock's mind?"

"Yes, An-yon, and you is figure right. Is that big."

Hanlon slowly shook his head in amazement. If that was meant for a
warship, it certainly spelled trouble for someone. He thought seriously
for several moments, then telepathed Nock. "Is there more than one ship
being built?"

"Oh, yes, there are many many." The picture built up of a whole row of
ships, and Hanlon counted swiftly.

_Eighteen!_

For what purpose was such a fleet being built? Men would not defy the
I-S C and the Federated Planets this way merely for business reasons, he
felt sure. There certainly was a plot being hatched--and what a plot!

He felt Geck's hand on his arm, and heard his voice. "Are two more
places where humans build many ship, An-yon. While you think me talk
many minds. One place are fourteen more great ones. At other are many
many many small ones five to ten Guddu long."

Shock on shock! Someone was building a tremendous fleet here! He must
get that news to Corps headquarters as quickly as possible. If those
ships were once finished, they would be able to dominate the system. For
the Corps had only a nominal fleet. They had never needed a large one.

To the best of his knowledge the Corps had only thirty-one first-line
battleships, much smaller than these. The Fleet also had fifty heavy
cruisers, a hundred and fifty light cruisers, and a thousand scouts
running from one-man up to twelve-man size.

"Please find out if any of those ships they are building have ever left
the ground."

"Some little ones only," Geck reported after awhile. "Some few disappear
into sky then come back after time, then do same again."

Trial trips, or training trips for the crews, Hanlon deduced.

Well, he had some data now, at least. Enough so that once he got that
news to Headquarters they would attack this place in force great enough
to stop this work ... IF ... he could get word to them soon enough.

"Let's see now," he figured quickly. "I've been here almost twelve
weeks. That means another six or seven until I'm supposed to be eligible
to get back to Simonides. Hmmm. Wish I knew how near finished those big
battle-wagons are."

More moments of intense thought. "I don't dare take the chance of trying
to sneak off to the yards," he reasoned logically. "I've got to do
everything I can to make sure I get my trip back when my eighteen weeks
are up. If I got caught off bounds that would ruin everything--I'd
really be in a mess."

Also, even if he could get to the shipyards, the moment he was spotted
trying to get inside any of those ships he would undoubtedly be killed
by guards who would certainly shoot first and ask questions later--if
any.

Nor were there any longer any native birds or animals left on Algon he
could use--he had learned that the men had killed them off soon after
they arrived.

"No, I'll just have to keep on trying, and get what dope I can without
exposing myself. With a month and a half I should be able to get a lot
more, and with what I already know, the Corps top brass will take steps,
but fast!"

Suddenly a new idea sprang into his mind. Where was "here?" In his
excitement and planning he had entirely forgotten to finish figuring out
that point.

That evening after dinner he stayed outside, ostensibly walking about
aimlessly, in reality looking at and studying the stars when he was sure
no one was watching him.

He couldn't spot any of the more familiar constellations such as the Big
Dipper, Bear, or the Southern Cross. He knew he was far to one side of
the galaxy from Terra--that while from there one could see the "front"
of those configurations, now he would be getting a "sidewise" view. But
he could identify quite a few of the bigger suns and distant nebulae.

He picked out several blue-white and red giants he was sure he knew.
That was Andromeda off there; that one was undoubtedly Orion--no other
contained so many 4.0 to 5.2 stars, beside the gigantic Rigel,
Betelgeuse and Bellatrix.

Good, he could fix all that in his mind well enough to draw it when he
got back, and the Corps planetographers certainly would pin-point this
system from those directions. Distance--let's see? He strained to
remember the time it had taken that freighter to come here, and
estimated that, with its slower speed, this world was somewhere between
ten and fifteen lights. He would time it more carefully, going back, and
estimate the ship's speed as closely as possible.

Young George Hanlon was maturing swiftly under the stress of the
tremendous task he was attempting. He was learning that he must think
and plan well ahead of time. He realized he could not afford to make any
serious mistakes, lest not only his task remain uncompleted, but his
life be forfeit as well.

He knew now that it was absolutely imperative that he get back to
Simonides at the earliest possible moment, and that the way to be sure
of this was to so impress Philander that he would feel duty-bound to
give Hanlon his vacation at end of the minimum time.

So Hanlon devoted many hours of serious thought to this problem, and
finally figured out several courses of action. The next day, as soon as
his shift was over, Hanlon walked across the compound and knocked on the
door of the headquarters office. When bade to enter he did so, hat in
hand.

"Have you got a half hour or so to talk, Mr. Philander, sir?" he asked.
"I've got a couple of ideas I'd like to gab with you about, that I think
might speed up production even more."

The man looked up in surprise, and his eyes bored deeply, suspiciously
into Hanlon's. "You think you can tell me how to run my job?" he rasped.

"Oh, no, sir. I didn't mean about the engineering or supervision. It's
about handling the natives, and getting more out of them. You've said I
was getting out more ore than the others, and I think perhaps I've got a
few ideas--a sort of hunch about making the Greenies themselves more
productive."

"Well, come in, come in then. What is it?"

"I've been doing a lot of thinking about the Greenies, sir. You remember
I thought they were vegetable matter, and the way they feed themselves
they'd need ground that either has lots of natural chemicals in it, or
that has been well-fertilized, to keep 'em well and strong. That being
the case, the dirt that forms the floors of their huts and stockades
would very quickly become exhausted of those vital chemicals, and the
natives would begin suffering from malnutrition, it seems to me. My gang
has been slowing down recently, although they still seem to be trying as
hard as ever."

"Why ... why, yes," the superintendent's eyes had widened in surprise as
Hanlon talked. "That makes sense. Imagine none of us thinking of that!
But then, we've always thought of them merely as dumb beasts."

"So I've been wondering if it wouldn't be a good idea either to move the
stockades every month or so, or else let the natives 'feed' out in the
open jungle every day--the sunlight would probably help them, too, being
vegetable. They could be tied together and guarded, of course, so they
couldn't escape."

Philander slumped down into his chair in deep thought, and Hanlon glowed
inwardly with the hope that something would come of this plan. It would
help him with Philander, if it worked. Also, it would help the Guddus,
for Geek had often grown almost hysterical when complaining about the
