of the German lines. He succeeded, after a perilous journey, in
gaining Havre by way of Bordeaux and Lyons; and after procuring the
necessary apparatus in England, he descended the Seine as far as
Poissy, which he reached on the 14th January 1871. After his
departure, two other scholars, MM. Desains and Bourbouze, relieving
each other day and night, waited at Paris, in a wherry on the Seine,
ready to receive the signal which they awaited with patriotic anxiety.
It was a question of working a process devised by the last-named pair,
in which the water of the river acted the part of the line wire. On
the 23rd January the communication at last seemed to be established,
but unfortunately, first the armistice and then the surrender of Paris
rendered useless the valuable result of this noble effort.

Special mention is also due to the experiments made by the Indian
Telegraph Office, under the direction of Mr Johnson and afterwards of
Mr W.F. Melhuish. They led, indeed, in 1889 to such satisfactory
results that a telegraph service, in which the line wire was replaced
by the earth, worked practically and regularly. Other attempts were
also made during the latter half of the nineteenth century to transmit
signals through the sea. They preceded the epoch when, thanks to
numerous physicists, among whom Lord Kelvin undoubtedly occupies a
preponderating position, we succeeded in sinking the first cable; but
they were not abandoned, even after that date, for they gave hopes of
a much more economical solution of the problem. Among the most
interesting are remembered those that S.W. Wilkins carried on for a
long time between France and England. Like Cooke and Wheatstone, he
thought of using as a receiver an apparatus which in some features
resembles the present receiver of the submarine telegraph. Later,
George E. Dering, then James Bowman and Lindsay, made on the same
lines trials which are worthy of being remembered.

But it is only in our own days that Sir William H. Preece at last
obtained for the first time really practical results. Sir William
himself effected and caused to be executed by his associates--he is
chief consulting engineer to the General Post Office in England--
researches conducted with much method and based on precise theoretical
considerations. He thus succeeded in establishing very easy, clear,
and regular communications between various places; for example, across
the Bristol Channel. The long series of operations accomplished by so
many seekers, with the object of substituting a material and natural
medium for the artificial lines of metal, thus met with an undoubted
success which was soon to be eclipsed by the widely-known experiments
directed into a different line by Marconi.

It is right to add that Sir William Preece had himself utilised
induction phenomena in his experiments, and had begun researches with
the aid of electric waves. Much is due to him for the welcome he gave
to Marconi; it is certainly thanks to the advice and the material
support he found in Sir William that the young scholar succeeded in
effecting his sensational experiments.


Sec. 4

The starting-point of the experiments based on the properties of the
luminous ether, and having for their object the transmission of
signals, is very remote; and it would be a very laborious task to hunt
up all the work accomplished in that direction, even if we were to
confine ourselves to those in which electrical reactions play a part.
An electric reaction, an electrostatic influence, or an
electromagnetic phenomenon, is transmitted at a distance through the
air by the intermediary of the luminous ether. But electric influence
can hardly be used, as the distances it would allow us to traverse
would be much too restricted, and electrostatic actions are often very
erratic. The phenomena of induction, which are very regular and
insensible to the variations of the atmosphere, have, on the other
hand, for a long time appeared serviceable for telegraphic purposes.

We might find, in a certain number of the attempts just mentioned, a
partial employment of these phenomena. Lindsay, for instance, in his
project of communication across the sea, attributed to them a
considerable role. These phenomena even permitted a true telegraphy
without intermediary wire between the transmitter and the receiver, at
very restricted distances, it is true, but in peculiarly interesting
conditions. It is, in fact, owing to them that C. Brown, and later
Edison and Gilliland, succeeded in establishing communications with
trains in motion.

Mr Willoughby S. Smith and Mr Charles A. Stevenson also undertook
experiments during the last twenty years, in which they used
induction, but the most remarkable attempts are perhaps those of
Professor Emile Rathenau. With the assistance of Professor Rubens and
of Herr W. Rathenau, this physicist effected, at the request of the
German Ministry of Marine, a series of researches which enabled him,
by means of a compound system of conduction and induction by
alternating currents, to obtain clear and regular communications at a
distance of four kilometres. Among the precursors also should be
mentioned Graham Bell; the inventor of the telephone thought of
employing his admirable apparatus as a receiver of induction phenomena
transmitted from a distance; Edison, Herr Sacher of Vienna, M. Henry
Dufour of Lausanne, and Professor Trowbridge of Boston, also made
interesting attempts in the same direction.

In all these experiments occurs the idea of employing an oscillating
current. Moreover, it was known for a long time--since, in 1842, the
great American physicist Henry proved that the discharges from a
Leyden jar in the attic of his house caused sparks in a metallic
circuit on the ground floor--that a flux which varies rapidly and
periodically is much more efficacious than a simple flux, which latter
can only produce at a distance a phenomenon of slight intensity. This
idea of the oscillating current was closely akin to that which was at
last to lead to an entirely satisfactory solution: that is, to a
solution which is founded on the properties of electric waves.


Sec. 5

Having thus got to the threshold of the definitive edifice, the
historian, who has conducted his readers over the two parallel routes
which have just been marked out, will be brought to ask himself
whether he has been a sufficiently faithful guide and has not omitted
to draw attention to all essential points in the regions passed
through.

Ought we not to place by the side, or perhaps in front, of the authors
who have devised the practical appliances, those scholars who have
constructed the theories and realised the laboratory experiments of
which, after all, the apparatus are only the immediate applications?
If we speak of the propagation of a current in a material medium, can
one forget the names of Fourier and of Ohm, who established by
theoretical considerations the laws which preside over this
propagation? When one looks at the phenomena of induction, would it
not be just to remember that Arago foresaw them, and that Michael
Faraday discovered them? It would be a delicate, and also a rather
puerile task, to class men of genius in order of merit. The merit of
an inventor like Edison and that of a theorist like Clerk Maxwell have
no common measure, and mankind is indebted for its great progress to
the one as much as to the other.

Before relating how success attended the efforts to utilise electric
waves for the transmission of signals, we cannot without ingratitude
pass over in silence the theoretical speculations and the work of pure
science which led to the knowledge of these waves. It would therefore
be just, without going further back than Faraday, to say how that
illustrious physicist drew attention to the part taken by insulating
media in electrical phenomena, and to insist also on the admirable
memoirs in which for the first time Clerk Maxwell made a solid bridge
between those two great chapters of Physics, optics and electricity,
which till then had been independent of each other. And no doubt it
would be impossible not to evoke the memory of those who, by
establishing, on the other hand, the solid and magnificent structure
of physical optics, and proving by their immortal works the undulatory
nature of light, prepared from the opposite direction the future
unity. In the history of the applications of electrical undulations,
the names of Young, Fresnel, Fizeau, and Foucault must be inscribed;
without these scholars, the assimilation between electrical and
luminous phenomena which they discovered and studied would evidently
have been impossible.

Since there is an absolute identity of nature between the electric and
the luminous waves, we should, in all justice, also consider as
precursors those who devised the first luminous telegraphs. Claude
Chappe incontestably effected wireless telegraphy, thanks to the
luminous ether, and the learned men, such as Colonel Mangin, who
perfected optical telegraphy, indirectly suggested certain
improvements lately introduced into the present method.

But the physicist whose work should most of all be put in evidence is,
without fear of contradiction, Heinrich Hertz. It was he who
demonstrated irrefutably, by experiments now classic, that an electric
discharge produces an undulatory disturbance in the ether contained in
the insulating media in its neighbourhood; it was he who, as a
profound theorist, a clever mathematician, and an experimenter of
prodigious dexterity, made known the mechanism of the production, and
fully elucidated that of the propagation of these electromagnetic
waves.

He must naturally himself have thought that his discoveries might be
applied to the transmission of signals. It would appear, however, that
when interrogated by a Munich engineer named Huber as to the
possibility of utilising the waves for transmissions by telephone, he
answered in the negative, and dwelt on certain considerations relative
to the difference between the periods of sounds and those of
electrical vibrations. This answer does not allow us to judge what
might have happened, had not a cruel death carried off in 1894, at the
age of thirty-five, the great and unfortunate physicist.

We might also find in certain works earlier than the experiments of
Hertz attempts at transmission in which, unconsciously no doubt,
phenomena were already set in operation which would, at this day, be
classed as electric oscillations. It is allowable no doubt, not to
speak of an American quack, Mahlon Loomis, who, according to Mr Story,
patented in 1870 a project of communication in which he utilised the
Rocky Mountains on one side and Mont Blanc on the other, as gigantic
antennae to establish communication across the Atlantic; but we cannot
pass over in silence the very remarkable researches of the American
Professor Dolbear, who showed, at the electrical exhibition of
Philadelphia in 1884, a set of apparatus enabling signals to be
transmitted at a distance, which he described as "an exceptional
application of the principles of electrostatic induction." This
apparatus comprised groups of coils and condensers by means of which
he obtained, as we cannot now doubt, effects due to true electric
waves.

Place should also be made for a well-known inventor, D.E. Hughes, who
from 1879 to 1886 followed up some very curious experiments in which
also these oscillations certainly played a considerable part. It was
this physicist who invented the microphone, and thus, in another way,
drew attention to the variations of contact resistance, a phenomenon
not far from that produced in the radio-conductors of Branly, which
are important organs in the Marconi system. Unfortunately, fatigued
and in ill-health, Hughes ceased his researches at the moment perhaps
when they would have given him final results.

In an order of ideas different in appearance, but closely linked at
bottom with the one just mentioned, must be recalled the discovery of
radiophony in 1880 by Graham Bell, which was foreshadowed in 1875 by
C.A. Brown. A luminous ray falling on a selenium cell produces a
variation of electric resistance, thanks to which a sound signal can
be transmitted by light. That delicate instrument the radiophone,
constructed on this principle, has wide analogies with the apparatus
of to-day.


Sec. 6

Starting from the experiments of Hertz, the history of wireless
telegraphy almost merges into that of the researches on electrical
waves. All the progress realised in the manner of producing and
receiving these waves necessarily helped to give rise to the
application already indicated. The experiments of Hertz, after being
checked in every laboratory, and having entered into the strong domain
of our most certain knowledge, were about to yield the expected fruit.

Experimenters like Sir Oliver Lodge in England, Righi in Italy,
Sarrazin and de la Rive in Switzerland, Blondlot in France, Lecher in
Germany, Bose in India, Lebedeff in Russia, and theorists like M.H.
Poincare and Professor Bjerknes, who devised ingenious arrangements or
elucidated certain points left dark, are among the artisans of the
work which followed its natural evolution.

It was Professor R. Threlfall who seems to have been the first to
clearly propose, in 1890, the application of the Hertzian waves to
telegraphy, but it was certainly Sir W. Crookes who, in a very
remarkable article in the _Fortnightly Review_ of February 1892,
pointed out very clearly the road to be followed. He even showed in
what conditions the Morse receiver might be applied to the new system
of telegraphy.

About the same period an American physicist, well known by his
celebrated experiments on high frequency currents--experiments, too,
which are not unconnected with those on electric oscillations,--M.
Tesla, demonstrated that these oscillations could be transmitted to
more considerable distances by making use of two vertical antennae,
terminated by large conductors.

A little later, Sir Oliver Lodge succeeded, by the aid of the coherer,
in detecting waves at relatively long distances, and Mr Rutherford
obtained similar results with a magnetic indicator of his own
invention.

An important question of meteorology, the study of atmospheric
discharges, at this date led a few scholars, and more particularly the
Russian, M. Popoff, to set up apparatus very analogous to the
receiving apparatus of the present wireless telegraphy. This comprised
a long antenna and filings-tube, and M. Popoff even pointed out that
his apparatus might well serve for the transmission of signals as soon
as a generator of waves powerful enough had been discovered.

Finally, on the 2nd June 1896, a young Italian, born in Bologna on the
25th April 1874, Guglielmo Marconi, patented a system of wireless
telegraphy destined to become rapidly popular. Brought up in the
laboratory of Professor Righi, one of the physicists who had done most
to confirm and extend the experiments of Hertz, Marconi had long been
familiar with the properties of electric waves, and was well used to
their manipulation. He afterwards had the good fortune to meet Sir
William (then Mr) Preece, who was to him an adviser of the highest
authority.

It has sometimes been said that the Marconi system contains nothing
original; that the apparatus for producing the waves was the
oscillator of Righi, that the receiver was that employed for some two
or three years by Professor Lodge and Mr Bose, and was founded on an
earlier discovery by a French scholar, M. Branly; and, finally, that
the general arrangement was that established by M. Popoff.

The persons who thus rather summarily judge the work of M. Marconi
show a severity approaching injustice. It cannot, in truth, be denied
that the young scholar has brought a strictly personal contribution to
the solution of the problem he proposed to himself. Apart from his
forerunners, and when their attempts were almost unknown, he had the
very great merit of adroitly arranging the most favourable
combination, and he was the first to succeed in obtaining practical
results, while he showed that the electric waves could be transmitted
and received at distances enormous compared to those attained before
his day. Alluding to a well-known anecdote relating to Christopher
Columbus, Sir W. Preece very justly said: "The forerunners and rivals
of Marconi no doubt knew of the eggs, but he it was who taught them to
make them stand on end." This judgment will, without any doubt, be the
one that history will definitely pronounce on the Italian scholar.


Sec. 7

The apparatus which enables the electric waves to be revealed, the
detector or indicator, is the most delicate organ in wireless
telegraphy. It is not necessary to employ as an indicator a
filings-tube or radio-conductor. One can, in principle, for the purpose
of constructing a receiver, think of any one of the multiple effects
produced by the Hertzian waves. In many systems in use, and in the new
one of Marconi himself, the use of these tubes has been abandoned and
replaced by magnetic detectors.

Nevertheless, the first and the still most frequent successes are due
to radio-conductors, and public opinion has not erred in attributing
to the inventor of this ingenious apparatus a considerable and almost
preponderant part in the invention of wave telegraphy.

The history of the discovery of radio-conductors is short, but it
deserves, from its importance, a chapter to itself in the history of
wireless telegraphy. From a theoretical point of view, the phenomena
produced in those tubes should be set by the side of those studied by
Graham Bell, C.A. Brown, and Summer Tainter, from the year 1878
onward. The variations to which luminous waves give rise in the
resistance of selenium and other substances are, doubtless, not
unconnected with those which the electric waves produce in filings. A
connection can also be established between this effect of the waves
and the variations of contact resistance which enabled Hughes to
construct the microphone, that admirable instrument which is one of
the essential organs of telephony.

More directly, as an antecedent to the discovery, should be quoted the
remark made by Varley in 1870, that coal-dust changes in conductivity
when the electromotive force of the current which passes through it is
made to vary. But it was in 1884 that an Italian professor, Signor
Calzecchi-Onesti, demonstrated in a series of remarkable experiments
that the metallic filings contained in a tube of insulating material,
into which two metallic electrodes are inserted, acquire a notable
conductivity under different influences such as extra currents,
induced currents, sonorous vibrations, etc., and that this
conductivity is easily destroyed; as, for instance, by turning the
tube over and over.

In several memoirs published in 1890 and 1891, M. Ed. Branly
independently pointed out similar phenomena, and made a much more
complete and systematic study of the question. He was the first to
note very clearly that the action described could be obtained by
simply making sparks pass in the neighbourhood of the radio-conductor,
and that their great resistance could be restored to the filings by
giving a slight shake to the tube or to its supports.

The idea of utilising such a very interesting phenomenon as an
indicator in the study of the Hertzian waves seems to have occurred
simultaneously to several physicists, among whom should be especially
mentioned M. Ed. Branly himself, Sir Oliver Lodge, and MM. Le Royer
and Van Beschem, and its use in laboratories rapidly became quite
common.

The action of the waves on metallic powders has, however, remained
some what mysterious; for ten years it has been the subject of
important researches by Professor Lodge, M. Branly, and a very great
number of the most distinguished physicists. It is impossible to
notice here all these researches, but from a recent and very
interesting work of M. Blanc, it would seem that the phenomenon is
allied to that of ionisation.


Sec. 8

The history of wireless telegraphy does not end with the first
experiments of Marconi; but from the moment their success was
announced in the public press, the question left the domain of pure
science to enter into that of commerce. The historian's task here
becomes different, but even more delicate; and he will encounter
difficulties which can be only known to one about to write the history
of a commercial invention.

The actual improvements effected in the system are kept secret by the
rival companies, and the most important results are patriotically left
in darkness by the learned officers who operate discreetly in view of
the national defence. Meanwhile, men of business desirous of bringing
out a company proclaim, with great nourish of advertisements, that
they are about to exploit a process superior to all others.

On this slippery ground the impartial historian must nevertheless
venture; and he may not refuse to relate the progress accomplished,
which is considerable. Therefore, after having described the
experiments carried out for nearly ten years by Marconi himself, first
across the Bristol Channel, then at Spezzia, between the coast and the
ironclad _San Bartolommeo_, and finally by means of gigantic apparatus
between America and England, he must give the names of those who, in
the different civilised countries, have contributed to the improvement
of the system of communication by waves; while he must describe what
precious services this system has already rendered to the art of war,
and happily also to peaceful navigation.

From the point of view of the theory of the phenomena, very remarkable
results have been obtained by various physicists, among whom should be
particularly mentioned M. Tissot, whose brilliant studies have thrown
a bright light on different interesting points, such as the role of
the antennae. It would be equally impossible to pass over in silence
other recent attempts in a slightly different groove. Marconi's
system, however improved it may be to-day, has one grave defect. The
synchronism of the two pieces of apparatus, the transmitter and the
receiver, is not perfect, so that a message sent off by one station
may be captured by some other station. The fact that the phenomena of
resonance are not utilised, further prevents the quantity of energy
received by the receiver from being considerable, and hence the
effects reaped are very weak, so that the system remains somewhat
fitful and the communications are often disturbed by atmospheric
phenomena. Causes which render the air a momentary conductor, such as
electrical discharges, ionisation, etc., moreover naturally prevent
the waves from passing, the ether thus losing its elasticity.

Professor Ferdinand Braun of Strasburg has conceived the idea of
employing a mixed system, in which the earth and the water, which, as
we have seen, have often been utilised to conduct a current for
transmitting a signal, will serve as a sort of guide to the waves
themselves. The now well-known theory of the propagation of waves
guided by a conductor enables it to be foreseen that, according to
their periods, these waves will penetrate more or less deeply into the
natural medium, from which fact has been devised a method of
separating them according to their frequency. By applying this theory,
M. Braun has carried out, first in the fortifications of Strasburg,
and then between the island of Heligoland and the mainland,
experiments which have given remarkable results. We might mention also
the researches, in a somewhat analogous order of ideas, by an English
engineer, Mr Armstrong, by Dr Lee de Forest, and also by Professor
Fessenden.

Having thus arrived at the end of this long journey, which has taken
him from the first attempts down to the most recent experiments, the
historian can yet set up no other claim but that of having written the
commencement of a history which others must continue in the future.
Progress does not stop, and it is never permissible to say that an
invention has reached its final form.

Should the historian desire to give a conclusion to his labour and
answer the question the reader would doubtless not fail to put to him,
"To whom, in short, should the invention of wireless telegraphy more
particularly be attributed?" he should certainly first give the name
of Hertz, the genius who discovered the waves, then that of Marconi,
who was the first to transmit signals by the use of Hertzian
undulations, and should add those of the scholars who, like Morse,
Popoff, Sir W. Preece, Lodge, and, above all, Branly, have devised the
arrangements necessary for their transmission. But he might then
recall what Voltaire wrote in the _Philosophical Dictionary_:

"What! We wish to know what was the exact theology of Thot, of
Zerdust, of Sanchuniathon, of the first Brahmins, and we are ignorant
of the inventor of the shuttle! The first weaver, the first mason, the
