
Kent did. "All dead! No gravitational pull from any direction--no, that
one shows a slight attraction from ahead!"

"Then gravitational attraction of some sort does exist in the dead-area
after all!" Liggett exclaimed.

"You don't understand," said Crain. "That attraction from ahead is the
pull of the wreck-pack at the dead-area's center."

"And it's pulling the _Pallas_ toward it?" Kent exclaimed.

Crain nodded. "We'll probably reach the wreck-pack in two more
ship-days."

      *      *      *      *      *

The next two ship-days seemed to Kent drawn out endlessly. A moody
silence had grown upon the officers and men of the ship. All seemed
oppressed by the strange forces of fate that had seized the ship and
were carrying it, smoothly and soundlessly, into this region of
irrevocable doom.

The radio-operators' vain calls had ceased. The _Pallas_ drifted on into
the dreaded area like some dumb ship laden with damned souls. It drifted
on, Kent told himself, as many a wrecked and disabled ship had done
before it, with the ordinary activities and life of the solar system
forever behind it, and mystery and death ahead.

It was toward the end of the second of those two ship-days that
Liggett's voice came down from the pilot-house:

"Wreck-pack in sight ahead!"

"We've arrived, anyway!" Kent cried, as he and Crain hastened up into
the pilot house. The crew was running to the deck-windows.

"Right ahead there, about fifteen degrees left," Liggett told Kent and
Crain, pointing. "Do you see it?"

Kent stared; nodded. The wreck-pack was a distant, disk-like mass
against the star-flecked heavens, a mass that glinted here and there in
the feeble sunlight of space. It did not seem large, but, as they
drifted steadily closer in the next hours, they saw that in reality the
wreck-pack was tremendous, measuring at least fifty miles across.

Its huge mass was a heterogeneous heap, composed mostly of countless
cigar-like space-ships in all stages of wreckage. Some appeared smashed
almost out of all recognizable shape, while others were, to all
appearances unharmed. They floated together in this dense mass in space,
crowded against one another by their mutual attraction.

There seemed to be among them every type of ship known in the solar
system, from small, swift mail-boats to big freighters. And, as they
drifted nearer, the three in the pilot-house could see that around and
between the ships of the wreck-pack floated much other matter--fragments
of wreckage, meteors, small and large, and space-debris of every sort.

The _Pallas_ was drifting, not straight toward the wreck-pack, but in a
course that promised to take the ship past it.

"We're not heading into the wreck-pack!" Liggett exclaimed. "Maybe we'll
drift past it, and on out the dead-area's other side!"

      *      *      *      *      *

Captain Crain smiled mirthlessly. "You're forgetting your
space-mechanics, Liggett. We will drift along the wreck-pack's edge, and
then will curve in and go round it in a closing spiral until we reach
its edge."

"Lord, who'd have thought there were so many wrecks here!" Kent
marvelled. "There must be thousands of them!"

"They've been collecting here ever since the first interplanetary
rocket-ships went forth," Crain reminded him. "Not only meteor-wrecked
ships, but ships whose mechanisms went wrong--or that ran out of fuel
like ours--or that were captured and sacked, and then set adrift by
space-pirates."

The _Pallas_ by then was drifting along the wreck-pack's rim at a
half-mile distance, and Kent's eyes were running over the mass.

"Some of those ships look entirely undamaged. Why couldn't we find one
that has fuel in its tanks, transfer it to our own tanks, and get away?"
he asked.

Crain's eyes lit. "Kent, that's a real chance! There must be some ships
in that pack with fuel in them, and we can use the space-suits to
explore for them!"

"Look, we're beginning to curve in around the pack now!" Liggett
exclaimed.

The _Pallas_, as though loath to pass the wreck-pack, was curving
inward to follow its rim. In the next hours it continued to sail slowly
around the great pack, approaching closer and closer to its edge.

In those hours Kent and Crain and all in the ship watched with a
fascinated interest that even knowledge of their own peril could not
kill. They could see swift-lined passenger-ships of the Pluto and
Neptune runs shouldering against small space-yachts with the insignia of
Mars or Venus on their bows. Wrecked freighters from Saturn or Earth
floated beside rotund grain-boats from Jupiter.

The debris among the pack's wrecks was just as varied, holding fragments
of metal, dark meteors of differing size--and many human bodies. Among
these were some clad in the insulated space-suits, with their
transparent glassite helmets. Kent wondered what wreck they had
abandoned hastily in those suits, only to be swept with it into the
dead-area, to die in their suits.

By the end of that ship-day, the _Pallas_, having floated almost
completely around the wreck-pack, finally struck the wrecks at its edge
with a jarring shock; then bobbed for a while and lay still. From
pilot-house and deck windows the men looked eagerly forth.

      *      *      *      *      *

Their ship floated at the wreck-pack's edge. Directly to its right
floated a sleek, shining Uranus-Jupiter passenger-ship whose bows had
been smashed in by a meteor. On their left bobbed an unmarked freighter
of the old type with projecting rocket-tubes, apparently intact. Beyond
them in the wreck-pack lay another Uranus craft, a freighter, and,
beyond it, stretched the countless other wrecks.

Captain Crain summoned the crew together again on the middle-deck.

"Men, we've reached the wreck-pack at the dead-area's center, and here
we'll stay until the end of time unless we get out under our own power.
Mr. Kent has suggested a possible way of doing so, which I consider
highly feasible.

"He has suggested that in some of the ships in the wreck-pack may be
found enough fuel to enable us to escape from the dead-area, once it is
transferred to this ship. I am going to permit him to explore the
wreck-pack with a party in space suits, and I am asking for volunteers
for this service."

The entire crew stepped quickly forward. Crain smiled. "Twelve of you
will be enough," he told them. "The eight tube-men and four of the
cargo-men will go, therefore, with Mr. Kent and Mr. Liggett as leaders.
Mr. Kent, you may address the men if you wish."

"Get down to the lower airlock and into your space-suits at once, then,"
Kent told them. "Mr. Liggett, will you supervise that?"

As Liggett and the men trooped down to the airlock, Kent turned back
toward his superior.

"There's a very real chance of your becoming lost in this huge
wreck-pack, Kent," Crain told him: "so be very careful to keep your
bearings at all times. I know I can depend on you."

"I'll do my best," Kent was saying, when Liggett's excited face
reappeared suddenly at the stair.

"There are men coming toward the _Pallas_ along the wreck-pack's edge!"
he reported--"a half-dozen men in space-suits!"
