The Project Gutenberg EBook of Hayslope Grange, by Emma Leslie

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Hayslope Grange
       A Tale of the Civil War

Author: Emma Leslie

Release Date: August 28, 2006 [EBook #19136]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HAYSLOPE GRANGE ***




Produced by David Clarke, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                            HAYSLOPE GRANGE

                        A TALE OF THE CIVIL WAR

                            BY EMMA LESLIE

AUTHOR OF "THE CAPTIVES," "CONSTANCIA'S HOUSEHOLD," "THE ORPHAN AND
FOUNDLING."

    LONDON:
    Sunday School Union.
    56, OLD BAILEY
    THOS. NELSON & SONS, 42, BLEECKER ST., NEW YORK

    THE GRESHAM PRESS
    LONDON & CHILWORTH

    UNWIN BROTHERS,
    PRINTERS BY WATER TOWER.




CONTENTS.


     CHAPTER I. THE DRURY FAMILY

    CHAPTER II. HARRY'S ANNOUNCEMENT

   CHAPTER III. TRAITOR OR HERO

    CHAPTER IV. CROMWELL'S IRONSIDES

     CHAPTER V. MAUD HARCOURT

    CHAPTER VI. THE HAYSLOPE

   CHAPTER VII. THE REVEL

  CHAPTER VIII. BESSIE'S DISTRESS

    CHAPTER IX. THE WOUNDED MESSENGER

     CHAPTER X. "ON, CAVALIER, ON!"

    CHAPTER XI. MYSTERIES

   CHAPTER XII. HARRY'S RETURN




CHAPTER I.

THE DRURY FAMILY.


It was a sweet spring day, soft and balmy as summer, and any one looking
across the green meadows and smiling uplands of Hayslope, now so full of
the promise of early fruitfulness, would have wondered what could make
the farm-labourers appear so gloomy, and the women-folk sigh instead of
singing at their work, if he knew nothing of what was going on a few
miles away.

It was the year 1644, and for two long years civil war had been raging
in England, and now two rival Parliaments were sitting, the one presided
over by the King meeting at Oxford, while that in London was engaged
upon the trial of Archbishop Laud, and levying war against the King, so
that it was not to be wondered at that men looked gloomy and sorrowful,
for they were dark, sad times for everybody.

Hayslope was a little village on the borders of Essex, but quite out of
the high road usually taken by travellers going from London northward,
so that when a young man came riding in towards the middle of the day,
everybody turned from their work to look at him. They did not make a
very close inspection before they raised their hats and cheered; but
this greeting, pleasant as it was, scarcely brought a smile to his lips
as he rode on up to the principal house in the place--Hayslope Grange.
This was a large, rambling, roomy building, half farm-house, half
mansion, standing in the midst of an old-fashioned garden, surrounded by
fields, and enclosed with a moat. The moat was dry now, and had been for
some years, and a permanent bridge of planks had been laid across,
leading to the village; Master Drury would not have it filled up. "It
might be useful yet," he would say, when his son Harry pressed him to
make the alteration.

As the traveller reached the old moss-grown bridge he paused for a
minute or two, and looked down at the broad deep trench. "God grant it
never may be wanted," he murmured; and then he threw back his long brown
curls that clustered round his head, and spurred his horse on at a
quicker pace. He was a fine, tall, handsome young man, about twenty-two,
with a thoughtful brow that would have made him look almost stern, but
for the genial smile that played around his mouth, and the kindly eyes
that looked as ready to cry as a girl's at a tale of suffering. Before
he was half-way across the fields he was met with the glad cry of,
"Harry, Harry, I am so glad you have come home!"

That he was a general favourite at home was evident enough, for his
younger sister and brother received him with screams of delight, and his
elder sister, Mary, forgot all her stateliness in the warmth of her
welcome. Only one of the group walking in the fields failed to run
forward to meet him--a fact Harry was not slow to notice.

"So Maud would not come to greet me," he said, holding out his hand when
he reached the spot where she was standing. He had sprung from his
horse, and left the animal to find his own way to the stable.

The young lady coloured and looked down as Harry stopped before her. "I
am very glad to see you," she said.

"But not quite so glad as my sisters here," said Harry.

"I am not your sister," said Maud, hardly knowing what to say.

"Oh, Maud," muttered little Bessie, "Harry is as much your brother as he
is mine. Why, you have lived with us all your life, and if your name
does happen to be Maud Harcourt instead of Maud Drury, it does not
matter. I'm sure you can love Harry just the same."

"Yes, so I can," said Maud, smiling, and feeling greatly relieved by
Bessie's little passionate outburst.

But Harry looked rather disappointed still.

"I am afraid my return is not very welcome to you, Maud," he said, as he
placed himself at her side to walk towards the house.

"Why?" she said, quickly, in a tone of pain.

"I don't know, only you don't seem glad to see me this time. You did not
come to meet me as the others did," replied Harry.

Maud looked down, but did not answer; and indeed there was no
opportunity to do so, for Bertram, thinking he had been neglected long
enough, pressed forward to his brother's side.

"Have you seen Prince Rupert, Harry?" he asked.

The young man's brow grew dark at the question. "Don't ask about Prince
Rupert, Bertie," he said.

"Why not?" exclaimed the boy. "He's a great soldier, come to fight the
King's battles against the wicked Parliament men. Do tell me about him?"
he added, coaxingly.

"Harry will tell us all by-and-by," said Mary. "You must remember, he
has not seen father yet. Let us make haste indoors," she added, turning
to Harry, who still kept close to Maud.

But Bertram was determined not to miss hearing of Prince Rupert's
valorous deeds, and fearing this account would be given to his father
alone, he took his brother's hand, resolving to keep close to him.
Prince Rupert's name, however, was not mentioned, and indeed Harry
seemed strangely reserved in speaking of public affairs; and, as soon as
he could get away, wandered off to a copse-like corner of the garden,
where he stayed until he was summoned to prayers, late in the evening.

He looked pale and agitated as he came in. The family were all
assembled--his father at the head of the table, with the Bible open
before him, and the maid-servants and serving-men at the other end of
the room; and Harry felt that every eye was upon him as he took his
accustomed place.

After the chapter was read they all knelt down, and then any one might
know how deeply and truly Master Drury loved his King, although he
rarely spoke of it at any other time. Now, however, the man's whole soul
was poured out before God in impassioned pleading for his royal master,
while his hatred of the Parliament and those who were leading the
rebellion could only find expression in the words of David against his
enemies. A deep "Amen" followed, uttered by every one in the room except
Harry,--an omission that was noticed by more than one present.

"Harry was asleep," whispered Bessie, who had had some difficulty in
keeping her own eyes open.

Maud, to whom this was confided, did not contradict the little girl, but
she knew it was not so, and she wondered why Harry had not responded to
what everybody must wish for, she thought--at least every true
Englishman. No one saw anything of Harry after he left the room that
night, and Maud did not see him until the following afternoon. She
thought he was offended with her, and that this was the reason he kept
away from everybody, and when she saw him leaning on the fence of the
farm-yard, she determined to go and speak to him.

"I'm very sorry, Harry, if I have offended you," she said, as she drew
near the spot.

Harry started. "Maud, Maud, what shall I do?" he said, impulsively,
turning towards her and taking her hand.

Maud was only a year younger than himself, but she could not help
feeling alarmed at his words.

"What is the matter?" she said. "Prithee, tell me all about what is
troubling you."

But Harry shook his head, and tried to smile away her fears. "I have
been wishing to be a chicken, and by my faith I do wish it too," he
said.

"Marry, that is an old wish of mine," said Maud, trying to smile, but
looking down as the colour stole into her cheeks.

"You wish to be a chicken!" uttered Harry in astonishment. "By my troth,
I did not think you were so foolish, Maud."

"And wherefore not, wise sir? since you would nathless enter
chickenhood."

But instead of replying in the same gay, bantering tone, Harry sighed
deeply, and, still holding her hand, drew her into the field.

"It is quite true, Maud," he said. "I was actually wishing to be a
chicken, or anything but what I am--Harry Drury, of Hayslope Grange."

"Prithee, now tell me wherefore you wished this," said Maud.

Harry had always told her his secrets since she first came, a little
delicate girl, to live at the Grange.

"Now, marry, I can scarcely do that. But life is such a puzzle--such a
tangle--men seem to be put in the wrong places."

"And you think you have one of the wrong places?" said Maud.

Harry nodded. "I am beginning to feel sure of it," he said, sadly.

"Then put yourself in the right place," said Maud, quickly, without in
the least knowing to what he referred.

"By my faith, I cannot," he said, huskily.

"Cannot?" she uttered. "Cannot do right? Be truthful and just--true to
yourself. Harry, you cannot mean you are afraid to do this?"

She thought she knew what was passing in his mind. He had been away from
home for several weeks, in London and in the North, and she thought he
longed to serve his King by taking up arms and joining actively in the
fray. Her spirit stirred and swelled within her, as she almost wished
that she, too, was a man, that she might follow him to the field and
fight by his side.

"Harry, you will do it," she said; "you will be brave and true, and tell
your father all that is passing in your mind."

Harry looked at her astonished, almost bewildered. "By my troth, Maud,
this is more wonderful than anything else," he said.

"Marry, that _I_ should tell you to be true to yourself and your own
conscience," said Maud, in a deeply injured tone.

"Nay, but I did not mean to grieve you, dearest Maud," said Harry; "but
I did not think--I dared not hope--you would see matters as I do."

"But I do see, that, whatever the cost may be----"

"Maud, the cost will not be half so great as I thought it half an hour
since. I have your sympathy," interrupted Harry.

"But is your father _sure_ to oppose your wishes in this?" said Maud.

Harry looked at her in some perplexity. "Can you ask it?" he said, "when
he----"

"Yes, I know he refuses to take any public part in----" At this moment
Maud was in her turn interrupted by Bessie rushing up to them with the
announcement that a visitor had just arrived from London who desired to
see Harry.

"It is a friend to whom I have spoken of the things we have been talking
about," he said in a lower tone, to Maud; and finding Bessie was
inclined to take his place by her side, he left them, and returned at
once to the house.

"Has Harry been telling you about Prince Rupert?" asked Bessie, when
they were left alone.

"No, dear," answered Maud; and then she relapsed into silence, for her
thoughts were busy about Harry, and she wondered why he could be so
afraid of mentioning his wish to become a soldier to his father.

Bessie waited a few minutes, and then she said,--"Has Harry told you
anything about Prince Rupert, to-day, Maud?"

Maud smiled. "We have so often talked about Prince Rupert, you know,
Bessie, that I think we have heard all Harry can tell us about his
winning the King's battles for him," she said.

"Marry, but we have not, though," said Bessie, earnestly. "Harry told
Bertie this morning that he was a fierce, cruel man, one of the greatest
robbers that ever lived; and that he justly deserved the title the
King's enemies had given him, 'Prince of Plunderers.'"

Maud looked down at the eager upturned face, feeling somewhat puzzled,
but she thought Harry might have heard something that seemed to him very
cruel--something that the great Prince had been obliged to do to save
the King, perhaps, which yet had roused Harry's anger, feeling so keenly
as he did for everybody's distress. At all events, Harry was right, and
Prince Rupert was right too, she had no doubt, if things could only be
explained; and in this way she contrived to silence Bessie, if she did
not convince her; and the little girl went to tell Bertie that Maud did
not think his soldier-hero a bad man after all; while Maud pursued her
walk through the fields, indulging in very happy thoughts, in spite of
the danger she was anticipating for Harry when he should join the King's
army.


