The Project Gutenberg EBook of Stairway to the Stars, by Larry Shaw

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Stairway to the Stars

Author: Larry Shaw

Release Date: October 24, 2007 [EBook #23159]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK STAIRWAY TO THE STARS ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, LN Yaddanapudi and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net






      +------------------------------------------------+
      | Yes, Earth may be a sort of fenced-off area,   |
      | so far as other intelligent races of the       |
      | galaxy are concerned. But not for the          |
      | grandiose reasons that some have imagined....  |
      +------------------------------------------------+

[Illustration]




STAIRWAY TO THE STARS

By Larry Shaw

  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  | It was a stairway leading down, but it also led out into     |
  | space--indirectly. And the situation had the aspects of a    |
  | burlesque on Grand Hotel, but....                            |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+


John Andrew Farmer scowled at the octopus that sprawled on his
living-room couch, rubbed his stubbly jaw with a stubby fist, and said,
"I love you."

Farmer was uncomfortable. He was almost always uncomfortable, for
various reasons; though it rarely if ever occurred to him, as he
considered each individual irritant, that this was his normal state of
existence. Right now he was acutely conscious of how ridiculous it must
look for him to be making love to an octopus, but he was even more
conscious of the very real pains of unrequited love.

It wasn't even a respectable, ordinary-looking octopus. To be accurate,
it would have to be called a nonapus; each of the nine tentacles had a
lobsterish claw at its tip, and there were various other unusual
appendages. It would be hard enough to explain an earthly octopus in his
living-room if the necessity arose, Farmer reflected for the teenteenth
time--but how in the name of Neptune could he ever explain _this_?

It had all started with Judge Ray. Ray had not been a real judge,
obviously, but had used the title in lieu of any other first name. That
was the first of the inexplicable things; Farmer would have expected the
odd little old man to call himself a professor of something or other.
But Ray insisted on Judge.

Ray had come to the office of the _Stein, Fine, Bryans Publishing Co._,
where Farmer was working as an assistant editor, and announced that he
was about to write the greatest book of the age. And yes, he wanted an
advance against royalties--it didn't have to be large; Ray lived
simply--to tide him over while doing the actual writing, which shouldn't
take more than a very few weeks.

Now, Farmer wasn't much of an editor, even as editors go. The one useful
quality he had was a homespun, ingratiating air which put nervous young
geniuses at their ease, so that they could give a reasonably coherent
verbal picture of what their books were about. This often saved Stein,
Fine & Bryans a lot of reading of unpublishable manuscripts. At least,
that had been the theory when they gave Farmer the job; as it worked
out, John Andrew was a person who found it virtually impossible to say
"no"; he generally took the manuscripts in hand and, when he couldn't
stick some other member of the firm with the task, read them himself
until the wee hours.

Farmer was not able to say no to Ray, but even he looked dubious at the
small gray fellow's voluble outpouring of pseudo-scientific jargon. Ray,
made sensitive by years of open skepticism on the part of many
listeners, caught the look and insisted on a demonstration of his
fabulous invention.

So the oddly assorted pair--quick, foxlike little Ray and big, awkward,
uncomfortable Farmer--sputtered out into Long Island Sound in an
indescribable old motor launch, and the adventure was on.

       *       *       *       *       *

Finally Ray shut off the racketing engine and let out the rusty anchor.
He opened a large wooden case, which showed evidence of some really good
cabinet-work, and took out a peculiar machine, which showed evidence of
