chapter seven, where the great multitudes are suddenly seen before the
throne with palm branches, songs, and white garments. It is the same
company as there. But there is a difference in telling the numbers.
_There_ they are too many to be counted. _Here_ they are said to be a
hundred and forty-four thousand. It is symbolical, a picture number,
the number of full corporate completeness as with the Spirit-baptized
Jews in chapter seven.

The believers caught up out of the great tribulation have been joined by
the trusting hearts of all time who have been waiting in the Father's
presence for this glad day. The number is now complete of all from
creation's earliest dawn, who by grace have followed fully, regardless
of hindrance or opposition. This great climax is thus seen by John in
sudden and sharp contrast with the climax of hellish evil on the earth.

Then John is shown the steps by which this climax is reached.[152]
Verses six to the close of this chapter seem clearly to be a detail of
what has gone before, describing the steps by which this climax is
reached, and then reaching further to the judgment upon the evil. During
the iniquitous scenes being enacted on earth an angel is seen flying in
mid-heavens calling to the people on earth, in warning, to give their
worship and reverence to God only. The gracious wooing of God never
ceases.

Another angel follows, calling out that the great system of iniquity, in
which they are enmeshed, is doomed. A third gives solemn warning that
those who yield to the terrible pressure, and engage in the blasphemous
worship, will be surely and terribly punished. Again there comes another
echo of the strain of pleading in the Church messages. In the midst of
just such conditions as prevail then, the saints can be steady in
keeping the commandments of God and the faith of Jesus.

And down into the awful persecution being waged comes an encouraging
voice from heaven. There is special blessing from God on all those who
remain true, even unto death. There will be sweetest rest for them, and
their faithful witnessing and suffering shall be all noted and
acknowledged and rewarded as they come up into the Father's presence.

And then follows the blessed harvest of the righteous whose wonderful
arrival in heaven has already been told in the opening scene of this
chapter. And then follows the awful harvest of evil down on the earth,
the visitation of judgments coming at the very end of the persecution.

So closes this long remarkable view of the tribulation. It connects back
with the nation of Israel. Its beginning is connected practically with
the casting of Satan down to earth. It gives a description of the leader
and the nature of the persecution, and a brief statement of the steps
with which it ends. And it states in three different ways that the
length of time involved is three and a half years.


A Bitter Cup to Its Dregs.

_The fifth view_[153] is, not of the whole tribulation time as with
these others, but of only a part, the closing part. It speaks of the
visitation of judgments, the great climactic battle, and the
earthquake, with which the period is brought to its end.

It connects at the point in the fourth view[154] where those who have
been suffering in the tribulation are seen standing before the throne
singing with harps. It is said that they are singing the song of Moses,
who had the experience of tribulation and deliverance in Egypt, and the
song of the Lamb, who went through the worst tribulation experience in
His contest with Satan and sin on our behalf.

It connects also with the close of the second view,[155] where the
temple is seen opened and the ark of the covenant is seen. That covenant
is now to receive further fulfilment. God never forgets His promises and
agreements. Seven angels have seven golden bowls full of the wrath of
God. In this way is told the visitation of judgments now described as
taking place at this time.

In the first view the picture is of _seals_ being broken or opened,
which indicates the execution of a document. The _trumpets_ of the next
view indicate a commanding call to action; the seven _thunders_, not
written, a great storm. These _bowls_ or vials indicate the
administration of a dose of bitter-tasting medicine. The visitation of
judgments by God is commonly spoken of in Scripture in this
language.[156]

Then follows the description of the judgments upon men's persons, and
everything concerning their life. Men's bodies are diseased, the water
is unfit to drink, the food supply cut short; they suffer with terrible
heat, and then darkness. But there is no penitence. The Euphrates is
said to be dried up, suggesting that it is the great river at or near
the world's centre of action. So, it is said, the way is prepared for
the kings that come from the east.

And the prophetic bit in Isaiah comes to mind about men passing over the
Euphrates at the time of the great gathering of the Jews.[157] As though
aroused by all this to bitterest opposition there is increased demon
activity, and through it a great gathering of all nations, at a place
named in Palestine, for a great battle.

Then a terrible climax comes in the earthquake, with which the first,
second, and third views closed. It is the worst earthquake ever
experienced. It centres in "_the_ great city," Babylon, the capital of
the whole system of wickedness. With the storm is a terrible hail. The
description tallies with that in the close of the first view,[158] and
with the vivid prophetic bit in Isaiah ii. 10-22.

There's no suggestion of how much time all this takes. The judgments
visited on Egypt at the deliverance of Israel are described at much
greater length, running into ten items. Yet all could have occurred
within five weeks, allowing for brief intervals. Whether these
judgments occur in succession, or all at once, or partly in both ways,
they could all come within a very short time. This fifth view depicts
the final scene. It gives the visitation of judgments ending the
tribulation period, describes a great pitched battle, in which all
nations are involved, and ends with the earthquake. This is the third of
the three great woes.[159]

_The sixth view_ is of the great system of wickedness in the world,
through which the tribulation comes, and which is judged at its
close.[160] The description is full of details of great interest and
instructiveness, but we can only have time at present for the essential
thing being taught. The Spirit takes John into a wilderness. To the
Spirit's eye wherever wickedness has sway, whether vulgar or polished,
political or commercial, cunning or brazen, it is a wilderness.

Here is shown a woman gorgeously clothed, prodigally bedecked with
jewels, and having a cup in her hand, made of gold, but full of vile
filth. Upon her forehead appears a description: "Mystery [or explanation
of mystery], Babylon the great, the mother of harlots and of the
abominations of the earth." This woman is riding upon a strange beast;
it is scarlet-colored, with seven heads and ten horns, and full of
blasphemous names. This is the startlingly suggestive picture.

Who is this woman? And what is this beast upon which she is seated? The
whole description taken together suggests that she is meant to stand
for the whole system of wickedness which has had such sway in the world
from earliest time until the end. And the beast represents typically the
dominant governmental powers. The two have always worked together. There
has been a consistent unity of spirit and of characteristic, and a
persistent devilishness marking the wickedness in the world throughout
the ages.

It has been as though there were an unseen spirit power tirelessly at
work _behind_ all the varied manifestations of evil. The dominant
characteristic always has been blasphemy of God. It has controlled
thrones and royal power, and has had unlimited gold at its command. And
it has always been an enemy, subtle or open, cunning or violent, of God
and His people.

That system or genius of evil is represented in the Old Testament as
finding expression in one great political power after another, but
chiefly in the power of Babylon. Babylon stands typically in these older
pages, not merely for the great empire of the Euphrates, but for the
unseen spirit of evil lying behind that power, and making use of it to
carry through its own foul purposes.

But that unseen evil spirit power has found more than one agency to
dominate and use. Babylon long since passed off the stage as a political
factor. But the power of evil has not ceased. It is distressing to note
another great organization behind and through which the power of evil
has worked. What is the system that has, for the past sixteen
centuries, been supported by the various great civil governments?

There is only one answer. It is the organization known as "the Christian
Church." And the term Church must be taken here in its fullest, broadest
meaning. Its great main stem historically is the Roman Catholic Church.
The first great split-off was the Greek Orthodox Church. The Church of
England was a later break-off. These, with the various government-ally
supported Churches, and those free of such support, and various ancient
primitive bodies,--these all together make up the organization known as
"the Church."

The two symbolical characteristics of this woman and the two dominant
characteristics of this historical Church are the same. The Church has
been and is supported almost wholly by the civil governments, and used
by them in furthering their policies. And it has been active in
persecuting to death the people of God who would not yield to its
domination. It has been marked by intolerance of all not yielding to its
wishes, and especially of the Jew. That intolerance has been carried not
only to the extreme of blood, but a riot of bloodshed. This is utterly
heart-breaking to realize and to repeat.

The woman is said to be "drunken (1) with the blood of the saints, and
(2) with the blood of the martyrs of Jesus." The twofold statement is
seen to cover the two great periods, before Christ and since. And it
covers also the two great powers through which the spirit of evil has
chiefly worked in those two periods. But the name given first in the
plains of Shinar, and used characteristically of the God-defying power
of evil, is given here, Babylon. It will be Babylon again at the very
end after the Church system is overthrown.

It is plainly said that the beast represents the great civil or
governmental power in its final stage, the shape it will be in at the
end when these events occur.[161] The chief dominating political power
of the world will have passed through a succession of changes, seven
kingdoms successively following each other. At the end there will be a
combination of some sort, with ten great subdivisions, and one great
head over all.

But at the last, the civil power will discard the Church, and persecute
it. The spirit of evil thus gets embodiment typically in the great
Babylon power, then in the Church, and at the very last, in a coalition
of civil powers heading up in a new Babylon.

Then follows announcement of the fall of Babylon. The city is regarded
here as the earthly capital of the organized system of unseen evil
spirit power at work in the world. The city and the system are
inseparably allied. The name Babylon is used in the Bible for both
system and city.

If the question be asked what city is meant here, there can be but one
answer. From the twelfth of Genesis on the Bible never touches history,
except as history touches Israel as a nation. A thoughtful review of the
book makes this clear. And this book of Revelation is a gathering-up of
Bible threads, and only these. There is only one city in the Bible
record that answers to the description here, "the great city which
reigneth over the kings of the earth." "Babylon _the_ great."

But the old Babylon lies in ruins. And its ruined condition has been
quoted as the fulfilment of the famous passage in Isaiah xiii. 19-22. It
should be carefully noted that the present conditions at the site of old
Babylon do not seem to satisfy fully the language of that passage. It
would seem to be another illustration of the rare use of language in the
Bible, which adapts a passage accurately to one event, and then to a
second event, a long time afterward.

This would, of course, involve the rebuilding of the old capital of the
Euphrates. The reverent student quietly notes the movements taking place
in that part of the world, but restrains mere curious speculation, as he
continues fervently to pray, "Thy kingdom come."

This eighteenth chapter of Revelation seems like an echo of that intense
twenty-first of Isaiah, and indeed of a strain sounding all through the
prophetic books. One familiar with the old writings is not surprised to
find this echo; he expects it. No echo of God's voice or purpose is ever
lost. God never loses any of the threads out of His hand.


Hallelujah! He Comes.

_The seventh view_ presents the climax. It includes from chapter
nineteen to chapter twenty-two, verse five. It presents in full the
great scene that closes this tribulation period; touches the kingdom in
a bare word so as to fit it into its place in the scheme of events being
outlined; and then gives the final wind-up after the Kingdom time is
over. We want to look now at the portion connected immediately with what
has just gone before, the description of the wondrous close of the
tribulation, in chapters nineteen, verse one, to twenty, verse three.

John hears a great outburst of worship and praise in heaven. It
resembles the outburst back in chapter five, when the Lamb took the
book. But it is seen to be yet greater than that. Its joy and delight
seem wholly unbounded. Again the living creatures and the four and
twenty elders lead the song that bursts out.

John tries to tell how great was the volume of adoring song that fills
all heaven. It is like the voice of a great multitude, like the waters
that he had heard many a time breaking in deafening roar on the rocky
coast of Patmos, like the mighty thunders which he had heard so much in
these visions.

And the song they sang explains the exuberance of their singing,
"Hallelujah: for the Lord our God, the Almighty _reigneth_." At last He
_reigneth_. In the earlier parts of the book God is spoken of as "He
who is and who was, and _who cometh_."[162] As later events are
described that last part "who cometh" is significantly dropped.[163]
Clearly at these points being described He has come. Now the great
realization bursts out from countless voices, the Lord, our God, the
Almighty _reigneth_!

And John is bidden to write the words whose refrain has filled such a
place in hymns and devout speech, "Blessed are they that are bidden to
the marriage supper of the Lamb." And the one who seems to be serving as
John's guide puts peculiar emphasis on all that is being revealed by
saying, "these are true words of God."

John is so overwhelmed that he falls down to worship this one. And then
he finds that this is one of his own redeemed brothers of the earth. And
as He quietly bids John give his worship to One only, He adds very
significant words: "the testimony of Jesus is the spirit of prophecy."
The whole genius and soul of all this wealth of prophecy is to point men
to our Lord Jesus Christ, God to us.

And now comes the event toward which the ages have looked. _The heavens
open._ And _our Lord Jesus appears_ coming in glory to earth. At last He
comes. There's a wonderful description. He comes as a conqueror, riding
forth to judge the earth righteously, and to make war on evil. His eyes
are as a flame of fire, and upon His head many diadems. He has a name
indicating that He is all alone in the experiences He has been through,
and in His character. He comes as King of kings and Lord of lords, to
rule all the earth with a new absolutism, to right all wrongs, and visit
the indignant wrath of God upon all sin.

As He appears an angel gives warning of what is coming. In words that
are an echo of Ezekiel's, long centuries before, he calls to all the
scavenger birds of the earth that haunt battlefields to come to a great
feasting time.[164] And John sees the vast armies of the nations of the
earth all gathered together for a last mighty battle, under the
leadership of the great leader of lawlessness and his lieutenant.

And the utter impotence of their struggle against God is revealed in the
quietness and brevity with which their defeat and capture are told.
Satan's great earth leader and his chief who deceived the people with
his miraculous power, both are taken and forever put away. And then
Satan himself is chained and fastened securely in the abyss. Such is the
tremendous consummation quietly told in a few lines. And then follows
the setting up of the glorious kingdom on earth.

Whatever the immediate circumstances under which the Second Psalm was
penned, it will be readily seen how it fits into this situation at the
end.

 "Why do the nations tumultuously assemble,
 And the peoples meditate a vain thing?
 The kings of the earth set themselves,
 And the rulers take counsel together,
 Against Jehovah and against His Anointed, saying,
 'Let us break their bonds asunder,
 And cast away their cords from us.'"

But their efforts seem so puny, and the result so one-sided, that

 "He that sitteth in the heavens will laugh:
 The Lord will have them in derision."

And we remember that, in these Revelation pages, it is always with the
sword of His mouth that the Lord Jesus is said to fight, as we read on:

 "Then will He _speak_ unto them in His wrath,
 And vex [or trouble] them in His sore displeasure; [saying]
 'Yet I have set _my_ King
 Upon my holy hill of Zion.'"

Then the Son speaks:

 "I will tell of the decree:
 Jehovah said unto me, 'thou art my Son;
 This day have I begotten thee.
 Ask of me and I will give thee the nations for thine inheritance,
 And the uttermost parts of the earth for thy possession.
 Thou shalt break them with a rod of iron;
 Thou shalt dash them in pieces like a potter's vessel.'"

And the writer of the Psalms closed with a word of earnest counsel to
the kings of earth:

 "Now therefore be wise, O ye kings:
 Be instructed, ye judges of the earth.
 Serve Jehovah with fear,
 And rejoice with trembling [awe],
 Kiss the Son, lest He be angry, and ye perish in the way,
 For His wrath will soon be kindled.
 Blessed are all they that take refuge in Him."

Thus it is seen that these seven views describe (1) the general
characteristics of the tribulation time; (2) the way in which it comes,
that is, by the withdrawal of restraint and so the loosing of evil; (3)
