Francisco Alvarez observed the act and understood its meaning. He smiled
again to himself. He had not misjudged the youth, and it confirmed him in
the plan that had come suddenly into his cunning mind.

"Senor Ware," he said, veiling his voice and speaking with a velvety
courtesy that was unusual in him, "I have brought you here to tell you
first that I repent my act to-day, by which I placed your comrade's life
in seeming danger. I was hasty, but I had been goaded greatly, and it may
be, too, that I was influenced by the sinister advice of one who hates you
and your friends in a manner almost beyond belief. Besides, the swordsman
had orders not to slay."

Henry Ware looked at him in great surprise. Five minutes ago he would not
have dreamed it possible that he could hear such a speech in such a tone
from Francisco Alvarez. He waited to see what it meant. Alvarez regarded
him in a sort of kindly contemplation, as a man would look upon a youth
for whom he had benevolent plans.

"We have been enemies so far," he resumed in his winning tone, "you and
your comrades against myself and my people. But I have learned one thing,
and I am confirmed in it by the opinion of others; boy as you are, you are
the strongest and most dangerous of the five who oppose me; you are the
leader."

The words, although true, were those of compliment and flattery, and Henry
felt the touch of poison in the silky tone. He stiffened himself slightly
as if he would resist a danger, unknown as yet, but all the more to be
dreaded on that account. He still remained silent.

"Yes, you are the strongest and the one most to be feared," continued
Alvarez musingly, "I am not saying it to flatter you, but because it is a
matter that I have weighed well for reasons pertaining to statecraft.
There sentiment or personal liking cannot count. I have plans, large
plans, in regard to this country. I suppose that every ambitious man who
comes here has them. How can he help it when he sees so vast and fertile a
land inhabited only by savages? My plan, I believe, is right, in
accordance with probability and justice. You, Senor Ware, are a
representative of a race that has crossed the mountains into a new
region. You have there, in Kaintock, thin and feeble settlements that must
soon be crushed."

Henry spoke for the first time, but he showed no excitement, although his
heart had begun to beat faster.

"I think you are wrong, Captain Alvarez," he said. "The settlements in
Kentucky have already driven back some formidable forays, and they grow
stronger every day."

"Forays of savages only. What could they do if a force of white men, a
powerful force, armed with cannon came?"

"But will they come?" asked Henry pointedly.

"Ah, I see you are clever," said Alvarez, still smiling. "You and the
other youth, Cotter, are educated, and you must realize the truth of what
I say. Yes, that force will come. Your Eastern colonies are about to be
defeated by the King of England. You are rebels, and there is no place for
defeated rebels but the depths of the wilderness. Spain has been
coquetting with these colonies, but she will come back to the side of the
English monarchy where she belongs. The monarchies must stand together
against all rebels."

"How do you know that Spain will help England to fight us?" asked Henry.

Alvarez smiled once more, but the smile now, instead of being merely
winning, was superior.

"It is a long distance from here to Europe," he replied, "but news may
come even into the depths of the woods. I have many friends in Spain,
friends near the court, who inform me whenever the wind changes."

Henry did not like that superior smile. It was a mistake of Francisco
Alvarez, a mistake that many strong men make, to assume a patronizing
manner even for a moment in the presence of another who was also strong.
Henry's intuition at once put him on guard at all points.

"I have heard," he said, "that Bernardo Galvez, the Spanish Governor
General at New Orleans, is no friend of the British power. But why do you
discuss these things with me or tell me of them?"

"It is because I have considered you and recognize your worth," replied
Alvarez slowly. "Why rush on to destruction with the foolish rebels? No,
do not speak! Pay good heed to what I say. There is more passing on this
continent than you think. Great events are about to occur. I do not speak
merely of the war between the rebels--or, if you prefer it, the
Americans--and the English, but of another change.

"Spain is seated at New Orleans near the mouth of the Mississippi, which
flows through a larger area of fertile and temperate country than any
other river in the world. The waters of hundreds of navigable streams
converge there, and it must become the rival of London and Paris. What can
Quebec, Boston, New York, or Charleston be to New Orleans? Can Spain give
up such a site and such a vast and fertile territory as Louisiana? Never!
And here is the greatest opportunity in the world for strong men! Come
with me! Bring your friends with you! We need such as you! I offer you a
career that could not even enter your dreams in the woods of Kaintock!"

A deep, red flush overspread Henry's face.

"Do you think that we could fight against our own people," he exclaimed.
"Do you think that we are made of such stuff as that miserable renegade,
Braxton Wyatt?"

Alvarez did not flinch. His words had been delivered with extraordinary
emphasis, and they carried the ring of his own conviction. His great plan
possessed him, and he saw before him an instrument of which he could make
good use.

"I do not ask you to go against your own people," he replied. "Remain in
Louisiana. Great work can be found here for you and your friends. And
where Kaintock is concerned another way could be made. It is far from the
Eastern colonies, divided by mountains, the forest, and Indians. Where
could they find a better friend to whom to turn than the King of Spain?
And they will surely need a powerful friend!"

Henry gazed at him in amazement, and yet he felt a certain respect for the
scope and largeness of the man's plan, repellent though the plan was to
him. He saw that Alvarez was not an ordinary man, that he was one with
whom the people for whom he cared would have to reckon. But he was not
afraid, nor was he tempted for a moment by the promise of a glittering
future that Alvarez held out to him. He felt an immense indignation, but
he was still master of himself, and he replied quietly.

"I could not leave my own people, nor would any of my comrades. The air of
Louisiana does not suit us. We are accustomed to a colder climate. We
feel, too, that Kaintock can take care of herself. Nor is it sure that the
Eastern colonies will be crushed by the King. But, should they be,
Kentucky would never desert them to join Spain."

Alvarez frowned, and his temper began to rise. Henry was showing more
finesse and more knowledge of the world and its events than he had thought
possible in one just come out of the woods.

"By entering my service, by becoming a lieutenant of mine, you have all to
gain and nothing to lose," he said, resuming his customary tone of
superiority.

Henry instantly felt the change of manner and resented it.

"I could not dream of accepting such an offer," he said, "but, if I
should, I'd merely take the place that you've already given to Braxton
Wyatt, a renegade. He thinks it is his, and you have made him think it is
his. If you do not keep faith with him how could I believe that you would
keep faith with me?"

The dark blood of anger flushed the Spaniard's face. He half rose from his
seat and then sat down again.

"I have made you an offer," he said, "one that any youth or young man
should be proud to accept, and you insult me by saying that you doubt my
faith. You are a child, a backwoodsman, and an ignorant fellow!"

"I am not ignorant about some things of importance," replied Henry calmly,
"but, if I were low enough to be tempted by your offer, I should still be
wise enough to know that a man who plots against his own superior officer
could not be trusted by me." "What do you mean?" asked Alvarez, paling for
a moment.

"Is it not true that by fair or foul means you expect shortly to succeed
Bernardo Galvez as Governor General of Louisiana?"

The Spaniard's hand flew to his sword hilt. Such things as these were not
to be known by everybody. But Henry met his gaze steadily, and the hand
fell away from the sword-hilt. He had gone too far already. He was sorry
that he had turned the professional swordsman loose on Paul--it had been
an unwise deed--and another act of violence in a single day was unworthy a
man of his self-control. No, a new and better plan came suddenly into his
mind.

The two sat for a few moments gazing steadily at each other. Alvarez was
in the higher chair, and that gave him the physical advantage, but the
look of the fearless youth was like the sharp sword that cuts scornfully
through the maze and web of intrigue and trickery. Alvarez was forced to
turn his gaze aside, and his soul was full of tumult and anger because he
had to yield. The new plan that he had conceived in regard to this daring
boy now seemed a peculiarly happy thought. Henry's pride and spirit must
be broken, and he, Francisco Alvarez, was the man for the task.

He clapped his hands and a soldier entered. He sent a message by him and
several more came, accompanied by Braxton Wyatt. Alvarez motioned Wyatt to
a seat.

"Senor Wyatt," he said in his slow, precise English, "I have been having a
talk with your friend, your former friend here, and I find him to be as
unworthy as you have described him to be. I offered only kindness to
himself and his friends. I chose to believe that they had been merely
foolish, misled by ignorance, but his reply has been only to insult me and
to blacken you."

The renegade did not seek to conceal the joy that shone in his eyes. He
had been in fear when he was sent out of the hall, in fear lest Alvarez
had some plan by which he would suffer, and now it was obvious that
nothing had been changed.

"It is his character," said Wyatt. "He is vicious and the truth has never
been in him."

Henry did not know what all this talk meant, but he refused to notice
Braxton Wyatt. His manner indicated that the renegade had ceased to exist,
and it made Wyatt furious.

"You tell the truth," continued Alvarez, "but he is dangerous, too, as you
told me, a strong, wily fellow, and I shall not take any chances on his
escape. See, I am providing against it."

A soldier entered, bearing balls and chain, and Alvarez pointed to Henry.
The youth sprang to his feet. He knew that this was intended as an
indignity, and his mind rebelled.

"Put them on him," said Alvarez, and the soldiers approached. Henry hurled
the first back and then the second, but the others were about to fling
themselves upon him in a heap, when a voice from the door cried:

"Stop!"

It was not a loud voice, but one full of dignity and command, and the
soldiers instantly fell back.

A tall man, robed in black, and with a thin face, smoothly shaven and
austere, stood in the doorway. The eyes, usually benevolent and kindly,
sparkled with indignation, and one hand was uplifted in rebuke.

"Father Montigny!" said Henry, under his breath.

"Who says 'stop!' here, where I command?" Alvarez exclaimed, and then he
paled at sight of the priest. The Spaniard was a bold man, but he wished
no conflict with Holy Church.

"I said 'stop,'" replied the priest with calm dignity, advancing into the
room. "Francisco Alvarez, you were about to perform a deed unworthy of
yourself, one that you would have cause to regret. There is no war between
Louisiana and Kaintock. What right have you to put this youth in chains?"

He took a step further, and the rebuking hand was still uplifted. The
soldiers shrank back and more than one crossed himself. Yet they were
relieved, as Father Montigny had interfered with a task that they did not
like.

"I have the utmost respect for Holy Church," replied Alvarez, though it
cost him an effort to utter the words, "but I am in command here and all
military affairs fall under my jurisdiction. This young man is a dangerous
spy and plotter from Kaintock, one who has used force against us. He and
his comrades seized one of our boats and that was an act of war."

"He is a good youth," said Father Montigny. "He and his comrades did me a
great service. I know that his motives are good, and I will not see him
treated in such barbarous fashion."

The face of Alvarez darkened. This was more than he could stand.

"I am the judge in these matters," he replied, "and I tell you, Father
Montigny, that you must not interfere. Your order, the Capuchins, are in
power now at New Orleans, as I know, but the Jesuits may come back. I
should favor their returning."

"It is not a question of Capuchin or Jesuit," replied Father Montigny
sternly, "and you, Francisco Alvarez, should know it. It is a question of
you and what you are doing here. You need not make any threats against me.
I care for none of them, but Bernardo Galvez, the Governor General at New
Orleans, shall know of what is passing at Beaulieu."

The face of Alvarez contracted into a terrible frown. Nevertheless he
feared the unarmed priest. He was helpless against him and he feared,
too, that if he persisted Father Montigny would quickly learn of other and
deeper matters. He broke into a short and by no means hearty laugh.

"Perhaps I was going rather far," he said, "but this youth has provoked me
beyond endurance. Take away those things, Gaspar."

The Spaniard whom he indicated took the irons, and Henry sat down again in
his chair. The threatened ignominy had stung him deeply and he said under
his breath: "I thank you, Father Montigny." Then Alvarez ordered Henry to
be taken away, also.

Henry arose without resistance, and walked from the hall with the
soldiers. As he passed, Father Montigny put his hand on his shoulder and
said: "I am your friend, my son."

Henry said nothing but gave him a look of deep gratitude as he walked
proudly out.




CHAPTER XII

THE SHADOW IN THE FOREST


Luiz and his comrades escorted Henry back to the prison, and the
expressive face of Luiz showed pleasure. He made a vigorous pantomime and
spoke words in Spanish.

"Yes, I understand your meaning if not your language, my friend," said
Henry, "and I thank you. I am glad to know that I have your good will."

When the door of his prison was thrown open and Henry was then shut in
again with his comrades they looked at him expectantly.

"Well?" said Paul.

"What happened?" said Long Jim.

"Anything to tell?" said Tom Ross.

"How's your shoulder, Paul?" asked Henry.

"Fast getting well," replied Paul, who knew that his comrade would speak
in his own good time.

Henry sat on the floor and leaned against the wall in as comfortable a
position as he could assume. Then he looked rather humorously at his
comrades.

"Alvarez wanted to bribe me," he said.

"To bribe you? What do you mean?"

"Yes, to bribe me--and all of us together. He wanted us to serve him here
in Louisiana, and help him in an attempt to bring over Kentucky to Spain."

"That is, he wanted to make Braxton Wyatts out of us?" said Paul.

"You put it exactly right, Paul," said Henry, "I laughed at him, and
called him by the names that belonged to him. He brought in Braxton Wyatt
and the soldiers and ordered me to be put in irons, there in his
presence."

"What!" exclaimed Paul, "did he dare that, too?"

"Yes. His object, of course, was to humiliate me--and all of us. It was
stopped by one who came in at the right moment. You couldn't guess who it
was."

"It must a-been Shif'less Sol," said Long Jim, whose mind ran to physical
deeds. "I guess he sent a bullet right into the middle uv that rascal
crew. Sol's the boy to be right on the spot when he's needed."

Henry laughed.

"No, Jim," he said. "That's a pretty wild guess. It was none other than
Father Montigny, the man whom we helped. He paid us back sooner than we
thought. You ought to have seen him, Paul. He looked like an avenging
angel. He stood there, a single, unarmed man, and they were afraid of him.
I could see fear on every one of their faces."

Paul's vivid imagination instantly painted the whole scene. It appealed to
him with tremendous power. It was the triumph of mind and character over
force and wickedness.

"I can see Father Montigny now," he said. "A man who always does right and
has no fear whatever of death, is afraid of nothing, either in this world
or the world to come."
