The Project Gutenberg eBook, The Young Trailers, by Joseph A. Altsheler


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: The Young Trailers
       A Story of Early Kentucky


Author: Joseph A. Altsheler



Release Date: October 5, 2006  [eBook #19477]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE YOUNG TRAILERS***


E-text prepared by the Project Gutenberg Online Distributed Proofreading
Team (http://www.pgdp.net/)



THE YOUNG TRAILERS

A Story of Early Kentucky

by

JOSEPH A. ALTSHELER







Appleton-Century-Crofts, Inc.
New York
Copyright, 1907, by
D. Appleton and Company
All rights reserved. This book, or parts thereof, must not be
reproduced in any form without permission of the publishers.
Copyright 1934 by Sallie B. Altsheler
Printed in the United States of America




TO
SYDNEY
A YOUNG KENTUCKIAN




CONTENTS

       I.--Into the Unknown

      II.--The First Great Exploit

     III.--Lost in the Wilderness

      IV.--The Haunted Forest

       V.--Afloat

      VI.--The Voice of the Woods

     VII.--The Giant Bones

    VIII.--The Wild Turkey's "Gobble"

      IX.--The Escape

       X.--The Cave Dust

      XI.--The Forest Spell

     XII.--The Primitive Man

    XIII.--The Call of Duty

     XIV.--The Return

      XV.--The Siege

     XVI.--A Girl's Way

    XVII.--The Battle in the Forest

   XVIII.--The Test

     XIX.--An Errand and a Friend




THE YOUNG TRAILERS




CHAPTER I

INTO THE UNKNOWN


It was a white caravan that looked down from the crest of the mountains
upon the green wilderness, called by the Indians, _Kain-tuck-ee_. The
wagons, a score or so in number, were covered with arched canvas,
bleached by the rains, and, as they stood there, side by side, they
looked like a snowdrift against the emerald expanse of forest and
foliage.

The travelers saw the land of hope, outspread before them, a wide sweep
of rolling country, covered with trees and canebrake, cut by streams of
clear water, flowing here and there, and shining in the distance, amid
the green, like threads of silver wire. All gazed, keen with interest
and curiosity, because this unknown land was to be their home, but none
was more eager than Henry Ware, a strong boy of fifteen who stood in
front of the wagons beside the guide, Tom Ross, a tall, lean man the
color of well-tanned leather, who would never let his rifle go out of
his hand, and who had Henry's heartfelt admiration, because he knew so
much about the woods and wild animals, and told such strange and
absorbing tales of the great wilderness that now lay before them.

But any close observer who noted Henry Ware would always have looked at
him a second time. He was tall and muscled beyond his years, and when he
walked his figure showed a certain litheness and power like that of the
forest bred. His gaze was rapid, penetrating and inclusive, but never
furtive. He seemed to fit into the picture of the wilderness, as if he
had taken a space reserved there for him, and had put himself in
complete harmony with all its details.

The long journey from their old home in Maryland had been a source of
unending variety and delight to Henry. There had been no painful
partings. His mother and his brother and young sister were in the fourth
wagon from the right, and his father stood beside it. Farther on in the
same company were his uncles and aunts, and many of the old neighbors.
All had come together. It was really the removal of a village from an
old land to a new one, and with the familiar faces of kindred and
friends around them, they were not lonely in strange regions, though
mountains frowned and dark forests lowered.

It was to Henry a return rather than a removal. He almost fancied that
in some far-off age he had seen all these things before. The forests and
the mountains beckoned in friendly fashion; they had no terrors, for
even their secrets lay open before him. He seemed to breathe a newer and
keener air than that of the old land left behind, and his mind expanded
with the thought of fresh pleasures to come. The veteran guide, Ross,
alone observed how the boy learned, through intuition, ways of the
wilderness that others achieved only by hard experience.

They had met fair weather, an important item in such a journey, and
there had been no illness, beyond trifling ailments quickly cured. As
they traveled slowly and at their ease, it took them a long time to pass
through the settled regions. This part of the journey did not interest
Henry so much. He was eager for the forests and the great wilderness
where his fancy had already gone before. He wanted to see deer and bears
and buffaloes, trees bigger than any that grew in Maryland, and
mountains and mighty rivers. But they left the settlements behind at
last, and came to the unbroken forest. Here he found his hopes
fulfilled. They were on the first slopes of the mountains that divide
Virginia from Kentucky, and the bold, wild nature of the country pleased
him. He had never seen mountains before, and he felt the dignity and
grandeur of the peaks.

Sometimes he went on ahead with Tom Ross, the guide, his chosen friend,
and then he considered himself, in very truth, a man, or soon to become
one, because he was now exploring the unknown, leading the way for a
caravan--and there could be no more important duty. At such moments he
listened to the talk of the guide who taught the lesson that in the
wilderness it was always important to see and to listen, a thing however
that Henry already knew instinctively. He learned the usual sounds of
the woods, and if there was any new noise he would see what made it. He
studied, too, the habits of the beasts and birds. As for fishing, he
found that easy. He could cut a rod with his clasp knife, tie a string
to the end of it and a bent pin to the end of a string, and with this
rude tackle he could soon catch in the mountain creeks as many fish as
he wanted.

Henry liked the nights in the mountains; in which he did not differ from
his fellow-travelers. Then the work of the day was done; the wagons were
drawn up in a half circle, the horses and the oxen were resting or
grazing under the trees, and, as they needed fires for warmth as well as
cooking, they built them high and long, giving room for all in front of
the red coals if they wished. The forest was full of fallen brushwood,
as dry as tinder, and Henry helped gather it. It pleased him to see the
flames rise far up, and to hear them crackle as they ate into the heart
of the boughs. He liked to see their long red shadows fall across the
leaves and grass, peopling the dark forest with fierce wild animals; he
would feel all the cosier within the scarlet rim of the firelight. Then
the men would tell stories, particularly Ross, the guide, who had
wandered much and far in Kentucky. He said that it was a beautiful land.
He spoke of the noble forests of beech and oak and hickory and maple,
the dense canebrake, the many rivers, and the great Ohio that received
them all--the Beautiful River, the Indians called it--and the game, with
which forests and open alike swarmed, the deer, the elk, the bear, the
panther and the buffalo. Now and then, when the smaller children were
asleep in the wagons and the larger ones were nodding before the fires,
the men would sink their voices and speak of a subject which made them
all look very grave indeed. It sounded like Indians, and the men more
than once glanced at their rifles and powderhorns.

But the boy, when he heard them, did not feel afraid. He knew that
savages of the most dangerous kind often came into the forests of
Kentucky, whither they were going, but he thrilled rather than shivered
at the thought. Already he seemed to have the knowledge that he would be
a match for them at any game they wished to play.

Henry usually slept very soundly, as became a boy who was on his feet
nearly all day, and who did his share of the work; but two or three
times he awoke far in the night, and, raising himself up in the wagon,
peeped out between the canvas cover and the wooden body. He saw a very
black night in which the trees looked as thin and ghostly as shadows,
and smoldering fires, beside which two men rifle on shoulder, always
watched. Often he had a wish to watch with them, but he said nothing,
knowing that the others would hold him too young for the task.

But to-day he felt only joy and curiosity. They were now on the crest of
the last mountain ridge and before them lay the great valley of
Kentucky; their future home. The long journey was over. The men took off
their hats and caps and raised a cheer, the women joined through
sympathy and the children shouted, too, because their fathers and
mothers did so, Henry's voice rising with the loudest.

A slip of a girl beside Henry raised an applauding treble and he smiled
protectingly at her. It was Lucy Upton, two years younger than himself,
slim and tall, dark-blue eyes looking from under broad brows, and
dark-brown curls, lying thick and close upon a shapely head.

"Are you not afraid?" she asked.

"Afraid of what?" replied Henry Ware, disdainfully.

"Of the forests over there in Kentucky. They say that the savages often
come to kill."

"We are too strong. I do not fear them."

He spoke without any vainglory, but in the utmost confidence. She
glanced covertly at him. He seemed to her strong and full of resource.
But she would not show her admiration.

They passed from the mountain slope into a country which now sank away
in low, rolling hills like the waves of the sea and in which everything
grew very beautiful. Henry had never seen such trees in the East. The
beech, the elm, the hickory and the maple reached gigantic proportions,
and wherever the shade was not too dense the grass rose heavy and rank.
Now and then they passed thickets of canebrake, and once, at the side of
a stream, they came to a salt "lick." It was here that a fountain
spouted from the base of a hill, and, running only a few feet, emptied
into a creek. But its waters were densely impregnated with salt, and all
around its banks the soft soil was trodden with hundreds of footsteps.

"The wild beasts made these," said the guide to Henry. "They come here
at night: elk, deer, buffalo, wolves, and all the others, big and
little, to get the salt. They drink the water and they lick up the salt
too from the ground."

A fierce desire laid hold of the boy at these words. He had a small
rifle of his own, which however he was not permitted to carry often. But
he wanted to take it and lie beside the pool at night when the game came
down to drink. The dark would have no terrors for him, nor would he need
companionship. He knew what to do, he could stay in the bush noiseless
and motionless for hours, and he would choose only the finest of the
deer and the bear. He could see himself drawing the bead, as a great
buck came down in the shadows to the fountain and he thrilled with
pleasure at the thought. Each new step into the wilderness seemed to
bring him nearer home.

Their stay beside the salt spring was short, but the next night they
built the fire higher than ever because just after dark they heard the
howling of wolves, and a strange, long scream, like the shriek of a
woman, which the men said was the cry of a panther. There was no danger,
but the cries sounded lonesome and terrifying, and it took a big fire to
bring back gayety.

Henry had not yet gone to bed, but was sitting in his favorite place
beside the guide, who was calmly smoking a pipe, and he felt the
immensity of the wilderness. He understood why the people in this
caravan clung so closely to each other. They were simply a big family,
far away from anybody else, and the woods, which curved around them for
so many hundreds of miles, held them together.

The men talked more than usual that night, but they did not tell
stories; instead they asked many questions of the guide about the
country two days' journey farther on, which, Ross said, was so good, and
it was agreed among them that they should settle there near the banks of
a little river.

"It's the best land I ever saw," said Ross, "an' as there's lots of
canebrake it won't be bad to clear up for farmin'. I trapped beaver in
them parts two years ago, an' I know."

This seemed to decide the men, and the women, too, for they had their
share in the council. The long journey was soon to end, and all looked
pleased, especially the women. The great question settled, the men
lighted their pipes and smoked a while, in silence, before the blazing
fires. Henry watched them and wished that he too was a man and could
take part in these evening talks. He was excited by the knowledge that
their journey was to end so soon, and he longed to see the valley in
which they were to build their homes. He climbed into the wagon at last
but he could not sleep. His beloved rifle, too, was lying near him, and
once he reached out his hand and touched it.

The men, by and by, went to the wagons or, wrapping themselves in
blankets, slept before the flames. Only two remained awake and on guard.
They sat on logs near the outskirts of the camp and held their rifles in
their hands.

Henry dropped the canvas edge and sought sleep, but it would not come.
Too many thoughts were in his mind. He was trying to imagine the
beautiful valley, described by Ross, in which they were to build their
houses. He lifted the canvas again after a while and saw that the fires
had sunk lower than ever. The two men were still sitting on the logs and
leaning lazily against upthrust boughs. The wilderness around them was
very black, and twenty yards away, even the outlines of the trees were
lost in the darkness.

Henry's sister who was sleeping at the other end of the wagon awoke and
cried for water. Mr. Ware raised himself sleepily, but Henry at once
sprang up and offered to get it. "All right," Mr. Ware said.

Henry quickly slipped on his trousers and taking the tin cup in his hand
climbed out of the wagon. He was in his bare feet, but like other
pioneer boys he scorned shoes in warm weather, and stubble and pebbles
did not trouble him.

The camp was in a glade and the spring was just at the edge of the
woods--they stopped at night only by the side of running water, which
was easy to find in this region. Near the spring some of the horses and
two of the oxen were tethered to stout saplings. As Henry approached, a
horse neighed, and he noticed that all of them were pulling on their
ropes. The two careless guards were either asleep or so near it that
they took no notice of what was passing, and Henry, unwilling to call
their attention for fear he might seem too forward, walked among the
animals, but was still unable to find the cause of the trouble. He knew
everyone by name and nature, and they knew him, for they had been
comrades on a long journey, and he patted their backs and rubbed their
noses and tried to soothe them. They became a little quieter, but he
could not remain any longer with them because his sister was waiting at
the wagon for the water. So he went to the spring and, stooping down,
filled his cup.

When Henry rose to his full height, his eyes happened to be turned
toward the forest, and there, about seven or eight feet from the ground,
and not far from him he saw two coals of fire. He was so startled that
the cup trembled in his hand, and drops of water fell splashing back
into the spring. But he stared steadily at the red points, which he now
noticed were moving slightly from side to side, and presently he saw
behind them the dim outlines of a long and large body. He knew that this
must be a panther. The habits of all the wild animals, belonging to this
region, had been described to him so minutely by Ross that he was sure
he could not be mistaken. Either it was a very hungry or a very ignorant
panther to hover so boldly around a camp full of men and guns.

The panther was crouched on a bough of a tree, as if ready to spring,
and Henry was the nearest living object. It must be he at whom the great
tawny body would be launched. But as a minute passed and the panther did
not move, save to sway gently, his courage rose, especially when he
remembered a saying of Ross that it was the natural impulse of all wild
animals to run from man. So he began to back away, and he heard behind
him the horses trampling about in alarm. The lazy guards still dozed and
all was quiet at the wagons. Now Henry recalled some knowledge that he
had learned from Ross and he made a resolve. He would show, at a time,
when it was needed, what he really could do. He dropped his cup, rushed
to the fire, and picked up a long brand, blazing at one end.

Swinging his torch around his head until it made a perfect circle of
flame he ran directly toward the panther, uttering a loud shout as he
ran. The animal gave forth his woman's cry, this time a shriek of
terror, and leaping from the bough sped with cat-like swiftness into the
forest.

All the camp was awake in an instant, the men springing out of the
wagons, gun in hand, ready for any trouble. When they saw only a boy,
holding a blazing torch above his head, they were disposed to grumble,
and the two sleepy guards, seeking an excuse for themselves, laughed
outright at the tale that Henry told. But Mr. Ware believed in the truth
of his son's words, and the guide, who quickly examined the ground near
the tree, said there could be no doubt that Henry had really seen the
panther, and had not been tricked by his imagination. The great tracks
of the beast were plainly visible in the soft earth.

"Pushed by hunger, an' thinking there was no danger, he might have
sprung on one of our colts or a calf," said Ross, "an' no doubt the boy
with his ready use of a torch has saved us from a loss. It was a brave
thing for him to do."
