whether you like it or not and would know better how to handle it than
anybody else. Perhaps our mechanized civilization _is_ going to the
dogs; as Scriven suspects and you and maybe I myself. But even so we
cannot abandon it; we belong, we are part of it, we're in it to the
bitter end."

Lee nodded slowly.

"Yes, I see what you mean. Please forgive me, Oona; The Brain, has a
terrific force of attrition, it's been wearing me down--Keeping
everything to myself and thinking that you would shrink from me as from
a madman. Tell me then, what shall I do? Should I tell Scriven or
anybody else about this thing?"

"For heaven's sake, no," she said horrified. "In the first place, Howard
carries an enormous burden at this present time; that Brain power
Extension Bill is going before Congress next week. It simply would be
unfair to bring any new uncertainty into his life when his energy is
already strained to its last ounce. In the second place Howard abhors
anything which smacks of the metaphysical. You have no _proof_, Semper,
and in the absence of that you cannot, you mustn't approach anybody with
the matter. All you can do is carry on and build up a strong case 100%
with solid facts. Don't forget that The Brain constitutes a
three-billion-dollar investment of taxpayers' money; besides The Brain
is the heart of our national defenses; never forget your "Oath of the
Brain." You cannot be too careful. Make the slightest mistake, and
believe me, it would be suicide. Promise, please, promise that you won't
do anything rash?"

Lee looked at her in frank amazement.

"You're right," he murmured, "these things never occurred to me before.
But you've got something there; good lord, what a complex world we're
living in."

The face she turned toward his suddenly was wet with tears.

"Forget it," she cried, "oh please, forget everything I said about
staying in this country and seeing this thing through to the end. Go, go
away, back to the never-never land, stay there and be safe. You cannot
cope with this thing, its too big and it's too involved with all those
politics behind. Get out of it as long as there's still time. You're a
child, you're a Don Quixote riding against windmills and it's going to
kill you--you--you innocent."

Anger and contempt were in her voice as she flung this last at him. She
hastily withdrew her hand from Lee; now it fingered for something in her
bag. He sat appalled; this was so unexpected, this was a different woman
from the composed and balanced Oona he had known. What had he done to
provoke this sudden reversal of opinion, this contempt, this tearing
away the king's purple from his shoulder, the purple which had been her
hand.

"She must think I'm a coward," he thought.

"This is awful." Aloud he said:

"Oh no; believe me, I never would have gone back to the never-never in
any case, Oona. Not without you that is. You said you couldn't follow me
there for some reasons which have nothing to do with me. Does that mean,
could I hope perhaps that you would--be my wife--later, when The Brain
problem is all done and over with?" He paused: "It wouldn't necessarily
mean to bury you in any desert, Oona," he added eagerly.

"No, Semper," she cried. "It's very good of you and I'm proud you asked
me, but it cannot be, never." Almost violently she repeated: "Never--it
is too late. Some day, I promise I'm going to explain; right now I
cannot, Semper. Please understand at least this one thing that right now
I cannot explain."

"It's horrid," Lee thought. "I'm always saying the wrong things at the
wrong time with Oona. I don't seem to have any understanding of a
woman's psychology at all; I'm hopeless."

"Of course" he said aloud. "It shall be as you wish."

       *       *       *       *       *

The girl still didn't look at him. Her face under the transparent
rainbow umbrella of the swooshing jet again was radiant with that
strange smile which women preserve for their newly born after the pangs
of birth or for their men when unseeing they lie in fever deliriums; the
old, the knowing smile as she starts on the road to pain. Still smiling
she gripped the controls with her firm, capable hands.

"From the first minute," she said, "we've been friends, Semper. Let's
stay that way. This afternoon I made a fool of myself by telling you
first to stay on and then to go away. I was a little unnerved; I'm
sorry, Semper, it won't happen again. I, too, am living under a
considerable strain. You won't leave, I can see that now; it's partly my
fault and partly the perversity of the male. Promise me as a friend that
you'll be careful, understand? _Very, very_ careful in all matters
concerning The Brain and above all: discreet. Will you do that?"

It buoyed Lee up no end.

"Of course, Oona," he said. "You know that I trust your judgment. You
know that I think the world of you."

"That's wonderful," she exclaimed, "and now: look down; see the last act
before the curtain falls."

Down in the canyon deeps the dream cities and castles which millions of
years and the river built were changing contours and colors as the big
fireball dived into the Sierra Mountains. And then the shadows raced
like a ferocious hunt out of the deep, chasing away the last iridescence
of that awesome beauty and drowning it in the rising tide of the night.

The girl had flicked on the dashboard lights; the radio started humming
the tune of the Cephalon sound-beam, a deft turn of the wheel set the
jetticopter upon its course. They were alone under the stars; all the
other pleasure craft had returned before darkness from the fashionable
sunset-cocktail hour over the Grand Canyon. Now it was Lee's arm which
eased itself around the shoulder of the girl feeling with a delight in
its every nerve the slight pressure by which she answered it.

"I'm going to kiss her now," he thought, "at last, at last!"

There was a buzz in the phone and Lee lost contact with her shoulder as
suddenly she bent forward to take the receiver:

"Oh hello, Oona; this is Howard. Saw your plane over the canyon."

"Where are you?"

"Right behind you," chuckled Scriven's voice. "On the maiden trip with
my new ship. Took her over in Los Angeles this afternoon straight from
the assembly line. She's got everything. Oona, I don't wish to spoil
your evening for you but there are a few things right now I wish I could
consult with you about. Do you think you could spare me a minute? Would
you feel terrible if you did? Who's with you now; I don't mean to be
personal, you understand."

"Why it's Dr. Lee, of course."

"That's fine. He's the very man I want to see. Perhaps you two would
like to come over for cocktails in my ship? We could both land at the
top of the Braintrust building; it would be more comfortable than up in
the air. Besides, we would have all our working material right there."

With her hand on the receiver Oona turned to Lee: "How about it,
Semper?"

"Do you want me to go?" he asked.

"Frankly I do," she said earnestly. "He needs your aid. He's in a
terrible fix right now."

He tried to hide the bitterness of disappointment by a smile. "Why then
of course," he said.

Uncovering the receiver Oona spoke aloud again: "Okay, Howard, we'll be
seeing you."

"Fine, fine," came the delighted voice: "I'll phone the tower
immediately."

With Scriven's big ship flying behind Oona's, only a few miles behind,
the broken spell did not return. Already like a white table cloth laid
in the sky, the landing platform of the Braintrust tower gleamed under
the floodlights, and as the two ships descended almost side by side into
the clearing behind the cabin, plain-clothes men materialized from under
the shadows of the trees. Under the strong lights their smiles were as
well-bred as those of trained diplomats and their poise was perfect. Six
of them kept Lee, the stranger, covered while the seventh quickly
frisked him under the disguise of a polite bow.

Bearing it all with a grin, Lee thought: "I never knew home would be
like this. Never suspected it would be this kind of an America we were
fighting for. The Brain, it's got a private army too. Funny that I
should have known that all the time and yet not realized...."

Scriven took him warmly by the arm. "I'm awfully sorry Lee, it's plain
folly of course. I don't feel as if I need all this protection, but the
government does. Don't blame it on these men, they merely obey orders.
Now, out with those lights--and let's go over to the "Brain Wave." I
seem to hear a pleasant tinkling of glasses from within."

       *       *       *       *       *

There was. With her remarkable ability of living up to an emergency,
Oona had taken possession of the strange ship. As the two men
approached, she stood at the door, unhurried hostess of an established
home with the soft glow of an electric fireplace behind her, ice cubes
and cocktail shakers already glittering on the little bar.

It was a spacious cabin. On Scriven's orders it had been equipped
somewhat like the captain's stateroom on an old "East-Indiaman" sailing
ship.

"I like your ship, Howard," she said. "She's swaying a little on her
shock absorbers in this breeze, but that makes one feel like really
being at high sea."

Scriven heaved a big sigh. "Thank you Oona, my dear. And you have no
idea how right you are. We _are_ at high sea; in fact, we're lost--at
least I am. Unless you save my life tonight, you and Dr. Lee."

Oona laughed and even Lee couldn't help smiling. There was something
irresistible comic in the puzzled and worried expression of that leonine
face. "Come on in, you need a drink," the girl said.

The aluminum steps creaked, and then the settee by the fireplace, under
the surgeon's mighty frame. "More than one. Tonight, so help me, I would
be justified, I would even have a right to get roaring drunk."

Lee began to wonder whether the great Scriven had already made some use
of his right in Los Angeles, which would account for the startling
change in the man. The drink, however, which Oona handed him, seemed to
do a lot of good. He sighed relief.

"This, briefly, is the story: I ran into General Vandergeest at the
airplane factory. He was there to take over some stuff for the Army and
he tipped me off. We are going to be invaded, Oona, a full scale
invasion mounted by a Congressional Committee."

"Oh God," there was sincere grief in the girl's voice. "And couldn't you
ward it off?"

With a gesture of despair, Scriven waved that away. "I know, I know. But
after all The Brain _is_ a military establishment and I am only the
scientific director of it. Yes, of course I protested, I protested
vehemently, but--" he shrugged his shoulders, "it was no good. You know
how the military are." He drained his glass and swung around.

"To put you into the picture, Lee, we have under construction at this
present time the 'Thorax.' That's a vast cavity underneath The Brain,
just as is the thorax in the human body. It's strictly hush-hush of
course, but since you were good enough to say that you're going to help
me out, I might as well tell you. The Thorax is going to house the
'motoric organs' of The Brain. It already contains the living quarters
for guards, maintenance engineers, and the general staff and so on in
the event of war emergency. It also contains the first fully automatic
factories for the production of spare parts which would make The Brain
self-sufficient. Eventually it is going to contain a great many
developments such as 'Gog and Magog' as I call them--fascinating little
beasts, I tell you, even if at present they are still in the nursery
stage. Anyway, for the completion of its Thorax The Brain needs another
billion dollars, and for the operation of the Thorax Congress has to
pass the Brainpower-Extension-Bill. For eventually, of course, all
war-essential traffic and all war-essential industries have to be
brought under the centralized control of The Brain if the country is
going to win the Atom-war. Naturally this Brainpower-Extension-Bill has
been very carefully edited by the War Department so as to appear a
peacetime project for the technological improvement of transportation
and so on. Even so we have great reason to fear that one of those blind
mice which we elect for our law-makers might accidentally fall over a
kernel of truth and start a great big squeak over it.

"So that's why I'm faced with this invasion. That's why I'm pushed up
front while the brass cautiously retires behind the ramparts which I'm
supposed to hold. Please Oona, let me have another drink."

From the Sierra Mountains the nightwind came in gusts, making the
"Brainwave's" hull vibrate like the body of a cello, over its rubber
tires it trembled, from time to time it bent a little in its hydraulic
knees. Almost in tune with the wind, gusts of wild thought whirled
through Lee:

"The Brain.... So it was already possessed of some motoric organs.... So
it already _had_ some means to exert its will ... so it wasn't The
Brain's wishful thinking, that full automatization which would lead to
the auto-procreation of machines. It was reality.... Most ominous of
all, why had The Brain concealed from him the work which must have been
going on for months, for years in this mysterious "Thorax", seat of
motoric organs.... Why, unless--had it not been for tonight's accident,
the sudden emergency and Scriven a little the worse for liquor under the
pressure of it.... Would he ever have learned _what_ was going on before
it was too _late_?"

       *       *       *       *       *

The silence was becoming awkward. It was broken by Oona's carefully
composed voice.

"When is it going to happen--this invasion thing?"

The simple question seemed to startle Scriven who had been looking into
his glass as if in reverie.

"_When?_ Why, didn't I tell you the worst of it? _Tonight!_"

"_Tonight?_"

"Sure," Scriven cast a malicious glance up to the antique ship's
chronometer which hung over the bar. "This very minute the honorable
members are boarding their plane in Washington. They're going to descend
upon us in sixty minutes flat."

"But that's impossible!" Oona said. "The Brain isn't a roadhouse. They
can't do that to us in the middle of the night."

Scriven chuckled over his glass. Obviously he had regained his humor.
"Sometimes, Oona, you're like a little child. You forget that this is
meant to be a wonderful surprise. You forget that it comes armed with
passes from the War Department and fully informed as to The Brain's
midnight intermission-time. You forget that by those logical processes,
peculiar to kings, dictators, and peoples' representatives, they will
expect every courtesy extended to them in the midst of the unexpected
surprise. Hotel reservations, careful guidance through The Brain, an
inspired little speech by the Braintrust Director, fresh as a daisy as
he ought to be at 3 a.m. Not to forget the refreshments of course. Why
else do you think I've buttonholed you two out of the air? I literally
put my life in your hands. Save me from this--if you can!"

Despite the obvious dramatic act he had put on in voice and gesture,
there was a sincere pleading in Scriven's dark brown eyes.

"I will be glad to help as best I can," Lee said. "I'll make an awful
job of it, I'm sure, but I'll try and do the conducting and the
lecturing."

Scriven wiped his forehead with a big silk handkerchief. The leonine
face beamed. "Lee, that will be a tremendous help. You see, they will
feel flattered being conducted by somebody with a big name. They want an
'objective' view and you are not one of our regular employees, you're a
guest scientist from Australia. That makes you just about ideal. But,
Lee, much as it is against my interest, I ought to warn you: Do you
realize the utter impossibility of this thing? Laymen, outsiders coming
to investigate and to pass judgment upon the most complex electronic
organism in the world! In two hours at the most they expect to be fully
informed as to how The Brain works and somehow to be magically
transformed into authorities entitled to mouth considered opinions about
radioactive pyramidal cells in houses of government. Do you really think
you could survive it, Lee?"

"At least I can try," Lee smiled.

"Good man." There was a new spring in Scriven's step as he came over to
shake hands. "I can never thank you enough for this."

"I suppose I could hold the hospitality front," Oona said calmly.

Standing between the two, Scriven put his hands upon their shoulders.
