they offered but little resistance to the flames--from the fields
of maize and cane, clouds of smoke were still rising, as the
conflagration spread; and at one stroke the whole agricultural
wealth of the island was destroyed. The boys regretted that this
should necessarily be the case; but they felt that it was now war,
to the knife, between the Spaniards and them, and that such a
defeat would be beneficial.

This, indeed, was the case; for the commander drew back his troops
to the town, in order to make fresh arrangements, before venturing
upon an attack on foes who showed themselves possessed of such
desperate determination.

Another six weeks elapsed, indeed, before a forward movement was
again commenced; and in that time considerable acquisitions of
force were obtained. Strong as the bands felt themselves, they
could not but be alarmed at the thought of the tremendous storm
gathering to burst over their heads. The women had long since been
sent away, to small native villages existing on the other side of
the island, and living at peace with their neighbors Thither Ned
also dispatched several of the party whom he believed to be either
wanting in courage, or whose constancy he somewhat doubted. A
traitor now would be the destruction of the party; and it was
certain that any negro deserting to the enemy, and offering to act
as their guide to the various strongholds of the defenders, would
receive immense rewards. Thus it was imperative that every man, of
whose fidelity and constancy the least doubt was entertained,
should be carefully sent out of the way of temptation. All the band
were, indeed, pledged by a most solemn oath; and death, by torture,
was the penalty awarded for any act of treachery.

The greater portion of the force were now provided with European
arms. The negroes had musketoons or arquebuses, the natives still
retained the bow, while all had pikes and spears. They were
undefended by protective amour, and in this respect the Spaniards
had a great advantage in the fight; but, as the boys pointed out,
this advantage was more than counterbalanced by the extra facility
of movement, on the part of the natives, who could scale rocks and
climb hills absolutely inaccessible to their heavily armed and
weighty opponents.

The scouts, who had been stationed on the lookout at the edge of
the forest, brought word that the Spaniards, nigh 1500 strong, had
divided in six bodies; and were marching so as to enter the forest
from six different, and nearly equidistant, points. Each band was
accompanied by bloodhounds, and a large number of other fierce dogs
of the wolfhound breed, which the Spaniards had imported for the
purpose of attacking negroes in their hiding places. Of these
animals the negroes had the greatest dread; and even the bravest,
who were ready to match themselves against armed Spaniards, yet
trembled at the thought of the encounter with these ferocious
animals.

It was clear that no repetition of the tactics formerly pursued
would be possible; for if any attempt at night attacks were made,
the dogs would rush out and attack them; and not only prove
formidable enemies themselves, but guide the Spaniards to the
places where they were stationed. Ned and Gerald would fain have
persuaded the natives that dogs, after all, however formidable they
might appear, were easily mastered by well-armed men; and that any
dog rushing to attack them would be pierced with spears and arrows,
to say nothing of being shot by the arquebuses, before he could
seize any of them. The negroes, however, had known so many cases in
which fugitives had been horribly torn, and indeed, frequently
killed, by these ferocious animals, that the dread of them was too
great for them to listen to the boys' explanations. The latter,
seeing that it would be useless to attempt to overcome their fears,
on this ground, abstained from the attempt.

It had been agreed that, in the event of the Spaniards advancing
from different quarters, one column only should be selected for a
main attack; and that, while the others should be harassed by small
parties, who should cast down rocks upon them while passing through
the gorges, and so inflict as much damage as possible, no attempt
would be made to strike any serious blow upon them. The column
selected for attack was, naturally, that whose path led through the
points which had been most strongly prepared and fortified. This
band mustered about three hundred; and was clearly too strong to be
attacked, in open fight, by the forest bands. Gerald and Ned had
already talked the matter over in every light, and decided that a
purely defensive fight must be maintained; each place where
preparations had been made being held to the last, and a rapid
retreat beaten to the next barricade.

The Spaniards advanced in heavy column. At a distance of a hundred
yards, on each side, marched a body of fifty in compact mass,
thereby sheltering the main body from any sudden attack.

The first point at which the lads had determined to make a stand
was the mouth of a gorge. Here steep rocks rose perpendicularly
from the ground, running almost like a wall along that portion of
the forest. In the midst of this was a cleft, through which a
little stream ran. It was here that the boys had made preparations.
The point could not be turned, without a long and difficult march
along the face of the cliff; and on the summit of this sixty men,
divided into two parties, one on each side of the fissure, were
stationed.

The Spaniards advanced until they nearly reached the mouth of the
ravine. It must be remembered that, although the forest was very
thick, and the vegetation luxuriant; yet there were paths here and
there, made by the constant passing, to and fro, of the occupants
of the wood. Their main direction acted as a guide to the
Spaniards; and the hounds, by their sniffing and eagerness, acted
as a guide to the advancing force.

They paused when they saw, opening before them, this entrance to
the rocky gorge. While they halted, the increased eagerness of the
dogs told them that they were now approaching the point where their
foes were concealed; and the prospect of an attack, on so strong a
position, was formidable even to such a body.

A small party, of thirty men, was told off to advance and
reconnoiter the position. These were allowed to enter the gorge,
and to follow it for a distance of a hundred yards, to a point
where the sides were approached to their nearest point. Then, from
a parapet of rock piled across the ravine came a volley of
musketry; and, simultaneously, from the heights of either side
great stones came crashing down. Such of the party as did not fall
at the first discharge fired a volley at their invisible
assailants, and then hurried back to the main body.

It was now clear that fighting, and that of a serious character,
was to be undertaken. The Spanish commander rapidly reconnoitered
the position; and saw that here, at least, no flanking movement was
possible. He therefore ordered his men to advance, for a direct
attack. Being more afraid of the stones from above than of the
defenders in the ravine, the Spaniards prepared to advance in
skirmishing order; in that way they would be able to creep up to
the barricade of rocks with the least loss, to themselves, from the
fire of its defenders; while the stones from above would prove far
less dangerous than would be the case upon a solid column.

With great determination, the Spanish troops advanced to the
attack. As they neared the mouth of the gorge, flights of arrows
from above were poured down upon them; and these were answered by
their own musketeers and bowmen, although the figures occasionally
exposed above offered but a poor mark, in comparison to that
afforded by the column below.

The men on the ridge were entirely natives, the boys having
selected the negroes, on whose courage at close quarters they could
more thoroughly rely, for the defense of the ravine. The firearms
in those days could scarcely be termed arms of precision. The
bell-mouth arquebuses could carry a large and heavy charge, but
there was nothing like accuracy in their fire; and although a
steady fire was kept up from the barricade, and many Spaniards
fell; yet a larger number succeeded in making their way through the
zone of fire, by taking advantage of the rocks and bushes; and
these gathered, near the foot of the barricade.

The stones which came crashing from above did serious damage among
them, but the real effect of these was more moral than physical.
The sound of the great masses of stone, plunging down the hillside,
setting in motion numbers of small rocks as they came, tearing down
the bushes and small trees, was exceedingly terrifying at first;
but as block after block dashed down, doing comparatively little
harm, the Spaniards became accustomed to them; and, keeping under
the shelter of masses of rock, to the last moment, prepared all
their energies for the attack. The Spanish commander found that the
greater portion of his troop were within striking distance, and he
gave the command, to those gathered near the barricade, to spring
forward to the attack.

The gorge, at this point, was some fifteen yards wide. The
barricade across it was thirty feet in height. It was formed of
blocks of stone, of various sizes; intermingled with which were
sharp stakes, with their points projecting; lines of bushes and
arms of trees, piled outwards; and the whole was covered loosely
with sharp prickly creepers, cut from the trees and heaped there. A
more difficult place to climb, even without its being defended from
above, would be difficult to find. The covering of thorny creepers
hid the rocks below; and at each step the soldiers put their feet
into deep holes between the masses of rock, and fell forward,
lacerating themselves horribly with the thorns, or coming face
downwards on one of the sharp-pointed stakes. But if, without any
resistance from above, the feat of climbing this carefully prepared
barricade was difficult; it was terrible when, from the ridge
above, a storm of bullets swept down. It was only for a moment that
the negroes exposed themselves, in the act of firing. Behind, the
barricade was as level and smooth as it was difficult upon the
outer side. Great steps, some three feet wide, had been prepared of
wood; so that the defenders could easily mount and, standing in
lines, relieve each other as they fired. The stones of the top
series had been carefully chosen of a form so as to leave, between
each, crevices through which the defenders could fire, while
scarcely exposing themselves to the enemy.

The Spaniards behind endeavored to cover the advance of their
comrades, by keeping up a heavy fire at the summit of the
barricade; and several of the negroes were shot through the head,
in the act of firing. Their loss, however, was small in comparison
to that of the assailants; who strove, in vain, to climb up the
thorny ascent, their position being the more terrible inasmuch as
the fire from the parties on the rocks above never ceased, and
stones kept up a sort of bombardment on those in the ravine. Even
the fierce dogs could with difficulty climb the thorn-covered
barriers, and those who reached the top were instantly shot, or
stabbed.

At last, after suffering very considerable loss, the Spanish
commander drew off his soldiers; and a wild yell of triumph rose
from the negroes. The combat however had, as the boys were aware,
scarcely begun; and they now waited, to see what the next effort of
the Spaniards would be.

It was an hour before the latter again advanced to the attack. This
time the troops were carrying large bundles of dried grass and
rushes; and although again suffering heavily in the attack, they
piled these at the foot of the barricade, and in another minute a
flash of fire ran up the side. The smoke and flame, for a time,
separated the defenders from their foes; and the fire ceased on
both sides, although those above never relaxed their efforts to
harass the assailants.

As the Spaniards had calculated, the flame of the great heap of
straw communicated with the creepers, and burnt them up in its
fiery tongue; and when the flames abated, the rocks lay open and
uncovered. The Spaniards now, with renewed hopes, advanced again to
the attack; and this time were able, although with heavy loss, to
make their way up the barricade.

When they arrived within three or four feet of the top, Ned gave
the word; and a line of thirty powerful negroes, each armed with a
long pike, suddenly arose and, with a yell, threw themselves over
the edge and dashed down upon the Spaniards. The latter, struggling
to ascend, with unsteady footing on the loose and uneven rocks,
were unable for an instant to defend themselves against this
assault.

The negroes, barefooted, had no difficulty on the surface which
proved so fatal to the Spaniards; and, like the crest of a wave,
they swept their opponents headlong down the face of the barricade.
The heavily armed Spaniards fell over each other, those in front
hurling those behind backwards in wild confusion; and the first
line of negroes being succeeded by another, armed with axes, who
completed the work which the first line had begun; the slaughter,
for a minute, was terrible.

For some thirty paces, the negroes pursued their advantage; and
then at a loud shout from Ned turned, and with a celerity equal to
that of their advance, the whole were back over the barricade,
before the Spaniards in rear could awaken from their surprise; and
scarcely a shot was fired, as the dark figures bounded back into
shelter.

This time, the Spanish officer drew back his men sullenly. He felt
that they had done all that could be expected of them. Upwards of
sixty men had fallen. It would be vain to ask them to make the
assault again. He knew, too, that by waiting, the other columns
would be gradually approaching; and that, on the morrow, some
method of getting in the enemy's rear would probably be discovered.

In the meantime, he sent off fifty men on either flank, to discover
how far its rocky wall extended; while trumpeters, under strong
guards, were sent up to the hilltops in the rear, and sounded the
call lustily. Musketoons, heavily charged so as to make as loud a
report as possible, were also fired to attract the attention of the
other columns.

The boys were perfectly aware that they could not hope, finally, to
defend this position. They had, however, given the Spaniards a very
heavy lesson; and the success of the defense had immensely raised
the spirit and courage of their men. The signal was therefore given
for a retreat; and in half an hour both the Indians, on the summit
of the hill, and the negroes, behind the barricade, had fallen
back; leaving only some half dozen to keep up the appearance of
defense, and to bring back tidings of the doings of the enemy;
while the rest hurried off, to aid the detached parties to inflict
heavy blows upon the other columns.

It was found that these were steadily approaching, but had lost a
good many men. The reinforcements enabled the natives to make a
more determined resistance, and in one or two places the columns
were effectually checked. The reports, when night fell, were that
the Spaniards had altogether lost over two hundred men; but that
all their columns had advanced a considerable distance towards the
center of the forest; and had halted, each as they stood; and
bivouacked, keeping up huge fires and careful watches.

It formed no part, however, of the boys' plan to attack them thus;
and when morning dawned the whole of the defenders, each taking
different paths, as far as possible; some even making great
circuits, so as to deceive the enemy, were directed to make for the
central fortress. The intermediate positions, several of which were
as strong as the barricade which they had so well defended, were
abandoned; for the advance from other quarters rendered it
impossible to hold these.




Chapter 9: Baffled.



By midday, all the defenders of the forest were assembled in the
semi-circular plateau on the face of the hill; and, scouts having
been placed near the entrance, they awaited the coming of the
enemy. So far as possible, every means had been taken to prevent
the access to their place of retreat being discovered. A stream had
been turned, so as to run down a small ravine, leading to its
approach. Trees which had been blown down by the wind had been
previously brought, from a considerable distance; and these were
piled in careless confusion across the gorge, so as to look as if
they had fallen there, and give an idea that no one could have
passed that way.

For the next two days, all was quiet. A scout upon the hilltop, and
others who were told off to watch the Spaniards, reported that the
woods below were being thoroughly searched; that the enemy were
acting in the most methodical way, the columns being now in close
connection with each other, the intermediate forest being searched
foot by foot; and that all were converging towards the central
mountains of the position. The dogs had proved valuable assistants,
and these were tracking the paths used by them, and steadily
leading them towards the stronghold.

That they would finally escape detection none of the defenders had
much hope. The Spaniards would be sure that they must be somewhere
within their line; and after the loss suffered, and the immense
preparations made, it was certain that they would not retire until
they had solved the mystery, and, if possible, annihilated the
forest bands.

On the fourth day after entering the wood, the Spaniards came to
the point where the barricade of trees had been erected. So
skilfully had this been constructed that they would have retired,
believing that there was no path beyond this little gorge; however,
the restlessness and anger of the dogs convinced them that there
must be something behind. Slowly a passage was cut, with axes,
through the virgin forest on either side; for the lesson they had
received had checked their impetuosity. They came down at the side
of the barricade, and thus having passed it, pressed forward in
steady array until they came to the foot of the great cliff. Here
the dogs were not long before they pointed out to the assailants
the narrow path, scarce visible, running along its face; and a
shout of satisfaction from the Spaniards testified that they now
felt certain that they had caught their enemies in a trap.

Parties were sent off to positions whence they could obtain a good
view of the place, and these soon reported that the ledge continued
to a great opening in the face of the precipice; that in some
places logs had been fixed to widen the path; and that there was
plenty of room, on the plateau formed by the retirement of the hill
face, for a large body to have taken refuge. They also reported
that the cliffs rose behind this amphitheater almost, if not quite
perpendicularly for a great height; and that, still higher, the
bare rock fell away at so steep an angle that it would be
difficult, in the extreme, to take up such a position from above as
would enable them to keep up a musquetry fire, or to hurl rocks
upon the defenders of the amphitheater.

When the reports were considered by the Spanish leader, he saw at
once that this was not an enterprise to be undertaken rashly. Men
were sent down to the plain below to reconnoiter; while others were
dispatched round the mountain, to see whether the path extended
across the whole face of the precipice, and also to discover, if
possible, whether the recess was commanded from above.

Both reports were unfavorable From the valley the great natural
strength of the position was manifest, for half a dozen men could
defend such a path as this against a thousand, by placing
themselves behind an angle and shooting down all who turned the
corner; while the men from above reported that the peak shelved so
rapidly towards the top of the sheer precipice, that it would be
impossible to get near enough to the edge to see down into the
amphitheater They reported, however, that stones and rocks set
going would dash down below, and that points could be gained from
which these missiles could be dispatched on their errand.

A council of war was held; and it was determined, in the first
place, to endeavor to force the position by direct attack. Some men
of approved courage were chosen to lead the forlorn hope; a number
of marksmen, with arrows and firearms, were placed in the valley to
keep up a fire upon any who might show themselves on the path,
while above, several hundreds of men were sent up, with crowbars,
to loosen and hurl down rocks.

The defenders, on their part, were not idle. Two spots had been
chosen in the pathway for the defense At each of these the face of
the cliff extended sharply out in an angle, and it was on the side
of this angle next to the amphitheater that the preparations were
made. Here barricades of stones were heaped up on the path, which
at this point was some three yards wide. Six of the steadiest and
most courageous negroes were placed here, with muskets and pikes.
Two of them were to lie with their guns pointed at the protecting
angle so that, the instant anyone showed himself round the corner,
they could open fire upon him. The others were lying in readiness
to assist, or to relieve those on guard. Either Gerald or Ned
remained with them, always.

A few stones were thrown up on the outside edge of the path, to
protect the defenders from the shots of those in the valley below;
not indeed that the danger from this source was very great, for the
face of the precipice was some eight hundred feet high, and the
path ran along some four hundred from the bottom. With the clumsy
arms in use, in those days, the fear of any one being struck from
below was by no means great.

A similar barricade was erected behind, and the negroes were, in
case of extreme necessity, to fall back from their first position.
