fourth at midnight, and so on--two hours earlier each day till the week
ends, when they throw in a whole night for good measure and begin the
next week at sunrise again!"

"Yes, that arrangement is made necessary because their Moon-day will not
agree with their Sun-day in any other manner. But it is rather
remarkable that the two moons agree with each other so well, the larger
one making twelve revolutions while the smaller makes one, so that at
the end of every week they both rise together, but on opposite sides of
the horizon, which is the signal for that night to be disregarded in the
count. The next week begins on the following morning, the first rising
of the larger moon being disregarded, and her second rising being the
one reckoned from."

We were discussing this during our noon-day meal, and, when we had
finished, I walked with the doctor out to the plateau, where I was
supervising some important work on the Gnomons; for I had not been ten
days in Kem until I attempted to buy, with my gold coins, a large amount
of wheat from the Pharaoh. Through the interference and objection of
Zaphnath, however, I failed utterly in getting any. But the gold had its
effect just the same, and later the Pharaoh showed an evident
willingness to part with anything in his possession in order to get a
liberal number of the smaller coins. But I put a very high value upon
the gold, comparing closely with the worth of diamonds upon Earth, and
refused to part with any, until one day the wisdom of buying the Gnomons
occurred to me. I considered the project carefully, and finally made him
an offer of a hundred half-eagles for them. Many of the small ones had
been built to watch the course of the birth-stars of his various
ancestors, and these were now in a sense monuments to his dynasty. He
reserved these and a small one, built to observe his own star of
nativity, and finally sold me all the large important ones, upon the
doctor's representation that they were no longer needed for astronomical
purposes. He specified only that they must not be torn down, but that I
might use them as I should see fit.

As I have said before, the Gnomons contained numerous large, long
chambers, and it only became necessary to put a permanent bottom in
these to convert them into enormous warehouses. All the storage places
inside the city were rapidly filling with grain, which poured in at
every gate on tens of thousands of mules. The plenteous crop, already
ripening, would have to be housed somewhere, and even if I did not
succeed in buying a large store of grain for myself, I knew how to make
a storehouse eat up a large portion of the value of the grain it housed.
I had seen wheat, stored year after year, finally become the property of
the elevator owner, by virtue of his charges.

I was not only putting a bottom to the storage chambers, but converting
the inclined slopes of the largest Gnomons into a passable mule-trail,
by roughening and corrugating the surface to give the patient animals a
surer foot-hold, so they might climb to the top to discharge their
cargoes. This was a simple form of elevator, and I laughed to think what
some of my former acquaintances would think of it! One of the smaller
Gnomons had already been completed to receive my share of the grain
which I earned in the Pharaoh's service, and to this I was adding such
meagre purchases as I could make from the small farmers. These, however,
were not numerous, for the land was mostly in the hands of the Pharaoh
and of a few large owners, more or less bound to him. I was therefore
not a little surprised now upon approaching to see a long line of mules
picking their way up the inclined side of the finished Gnomon, and as
they reached the top their drivers emptied the pair of sacks they bore
into my storehouse. Including the drove of unladen animals at the bottom
of the Gnomon, there must have been a hundred in all, and I was awaited
by the chief driver, who rode one sleek mule covered with a soft blanket
of feather texture, and had another similarly saddled by his side. After
a slow salute of each hand upon his cheek, he said to me,--

"My master, the glorious Hotep, sendeth to the keeper of the Pharaoh's
grain a present of two hundred bags of wheat, and wisheth to know if it
be true that thou desirest to buy a large store of grain with gold? For
hath not Hotep the gathered harvests of two full years in his bins, and
upon his fertile lands the largest crop in all Kem (save only that of
the Pharaoh) is nodding and awaiting the warm, ripening breath of the
Snowless Month! Yet Hotep hath no use for iron money, for he is weighted
and fettered with it already; but if thou desirest to bargain with him
for as much yellow gold as thou hast bartered to the Pharaoh, he will be
most pleased to treat with thee, and sendeth me with this ambling mule
to fetch thee. Will it please thee to come with me now to his palace
within the city?"

"What do you think, Doctor? This Hotep must be almost a rival to the
Pharaoh, if he has stored so much grain and owns so many ripening
fields. He must have seen the new gold ornaments upon the Pharaoh's
women, which have rendered him envious. If, indeed, he has such a vast
quantity of grain to sell, I will deck him out with gold, such as will
turn the Pharaoh green with envy! I shall lose no time in seeing him;"
and so saying I mounted the mule, and assured the chief driver I would
express my thanks in person to the great Hotep.

He conducted me to the opposite side of the city, and, as we crossed a
height near its centre, he pointed out to me the long fields of his
master lining the left bank of the river. There were miles of waving
grain just beginning to turn from a luxuriant green to the lighter
yellow tints of harvest. Presently we approached a large palace, which I
had often before seen from afar against the distant wall of the city,
but had never known. Upon entering, I observed every sign of the same
idle luxury which marked the Pharaoh's dwelling, but none of that regal
disdain or imperial haughtiness which separated every one but his
favourite women from the immediate presence of the monarch.

I was graciously received in a large, lighted chamber, where Hotep
reclined lazily upon a billowy heap of downy cushions, surrounded by
many women. He only arose from his elbow to a sitting posture when I
saluted him. Without saying a word to him, I approached, and, loosening
my belt from about my waist, I unbuckled its mouth and poured out upon
a large cushion by his side my three hundred shining golden eagles. The
effect was electrical, for they were twice the size and three times as
many as the coins I had given the Pharaoh. It must have seemed
impossible to him that I could possess larger coins, and more of them,
than he had seen upon the monarch's favourites. He was simply delighted
with the mere view, and his women crowded around or ran out in haste to
bring in their absent sisters to behold a marvel of riches such as Kem
had never seen. But though they wondered and gloated over the sight,
none of them touched a coin until I spoke.

"I pray thee, most gracious Hotep, examine all these coins, and pass
them among thy women to see if they be pleased with them. Observe their
regularity of form and beauty of design, and test the music they give
forth when cast upon thy floor of stone. Mayhap, thou wouldst rather own
all these than to be cumbered with so much grain."

Thereupon Hotep seized a heaping handful, which he poured jingling from
one palm to the other, and all the women delved their pretty fingers
into the shining heap and passed the coins to their admiring sisters,
until not one was left upon the cushion.

"Thy Chief of Harvests hath made known to me, O Hotep, that thou still
hast the full crops of two years. Wilt thou tell me how many bags of
grain grow upon thy fields at a single crop?"

"Are not the number of my mules a thousand and one, and bear they not
two bags each? To gather a single harvest, each faithful animal must
make five trips each day for the period of an hundred days."

I had often estimated an average mule-load at five bushels, upon which
basis each crop would aggregate two and a half million bushels. This
seemed impossible for a single farmer, but his fields wearied the sight
to follow down the left bank of the Nasr-Nil.

"If thou wilt leave all this gold with me, I will deliver by my mules to
thy storehouses upon the plateau all the grain of my past two crops with
which my whole palace here is cumbered."

"I fear thou holdest thy grain too dearly, and that thou knowest not the
value of this gold. What is more plenteous in Kem than wheat? There be
more bags of it than the stars in heaven. But this gold I bring is more
than all the store of it upon Ptah before I came. Pray give it back
again," I said, gathering up the few pieces which had been returned to
the cushion, and glancing about among the women as if searching for the
rest. They returned them slowly, but Hotep still held his handful. After
a brief pause, I continued,--

"Hast thou not a fair crop growing which thou mightest also give me, so
that no other than Hotep shall receive any of these coins?"

"In truth, I have never ridden as far as my waving fields stretch down
the Nasr-Nil; but one cannot sell what hath not fully ripened, for who
knoweth what it may turn out to be?"

"Then I must beg thee to return my coins," I answered slowly; but,
unbuckling the other end of my belt, I poured out upon another cushion
the hundred magnificent double eagles which I was holding in reserve.
Then, taking a particularly bright one of these, I continued,--

"But as thou hast been generous and thoughtful enough to send me a
present, O Hotep, I desire to return one to thee, such as no man in Kem
ever possessed before. Will it please thee to accept this disc of gold
as large as the lesser moon that creeps across the sky? And with it go
my wishes that Hotep's crops may always be great and plentiful."

Slowly and unwillingly the women returned the eagles to the cushion,
while they stared in wonder at the heap of larger coins. Hotep filtered
the handful through his fingers to the cushion, and accepted the double
eagle with gladness. With his eyes fixed on the second heap he seemed to
be thinking deeply and making calculations.

"The people are wont to call thee Iron Man, but I believe thou art
golden!" he ruminated, and then suddenly, "For these heaps of riches,
large and small, what desirest thou of all my possessions? Wilt thou
have all my grain and half my land? Shall I give to thee all my fields
which cannot be seen from the palace here?"

"Why should I wish thy land when I have no cattle to till it, nor mules
to gather the harvest? In lieu of the land, give me only a share of what
it should produce for a few years. Now give heed to the bargain I will
make with thee. If thou wilt deliver to my storehouses, upon the
plateau, all the gathered grain of thy past two crops, and all the grain
thou shalt gather from this growing crop (save only what thou needest
for seed), and half of each of the crops of the three succeeding
years,--provided, however, that you assure me each year as much as thy
thousand mules can carry in an hundred journeys;--then thou mayest keep
all this store of gold, which is, indeed, all that both of us from the
Blue Star possess."

He seemed to be revolving these terms slowly in his mind to be sure of
them, and then called out to his servants,--

"Bring in spiced wine, and bid my Chief of Harvests enter! He shall be
witness that Hotep agrees to this compact, and, should I die before it
is fulfilled, he shall see that it is carried out to the last year. But
wilt thou leave all this gold with me now, or must I wait until the
harvests are delivered?"

"What Hotep promiseth me I believe, as certainly as if it were done
already. I will leave the gold with thee, knowing thou wilt perform the
contract in every item; but if thou failest in any year, thou shalt
return to me one small gold-piece for each trip that thy thousand mules
fall short of an hundred."

He agreed, and arose and recited the terms of the compact to his Chief
of Harvests, charging him to carry it out, and to cause to be engraved a
small stone cylinder as a permanent record of its provisions, as it was
their custom to do in such cases. Then filling three goblets with rich
spiced wine, he exclaimed,--

"For thy sake, O most generous youth, may the Nasr-Nil fondly nurse
every harvest, and may the gentle Snowless Month ripen them in such
abundance as they have never shown before! And may Hotep's mules grow
old and weary bearing the plenty to thy storehouses!"




CHAPTER X

Humanity on Ptah


The magnificent abundance of the seventh great harvest, which ripened
late in the year of our arrival, attracted a multitude of both men and
animals from all the out-lying countries into Kem to assist in gathering
it, and many of them remained to spend their gains in the luxuries of
the great city. It was an unparalleled period of prosperity and plenty;
and though the rich wasted everything with a careless hand, the poor
were better provided for than they had ever been.

Like an endless caravan Hotep's mules trailed across the city day by
day, and emptied their cargoes into the bottomless pits of the Gnomons.
And Hotep's thousand cattle tramped his threshing-floors during the long
winter, and until the later nightly snows signalled the coming of a
tardy spring; and yet the patient mules streamed through the city, and
wore deeper paths into the sides of the Gnomons, until one by one the
great chambers were filled and sealed.

Late in the spring the toiling cattle left the threshing-floors, and
traversed the fields in long procession, two and two, lashed together by
a bar across the horns instead of a yoke, and dragging heavy stone
ploughs slowly after them to prepare the soil for a new planting. But
while the whole left bank of the Nasr-Nil swarmed with Hotep's patient
teams and their busy drivers, the right bank was deserted, idle, and
lifeless. Every one wondered why the Pharaoh's planting was being
delayed; no one knew why the Pharaoh's men and cattle were idle; and the
old men shook their heads and muttered that the river would overflow its
banks long before the Pharaoh's seed was in. After a while Zaphnath sent
for me, and when I came before him he said,--

"The Pharaoh is sick with the plenty of the land, weary of the sight of
grain-laden mules and ploughing cattle, and so cumbered about with
mountains of wheat that he desireth not to plant his fields. Thou art
not one to see his lands lie idle. If thou hast aught with which to
tempt him, I can persuade him to let unto thee all his land and to hire
unto thee all his men and mules and cattle. For hath he not acquired all
his riches in seven years' harvests? and in another seven thou mayest be
as rich as he."

"Mayhap, O Zaphnath, the coming seven years may not be as plenteous as
the last seven have been; but, in any case, I have no more gold with
which to tempt the Pharaoh, having parted with all of it in a bad
bargain with Hotep, whom thou knowest, for half of his coming crops."

Thereupon he bade me remain, and sent for Hotep, and said to him,--

"Behold, have not the harvests of seven years made Pharaoh the richest
man upon Ptah, so that he covets no more grain, but only things of rare
beauty? And are not thy harvests reduced by half through thy compact
with him from the Blue Star? Now, if thou likest to tempt the Pharaoh
with an hundred of thy golden coins, and one-and-twenty of the
moon-sized discs of gold such as thou wearest there, thou mayest hire
his land for the next seven years, and all his men and animals for a
like time, if thou wilt feed and nourish them; and then shall not both
banks of the great river bring forth riches, and be burdened with the
plenteous harvests of Hotep?"

"Is the Pharaoh indeed weary of rich harvests, or doth he rather itch
for my gold? Yet, had I the seed to plant all his fields, I might
consider the undertaking thou shewest me."

"Let not that delay thee," answered Zaphnath, "for I am sure he will
gladly lend to such a man as Hotep the seed thou needest until thy next
harvest be gathered."

So the matter was thus finally concluded, and I was a witness to the
compact.

Then Hotep's Chief of Harvests worked early and late to finish planting
before the Month of Midnight Snows, when the Nasr-Nil usually overflows
its banks and waters the harvest. But, as if to oblige a man so
industrious in preparing the way for it, the great river did not rise at
its customary time, and Hotep was able to finish his seeding on both
banks.

The black loam along the shores parched and crumbled, and borrowed the
look of the great desert; the feathers of darkness fell later and later,
until they began to appear with the dawn, and yet the river failed to
rise; the priests went through their perfunctory rites to placate the
god of the Overflow, and made their impotent sacrifices to tempt him to
bless the harvest; but Hotep saw the Snowless Month, which should have
ripened his grain, dawn upon fields that were dried to seas of drifting
dust and void of all vegetation. His army of men, augmented by the
Pharaoh's thousands, and his ten thousand cattle and mules, all ate and
waited and waited and ate, and yet there was no work for them. The
following spring there was no need to plough the fields, and no seed to
plant them.

When Zaphnath learned that Hotep must deliver a hundred thousand
mule-cargoes of wheat to me, or forfeit a hundred gold pieces, he sent
for him, and sold to him for the hundred pieces enough of the Pharaoh's
grain already on the plateau to pay me, and lent him the seed to plant
all the land again. But aside from this, the Pharaoh sold not a bag of
wheat, and during the first year all the small stores of grain
throughout Kem were consumed, and the price rose to three times its
former value. Therefore, Hotep consoled himself with the thought that he
could make more out of one crop after a failure than he could have made
out of two crops without it, and he happily sowed his fields anew.

Before the river was due to rise the second time, the poor began to
suffer from the famine. There was no employment for the thousands who
had been attracted to Kem to gather the previous large harvests. Only
those fortunate enough to be slaves enjoyed an assured living, and this
entire class was now dependent upon Hotep, for Pharaoh supported only
his women and his personal servants. Many people desired to deliver
themselves into slavery, but Pharaoh would not accept any, and Hotep
already had more than he could feed. During the Month of Midnight Snows
the entire population of the city watched the river with apprehension,
noting its slightest fluctuation. But day after day the people saw no
change, and idleness fostered grumbling and discontent among them.
Zaphnath and the Pharaoh were privately criticised because they did not
attend or contribute to the sacrifices made to the god of Overflow;
because they hoarded so much grain, and did nothing to alleviate the
distress of the people. And there were many who attributed the unusual
action of the river to the presence upon Ptah of two strangers from the
Blue Star.

When two fruitless months had passed without any rising of the waters,
Hotep lost courage, and was obliged to proclaim that all his men and
beasts must exist upon half-rations. It was then that public suffering
became general. About this time I consulted with the doctor whether to
press Hotep for the second delivery of a hundred thousand cargoes of
wheat.

"Certainly; demand it from him," he answered, greatly to my surprise,
"especially so long as it amounts to squeezing the wheat out of the
Pharaoh. It is certain he will furnish the wheat in exchange for Hotep's
gold, and a few coins are really nothing to him or to you either. As
long as the Pharaoh covets them, make him pay well for them."

"But I expected you would advise leniency, as you have never sympathized
with my wheat speculation in the least," I replied.

"I do not share your idle dream of riches, but nevertheless I want to
get as much wheat into our hands as possible, especially if it comes
from the Pharaoh. You do not seem to appreciate the real reason, but
blindly chase after the bauble of fortune. It was the same when I first
saw you in Chicago, and now you are just as impulsive and thoughtless. I
have no doubt but you have already computed a hundred times how rich
you are in Earthly terms and figures."

"The time for a big value has not quite come yet, but I confess I have
estimated that it will run into many millions of dollars."

"Rubbish! What is the use of such childish nonsense? Even if we had our
projectile to return with, you could never take any of your riches back
to Earth with you!"

"And why not?" I demanded in astonishment.

"What is your fortune? It now exists in grain at an inflated famine
value. You couldn't transport the grain back to Earth, and if you could,
it would shrink in value and fail to pay the freight. What can you
exchange it for here? For lands, for women, for slaves, none of which
have any commercial value on Earth."

"But I can sell it for money!" I put in.

"Yes, for iron money worth a few dollars a ton on Earth! Why, not even
your entire fortune will buy enough iron to build a new projectile to
enable us to return. You parted with the only valuable and portable form
of property when you exchanged your gold. Now that is rapidly going into
