The Project Gutenberg EBook The Bride of the Nile, by Georg Ebers, v10
#87 in our series by Georg Ebers

Copyright laws are changing all over the world. Be sure to check the
copyright laws for your country before downloading or redistributing
this or any other Project Gutenberg eBook.

This header should be the first thing seen when viewing this Project
Gutenberg file.  Please do not remove it.  Do not change or edit the
header without written permission.

Please read the "legal small print," and other information about the
eBook and Project Gutenberg at the bottom of this file.  Included is
important information about your specific rights and restrictions in
how the file may be used.  You can also find out about how to make a
donation to Project Gutenberg, and how to get involved.


**Welcome To The World of Free Plain Vanilla Electronic Texts**

**EBooks Readable By Both Humans and By Computers, Since 1971**

*****These EBooks Were Prepared By Thousands of Volunteers*****


Title: The Bride of the Nile, Volume 10.

Author: Georg Ebers

Release Date: April, 2004  [EBook #5526]
[Yes, we are more than one year ahead of schedule]
[This file was first posted on July 4, 2002]

Edition: 10

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII





*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BRIDE OF THE NILE, BY EBERS, V10 ***



This eBook was produced by David Widger <widger@cecomet.net>



[NOTE: There is a short list of bookmarks, or pointers, at the end of the
file for those who may wish to sample the author's ideas before making an
entire meal of them.  D.W.]





THE BRIDE OF THE NILE

By Georg Ebers

Volume 10.



CHAPTER XIII.

The Vekeel, like the Persian lovers, did not allow the heat of the day to
interfere with his plans.  He regarded the governor's house as his own;
all he found there aroused, not merely his avarice, but his interest.
His first object was to find some document which might justify his
proceedings against Orion and the sequestration of his estates, in the
eyes of the authorities at Medina.

Great schemes were brewing there; if the conspiracy against the Khaliff
Omar should succeed, he had little to fear; and the greater the sum he
could ere long forward to the new sovereign, the more surely he could
count on his patronage--a sum exceeding, if possible, the largest which
his predecessor had ever cast into the Khaliff's treasury.

He went from room to room with the curiosity and avidity of a child,
touching everything, testing the softness of the pillows, peeping into
scrolls which he did not understand, tossing them aside, smelling at the
perfumes in the dead woman's rooms, and the medicines she had used.  He
showed his teeth with delight when he found in her trunks some costly
jewels and gold coins, stuck the finest of her diamond rings on his
finger, already covered with gems, and then eagerly searched every corner
of the rooms which Orion had occupied.

His interpreter, who could read Greek, had to translate every document he
found that did not contain verses.  While he listened, he clawed and
strummed on the young man's lyre and poured out the scented oil which
Orion had been wont to use to smear it over his beard.  In front of the
bright silver mirror he could not cease from making faces.

To his great disgust he could find nothing among the hundred objects and
trifles that lay about to justify suspicion, till, just as he was leaving
the room, he noticed in a basket near the writing-table some discarded
tablets.  He at once pointed them out to the interpreter and, though
there was but little to read on the Diptychon,--[Double writing-tablets,
which folded together]--it seemed important to the negro for it ran as
follows:

"Orion, the son of George, to Paula the daughter of Thomas!

"You have heard already that it is now impossible for me to assist in the
rescue of the nuns.  But do not misunderstand me.  Your noble, and only
too well-founded desire to lend succor to your fellow-believers would
have sufficed. . ."

From this point the words written on the wax were carefully effaced, and
hardly a letter was decipherable; indeed, there were so few lines that it
seemed as though the letter had never been ended-which was the fact.

Though it gave the Vekeel no inculpating evidence against Orion it
pointed to his connection with the guilty parties: Paula, doubtless, had
been concerned in the scheme which had cost the lives of so many brave
Moslems.  The negro had learnt, through the money-changer at Fostat, that
she was on terms of close intimacy with the Mukaukas' son and had
entrusted her property to his stewardship.  They must both be accused as
accomplices in the deed, and the document proved Orion's knowledge of it,
at any rate.

Plotinus, the bishop, at whose instigation the fugitives had been chased,
could fill up what the damsel might choose to conceal.

He had started to follow the patriarch immediately after the pursuers had
set out, and had only returned from Upper Egypt early on the previous
day.  On his arrival he had forwarded to the Vekeel two indictments
brought against Orion by the prelate: the first relating to the evasion
of the nuns; the other to the embezzlement of a costly emerald; the
rightful property of the church.  These accusations were what had
encouraged the Negro to confiscate the young man's estate, particularly
as the bitter tone of the patriarch's document sufficiently proved that
in him he had found an ally.

Paula must next be placed in safe custody, and he had no doubt whatever
that her statement would incriminate Orion in some degree.  He would
gladly have cross-examined her at once, but he had other matters in hand
to-day.

The longest part of his task was ransacking the treasurer's office; Nilus
himself had to conduct the search.  Everything which he pointed out as a
legal document, title-deed, contract for purchase or sale, revenue
account or the like, was at once placed in oxcarts or on camels, with the
large sums of gold and silver coin, and carried across the river under a
strong escort.  All the more antique deeds and the family archives, the
Vekeel left untouched. He was indeed an indefatigable man, for although
these details kept him busy the whole day, he allowed himself no rest nor
did he once ask for the refreshment of food or a cooling draught.  As the
day went on he enquired again and again for the bishop, with increasing
impatience and irritation.  It would have been his part to wait on the
patriarch, but who was Plotinus?  Thin-skinned, like all up-starts in
authority, he took the bishop's delay as an act of personal contumely.
But the shepherd of the flock at Memphis was not a haughty prelate,
but a very humble and pious minister.  His superior, the patriarch, had
entrusted him with an important mission to Amru or his lieutenant, and
yet he could let the Vekeel wait in vain, and not even send him a message
of explanation; in the afternoon, however, his old housekeeper dispatched
the acolyte who was attached to his person to seek Philippus.  Her
master, a hale and vigorous man, had gone to bed by broad day-light a few
hours after his return home, and had not again left it.  He was hot and
thirsty, and did not seem fully conscious of where he was or of what was
happening.

Plotinus had always maintained that prayer was the Christian's best
medicine; still, as his poor body had become alarmingly heated the old
woman ventured to send for the physician; but the messenger came back
saying that Philippus was absent on a journey.  This was in fact the
case: He had quitted Memphis in obedience to a letter from Haschim.  The
merchant's unfortunate son was not getting better.  There seemed to be an
injury to some internal organ, which threatened his life.  The anxious
father besought the leech, in whom he had the greatest confidence, to
hasten to Djidda, there to examine the sufferer and undertake the case.
At the same time he desired that Rustem should join him as soon as his
health would permit.

This letter--which ended with greetings to Paula, for whose father he was
making diligent search--agitated Philippus greatly. How could he leave
Memphis at a time of such famine and sickness?--And Dame Joanna and her
daughter!

On the other hand he was much drawn to get away on Paula's account--away,
far away; and then how gladly would he do his best to save that fine old
man's son. In spite of all this he would have remained, but that his old
friend, quite unexpectedly, took Haschim's side of the question and
implored him to make the journey.  He would make it his business and his
pleasure to take charge of the women in Rufinus' house; Philip's
assistant could fill his place at the bedside of many of the sick, and
the rest could die without him.  Had not he himself said that there was
no remedy for the disease?  Again, Philip had said not long since that
there could be no peace for him within reach of Paula: here was a
favorable opportunity for escape without attracting remark, and at the
same time for doing a work of the truest charity.

So Philippus had yielded, and had started on his journey with very mixed
feelings.

Horapollo did not devote any particular attention to his personal
comfort; but in one respect he took especial care of himself.  He had
great difficulty in walking and, as he loved to breathe the fresh air at
sundown, and sometimes to study the stars at a late hour, he kept an ass
of the best and finest breed.  He did not hesitate to pay a high price
