Dagda's own son by the queen Boann, according to some accounts, so that
as the name (Son of the Young) signifies, Dagda and Boann, both
immortals, both Tuatha De Danann, were necessarily always young, never
knowing the touch of disease, or decay, or old age. Not until
Christianity gained its psychic triumph at Tara, through the magic of
Patrick prevailing against the magic of the Druids--who seem to have
stood at that time as mediators between the People of the Goddess Dana
and the pagan Irish--did the Tuatha De Danann lose their immortal
youthfulness in the eyes of mortals and become subject to death. In the
most ancient manuscripts of Ireland the pre-Christian doctrine of the
immortality of the divine race 'persisted intact and without
restraint';[233] but in the _Senchus na relec_ or 'History of the
Cemeteries', from the _Leabhar na h-Uidhre_, and in the _Lebar gabala_
or 'Book of the Conquests', from the _Book of Leinster_, it was
completely changed by the Christian scribes.[233]

When Dagda thus distributed the underground palaces, Mac ind Oc, or as
he was otherwise called Oengus, was absent and hence forgotten. So when
he returned, naturally he complained to his father, and the _Brug na
Boinne_, the king's own residence, was ceded to him for a night and a
day, but Oengus maintained that it was for ever. This palace was a most
marvellous one: it contained three trees which always bore fruit, a
vessel full of excellent drink, and two pigs--one alive and the other
nicely cooked ready to eat at any time; and in this palace no one ever
died.[234] In the _Colloquy_, Caeilte tells of a mountain containing a
fairy palace which no man save Finn and six companions, Caeilte being
one of these, ever entered. The Fenians, while hunting, were led thither
by a fairy woman who had changed her shape to that of a fawn in order to
allure them; and the night being wild and snowy they were glad to take
shelter therein. Beautiful damsels and their lovers were the inhabitants
of the palace; in it there was music and abundance of food and drink;
and on its floor stood a chair of crystal.[235] In another fairy palace,
the enchanted cave of Keshcorran, Conaran, son of Imidel, a chief of the
Tuatha De Danann, had sway; 'and so soon as he perceived that the
hounds' cry now sounded deviously, he bade his three daughters (that
were full of sorcery) to go and take vengeance on Finn for his
hunting'[236]--just as nowadays the 'good people' take vengeance on one
of our race if a fairy domain is violated. Frequently the fairy palace
is under a lake, as in the christianized story of the _Disappearance of
Caenchomrac_:--Once when 'the cleric chanted his psalms, he saw [come]
towards him a tall man that emerged out of the loch: from the bottom of
the water that is to say.' This tall man informed the cleric that he
came from an under-water monastery, and explained 'that there should be
subaqueous inhabiting by men is with God no harder than that they should
dwell in any other place'.[237] In all these ancient literary accounts
of the _Sidhe_-palaces we easily recognize the same sort of palaces as
those described to-day by Gaelic peasants as the habitations of the
'gentry', or 'good people', or 'people of peace.' Such habitations are
in mountain caverns like those of Ben Bulbin or Knock Ma, or in fairy
hills or knolls like the Fairy-Hill at Aberfoyle on which Robert Kirk is
believed to have been _taken_, or beneath lakes. This brings us directly
to the way in which the _Sidhe_ or Tuatha De Danann of the olden times
_took_ fine-looking young men and maidens.


HOW THE _SIDHE_ 'TOOK' MORTALS

Perhaps one of the earliest and most famous literary accounts of such a
_taking_ is that concerning Aedh, son of Eochaid Lethderg son of the
King of Leinster, who is represented as contemporary with Patrick.[238]
While Aedh was enjoying a game of hurley with his boy companions near
the _sidh_ of Liamhain Softsmock, two of the _sidh_-women, who loved the
young prince, very suddenly appeared, and as suddenly took him away with
them into a fairy palace and kept him there three years. It happened,
however, that he escaped at the end of that time, and, knowing the
magical powers of Patrick, went to where the holy man was, and thus
explained himself:--'Against the youths my opponents I (i. e. my side)
took seven goals; but at the last one that I took, here come up to me
two women clad in green mantles: two daughters of _Bodhb derg mac an
Daghda_, and their names _Slad_ and _Mumain_. Either of them took me by
a hand, and they led me off to a garish _brugh_; whereby for now three
years my people mourn after me, the _sidh_-folk caring for me ever
since, and until last night I got a chance opening to escape from the
_brugh_, when to the number of fifty lads we emerged out of the _sidh_
and forth upon the green. Then it was that I considered the magnitude of
that strait in which they of the _sidh_ had had me, and away from the
_brugh_ I came running to seek thee, holy Patrick.' 'That,' said the
saint, 'shall be to thee a safeguard, so that neither their power nor
their dominion shall any more prevail against thee.' And so when Patrick
had thus made Aedh proof against the power of the fairy-folk, he kept
him with him under the disguise of a travelling minstrel until, arriving
in Leinster, he restored him to his father the king and to his
inheritance: Aedh enters the palace in his minstrel disguise; and in the
presence of the royal assembly Patrick commands him: 'Doff now once for
all thy dark capacious hood, and well mayest thou wear thy father's
spear!' When the lad removed his hood, and none there but recognized
him, great was the surprise. He seemed like one come back from the
dead, for long had his heirless father and people mourned for him. 'By
our word,' exclaimed the assembly in their joyous excitement, 'it is a
good cleric's gift!' And the king said: 'Holy Patrick, seeing that till
this day thou hast nourished him and nurtured, let not the Tuatha De
Danann's power any more prevail against the lad.' And Patrick answered:
'That death which the King of Heaven and Earth hath ordained is the one
that he will have.' This ancient legend shows clearly that the Tuatha De
Danann, or _Sidhe_, in the time when the scribe wrote the _Colloquy_
were thought of in the same way as now, as able to _take_ beautiful
mortals whom they loved, and able to confer upon them fairy immortality
which prevented 'that death which the King of Heaven and Earth hath
ordained'.

Mortals, did they will it, could live in the world of the _Sidhe_ for
ever, and we shall see this more fully in our study of the Otherworld.
But here it will be interesting to learn that, unlike Aedh, whom some
perhaps would call a foolish youth, Laeghaire, also a prince, for he was
the son of the king of Connaught, entered a _dun_ of the _Sidhe_, taking
fifty other warriors with him; and he and his followers found life in
Fairyland so pleasant that they all decided to enjoy it eternally.
Accordingly, when they had been there a year, they planned to return to
Connaught in order to bid the king and his people a final farewell. They
announced their plan, and Fiachna of the _Sidhe_ told them how to
accomplish it safely:--'If ye would come back take with you horses, but
by no means dismount from off them'; 'So it was done: they went their
way and came upon a general assembly in which Connaught, as at the year
expired, mourned for the aforesaid warrior-band, whom now all at once
they perceived above them (i. e. on higher ground). Connaught sprang to
meet them, but Laeghaire cried: "Approach us not [to touch us]: 'tis to
bid you farewell that we are here!" "Leave me not!" Crimthann, his
father, said: "Connaught's royal power be thine; their silver and their
gold, their horses with their bridles, and their noble women be at thy
discretion, only leave me not!" But Laeghaire turned from them and so
entered again into the _sidh_, where with Fiachna he exercises joint
kingly rule; nor is he as yet come out of it.'[239]


HILL VISIONS OF _SIDHE_ WOMEN

There are many recorded traditions which represent certain hills as
mystical places whereon men are favoured with visions of fairy women.
Thus, one day King Muirchertach came forth to hunt on the border of the
Brugh (near Stackallan Bridge, County Meath), and his companions left
him alone on his hunting-mound. 'He had not been there long when he saw
a solitary damsel beautifully formed, fair-haired, bright-skinned, with
a green mantle about her sitting near him on the turfen mound; and it
seemed to him that of womankind he had never beheld her equal in beauty
and refinement.'[240] In the Mabinogion of _Pwyll, Prince of Dyvet_,
which seems to be only a Brythonic treatment of an original Gaelic tale,
Pwyll seating himself on a mound where any mortal sitting might see a
prodigy, saw a fairy woman ride past on a white horse, and she clad in a
garment of shining gold. Though he tried to have his servitor on the
swiftest horse capture her, 'There was some magic about the lady that
kept her always the same distance ahead, though she appeared to be
riding slowly.' When on the second day Pwyll returned to the mound the
fairy woman came riding by as before, and the servitor again gave
unsuccessful chase. Pwyll saw her in the same manner on the third day.
He thereupon gave chase himself, and when he exclaimed to her, 'For the
sake of the man whom you love, wait for me!' she stopped; and by mutual
arrangement the two agreed to meet and to marry at the end of a
year.[241]


THE MINSTRELS OR MUSICIANS OF THE _SIDHE_

Not only did the fairy-folk of more ancient times enjoy wonderful
palaces full of beauty and riches, and a life of eternal youth, but they
also had, even as now, minstrelsy and rare music--music to which that of
our own world could not be compared at all; for even Patrick himself
said that it would equal the very music of heaven if it were not for 'a
twang of the fairy spell that infests it'.[242] And this is how it was
that Patrick heard the fairy music:--As he was travelling through
Ireland he once sat down on a grassy knoll, as he often did in the good
old Irish way, with Ulidia's king and nobles and Caeilte also: 'Nor were
they long there before they saw draw near them a _scolog_ or
"non-warrior" that wore a fair green mantle having in it a fibula of
silver; a shirt of yellow silk next his skin, over and outside that
again a tunic of soft satin, and with a _timpan_ (a sort of harp) of the
best slung on his back. "Whence comest thou, _scolog_?" asked the king.
"Out of the _sidh_ of the Daghda's son Bodhb Derg, out of Ireland's
southern part." "What moved thee out of the south, and who art thou
thyself?" "I am Cascorach, son of Cainchinn that is _ollave_ to the
Tuatha De Danann, and am myself the makings of an _ollave_ (i. e. an
aspirant to the grade). What started me was the design to acquire
knowledge, and information, and lore for recital, and the Fianna's
mighty deeds of valour, from Caeilte son of Ronan." Then he took his
_timpan_ and made for them music and minstrelsy, so that he sent them
slumbering off to sleep.' And Cascorach's music was pleasing to Patrick,
who said of it: 'Good indeed it were, but for a twang of the fairy spell
that infests it; barring which nothing could more nearly than it
resemble Heaven's harmony.'[243] And that very night which followed the
day on which the _ollave_ to the Tuatha De Danann came to them was the
Eve of _Samain_. There was also another of these fairy _timpan_-players
called 'the wondrous elfin man', 'Aillen mac Midhna of the Tuatha De
Danann, that out of _sidh_ Finnachaidh to the northward used to come to
Tara: the manner of his coming being with a musical _timpan_ in his
hand, the which whenever any heard he would at once sleep. Then, all
being lulled thus, out of his mouth Aillen would emit a blast of fire.
It was on the solemn _Samain_-Day (November Day) he came in every year,
played his _timpan_, and to the fairy music that he made all hands would
fall asleep. With his breath he used to blow up the flame and so, during
a three-and-twenty years' spell, yearly burnt up Tara with all her
gear.' And it is said that Finn, finally overcoming the magic of Aillen,
slew him.[243]

Perhaps in the first musician, Cascorach, though he is described as the
son of a Tuatha De Danann minstrel, we behold a mortal like one of the
many Irish pipers and musicians who used to go, or even go yet, to the
fairy-folk to be educated in the musical profession, and then come back
as the most marvellous players that ever were in Ireland; though if
Cascorach were once a mortal it seems that he has been quite transformed
in bodily nature so as to be really one of the Tuatha De Danann himself.
But Aillen mac Midhna is undoubtedly one of the mighty 'gentry' who
could--as we heard from County Sligo--destroy half the human race if
they wished. Aillen visits Tara, the old psychic centre both for
Ireland's high-kings and its Druids. He comes as it were against the
conquerors of his race, who in their neglectfulness no longer render due
worship and sacrifice on the Feast of _Samain_ to the Tuatha De Danann,
the gods of the dead, at that time supreme; and then it is that he works
his magic against the royal palaces of the kings and Druids on the
ancient Hill. And to overcome the magic of Aillen and slay him, that is,
make it impossible for him to repeat his annual visits to Tara, it
required the might of the great hero Finn, who himself was related to
the same _Sidhe_ race, for by a woman of the Tuatha De Danann he had his
famous son Ossian (Oisin).[244]

In _Gilla de_, who is Manannan mac Lir, the greatest magician of the
Tuatha De Danann, disguised as a being who can disappear in the
twinkling of an eye whenever he wishes, and reappear unexpectedly as a
'kern that wore garb of yellow stripes', we meet with another fairy
musician. And to him O'Donnell says:--'By Heaven's grace again, since
first I heard the fame of them that within the hills and under the earth
beneath us make the fairy music, ... music sweeter than thy strains I
have never heard; thou art in sooth a most melodious rogue!'[245] And
again it is said of him:--'Then the _gilla decair_ taking a harp played
music so sweet ... and the king after a momentary glance at his own
musicians never knew which way he went from him.'[246]


SOCIAL ORGANIZATION AND WARFARE AMONG THE _SIDHE_

So far, we have seen only the happy side of the life of the
_Sidhe_-folk--their palaces and pleasures and music; but there was a
more human (or anthropomorphic) side to their nature in which they wage
war on one another, and have their matrimonial troubles even as we
moderns. And we turn now to examine this other side of their life, to
behold the _Sidhe_ as a warlike race; and as we do so let us remember
that the 'gentry' in the Ben Bulbin country and in all Ireland, and the
people of Finvara in Knock Ma, and also the invisible races of
California, are likewise described as given to war and mighty feats of
arms.

The invisible Irish races have always had a very distinct social
organization, so distinct in fact that Ireland can be divided according
to its fairy kings and fairy queens and their territories even now;[247]
and no doubt we see in this how the ancient Irish anthropomorphically
projected into an animistic belief their own social conditions and
racial characteristics. And this social organization and territorial
division ought to be understood before we discuss the social troubles
and consequent wars of the _Sidhe_-folk. For example in Munster Bodb was
king and his enchanted palace was called the _Sid_ of the Men of
Femen;[248] and we already know about the over-king Dagda and his Boyne
palace near Tara. In more modern times, especially in popular
fairy-traditions, Eevil or Eevinn (_Aoibhill_ or _Aoibhinn_) of the
_Craig Liath_ or Grey Rock is a queen of the Munster fairies;[249] and
Finvara is king of the Connaught fairies (see p. 42). There are also the
Irish fairy-queens Cleeona (_Cliodhna_, or in an earlier form _Clidna_
[cf. p. 356]) and Aine (see p. 79 above).

We are now prepared to see the Tuatha De Danann in their domestic
troubles and wars; and the following story is as interesting as any, for
in it Dagda himself is the chief actor. Once when his own son Oengus
fell sick of a love malady, King Dagda, who ruled all the _Sidhe_-folk
in Ireland, joined forces with Ailill and Medb in order to compel Ethal
Anbual to deliver up his beautiful daughter Caer whom Oengus loved. When
Ethal Anbual's palace had been stormed and Ethal Anbual reduced to
submission, he declared he had no power over his daughter Caer, for on
the first of November each year, he said, she changed to a swan, or from
a swan to a maiden again. 'The first of November next,' he added, 'my
daughter will be under the form of a swan, near the Loch bel Draccon.
Marvellous birds will be seen there: my daughter will be surrounded by a
hundred and fifty other swans.' When the November Day arrived, Oengus
went to the lake, and, seeing the swans and recognizing Caer, plunged
into the water and instantly became a swan with her. While under the
form of swans, Oengus and Caer went together to the Boyne palace of the
king Dagda, his father, and remained there; and their singing was so
sweet that all who heard it slept three days and three nights.[250] In
this story, new elements in the nature of the _Sidhe_ appear, though
like modern ones: the _Sidhe_ are able to assume other forms than their
own, are subject to enchantments like mortals; and when under the form
of swans are in some perhaps superficial aspects like the swan-maidens
in stories which are world-wide, and their swan-song has the same
sweetness and magical effect as in other countries.[251]

In the Rennes _Dinnshenchas_ there is a tale about a war among the 'men
of the Elfmounds' over 'two lovable maidens who dwelt in the elfmound',
and when they delivered the battle 'they all shaped themselves into the
shapes of deer'.[252] Midir's sons under Donn mac Midir, in rebellion
against the Daghda's son Bodh Derg, fled away to an obscure _sidh_,
where in yearly battle they met the hosts of the other Tuatha De Danann
under Bodh Derg; and it was into this _sidh_ or fairy palace on the very
eve before the annual contest that Finn and his six companions were
enticed by the fairy woman in the form of a fawn, to secure their
aid.[253] And in another tale, Laeghaire, son of the king of Connaught,
with fifty warriors, plunged into a lake to the fairy world beneath it,
in order to assist the fairy man, who came thence to them, to recover
his wife stolen by a rival.[253]


THE _SIDHE_ AS WAR-GODDESSES OR THE _BADB_

It is in the form of birds that certain of the Tuatha De Danann appear
as war-goddesses and directors of battle,[254]--and we learn from one of
our witnesses (p. 46) that the 'gentry' or modern _Sidhe_-folk take
sides even now in a great war, like that between Japan and Russia. It is
in their relation to the hero Cuchulainn that one can best study the
People of the Goddess Dana in their role as controllers of human war. In
the greatest of the Irish epics, the _Tain Bo Cuailnge_, where
Cuchulainn is under their influence, these war-goddesses are called
_Badb_[255] (or _Bodb_) which here seems to be a collective term for
_Neman_, _Macha_, and _Morrigu_ (or _Morrigan_)[256]--each of whom
exercises a particular supernatural power. _Neman_ appears as the
confounder of armies, so that friendly bands, bereft of their senses by
her, slaughter one another; _Macha_ is a fury that riots and revels
among the slain; while _Morrigu_, the greatest of the three, by her
presence infuses superhuman valour into Cuchulainn, nerves him for the
cast, and guides the course of his unerring spear. And the Tuatha De
Danann in infusing this valour into the great hero show themselves--as
we already know them to be on _Samain_ Eve--the rulers of all sorts of
demons of the air and awful spirits:--In the _Book of Leinster_ (fol.
57, B 2) it is recorded that 'the satyrs, and sprites, and maniacs of
the valleys, and demons of the air, shouted about him, for the Tuatha De
Danann were wont to impart their valour to him, in order that he might
be more feared, more dreaded, more terrible, in every battle and
battle-field, in every combat and conflict, into which he went.'

The Battles of Moytura seem in most ways to be nothing more than the
traditional record of a long warfare to determine the future spiritual
control of Ireland, carried on between two diametrically opposed orders
of invisible beings, the Tuatha De Danann representing the gods of light
and good and the Fomorians representing the gods of darkness and evil.
It is said that after the second of these battles 'The _Morrigu_,
daughter of Ernmas (the Irish war-goddess), proceeded to proclaim that
battle and the mighty victory which had taken place, to the royal
heights of Ireland and to its fairy host and its chief waters and its
river-mouths'.[257] For good had prevailed over evil, and it was settled
that all Ireland should for ever afterwards be a sacred country ruled
over by the People of the Goddess Dana and the Sons of Mil jointly. So
that here we see the Tuatha De Danann with their war-goddess fighting
their own battles in which human beings play no part.

It is interesting to observe that this Irish war-goddess, the _bodb_ or
_badb_, considered of old to be one of the Tuatha De Danann, has
survived to our own day in the fairy-lore of the chief Celtic countries.
In Ireland the survival is best seen in the popular and still almost
general belief among the peasantry that the fairies often exercise their
magical powers under the form of royston-crows; and for this reason
these birds are always greatly dreaded and avoided. The resting of one
of them on a peasant's cottage may signify many things, but often it
means the death of one of the family or some great misfortune, the bird
in such a case playing the part of a _bean-sidhe_ (banshee). And this
folk-belief finds its echo in the recorded tales of Wales, Scotland, and
Brittany. In the _Mabinogi_, 'Dream of Rhonabwy,' Owain, prince of
Rheged and a contemporary of Arthur, has a wonderful crow which always
secures him victory in battle by the aid of three hundred other crows
under its leadership. In Campbell's _Popular Tales of the West
Highlands_ the fairies very often exercise their power in the form of
the common hoody crow; and in Brittany there is a folk-tale entitled
'_Les Compagnons_'[258] in which the chief actor is a fairy under the
form of a magpie who lives in a royal forest just outside Rennes.[259]

W. M. Hennessy has shown that the word _bodb_ or _badb_, aspirated
_bodhbh_ or _badhbh_ (pronounced _bov_ or _bav_), originally signified
rage, fury, or violence, and ultimately implied a witch, fairy, or
goddess; and that as the memory of this Irish goddess of war survives in
folk-lore, her emblem is the well-known scald-crow, or royston-crow.[260]
By referring to Peter O'Connell's _Irish Dictionary_ we are able to
confirm this popular belief which identifies the battle-fairies with the
royston-crow, and to discover that there is a definite relationship or
even identification between the _Badb_ and the _Bean-sidhe_ or banshee, as
there is in modern Irish folk-lore between the royston-crow and the fairy
who announces a death. _Badb-catha_ is made to equal 'Fionog, a
royston-crow, a squall crow'; _Badb_ is defined as a '_bean-sidhe_, a
female fairy, phantom, or spectre, supposed to be attached to certain
families, and to appear sometimes in the form of squall-crows, or
royston-crows'; and the _Badb_ in the three-fold aspect is thus explained:
'_Macha_, i. e. a royston-crow; _Morrighain_, i. e. the great fairy;
_Neamhan_, i. e. _Badb catha no feannog; a badb catha_, or royston-crow.'
Similar explanations are given by other glossarists, and thus the evidence
of etymological scholarship as well as that of folk-lore support the
Psychological Theory.


THE _SIDHE_ IN THE BATTLE OF CLONTARF, A. D. 1014

The People of the Goddess Dana played an important part in human warfare
even so late as the Battle of Clontarf, fought near Dublin, April 23,
1014; and at that time fairy women and phantom-hosts were to the Irish
unquestionable existences, as real as ordinary men and women. It is
recorded in the manuscript story of the battle, of which numerous copies
exist, that the fairy woman Aoibheall[261] came to Dunlang O'Hartigan
before the battle and begged him not to fight, promising him life and
happiness for two hundred years if he would put off fighting for a
single day; but the patriotic Irishman expressed his decision to fight
for Ireland, and then the fairy woman foretold how he and his friend
Murrough, and Brian and Conaing and all the nobles of Erin and even his
own son Turlough, were fated to fall in the conflict.

On the eve of the battle, Dunlang comes to his friend Murrough directly
from the fairy woman; and Murrough upon seeing him reproaches him for
his absence in these words:--'Great must be the love and attachment of
some woman for thee which has induced thee to abandon me.' 'Alas O
King,' answered Dunlang, 'the delight which I have abandoned for thee is
greater, if thou didst but know it, namely, life without death, without
cold, without thirst, without hunger, without decay, beyond any delight
of the delights of the earth to me, until the judgement, and heaven
after the judgement; and if I had not pledged my word to thee I would
not have come here; and, moreover, it is fated for me to die on the day
that thou shalt die.' When Murrough has heard this terrible message, the
prophecy of his own death in the battle, despondency seizes him; and
then it is that he declares that he for Ireland like Dunlang for honour
has also sacrificed the opportunity of entering and living in that
wonderful Land of Eternal Youth:--'Often was I offered in hills, and in
fairy mansions, this world (the fairy world) and these gifts, but I
never abandoned for one night my country nor mine inheritance for
them.'[262]

And thus is described the meeting of the two armies at Clontarf, and the
demons of the air and the phantoms, and all the hosts of the invisible
world who were assembled to scatter confusion and to revel in the
bloodshed, and how above them in supremacy rose the _Badb_:--'It will be
one of the wonders of the day of judgement to relate the description of
this tremendous onset. There arose a wild, impetuous, precipitate, mad,
inexorable, furious, dark, lacerating, merciless, combative, contentious
_badb_, which was shrieking and fluttering over their heads. And there
arose also the satyrs, and sprites, and the maniacs of the valleys, and
the witches, and goblins, and owls, and destroying demons of the air and
firmament, and the demoniac phantom host; and they were inciting and
sustaining valour and battle with them.'[263] It is said of Murrough
(_Murchadh_) as he entered the thick of the fight and prepared to assail
the foreign invaders, the Danes, when they had repulsed the Dal-Cais,
that 'he was seized with a boiling terrible anger, an excessive
elevation and greatness of spirit and mind. A bird of valour and
championship rose in him, and fluttered over his head and on his
breath'.[264]


CONCLUSION

The recorded or manuscript Fairy-Faith of the Gaels corresponds in all
essentials with the living Gaelic Fairy-Faith: the Tuatha De Danann or
_Sidhe_, the 'Gentry', the 'Good People', and the 'People of Peace' are
described as a race of invisible divine beings eternally young and
unfading. They inhabit fairy palaces, enjoy rare feasts and love-making,
and have their own music and minstrelsy. They are essentially majestic
in their nature; they wage war in their own invisible realm against
other of its inhabitants like the ancient Fomorians; they frequently
direct human warfare or nerve the arm of a great hero like Cuchulainn;
and demons of the air, spirit hosts, and awful unseen creatures obey
them. Mythologically they are gods of light and good, able to control
natural phenomena so as to make harvests come forth abundantly or not at
all. But they are not such mythological beings as we read about in
scholarly dissertations on mythology, dissertations so learned in their
curious and unreasonable and often unintelligible hypotheses about the
workings of the mind among primitive men. The way in which social
psychology has deeply affected all such animistic beliefs was pointed
out above in chapter iii. In chapter xi, entitled _Science and Fairies_,
our position with respect to the essential nature of the fairy races
will be made clear.




SECTION II

THE RECORDED FAIRY-FAITH




CHAPTER V

BRYTHONIC DIVINITIES AND THE BRYTHONIC FAIRY-FAITH[265]

     'On the one hand we have the man Arthur, whose position we have
     tried to define, and on the other a greater Arthur, a more colossal
     figure, of which we have, so to speak, but a _torso_ rescued from
     the wreck of the Celtic pantheon.'--The Right Hon. Sir JOHN
     RHYS.

     The god Arthur and the hero Arthur--Sevenfold evidence to show
     Arthur as an incarnate fairy king--Lancelot the foster-son of a
     fairy woman--Galahad the offspring of Lancelot and the fairy woman
     Elayne--Arthur as a fairy king in _Kulhwch and Olwen_--Gwynn ab
     Nudd--Arthur like Dagda, and like Osiris--Brythonic fairy-romances:
     their evolution and antiquity--Arthur in Nennius, Geoffrey, Wace,
     and in Layamon--Cambrensis' Otherworld tale--Norman-French writers
     of twelfth and thirteenth centuries--_Romans d'Aventure_ and
     _Romans Bretons_--Origins of the 'Matter of Britain'--Fairy-romance
     episodes in Welsh literature--Brythonic origins.


ARTHUR AND ARTHURIAN MYTHOLOGY

As we have just considered the Gaelic Divinities in their character as
the Fairy-Folk of popular Gaelic tradition, so now we proceed to
consider the Brythonic Divinities in the same way, beginning with the
greatest of them all, Arthur. Even a superficial acquaintance with the
Arthurian Legend shows how impossible it is to place upon it any one
interpretation to the exclusion of other interpretations, for in one
aspect Arthur is a Brythonic divinity and in another a sixth-century
Brythonic chieftain. But the explanation of this double aspect seems
easy enough when we regard the historical Arthur as a great hero, who,
exactly as in so many parallel cases of national hero-worship,
came--within a comparatively short time--to be enshrined in the
imagination of the patriotic Brythons with all the attributes anciently
belonging to a great Celtic god called Arthur.[266] The hero and the god
were first confused, and then identified,[267] and hence arose that
wonderful body of romance which we call Arthurian, and which has become
the glory of English literature.

Arthur in the character of a culture hero,[268] with god-like powers to
instruct mortals in wisdom, and, also, as a being in some way related to
the sun--as a sun-god perhaps--can well be considered the human-divine
institutor of the mystic brotherhood known as the Round Table. We ought,
probably, to consider Arthur, like Cuchulainn, as a god incarnate in a
human body for the purpose of educating the race of men; and thus, while
living as a man, related definitely and, apparently, consciously to the
invisible gods or fairy-folk. Among the Aztecs and Peruvians in the New
World, there was a widespread belief that great heroes who had once been
men have now their celestial abode in the sun, and from time to time
reincarnate to become teachers of their less developed brethren of our
own race; and a belief of the same character existed among the Egyptians
and other peoples of the Old World, including the Celts. It will be
further shown, in our study of the Celtic Doctrine of Re-birth, that
anciently among the Gaels and Brythons such heroes as Cuchulainn and
Arthur were also considered reincarnate sun-divinities. As a being
related to the sun, as a sun-god, Arthur is like Osiris, the Great
Being, who with his brotherhood of great heroes and god-companions
enters daily the underworld or Hades to battle against the demons and
forces of evil,[269] even as the Tuatha De Danann battled against the
Fomors. And the most important things in the traditions of the great
Brythonic hero connect him directly with this strange world of
subjectivity. First of all, his own father, Uthr Bendragon,[270] was a
king of Hades, so that Arthur himself, being his child, is a direct
descendant of this Otherworld. Second, the Arthurian Legend traces the
origin of the Round Table back to Arthur's father, Hades being 'the
realm whence all culture was fabled to have been derived'.[271] Third,
the name of Arthur's wife, Gwenhwyvar, resolves itself into White
Phantom or White Apparition, in harmony with Arthur's line of descent
from the region of phantoms and apparitions and fairy-folk.
Thus:--_Gwenhwyvar_ or _Gwenhwyfar_ equals _Gwen_ or _Gwenn_, a
Brythonic word meaning white, and _hwyvar_, a word not found in the
Brythonic dialects, but undoubtedly cognate with the Irish word
_siabhradh_, a fairy, equal to _siabhra_, _siabrae_, _siabur_, a fairy,
or ghost, the Welsh and the Irish word going back to the form
_*seibaro_.[272] Hence the name of Arthur's wife means the _white ghost_
or _white phantom_, quite in keeping with the nature of the Tuatha De
Danann and that of the fairy-folk of Wales or _Tylwyth Teg_--the 'Fair
Family'.

Fourth, as a link in the chain of evidence connecting Arthur with the
invisible world where the Fairy-People live, his own sister is called
_Morgan le Fay_ in the romances,[273] and is thus definitely one of the
fairy women who, according to tradition, are inhabitants of the Celtic
Otherworld sometimes known as Avalon. Fifth, in the Welsh Triads,[274]
Llacheu, the son of Arthur and Gwenhwyvar, is credited with clairvoyant
vision, like the fairy-folk, so that he understands the secret nature of
all solid and material things; and 'the story of his death as given in
the second part of the Welsh version of the Grail, makes him hardly
human at all.'[275] Sixth, the name of Melwas, the abductor of Arthur's
wife, is shown by Sir John Rhys to mean a prince-youth or a princely
youth, and the same authority considers it probable that, as such,
Melwas or Maelwas was a being endowed with eternal youth,--even as
Midir, the King of the Tuatha De Danann, who though a thousand years old
appeared handsome and youthful. So it seems that the abduction of
Gwenhwyfar was really a fairy abduction, such as we read about in the
domestic troubles of the Irish fairy-folk, on a level with the abduction
of Etain by her Otherworld husband Midir.[276] And in keeping with this
superhuman character of the abductor of the White Phantom or Fairy,
Chretien de Troyes, in his metrical romance _Le Conte de la Charrette_,
describes the realm of which Melwas was lord as a place whence no
traveller returns.[277] As further proof that the realm of Melwas was
meant by Chretien to be the subjective world, where the god-like Tuatha
De Danann, the _Tylwyth Teg_, and the shades of the dead equally exist,
it is said that access to it was by two narrow bridges; 'one called _li
Ponz Evages_ or the Water Bridge, because it was a narrow passage a foot
and a half wide and as much in height, with water above and below it as
well as on both sides'; the other _li Ponz de l'Espee_ or the Sword
Bridge, because it consisted of the edge of a sword two lances in
length.[278] The first bridge, considered less perilous than the other,
was chosen by Gauvain (Gwalchmei), when with Lancelot he was seeking to
rescue Gwenhwyfar; but he failed to cross it. Lancelot with great
trouble crossed the second. In many mythologies and in world-wide
folk-tales there is a narrow bridge or bridges leading to the realm of
the dead. Even Mohammed in the _Koran_ declares it necessary to cross a
bridge as thin as a hair, if one would enter Paradise. And in living
folk-lore in Celtic countries, as we found among the Irish peasantry,
the crossing of a bridge or stream of water when pursued by fairies or
phantoms is a guarantee of protection. There is always the mystic water
between the realm of the living and the realm of subjectivity.[279] In
ancient Egypt there was always the last voyage begun on the sacred Nile;
and in all classical literature Pluto's realm is entered by crossing a
dark, deep river,--the river of forgetfulness between physical
consciousness and spiritual consciousness. Burns has expressed this
belief in its popular form in his _Tam O'Shanter_. And in our Arthurian
parallel there is a clear enough relation between the beings inhabiting
the invisible realm and the Brythonic heroes and gods. How striking,
too, as Gaston Paris has pointed out, is the similarity between Melwas'
capturing Gwenhwyvar as she was in the woods a-maying, and the rape of
Proserpine by Pluto, the god of Hades, while she was collecting flowers
in the fields.[280]

A curious matter in connexion with this episode of Gwenhwyvar's
abduction should claim our attention. Malory relates[281] that when
Queen Guenever advised her knights of the Table Round that on the morrow
(May Day, when fairies have special powers) she would go on maying, she
warned them all to be well-horsed and _dressed in green_. This was the
colour that nearly all the fairy-folk of Britain and Ireland wear. It
symbolizes, as many ancient mystical writings declare, eternal youth,
and resurrection or re-birth, as in nature during the springtime, when
all vegetation after its death-sleep of winter springs into new
life.[282] In the _Myvyrian Archaiology_,[283] Arthur when he has
reached the realm of Melwas speaks with Gwenhwyvar,[284] he being on a
black horse and she on a green one:--'Green is my steed of the tint of
the leaves.' Arthur's black horse--black perhaps signifying the dead to
whose realm he has gone--being proof against all water, may have been,
therefore, proof against the inhabitants of the world of shades and
against fairies:--

  Black is my steed and brave beneath me,
  No water will make him fear,
  And no man will make him swerve.

The fairy colour, in different works and among different authors
differing both in time and country, continues to attach itself to the
abduction episode. Thus, in the fourteenth century the poet D. ab Gwilym
alludes to Melwas himself as having a cloak of green:--'The sleep of
Melwas beneath (or in) the green cloak.' Sir John Rhys, who makes
this translation, observes that another reading still of _y glas glog_
resolves it into a green bower to which Melwas took Gwenhwyvar.[285] In
any case, the reference is significant, and goes far, in combination
with the other references, to represent the White Phantom or Fairy and
her lover Melwas as beings of a race like the Irish _Sidhe_ or People of
the Goddess Dana. And though by no means exhausting all examples tending
to prove this point, we pass on to the seventh and most important of our
links in the sequence of evidence, the carrying of Arthur to Avalon in a
fairy ship by fairy women.

From the first, Arthur was under superhuman guidance and protection.
Merlin the magician, born of a spirit or daemon, claimed Arthur before
birth and became his teacher afterwards. From the mysterious Lady of the
Lake, Arthur received his magic sword _Excalibur_,[286] and to her
returned it, through Sir Bedivere. During all his time on earth the
'lady of the lake that was always friendly to King Arthur'[287] watched
over him; and once when she saw him in great danger, like the Irish
_Morrigu_ who presided over the career of Cuchulainn, she sought to save
him, and with the help of Sir Tristram succeeded.[287] The passing of
Arthur to Avalon or Faerie seems to be a return to his own native realm
of subjectivity. His own sister was with him in the ship, for she was of
the invisible country too.[288] And another of his companions on his
voyage from the visible to the invisible was his life-guardian Nimue,
the lady of the lake. Merlin could not be of the company, for he was
already in Faerie with the Fay Vivian. Behold the passing of Arthur as
Malory describes it:--'... thus was he led away in a ship wherein were
three queens; that one was King Arthur's sister, Queen Morgan le Fay;
the other was the Queen of Northgalis; the third was the Queen of the
Waste Lands. Also there was Nimue, the chief lady of the lake, that had
wedded Pelleas the good knight; and this lady had done much for King
Arthur, for she would never suffer Sir Pelleas to be in no place where
he should be in danger of his life.'[289] Concerning the great Arthur's
return from Avalon we shall speak in the chapter dealing with Re-birth.
And we pass now from Arthur and his Brotherhood of gods and fairy-folk
to Lancelot and his son Galahad--the two chief knights in the Arthurian
Romance.

According to one of the earliest accounts we have of Lancelot, the
German poem by Ulrich von Zatzikhoven, as analysed by Gaston Paris, he
was the son of King Pant and Queen Clarine of Genewis.[290] In
consequence of the hatred of their subjects the royal pair were forced
to flee when Lancelot was only a year old. During the flight, the king,
mortally wounded, died; and just as the queen was about to be taken
captive, a fairy rising in a cloud of mist carried away the infant
Lancelot from where his parents had placed him under a tree. The fairy
took him to her abode on an island in the midst of the sea, from whence
she derived her title of Lady of the Lake, and he, as her adopted son,
the name of _Lancelot du Lac_; and her island-world was called the Land
of Maidens. Having lived in that world of Faerie so long, it was only
natural that Lancelot should have grown up more like one of its
fair-folk than like a mortal. No doubt it was on account of his
half-supernatural nature that he fell in love with the White Phantom,
Gwenhwyvar, the wife of the king who had power to enter Hades and return
again to the land of the living. Who better than Lancelot could have
rescued Arthur's queen? No one else in the court was so well fitted for
the task. And it was he who was able to cross one of the magic bridges
into the realm of Melwas, the Otherworld, while Gauvain (in the English
form, Gawayne) failed.

Malory's narrative records how Lancelot, while suffering from the malady
of madness caused by Gwenhwyvar's jealous expulsion of Elayne his
fairy-sweetheart,--quite a parallel case to that of Cuchulainn when his
wife Emer expelled his fairy-mistress Fand,--fought against a wild boar
and was terribly wounded, and how afterwards he was nursed by his own
Elayne in Fairyland, and healed and restored to his right mind by the
Sangreal. Then Sir Ector and Sir Perceval found him there in the Joyous
Isle enjoying the companionship of Elayne, where he had been many years,
and from that world of Faerie induced him to return to Arthur's court.
And, finally, comes the most important element of all to show how
closely related Lancelot is with the fairy world and its people, and how
inseparable from that invisible realm another of the fundamental
elements in the life of Arthur is--the Quest of the Holy Grail, and the
story of Galahad, who of all the knights was pure and good enough to
behold the Sacred Vessel, and who was the offspring of the foster-son of
the Lady of the Lake and the fairy woman Elayne.[291]

In the strange old Welsh tale of _Kulhwch and Olwen_ we find Arthur and
his knights even more closely identified with the fairy realm than in
Malory and the Norman-French writers; and this is important, because the
ancient tale is, as scholars think, probably much freer from foreign
influences and re-working than the better-known romances of Arthur, and
therefore more in accord with genuine Celtic beliefs and folk-lore, as
we shall quickly see. The court of King Arthur to which the youth
Kulhwch goes seeking aid in his enterprise seems in some ways--though
the parallel is not complete enough to be emphasized--to be a more
artistic, because literary, picture of that fairy court which the Celtic
peasant locates under mountains, in caverns, in hills, and in knolls, a
court quite comparable to that of the Irish _Sidhe_-folk or Tuatha De
Danann. Arthur is represented in the midst of a brilliant life where, as
in the fairy palaces, there is much feasting; and Kulhwch being invited
to the feasting says, 'I came not here to consume meat and drink.'

And behold what sort of personages from that court Kulhwch has pledged
to him, so that by their supernatural assistance he may obtain Olwen,
herself perhaps a fairy held under fairy enchantment[292]: the sons of
Gwawrddur Kyrvach, whom Arthur had power to call from the confines of
hell; Morvran the son of Tegid, who, because of his ugliness, was
thought to be a demon; Sandde Bryd Angel, who was so beautiful that
mortals thought him a ministering angel; Henbedestyr, with whom no one
could keep pace 'either on horseback, or on foot', and who therefore
seems to be a spirit of the air; Henwas Adeinawg, with whom 'no
four-footed beast could run the distance of an acre, much less go beyond
it'; Sgilti Yscawndroed, who must have been another spirit or fairy, for
'when he intended to go on a message for his Lord (Arthur, who is like a
Tuatha De Danann king), he never sought to find a path, but knowing
whither he was to go, if his way lay through a wood he went along the
tops of the trees', and 'during his whole life, a blade of reed-grass
bent not beneath his feet, much less did one ever break, so lightly did
he tread'; Gwallgoyc, who 'when he came to a town, though there were
three hundred houses in it, if he wanted anything, he would not let
sleep come to the eyes of any whilst he remained there'; Osla
Gyllellvawr, who bore a short broad dagger, and 'when Arthur and his
hosts came before a torrent, they would seek for a narrow place where
they might pass the water, and would lay the sheathed dagger across the
torrent, and it would form a bridge sufficient for the armies of the
three Islands of Britain, and of the three islands adjacent, with their
spoil.' It seems very evident that this is the magic bridge, so often
typified by a sword or dagger, which connects the world invisible with
our own, and over which all shades and spirits pass freely to and fro.
In this case we think Arthur is very clearly a ruler of the spirit
realm, for, like the great Tuatha De Danann king Dagda, he can command
its fairy-like inhabitants, and his army is an army of spirits or
fairies. The unknown author of _Kulhwch_, like Spenser in modern times
in his _Faerie Queene_, seems to have made the Island of Britain the
realm of Faerie--the Celtic Otherworld--and Arthur its king. But let us
take a look at more of the men pledged to Kulhwch from among Arthur's
followers: Clust the son of Clustveinad, who possessed clairaudient
faculties of so extraordinary a kind that 'though he were buried seven
cubits beneath the earth, he would hear the ant fifty miles off rise
from her nest in the morning'; and the wonderful Kai, who could live
nine days and nine nights under water, for his breath lasted this long,
and he could exist the same length of time without sleep. 'A wound from
Kai's sword no physician could heal.' And at will he was as tall as the
