"Yes. It will in a few hours be the property of Prince Oscar
Oscarovitch."

As Phadrig spoke he hid the gem in his hand. His voice was so changed
that the Jew looked up at him. His eyes were wide open now, and glowing
with a fire that made them look almost dull red. They seemed to see
right through his eyeballs and look into his brain. Josephus started as
though he had been struck. He tried to turn his head away, but the
terrible eyes held him. His fat, greasy, olive face grew grey and dry,
and his head shook from side to side.

"What is the matter, my dear Mr Josephus?" asked Phadrig, in slow, stern
tones. "The mention of the Prince seems to have affected your nerves.
Are you acquainted with His Highness?"

"Me? I? Why, how should I know a great man like the noble Prince? No,
no; of course I know him as a very grand and great gentleman, but that
is all, really all, my dear Phadrig."

"Yes, yes, of course," said the Egyptian, once more in his gentle voice;
"would not be likely, would it? Now, if you would like to look at the
gem more closely, go and sit down there by the light and take it in your
hand. You will see that it is engraved with hieroglyphics. They say that
this jewel was once the property of Rameses the Great of Egypt, and was
given by him to his daughter Nitocris."

This information did not interest the Jew in the slightest, since he had
never heard the names in his life; but the delight and honour of holding
such a glorious gem in his hand even for a few minutes was ecstasy to
him. He sat down, and held out his fat, trembling hand greedily. With a
smile of contempt Phadrig placed the jewel in it, and said:

"Examine it closely, my friend. It is well worth it, and it may be long
before you see another like it."

"Like--like _it_, like _this_! By the beard of Father
Moses, I should think not--I should think--I should--oh,
beautiful--glor--glorious--splendid--did--splen--oh, what a
light--li--light--li--oh----!"

As each of the disjointed syllables came from his shaking lips he
mumbled more and more, and his head sank lower towards the priceless
thing in his palm. As he gazed, the stone grew round and bigger and
brighter, till it seemed like a great green-blazing eye glaring into the
utmost depths of his being. Then the light suddenly went out, his head
fell on his breast, and as his hand sank, Phadrig caught it and took
away the jewel. Then he put the Jew back in the chair, and standing in
front of him began in a slow, penetrating voice:

"Isaac Josephus, thou hast gazed upon the Horus Stone, and he who doeth
that may not answer the questions of an Adept with lies save at the
price of his life. Now answer me truly, or to-morrow morning those of
thine household shall find thee dead in thy bed."

Wide open the eyes of the hypnotised man stared at him, and the loose
lips quivered, but these were the only signs of life.

"Thou art not only a dealer in gems and curious things: thou art also a
spy of the police; is not that so?"

"Yes."

"Believing that I am a very poor man, yet knowing that I dealt with
objects of value, they thought me to be one who receives such things
from thieves to sell them again, since they could not. Is that so?"

"Yes."

"And, believing this, and knowing thee to have dealings with me, they
bribed thee to come here as my friend and fellow-dealer and spy upon my
actions, so that they might have evidence against me and cast me into
prison. Is that so?"

"Yes."

"Late on the last night but one thou didst go to the house of Nicol
Hendry, who is no common catcher of thieves, but a spy of nations whose
business is with the great ones of the earth. Tell me: whom did thy
business with him concern?"

"Prince Oscarovitch and yourself."

"What were his orders?"

"To watch you both, especially you, and find out when you went to him,
and why you were sometimes a poor devil in a miserable hole like this,
and sometimes a swell going to swagger places with him."

"How were you going to do this?"

"I know your servant or chum, Mr Pentana. I've lent him money: and Peter
Petroff, the Prince's particular servant, gambles like a lord, and he
owes me and a friend of mine a lot of money. We were going to work
through them."

"It is enough; and well for you that you have answered truthfully. Now
tell me: do you know how to use a revolver?"

"Never fired a shot in my life."

Phadrig went to the secretaire and took a common, cheap revolver,
identical with thousands of others which our criminally careless
Government allows to be bought every day without the production of a
licence--just a hooligan's weapon, in fact--went back and put it into
the Jew's hand. He raised the hand several times, and pointed the muzzle
to the temple, keeping the forefinger on the trigger. At length he let
go the wrist, and said in a gentle, persuading tone:

"That is the way to handle a revolver when you are going to shoot, my
dear Josephus. Now, let me see if you can do it by yourself."

With mechanical precision the Jew's arm went up until the muzzle touched
his temple. Again and again he did the same thing at Phadrig's bidding,
till at length he said rather more peremptorily:

"Now pull the trigger!"

The finger tightened and the hammer clicked. Five times more was the
operation repeated, and then Phadrig gently took the revolver and laid
the hand down. He went to the secretaire and loaded the six chambers,
cocked the weapon and put it into the right hand side-pocket of the
lounge jacket which Josephus was wearing, and said deliberately:

"Now remember, my dear Josephus: you will go straight back to your
office in Waterloo Road and let yourself in with your key. In your
private room you will see a man who wants to rob you of some valuable
papers. You will be ruined if he gets them, so you must take your pistol
out of your pocket and shoot him. Do you quite understand me?"

"Yes; I am to shoot him."

"That is right. Now, if you do not go he will have them before you get
there. Get up and we will say good-night. You must not put your hand in
your pocket until you see the man who wants to rob you. Good-night.
There is your hat."

"Good-night!"

Mr Isaac Josephus put on his hat and walked away to his death with the
motions of a mechanical doll.




CHAPTER XIX

THE HORUS STONE


An hour later Phadrig, the poor curio dealer, had disappeared, and Mr
Phadrig Amena, the wonder-working Adept, clad in evening clothes and a
light overcoat, alighted from a hansom at the great entrance to the
Royal Court Mansions. The huge, gorgeously uniformed guardian of the
Gilded Gates was saluting at his elbow in an instant, for a friend of
Princes is a very great man in the eyes of even such dignitaries as he.

"The Prince expects you, sir," he said, loud enough to make the title
heard by those who were standing by. "Will you be good enough to walk
in? I will discharge the cab."

He stood aside with a bow and another salute, and Phadrig walked lightly
up the broad steps. Peter Petroff opened the door of the flat, bowing
low, and conducted him to his master's sanctum. Evidently he was
expected, for the coffee apparatus stood ready on the Moorish table
beside the cosy chair which he was wont to occupy. The Prince, who was
standing on a white bear's skin by the mantel, motioned him to it,
saying:

"Ah, Phadrig, my friend, punctual, of course; and equally, of course,
you have something important to impart. Your wire just caught me in
time to put off an engagement which, happily, is of no great
consequence. There's the coffee, and you'll find the cigars you like in
the second drawer. Now, what is the news?"

His guest filled a cup of coffee and took a cigar and lit it before he
replied. Then, turning to the Prince, he said in his usual slow, even
tone:

"Highness, I regret to say that my news is both urgent and bad."

"It would naturally be urgent," said the Prince, turning quickly towards
him, "but bad I hardly expected. Well, all news cannot be good. What is
it?"

"I fear that my warning was even more urgent than I thought it myself--I
mean, in point of time. Your Highness is already being watched."

"What! A Prince of the Empire, the man whom they call the Modern
Skobeleff, an intimate of Nicholas! What should I be watched for?"
exclaimed the Prince, half angry and half astonished. "The thing is
ridiculous; another of your dreams!"

"Ridiculous it may be, Highness," replied Phadrig, quite unruffled, "but
it is no dream; and, moreover, the eyes which are watching you are keen
ones--and they are everywhere. You are under the surveillance of the
International Police."

These were not words which even a Prince of the Holy Russian Empire
cared to hear. Oscarovitch was silent for a few moments, for the
earnestness, and yet the calmness, with which they were spoken made it
impossible for him to doubt them. As he had asked, what could such a man
as he be watched for by this thousand-eyed organisation of which he
himself was one of the supreme Directors? It was impossible that
these people could suspect his great scheme of treachery and
self-aggrandisement. That was known to only three persons in the
world--himself, Phadrig, and the Princess Hermia; and the Princess, the
woman who had willingly sacrificed her brilliant young husband to her
guilty love and her boundless ambition--no, she could be no traitress.
It must be something else: and yet what?

He took two or three rapid turns up and down the room, chewing and
puffing at his cigar, until he stopped before Phadrig, and said quietly,
but with angry eyes:

"Very well, we will grant that I am watched by the International. Tell
me how you came to know it."

The Egyptian took a few sips of his coffee, and then related almost word
for word his interview with Josephus. He ended by saying:

"Your Highness may believe or not now as you please, but I presume you
will when you read in your paper to-morrow morning of the suicide of a
respectable Hebrew merchant named Isaac Josephus at the address which I
have mentioned."

Oscarovitch had pretty strong nerves, and he was well accustomed to
regard any kind of crime as a quite proper means of furthering
political ends: but there was something in this man's utter
soullessness and the weird horror of the crime which he had just
accomplished--for by this time his victim would be already lying
self-slain on the floor of his own spider's lair--that chilled him,
cold-blooded as he was. He looked at him lounging in his chair and
calmly puffing the smoke from his half-smiling lips as though he hadn't
a thought beyond the little blue rings that he was making.

"That was a devilish thing to do, Phadrig!" he said, a little above a
whisper.

"Devilish, possibly, Highness, but necessary, of a certainty," was the
quiet reply. "You will agree with me that Nicol Hendry is a dangerous
antagonist even for you, and as for me--no doubt he thinks that he can
crush me under his foot whenever he chooses to put it down. I should
like to know his feelings as he reads of his spy's suicide when he had
only just got to work."

"It will certainly be somewhat of a shock to him and his colleagues, and
for that reason I am inclined, on second thoughts, to agree that it was
necessary, and ghastly, as I confess; it seems to me, I think, that you
took the best means to give them a salutary warning. After all, the life
of an individual, and that individual a Jew, does not count for much
when the fate of empires is at stake. What puzzles me is how these
fellows came to suspect me, and what do they suspect me of. I suppose
you have no idea on the subject, have you?"

He looked at him keenly as he spoke, but he might as well have looked at
the face of a graven image. Then, like a flash of inspiration, the
Zastrow affair leapt into his mind. Had his connection with that, by any
extraordinary chance, come to the knowledge of the International? The
thought was distinctly disquieting. Phadrig had helped in this with his
strange arts. He would discuss this phase of the matter with him
afterwards.

Phadrig replied, returning his glance:

"Highness, I have only one explanation to offer, and that you have
already refused. Were I to speak of any other it would only be vain
invention."

"You mean about Professor Marmion and his mathematical miracles?" said
the Prince somewhat uneasily.

"I do," replied the Egyptian firmly. "I say now what I thought when I
saw him work them. I did not believe that any man could have done what
he did unless he had attained to what we styled in the ancient days the
Perfect Knowledge, or, as they term it to-day, passed the border between
the states of three and four dimensions. If Professor Marmion has
achieved that triumph of virtue and intelligence--and in the days that I
can remember there were more than one of the adepts who had done
so--then Your Highness's Imperial designs must be as well known to him
as to yourself: nay, better, for, while you can see only a part, the
beginning and a little way beyond, he can see the whole, even to the
end; for in that state, as we were taught, past, present, and future are
one. Now, only three persons know of the project, and treason among them
is not within the limits of reason, wherefore I would again ask Your
Highness to believe that such information as the International may have
has been given them directly or indirectly by Professor Marmion."

"But," said the Prince, who was now evidently wavering in his
scepticism, since Phadrig's explanation of the mystery really seemed to
be the only feasible one, impossible as it looked to him, "granted all
you say, what possible interest could Professor Marmion, whether he's
living in this world or the one of four dimensions, have in interfering
in such a project, even if he did know all about it, especially as every
educated Englishman admits that the state of affairs in Russia could
hardly be worse than it is? I cannot see what conceivable interest he
can have in the matter."

"But, Highness, his interest may be a private and not a public one."

"What do you mean by that, Phadrig?" asked the Prince sharply.

"As I have said," replied the Egyptian slowly, "it may be that his
daughter, who was once the Queen, has also attained to the Knowledge. In
that case the love which Your Highness so suddenly conceived for her
would instantly bring you within the sphere of his and her influence and
power. Now, she, as Nitocris Marmion, the mortal, is betrothed to the
English officer, Merrill. She loves him, and therefore, since you are
great and powerful in the earth-life, your ruin, or even your death,
might seem necessary to remove you from her path."

Oscarovitch shivered in spite of all his courage and self-control. The
idea of fearing anything human had never occurred to him after his first
battle; but this, if true, was a very different matter. To be threatened
with ruin or death by a power which he could not even see, to contend
against enemies who could read his very thoughts, and even be present in
a room with him without his knowing it--as Phadrig had assured him more
than once that they could be--was totally beyond the power of the
bravest or strongest of men. No, it was impossible: he could not, would
not, believe that, such a thing could be. His invincible materialism
came suddenly to his aid, and saved him from the reproach of fear in his
own eyes.

"No, Phadrig," he said, with a gesture of impatience, "that is not to be
credited. To you it may seem a reality: to me it can never be anything
more than a phantasy of intellect run mad on a single point--which, I
need hardly remind you, is a by no means uncommon failing of the
greatest of minds. Another reason has just occurred to me which would
need no such fantastic explanation."

"And that, Highness?" queried Phadrig, looking up with an almost
imperceptible shrug of his shoulders.

"The Zastrow affair. Unlikely as it seems, it is not impossible that
there has been treason there. I have many enemies in both Russia and
Germany, and it is well known that Zastrow and I were rivals once. Yes,
that is it: it must be so, and therefore we must prepare to fight the
International; and with such weapons as you are able to use there is not
much reason why we should fear them."

He dismissed the subject with an imperious wave of his hand, and
continued in an altered tone:

"And now, _apropos_ of your weapons. Tell me something about this
wonderful gem with which you hypnotised the Jew."

"I will not only tell you about it, Highness, I will show it to you, if
you desire to see it," replied Phadrig, who now fully recognised the
hopelessness of overcoming the blind materialism which was, of course,
inevitable to the life-condition in which the Prince had his present
being.

"What! you have brought it with you! Excellent! Now I think we shall be
able to talk on pleasanter subjects than conspiracies and such phantasms
as the Fourth Dimension!" exclaimed Oscarovitch, who, like all Russians,
was almost passionately fond of gems. "Fancy asking a Russian if he
desires to see such a thing as that!"

"Your Excellency must be careful not to look at it too long or closely,"
said Phadrig, putting his hand down inside his waistcoat and drawing out
a wash-leather bag. "As I have told you, it possesses certain qualities
which are not to be trifled with. You are, of course, aware that many
Eastern gems are credited with hypnotic powers. This one undoubtedly has
them."

As he spoke he drew out the emerald, and held it by the clasp under a
cluster of electric lights.

"What a glorious gem!" exclaimed the Prince, starting forward to look at
it more closely. "There is nothing to compare with it even among the
Imperial jewels of Russia."

"Have a care, Highness," said the Egyptian, raising his left hand,
"unless you wish to fall under its influence. Once it seized your gaze
you could not withdraw it without the permission of its possessor, and
meanwhile he would have complete mastery of you. I am your faithful
servant, and therefore I warn you."

Was there just the faintest suspicion of a sneer in his voice as he said
this? If there was, Oscarovitch did not notice it. He was already too
much under the charm of the Horus Stone. Phadrig suddenly put his hand
over the gem and went on. "The story of this jewel, Highness, is that
many ages ago, before the beginning of the First Dynasty, a little raft
of a strange wood, as white as ivory and shaped like a river-lily, came
floating down the Nile at full flood-time and drifted to the shore in
front of the house of a wise and holy man who was reputed to hold
perpetual communion with the gods. On the raft was a cradle of white
wicker-work lined with down, upon which lay a man-child of such
exquisite beauty that he could scarce have been born of mortal parents.
His body was bare, but round his neck was a glistening chain of
marvellously wrought gold, fastened to which was this gem lying on his
breast. This was doubtless the origin of the Hebrew fable of the finding
of Moses, who, as all scholars know, was not a Hebrew, but an Egyptian
priest in the House of Ra.

"The holy man took him into his home, burying the chain and gem, lest it
might bring temptation to those who saw them; and as the boy grew to
manhood he taught him all his lore, until he, too, was wise enough to be
admitted into the communion of the gods, which afterwards was called by
the adepts the Perfect Knowledge. On the gem are engraved the three
symbols by which the Trinity--Osiris, Isis, and Horus; Father: Mother,
and Child, the antetype of Humanity--became known and worshipped. The
holy man divined that the boy was the incarnation of Horus sent thus to
earth to teach men the way of knowledge, which is the only
righteousness, since those who know all cannot sin. Where his house
stood was built the first Temple of the Divine Trinity, and of this
Horus became High Priest. He crowned the King in the land, and hung this
gem round his neck as the symbol of his kingship and the approval of the
gods.

"From the first king it was handed down from monarch to monarch through
all the changes of dynasties, until it hung from the royal chain of the
great Rameses; and by him it was given to his daughter Nitocris, thereby
making her Queen of Egypt after him; and she wore it on that fatal
night of the death-bridal when, rather than wed with you, who were then
Menkau-Ra, Lord of War, she flooded the banqueting hall of Pepi and
drowned herself and all her guests--which, Highness, is an omen that it
were well for you not to forget should you persist in your pursuit of
the daughter of Professor Marmion."

Oscarovitch was a man of vivid imagination, as all great soldiers and
statesmen must be, and so the story of the Horus Stone appealed strongly
to him; but what interested him perhaps even more was the spectacle of
this man, who had just been guilty of a peculiarly ghastly form of
murder, sitting there and telling with simple eloquence and evident
reverence the sacred Myth out of which what was perhaps the most ancient
religion in the world had evolved. He heard him with a silence of both
interest and respect until his last sentence. Then he got up and
stretched his arms out and said with a laugh:

"Omen, Phadrig! Your tale of the stone has interested me deeply, but I
believe no more in the omen than I do in the story. Ay, and even if I
did, I would dare all the omens that wizards ever invented for their own
profit in trying to make Nitocris Marmion what I want her to be, and
what she shall be unless she is the cause of my first failure to achieve
what I had set my heart upon. But you have not finished your story. Tell
me now how the stone came into your possession, seeing that it was swept
out into the Nile hanging on the breast of the Royal Nitocris."

"The next season of Flood, so the records ran, Highness, the skeleton of
