tool of Cauchon? Do you remember that under the sacred seal of the
confessional Joan freely and trustingly revealed to him everything
concerning her history save only a few things regarding her supernatural
revelations which her Voices had forbidden her to tell to any one--and
that the unjust judge, Cauchon, was a hidden listener all the time?

Now you understand how the inquisitors were able to devise that long
array of minutely prying questions; questions whose subtlety and
ingenuity and penetration are astonishing until we come to remember
Loyseleur's performance and recognize their source. Ah, Bishop of
Beauvais, you are now lamenting this cruel iniquity these many years
in hell! Yes verily, unless one has come to your help. There is but one
among the redeemed that would do it; and it is futile to hope that that
one has not already done it--Joan of Arc.

We will return to the questionings.

"Did they make you still another promise?"

"Yes, but that is not in your proces. I will not tell it now, but before
three months I will tell it you."

The judge seems to know the matter he is asking about, already; one gets
this idea from his next question.

"Did your Voices tell you that you would be liberated before three
months?"

Joan often showed a little flash of surprise at the good guessing of the
judges, and she showed one this time. I was frequently in terror to find
my mind (which I could not control) criticizing the Voices and saying,
"They counsel her to speak boldly--a thing which she would do without
any suggestion from them or anybody else--but when it comes to telling
her any useful thing, such as how these conspirators manage to guess
their way so skilfully into her affairs, they are always off attending
to some other business."

I am reverent by nature; and when such thoughts swept through my head
they made me cold with fear, and if there was a storm and thunder at the
time, I was so ill that I could but with difficulty abide at my post and
do my work.

Joan answered:

"That is not in your proces. I do not know when I shall be set free, but
some who wish me out of this world will go from it before me."

It made some of them shiver.

"Have your Voices told you that you will be delivered from this prison?"

Without a doubt they had, and the judge knew it before he asked the
question.

"Ask me again in three months and I will tell you." She said it with
such a happy look, the tired prisoner! And I? And Noel Rainguesson,
drooping yonder?--why, the floods of joy went streaming through us from
crown to sole! It was all that we could do to hold still and keep from
making fatal exposure of our feelings.

She was to be set free in three months. That was what she meant; we
saw it. The Voices had told her so, and told her true--true to the very
day--May 30th. But we know now that they had mercifully hidden from her
how she was to be set free, but left her in ignorance. Home again!

That day was our understanding of it--Noel's and mine; that was our
dream; and now we would count the days, the hours, the minutes. They
would fly lightly along; they would soon be over.

Yes, we would carry our idol home; and there, far from the pomps and
tumults of the world, we would take up our happy life again and live
it out as we had begun it, in the free air and the sunshine, with the
friendly sheep and the friendly people for comrades, and the grace and
charm of the meadows, the woods, and the river always before our eyes
and their deep peace in our hearts. Yes, that was our dream, the dream
that carried us bravely through that three months to an exact and awful
fulfilment, the thought of which would have killed us, I think, if we had
foreknown it and been obliged to bear the burden of it upon our hearts
the half of those weary days.

Our reading of the prophecy was this: We believed the King's soul was
going to be smitten with remorse; and that he would privately plan a
rescue with Joan's old lieutenants, D'Alencon and the Bastard and La
Hire, and that this rescue would take place at the end of the three
months. So we made up our minds to be ready and take a hand in it.

In the present and also in later sittings Joan was urged to name the
exact day of her deliverance; but she could not do that. She had not the
permission of her Voices. Moreover, the Voices themselves did not name
the precise day. Ever since the fulfilment of the prophecy, I have
believed that Joan had the idea that her deliverance was going to come
in the form of death. But not that death! Divine as she was, dauntless
as she was in battle, she was human also. She was not solely a saint,
an angel, she was a clay-made girl also--as human a girl as any in
the world, and full of a human girl's sensitiveness and tenderness and
delicacies. And so, that death! No, she could not have lived the three
months with that one before her, I think. You remember that the first
time she was wounded she was frightened, and cried, just as any other
girl of seventeen would have done, although she had known for eighteen
days that she was going to be wounded on that very day. No, she was
not afraid of any ordinary death, and an ordinary death was what she
believed the prophecy of deliverance meant, I think, for her face showed
happiness, not horror, when she uttered it.

Now I will explain why I think as I do. Five weeks before she was
captured in the battle of Compiegne, her Voices told her what was
coming. They did not tell her the day or the place, but said she would
be taken prisoner and that it would be before the feast of St. John.
She begged that death, certain and swift, should be her fate, and the
captivity brief; for she was a free spirit, and dreaded the confinement.
The Voices made no promise, but only told her to bear whatever came. Now
as they did not refuse the swift death, a hopeful young thing like Joan
would naturally cherish that fact and make the most of it, allowing it
to grow and establish itself in her mind. And so now that she was told
she was to be "delivered" in three months, I think she believed it meant
that she would die in her bed in the prison, and that that was why she
looked happy and content--the gates of Paradise standing open for her,
the time so short, you see, her troubles so soon to be over, her reward
so close at hand. Yes, that would make her look happy, that would make
her patient and bold, and able to fight her fight out like a soldier.
Save herself if she could, of course, and try for the best, for that
was the way she was made; but die with her face to the front if die she
must.

Then later, when she charged Cauchon with trying to kill her with a
poisoned fish, her notion that she was to be "delivered" by death in the
prison--if she had it, and I believe she had--would naturally be greatly
strengthened, you see.

But I am wandering from the trial. Joan was asked to definitely name the
time that she would be delivered from prison.

"I have always said that I was not permitted to tell you everything. I
am to be set free, and I desire to ask leave of my Voices to tell you
the day. That is why I wish for delay."

"Do your Voices forbid you to tell the truth?"

"Is it that you wish to know matters concerning the King of France? I
tell you again that he will regain his kingdom, and that I know it as
well as I know that you sit here before me in this tribunal." She
sighed and, after a little pause, added: "I should be dead but for this
revelation, which comforts me always."

Some trivial questions were asked her about St. Michael's dress and
appearance. She answered them with dignity, but one saw that they gave
her pain. After a little she said:

"I have great joy in seeing him, for when I see him I have the feeling
that I am not in mortal sin."

She added, "Sometimes St. Marguerite and St. Catherine have allowed me
to confess myself to them."

Here was a possible chance to set a successful snare for her innocence.

"When you confessed were you in mortal sin, do you think?"

But her reply did her no hurt. So the inquiry was shifted once more
to the revelations made to the King--secrets which the court had tried
again and again to force out of Joan, but without success.

"Now as to the sign given to the King--"

"I have already told you that I will tell you nothing about it."

"Do you know what the sign was?"

"As to that, you will not find out from me."

All this refers to Joan's secret interview with the King--held
apart, though two or three others were present. It was known--through
Loyseleur, of course--that this sign was a crown and was a pledge of the
verity of Joan's mission. But that is all a mystery until this day--the
nature of the crown, I mean--and will remain a mystery to the end of
time. We can never know whether a real crown descended upon the King's
head, or only a symbol, the mystic fabric of a vision.

"Did you see a crown upon the King's head when he received the
revelation?"

"I cannot tell you as to that, without perjury."

"Did the King have that crown at Rheims?"

"I think the King put upon his head a crown which he found there; but a
much richer one was brought him afterward."

"Have you seen that one?"

"I cannot tell you, without perjury. But whether I have seen it or not,
I have heard say that it was rich and magnificent."

They went on and pestered her to weariness about that mysterious crown,
but they got nothing more out of her. The sitting closed. A long, hard
day for all of us.




10 The Inquisitors at Their Wits' End

THE COURT rested a day, then took up work again on Saturday, the third
of March.

This was one of our stormiest sessions. The whole court was out
of patience; and with good reason. These threescore distinguished
churchmen, illustrious tacticians, veteran legal gladiators, had left
important posts where their supervision was needed, to journey
hither from various regions and accomplish a most simple and easy
matter--condemn and send to death a country-lass of nineteen who could
neither read nor write, knew nothing of the wiles and perplexities of
legal procedure, could not call a single witness in her defense, was
allowed no advocate or adviser, and must conduct her case by herself
against a hostile judge and a packed jury. In two hours she would be
hopelessly entangled, routed, defeated, convicted. Nothing could be more
certain that this--so they thought. But it was a mistake. The two hours
had strung out into days; what promised to be a skirmish had expanded
into a siege; the thing which had looked so easy had proven to be
surprisingly difficult; the light victim who was to have been puffed
away like a feather remained planted like a rock; and on top of all
this, if anybody had a right to laugh it was the country-lass and not
the court.

She was not doing that, for that was not her spirit; but others were
doing it. The whole town was laughing in its sleeve, and the court knew
it, and its dignity was deeply hurt. The members could not hide their
annoyance.

And so, as I have said, the session was stormy. It was easy to see that
these men had made up their minds to force words from Joan to-day which
should shorten up her case and bring it to a prompt conclusion. It shows
that after all their experience with her they did not know her yet.

They went into the battle with energy. They did not leave the
questioning to a particular member; no, everybody helped. They volleyed
questions at Joan from all over the house, and sometimes so many were
talking at once that she had to ask them to deliver their fire one at a
time and not by platoons. The beginning was as usual:

"You are once more required to take the oath pure and simple."

"I will answer to what is in the proces verbal. When I do more, I will
choose the occasion for myself."

That old ground was debated and fought over inch by inch with great
bitterness and many threats. But Joan remained steadfast, and the
questionings had to shift to other matters. Half an hour was spent over
Joan's apparitions--their dress, hair, general appearance, and so on--in
the hope of fishing something of a damaging sort out of the replies; but
with no result.

Next, the male attire was reverted to, of course. After many well-worn
questions had been re-asked, one or two new ones were put forward.

"Did not the King or the Queen sometimes ask you to quit the male
dress?"

"That is not in your proces."

"Do you think you would have sinned if you had taken the dress of your
sex?"

"I have done best to serve and obey my sovereign Lord and Master."

After a while the matter of Joan's Standard was taken up, in the hope of
connecting magic and witchcraft with it.

"Did not your men copy your banner in their pennons?"

"The lancers of my guard did it. It was to distinguish them from the
rest of the forces. It was their own idea."

"Were they often renewed?"

"Yes. When the lances were broken they were renewed."

The purpose of the question unveils itself in the next one.

"Did you not say to your men that pennons made like your banner would be
lucky?"

The soldier-spirit in Joan was offended at this puerility. She drew
herself up, and said with dignity and fire: "What I said to them was,
'Ride those English down!' and I did it myself."

Whenever she flung out a scornful speech like that at these French
menials in English livery it lashed them into a rage; and that is what
happened this time. There were ten, twenty, sometimes even thirty of
them on their feet at a time, storming at the prisoner minute after
minute, but Joan was not disturbed.

By and by there was peace, and the inquiry was resumed.

It was now sought to turn against Joan the thousand loving honors which
had been done her when she was raising France out of the dirt and shame
of a century of slavery and castigation.

"Did you not cause paintings and images of yourself to be made?"

"No. At Arras I saw a painting of myself kneeling in armor before the
King and delivering him a letter; but I caused no such things to be
made."

"Were not masses and prayers said in your honor?"

"If it was done it was not by my command. But if any prayed for me I
think it was no harm."

"Did the French people believe you were sent of God?"

"As to that, I know not; but whether they believed it or not, I was not
the less sent of God."

"If they thought you were sent of God, do you think it was well
thought?"

"If they believed it, their trust was not abused."

"What impulse was it, think you, that moved the people to kiss your
hands, your feet, and your vestments?"

"They were glad to see me, and so they did those things; and I could
not have prevented them if I had had the heart. Those poor people came
lovingly to me because I had not done them any hurt, but had done the
best I could for them according to my strength."

See what modest little words she uses to describe that touching
spectacle, her marches about France walled in on both sides by the
adoring multitudes: "They were glad to see me." Glad?

Why they were transported with joy to see her. When they could not kiss
her hands or her feet, they knelt in the mire and kissed the hoof-prints
of her horse. They worshiped her; and that is what these priests were
trying to prove. It was nothing to them that she was not to blame for
what other people did. No, if she was worshiped, it was enough; she was
guilty of mortal sin.

Curious logic, one must say.

"Did you not stand sponsor for some children baptized at Rheims?"

"At Troyes I did, and at St. Denis; and I named the boys Charles, in
honor of the King, and the girls I named Joan."

"Did not women touch their rings to those which you wore?"

"Yes, many did, but I did not know their reason for it."

"At Rheims was your Standard carried into the church? Did you stand at
the altar with it in your hand at the Coronation?"

"Yes."

"In passing through the country did you confess yourself in the Churches
and receive the sacrament?"

"Yes."

"In the dress of a man?"

"Yes. But I do not remember that I was in armor."

It was almost a concession! almost a half-surrender of the permission
granted her by the Church at Poitiers to dress as a man. The wily court
shifted to another matter: to pursue this one at this time might call
Joan's attention to her small mistake, and by her native cleverness she
might recover her lost ground. The tempestuous session had worn her and
drowsed her alertness.

"It is reported that you brought a dead child to life in the church at
Lagny. Was that in answer to your prayers?"

"As to that, I have no knowledge. Other young girls were praying for the
child, and I joined them and prayed also, doing no more than they."

"Continue."

"While we prayed it came to life, and cried. It had been dead three
days, and was as black as my doublet. It was straight way baptized, then
it passed from life again and was buried in holy ground."

"Why did you jump from the tower of Beaurevoir by night and try to
escape?"

"I would go to the succor of Compiegne."

It was insinuated that this was an attempt to commit the deep crime of
suicide to avoid falling into the hands of the English.

"Did you not say that you would rather die than be delivered into the
power of the English?"

Joan answered frankly; without perceiving the trap:

"Yes; my words were, that I would rather that my soul be returned unto
God than that I should fall into the hands of the English."

It was now insinuated that when she came to, after jumping from the
tower, she was angry and blasphemed the name of God; and that she did it
again when she heard of the defection of the Commandant of Soissons. She
was hurt and indignant at this, and said:

"It is not true. I have never cursed. It is not my custom to swear."




11 The Court Reorganized for Assassination

A HALT was called. It was time. Cauchon was losing ground in the fight,
Joan was gaining it.

There were signs that here and there in the court a judge was being
