matters a very painful indifference was manifested."

One great obstacle to the reception of evangelical truth among the
Bulgarians, was the attachment of all classes to their national
unity. The same had been found among the Armenians and Greeks. Men
objected to the examination of evangelical doctrines, lest the
result should be a schism in the nation; not being able to see how a
change in religious belief could consist with national loyalty. Yet,
though the progress of the work had not equaled the expectations
awakened at the outset, it was obvious that increasing acquaintance
with the missionaries was perceptibly removing prejudice. The
conviction was gaining strength with many, not only that Protestants
had a Christian faith, but that it was purer than their own. The
girls' school at Eski Zagra had thirty pupils in regular attendance,
and a score of applicants were refused for want of room. Mr. Clarke
having been overworked, it was necessary to secure aid for him, and
Mr. Haskell removed to Philippopolis. Mr. Ball, after a long
detention at home by the decline of his wife's health, joined the
Adrianople station in 1865. Some new prejudice against the
missionaries was now created by accusations transferred from English
newspapers, made in defense of the intolerance of the Turkish
authorities, and of what certainly seemed an unfriendly policy in
Sir Henry Bulwer, the English Ambassador.

But the school for young men at Philippopolis, and that for girls at
Eski Zagra, conciliated favor. The former had fourteen pupils, who
made good improvement in mental and moral character, and manifested
a good degree of religious feeling, a spirit of benevolence, and a
readiness to labor for the good of others. During vacation, six of
them were employed as colporters. Nearly all the older students
seemed ready to take their stand on the Bible, and did not fear the
name of Protestant. The girls' school numbered about thirty pupils,
whose progress in study had been gratifying, and there had often
been deep feeling under religious instruction. Members of the common
council of the town, and others who witnessed an examination of the
school, sent to Mr. Byington a letter of thanks, and assured him
that the missionaries would yet be recognized by the Bulgarians as
benefactors of their nation.

The people could not, as yet, be drawn, in any numbers, to attend
the regular religious services of the missionaries. They were banded
together against receiving spiritual truth. Still something could be
done by personal conversations and the circulation of books and
tracts. Touring in the villages was often attended with
encouragement.

The year 1867 was one of peculiar promise. The moral stupor, which
for so many years had taxed the faith of the mission, seemed to be
yielding to the awakening power of the Word of God, and Gospel truth
was not only better apprehended by the intellect, but also was
impressing the heart and conscience. Though the awakening was
neither as extensive, or thorough, or spiritual as was desired, it
was real, and indicated the entering upon a new stage of the work.

Miss Roseltha A. Norcross became the associate of Miss Reynolds in
the school at Eski Zagra. The arrival of a new teacher and many
applications for admission, led to an enlargement of the school. Two
sisters, however, who were among the most interesting pupils, were
called to severe trials. One of them left in 1866, but the other
remained, and was the best scholar in the school. Both possessed
more than ordinary intelligence and amiability, and for more than
two years had been heartily devoted to Christ. "The younger who had
left the school," says the report of the mission, "was taken, a few
days since, into a room where many of her relatives and a priest had
assembled, to extort from her a renunciation of her faith, and was
told that she would either have to give up, or die; that they would
give her no peace so long as she persisted in her present course.
But the Lord sustained her. They resorted to entreaty, and besought
her merely to make the sign of submission, telling her that she need
not in her heart change her belief. But their seductions were as
unavailing as their threats. It is more than a year since she left
the school, and though, during this time, her closet, her Bible, and
the conversation of her sister have been her only means of grace, it
is evident that, in the midst of this wearing domestic persecution,
a Christian character of unusual loveliness is being developed. She
is as frail as a lily, but the strength of the Lord rests upon her."

Another case was that of a pupil who had left a year and a half
before, to teach a Bulgarian school. "Unaided," says the mission,
"except from on high, she has fought a good fight during the past
year. The parents of her pupils complain because she will not
conform to the rites of their Church, but the trustees of the
school, not wishing to lose her services, have been wise enough not
to make conformity a condition of remaining in their service. Her
parents have forbidden her visiting the missionary premises, but
they have not been able to separate her from her Lord, nor to
prevent her laboring for the spiritual good of her pupils. Although
she has been occupying, for more than a year, a position beset with
temptations, and has been in a great degree deprived of the sympathy
and advice of Christian friends, we still hear from her that she is
kept by the power of God."

The mission suffered a most serious loss in the return of Mr. and
Mrs. Byington to their native land, in consequence of the failing
health of the latter.

The great complaint of the missionaries had been of the indifference
of the people. But after the departure of Mr. Byington, there was no
ground for this at Eski Zagra. False reports were circulated with
such effect, that the day-scholars were taken from the school, and
the boarding-school was reassembled with difficulty. The oldest
assistant teacher was forcibly abducted, but escaped and returned. A
mob soon gathered, broke open an outer door, cut away some of the
bars to the windows, and broke sixty panes of glass with stones. The
proprietor of the house now sent for the police, which dispersed the
rioters. Such outrages could not be allowed, and representations
were made to Mr. Morris, the American Minister at Constantinople,
and to Mr. Blunt, the friendly English Consul at Adrianople. Their
prompt efforts were effectual. More than a score of the offenders
were sentenced to imprisonment of different lengths, but were
pardoned at the request of the missionaries. This act of clemency
had a happy influence on the people, and the persecution had a good
effect on the school.

A young man who had been for five years a student at Philippopolis,
was licensed to preach the gospel on the 24th of July; and on the
following Sabbath, ten Bulgarians, six of whom were girls in the
school, sat down at the Lord's table, in the presence of forty
spectators. This was the more significant, as the Bulgarian council,
a month before, had enjoined upon the different "trades" of the city
and neighboring villages, to have no dealings with two individuals
whose names and places of business were specified, nor with any
others who were known as inclined to Protestantism. Such persons
were therefore refused bread, or the right of baking at the public
ovens, and some were reduced to great distress. The missionaries
talked seriously with the leading men of the city in favor of
religious _freedom_, but only a few of them conversed reasonably on
the subject, and the masses were wholly opposed to it. Three men, as
a means of asserting their religious liberty, went before the
Turkish authorities and declared themselves Protestants, which
seemed to be the beginning of a Protestant Bulgarian community. The
missionaries were sometimes threatened with personal violence, but
the Turkish government was ready to defend them.

In January, 1869, four Bulgarians were admitted to the communion at
Eski Zagra, two of them pupils in the school, and two married men.
The number of Bulgarian communicants in that place was now eleven.

The mission was strengthened, in 1868, by the arrival of Messrs.
Lewis Bond, William Edwin Locke, and Henry Pitt Page, all ordained
missionaries, and their wives. Mr. Bond was stationed at Eski Zagra,
and Miss Esther P. Maltbie came thither as a teacher in 1870. Mr.
Haskell welcomed the arrival, at Philippopolis, of Miss Minnie C.
Beach, in 1869, and Messrs. Locke and Page commenced a new station,
before noticed, at Samokov, in ancient Macedonia. Mr. and Mrs. Ball
of Adrianople and Miss Reynolds of Eski Zagra found it necessary to
return to the United States on account of their health; and it soon
appeared that it was too late for them to recover. Mr. Ball died at
Grand Rapids, Wisconsin, June 6, 1870, after a useful connection of
seventeen years with the missionary work, and Miss Reynolds, at
Springfield, Massachusetts, June 1, 1871, just eight years from the
day of her sailing for Turkey, and after a life of singular
devotedness and success.[1]

[1] See _Missionary Herald_, 1871, p. 247.

Previous to the year 1870, the missionaries to the Bulgarians had
sustained a nominal relation to the Western Armenian Mission. This
connection was now dissolved, and the associated brethren took the
name of the EUROPEAN TURKEY MISSION. Its stations were Eski Zagra,
Philippopolis, Samokov, and Adrianople; and Dr. Riggs was reckoned
as a member of it, though he continued to reside in Constantinople,
his labors being chiefly for the Bulgarians. The Rev. Henry A.
Schauffler, then in the United States, was also transferred from the
Western Turkey Mission, and was expected, on his return to the
field, to go to Philippopolis, where he would use the Turkish and
Greek for the benefit of those who spoke these languages; and with
the expectation that the work among the Bulgarians would everywhere
connect itself, as soon as possible, with that of the large
Mohammedan and Greek population, with whom they were intermingled.

The Sultan, having confirmed the appointment of Bishop Anthimas, of
Widdin, to be Exarch of Bulgaria, the Bulgarians thus virtually
acquired their ecclesiastical independence, and so both their
national spirit and their unwillingness to allow Protestantism to
come in as an element of apprehended division, acquired strength.
Few were yet able to see how one could be both a Bulgarian and a
Protestant, and no general movement on the part of rulers and
ecclesiastics towards Protestantism, was to be expected. But the
Scriptures and evangelical publications were extensively circulated.
Thoughtful minds were reached, and examples of what the Gospel could
do to regenerate character and give peace to troubled spirits were
beginning to attract attention. There was not such liberty to
persecute as there had been in Asiatic Turkey. Truth was gaining a
hold in cities and villages. The girls' school at Eski Zagra, under
Miss Norcross, numbering twenty-six pupils, contained several who
gave evidence of spiritual renewal, and applications for teachers
had come from several towns and villages, accompanied by
comparatively liberal subscriptions for their support. The hope, at
Philippopolis, of getting helpers from the high school for young
men, had been much disappointed, but some of its pupils were doing
good. An influential merchant in Samokov was an active convert, and
there was much to encourage in that region.

Early in the autumn of 1870, Miss Norcross sickened, and on the 4th
of November died, greatly to the grief of her pupils and of the
whole mission.[1] Miss Maltbie arrived in less than a month after
she had passed away. It was soon resolved to remove the school to
Samokov, as a more healthful place, and more eligible on other
accounts. A regular Sabbath service was held at this station, and a
weekly prayer-meeting. The audiences were very small, and but five
persons were deemed worthy to be received to church fellowship. At
the out-stations, though there had been no striking success, there
were everywhere signs of an advance. The native helper in the
beautiful town of Bansko had a school of twenty-two pupils, and a
congregation of sixty-five, and the little company contributed to
Christian objects, during the year, nearly two hundred dollars,
including the purchase of a site for a house of worship. The cause
was greatly advanced by the labors of an earnest and devoted
Bible-woman, whom the women of Bansko helped to support.

[1] See _Missionary Herald_, 1871, p. 53.

Bansko will have the ecclesiastical distinction, hereafter, of being
the place where the first evangelical Bulgarian church was formed,
and fully organized. This was in August, 1871. The candidates were
fifteen, nine men, and six women. In accordance with a written
invitation from the people, Messrs. Locke, Bond, and Page started on
Tuesday, August 22d, and went by a circuitous, though a pleasant,
picturesque and easy route, passing through two cities, where they
found several who were examining the truth, and reached their place
of destination on the 24th. The brethren at Bansko had arranged
liberally for the brethren and their horses, at their own houses,
and gave them a hearty welcome. The candidates for church-membership
were all examined, and answered the questions put to them more
clearly than the missionaries had thought possible, considering the
advantages they had enjoyed. The candidate for ordination as pastor,
Mr. Evansko Touzorve, was examined on Saturday afternoon. He had
been preaching there as a helper of the mission, and the examination
was quite satisfactory, especially on the evidences of Christianity,
just then a subject of special importance in that field, owing to
the influx of German and French infidelity.

Sabbath, August 27th, was devoted to the organization of the church,
and the ordination of the pastor. A deacon had been previously
chosen. The service was concluded with the Lord's Supper. The people
were to have the services of the pastor eight months in the year,
and to pay half his salary for that time, and the mission was to
employ him the other four months in another part of the field. The
new church could not then pay more towards the salary, having bought
a lot of land, on which to build a church. The little flock was
jubilant and of good courage. "What a contrast," exclaims the
missionary, "between this state of things, and that two years ago,
when the people seized our horses, and drove us from the village!"

One of the most important results of the mission to the Bulgarians,
has doubtless been the translation of the whole Bible into their
present spoken language.[1] This was published for the first time,
in the year 1871. "Methodius and Cyril, who first preached the
gospel to the Bulgarians a thousand years ago, gave them the
Scriptures in their then spoken language, the Slavic. But this
ancient tongue, the mother of the modern Russian, Bulgarian,
Servian, Polish, Illyrian, etc., has long since ceased to be the
vernacular of any of the nations. Hence the necessity of new
translations of the Word of God in all these dialects." One of the
earliest results of the waking up of the Bulgarian people, was a
translation of the four Gospels by Messrs. Seraphim of Eski Zagra,
and Sapoonoff of Trevna, published at Bucharest in 1828. The first
edition of the whole New Testament in Bulgarian was issued at
Smyrna, in 1840, at the expense of the British and Foreign Bible
Society; but the literary labor was performed by a Bulgarian, the
Rev. Neophytus P. Petroff, of Rila, with the aid of Hilarion, the
Metropolitan Bishop of Ternovo. This edition was well received, and
sold rapidly. It was faithfully, carefully, and ably prepared.

[1] See Dr. Riggs' statement in the _Missionary Herald_, for 1872,
pp. 76-79.

The British and Foreign Bible Society published seven editions of
this Testament, or about forty thousand copies, and authorized the
preparation of a translation of the Old Testament. Mr. Constantine
Photinoff, of Smyrna, to whom this work was committed, just lived to
complete the first draft of a translation of the Old Testament, and
died in 1858, only a few days after having removed from Smyrna to
Constantinople, in order to revise it for publication, with Dr.
Riggs.

Meanwhile a rapid change had been going on in the Bulgarian
language, and it had become manifest that the work must have a
thorough revision. The translations of both the Old and New
Testaments had been made in the Western, or Macedonian dialect; but
the Eastern, or Slavic, was now taking the lead, and the language
was evidently to be mainly moulded after that model.

It is an interesting fact, stated by Dr. Riggs, that the government
censor for Bulgarian publications called on him, the day after Mr.
Photinoff's death, and expressed his hearty interest in the work of
translating the Scriptures, and his hope that it would not be
delayed.

In the preparation of this work, Dr. Riggs was aided by two of the
best Bulgarian scholars, the one trained in the use of the Western,
and the other of the Eastern dialect. In the revision of the New
Testament, he was also aided by the Rev. A. L. Long, D. D., of the
Methodist Bulgarian mission. With such assistance, it is believed
that this translation of the Bible will become a standard work. The
first edition was printed in an imperial octavo volume of one
thousand and sixty pages, with the references of our English Bible,
which will be of special value to a people having as yet no
Concordances, Bible Dictionaries, or Commentaries. Dr. Riggs brought
to the annual meeting of the newly organized mission, in 1871, the
first copy received from the binders.

It should be borne in mind, that only preliminary work has been done
as yet in this most inviting field. Scarcely fourteen years have
elapsed since the field was first explored, and only twelve since
stations began to be occupied. It is not time to expect any other
results than first fruits. The missionaries have become thoroughly
acquainted with the field, with its wants, and its strategetic
points, and are ready to move forward as fast as they shall receive
the needful aid.






CHAPTER XXXIII.

THE ARMENIANS.

1861-1863.


Dr. Dwight having completed his eastern tour, visited the United
States, where he arrived in November, 1861. It was arranged, that he
should prepare and publish the results of his extended missionary
observations. But the Head of the Church had ordered otherwise. On
Saturday, January 25, 1862, while passing in the cars through
Shaftsbury, Vermont, on his way to spend a Sabbath at Middlebury
College, "the stormy wind, fulfilling His word," lifted the car from
off the rails, and tossed it down a steep embankment; and one of the
heavy trucks, following and dashing through it, at once set free the
sanctified spirit of our brother, and gave him a sort of translation
to the regions of the blessed. It was a sudden and unexpected close
of a most useful life.

Dr. Dwight was born at Conway, Massachusetts, on the 22d of
November, 1803. His family removed to Utica, New York, and there, at
the age of fifteen, he was hopefully converted during a revival of
religion, and united with a Presbyterian church. He graduated at
Hamilton College in 1825, and, while in the Theological Seminary at
Andover, became deeply interested in the missionary work, and took
great pains, along with some fellow-students, to illustrate the
beginning of foreign missions from the United States. In his last
year at the Seminary he offered himself to the American Board, and
was appointed one of its missionaries. After completing his studies,
he entered upon an agency for the Board, which continued until 1829.
From this time, through more than thirty years, the events of his
life form an important part of the history of the mission to the
Armenians. That mission grew, in his time, from a single station at
Constantinople to twenty-three stations, and eighty-one
out-stations, extending over the greater part of Western Asia; and
whereas, at the commencement of his labors, he did not know of a
single convert in the whole country, at their close, there were
forty-two churches, with sixteen hundred members, twelve ordained
native pastors, forty-three licensed native preachers, thirty-four
catechists, fifty-five teachers, and thirty-nine other helpers.

He was made to be a leader in the Lord's host. There was in him a
rare combination of sound common sense, piety, resolution, firmness,
candor, and courtesy, and withal an honest simplicity, a godly
sincerity, and a practical tact, that seldom failed to secure for
him a commanding influence; and the mission, of which he was so long
a member, was sufficiently eventful to give full exercise to all his
powers.

It affords much pleasure to the writer, that he is unable to recall
an instance, in all the thirty years, where Dr. Dwight's opinions
were seriously at variance with those of the Committee and
Secretaries of the Board. It may be that, under the influence of a
more extended correspondence, there was sometimes greater progress
in their opinions on questions of missionary experience, than in
his; but there was never any collision of thought; and it was most
gratifying, on his arrival in this country, after his instructive
and interesting tour of observation among the missions and mission
churches, to find this eminent servant of Christ in full accord with
his Committee on all the great points of missionary practice. The
prominent trait, however, in his character was spirituality. This
was in him an ever-growing quality. From day to day, from month to
month, from the commencement of his missionary life until his death,
he was wholly devoted to the kingdom and glory of his Redeemer. He
walked with God, and was not, for God took him.

It will be appropriate, at this stage of the history, to quote some
of the views of Dr. Dwight on missionary policy in Turkey, as they
were embodied in a circular letter to the brethren of his own
mission, and substantially communicated to the Secretaries in their
personal intercourse with him just before his lamented death. Coming
from such a man, after so long and varied an experience, they
deserve thoughtful attention. He speaks first of the education of a
native ministry.

"I am inclined to think that we have made our education at the Bebek
Seminary too comprehensive, considering the actual circumstances and
wants of the people. True, our course of study is nothing compared
with that of American colleges; but it is much, compared with the
amount of education existing in this country; and it seems to me we
are in danger from two sources; namely, first, that our native
preachers will be educated too far above their people; and,
secondly, that they will require much more for their support, in
consequence of their education, than their people can give. The plan
of removing the Bebek Seminary to the interior, strikes me very
favorably."

Again, as to the support of the native ministry: "I think it very
evident, that the past system is fraught with too many evils to be
continued. I would not favor any sudden change, but it seems to me,
that the experience we have gained, by the working of the past,
would lead us to begin immediately on a new plan; and the providence
of God, in restricting our means, is giving us an admirable
opportunity for so doing. We may urge with great weight upon the
churches the support of their own pastors, and leave the
responsibility there, even when the treasury of the Board shall be
relieved. I begin to question, whether we ought even to give regular
aid from our funds, for the support of settled pastors, or even
stated supplies of churches fully organized. Would it not simplify
our relations to those churches, as well as call forth much more
efficient effort from themselves, if we were to leave them, as the
Apostles did their native churches, to take care of their own
pastors, after such have been ordained? The native churches should
be expected and encouraged to take, as fast as possible, the work of
evangelizing surrounding districts upon themselves; and it will be
better to leave them to choose and support wholly their own
laborers. The plan of having such men supported partly by the
mission and partly by the native churches, does not work well. If it
is necessary for the mission to assist the churches in this work, I
would do it irregularly, and without any pledges as to the amount or
frequency of such aid."

These views had been already exemplified, substantially, in the
Central mission; and they have since had a more full practical
development in the Eastern mission; as will appear in the progress
of the history.

It was not found easy to determine the number of stations or of
missionaries desirable in Eastern or Western Turkey. The early
theories in relation to this matter have been considerably modified
by experience. It was natural to suppose, that many missionaries
could labor among the million of people in Constantinople, without
interfering with each other, or standing in the way of a native
ministry. And so they might, could they at once have access to a
considerable part of the population. But this was not true in fact,
either as to missionaries, or the native ministry. It has been
found, that it results in loss to place more preachers on the
ground, than can find full scope for their ministry. Even should the
overcrowded ministry be of the same denomination, it works badly,
but far worse if made up of rival sects. For a time at least, all
must operate upon nearly the same persons. In the rural districts,
the missionaries reside in the centres of population, and generally
where two families can dwell together, and where each missionary can
have a distinct field of labor. But even there it is deemed
expedient for the churches to have native pastors; nor there alone.
The aim is to have constellations of churches with native
office-bearers, around every missionary station. Not otherwise can
the whole country be permeated by evangelical influences.

It is plain that in a work so unlike anything at home, missionaries
ought to have large discretion as to the time and manner of
organizing native churches. Nor, since these infant communities are
only partially enlightened and sanctified, is there reason for
discouragement should they sometimes be not perfectly harmonious
with their missionary fathers. It was so for a time with one of the
first churches formed at the metropolis. The missionaries had of
course the sole responsibility of determining what use should be
made of the funds remitted by the Board. But the pastor and a
portion of the church thought they ought to have a voice in their
