The Project Gutenberg EBook of Where the World is Quiet, by Henry Kuttner

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Where the World is Quiet

Author: Henry Kuttner

Release Date: February 7, 2010 [EBook #31207]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WHERE THE WORLD IS QUIET ***




Produced by Sankar Viswanathan, Greg Weeks, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net







                         Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from Fantastic Universe May 1954. Extensive
    research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S. copyright on this
    publication was renewed.


     _The life of an anthropologist is no doubt filled much of
      the time with the monotonous routine of carefully assembling
      powdery relics of ancient races and civilizations. But
      White's lone Peruvian odyssey was most unusual. A story
      pseudonymously penned by one of the greats in the genre._



                       where the world is quiet

                        _by ... C. H. Liddell_


     Fra Rafael saw strange things, impossible things. Then there
     was the mystery of the seven young virginal girls of
     Huascan.

       *       *       *       *       *




Fra Rafael drew the llama-wool blanket closer about his narrow
shoulders, shivering in the cold wind that screamed down from Huascan.
His face held great pain. I rose, walked to the door of the hut and
peered through fog at the shadowy haunted lands that lifted toward the
sky--the Cordilleras that make a rampart along Peru's eastern border.

"There's nothing," I said. "Only the fog, Fra Rafael."

He made the sign of the cross on his breast. "It is the fog that
brings the--the terror," he said. "I tell you, _Senor_ White, I have
seen strange things these last few months--impossible things. You are
a scientist. Though we are not of the same religion, you also know
that there are powers not of this earth."

I didn't answer, so he went on: "Three months ago it began, after the
earthquake. A native girl disappeared. She was seen going into the
mountains, toward Huascan along the Pass, and she did not come back. I
sent men out to find her. They went up the Pass, found the fog grew
thicker and thicker until they were blind and could see nothing. Fear
came to them and they fled back down the mountain. A week later
another girl vanished. We found her footprints."

"The same canyon?"

"_Si_, and the same result. Now seven girls have gone, one after the
other, all in the same way. And I, _Senor_ White--" Fra Rafael's pale,
tired face was sad as he glanced down at the stumps of his legs--"I
could not follow, as you see. Four years ago an avalanche crippled me.
My bishop told me to return to Lima, but I prevailed on him to let me
remain here for these natives are my people, _Senor_. They know and
trust me. The loss of my legs has not altered that."

I nodded. "I can see the difficulty now, though."

"Exactly. I cannot go to Huascan and find out what has happened to the
girls. The natives--well, I chose four of the strongest and bravest
and asked them to take me up the Pass. I thought that I could overcome
their superstitions. But I was not successful."

"How far did you go?" I asked.

"A few miles, not more than that. The fog grew thicker, until we were
blinded by it, and the way was dangerous. I could not make the men go
on." Fra Rafael closed his eyes wearily. "They talked of old Inca gods
and devils--Manco Capac and Oello Huaco, the Children of the Sun. They
are very much afraid, _Senor_ White. They huddle together like sheep
and believe that an ancient god has returned and is taking them away
one by one. And--one by one they _are_ taken."

"Only young girls," I mused. "And no coercion is used, apparently.
What's up toward Huascan?"

"Nothing but wild llamas and the condors. And snow, cold, desolation.
These are the Andes, my friend."

"Okay," I said. "It sounds interesting. As an anthropologist I owe it
to the Foundation to investigate. Besides, I'm curious. Superficially,
there is nothing very strange about the affair. Seven girls have
disappeared in the unusually heavy fogs we've had ever since the
earthquake. Nothing more."

I smiled at him. "However, I think I'll take a look around and see
what's so attractive about Huascan."

"I shall pray for you," he said. "Perhaps--well, _Senor_, for all the
loss of my legs, I am not a weak man. I can stand much hardship. I can
ride a burro."
