  when they are sick, thinking that the Operation of the Remedies they
  take, is proportional to the Presents they make unto those who have
  prescrib'd them.

In connection with this, reference is made by Marquette to a certain
class of individuals among the Illinois and Dakota, who were compelled
to wear women's clothes, and who were debarred many privileges, but were
permitted to "assist at all the Superstitions of their _Juglers_, and
their solemn Dances in honor of the _Calumet_, in which they may sing,
but it is not lawful for them to dance. They are call'd to their
Councils, and nothing is determin'd without their Advice; for, because
of their extraordinary way of Living, they are look'd upon as
_Manitous_, or at least for great and incomparable Genius's."

That the calumet was brought into requisition upon all occasions of
interest is learned from the following statement, in which the same
writer declares that it is "the most mysterious thing in the World. The
Sceptres of our Kings are not so much respected; for the Savages have
such a Deference for this Pipe, that one may call it _The God of Peace
and War, and the Arbiter of Life and Death_. Their _Calumet of Peace_ is
different from the _Calumet of War_; They make use of the former to seal
their Alliances and Treaties, to travel with safety, and receive
Strangers; and the other is to proclaim War."

This reverence for the calumet is shown by the manner in which it is
used at dances, in the ceremony of smoking, etc., indicating a religious
devoutness approaching that recently observed among various Algonkian
tribes in connection with the ceremonies of the Mid[-e]/wiwin. When the
calumet dance was held, the Illinois appear to have resorted to the
houses in the winter and to the groves in the summer. The above-named
authority continues in this connection:

  They chuse for that purpose a set Place among Trees, to shelter
  themselves against the Heat of the Sun, and lay in the middle a large
  Matt, as a Carpet, to lay upon the God of the Chief of the Company,
  who gave the Ball; for every one has his peculiar God, whom they call
  _Manitoa_. It is sometime a Stone, a Bird, a Serpent, or anything else
  that they dream of in their Sleep; for they think this _Manitoa_ will
  prosper their Wants, as Fishing, Hunting, and other Enterprizes. To
  the Right of their _Manitoa_ they place the _Calumet_, their Great
  Deity, making round about it a Kind of Trophy with their Arms, viz.
  their Clubs, Axes, Bows, Quivers, and Arrows.  *  *  *  Every Body
  sits down afterwards, round about, as they come, having first of all
  saluted the _Manitoa_, which they do in blowing the Smoak of their
  Tobacco upon it, which is as much as offering to it Frankincense.
  *  *  *  This _Preludium_ being over, he who is to begin the Dance
  appears in the middle of the Assembly, and having taken the _Calumet_,
  presents it to the Sun, as if he wou'd invite him to smoke. Then he
  moves it into an infinite Number of Postures sometimes laying it near
  the Ground, then stretching its Wings, as if he wou'd make it fly, and
  then presents it to the Spectators, who smoke with it one after
  another, dancing all the while. This is the first Scene of this famous
  Ball.

The infinite number of postures assumed in offering the pipe appear as
significant as the "smoke ceremonies" mentioned in connection with the
preparatory instruction of the candidate previous to his initiation into
the Mid[-e]/wiwin.

In his remarks on the religion of the Indians and the practices of the
sorcerers, Hennepin says:

  As for their Opinion concerning the Earth, they make use of a Name of
  a certain _Genius_, whom they call _Micaboche_, who has cover'd the
  whole Earth with water (as they imagine) and relate innumerable
  fabulous Tales, some of which have a kind of Analogy with the
  Universal Deluge. These Barbarians believe that there are certain
  Spirits in the Air, between Heaven and Earth, who have a power to
  foretell future Events, and others who play the part of Physicians,
  curing all sorts of Distempers. Upon which account, it happens, that
  these _Savages_ are very Superstitious, and consult their Oracles with
  a great deal of exactness. One of these Masters-Jugglers who pass for
  Sorcerers among them, one day caus'd a Hut to be erected with ten
  thick Stakes, which he fix'd very deep in the Ground, and then made a
  horrible noise to Consult the Spirits, to know whether abundance of
  Snow wou'd fall ere long, that they might have good game in the
  Hunting of Elks and Beavers: Afterward he bawl'd out aloud from the
  bottom of the Hut, that he saw many Herds of Elks, which were as yet
  at a very great distance, but that they drew near within seven or
  eight Leagues of their Huts, which caus'd a great deal of joy among
  those poor deluded Wretches.

That this statement refers to one or more tribes of the Algonkian
linguistic stock is evident, not only because of the reference to the
sorcerers and their peculiar methods of procedure, but also that the
name of _Micaboche_, an Algonkian divinity, appears. This Spirit, who
acted as an intercessor between Ki/tshi Man/id[-o] (Great Spirit) and
the Indians, is known among the Ojibwa as Mi/nab[-o]/zho; but to this
full reference will be made further on in connection with the Myth of
the origin of the Mid[-e]/wiwin. The tradition of Nokomis (the earth)
and the birth of Manabush (the Mi/nab[-o]/zho of the Menomoni) and his
brother, the Wolf, that pertaining to the re-creation of the world, and
fragments of other myths, are thrown together and in a mangled form
presented by Hennepin in the following words:

  Some Salvages which live at the upper end of the River St. _Lawrence_,
  do relate a pretty diverting Story. They hold almost the same opinion
  with the former [the Iroquois], that a Woman came down from Heaven,
  and remained for some while fluttering in the Air, not finding Ground
  whereupon to put her Foot. But that the Fishes moved with Compassion
  for her, immediately held a Consultation to deliberate which of them
  should receive her. The Tortoise very officiously offered its Back on
  the Surface of the Water. The Woman came to rest upon it, and fixed
  herself there. Afterwards the Filthiness and Dirt of the Sea gathering
  together about the Tortoise, there was formed by little and little
  that vast Tract of Land, which we now call _America_.

  They add that this Woman grew weary of her Solitude, wanting some body
  for to keep her Company, that so she might spend her time more
  pleasantly. Melancholy and Sadness having seiz'd upon her Spirits, she
  fell asleep, and a Spirit descended from above, and finding her in
  that Condition approach'd and knew her unperceptibly. From which
  Approach she conceived two Children, which came forth out of one of
  her Ribs. But these two Brothers could never afterwards agree
  together. One of them was a better Huntsman than the other; they
  quarreled every day; and their Disputes grew so high at last, that one
  could not bear with the other. One especially being of a very wild
  Temper, hated mortally his Brother who was of a milder Constitution,
  who being no longer able to endure the Pranks of the other, he
  resolved at last to part from him. He retired then into Heaven,
  whence, for a Mark of his just Resentment, he causeth at several times
  his Thunder to rore over the Head of his unfortunate Brother.

  Sometime after the Spirit descended again on that Woman, and she
  conceived a Daughter, from whom (as the Salvages say) were propagated
  these numerous People, which do occupy now one of the greatest parts
  of the Universe.

It is evident that the narrator has sufficiently distorted the
traditions to make them conform, as much as practicable, to the biblical
story of the birth of Christ. No reference whatever is made in the
Ojibwa or Menomoni myths to the conception of the Daughter of Nokomis
(the earth) by a celestial visitant, but the reference is to one of the
wind gods. Mi/nab[-o]/zho became angered with the Ki/tshi Man/id[-o],
and the latter, to appease his discontent, gave to Mi/nab[-o]/zho the
rite of the Mid[-e]wiwin. The brother of Mi/nab[-o]/zho was destroyed by
the malevolent underground spirits and now rules the abode of
shadows,--the "Land of the Midnight Sun."

Upon his arrival at the "Bay of Puans" (Green Bay, Wisconsin), Marquette
found a village inhabited by three nations, viz: "Miamis, Maskoutens,
and Kikabeux." He says:

  When I arriv'd there, I was very glad to see a great Cross set up in
  the middle of the Village, adorn'd with several White Skins, Red
  Girdles, Bows and Arrows, which that good People had offer'd to the
  Great _Manitou_, to return him their Thanks for the care he had taken
  of them during the Winter, and that he had granted them a prosperous
  Hunting. _Manitou_, is the Name they give in general to all Spirits
  whom they think to be above the Nature of Man.

Marquette was without doubt ignorant of the fact that the cross is the
sacred post, and the symbol of the fourth degree of the Mid[-e]/wiwin,
as will be fully explained in connection with that grade of the society.
The erroneous conclusion that the cross was erected as an evidence of
the adoption of Christianity, and possibly as a compliment to the
visitor, was a natural one on the part of the priest, but this same
symbol of the Mid[-e]/ Society had probably been erected and bedecked
with barbaric emblems and weapons months before anything was known of
him.

The result of personal investigations among the Ojibwa, conducted during
the years 1887, 1888 and 1889, are presented in the accompanying paper.
The information was obtained from a number of the chief Mid[-e]/ priests
living at Red Lake and White Earth reservations, as well as from members
of the society from other reservations, who visited the last named
locality during the three years. Special mention of the peculiarity of
the music recorded will be made at the proper place; and it may here be
said that in no instance was the use of colors detected, in any
birch-bark or other records or mnemonic songs, simply to heighten the
artistic effect; though the reader would be led by an examination of the
works of Schoolcraft to believe this to be a common practice. Col.
Garrick Mallery; U.S. Army, in a paper read before the Anthropological
Society of Washington, District of Columbia, in 1888, says, regarding
this subject:

  The general character of his voluminous publications has not been such
  as to assure modern critics of his accuracy, and the wonderful
  minuteness, as well as comprehension, attributed by him to the Ojibwa
  hieroglyphs has been generally regarded of late with suspicion. It was
  considered in the Bureau of Ethnology an important duty to ascertain
  how much of truth existed in these remarkable accounts, and for that
  purpose its pictographic specialists, myself and Dr. W. J. Hoffman as
  assistant, were last summer directed to proceed to the most favorable
  points in the present habitat of the tribe, namely, the northern
  region of Minnesota and Wisconsin, to ascertain how much was yet to be
  discovered.  *  *  *  The general results of the comparison of
  Schoolcraft's statements with what is now found shows that, in
  substance, he told the truth, but with much exaggeration and coloring.
  The word "coloring" is particularly appropriate, because, in his
  copious illustrations, various colors were used freely with apparent
  significance, whereas, in fact, the general rule in regard to the
  birch-bark rolls was that they were never colored at all; indeed, the
  bark was not adapted to coloration. The metaphorical coloring was also
  used by him in a manner which, to any thorough student of the Indian
  philosophy and religion, seems absurd. Metaphysical expressions are
  attached to some of the devices, or, as he calls them, symbols, which,
  could never have been entertained by a people in the stage of culture
  of the Ojibwa.


SHAMANS.

There are extant among the Ojibwa Indians three classes of mystery men,
termed respectively and in order of importance the Mid[-e]/, the
J[)e]s/sakk[-i]d/, and the W[^a]b[)e]n[-o]/, but before proceeding to
elaborate in detail the Society of the Mid[-e]/, known as the
Mid[-e]/wiwin, a brief description of the last two is necessary.

The term W[^a]b[)e]n[-o]/ has been explained by various intelligent
Indians as signifying "Men of the dawn," "Eastern men," etc. Their
profession is not thoroughly understood, and their number is so
extremely limited that but little information respecting them can be
obtained. Schoolcraft,[5] in referring to the several classes of
Shamans, says "there is a third form or rather modification of the
medawin,  *  *  *  the W[^a]b[)e]n[-o]/; a term denoting a kind of
midnight orgies, which is regarded as a corruption of the Meda." This
writer furthermore remarks[6] that "it is stated by judicious persons
among themselves to be of modern origin. They regard it as a degraded
form of the mysteries of the Meda."

    [Footnote 5: Information respecting the history, condition, and
    prospects of the Indian tribes of the United States. Philadelphia,
    1851, vol. 1, p. 319.]

    [Footnote 6: Ibid., p. 362.]

From personal investigation it has been ascertained that a
W[^a]b[)e]n[-o]/ does not affiliate with others of his class so as to
constitute a society, but indulges his pretensions individually. A
W[^a]b[)e]n[-o]/ is primarily prompted by dreams or visions which may
occur during his youth, for which purpose he leaves his village to fast
for an indefinite number of days. It is positively affirmed that evil
man/id[-o]s favor his desires, and apart from his general routine of
furnishing "hunting medicine," "love powders," etc., he pretends also to
practice medical magic. When a hunter has been successful through the
supposed assistance of the W[^a]b[)e]n[-o]/, he supplies the latter with
part of the game, when, in giving a feast to his tutelary daimon, the
W[^a]b[)e]n[-o]/ will invite a number of friends, but all who desire to
come are welcome. This feast is given at night; singing and dancing are
boisterously indulged in, and the W[^a]b[)e]n[-o]/, to sustain his
reputation, entertains his visitors with a further exhibition of his
skill. By the use of plants he is alleged to be enabled to take up and
handle with impunity red-hot stones and burning brands, and without
evincing the slightest discomfort it is said that he will bathe his
hands in boiling water, or even boiling maple sirup. On account of such
performances the general impression prevails among the Indians that the
W[^a]b[)e]n[-o]/ is a "dealer in fire," or "fire-handler." Such
exhibitions always terminate at the approach of day. The number of these
pretenders who are not members of the Mid[-e]/wiwin, is very limited;
for instance, there are at present but two or three at White Earth
Reservation and none at Leech Lake.

As a general rule, however, the W[^a]b[)e]n[-o]/ will seek entrance into
the Mid[-e]/wiwin when he becomes more of a specialist in the practice
of medical magic, incantations, and the exorcism of malevolent
man/id[-o]s, especially such as cause disease.

The J[)e]s/sakk[-i]d/ is a seer and prophet; though commonly designated
a "juggler," the Indians define him as a "revealer of hidden truths."
There is no association whatever between the members of this profession,
and each practices his art singly and alone whenever a demand is made
and the fee presented. As there is no association, so there is no
initiation by means of which one may become a J[)e]s/sakk[-i]d/. The
gift is believed to be given by the thunder god, or Animiki/, and then
only at long intervals and to a chosen few. The gift is received during
youth, when the fast is undertaken and when visions appear to the
individual. His renown depends upon his own audacity and the opinion of
the tribe. He is said to possess the power to look into futurity;
to become acquainted with the affairs and intentions of men; to
prognosticate the success or misfortune of hunters and warriors, as well
as other affairs of various individuals, and to call from any living
human being the soul, or, more strictly speaking, the shadow, thus
depriving the victim of reason, and even of life. His power consists in
invoking, and causing evil, while that of the Mid[-e]/ is to avert it;
he attempts at times to injure the Mid[-e]/ but the latter, by the aid
of his superior man/idos, becomes aware of, and averts such premeditated
injury. It sometimes happens that the demon possessing a patient is
discovered, but the Mid[-e]/ alone has the power to expel him. The
exorcism of demons is one of the chief pretensions of this personage,
and evil spirits are sometimes removed by sucking them through tubes,
and startling tales are told how the J[)e]s/sakk[-i]d/ can, in the
twinkling of an eye, disengage himself of the most complicated tying of
cords and ropes, etc. The lodge used by this class of men consists of
four poles planted in the ground, forming a square of three or four feet
and upward in diameter, around which are wrapped birch bark, robes, or
canvas in such a way as to form an upright cylinder. Communion is held
with the turtle, who is the most powerful man/id[-o] of the
J[)e]s/sakk[-i]d/, and through him, with numerous other malevolent
man/id[-o]s, especially the Animiki/, or thunder-bird. When the prophet
has seated himself within his lodge the structure begins to sway
violently from side to side, loud thumping noises are heard within,
denoting the arrival of man/id[-o]s, and numerous voices and laughter
are distinctly audible to those without. Questions may then be put to
the prophet and, if everything be favorable, the response is not long in
coming. In his notice of the J[)e]s/sakk[-i]d/, Schoolcraft affirms[7]
that "while he thus exercises the functions of a prophet, he is also a
member of the highest class of the fraternity of the Mid[^a]win--a
society of men who exercise the medical art on the principles of magic
and incantations." The fact is that there is not the slightest
connection between the practice of the J[)e]s/sakk[-i]d/ and that of the
Mid[-e]/wiwin, and it is seldom, if at all, that a Mid[-e]/ becomes a
J[)e]s/sakk[-i]d/, although the latter sometimes gains admission into
the Mid[-e]/wiwin, chiefly with the intention of strengthening his power
with his tribe.

    [Footnote 7: Op. cit., vol. 5, p. 423.]

The number of individuals of this class who are not members of the
Mid[-e]/wiwin is limited, though greater than that of the
W[^a]b[)e]n[-o]/. An idea of the proportion of numbers of the respective
classes may be formed by taking the case of Menomoni Indians, who are in
this respect upon the same plane as the Ojibwa. That tribe numbers about
fifteen hundred, the Mid[-e]/ Society consisting, in round numbers, of
one hundred members, and among the entire population there are but two
W[^a]b[)e]n[-o]/ and five J[)e]s/sakk[-i]d/.

It is evident that neither the W[^a]b[)e]n[-o]/ nor the
J[)e]s/sakk[-i]d/ confine themselves to the mnemonic songs which are
employed during their ceremonial performances, or even prepare them to
any extent. Such bark records as have been observed or recorded, even
after most careful research and examination extending over the field
seasons of three years, prove to have been the property of
W[^a]b[)e]n[-o]/ and J[)e]s/sakk[-i]d/, who were also Mid[-e]/. It is
probable that those who practice either of the first two forms of
ceremonies and nothing else are familiar with and may employ for their
own information certain mnemonic records; but they are limited to the
characteristic formulae of exorcism, as their practice varies and is
subject to changes according to circumstances and the requirements and
wants of the applicant when words are chanted to accord therewith.

Some examples of songs used by J[)e]s/sakk[-i]d/, after they have become
Mid[-e]/, will be given in the description of the several degrees of the
Mid[-e] 'wiwin.

There is still another class of persons termed
Mashk[-i]/k[)i]k[-e]/win[)i]n[)i], or herbalists, who are generally
denominated "medicine men," as the Ojibwa word implies. Their calling is
a simple one, and consists in knowing the mysterious properties of a
variety of plants, herbs, roots, and berries, which are revealed upon
application and for a fee. When there is an administration of a remedy
for a given complaint, based upon true scientific principles, it is only
in consequence of such practice having been acquired from the whites,
as it has usually been the custom of the Catholic Fathers to utilize
all ordinary and available remedies for the treatment of the common
disorders of life. Although these herbalists are aware that certain
plants or roots will produce a specified effect upon the human system,
they attribute the benefit to the fact that such remedies are
distasteful and injurious to the demons who are present in the system
and to whom the disease is attributed. Many of these herbalists are
found among women, also; and these, too, are generally members of the
Mid[-e]/wiwin. In Fig. 1 is shown an herbalist preparing a mixture.

  [Illustration: Fig. 1.--Herbalist preparing medicine and treating
  patient.]

The origin of the Mid[-e]/wiwin or Mid[-e]/ Society, commonly, though
erroneously, termed Grand Medicine Society, is buried in obscurity. In
the Jesuit Relations, as early as 1642, frequent reference is made to
sorcerers, jugglers, and persons whose faith, influence, and practices
are dependent upon the assistance of "Manitous," or mysterious spirits;
though, as there is no discrimination made between these different
professors of magic, it is difficult positively to determine which of
the several classes were met with at that early day. It is probable that
the J[)e]s/sakk[-i]d/, or juggler, and the Mid[-e]/, or Shaman, were
referred to.

The Mid[-e]/, in the true sense of the word, is a Shaman, though he has
by various authors been termed powwow, medicine man, priest, seer,
prophet, etc. Among the Ojibwa the office is not hereditary; but among
the Menomoni a curious custom exists, by which some one is selected to
fill the vacancy one year after the death of a Shaman. Whether a similar
practice prevailed among other tribes of the Algonkian linguistic stock
can be ascertained only by similar research among the tribes
constituting that stock.

Among the Ojibwa, however, a substitute is sometimes taken to fill the
place of one who has been prepared to receive the first degree of the
Mid[-e]/wiwin, or Society of the Mid[-e]/, but who is removed by death
before the proper initiation has been conferred. This occurs when a
young man dies, in which case his father or mother may be accepted as a
substitute. This will be explained in more detail under the caption of
Dzhibai/ Mid[-e]/wig[^a]n or "Ghost Lodge," a collateral branch of the
Mid[-e]/wiwin.

As I shall have occasion to refer to the work of the late Mr. W. W.
Warren, a few words respecting him will not be inappropriate. Mr. Warren
was an Ojibwa mixed blood, of good education, and later a member of the
legislature of Minnesota. His work, entiled "History of the Ojibwa
Nation," was published in Vol. V of the Collections of the Minnesota
Historical Society, St. Paul, 1885, and edited by Dr. E. D. Neill. Mr.
Warren's work is the result of the labor of a lifetime among his own
people, and, had he lived, he would undoubtedly have added much to the
historical material of which the printed volume chiefly consists. His
manuscript was completed about the year 1852, and he died the following
year. In speaking of the Society of the Mid[-e]/,[8] he says:

  The grand rite of Me-da-we-win (or, as we have learned to term it,
  "Grand Medicine,") and the beliefs incorporated therein, are not yet
  fully understood by the whites. This important custom is still
  shrouded in mystery even to my own eyes, though I have taken much
  pains to inquire and made use of every advantage possessed by speaking
  their language perfectly, being related to them, possessing their
  friendship and intimate confidence has given me, and yet I frankly
  acknowledge that I stand as yet, as it were, on the threshold of the
  Me-da-we lodge. I believe, however, that I have obtained full as much
  and more general and true information on this matter than any other
  person who has written on the subject, not excepting a great and
  standard author, who, to the surprise of many who know the Ojibways
  well, has boldly asserted in one of his works that he has been
  regularly initiated into the mysteries of this rite, and is a member
  of the Me-da-we Society. This is certainly an assertion hard to
  believe in the Indian country; and when the old initiators or Indian
  priests are told of it they shake their heads in incredulity that a
  white man should ever have been allowed _in truth_ to become a member
  of their Me-da-we lodge.

  An entrance into the lodge itself, while the ceremonies are being
  enacted, has sometimes been granted through courtesy; though this does
  not initiate a person into the mysteries of the creed, nor does it
  make him a member of the Society.

    [Footnote 8: Op. cit., pp. 65, 66.]

These remarks pertaining to the pretensions of "a great and standard
authority" have reference to Mr. Schoolcraft, who among numerous other
