fleet was prepared, and Nicias, Lam'a-chus, and Alcibiades were chosen
generals of the expedition. The fleet was on the point of sailing out of
the Piraeus, when the Athenians found out that all the statues of their
god Her'mes, which were used as boundary marks and milestones, had been
shamefully broken.

The excited people assembled on the market place to discuss this event;
and all cried loudly against it, for the statues were considered sacred,
as they represented a god. Alcibiades' enemies--and he had a number,
although he was so popular--now stepped forward, and declared that he
had done it after the banquet which he had given to celebrate his
departure.

The young man denied having broken the statues, and asked that his
trial might take place at once, so that he might prove his innocence
before he started out; but, in spite of this urgent request, it was
postponed, and he was forced to depart with this cloud hanging over him.




LXVI. ALCIBIADES IN DISGRACE.


Alcibiades had no sooner sailed, however, than his enemies, grown
bolder, began to talk louder, and soon convinced the people of his
guilt. In their wrath, the Athenians now sent a messenger to Sicily to
overtake him, and bid him return to Athens to be tried.

His friends, seeing the excitement of the people, and fearing that they
would condemn him in anger, sent word to him not to return, but to wait
until the popular fury had had time to blow over.

In obedience to this advice, Alcibiades left the fleet, and, instead of
going to Athens, went straight to Sparta, where he took up his abode.
Here the changeable youth adopted the Spartan dress, lived with the
utmost simplicity and frugality, and even used the laconic mode of
speech.

As he was tall and strong, and a very good athlete, he soon won the
admiration of the Spartans, and made many friends. During his stay here,
he heard that he had been tried at Athens, although absent, found guilty
of sacrilege, and even sentenced to death.

This ingratitude on the part of his people so angered Alcibiades, that
he told the Spartans all the Athenian plans, and showed how to upset
them. By his advice, the Spartans sent aid to the Greeks in Sicily,
helped them to resist the Athenian attack, and even captured both
generals and seven thousand soldiers, who were put to death.

The Spartans, still under Alcibiades' instructions, now took and
fortified the small town of Dec-e-le'a, only twelve miles from Athens.
Here they kept an armed force, ready to spring out at any minute and
molest the Athenians, who thus found themselves in a continual state of
warfare and insecurity.

The small cities and islands which the Athenians had won by force now
seized this favorable opportunity to revolt; and the Persians, at
Alcibiades' invitation, joined them, and again began to wage war with
the proud city.

[Illustration: Alcibiades.]

The Athenians were almost in despair. They had enemies on all sides, and
were also worried by the quarrels of aristocrats and democrats within
the city. These two political parties were now so opposed to each other,
that nothing could make them friends.

The army, longing for action, and without a leader, finally took matters
into their own hands. They recalled Alcibiades, and asked him to help
them. The young man, who was generous and kind-hearted, immediately
responded to this appeal; and, now that it was too late, he repented of
what he had done, and began to do all in his power to defeat the enemy
he had aroused.

By his eloquence and skill, Alcibiades finally succeeded in winning the
Persians over to side with the Athenians, and to fight against the
Spartans; but all his efforts to make up for the past were vain. His
treachery had ruined Athens; and when he led the troops against the
Spartans, the Athenians were completely defeated.




LXVII. DEATH OF ALCIBIADES.


Afraid to return to his native city, where he knew the people would
blame him for their sufferings, Alcibiades fled. After roaming about for
some time, he took refuge in a castle which he had built on the
Cher-so-ne'sus.

From the height upon which the castle stood, Alcibiades could overlook
the sea on both sides; and he watched the Spartan and Athenian fleets,
which, unknown to each other, had come to anchor very near him. He soon
discovered that the Spartans had become aware of the presence of the
Athenians, and were preparing to surprise them.

He therefore left his castle, and, at the risk of his life, went down to
warn the Athenians of the coming danger. They, however, treated his
warning with scorn, and bade him return to his castle, and remember
that he no longer had any right to interfere in their affairs.

From the top of his promontory, Alcibiades saw the complete destruction
of the Athenian fleet. Only a few men managed to escape to his castle
for shelter; while a single ship sailed in haste to Athens, to report
the defeat, and warn the people of the coming danger.

A few days later the victorious Spartan army marched unchallenged into
Athens, for there were now no fighting men left to oppose them. The
Spartans said that Athens must now obey them in all things; and, to
humiliate the people, they tore down the Long Walls to the sound of
joyful music on the anniversary of the glorious victory of Salamis.

Thus ended the Peloponnesian War, which, as you have seen, began shortly
before the death of Pericles. From this time on, the fame of Athens was
due mostly to her literature and art.

By order of the Spartans, Solon's laws were set aside, and thirty men
were chosen to govern the city. These rulers proved so stern and cruel,
that they were soon known as the Thirty Tyrants, and were hated by every
one.

The Athenians suffered so sorely under the government which the Spartans
had thus forced upon them, that they soon began to long for the return
of Alcibiades, who, whatever his faults, was always generous.

When the Thirty Tyrants and the Spartans learned of this feeling, they
were afraid that the Athenians would summon Alcibiades, so they bribed
the Persian governor to put him to death.

A party of murderers went to his house at night, and set it afire.
Alcibiades, waking up suddenly, tried to escape with his household; but
no sooner had he reached the door than he found himself surrounded by
enemies.

Alcibiades quickly wrapped his cloak around his left arm to serve as a
shield, and, seizing his sword in his right hand, rushed manfully out
upon his foes. The Persians, frightened at his approach, fled in haste;
but they came to a stop at a safe distance, and flung so many stones and
spears at him that he soon fell dead from the blows.

His body was left where it had fallen, and was found by his wife, who
loved him dearly in spite of all his faults. She tenderly wrapped it up
in her own mantle, and had it buried not far from where it lay.

Thus ended the life of the brilliant Alcibiades, who died at the age of
forty, far away from his native land, and from the people whose idol he
had once been, but whom he had ruined by his vanity.




LXVIII. THE OVERTHROW OF THE THIRTY TYRANTS.


Although the Thirty Tyrants ruled in Athens but a short time, they
condemned fifteen hundred men to death, and drove many good citizens
into exile. During their brief period of authority they even found fault
with Socrates, and would have liked to kill him, though he was the
greatest philosopher the world has ever known.

As the rule of the Thirty Tyrants had been forced upon them by the
victorious Spartans, the Athenians soon resolved to get rid of them.
Among the good citizens whom these cruel rulers had driven away into
exile, was Thras-y-bu'lus, who was a real patriot.

He had seen the sufferings of the Athenians, and his sympathy had been
roused. So he began plotting against the Thirty Tyrants, assembled a few
brave men, entered the city, drove out the Spartans, and overturned
their government when they least expected it.

Some years later the Athenians rebuilt the Long Walls, which Ly-san'der,
the Spartan general, had torn down to the sound of festive music. They
were so glad to be rid of the cruel tyrants, that they erected statues
in honor of Thrasybulus, their deliverer, and sang songs in his praise
at all their public festivals.

The Spartans, in the mean while, had been changing rapidly for the
worse, for the defeat of the Athenians had filled their hearts with
pride, and had made them fancy they were the bravest and greatest people
on earth. Such conceit is always harmful.

Lysander, in capturing Athens and the smaller towns of Attica, had won
much booty, which was all sent to Sparta. The ephors refused at first to
accept or distribute this gold, saying that the love of wealth was the
root of all evil; but they finally decided to use it for the improvement
of their city.

Lysander himself was as noble a man as he was a good general, and kept
none of the booty for his own use. On the contrary, he came back to
Sparta so poor, that, when he died, the city had to pay his funeral
expenses.

The Spartans felt so grateful for the services which he had rendered
them, that they not only gave him a fine burial, but also gave marriage
portions to his daughters, and helped them to get good husbands.




LXIX. ACCUSATION OF SOCRATES.


Socrates, as you know, was one of the best and gentlest of men, yet he
had many enemies. These were principally the people who were jealous of
him and of his renown for great wisdom; for his reputation was so well
established, that the oracle at Delphi, when consulted, replied that the
most learned man in Greece was Socrates.

Although Socrates was so wise and good and gentle, he was not at all
conceited, and showed his wisdom by never pretending to know what he did
not know, and by his readiness to learn anything new, provided one could
prove it to be true.

Among the noted Athenians of this time was Aristophanes, a writer of
comedies or funny plays. He was so witty that his comedies are still
admired almost as much as when they were played in the Theater of
Dionysus for the amusement of the people.

Like most funny men, Aristophanes liked to turn everything into
ridicule. He had often seen Socrates and Alcibiades walking through the
streets of Athens, and was greatly amused at the contrast they
presented.

Now, Aristophanes, with all his cleverness, was not always just; and
while his ridicule sometimes did good, at other times it did a great
deal of harm. He soon learned to dislike Alcibiades; but he saw how
dearly the people loved the young man, and fancied that his faults must
be owing to the bad advice of his teacher. Such was not the case, for
Socrates had tried to bring out all the good in his pupil. Alcibiades'
pride, insolence, and treachery were rather the result of the constant
flattery to which he had been exposed on the part of those who claimed
to be his friends.

Aristophanes disliked Alcibiades so much that he soon wrote a comedy
called "The Clouds," in which he made fun of him. Of course, he did not
call the people in the play by their real names; but the hero was a
good-for-nothing young man, who, advised by his teacher, bought fast
horses, ran his father into debt, cheated everybody, and treated even
the gods with disrespect.

As the actors who took part in this comedy dressed and acted as nearly
as possible like Alcibiades and Socrates, you can imagine that the play,
which was very comical and clever, made the Athenians roar with
laughter.

Everybody talked about it, repeated the best jokes, and went again and
again to see and laugh over it. We are told that Socrates went there
himself one day; and, when asked why he had come, he quietly said, "I
came to find out whether, among all the faults of which I am accused,
there may not be some that I can correct."

You see, the philosopher knew that it was never too late to mend, and
fully intended to be as perfect as possible. He knew, of course, that he
could not straighten his crooked nose or make his face good-looking,
but he hoped to find some way of improving his character.

"The Clouds" amused the Athenians for about twenty years; and when
Alcibiades turned traitor, and caused the ruin of his country, the
people still went to see it. In their anger against Alcibiades, they
began to think that perhaps Aristophanes was right, and that the youth
they had once loved so dearly would never have turned out so badly had
he not been influenced for evil.

As the teacher in the play was blamed for all the wrongdoing of his
pupil, so Socrates was now accused by the Athenians of ruining
Alcibiades. Little by little the philosopher's enemies became so bold
that they finally made up their minds to get rid of him. As he was quite
innocent, and as there was no other excuse for dragging him before the
Tribunal, they finally charged him with giving bad advice to young men,
and speaking ill of the gods.




LXX. DEATH OF SOCRATES.


The false accusation made against Socrates by his enemies soon had the
desired effect, for the Tribunal gave orders for his arrest and trial.
The philosopher, sure of his innocence, came before his judges, and
calmly answered their questions.

He told them he had never turned the gods into ridicule, as he knew it
was wrong to make fun of anything which others deemed sacred. Then, as
they still further pressed him to explain his views, he confessed that
he believed there was a God greater and better than any they worshiped.

As to teaching the young men anything which could do them harm, he said
it was quite impossible; for he had ever told them that they should be
as good, virtuous, and helpful as they could, which was surely not
wrong.

Socrates gave noble answers to all their questions; but the judges,
blinded with prejudice, believed the lying charges of his enemies, which
Socrates scorned to contradict. The philosopher's friends begged him to
use his eloquence to defend himself and confound his accusers; but he
calmly refused, saying, "My whole life and teaching is the only
contradiction, and the best defense I can offer."

Socrates, as you have seen, was really one of the best men that ever
lived, and, without having ever heard of the true God, he still believed
in him. Nearly four centuries before the coming of Christ, when people
believed in revenge, he preached the doctrine of "Love one another" and
"Do good to them that hate you."

