
"Now, out on thee, Adeline! What are riches and renown but the means to
power! And for strife, the shield of warriors was my cradle--pray the
saints it be my bier! These wild and wizard extremes of life--from the
bower to the tent--from the cavern to the palace--today a wandering
exile, tomorrow the equal of kings--make the true element of the
chivalry of my Norman sires. Normandy taught me war, and sweet Provence
love. Kiss me, dear Adeline; and now let thy handmaids attire thee.
Forget not thy lute, sweet one. We will rouse the echoes with the songs
of Provence."

The ductile temper of Adeline yielded easily to the gaiety of her lord;
and the party soon sallied from the castle towards the spot in which
Montreal had designed their resting-place during the heats of day. But
already prepared for all surprise, the castle was left strictly guarded,
and besides the domestic servitors of the castle, a detachment of ten
soldiers, completely armed, accompanied the lovers. Montreal himself
wore his corselet, and his squires followed with his helmet and lance.
Beyond the narrow defile at the base of the castle, the road at that day
opened into a broad patch of verdure, circled on all sides, save that
open to the sea, by wood, interspersed with myrtle and orange, and
a wilderness of odorous shrubs. In this space, and sheltered by the
broad-spreading and classic fagus (so improperly translated into the
English "beech"), a gay pavilion was prepared, which commanded the
view of the sparkling sea;--shaded from the sun, but open to the gentle
breeze. This was poor Adeline's favourite recreation, if recreation it
might be called. She rejoiced to escape from the gloomy walls of her
castellated prison, and to enjoy the sunshine and the sweets of that
voluptuous climate without the fatigue which of late all exercise
occasioned her. It was a gallantry on the part of Montreal, who foresaw
how short an interval might elapse before the troops of Rienzi besieged
his walls; and who was himself no less at home in the bower than in the
field.

As they reclined within the pavilion--the lover and his lady,--of the
attendants without, some lounged idly on the beach; some prepared the
awning of a pleasure-boat against the decline of the sun; some, in a
ruder tent, out of sight in the wood, arranged the mid-day repast; while
the strings of the lute, touched by Montreal himself with a careless
skill, gave their music to the dreamy stillness of the noon.

While thus employed, one of Montreal's scouts arrived breathless and
heated at the tent.

"Captain," said he, "a company of thirty lances completely armed, with
a long retinue of squires and pages, have just quitted Terracina. Their
banners bear the two-fold insignia of Rome and the Colonna."

"Ho!" said Montreal, gaily, "such a troop is a welcome addition to our
company; send our squire hither."

The squire appeared.

"Hie thee on thy steed towards the procession thou wilt meet with in the
pass, (nay, sweet lady mine, no forbiddal!) seek the chief, and say that
the good Knight Walter de Montreal sends him greeting, and prays him,
in passing our proper territory, to rest awhile with us a welcome guest;
and--stay,--add, that if to while an hour or so in gentle pastime be
acceptable to him, Walter de Montreal would rejoice to break a lance
with him, or any knight in his train, in honour of our respective
ladies. Hie thee quick!"

"Walter, Walter," began Adeline, who had that keen and delicate
sensitiveness to her situation, which her reckless lord often wantonly
forgot; "Walter, dear Walter, canst thou think it honour to--"

"Hush thee, sweet Fleur de lis! Thou hast not seen pastime this many
a day; I long to convince thee that thou art still the fairest lady in
Italy--ay, and of Christendom. But these Italians are craven knights,
and thou needst not fear that my proffer will be accepted. But in truth,
lady mine, I rejoice for graver objects, that chance throws a Roman
noble, perhaps a Colonna, in my way;--women understand not these
matters; and aught concerning Rome touches us home at this moment."

With that the Knight frowned, as was his wont in thought, and Adeline
ventured to say no more, but retired to the interior division of the
pavilion.

Meanwhile the squire approached the procession that had now reached the
middle of the pass. And a stately and gallant company it was:--if the
complete harness of the soldiery seemed to attest a warlike purpose,
it was contradicted on the other hand by a numerous train of unarmed
squires and pages gorgeously attired, while the splendid blazon of
two heralds preceding the standard-bearers, proclaimed their object
as peaceful, and their path as sacred. It required but a glance at the
company to tell the leader. Arrayed in a breast-plate of steel, wrought
profusely with gold arabesques, over which was a mantle of dark green
velvet, bordered with pearls, while above his long dark locks waved a
black ostrich plume in a high Macedonian cap, such as, I believe, is now
worn by the Grand Master of the order of St. Constantine, rode in the
front of the party, a young cavalier, distinguished from his immediate
comrades, partly by his graceful presence and partly by his splendid
dress.

The squire approached respectfully, and dismounting, delivered himself
of his charge.

The young cavalier smiled, as he answered, "Bear back to Sir Walter de
Montreal the greeting of Adrian Colonna, Baron di Castello, and say,
that the solemn object of my present journey will scarce permit me to
encounter the formidable lance of so celebrated a knight; and I regret
this the more, inasmuch as I may not yield to any dame the palm of my
liege lady's beauty. I must live in hope of a happier occasion. For
the rest, I will cheerfully abide for some few hours the guest of so
courteous a host."

The squire bowed low. "My master," said he, hesitatingly, "will grieve
much to miss so noble an opponent. But my message refers to all this
knightly and gallant train; and if the Lord Adrian di Castello deems
himself forbidden the joust by the object of his present journey, surely
one of his comrades will be his proxy with my master."

Out and quickly spoke a young noble by the side of Adrian, Riccardo
Annibaldi, who afterwards did good service both to the Tribune and to
Rome, and whose valour brought him, in later life, to an untimely end.

"By the Lord Adrian's permission," cried he, "I will break a lance
with--"

"Hush! Annibaldi," interrupted Adrian. "And you, Sir Squire, know, that
Adrian di Castello permits no proxy in arms. Avise the Knight of St.
John that we accept his hospitality, and if, after some converse on
graver matters, he should still desire so light an entertainment, I will
forget that I am the ambassador to Naples, and remember only that I am a
Knight of the Empire. You have your answer."

The squire with much ceremony made his obeisance, remounted his steed,
and returned in a half-gallop to his master.

"Forgive me, dear Annibaldi," said Adrian, "that I balked your valour;
and believe me that I never more longed to break a lance against any man
than I do against this boasting Frenchman. But bethink you, that though
to us, brought up in the dainty laws of chivalry, Walter de Montreal
is the famous Knight of Provence, to the Tribune of Rome, whose grave
mission we now fulfil, he is but the mercenary captain of a Free
Company. Grievously in his eyes should we sully our dignity by so wanton
and irrelevant a holiday conflict with a declared and professional
brigand."

"For all that," said Annibaldi, "the brigand ought not to boast that a
Roman knight shunned a Provencal lance."

"Cease, I pray thee!" said Adrian, impatiently. In fact, the young
Colonna, already chafed bitterly against his discreet and dignified
rejection of Montreal's proffer, and recollecting with much pique
the disparaging manner in which the Provencal had spoken of the Roman
chivalry, as well as a certain tone of superiority, which in all warlike
matters Montreal had assumed over him,--he now felt his cheek burn, and
his lip quiver. Highly skilled in the martial accomplishments of his
time, he had a natural and excusable desire to prove that he was at
least no unworthy antagonist even of the best lance in Italy: and, added
to this, the gallantry of the age made him feel it a sort of treason to
his mistress to forego any means of asserting her perfections.

It was, therefore, with considerable irritation that Adrian, as the
pavilion of Montreal became visible, perceived the squire returning
to him. And the reader will judge how much this was increased when the
latter, once more dismounting, accosted him thus:

"My master, the Knight of St. John, on hearing the courteous answer of
the Lord Adrian di Castello, bids me say, that lest the graver converse
the Lord Adrian refers to should mar gentle and friendly sport, he
ventures respectfully to suggest, that the tilt should preface the
converse. The sod before the tent is so soft and smooth, that even a
fall could be attended with no danger to knight or steed."

"By our Lady!" cried Adrian and Annibaldi in a breath, "but thy last
words are discourteous; and" (proceeded Adrian, recovering himself)
"since thy master will have it so, let him look to his horse's girths. I
will not gainsay his fancy."

Montreal, who had thus insisted upon the exhibition, partly, it may
be, from the gay and ruffling bravado, common still amongst his brave
countrymen; partly because he was curious of exhibiting before those who
might soon be his open foes his singular and unrivalled address in arms,
was yet more moved to it on learning the name of the leader of the
Roman Company; for his vain and haughty spirit, however it had
disguised resentment at the time, had by no means forgiven certain
warm expressions of Adrian in the palace of Stephen Colonna, and in the
unfortunate journey to Corneto. While Adrian, halting at the entrance of
the defile, aided by his squires, indignantly, but carefully, indued the
rest of his armour, and saw, himself, to the girths, stirrup-leathers,
and various buckles in the caparison of his noble charger, Montreal in
great glee kissed his lady, who, though too soft to be angry, was deeply
vexed, (and yet her vexation half forgotten in fear for his safety,)
snatched up her scarf of blue, which he threw over his breastplate, and
completed his array with the indifference of a man certain of victory.
He was destined, however, to one disadvantage, and that the greatest;
his armour and lance had been brought from the castle--not his warhorse.
His palfrey was too slight to bear the great weight of his armour, nor
amongst his troop was there one horse that for power and bone could
match with Adrian's. He chose, however, the strongest that was at hand,
and a loud shout from his wild followers testified their admiration when
he sprung unaided from the ground into the saddle--a rare and difficult
feat of agility in a man completely arrayed in the ponderous armour
which issued at that day from the forges of Milan, and was worn far more
weighty in Italy than any other part of Europe. While both companies
grouped slowly, and mingled in a kind of circle round the green turf,
and the Roman heralds, with bustling importance, attempted to marshal
the spectators into order, Montreal rode his charger round the sward,
forcing it into various caracoles, and exhibiting, with the vanity that
belonged to him, his exquisite and practised horsemanship.

At length, Adrian, his visor down, rode slowly into the green space,
amidst the cheers of his party. The two Knights, at either end, gravely
fronted each other; they made the courtesies with their lances, which,
in friendly and sportive encounters, were customary; and, as they thus
paused for the signal of encounter, the Italians trembled for the honour
of their chief: Montreal's stately height and girth of chest forming a
strong contrast, even in armour, to the form of his opponent, which was
rather under the middle standard, and though firmly knit, slightly and
slenderly built. But to that perfection was skill in arms brought in
those times, that great strength and size were far from being either
the absolute requisites, or even the usual attributes, of the more
celebrated knights; in fact, so much was effected by the power and the
management of the steed, that a light weight in the rider was often
rather to his advantage than his prejudice: and, even at a later period,
the most accomplished victors in the tourney, the French Bayard and the
English Sydney, were far from remarkable either for bulk or stature.

Whatever the superiority of Montreal in physical power, was, in much,
counterbalanced by the inferiority of his horse, which, though a
thick-built and strong Calabrian, had neither the blood, bone, nor
practised discipline of the northern charger of the Roman. The shining
coat of the latter, coal black, was set off by a scarlet cloth wrought
in gold; the neck and shoulders were clad in scales of mail; and from
the forehead projected a long point, like the horn of an unicorn, while
on its crest waved a tall plume of scarlet and white feathers. As the
mission of Adrian to Naples was that of pomp and ceremony to a court of
great splendour, so his array and retinue were befitting the occasion
and the passion for show that belonged to the time; and the very bridle
of his horse, which was three inches broad, was decorated with gold, and
even jewels. The Knight himself was clad in mail, which had tested the
finest art of the celebrated Ludovico of Milan; and, altogether, his
appearance was unusually gallant and splendid, and seemed still more so
beside the plain but brightly polished and artfully flexile armour of
Montreal, (adorned only with his lady's scarf,) and the common and rude
mail of his charger. This contrast, however, was not welcome to the
Provencal, whose vanity was especially indulged in warlike equipments;
and who, had he foreseen the "pastime" that awaited him, would have
outshone even the Colonna.

The trumpeters of either party gave a short blast--the Knights remained
erect as statues of iron; a second, and each slightly bent over his
saddle-bow; a third, and with spears couched, slackened reins, and
at full speed, on they rushed, and fiercely they met midway. With the
reckless arrogance which belonged to him, Montreal had imagined, that at
the first touch of his lance Adrian would have been unhorsed; but to his
great surprise the young Roman remained firm, and amidst the shouts of
his party, passed on to the other end of the lists. Montreal himself was
rudely shaken, but lost neither seat nor stirrup.

"This can be no carpet knight," muttered Montreal between his teeth,
as, this time, he summoned all his skill for a second encounter; while
Adrian, aware of the great superiority of his charger, resolved to bring
it to bear against his opponent. Accordingly, when the Knights again
rushed forward, Adrian, covering himself well with his buckler, directed
his care less against the combatant, whom he felt no lance wielded by
mortal hand was likely to dislodge, than against the less noble animal
he bestrode. The shock of Montreal's charge was like an avalanche--his
lance shivered into a thousand pieces, Adrian lost both stirrups, and
but for the strong iron bows which guarded the saddle in front and rear,
would have been fairly unhorsed; as it was, he was almost doubled back
by the encounter, and his ears rung and his eyes reeled, so that for a
moment or two he almost lost all consciousness. But his steed had well
repaid its nurture and discipline. Just as the combatants closed, the
animal, rearing on high, pressed forward with its mighty crest against
its opponent with a force so irresistible as to drive back Montreal's
horse several paces: while Adrian's lance, poised with exquisite skill,
striking against the Provencal's helmet, somewhat rudely diverted the
Knight's attention for the moment from his rein. Montreal, drawing the
curb too tightly in the suddenness of his recovery, the horse reared
on end; and, receiving at that instant, full upon his breastplate, the
sharp horn and mailed crest of Adrian's charger--fell back over its
rider upon the sward. Montreal disencumbered himself in great rage and
shame, as a faint cry from his pavilion reached his ear, and redoubled
his mortification. He rose with a lightness which astonished the
beholders; for so heavy was the armour worn at that day, that few
knights once stretched upon the ground could rise without assistance;
and drawing his sword, cried out fiercely--"On foot, on foot!--the fall
was not mine, but this accursed beast's, that I must needs for my sins
raise to the rank of a charger. Come on--"

"Nay, Sir Knight," said Adrian, drawing off his gauntlets and unbuckling
his helmet, which he threw on the ground, "I come to thee a guest and
a friend; but to fight on foot is the encounter of mortal foes. Did I
accept thy offer, my defeat would but stain thy knighthood."

Montreal, whose passion had beguiled him for the moment, sullenly
acquiesced in this reasoning. Adrian hastened to soothe his antagonist.
"For the rest," said he, "I cannot pretend to the prize. Your lance lost
me my stirrups--mine left you unshaken. You say right; the defeat, if
any, was that of your steed."

"We may meet again when I am more equally horsed," said Montreal, still
chafing.

"Now, our Lady forbid!" exclaimed Adrian, with so devout an earnestness
that the bystanders could not refrain from laughing; and even Montreal
grimly and half-reluctantly, joined in the merriment. The courtesy of
his foe, however, conciliated and touched the more frank and soldierly
qualities of his nature, and composing himself, he replied:--

"Signor di Castello, I rest your debtor for a courtesy that I have but
little imitated. Howbeit, if thou wouldst bind me to thee for ever, thou
wilt suffer me to send for my own charger, and afford me a chance to
retrieve mine honour. With that steed, or with one equal to thine, which
seems to me of the English breed, I will gage all I possess, lands,
castle, and gold, sword and spurs, to maintain this pass, one by one,
against all thy train."

Fortunately, perhaps, for Adrian, ere he could reply, Riccardo Annibaldi
cried, with great warmth, "Sir Knight, I have with me two steeds well
practised in the tourney; take thy choice, and accept in me a champion
of the Roman against the French chivalry;--there is my gage."

"Signor," replied Montreal, with ill-suppressed delight, "thy proffer
shows so gallant and free a spirit, that it were foul sin in me to balk
it. I accept thy gage, and whichever of thy steeds thou rejectest, in
God's name bring it hither, and let us waste no words before action."

Adrian, who felt that hitherto the Romans had been more favoured by
fortune than merit, vainly endeavoured to prevent this second hazard.
But Annibaldi was greatly chafed, and his high rank rendered it
impolitic in Adrian to offend him by peremptory prohibition; the
Colonna reluctantly, therefore, yielded his assent to the engagement.
Annibaldi's steeds were led to the spot, the one a noble roan, the other
a bay, of somewhat less breeding and bone, but still of great strength
and price. Montreal finding the choice pressed upon him, gallantly
selected the latter and less excellent.

Annibaldi was soon arrayed for the encounter, and Adrian gave the word
to the trumpeters. The Roman was of a stature almost equal to that of
Montreal, and though some years younger, seemed, in his armour, nearly
of the same thews and girth, so that the present antagonists appeared
at the first glance more evenly matched than the last. But this time
Montreal, well horsed, inspired to the utmost by shame and pride,
felt himself a match for an army; and he met the young Baron with
such prowess, that while the very plume on his casque seemed scarcely
stirred, the Italian was thrown several paces from his steed, and it was
not till some moments after his visor was removed by his squires that
he recovered his senses. This event restored Montreal to all his natural
gaiety of humour, and effectually raised the spirits of his followers,
who had felt much humbled by the previous encounter.

He himself assisted Annibaldi to rise with great courtesy, and a
profusion of compliments, which the proud Roman took in stern silence,
and then led the way to the pavilion, loudly ordering the banquet to be
spread. Annibaldi, however, loitered behind, and Adrian, who penetrated
his thoughts, and who saw that over their cups a quarrel between
the Provencal and his friend was likely to ensue, drawing him aside,
said:--"Methinks, dear Annibaldi, it would be better if you, with the
chief of our following, were to proceed onward to Fondi, where I will
join you at sunset. My squires, and some eight lances, will suffice for
my safeguard here; and, to say truth, I desire a few private words
with our strange host, in the hope that he may be peaceably induced
to withdraw from hence without the help of our Roman troops, who have
enough elsewhere to feed their valour."

Annibaldi pressed his companion's hand: "I understand thee," he replied
with a slight blush, "and, indeed, I could but ill brook the complacent
triumph of the barbarian. I accept thy offer."



Chapter 3.III. The Conversation between the Roman and the
Provencal--Adeline's History--the Moonlit Sea--the Lute and the Song.

As soon as Annibaldi, with the greater part of the retinue, was gone,
Adrian, divesting himself of his heavy greaves, entered alone the
pavilion of the Knight of St. John. Montreal had already doffed all his
armour, save the breastplate, and he now stepped forward to welcome his
guest with the winning and easy grace which better suited his birth
than his profession. He received Adrian's excuses for the absence of
Annibaldi and the other knights of his train with a smile which seemed
to prove how readily he divined the cause, and conducted him to the
other and more private division of the pavilion in which the repast
(rendered acceptable by the late exercise of guest and host) was
prepared; and here Adrian for the first time discovered Adeline. Long
inurement to the various and roving life of her lover, joined to a
certain pride which she derived from conscious, though forfeited, rank,
gave to the outward manner of that beautiful lady an ease and freedom
which often concealed, even from Montreal, her sensitiveness to her
unhappy situation. At times, indeed, when alone with Montreal, whom she
loved with all the devotion of romance, she was sensible only to the
charm of a presence which consoled her for all things; but in his
frequent absence, or on the admission of any stranger, the illusion
vanished--the reality returned. Poor lady! Nature had not formed,
education had not reared, habit had not reconciled, her to the breath of
shame!

The young Colonna was much struck by her beauty, and more by her gentle
and highborn grace. Like her lord she appeared younger than she was;
time seemed to spare a bloom which an experienced eye might have told
was destined to an early grave; and there was something almost girlish
in the lightness of her form--the braided luxuriance of her rich auburn
hair, and the colour that went and came, not only with every moment,
but almost with every word. The contrast between her and Montreal
became them both--it was the contrast of devoted reliance and protecting
strength: each looked fairer in the presence of the other: and as Adrian
sate down to the well-laden board, he thought he had never seen a pair
more formed for the poetic legends of their native Troubadours.

Montreal conversed gaily upon a thousand matters--pressed the wine
flasks--and selected for his guest the most delicate portions of the
delicious spicola of the neighbouring sea, and the rich flesh of the
wild boar of the Pontine Marshes.

"Tell me," said Montreal, as their hunger was now appeased--"tell me,
noble Adrian, how fares your kinsman, Signor Stephen? A brave old man
for his years."

"He bears him as the youngest of us," answered Adrian.

"Late events must have shocked him a little," said Montreal, with an
arch smile. "Ah, you look grave--yet commend my foresight;--I was the
first who prophesied to thy kinsman the rise of Cola di Rienzi; he seems
a great man--never more great than in conciliating the Colonna and the
Orsini."

"The Tribune," returned Adrian, evasively, "is certainly a man of
extraordinary genius. And now, seeing him command, my only wonder is how
he ever brooked to obey--majesty seems a very part of him."

"Men who win power, easily put on its harness, dignity," answered
Montreal; "and if I hear aright--(pledge me to your lady's health)--the
Tribune, if not himself nobly born will soon be nobly connected."

"He is already married to a Raselli, an old Roman house," replied
Adrian.

"You evade my pursuit,--Le doulx soupir! le doulx soupir! as the old
Cabestan has it"--said Montreal, laughing. "Well, you have pledged me
one cup to your lady, pledge another to the fair Irene, the Tribune's
sister--always provided they two are not one.--You smile and shake your
head."

"I do not disguise from you, Sir Knight," answered Adrian, "that when my
present embassy is over, I trust the alliance between the Tribune and a
Colonna will go far towards the benefit of both."

"I have heard rightly, then," said Montreal, in a grave and thoughtful
tone. "Rienzi's power must, indeed, be great."

"Of that my mission is a proof. Are you aware, Signor de Montreal, that
Louis, King of Hungary--"

"How! what of him?"

"Has referred the decision of the feud between himself and Joanna of
Naples, respecting the death of her royal spouse, his brother, to the
fiat of the Tribune? This is the first time, methinks, since the death
of Constantine, that so great a confidence and so high a charge were
ever intrusted to a Roman!"

"By all the saints in the calendar," cried Montreal, crossing himself,
"this news is indeed amazing! The fierce Louis of Hungary waive the
right of the sword, and choose other umpire than the field of battle!"

"And this," continued Adrian, in a significant tone, "this it was which
induced me to obey your courteous summons. I know, brave Montreal, that
you hold intercourse with Louis. Louis has given to the Tribune the best
pledge of his amity and alliance; will you do wisely if you--"

"Wage war with the Hungarian's ally," interrupted Montreal. "This you
were about to add; the same thought crossed myself. My Lord, pardon
me--Italians sometimes invent what they wish. On the honour of a knight
of the Empire, these tidings are the naked truth?"

"By my honour, and on the Cross," answered Adrian, drawing himself up;
"and in proof thereof, I am now bound to Naples to settle with the Queen
the preliminaries of the appointed trial."

"Two crowned heads before the tribunal of a plebeian, and one a
defendant against the charge of murther!" muttered Montreal; "the news
might well amaze me!"

He remained musing and silent a little while, till looking up, he caught
Adeline's tender gaze fixed upon him with that deep solicitude with
which she watched the outward effect of schemes and projects she was too
soft to desire to know, and too innocent to share.

"Lady mine," said the Provencal, fondly, "how sayest thou? must we
abandon our mountain castle, and these wild woodland scenes, for the
dull walls of a city? I fear me so.--The Lady Adeline," he continued,
turning to Adrian, "is of a singular bias; she hates the gay crowds
of streets and thoroughfares, and esteems no palace like the solitary
outlaw's hold. Yet, methinks, she might outshine all the faces of
Italy,--thy mistress, Lord Adrian, of course, excepted."

"It is an exception which only a lover, and that too a betrothed lover,
would dare to make," replied Adrian, gallantly.

"Nay," said Adeline, in a voice singularly sweet and clear, "nay, I know
well at what price to value my lord's flattery, and Signor di Castello's
courtesy. But you are bound, Sir Knight, to a court, that, if fame speak
true, boasts in its Queen the very miracle and mould of beauty."

"It is some years since I saw the Queen of Naples," answered Adrian;
"and I little dreamed then, when I gazed upon that angel face, that I
should live to hear her accused of the foulest murther that ever stained
even Italian royalty."

"And, as if resolved to prove her guilt," said Montreal, "ere long
be sure she will marry the very man who did the deed. Of this I have
certain proof."

Thus conversing, the Knights wore away the daylight, and beheld from the
open tent the sun cast his setting glow over the purple sea. Adeline
had long retired from the board, and they now saw her seated with her
handmaids on a mound by the beach; while the sound of her lute faintly
reached their ears. As Montreal caught the air, he turned from the
converse, and sighing, half shaded his face with his hand. Somehow or
other the two Knights had worn away all the little jealousy or pique
which they had conceived against each other at Rome. Both imbued with
the soldier-like spirit of the age, their contest in the morning had
served to inspire them with that strange kind of respect, and even
cordiality, which one brave man even still (how much more at that day!)
feels for another, whose courage he has proved while vindicating his
own. It is like the discovery of a congenial sentiment hitherto latent;
and, in a life of camps, often establishes sudden and lasting friendship
in the very lap of enmity. This feeling had been ripened by their
subsequent familiar intercourse, and was increased on Adrian's side by
the feeling, that in convincing Montreal of the policy of withdrawing
from the Roman territories, he had obtained an advantage that well
repaid whatever danger and delay he had undergone.

The sigh, and the altered manner of Montreal, did not escape Adrian, and
he naturally connected it with something relating to her whose music had
been its evident cause.

"Yon lovely dame," said he, gently, "touches the lute with an exquisite
and fairy hand, and that plaintive air seems to my ear as of the
minstrelsy of Provence."

"It is the air I taught her," said Montreal, sadly, "married as it is
to indifferent words, with which I first wooed a heart that should never
have given itself to me! Ay, young Colonna, many a night has my boat
been moored beneath the starlit Sorgia that washes her proud father's
halls, and my voice awaked the stillness of the waving sedges with a
soldier's serenade. Sweet memories! bitter fruit!"

"Why bitter? ye love each other still."

"But I am vowed to celibacy, and Adeline de Courval is leman where she
should be wedded dame. Methinks I fret at that thought even more than
she,--dear Adeline!"

"Your lady, as all would guess, is then nobly born?"

"She is," answered Montreal, with a deep and evident feeling which, save
in love, rarely, if ever, crossed his hardy breast. "She is! our tale is
a brief one:--we loved each other as children: Her family was wealthier
than mine: We were separated. I was given to understand that she
abandoned me. I despaired, and in despair I took the cross of St. John.
Chance threw us again together. I learned that her love was
undecayed. Poor child!--she was even then, sir, but a child! I,
wild,--reckless--and not unskilled, perhaps, in the arts that woo and
win. She could not resist my suit or her own affection!--We fled. In
those words you see the thread of my after history. My sword and
my Adeline were all my fortune. Society frowned on us. The Church
threatened my soul. The Grand Master my life. I became a knight of
fortune. Fate and my right hand favoured me. I have made those who
scorned me tremble at my name. That name shall yet blaze, a star or a
meteor, in the front of troubled nations, and I may yet win by force
from the Pontiff the dispensation refused to my prayers. On the same
day, I may offer Adeline the diadem and the ring.--Eno' of this;--you
marked Adeline's cheek!--Seems it not delicate? I like not that
changeful flush,--and she moves languidly,--her step that was so
blithe!"

"Change of scene and the mild south will soon restore her health," said
Adrian; "and in your peculiar life she is so little brought in contact
with others, especially of her own sex, that I trust she is but seldom
made aware of whatever is painful in her situation. And woman's love,
Montreal, as we both have learned, is a robe that wraps her from many a
storm!"

"You speak kindly," returned the Knight; "but you know not all our cause
of grief. Adeline's father, a proud sieur, died,--they said of a broken
heart,--but old men die of many another disease than that! The mother, a
dame who boasted her descent from princes, bore the matter more sternly
than the sire; clamoured for revenge,--which was odd, for she is as
religious as a Dominican, and revenge is not Christian in a woman,
though it is knightly in a man!--Well, my Lord, we had one boy, our
only child; he was Adeline's solace in my absence,--his pretty ways were
worth the world to her! She loved him so, that, but he had her eyes and
looked like her when he slept, I should have been jealous! He grew up in
our wild life, strong and comely; the young rogue, he would have been a
brave knight! My evil stars led me to Milan, where I had business with
the Visconti. One bright morning in June, our boy was stolen; verily
that June was like a December to us!"

"Stolen!--how?--by whom?"

"The first question is answered easily,--the boy was with his nurse in
the courtyard, the idle wench left him for but a minute or two--so she
avers--fetch him some childish toy; when she returned he was gone; not a
trace left, save his pretty cap with the plume in it! Poor Adeline, many
a time have I found her kissing that relic till it was wet with tears!"

"A strange fortune, in truth. But what interest could--"

"I will tell you," interrupted Montreal, "the only conjecture I could
form;--Adeline's mother, on learning we had a son, sent to Adeline a
letter, that well nigh broke her heart, reproaching her for her love
to me, and so forth, as if that had made her the vilest of the sex.
She bade her take compassion on her child, and not bring him up to a
robber's life,--so was she pleased to style the bold career of Walter de
Montreal. She offered to rear the child in her own dull halls, and fit
him, no doubt, for a shaven pate and a monk's cowl. She chafed much that
a mother would not part with her treasure! She alone, partly in revenge,
partly in silly compassion for Adeline's child, partly, it may be, from
some pious fanaticism, could, it so seemed to me, have robbed us of our
boy. On inquiry, I learned from the nurse--who, but that she was of the
same sex as Adeline, should have tasted my dagger,--that in their walks,
a woman of advanced years, but seemingly of humble rank, (that might
be disguise!) had often stopped, and caressed and admired the child. I
repaired at once to France, sought the old Castle of De Courval;--it had
passed to the next heir, and the old widow was go on, none knew whither,
but, it was conjectured, to take the veil in some remote convent."

"And you never saw her since?"

"Yes, at Rome," answered Montreal, turning pale; "when last there I
chanced suddenly upon her; and then at length I learned my boy's fate,
and the truth of my own surmise; she confessed to the theft--and my
child was dead! I have not dared to tell Adeline of this; it seems to me
as if it would be like plucking the shaft from the wounded side--and she
would die at once, bereft of the uncertainty that rankles within her.
She has still a hope--it comforts her; though my heart bleeds when I
think on its vanity. Let this pass, my Colonna."

And Montreal started to his feet as if he strove, by a strong effort, to
shake off the weakness that had crept over him in his narration.

"Think no more of it. Life is short--its thorns are many--let us not
neglect any of its flowers. This is piety and wisdom too; Nature that
meant me to struggle and to toil, gave me, happily, the sanguine heart
and the elastic soul of France; and I have lived long enough to own that
to die young is not an evil. Come, Lord Adrian, let us join my lady ere
you part, if part you must; the moon will be up soon, and Fondi is but
a short journey hence. You know that though I admire not your Petrarch,
you with more courtesy laud our Provencal ballads, and you must hear
Adeline sing one that you may prize them the more. The race of the
Troubadours is dead, but the minstrelsy survives the minstrel!"

Adrian, who scarce knew what comfort to administer to the affliction of
his companion, was somewhat relieved by the change in his mood, though
his more grave and sensitive nature was a little startled at its
suddenness. But, as we have before seen, Montreal's spirit (and this
made perhaps its fascination) was as a varying and changeful sky;
the gayest sunshine, and the fiercest storm swept over it in rapid
alternation; and elements of singular might and grandeur, which,
properly directed and concentrated, would have made him the blessing and
glory of his time, were wielded with a boyish levity, roused into war
and desolation, or lulled into repose and smoothness, with all the
suddenness of chance, and all the fickleness of caprice.

Sauntering down to the beach, the music of Adeline's lute sounded more
distinctly in their ears, and involuntarily they hushed their steps
upon the rich and odorous turf, as in a voice, though not powerful,
marvellously sweet and clear, and well adapted to the simple fashion of
the words and melody, she sang the following stanzas:--

Lay of the Lady of Provence.

     1.

     Ah, why art thou sad, my heart?  Why
     Darksome and lonely?
     Frowns the face of the happy sky
