his tabor, and, as he played, the dolls danced up and down, and round
and round, first on one side, then on the other, now bobbing down
their heads, now frisking about their feet.

But while this was going on at the gate, the kid heard the pipe and
tabor, and after listening to it a minute, with its head on one side,
suddenly jumped up in the air, gave a great many little kicks, very
quick and funny, then ran frisking round its mother, and at last stood
upon its hind legs, and danced all across the grass plot.

Little Mary, who had been looking at the dolls, happened to turn round
at the moment when the kid was dancing. "O, you little dear, dear
kid!" cried Mary, first running towards the kid, then back to look at
the dolls, then again at the kid, then at the dolls, and the Italian
boy played away with his pipe and tabor, and made his dolls jump up in
the air, and reel, and set, and hop; but it was all nothing to the
jumps in the air of the kid, and its frisking kicks and flings, and
its fun and its fancies.

At last the Italian boy went away, with a large piece of bread and
cheese in his hand, and his dolls and dancing-board at his back; but
playing his pipe and tabor all down the lane. The goat stood looking
after him, with her head raised tall in the air, and a serious face;
but the kid continued to dance as long as the pipe and tabor could be
heard.




The Little Foundling.


In the beginning of June, when the young birds have got nearly all
their principal feathers, but have not yet learned to fly, it is a sad
thing if by any accident one of them tumbles out of the nest. This
misfortune sometimes happens when a nest is too full. Five or six
little birds are a good many for a nest no bigger than a teacup; and
there are often as many as five. We have also to recollect that these
young things are always very wild, and impatient, and unreasonable,
and make a great fluttering together, and scramble and climb over each
other, especially when their mother brings them food in her bill.
There is, of course, not enough food for all of them at once, but they
all try to get it at once, and some of them are naughty and greedy,
and try to get a second morsel before their brothers and sisters have
had any at all. Now, the careful mother-bird knows this very well, and
she, therefore, divides everything among them, so that each has a bit
in turn, and while she feeds them she begs the rest to be as patient
as they can, and not flutter, and chirrup, and gape so widely, and
above all things, to mind they do not tumble, or push each other, over
the edge of the nest.

It happened one day that this very accident occurred in a
hedge-sparrow's nest which had been built in the largest branch of a
hawthorn-tree. This tree grew in the middle of a hedge that went round
a large field, where there were at this time a number of haymakers,
all very busy with the hay. While some were tossing the hay about in
order to spread it out in the sun and dry it, others were raking up
the hay that was already dry enough, and piling it up into haycocks.
Men and women, and boys and girls too, were all at work in this way,
and singing in the sun as they tossed the hay with forks, or raked it
up with large wooden rakes. When the hay was thus moved about on the
field, a frog sometimes jumped up, and went silently leaping away
towards the hedge; and sometimes a field-mouse sprang out from the
short grass, with a loud squeak, and ran off to hide himself in the
hedge, squeaking all the way, not because he was in the least hurt,
but because he had waked in a great fright.

At the same time that all this was going on, the sparrow, whose nest
was in the hawthorn-tree, had brought a few seeds and a morsel of
crust to her young ones. The seed she distributed with ease, but the
morsel of crust was rather hard, and required her to pinch and peck it
a good deal with her bill before it could be soft enough for the young
birds. The young ones, however, were all so anxious to be first to
receive the crust the moment it was ready, that they all began to
make a loud chirruping, and scrambling, and pushing, and fluttering,
and trampling, and climbing over each other, till at last two of them
were on the very edge of the nest, and had each got hold of the crust.
But the mother-bird did not approve of such rudeness, so she took it
away from them in her own bill just as the two were beginning to pull
with all their might, standing on opposite sides of the nest. They
could not recover themselves, but over they went, fluttering down into
the tree. One fell into the next bough below, but the other went
fluttering into the hedge under the tree. The mother helped the
nearest one up again into the nest, by showing it how to hop and fly
from branch to branch; the other, however, was too low down, so there
sat the unfortunate little fellow all alone upon a twig, chirruping
and looking up in vain at his lost nest.

[Illustration]

This unlucky nestling had not long sat in this way before some boys,
who had brought the haymakers their dinners, and were returning home,
saw him in the hedge, and immediately began to try to catch him. But
though he could not fly, he could flutter, and if he was not able to
run, at least he could hop; so every time one of the boys got near to
him, the nestling scrambled on to the next bough, and thus from bough
to bough all along the hedge. If the boys had only known how
dreadfully frightened the poor little bird was, they never could have
been so cruel as to hunt him in this way. They did not know this,
however, and only thought of catching him. At last he had got to the
end of the hedge, and then went fluttering down upon the field with
the boys after him. They soon were so close to him, as he hopped and
