dog held back my slumber. She would growl sullenly, then stir about for
a new position; she was never quite still. I could picture her there
in the library, behind the curtains, crouched, half resting, half
slumbering, always watching. I would awaken in the night and listen; a
low guttural warning, a sullen whine--then stillness. It was the same
with my companion. We could never quite understand it. Perhaps we were a
bit afraid.

But one can become accustomed to almost anything. It went on for many
nights without anything happening, until one night.

It was dark, exceedingly dark, with neither moon nor starlight; one of
those nights of inky intenseness. I cannot say just exactly what woke
me. The house was strangely silent and still; the air seemed stretched
and laden. It was summer. Perhaps it was the heat. I only knew that I
woke suddenly and blinked in the darkness.

In the next room with the door open I could hear the heavy breathing
of the detective. A heavy feeling lay against my heart. I had grown
accustomed to dread and isolation; but this was different. Perhaps
it was premonition. I do not know. And yet I was terribly sleepy; I
remember that.

I struck a match and looked at my watch on the bureau--twelve
thirty-five. No sound--not even Queen--not even a rumble from the
streets. I lay back and dropped into slumber. Just as I drifted off to
sleep I had a blurring fancy of sound, guttural, whining, fearful--then
suddenly drifting into incoherent rumbling phantasms--a dream. I awoke
suddenly. Someone was speaking. It was Jerome.

"Harry!"

I was frightened. It was like something clutching out of the darkness.
I sat up. I didn't answer. It wasn't necessary. The incoherence of my
dream had been external. The library was just below me. I could hear the
dog pacing to and fro, and her snarling. Snarling? It was just that. It
was something to arouse terror.

She had never growled like that--I was positive, I could hear her
suddenly leap back from the curtains. She barked. Never before had she
come to that. Then a sudden lunge into the other room--a vicious series
of snapping barks, yelps--pandemonium--I could picture her leaping--at
what? Then suddenly I leaped out of bed. The barks grew faint, faint,
fainter--into the distance.

In the darkness I couldn't find the switch. I bumped into Jerome. We
were lost in our confusion. It was a moment before we could find either
a match or a switch to turn on the lights. But at last--I shall not
forget that moment; nor Jerome. He was rigid; one arm held
aloft, his eyes bulged out. The whole house was full of
sound--full-toned--vibrant--magnetic. It was the bell.

I jumped for the stairway, but not so quick as Jerome. With three bounds
we were in the library with the lights on. The sound was running down
to silence. We tore down the curtains and rushed into the room. It was
empty!

There was not even the dog. Queen had gone! In a vain rush of grief I
began calling and whistling. It was an overwhelming moment. The poor,
brave shepherd. She had seen it and rushed into its face.

It was the last night I was to have Jerome. We sat up until daylight.
For the thousandth time we went over the house in detail, but there was
nothing. Only the ring. At the suggestion of the detective I touched the
match to the sapphire. It was the same. The colour diminishing, and the
translucent corridors deepening into the distance; then the blur and the
coming of shadows--the men, Watson and the professor--and my dog.

Of the men, only the heads showed; but the dog was full figure; she was
sitting, apparently on a pedestal, her tongue was lolling out of her
mouth and her face of that gentle intelligence which only the Australian
shepherd is heir to. That is all--no more--nothing. If we had hoped to
discover anything through her medium we were disappointed. Instead of
clearing up, the whole thing had grown deeper.

I have said that it was the last night I was to have Jerome. I didn't
know it then. Jerome went out early in the morning. I went to bed. I
was not afraid in the daylight. I was certain now that the danger was
localised. As long as I kept out of that apartment I had nothing to
fear. Nevertheless, the thing was magnetic. A subtle weirdness pervaded
the building. I did not sleep soundly. I was lonely; the isolation was
crowding on me. In the afternoon I stepped out on the streets.

I have spoken of my experience with the conductor. On this day I had the
certainty of my isolation; it was startling. In the face of what I was
and what I had seen it was almost terrifying. It was the first time
I thought of sending for Hobart. I had thought I could hold out. The
complete suddenness of the thing set me to thinking. I thought of
Watson. It was the last phase, the feebleness, the wanness, the inertia!
He had been a far stronger man than I in the beginning.

I must cable Fenton. While I had still an ego in the presence of men, I
must reach out for help. It was a strange thing and inexplicable. I was
not invisible. Don't think that. I simply did not individualise. Men
didn't notice me--till I spoke. As if I was imperceptibly losing the
essence of self. I still had some hold on the world. While it remained I
must get word to Hobart. I did not delay. Straight to the office I went
and paid for the cable.

CANNOT HOLD OUT MUCH LONGER. COME AT ONCE.--HARRY.

I was a bit ashamed. I had hoped. I had counted upon myself. I
had trusted in the full strength of my individuality. I had been
healthy--strong--full blooded. On the fullness of vitality one would
live forever. There is no tomorrow. It was not a year ago. I was eighty.
It had been so with Watson. What was this subtle thing that ate into
one's marrow? I had read of banshees, lemures and leprechauns; they were
the ghosts and the fairies of ignorance but they were not like this. It
was impersonal, hidden, inexorable. It was mystery. And I believed that
it was Nature.

I know it now. Even as I write I can sense the potency of the force
about me. Some law, some principle, some force that science has not
uncovered.

What is that law that shall bridge the chaos between the mystic and the
substantial? I am standing on the bridge; and I cannot see it. What is
the great law that was discovered by Dr. Holcomb? Who is the Rhamda? Who
is the Nervina?

Jerome has not returned. I cannot understand it. It has been a week. I
am living on brandy--not much of anything else--I am waiting for Fenton.
I have taken all my elaborations and notes and put them together.
Perhaps I--

(This is the last of the strange document left by Harry Wendel. The
following memorandum is written by Charlotte Fenton.)




XVIII

CHARLOTTE'S STORY


I do not know. It is hard to write after what has happened.

Hobart says that it is why I am to write it. It is to be a plain
narrative. Besides, he is very busy and cannot do it himself. There must
be some record. I shall do my best and hold out of my writing as much as
I can of my emotion. I shall start with the Nervina.

It was the first I knew; the first warning. Looking back I cannot but
wonder. No person I think who has ever seen the Nervina can do much
else; she is so beautiful! Beautiful? Why do I say it? I should be
jealous and I should hate her. Yet I do not. Why is it?

It was about eight months after Hobart had left for South America. I
remember those eight months as the longest in my life; because of Harry.
I am a girl and I like attention; all girls do. Ordinarily he would come
over every fortnight at least. After Hobart had gone he came once only,
and of course I resented the inattention.

It seemed to me that no business could be of enough importance if he
really loved me. Even his letters were few and far between. What he
wrote were slow and weary and of an undertone that I could not fathom.
I--loved Harry. I could not understand it. I had a thousand fearful
thoughts and jealousies; but they were feminine and in no way
approximated even the beginning of the truth. Inattention was not like
Harry. It was not until the coming of the Nervina that I was afraid.

Afraid? I will not say that--exactly. It was rather a suspicion, a queer
undercurrent of wonder and doubt. The beauty of the girl, her interest
in Harry and myself, her concern over this ring, put me a bit on guard.
I wondered what this ring had to do with Harry Wendel.

She did not tell me in exact words or in literal explanation; but she
managed to convey all too well a lurking impression of its sinister
potency. It was something baleful, something the very essence of which
would break down the life of one who wore it. Harry had come into its
possession by accident and she would save him. She had failed through
direct appeal. Now she had come to me. She did not say a word of the
Blind Spot.

And the next day came Harry. It was really a shock, though I had been
warned by the girl. He was not Harry at all, but another. His eyes were
dim and they had lost their lustre; when they did show light at all,
it was a kind that was a bit fearful. He was wan, worn, and shrunk to a
shadow, as if he had gone through a long illness.

He said he had not been sick. He maintained that he was quite well
physically. And on his finger was the ring of which the girl had spoken.
Its value must have been incalculable. Wherever he moved his hand its
blue flame cut a path through the darkness. But he said nothing about
it. I waited and wondered and was afraid. It was not until our walk
under the elm trees that it was mentioned.

It was a full moon; a wonderful, mellow moon of summer. He stopped
suddenly and gazed up at the orb above us. It seemed to me that his
mind was wandering, he held me closely--tenderly. He was not at all
like Harry. There was a missing of self, of individuality; he spoke in
abstractions.

"The maiden of the moonbeams?" he said. "What can it mean?"

And then I asked him. He has already told of our conversation. It was
the ring of which the Nervina had told me. It had to do with the Blind
Spot--the great secret that had taken Dr. Holcomb. He would not give it
to me. I worked hard, for even then I was not afraid of it. Something
told me--I must do it to save him. It was weird, and something I could
not understand--but I must do it for Harry.

I failed. Though he was broken in every visible way there was one thing
as strong as ever--his honour. He was not afraid; he had been the same
in his boyhood. When we parted that night he kissed me. I shall never
forget how long he looked into my eyes, nor his sadness. That is all.
The next morning he left for San Francisco.

And then came the end. A message; abrupt and sudden. It was some time
after and put a period to my increasing stress and worry. It read:

CITY OF PERU DOCKS TONIGHT AT EIGHT. MEET ME AT THE PIER. HOBART
COMING,--HARRY.

It was a short message and a bit twisted. In ordinary circumstances he
would have motored down and brought me back to greet Hobart. It was a
bit strange that I should meet him at the pier. However, I had barely
time to get to the city if I hurried.

I shall never forget that night.

It was dark when I reached San Francisco. I was a full twenty minutes
early at the pier. A few people were waiting. I looked about for Harry.
He was to meet me and I was certain that I would find him. But he was
not there. Of course there was still time. He was sure to be on hand to
greet Hobart.

Nevertheless, I had a vague mistrust. Since that strange visit I had not
been sure. Harry wasn't well. There was something to this mystery that
he had not told me. Why had he asked me to meet him at the pier? Why
didn't he come? When the boat docked and he was still missing I was
doubly worried.

Hobart came down the gangplank. He was great, strong, healthy, and it
seemed to me in a terrible hurry. He scanned the faces hurriedly and ran
over to me.

"Where's Harry?" He kissed me and in the same breath repeated, "Where's
Harry?"

"Oh, Hobart!" I exclaimed. "What's the matter with Harry? Tell me. It's
something terrible!"

He was afraid. Plainly I could see that! There were lines of anxiety
about his eyes. He clutched me by the arm and drew me away.

"He was to meet me here," I said. "He didn't come. He was to meet me
here! Oh, Hobart, I saw him some time ago. He was--it was not Harry at
all! Do you know anything about it?"

For a minute he stood still, looking at me. I had never seen Hobart
frightened; but at that moment there was that in his eyes which I could
not understand. He caught me by the arm and started out almost at a
run. There were many people and we dodged in and out among them. Hobart
carried a suitcase. He hailed a taxi.

I don't know how I got into the car. It was a blur. I was frightened.
Some terrible thing had occurred, and Hobart knew it. I remember a few
words spoken to the driver. "Speed, speed, no limit; never mind the
law--and Chatterton Place!" After that the convulsive jerking over the
cobbled streets, a climbing over hills and twisted corners. And Hobart
at my side. "Faster--faster," he was saying; "faster! My lord, was there
ever a car so slow! Harry! Harry!" I could hear him breathing a prayer.
Another hill; the car turned and came suddenly to a stop! Hobart leaped
out.

A sombre two-storey house; a light burning in one of the windows, a dim
light, almost subdued and uncanny. I had never seen anything so lonely
as that light; it was grey, uncertain, scarcely a flicker. Perhaps
it was my nerves. I had scarcely strength to climb the steps. Hobart
grasped the knob and thrust open the door; I can never forget it.

It is hard to write. The whole thing! The room; the walls lined with
books; the dim, pale light, the faded green carpet, and the man. Pale,
worn, almost a shadow of his former self. Was it Harry Wendel? He had
aged forty years. He was stooped, withered, exhausted. A bottle
of brandy on the desk before him. In his weak, thin hand an empty
wineglass. The gem upon his finger glowed with a flame that was almost
wicked; it was blue, burning, giving out sparkles of light--like a
colour out of hell. The path of its light was unholy--it was too much
alive.

We both sprang forward. Hobart seized him by the shoulders.

"Harry, old boy; Harry! Don't you know us? It's Hobart and Charlotte."

It was terrible. He didn't seem to know. He looked right at us. But he
spoke in abstractions.

"Two," he said. And he listened. "Two! Don't you hear it?" He caught
Hobart by the arm. "Now, listen. Two! No, it's three. Did I say three?
Can't you hear? It's the old lady. She speaks out of the shadows. There!
There! Now, listen. She has been counting to me. Always she says three!
Soon it will be four."

What did he mean? What was it about? Who was the old lady? I looked
round. I saw no one. Hobart stooped over. Harry began slowly to
recognise us. It was as if his mind had wandered and was coming back
from a far place. He spoke slowly; his words were incoherent and
rambling.

"Hobart," he said; "you know her. She is the maiden out of the
moonbeams. The Rhamda, he is our enemy. Hobart, Charlotte. I know so
much. I cannot tell you. You are two hours late. It's a strange thing. I
have found it and I think I know. It came suddenly. The discovery of the
great professor. Why didn't you come two hours earlier? We might have
conquered."

He dropped his head upon his arms; then as suddenly he looked up. He
drew the ring from his finger.

"Give it to Charlotte," he said. "It won't hurt her. Don't touch it
yourself. Had I only known. Watson didn't know--"

He straightened; he was tense, rigid, listening.

"Do you hear anything? Listen! Can you hear? It's the old lady. There--"

But there was not a sound; only the rumble of the streets, the ticking
of the clock, and our heart-beats. Again he went through the counting.

"Hobart!"

"Yes, Harry."

"And Charlotte! The ring--ah, yet it was there, Keep it. Give it to no
one. Two hours ago we might have conquered. But I had to keep the ring.
It was too much, too powerful; a man may not wear it. Charlotte"--he
took my hand and ran the ring upon my finger. "Poor Charlotte. Here is
the ring. The most wonderful--"

Again he dropped over. He was weak--there was something going from him
minute by minute.

"Water," he asked. "Hobart, some water."

It was too pitiful. Harry, our Harry--come to a strait like this! Hobart
rushed to another room with the tumbler. I could hear him fumbling. I
stooped over Harry. But he held up his hand.

"No, Charlotte, no. You must not. If--"

He stopped. Again the strange attention, as if he was listening to
something far off in the distance; the pupils of his hollow, worn,
lustreless eyes were pin-points. He stood on his feet rigid, quivering;
then he held up his hand. "Listen!"

But there was nothing. It was just as before; merely the murmuring of
the city night, and the clock ticking.

"It's the dog! D'you hear her? And the old lady. Now listen, 'Two!
Now there are two! Three! Three! Now there are three!' There--now." He
turned to me. "Can you hear it, Charlotte? No? How strange. Perhaps--"
He pointed to the corner of the room. "That paper. Will you--"

I shall always go over that moment. I have thought over it many times
and have wondered at the sequence. Had I not stepped across the library,
what would have happened?

What was it.

I had stooped to pick up the piece of paper. There came a queer,
cracking, snapping sound, almost audible, I have a strange recollection
of Harry standing up by the side of the desk--a flitting
vision. An intuition of some terrible force. It was out of
nothing--nowhere--approaching. I turned about. And I saw it--the dot of
blue.

Blue! That is what it was at first. Blue and burning, like the flame
of a million jewels centred into a needlepoint. On the ceiling directly
above Harry's head. It was scintillating, coruscating, opalescent; but
it was blue most of all. It was the colour of life and of death; it was
burning, throbbing, concentrated. I tried to scream. But I was frozen
with horror. The dot changed colour and went to a dead-blue. It seemed
to grow larger and to open. Then it turned to white and dropped like a
string of incandescence, touching Harry on the head.

What was it? It was all so sudden. A door flung open and a swish of
rushing silk. A woman! A beautiful girl! The Nervina! It was she!

Never have I seen anyone like her. She was so beautiful. In her face all
the compassion a woman is heir to. For scarcely a second she stopped.

"Charlotte," she called. "Charlotte--oh, why didn't you save him! He
loves you!" Then she turned to Harry. "It shall not be. He shall not go
alone. I shall save him, even beyond--"

With that she rushed upon Harry. It was all done in an instant. Her arms
were outstretched to the dimming form of Harry and the incandescence.
The splendid impassioned girl. Their forms intermingled. A blur of her
beautiful body and Harry's wan, weary face. A flash of light, a thread
of incandescence, a quiver--and they were gone.

The next I knew was the strong arms of my brother Hobart. He gave me the
water he had fetched for Harry. He was terribly upset, but very calm. He
held the glass up to my lips. He was speaking.

"Don't worry. Don't worry. I know now. I think I know. I was just in
time to see them go. I heard the bell. Harry is safe. It is the Nervina.
I shall get Harry. We'll solve the Blind Spot."




XIX

HOBART FENTON TAKES UP THE TALE


Right here at the outset, I had better make a clean breast of something
which the reader will very soon suspect, anyhow: I am a plain, unpoetic,
blunt-speaking man, trained as a civil engineer, and in most respects
totally dissimilar from the man who wrote the first account of the Blind
Spot.

Harry had already touched upon this. He came of an artistic family. I
think he must have taken up law in the hope that the old saying would
prove true: "The only certain thing about law is its uncertainty." For
he dearly loved the mysterious, the unknowable; he liked uncertainty for
its excitement: and it is a mighty good thing that he was honest, for he
would have made a highly dangerous crook.

Observe that I use the past tense in referring to my old friend. I do
this in the interests of strict, scientific accuracy, to satisfy those
who would contend that, having utterly vanished from sight and sound of
man, Harry Wendel is no more.

But in my own heart is the firm conviction that he is still very much
alive.

Within an hour of his astounding disappearance, my sister, Charlotte,
and I made our way to an hotel; and despite the terrible nature of what
had happened, we managed to get a few hours rest. The following morning
Charlotte declared herself quite strong enough to discuss the situation.
We lost no time.

It will be remembered that I had spent nearly the whole of the preceding
year in South America, putting through an irrigation scheme. Thus, I
knew little of what had occurred in that interval. On the other hand,
Harry and I had never seen fit to take Charlotte into our confidence as,
I now see, we should have done.

So we fairly pounced upon the manuscript which Harry had left behind.
And by the time we had finished reading it, I for one, had reached one
solid conclusion.

"I'm convinced," I said, "that the stranger--Rhamda Avec--is an
out-and-out villain. Despite his agreeable ways, I think he was solely
and deliberately to blame for Professor Holcomb's disappearance.
Consequently, this Rhamda is, in himself, a very valuable clue as to
Harry's present predicament."

Referring to Harry's notes, I pointed out the fact that, although Avec
had often been seen on the streets of San Francisco, yet the police had
never been able to lay hands on him. This seemed to indicate that
