Georgie was being spoiled, and would have to be looked after.

Dick was not the only Templetonian who had made this brilliant
discovery.  Ponty had dropped a casual eye on him now and then, so had
Mansfield; and neither the captain that was, nor the captain that was to
be, liked the look of things.

"He's going the way of all--all the Pledgelings," said Ponty.  "Can't
you stop it, Mansfield?"

"If I were captain of Templeton, I'd try, old man," replied the other.

"Really, Mansfield, you frighten me when you look so solemn.  What can I
do?"

"Do?  Take him away from where he is, to begin with."

"On what grounds?  Pledge hasn't done anything you or I could take hold
of.  And if the kid is going to the dogs, we can't connect it with
Pledge, any more than we can with Winter himself."

And Ponty yawned, and wished Mansfield would not look as if somebody
wanted hanging.

"It's curious, at any rate," said Mansfield, "that Pledge's fag should
begin to go to the dogs, while his chum, who fags for Cresswell, and is
quite as racketty, should keep all right."

"Do you call young Richardson all right?" asked Ponty.  "I should say he
and his friend are in the same boat, and he's holding the tiller."

Which was pretty 'cute for a lazy one like Ponty.

"Well," said Mansfield, who, with all his earnestness, felt really
baffled over the problem, "things mustn't go on as they are, surely."

"Certainly not, dear boy, if we can make them better; but I don't see
what's to be done.  I'd bless you if you could put things right."

And he put his feet upon the chair in front, and took up his novel.

Mansfield took the hint.  Nor did he misunderstand his indolent friend.
Ponty's indolence wasn't all laziness.  It was sometimes a cloak for
perplexity; and the captain-to-be, as he said good-night, guessed
shrewdly that not many pages of the novel would be skimmed that evening.

Ponty did, in fact, wake up a bit those last few weeks of the term.  He
rambled down once or twice to the Juniors' tennis court, and terrified
the small fry there by sprawling at full length on the grass within
sight of the play.  It was a crowded corner of the fields and a noisy
one, and, if the captain went there for a nap, he had queer notions of a
snug berth.  If, however, he went there to see life, he knew what he was
about.

He saw Aspinall there, toughening every day, and working up his screwy
service patiently and doggedly, till one or two of the knowing ones
found it worth their while to get on the other side of the net and play
against him.  Culver was there, big of bone, bragging, blustering as
ever, but keeping the colour in his cheeks with healthy sport.  Gosse
was there, forgetting to make himself a nuisance for one hour in twenty-
four.  The globular Cazenove was there, melting with the heat, but
proclaiming that even a big body and short legs can do some good by help
of a true eye and a patient spirit.  These and twenty others were there,
getting good every one of them, and atoning, every time they scored a
point and hit out a rally, for something less healthy or less profitable
scored elsewhere.  And Ponty, as he lay there blinking in the sun,
moralised on the matter, and came to the conclusion that there is hope
for a boy as long as he loves to don his flannels and roll up his shirt-
sleeves, and stand up, with his head in the air, to face his rival like
a man.  Even a Culver may look a gentleman as he rushes down to his
corner and saves his match with a left-hander, and Aspinall himself may
appear formidable when, as he stands up to serve, his foeman pulls his
cap down and retreats with lengthened face across the service-line.

But where were Dick and Heathcote?  For a whole week Ponty took his
siesta in the Juniors' corner, blinking now at the cricket, now at the
tennis, strolling sometimes into the gymnasium, and sometimes to the
fives courts, but nowhere did Basil the son of Richard meet his eyes,
and nowhere was Heathcote the Pledgeling.

One day he did find the latter wandering like a ghost in the Quadrangle,
and saw him bolt like a rat to his hole at sight of a monitor; and once
he saw Dick striding at the head of a phalanx of Juniors, with his coat
off and his face very much on one side, and the marks of battle on his
eye and lip.  Ponty sheered off before the triumphal army reached him
and shrugged his shoulders.

That afternoon he encountered our heroes arm-in-arm in the Quadrangle
and hailed them.  They obeyed his summons uneasily.

"Go and put on your flannels, both of you," said the captain, "and come
back here; I'll wait for you."

In trepidation they obeyed and went, while Ponty looked about for a cozy
seat on which to stretch himself.

In five minutes they returned and presented themselves.  Ponty eyed them
both calmly, and then roused himself and began to walk to the fields.

Tennis was in full swing in the Junior corner, where all sorts of play,
good, bad and indifferent, was going on at the nets.  Ponty, followed by
the two bewildered champions, strolled about till he came upon an
indifferent set being played by Gosse and Cazenove against Raggles and
another boy called Wade.

"Stop the game for a bit, you youngsters," said the captain.  "Which two
of you are the best?"

"I think I and Raggles are," said Gosse, with his usual modesty.

"Oh, then you can sit out.  Give your rackets to these two; they're
going to play against Cazenove and Wade."

Dick's heart sank within him as he took Gosse's racket and glanced up at
the captain's face.

"I'm rather out of practice," faltered he.

"Come, are you ready?  I'll umpire," said the captain.

It was a melancholy exhibition, that scratch match; all the more
melancholy that the other courts gradually emptied and a ring of Juniors
formed, who stared silently now at the players, then round at Pontifex,
and wondered what on earth he found to interest him in a miserable show
like this.  For our heroes mulled everything.  Two faults were not
enough for them; the holes in their rackets were legion, and their legs
never went the way they wanted.  The Den blushed as it looked on and
heard Ponty call, game after game, "Love--forty."

Of course the two wretched boys were scared--Ponty knew that well
enough--but so were Cazenove and Wade.  And yet Cazenove and Wade
managed to keep their wind and get over their net, and no one could say
they had less to be scared at than their opponents.

At length the doleful spectacle was over.  "One--six" was the score in
games.

"You must be proud of your one game," said Ponty, strolling off.

Our heroes watched him go, and felt they were hard hit.  It was no use
pretending not to understand the captain's meaning, or not to notice the
still lingering blushes of the spectators on their account.

So they withdrew sadly from the field of battle, chastened in spirit,
yet not without a dawning ambition to make Ponty change his mind
concerning them before the term was quite run out.



CHAPTER FOURTEEN.

HOW DICK HAS ONE LATIN EXERCISE MORE THAN HE BARGAINED FOR.

Dick did not often feel ashamed of himself.  He had a knack of keeping
his head above water, even in reverses, which usually stood him in good
stead.  But after that mournful scratch match with Cazenove and Wade, he
certainly did feel ashamed.

And, be it said to the credit of his honesty, that he blamed the right
offender.  Ponty had been rough on him, but it wasn't Ponty's fault.
Cazenove and Wade had knocked him and his chum into a cocked hat, but it
wasn't Cazenove's or Wade's fault.  Heathcote had mulled his game
dreadfully, and done nothing to save the match, but it wasn't
Heathcote's fault.  Basil the son of Richard was the guilty man, and
Basil the son of Richard kicked himself and called himself a fool.

Not publicly, though.  In the Den, despite the blushes his tennis had
caused, he did his best to keep up his swagger and restore confidence by
a few acts of special audacity; and the Den was forgiving on the whole.
They did feel sore for a day, and showed it; but gradually they came
back to their allegiance, and made excuses for their hero of their own
accord.

If truth must be told, Dick was far more concerned as to the possible
effect of his public humiliation on his election at "the Sociables,"
which was now only a day off.

Braider told him, with rather a long face, that his chances had been
rather shaken by the affair, and that there was again some talk of
pushing Culver against him.  This alarming news drove all immediate
projects of virtue out of Dick's head.  Not that membership of the club
was his one ideal of bliss; but, being a candidate, he could not bear
the idea of being defeated, particularly by a young ruffian like Culver.
So he indulged in all sorts of extravagances on the last day of his
probation, and led Heathcote on to the very verge of a further
punishment in order to recover some of the ground he had lost with the
"select" twenty.

After school he could settle to nothing till he knew his fate.  He
dragged the unsuspecting Heathcote up and down the great Quadrangle
under pretext of discussing Tom White's boat, but really in order to
keep his eye on the door behind which the select "Sociables" sat in
congress.

Heathcote saw there was a secret somewhere, and, feeling himself out of
it, departed somewhat moodily to Pledge's study.  Dick, however,
continued his walk, heedless if every friend on earth deserted him, so
long as Culver should not be preferred before him behind that door.

He was getting tired of this solitary promenade, and beginning to wonder
whether the "Select Sociables" had fallen asleep in the act of voting
for him, when a ball pitched suddenly on to the pavement between his
feet.

He couldn't tell where it came from--probably from some window above,
for no one just then was about in the Quadrangle.

He stooped down to pick it up and pitch it back into the first open
window, when, greatly to his surprise, he saw his name written across
it, and discovered that the ball was not a tennis ball at all, but a
round paper box, which came in two as he held it.

Dick was not superstitious.  He had scoffed at the Templeton ghost when
he first heard of it, and made up his mind long since it was a bogey
kept for the benefit of new boys.

But it certainly gave him a start to find himself, at this late period
of the term, when he had almost forgotten he ever was a new boy, pitched
upon as the recipient of one of these mysterious missives.

The letter inside was written in printed characters, like those
addressed to Heathcote.

"Dick," it began.

"Hallo," thought Dick to himself, "rather cheek of a ghost to call a
fellow by his Christian name, isn't it?"

"Dick,--Don't be a fool.  You were a fine fellow when you came.  What
are you now?  Don't let fellows lead you astray.  You can be a fine
fellow without being a bad one.  Let the 'Sociables' alone.  They'll
teach you to be a cad.  If you don't care for yourself, think of
Heathcote, who only needs your encouragement to make a worse failure
than he has made already.  Save him from Pledge.  Then you'll be a fine
fellow, with a vengeance.  Your real friend,--

"Junius.

"P.S.--Translate 'Dominat qui in se dominatur.'"

The first thing that struck Dick about this extraordinary epistle was,
that it was odd the ghost should write his letters on Templeton exercise
paper.  It then occurred to him that it was rather rough to put him
through his paces in Latin idioms at a time like this.  Couldn't the
ghost get a dictionary, or ask a senior, and find out for himself?

It then occurred to him, who on earth was it who had written to him like
this?  Some one who knew him, that was certain; and he almost fancied it
must be some one who liked him, for a fellow wouldn't take the trouble
to tell him he was a fine fellow at the beginning of the term, and all
that sort of thing, unless he had a fancy for him.

What did he mean by "What are you now?"  It sounded as if he meant "You
are not a fine fellow now."  Rather a personal remark.

"What's it got to do with him what I am now?" reflected Dick, digging
his hands into his pockets, and resuming his promenade.  "And what does
he mean by fellows leading me astray?  Like to catch any one trying it
on, that's all.  Like to catch _him_, for the matter of that, for his
howling cheek!"

Dick sat down on one of the stone benches, and pulled out the letter for
another perusal.

"'Let the Sociables alone.'  Oh, ah! most likely he's been blackballed
himself, and don't like any one to--.  Humph! wonder if they _are_ a
shady lot or not?  What does he mean by saying they'll teach me to be a
cad?  Who'll teach me to be a cad?  Not a muff like Braider."

At that moment a door opened at the end of the corridor, and a voice
shouted--

"Richardson!"

It was Braider's voice, and Dick knew it.

He crumpled the letter up in his hand, and the colour came and went from
his cheeks.

"Richardson! where are you?" called Braider again, for it was dusk, and
our hero's seat was screened from view.

Dick coloured again, and bit his lips; and finally got up from the
bench, and strolled off in an opposite direction.

"Richardson! do you hear?" once more shouted the invisible Braider.

Dick walked on in the dusk, wondering to himself whether Braider would
get into a row for kicking up that uproar in the Quad.

At last, after one final shout, he heard the door slam.  Then he
quickened his pace, and made for Cresswell's study.

On the staircase he met Aspinall.

"I heard some one calling you out in the Quad.," said the small boy.

"Did you?" replied Dick.  "I wonder who it can have been?  Is Cresswell
in his study?"

"No."

"All serene.  Come back with me.  Have you done your swot?"

"Yes, I did my lessons an hour ago."

"Oh!" said Dick, and strode on, followed somewhat dubiously by his young
_protege_.

"Shut the door," said Dick, sternly, as they entered the study.

"Whatever is going to happen to me?" ejaculated the small boy, inwardly,
as he obeyed.  Dick had never spoken to him like this before.  Had he
offended him unwittingly?  Had he been disloyal to his sovereignty?

Dick walked to the fireplace, and, pulling a letter from his pocket,
read it through twice, apparently heedless of his subject's presence.
Then he looked up suddenly, and, crushing the paper viciously back into
his pocket, stared hard at his perturbed companion.

"Young Aspinall," said he, sharply, "do you say I'm a fool?"

"Oh, no," replied the boy, staggered by the very suggestion, "I should
never think of saying such a thing."

"Should you say I was a blackguard?"

"No, indeed, Dick.  No one could say that."

The hero's face brightened.  There was a warmth in Aspinall's voice
which touched the most sensitive side of his nature.  Dick would have
liked the ghost to be near to hear it.

"Should you say I've let myself be led astray, and made a mess of it
here, at Templeton?"

"No, Dick, I don't think so," said the boy.

"What do you mean? _don't think_.  Have I, or have I not?" demanded
Dick.

It was a delicate position for the timorous small boy.  He had had his
misgivings about Dick, and seen a change in him, not, as he thought, for
the better.  But the idea of telling him so to his face was as much as
his peace was worth.  Yet he must either tell the truth, or a lie, and
when it came to that, Aspinall could not help himself.

"You are the best friend I've got," said he, nervously, "and I'd give
anything to be as brave as you; but--"

"Well, wire in," said Dick, tearing to bits one of Cresswell's quill
pens with his teeth; "but what?"

"You're so good-natured," said Aspinall, "fellows make you do things you
wouldn't do of your own accord."

"Who makes me do things?" demanded Dick, sternly.

"I don't know," pleaded the boy, feeling that this sort of tight-rope
dancing was not in his line; "perhaps some of your friends in the Fourth
and Fifth.  But I may be all wrong."

"What do they make me do?" said Dick.

"They make you," said Aspinall, feeling that it was no use trying to
keep his balance any longer, and that he might as well throw down his
pole and tumble into the net; "they make you break rules and get into
rows, Dick, because you see it goes down with them, and they cheer you
for it.  You wouldn't do that of your own accord."

"How do you know that?"

"I don't think you would," said the boy.

If any one had told Aspinall, ten minutes ago, he would be talking to
Dick in this strain, he would have scouted the idea as a bit of chaff.
As it was, he could hardly believe he had said as much as he had, and
waited, in an uncomfortable sort of way, for Dick's next remark.

"Oh! that's what you think, is it?"

"Please don't be angry," pleaded the boy, "you asked me."

"What about Heathcote?" demanded Dick, abruptly, after a pause.

"What do you mean, Dick?"

"I mean, is he making a mess of it, too?"

"Oh, Dick; I never said you were making a mess of it."

"Well, then, is Heathcote being led astray?"

"I don't know.  He seems different; and talks funnily about things."

"Does what?  I never heard Georgie talk funnily about things, and I've
known him a good bit.  Who's leading him astray?  Am I?"

Poor Aspinall was on the tight-rope again, at the most ticklish part.
For he did think Dick was running Heathcote into mischief,
unintentionally, no doubt, but still unmistakably, "Am I?" repeated
Dick, rounding on his man, and fixing him with his eyes.

"Heathcote's not so strong-minded as you are, Dick, and when he sees you
doing things, I fancy he thinks he can do them too.  But he can't pull
up like you, and so he gets into rows."

"Oh!" said Dick, returning to his quill pen, and completing its
demolition.  Then he pulled out the letter, and read it to himself
again, and this time, instead of returning it to his pocket, twisted it
up into a spill, and lit the gas with it.

"What should you say was the English of 'Dominat qui in se dominatur,'
young 'un," he asked, casually, when the operation was complete.

"Why, that's one of the mottoes in the Quad," said Aspinall, wondering
what on earth this had to do with Heathcote's rows.  "I always fancied
it meant, 'He rules best, who knows how to rule himself.'"

"Which is the word for best," asked Dick, critically, rather pleased to
have found a flaw in the motto.

"Oh, I suppose it's understood," said Aspinall.

"Why couldn't he say what he meant, straight out?" said Dick, waxing
wondrous wroth at the motto-maker, "there's plenty of room in the Quad
for an extra word."

Aspinall quite blushed at this small explosion, and somehow felt
personally implicated in the defects of the motto.

"Perhaps I'm wrong," said he.  "Perhaps it means a fellow can't rule at
all, unless he can rule himself."

"That won't wash," said Dick, profoundly.  "Where's the '_nisi_?'  Never
mind.  Good-night, young Aspinall.  I'm going to do my work here."

And Aspinall departed, a good deal exercised in his mind as to Dick's
latest humour, but thankful, all the same, that he didn't appear
desperately offended with the answers he had extorted to his very home
questions.

Dick did not do much "swot" that evening.  He couldn't get the ghost out
