through the M's in Webster's Dictionary, there could be little choice.
On the side of liberty and freedom alone could the balance fall. The
bedroom towels were quickly tied on to the old rope, the rope secured
firmly inside the window-sill, and the two girls let themselves swing
lightly on to the step-ladder. They were both agile, and the descent did
not terrify them in the least. When they reached the ground they took
each other's hands, and looked into each other's faces.

"You might have thought of bringing a hat, Miss Polly."

"Oh, never mind, Maggie. You do look shabby; your frock is torn right
open."

"Well, Miss, I got it a-coming to save you. Miss Polly, Mrs. Power's
back in the kitchen. Hadn't we better run? We'll talk afterwards."

So they did, not meeting any one, for Mrs. Cameron and the children were
all at dinner, and the servants were also in the house. They ran through
the kitchen garden, vaulted over the sunken fence, and found themselves
in the little sheltered green lane, where Polly had lain on her face and
hands and caught the thrushes on the July day when her mother died. She
stood almost in the same spot now, but her mind was in too great a
whirl, and her feelings too excited, to cast back any glances of memory
just then.

"Well, Maggie," she said, pulling up short, "now, what are your plans?
Where are we going to? Where are we to hide?"

"Eh?" said Maggie.

She had evidently come to the end of her resources, and the intelligent
light suddenly left her face.

"I didn't think o' that," she said: "there's mother's."

"No, that wouldn't do," interrupted Polly. "Your mother has only two
rooms. I couldn't hide long in her house; and besides, she is poor, I
would not put myself on her for anything. I'll tell you what, Maggie,
we'll go across Peg-Top Moor, and make straight for the old hut by the
belt of fir-trees. You know it, we had a picnic there once, and I made
up a story of hermits living in the hut. Well, you and I will be the
hermits."

"But what are we to eat?" said Maggie, whose ideas were all practical,
and her appetite capacious.

Polly's bright eyes, however, were dancing, and her whole face was
radiant. The delight of being a real hermit, and living in a real hut,
far surpassed any desire for food.

"We'll eat berries from the trees," she said, "and we'll drink water
from the spring. I know there's a spring of delicious water not far from
the hut. Oh! come along, Maggie, do; this is delightful!"

An old pony, who went in the family by the stately name of Sultan, had
been wont to help the children in their long rambles over the moor. They
were never allowed to wander far alone, and had not made one expedition
since their mother's death. It was really two years since Polly had been
to the hut at the far end of Peg-Top Moor. This moor was particularly
lonely, it was interspersed at intervals with thickets of rank
undergrowth and belts of trees, and was much frequented on that account
by gipsies and other lawless people. Polly, who went last over the moor,
carried the greater part of the way on Sultan's friendly back, had very
little idea how far the distance was. It was September now, but the sun
shone on the heather and fern with great power, and as Polly had no hat
on her head, having refused to take Maggie's from her; she was glad to
take shelter under friendly trees whenever they came across her path.

At first the little girls walked very quickly, for they were afraid of
being overtaken and brought back; but after a time their steps grew
slow, their movement decidedly languid, and Maggie at least began to
feel that berries from the trees and water from the spring, particularly
when neither was to be found anywhere, was by no means a substantial or
agreeable diet to dwell upon.

"I don't think I like being a hermit," she began. "I don't know nought
what it means, but I fancy it must be very thinning and running down to
the constitootion."

Polly looked at her, and burst out laughing.

"It is," she said, "that's what the life was meant for, to subdue the
flesh in all possible ways; you'll get as thin as a whipping-post, Mag."

"I don't like it," retorted Maggie. "Maybe we'd best be returning home,
now, Miss Polly."

Polly's eyes flashed. She caught Maggie by the shoulder.

"You are a mean girl," she said. "You got me into this scrape, and now
you mean to desert me. I was sitting quietly in my room, reading through
the M's in Webster's Dictionary, and you came and asked me to run away;
it was your doing, Maggie, you know that."

"Yes, miss! yes, Miss!"

Maggie began to sob. "But I never, never thought it meant berries and
spring-water; no, that I didn't. Oh, I be so hungry!"

At this moment all angry recriminations were frozen on the lips of both
little girls, for rising suddenly, almost as it seemed from the ground
at their feet, appeared a gaunt woman of gigantic make.

"Maybe you'll be hungrier," she said in a menacing voice. "What
business have you to go through Deadman's Copse without leave?"

Maggie was much too alarmed to make any reply, but Polly, after a moment
or two of startled silence, came boldly to the rescue.

"Who are you?" she said. "Maggie and I know nothing of Deadman's Copse;
this is a wood, and we are going through it; we have got business on the
other side of Peg-Top-Moor."

"That's as it may be," replied the woman, "this wood belongs to me and
to my sons, Nathaniel and Patrick, and to our dogs, Cinder and Flinder,
and those what goes through Deadman's Copse must pay toll to me, the
wife of Micah Jones. My husband is dead, and he left the wood to me, and
them as go through it must pay toll."

The woman's voice was very menacing; she was of enormous size, and going
up to the little girls, attempted to place one of her brawny arms on
Polly's shoulder. But Polly with all her faults possessed a great deal
of courage; her eyes flashed, and she sprang aside from the woman's
touch.

"You are talking nonsense," she said. "Father has over and over told me
that the moor belongs to the Queen, so this little bit couldn't have
been given to your husband, Micah Jones, and we are just as free to walk
here as you are. Come on, Maggie, we'll be late for our business if we
idle any longer."

But the woman with a loud and angry word detained her.

"Highty-tighty!" she said. "Here's spirit for you, and who may your
respected papa be, my dear? He seems to be mighty wise. And the wife of
Micah Jones would much like to know his name."

"You're a very rude unpleasant woman," said Polly. "Don't hold me, I
won't be touched by you. My father is Dr. Maybright, of Sleepy Hollow,
you must know his name quite well."

The wife of Micah Jones dropped a supercilious curtsey.

"Will you tell Dr. Maybright, my pretty little dear," she said, "that in
these parts might is right, and that when the Queen wants Deadman's
Copse, she can come and have a talk with me, and my two sons, and the
dogs, Cinder and Flinder. But, there, what am I idling for with a chit
like you? You and that other girl there have got to pay toll. You have
both of you got to give me your clothes. There's no way out of it, so
you needn't think to try words, nor blarney, nor nothing else with me, I
have a sack dress each for you, and what you have on is mine. That's the
toll, you will have to pay it. My hut is just beyond at the other side
of the wood, my sons are away, but Cinder and Flinder will take care of
you until I come back, at nine o'clock. Here, follow me, we're close to
the hut. No words, or it will be the worse for you. On in front, the two
of you, or you, little Miss," shaking her hand angrily at Polly, "will
know what it means to bandy words with the wife of Micah Jones."

The woman's face became now very fierce and terrible, and even Polly was
sufficiently impressed to walk quietly before her, clutching hold of
poor terrified Maggie's hand.

The hut to which the woman took the little girls was the very hermit's
hut to which their own steps had been bent. It was a very dirty place,
consisting of one room, which was now filled with smoke from a fire made
of broken faggots, fir-cones, and withered fern. Two ugly, lean-looking
dogs guarded the entrance to the hut. When they saw the woman coming,
they jumped up and began to bark savagely; poor Maggie began to scream,
and Polly for the first time discovered that there could be a worse
state of things than solitary confinement in her room, with Webster's
Dictionary for company.

"Sit you there," said the woman, pushing the little girls into the hut.
"I'll be back at nine o'clock. I'm off now on some business of my own.
When I come back I'll take your clothes, and give you a sack each to
wear. Cinder and Flinder will take care of you; they're very savage
dogs, and can bite awful, but they won't touch you if you sit very
quiet, and don't attempt to run away."




CHAPTER XIX.

DISTRESSED HEROINES.


If ever poor little girls found themselves in a sad plight it was the
two who now huddled close together in the hermit's hut. Even Polly was
thoroughly frightened, and as to Maggie, nothing but the angry growls of
Cinder restrained the violence of her sobs.

"Oh, ain't a hermit's life awful!" she whispered more than once to her
companion. "Oh! Miss Polly, why did you speak of Peg-Top Moor, and the
hermit's hut, and berries and water?"

"Don't be silly, Maggie," said Polly, "I did not mention the wife of
Micah Jones, nor these dreadful dogs. This is a misfortune, and we must
bear it as best we can. Have you none of the spirit of a heroine in you,
Maggie; don't you know that in all the story-books, when the heroines
run away, they come to dreadful grief? If we look at it in that light,
and think of ourselves as distressed heroines, it will help us to bear
up. Indeed," continued Polly, "if it wasn't for my having been naughty a
few days ago, and perhaps father coming back to-night, I think I'd enjoy
this--I would really. As it is----" Here the brave little voice broke
off into a decided quaver. The night was falling, the stars were coming
out in the sky, and Polly, standing in the door of the hut, with her arm
thrown protectingly round Maggie's neck, found a great rush of
loneliness come over her.

During those weary days spent in her bedroom, repentance, even in the
most transient guise, had scarcely come near her. She was too much
oppressed with a sense of injustice done to herself to be sorry about
the feast in the attic. In short, all her time was spent in blaming Aunt
Maria.

Now with the lonely feeling came a great soreness of heart, and an
intense and painful longing for her mother. Those fits of longing which
came to Polly now and then heralded in, as a rule, a tempest of grief.
Wherever she was she would fling herself on the ground, and give way to
most passionate weeping. Her eyes swam in tears now, she trembled
slightly, but controlled herself. On Maggie's account it would never do
for her to give way. The ugly dogs came up and sniffed at her hands, and
smelt her dress. Maggie screamed when they approached her, but Polly
patted their heads. She was not really afraid of them, neither was she
greatly alarmed at the thought of the wife of Micah Jones. What
oppressed her, and brought that feeling of tightness to her throat, and
that smarting weight of tears to her eyes, were the great multitude of
stars in the dark-blue heavens, and the infinite and grand solitude of
the moors which lay around.

The night grew darker; poor Maggie, worn out, crouched down on the
ground; Polly, who had now quite made friends with Cinder, sat by
Maggie's side, and when the poor hungry little girl fell asleep, Polly
let her rest her head in her lap. The dogs and the two children were all
collected in the doorway of the hut, and now Polly could look more
calmly up at the stars, and the tears rolled silently down her cheeks.

It was in this position that, at about a quarter to nine, Dr. Maybright
found her. Some instinct seemed to lead him to Peg-Top Moor--a sudden
recollection brought the hut to his memory, a ringing voice, and gay
laugh came back to him. The laugh was Polly's, the words were hers. "Oh,
if there could be a delightful thing, it would be to live as a hermit in
the hut at the other side of Peg-Top Moor!"

"The child is there," he said to himself. And when this thought came to
him he felt so sure that it was a true and guiding thought that he
whistled for the men who were to help him in the search, and together
they went to the hut.

Cinder and Flinder had got accustomed to Polly, whom they rather liked;
Maggie they barely tolerated; but the firm steps of three strangers
approaching the hut caused them to bristle up, to call all their canine
ferocity to their aid, and to bark furiously.

But all their show of enmity mattered nothing in such a supreme moment
as this to Polly. No dogs, however fierce, should keep her from the arms
of her father. In an instant she was there, cuddling up close to him,
while the men he had brought with him took care of Maggie, and beat off
the angry dogs.

"Father, there never was any one as naughty as I have been!"

"My darling, you have found that out?"

"Yes, yes, yes! and you may punish me just whatever way you like best,
only let me kiss you now. Punish me, but don't be angry."

"I'm going to take you home," said Doctor, who feared mischief from
Polly's present state of strong excitement. "I expect you have gone
through a fright and have had some punishment. The minute, too, we find
out that we are really naughty, our punishment begins, as well as our
forgiveness. I shall very likely punish you, child, but be satisfied, I
forgive you freely. Now home, and to bed, and no talk of anything
to-night, except a good supper, and a long restful sleep. Come, Polly,
what's the matter? Do you object to be carried?"

"But not in your arms, father. I am so big and heavy, it will half kill
you."

"You are tall, but not heavy, you are as light as a reed. Listen! I
forbid you to walk a step. When I am tired there are two men to help me.
Simpkins, will you and George give Maggie a hand, and keep close to us.
Now, we had better all get home as fast as possible."

It was more than half-past ten that night before Polly and the Doctor
returned to Sleepy Hollow. But what a journey home she had! how
comforting were the arms that supported her, how restful was the
shoulder, on which now and then in an ecstasy to love and repentance,
she laid her tired head! The stars were no longer terrible, far-off, and
lonely, but near and friendly, like the faces of well-known friends. The
moor ceased to be a great, vast, awful solitude, it smelt of heather,
and was alive with the innumerable sounds of happy living
creatures--and best of all, mother herself seemed to come back out of
the infinite, to comfort the heart of the sorrowful child.




CHAPTER XX.

LIMITS.


"And _now_, Maria, I want to know what is the meaning of all this," said
the Doctor.

It was late that night, very late. Polly was in bed, and Helen lay in
her little white bed also close to Polly's side, so close that the
sisters could hold each other's hands. They lay asleep now, breathing
peacefully, and the Doctor, being satisfied that no serious mischief had
happened to any of his family, meant to have it out with his
sister-in-law.

Mrs. Cameron was a very brave woman, or at least she considered herself
so; it was perfectly natural that people should fear her, she did not
object to a little wholesome awe on the parts of those who looked up to
her and depended on her words of wisdom. To be afraid on her own part
was certainly not her custom, and yet that evening, as she sat alone in
the deserted old drawing-room, and listened to the wind as it rose
fitfully and moaned through the belt of fir-trees that sheltered the
lawn; as she sat there, pretending to knit, but listening all the time
