Yes, the music had stopped suddenly. The man in the farthest alcove
turned to his companion. They were hidden by a group of palms.

"I wonder why?" queried the woman. She was deathly pale. Her eyes were
dark with fear, yet alight with passionate determination.

"When it begins," said the man tenderly, "we will slip away. My car is
outside. Everything is ready."

"That is my husband over there," said the woman.

"Yes," said the man, "he won't trouble you any more."

"That woman with him is leaving him," she said. "I wonder why." She
turned suddenly with a great start. "There is somebody here," she
whispered, staring into the back of the alcove.

"Nonsense," said the man, throwing a glance around the recess. "There's
nobody here but you and I. We are alone together, as we shall be
hereafter, when we have taken the step."

"But that child," whispered the woman, "with his strange vesture and
his wonderful face. His eyes look at me so."

"There is no child there, my dear," urged the man; "you are overwrought,
excited, nervous. The music starts. Let us go."

He stretched out his hand to the woman, but as he came nearer she shrank
back with her own hand on her heart.

"Oh," she said faintly, "he's gone."

"Of course he's gone," he answered soothingly. "Now is our time to get
away. Let me--"

"No, no," said the woman. "I can't go with you now. It wouldn't be
right."

"But you knew that before," pleaded the man. "Besides--"

"Yes, but I can't do it. He was there! His eyes spoke--I--don't touch
me," she said; "I'm going back to my husband. Don't follow."




II

The Child




"SUFFER THE LITTLE CHILDREN TO COME UNTO ME"




II

The Child


The employees had all gone home, carrying with them Christmas checks and
hearty greetings from the great man whose beck and nod they followed. He
sat in his private office absolutely alone. He had some serious matters
to consider and did not want any interruptions. His balance-sheet for
the year had been made up according to the custom of the firm before
Christmas instead of on New Year's Day. He examined it again. It showed
tremendous profit. The mills were turning out quantities of material,
the demand for which was greater and the cost of production less than
ever before.

"I tell you," said the man to himself, "it was a master-stroke to
displace the men with children in the mills. They have reduced the cost
by four fifths. War has made the prices go up. This is not wealth, it is
riches beyond calculation."

He picked up a letter, read it over. It was a proposal from the
superintendent to clear more land, to build more buildings, to install
more machines, to employ more children and increase the profits greatly.

"I'll do it," said the man. "We can crush opposition absolutely. I'll
control the markets of the world. I'll build a fortune upon this
foundation so great that no one can comprehend it."

He stopped, leaned back in his chair, lifted his eyes up toward the
ceiling of the room and saw beyond it the kingdoms of this world and the
means unlimited to make him lord and master. He gave no thought to the
foundations, only to the structure erected by his fancy. How long he
indulged in dreams he scarcely realized, but presently he put his hands
on the arms of the chair and started to rise, saying,

"I'll telegraph the superintendent to go ahead."

He had scarcely formulated the words when right in front of him, seated
on his desk, he saw a young lad regarding him intently. He stopped,
petrified, in the position he had assumed.

"How did you get in? What are you doing here?" he asked. There was no
answer. "Come," said the man, shrinking back. "I can't imagine how you
got in here. If my people had not all gone I should hold them to strict
account. As it is, you--"

The room was suddenly filled with people. They came crowding through the
walls from every side and pressed close to him. Such people he had never
seen: wan, worn, stunted, pinched, starved, joyless. They were all
children, meagerly clothed, badly nourished, ill developed. They were
quite silent. They did not cry. They did not protest. They did not
argue. They did not plead. They did not laugh. They just looked at him.
They made no sound of any sort. He had children of his own and he had
known many children. He had never known so many gathered together
without a smile or a laugh.

His eye wandered around the room. They were very close to him and yet
they did not touch him. He turned to the desk where the lad had sat, but
he was no longer there and yet he well remembered his face. He knew
exactly how he looked. He turned to the nearest child and in some
strange way, although the poor, wretched face had not changed, his look
suggested the lad who had been his first visitor. He turned to another
and another. They all looked back at him in the same way with the same
eyes.

He threw his head up again and saw the castle of success of which he had
dreamed. He looked down again. This was the foundation. Slowly his hand
went to the desk. The little crowding figures drew back to give him
freedom of movement as he stretched his hand out for a telegraph-blank.
He drew it to him. He seized a pen and wrote rapidly:

"Build no more mills, take the children out of those already in
operation, put men in their places. We will be content with less profit
in the future."

He read over the telegram. The telephone was close at hand. He called up
the telegraph-office, dictated it and directed it to be sent
immediately. He had been so engrossed in this task that he had noticed
nothing else. Now he looked up. The room was still filled with children,
but they were all laughing. It was a soundless laugh, and yet he heard
it. And then the room was empty save for the child he had seen first and
vaguely. He had just time to catch a smile from his lips and then he,
too, was gone as silently and as strangely as he had appeared.

Was it a dream? No, there was the telegram in his hand! Had he sent it?
Again he called up the office on the telephone.

"Did you get a message from me just a minute ago?"

"Yes, do you want to recall it?"

The man thought a second.

"No," he said quietly--was it to himself or to his vanished
visitors?--"let it go. Merry Christmas."




III

The Friend




"INASMUCH AS YE HAVE DONE IT UNTO ONE OF THE LEAST OF THESE, MY
BRETHREN"




III

The Friend


"Is the story of the Christ Child true, Mommy?" quivered one little,
thin voice.

"Yes, they told us it was over at the mission Sunday-school," said the
