The Project Gutenberg eBook, Now or Never, by Oliver Optic


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net





Title: Now or Never

Author: Oliver Optic

Release Date: January 23, 2005  [eBook #14762]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NOW OR NEVER***


E-text prepared by Al Haines



NOW OR NEVER

Or, The Adventures of Bobby Bright.

A Story for Young Folks

by

OLIVER OPTIC

Author of _The Boat Club_, _All Aboard_, _In Doors and Out_, etc.

Boston: Lee and Shepard, Publishers.
New York: Lee, Shepard & Dillingham, 49 Greene Street

1872







TO

MY NEPHEW,

CHARLES HENRY POPE.


This Book

IS AFFECTIONATELY DEDICATED.




PREFACE

The story contained in this volume is a record of youthful struggles,
not only in the world without, but in the world within; and the success
of the little hero is not merely a gathering up of wealth and honors,
but a triumph over the temptations that beget the pilgrim on the plain
of life.  The attainment of worldly prosperity is not the truest
victory, and the author has endeavored to make the interest of his
story depend more on the hero's devotion to principles than on his
success in business.

Bobby Bright is a smart boy; perhaps the reader will think he is
altogether too smart for one of his years.  This is a progressive age,
and any thing which Young America may do need not surprise any person.
That little gentleman is older than his father, knows more than his
mother, can talk politics, smoke cigars, and drive a 2:40 horse.  He
orders "one stew" with as much ease as a man of forty, and can even
pronounce correctly the villanous names of sundry French and German
wines and liqueurs.  One would suppose, to hear him talk, that he had
been intimate with Socrates and Solon, with Napoleon and Noah Webster;
in short, that whatever he did not know was not worth knowing.

In the face of these manifestations of exuberant genius, it would be
absurd to accuse the author of making his hero do too much.  All he has
done is to give this genius a right direction; and for politics,
cigars, 2:40 horses, and "one stew," he has substituted the duties of a
rational and accountable being, regarding them as better fitted to
develop the young gentleman's mind, heart, and soul.

Bobby Bright is something more than a smart boy.  He is a good boy, and
makes a true man.  His daily life is the moral of the story, and the
author hopes that his devotion to principle will make a stronger
impression upon the mind of the young reader, than even the most
exciting incidents of his eventful career.

WILLIAM T. ADAMS.

DORCHESTER, Nov. 15, 1856.




CONTENTS.

CHAP. I.--In which Bobby goes a fishing, and catches a Horse.

CHAP. II.--In which Bobby blushes several Times, and does a Sum in
Arithmetic.

CHAP. III.--In which the Little Black House is bought, but not paid for.

CHAP. IV.--In which Bobby gets out of one Scrape, and into another.

CHAP. V.--In which Bobby gives his Note for Sixty Dollars.

CHAP. VI.--In which Bobby sets out on his Travels.

CHAP. VII.--In which Bobby stands up for certain "Inalienable Rights."

CHAP. VIII.--In which Mr. Timmins is astonished, and Bobby dines in
Chestnut Street.

CHAP. IX.--In which Bobby opens various Accounts, and wins his first
Victory.

CHAP X.--In which Bobby is a little too smart.

CHAP. XI.--In which Bobby strikes a Balance, and returns to Riverdale.

CHAP. XII.--In which Bobby astonishes sundry Persons, and pays Part of
his Note.

CHAP. XIII.--In which Bobby declines a Copartnership, and visits B----
again.

CHAP. XIV.--In which Bobby's Air Castle is upset, and Tom Spicer takes
to the Woods.

CHAP. XV.--In which Bobby gets into a Scrape, and Tom Spicer turns up
again.

CHAP. XVI.--In which Bobby finds "it is an ill wind that blows no one
any good."

CHAP. XVII.--In which Tom has a good Time, and Bobby meets with a
terrible Misfortune.

CHAT. XVIII.--In which Bobby takes French Leave, and camps in the Woods.

CHAP. XIX.--In which Bobby has a narrow Escape, and goes to Sea with
Sam Ray.

CHAP. XX.--In which the Clouds blow over, and Bobby is himself again.

CHAP. XXI.--In which Bobby steps off the Stage, and the Author must
finish "Now or Never."





CHAPTER I.

IN WHICH BOBBY GOES A FISHING, AND CATCHES A HORSE.

"By jolly!  I've got a bite!" exclaimed Tom Spicer, a rough,
hard-looking boy, who sat on a rock by the river's side, anxiously
watching the cork float on his line.

"Catch him, then," quietly responded Bobby Bright, who occupied another
rock near the first speaker, as he pulled up a large pout, and, without
any appearance of exultation, proceeded to unhook and place him in his
basket.

"You are a lucky dog, Bob," added Tom, as he glanced into the basket of
his companion, which now contained six good-sized fishes.  "I haven't
caught one yet."

"You don't fish deep enough."

"I fish on the bottom."

"That is too deep."

"It don't make any difference how I fish; it is all luck."

"Not all luck, Tom; there is something in doing it right."

"I shall not catch a fish," continued Tom, in despair.

"You'll catch something else, though, when you go home."

"Will I?"

"I'm afraid you will."

"Who says I will?"

"Didn't you tell me you were 'hooking jack'?

"Who is going to know any thing about it?"

"The master will know you are absent."

"I shall tell him my mother sent me over to the village on an errand."

"I never knew a fellow to 'hook jack,' yet, without getting found out."

"I shall not get found out unless you blow on me; and you wouldn't be
mean enough to do that;" and Tom glanced uneasily at his companion.

"Suppose your mother should ask me if I had seen you."

"You would tell her you have not, of course."

"Of course?"

"Why, wouldn't you?  Wouldn't you do as much as that for a fellow?"

"It would be a lie."

"A lie!  Humph!"

"I wouldn't lie for any fellow," replied Bobby, stoutly, as he pulled
in his seventh fish, and placed him in the basket.

"Wouldn't you?"

"No, I wouldn't."

"Then, let me tell you this; if you peach on me I'll smash your head."

Tom Spicer removed one hand from the fish pole and, doubling his fist,
shook it with energy at his companion.

"Smash away," replied Bobby, coolly.  "I shall not go out of my way to
tell tales; but if your mother or the master asks me the question, I
shall not lie."

"Won't you?"

"No, I won't."

"I'll bet you will;" and Tom dropped his fish pole, and was on the
point of jumping over to the rock occupied by Bobby, when the float of
the former disappeared beneath the surface of the water.

"You have got a bite," coolly interposed Bobby, pointing to the line.

Tom snatched the pole, and with a violent twitch, pulled up a big pout;
but his violence jerked the hook out of the fish's mouth, and he
disappeared beneath the surface of the river.

"Just my luck!" muttered Tom.

"Keep cool, then."

"I will fix you yet."

"All right; but you had better not let go your pole again, or you will
lose another fish."

"I'm bound to smash your head, though."

"No, you won't."

"Won't I?"

"Two can play at that game."

"Do you stump me?"

"No; I don't want to fight; I won't fight if I can help it."

"I'll bet you won't!" sneered Tom.

"But I will defend myself."

"Humph!"

"I am not a liar, and the fear of a flogging shall not make me tell a
lie."'

"Go to Sunday school--don't you?"

"I do; and besides that, my mother always taught me never to tell a
lie."

"Come! you needn't preach to me.  By and by, you will call me a liar."

"No, I won't; but just now you told me you meant to lie to your mother,
and to the master."

"What if I did?  That is none of your business."

"It is my business when you want me to lie for you, though; and I shall
not do it."

"Blow on me, and see what you will get."

"I don't mean to blow on you."

"Yes you do."

"I will not lie about it; that's all."

"By jolly! see that horse!" exclaimed Tom, suddenly, as he pointed to
the road leading to Riverdale centre.

"By gracious!" added Bobby, dropping his fish pole, as he saw the horse
running at a furious rate up the road from the village.

The mad animal was attached to a chaise, in which was seated a lady,
