  60. 'TIS SAID. How does the voice subordinate this
  phrase? (Introduction, p. 24.)

  66-69. Which are the emphatic words and why are they
  emphatic?

  77. What feeling is introduced here? How does the voice
  express it?

       *       *       *       *       *


THE OUTLAW

From "Rokeby"


  O, Brignall banks are wild and fair,
    And Greta woods are green,
  And you may gather garlands there,
    Would grace a summer queen.

  And as I rode by Dalton-Hall,                                        5
    Beneath the turrets high,
  A Maiden on the castle wall
    Was singing merrily,--

  "O, Brignall banks are fresh and fair,
    And Greta woods are green;                                        10
  I'd rather rove with Edmund there
    Than reign our English queen."--

  "If, Maiden, thou would'st wend with me,
    To leave both tower and town,
  Thou first must guess what life lead we                             15
    That dwell by dale and down.
  And if thou canst that riddle read,
    As read full well you may,
  Then to the greenwood shalt thou speed
    As blithe as Queen of May."--                                     20

  Yet sung she, "Brignall banks are fair,
    And Greta woods are green;
  I'd rather rove with Edmund there.
    Than reign our English queen.

  "I read you by your bugle-horn,                                     25
    And by your palfrey good,
  I read you for a Ranger sworn,
    To keep the king's greenwood."--
  "A Ranger, lady, winds his horn,
   And 'tis at peep of light;                                         30
  His blast is heard at merry morn,
    And mine at dead of night."--

  Yet sung she, "Brignall banks are fair,
    And Greta woods are gay;
  I would I were with Edmund there,                                   35
    To reign his Queen of May!

  "With burnish'd brand and musketoon,
    So gallantly you come,
  I read you for a bold Dragoon,
    That lists the tuck of drum."--                                   40
  "I list no more the tuck of drum,
    No more the trumpet hear;
  But when the beetle sounds his hum
    My comrades take the spear.

  "And O! though Brignall banks be fair                               45
    And Greta woods be gay,
  Yet mickle must the maiden dare
    Would reign my Queen of May!

  "Maiden! a nameless life I lead,
    A nameless death I'll die!                                        50
  The fiend whose lantern lights the mead
    Were better mate than I!
  And when I'm with my comrades met
    Beneath the greenwood bough,
  What once we were we all forget,                                    55
    Nor think what we are now.

  "Yet Brignall banks are fresh and fair,
    And Greta woods are green,
  And you may gather garlands there
    Would grace a summer queen."                                      60

      --_Sir Walter Scott_


  PREPARATORY.--"The Life of an Outlaw." Speak on this
  subject, illustrating from such characters as Rob Roy,
  Robin Hood, etc., and emphasizing the pathos of such a
  life.

  For dramatic rendering see preparatory notes on
  _Highland Hospitality_.

  1-4. What Stress indicates the state of mind reflected
  by these lines? (Introduction, p. 29.)

  3, 11. What Inflection is placed on THERE?
  (Introduction, p. 16.)

  12. What word may be supplied after REIGN? How is this
  indicated in the reading? (Introduction, p. 10.)

  13-20. Read these lines with a view to Perspective.
  (Introduction, p. 33.)

  Give examples of Grouping throughout the poem and show
  how the Pause is affected. (Introduction, p. 11.)

  What words in stanza iii are emphatic through contrast?
  In stanza v?

  What feeling in the last half of stanza v?
  (Introduction, pp. 10-12.) In what Time, Pitch, and
  Force are these lines read? Give your reasons.

       *       *       *       *       *


OF STUDIES

From the "Essays"


Studies serve for delight, for ornament, and for ability. Their chief
use for delight, is in privateness and retiring; for ornament, is in
discourse; and for ability, is in the judgment and disposition of
business. For expert men can execute, and perhaps judge of
particulars, one by one; but the general counsels, and the plots, and
marshalling of affairs, come best from those that are learned.

To spend too much time in studies, is sloth; to use them too much for
ornament, is affectation; to make judgment wholly by their rules, is
the humour of a scholar. They perfect nature and are perfected by
experience: for natural abilities are like natural plants, that need
pruning by study; and studies themselves do give forth directions too
much at large, except they be bounded in by experience.

Crafty men contemn studies; simple men admire them; and wise men use
them; for they teach not their own use; but that is a wisdom without
them, and above them, won by observation. Read not to contradict and
confute; nor to believe and take for granted; nor to find talk and
discourse; but to weigh and consider.

Some books are to be tasted, others to be swallowed, and some few to
be chewed and digested; that is, some books are to be read only in
parts; others to be read, but not curiously; and some few to be read
wholly, and with diligence and attention. Some books also may be read
by deputy, and extracts made of them by others; but that would be only
in the less important arguments, and the meaner sort of books; else
distilled books are like common distilled waters, flashy things.

Reading maketh a full man; conference a ready man; and writing an
exact man. And therefore, if a man write little, he had need have a
good memory, if he confer little, he had need have a present wit; and
if he read little, he had need have much cunning, to seem to know that
he doth not.

If a man's wit be wandering, let him study the mathematics; for in
demonstrations, if his wit be called away never so little, he must
begin again; if his wits be not apt to distinguish or find
differences, let him study the schoolmen; if he be not apt to beat
over matters, and to call up one thing to prove and illustrate
another, let him study the lawyers' cases. So every defect of the mind
may have a special receipt.

      --_Lord Bacon_


  Preparatory.--Observe the sentence structure employed
  throughout this extract, and make a list of the
  antithetical words and phrases.

  This lesson may be used as an exercise to illustrate the
  principle of Inflection as applied to antithetical words
  or phrases and to series of words or phrases parallel in
  construction. (Introduction, p. 20.)

       *       *       *       *       *


THE INFLUENCE OF ATHENS

From essay "On Mitford's History of Greece"


If we consider merely the subtlety of disquisition, the force of
imagination, the perfect energy and elegance of expression, which
characterize the great works of Athenian genius, we must pronounce
them intrinsically most valuable. But what shall we say when we
reflect that from hence have sprung, directly or indirectly, all the
noblest creations of the human intellect; that from hence were the
vast accomplishments and the brilliant fancy of Cicero, the withering
fire of Juvenal, the plastic imagination of Dante, the humour of
Cervantes, the comprehension of Bacon, the wit of Butler, the supreme
and universal excellence of Shakespeare?

All the triumphs of truth and genius over prejudice and power, in
every country and in every age, have been the triumphs of Athens.
Wherever a few great minds have made a stand against violence and
fraud, in the cause of liberty and reason, there has been her spirit
in the midst of them; inspiring, encouraging, consoling;--by the
lonely lamp of Erasmus, by the restless bed of Pascal, in the tribune
of Mirabeau, in the cell of Galileo, on the scaffold of Sidney.

But who shall estimate her influence on private happiness? Who shall
say how many thousands have been made wiser, happier, and better, by
those pursuits in which she has taught mankind to engage; to how many
the studies which took their rise from her have been wealth in
poverty, liberty in bondage, health in sickness, society in solitude?

Her power is, indeed, manifested at the bar, in the senate, in the
field of battle, in the schools of philosophy. But these are not her
glory. Wherever literature consoles sorrow, or assuages pain; wherever
it brings gladness to eyes which fail with wakefulness and tears, and
ache for the dark house and the long sleep,--there is exhibited, in
its noblest form, the immortal influence of Athens.

The dervish, in the Arabian tale, did not hesitate to abandon to his
comrade the camels with their loads of jewels and gold, while he
retained the casket of that mysterious juice which enabled him to
behold at one glance all the hidden riches of the universe. Surely it
is no exaggeration to say that no external advantage is to be compared
with that purification of the intellectual eye which gives us to
contemplate the infinite wealth of the mental world, all the hoarded
treasures of its primeval dynasties, all the shapeless ore of its yet
unexplored mines. This is the gift of Athens to man.

Her freedom and her power have, for more than twenty centuries, been
annihilated; her people have degenerated into timid slaves; her
language, into a barbarous jargon; her temples have been given up to
the successive depredations of Romans, Turks, and Scotchmen; but her
intellectual empire is imperishable.

And when those who have rivalled her greatness shall have shared her
fate; when civilization and knowledge shall have fixed their abode in
distant continents; when the sceptre shall have passed away from
England; when, perhaps, travellers from distant regions shall in vain
labour to decipher on some mouldering pedestal the name of our
proudest chief, shall hear savage hymns chaunted to some misshapen
idol over the ruined dome of our proudest temple, and shall see a
single naked fisherman wash his nets in the river of the ten thousand
masts,--her influence and her glory will still survive,--fresh in
eternal youth, exempt from mutability and decay, immortal as the
intellectual principle from which they derived their origin, and over
which they exercise their control.

      --_Macaulay_


  Illustrate from this lesson the principle of Inflection
  as applied to (1) a series of words parallel in
  construction; (2) rhetorical questions.

  How should the principal clause in the last paragraph be
  made prominent by the voice? (Introduction, p. 33.)

       *       *       *       *       *


NATIONAL MORALITY


1. I believe there is no permanent greatness to a nation except it be
based upon morality. I do not care for military greatness or military
renown. I care for the condition of the people among whom I live.
There is no man in England who is less likely to speak irreverently of
the Crown and Monarchy of England than I am; but crowns, coronets,
mitres, military display, the pomp of war, wide colonies, and a huge
empire, are, in my view, all trifles light as air, and not worth
considering, unless with them you can have a fair share of comfort,
contentment, and happiness, among the great body of the people.
Palaces, baronial castles, great halls, stately mansions, do not make
a nation. The nation in every country dwells in the cottage; and
unless the light of your Constitution can shine there, unless the
beauty of your legislation and the excellence of your statesmanship
are impressed there on the feelings and condition of the people, rely
upon it, you have yet to learn the duties of government.

2. I have not pleaded, as you have observed, that this country should
remain without adequate and scientific means of defence. I acknowledge
it to be the duty of your statesmen, acting upon the known opinions
and principles of ninety-nine out of every one hundred persons in the
country, at all times, with all possible moderation, but with all
possible efficiency, to take steps which shall preserve order within
and on the confines of your kingdom. But I shall repudiate and
denounce the expenditure of every shilling, the engagement of every
man, the employment of every ship which has no object but
intermeddling in the affairs of other countries and endeavouring to
extend the boundaries of an Empire which is already large enough to
satisfy the greatest ambition, and I fear is much too large for the
highest statesmanship to which any man has yet attained.

3. The most ancient of profane historians has told us that the
Scythians of his time were a very warlike people, and that they
elevated an old scimitar upon a platform as a symbol of Mars, for to
Mars alone, I believe, they built altars and offered sacrifices. To
this scimitar they offered sacrifices of horses and cattle, the main
wealth of the country, and more costly sacrifices than to all the rest
of their gods. I often ask myself whether we are at all advanced in
one respect beyond those Scythians. What are our contributions to
charity, to education, to morality, to religion, to justice, and to
civil government, when compared with the wealth we expend in
sacrifices to the old scimitar?

4. Two nights ago I addressed in this hall a vast assembly composed to
a great extent of your countrymen, who have no political power, who
are at work from the dawn of the day to the evening, and who have
therefore limited means of informing themselves on these great
subjects. Now I am privileged to speak to a somewhat different
audience. You represent those of your great community who have a more
complete education, who have on some points greater intelligence, and
in whose hands reside the power and influence of the district. I am
speaking, too, within the hearing of those whose gentle nature, whose
finer instincts, whose purer minds, have not suffered as some of us
have suffered in the turmoil and strife of life. You can mould
opinion, you can create political power,--you cannot think a good
thought on this subject and communicate it to your neighbours,--you
cannot make these points topics of discussion in your social circles
and more general meetings, without affecting sensibly and speedily the
course which the government of your country will pursue. May I ask
you, then, to believe, as I do most devoutly believe, that the moral
law was not written for men alone in their individual character, but
that it was written as well for nations, and for nations great as this
of which we are citizens. If nations reject and deride that moral law,
there is a penalty which will inevitably follow. It may not come at
once, it may not come in our lifetime; but, rely upon it, the great
Italian is not a poet only, but a prophet, when he says:

  The sword of heaven is not in haste to smite,
  Nor yet doth linger.

5. We have experience, we have beacons, we have landmarks enough. We
know what the past has cost us, we know how much and how far we have
wandered, but we are not left without a guide. It is true, we have
not, as an ancient people had, Urim and Thummin--those oraculous gems
in Aaron's breast--from which to take counsel, but we have the
unchangeable and eternal principles of the moral law to guide us, and
only so far as we walk by that guidance can we be permanently a great
nation, or our people a happy people.

      --_The Right Honourable John Bright_


  BARONIAL, CASTLES, CHARACTER, PAST. (Appendix A, 1.)

  Par. 1. MILITARY GREATNESS, MILITARY RENOWN. Note the
  transferred Emphasis. (Introduction, pp. 31 and 32.)

  CROWNS, CORONETS, ETC. Explain the Inflection on each
  member of this series. Give similar examples from this
  paragraph and from Pars. 3, 4, and 5.

  UNLESS WITH THEM, ETC. How does the voice prepare the
  listener for this clause? Give a similar example from
  Par. 4.

  YOU HAVE YET TO LEARN, ETC. How is this clause made
  prominent?

  Par. 2. Give an analysis of the second sentence from the
  standpoint of Perspective.

  THE EXPENDITURE ... SHIP. How is the Climax brought out?

  FOR THE HIGHTEST ... ATTAINED. Note the Grouping. Give
  another example from this sentence.

  Par. 4. NATIONS. What Inflection on this word? With what
  is it contrasted?

       *       *       *       *       *


HAMLET'S ADVICE TO THE PLAYERS

Act III. Scene 2


Speak the speech, I pray you, as I pronounced it to
you, trippingly on the tongue: but if you mouth it, as
many of your players do, I had as lief the town-crier
spoke my lines. Nor do not saw the air too much with
your hand, thus; but use all gently: for in the very                   5
torrent, tempest, and, as I may say, the whirlwind of
passion, you must acquire and beget a temperance that
may give it smoothness. O, it offends me to the soul to
hear a robustious periwig-pated fellow tear a passion to
tatters, to very rags, to split the ears of the groundlings,          10
who, for the most part, are capable of nothing but
inexplicable dumb-shows and noise: I would have such
a fellow whipped for o'erdoing Termagant; it out-herods
Herod: pray you, avoid it.

Be not too tame neither, but let your own discretion                  15
be your tutor: suit the action to the word, the word to
the action; with this special observance, that you o'erstep
not the modesty of nature: for anything so overdone
is from the purpose of playing, whose end, both at the
first and now, was and is, to hold, as 'twere, the mirror             20
