The work slacked off; finally, there was nothing but the two dredges
doing anything, and then they backed away and let down, and it was all
over but standing around and watching the scattered fire burn itself
out. I looked at my watch. It was two hours since the first alarm had
come in. I took a last swing around, got the spaceport people
gathering up wax and hauling it away, and the broken lake of fire that
extended downtown from where the stacks had been, and then I floated
my jeep over to the sandwich-and-coffee stand and let down, getting
out. Maybe, I thought, I could make some kind of deal with somebody
like Interworld News on this. It would make a nice thrilling
feature-program item. Just a little slice of life from Fenris, the
Garden Spot of the Galaxy.

I got myself a big zhoumy-loin sandwich with hot sauce and a cup of
coffee, made sure that my portable radio was on, and circulated among
the fire fighters, getting comments. Everybody had been a hero,
natch, and they were all very unbashful about admitting it. There was
a great deal of wisecracking about Al Devis buying himself a ringside
seat for the fire he'd started. Then I saw Cesario Vieira and joined
him.

"Have all the fire you want, for a while?" I asked him.

"Brother, and how! We could have used a little of this over on Hermann
Reuch's Land, though. Have you seen Tom around anywhere?"

"No. Have you?"

"I saw him over there, about an hour ago. I guess he stayed on this
side. After they started blowing it, I was over on Al Devis's side."
He whistled softly. "Was that a mess!"

There was still a crowd at the fire, but they seemed all to be
townspeople. The hunters had gathered where Joe Kivelson had been
directing operations. We finished our sandwiches and went over to join
them. As soon as we got within earshot, I found that they were all in
a very ugly mood.

"Don't fool around," one man was saying as we came up. "Don't even
bother looking for a rope. Just shoot them as soon as you see them."

Well, I thought, a couple of million sols' worth of tallow-wax, in
which they all owned shares, was something to get mean about. I said
something like that.

"It's not that," another man said. "It's Tom Kivelson."

"What about him?" I asked, alarmed.

"Didn't you hear? He got splashed with burning wax," the hunter said.
"His whole back was on fire; I don't know whether he's alive now or
not."

So that was who I'd seen screaming in agony while the firemen tore his
burning clothes away. I pushed through, with Cesario behind me, and
found Joe Kivelson and Mohandas Feinberg and Corkscrew Finnegan and
Oscar Fujisawa and a dozen other captains and ships' officers in a
huddle.

"Joe," I said, "I just heard about Tom. Do you know anything yet?"

Joe turned. "Oh, Walt. Why, as far as we know, he's alive. He was
alive when they got him to the hospital."

"That's at the spaceport?" I unhooked my handphone and got Dad. He'd
heard about a man being splashed, but didn't know who it was. He said
he'd call the hospital at once. A few minutes later, he was calling me
back.

"He's been badly burned, all over the back. They're preparing to do a
deep graft on him. They said his condition was serious, but he was
alive five minutes ago."

I thanked him and hung up, relaying the information to the others.
They all looked worried. When the screen girl at a hospital tells you
somebody's serious, instead of giving you the well-as-can-be-expected
routine, you know it is serious. Anybody who makes it alive to a
hospital, these days, has an excellent chance, but injury cases do
die, now and then, after they've been brought in. They are the
"serious" cases.

"Well, I don't suppose there's anything we can do," Joe said heavily.

"We can clean up on the gang that started this fire," Oscar Fujisawa
said. "Do it now; then if Tom doesn't make it, he's paid for in
advance."

Oscar, I recalled, was the one who had been the most impressed with
Bish Ware's argument that lynching Steve Ravick would cost the hunters
the four million sols they might otherwise be able to recover, after a
few years' interstellar litigation, from his bank account on Terra.
That reminded me that I hadn't even thought of Bish since I'd left the
_Times_. I called back. Dad hadn't heard a word from him.

"What's the situation at Hunters' Hall?" I asked.

"Everything's quiet there. The police left when Hallstock commandeered
that fire-fighting equipment. They helped the shipyard men get it out,
and then they all went to the Municipal Building. As far as I know,
both Ravick and Belsher are still in Hunters' Hall. I'm in contact
with the vehicles on guard at the approaches; I'll call them now."

I relayed that. The others nodded.

"Nip Spazoni and a few others are bringing men and guns up from the
docks and putting a cordon around the place on the Main City Level,"
Oscar said. "Your father will probably be hearing that they're moving
into position now."

He had. He also said that he had called all the vehicles on the First
and Second Levels Down; they all reported no activity in Hunters' Hall
except one jeep on Second Level Down, which did not report at all.

Everybody was puzzled about that.

"That's the jeep that reported Bish Ware going in on the bottom,"
Mohandas Feinberg said. "I wonder if somebody inside mightn't have
gotten both the man on the jeep and Bish."

"He could have left the jeep," Joe said. "Maybe he went inside after
Bish."

"Funny he didn't call in and say so," somebody said.

"No, it isn't," I contradicted. "Manufacturers' claims to the
contrary, there is no such thing as a tap-proof radio. Maybe he wasn't
supposed to leave his post, but if he did, he used his head not
advertising it."

"That makes sense," Oscar agreed. "Well, whatever happened, we're not
doing anything standing around up here. Let's get it started."

He walked away, raising his voice and calling, "_Pequod_! _Pequod_!
All hands on deck!"

The others broke away from the group, shouting the names of their
ships to rally their crews. I hurried over to the jeep and checked my
equipment. There wasn't too much film left in the big audiovisual, so
I replaced it with a fresh sound-and-vision reel, good for another
couple of hours, and then lifted to the ceiling. Worrying about Tom
wouldn't help Tom, and worrying about Bish wouldn't help Bish, and I
had a job to do.

What I was getting now, and I was glad I was starting a fresh reel for
it, was the beginning of the First Fenris Civil War. A long time from
now, when Fenris was an important planet in the Federation, maybe
they'd make today a holiday, like Bastille Day or the Fourth of July
or Federation Day. Maybe historians, a couple of centuries from now,
would call me an important primary source, and if Cesario's religion
was right, maybe I'd be one of them, saying, "Well, after all, is
Boyd such a reliable source? He was only seventeen years old at the
time."

Finally, after a lot of yelling and confusion, the Rebel Army got
moving. We all went up to Main City Level and went down Broadway,
spreading out side streets when we began running into the cordon that
had been thrown around Hunters' Hall. They were mostly men from the
waterfront who hadn't gotten to the wax fire, and they must have
stripped the guns off half the ships in the harbor and mounted them on
lorries or cargo skids.

Nobody, not even Joe Kivelson, wanted to begin with any massed frontal
attack on Hunters' Hall.

"We'll have to bombard the place," he was saying. "We try to rush it
and we'll lose half our gang before we get in. One man with good cover
and a machine gun's good for a couple of hundred in the open."

"Bish may be inside," I mentioned.

"Yes," Oscar said, "and even aside from that, that building was built
with our money. Let's don't burn the house down to get rid of the
cockroaches."

"Well, how are you going to do it, then?" Joe wanted to know. Rule out
frontal attack and Joe's at the end of his tactics.

"You stay up here. Keep them amused with a little smallarms fire at
the windows and so on. I'll take about a dozen men and go down to
Second Level. If we can't do anything else, we can bring a couple of
skins of tallow-wax down and set fire to it and smoke them out."

That sounded like a pretty expensive sort of smudge, but seeing how
much wax Ravick had burned uptown, it was only fair to let him in on
some of the smoke. I mentioned that if we got into the building and up
to Main City Level, we'd need some way of signaling to avoid being
shot by our own gang, and got the wave-length combination of the
Pequod scout boat, which Joe and Oscar were using for a command car.
Oscar picked ten or twelve men, and they got into a lorry and went
uptown and down a vehicle shaft to Second Level. I followed in my
jeep, even after Oscar and his crowd let down and got out, and hovered
behind them as they advanced on foot to Hunters' Hall.

The Second Level Down was the vehicle storage, where the derricks and
other equipment had been kept. It was empty now except for a
workbench, a hand forge and some other things like that, a few drums
of lubricant, and several piles of sheet metal. Oscar and his men got
inside and I followed, going up to the ceiling. I was the one who saw
the man lying back of a pile of sheet metal, and called their
attention.

He wore boat-clothes and had black whiskers, and he had a knife and a
pistol on his belt. At first I thought he was dead. A couple of
Oscar's followers, dragging him out, said:

"He's been sleep-gassed."

Somebody else recognized him. He was the lone man who had been on
guard in the jeep. The jeep was nowhere in sight.

I began to be really worried. My lighter gadget could have been what
had gassed him. It probably was; there weren't many sleep-gas weapons
on Fenris. I had to get fills made up specially for mine. So it looked
to me as though somebody had gotten mine off Bish, and then used it
to knock out our guard. Taken it off his body I guessed. That crowd
wasn't any more interested in taking prisoners alive than we were.

We laid the man on a workbench and put a rolled-up sack under his head
for a pillow. Then we started up the enclosed stairway. I didn't think
we were going to run into any trouble, though I kept my hand close to
my gun. If they'd knocked out the guard, they had a way out, and none
of them wanted to stay in that building any longer than they had to.

The First Level Down was mostly storerooms, with nobody in any of
them. As we went up the stairway to the Main City Level, we could hear
firing outside. Nobody inside was shooting back. I unhooked my
handphone.

"We're in," I said when Joe Kivelson answered. "Stop the shooting;
we're coming up to the vehicle port."

"Might as well. Nobody's paying any attention to it," he said.

The firing slacked off as the word was passed around the perimeter,
and finally it stopped entirely. We went up into the open arched
vehicle port. It was barricaded all around, and there were half a
dozen machine guns set up, but not a living thing.

"We're going up," I said. "They've all lammed out. The place is
empty."

"You don't know that," Oscar chided. "It might be bulging with
Ravick's thugs, waiting for us to come walking up and be mowed down."

Possible. Highly improbable, though, I thought. The escalators weren't
running, and we weren't going to alert any hypothetical ambush by
starting them. We tiptoed up, and I even drew my pistol to show that I
wasn't being foolhardy. The big social room was empty. A couple of us
went over and looked behind the bar, which was the only hiding place
in it. Then we went back to the rear and tiptoed to the third floor.

The meeting room was empty. So were the offices behind it. I looked in
all of them, expecting to find Bish Ware's body. Maybe a couple of
other bodies, too. I'd seen him shoot the tread-snail, and I didn't
think he'd die unpaid for. In Steve Ravick's office, the safe was open
and a lot of papers had been thrown out. I pointed that out to Oscar,
and he nodded. After seeing that, he seemed to relax, as though he
wasn't expecting to find anybody any more. We went to the third floor.
Ravick's living quarters were there, and they were magnificently
luxurious. The hunters, whose money had paid for all that magnificence
and luxury, cursed.

There were no bodies there, either, or on the landing stage above. I
unhooked the radio again.

"You can come in, now," I said. "The place is empty. Nobody here but
us Vigilantes."

"Huh?" Joe couldn't believe that. "How'd they get out?"

"They got out on the Second Level Down." I told him about the
sleep-gassed guard.

"Did you bring him to? What did he say?"

"Nothing; we didn't. We can't. You get sleep-gassed, you sleep till
you wake up. That ought to be two to four hours for this fellow."

"Well, hold everything; we're coming in."

We were all in the social room; a couple of the men had poured drinks
or drawn themselves beers at the bar and rung up no sale on the cash
register. Somebody else had a box of cigars he'd picked up in Ravick's
quarters on the fourth floor and was passing them around. Joe and
about two or three hundred other hunters came crowding up the
escalator, which they had turned on below.

"You didn't find Bish Ware, either, I'll bet," Joe was saying.

"I'm afraid they took him along for a hostage," Oscar said. "The guard
was knocked out with Walt's gas gadget, that Bish was carrying."

"Ha!" Joe cried. "Bet you it was the other way round; Bish took them
out."

That started an argument. While it was going on, I went to the
communication screen and got the _Times_, and told Dad what had
happened.

"Yes," he said. "That was what I was afraid you'd find. Glenn Murell
called in from the spaceport a few minutes ago. He says Mort Hallstock
came in with his car, and he heard from some of the workmen that Bish
Ware, Steve Ravick and Leo Belsher came in on the Main City Level in a
jeep. They claimed protection from a mob, and Captain Courtland's
police are protecting them."




19

MASKS OFF


There was dead silence for two or three seconds. If a kitten had
sneezed, everybody would have heard it. Then it started, first an
inarticulate roar, and then a babel of unprintabilities. I thought I'd
heard some bad language from these same men in this room when Leo
Belsher's announcement of the price cut had been telecast, but that
was prayer meeting to this. Dad was still talking. At least, I saw his
lips move in the screen.

"Say that again, Ralph," Oscar Fujisawa shouted.

Dad must have heard him. At least, his lips moved again, but I wasn't
a lip reader and neither was Oscar. Oscar turned to the mob--by now,
it was that, pure and simple--and roared, in a voice like a foghorn,
"_Shut up and listen!_" A few of those closest to him heard him. The
rest kept on shouting curses. Oscar waited a second, and then pointed
his submachine gun at the ceiling and hammered off the whole clip.

"Shut up, a couple of hundred of you, and listen!" he commanded, on
the heels of the blast. Then he turned to the screen again. "Now,
Ralph; what was it you were saying?"

"Hallstock got to the spaceport about half an hour ago," Dad said. "He
bought a ticket to Terra. Sigurd Ngozori's here; he called the bank
and one of the clerks there told him that Hallstock had checked out
his whole account, around three hundred thousand sols. Took some of it
in cash and the rest in Banking Cartel drafts. Murell says that his
information is that Bish Ware, Steve Ravick and Leo Belsher arrived
earlier, about an hour ago. He didn't see them himself, but he talked
with spaceport workmen who did."

The men who had crowded up to the screen seemed to have run out of
oaths and obscenities now. Oscar was fitting another clip into his
submachine gun.

"Well, we'll have to go to the spaceport and get them," he said. "And
take four ropes instead of three."

"You'll have to fight your way in," Dad told him. "Odin Dock &
Shipyard won't let you take people out of their spaceport without a
