"Well, it seems as if we had."

"But what good will it do us," argued Benjy, becoming more earnest in
the discussion, "if it's all surrounded by a ring of ice such as we have
passed over on sledges."

"If," repeated Alf, "in that `if' lies the whole question.  No doubt
Enterprise has fought heroically for centuries to overleap this supposed
ring of ice, and science has stood expectant on the edge, looking
eagerly for the day when human perseverance shall reveal the secrets of
the Far North.  It is true, also, that _we_ at last appear to have
penetrated into the great unknown, but who shall say that the so-called
ice-ring has been fully examined?  Our explorations have been hitherto
confined to one or two parts of it.  We may yet find an ever-open
entrance to this open Polar sea, and our ships may yet be seen sailing
regularly to and fro over the North Pole."

"Just so," said Benjy, "a North Pole steam line once a month to Japan
and back--first class accommodation for second class fares.  Walrus and
white bear parties dropped on the way at the Pole Star Hotel, an easy
trip from the Pole itself, which may be made in Eskimo cabs in summer
and reindeer sleighs in winter.  Return tickets available for six
months--touching at China, India, Nova Zembla, Kamtschatka, and Iceland.
Splendid view of Hecla and the great Mer de Glace of Greenland--fogs
permitting.--Don't eat so much, Butterface, else bu'stin' will surely be
your doom."

"Your picture is perhaps a little overdrawn, Ben," rejoined Alf with a
smile.

"So would the ancients have said," retorted Benjy, "if you had
prophesied that in the nineteenth century our steamers would pass
through the Straits of Hercules, up the Mediterranean, and over the land
to India; or that our cousins' steam cars would go rattling across the
great prairies of America, through the vast forests, over and under the
Rocky Mountains from the States to California, in seven days; or that
the telephone or electric light should ever come into being."

"Well, you see, Butterface," said Alf, "there is a great deal to be said
in favour of Arctic exploration, even at the present day, and despite
all the rebuffs that we have received.  Sir Edward Sabine, one of the
greatest Arctic authorities, says of the route from the Atlantic to the
Pacific, that it is the greatest geographical achievement which can be
attempted, and that it will be the crowning enterprise of those Arctic
researches in which England has hitherto had the pre-eminence.  Why,
Butterface," continued Alf, warming with his subject, while the
enthusiastic negro listened as it were with every feature of his
expressive face, and even the volatile Benjy became attentive, "why,
there is no telling what might be the advantages that would arise from
systematic exploration of these unknown regions, which cover a space of
not less than two million, five hundred thousand square miles.  It would
advance the science of hydrography, and help to solve some of the
difficult problems connected with Equatorial and Polar currents.  It
would enable us, it is said, by a series of pendulum observations at or
near the Pole, to render essential service to the science of geology, to
form a mathematical theory of the physical condition of the earth, and
to ascertain its exact conformation.  It would probably throw light on
the wonderful phenomena of magnetism and atmospheric electricity and the
mysterious Aurora Borealis--to say nothing of the flora of these regions
and the animal life on the land and in the sea."

"Why, Alf," exclaimed Benjy in surprise, "I had no idea you were so
deeply learned on these subjects."

"Deeply learned!" echoed Alf with a laugh, "why, I have only a
smattering of them.  Just knowledge enough to enable me in some small
degree to appreciate the vast amount of knowledge which I have yet to
acquire.  Why do you look perplexed, Butterface?"

"'Cause, massa, you's too deep for me altogidder.  My brain no big
'nough to hold it all."

"And your skull's too thick to let it through to the little blob of
brain that you do possess," said Benjy with a kindly-contemptuous look
at his sable friend.  "Oh! flatnose, you're a terrible thick-head."

"You's right dere, massa," replied the negro, with a gratified smile at
what he deemed a compliment.  "You should ha' seed me dat time when I
was leetle boy down in Ole Virginny, whar dey riz me, when my gran'moder
she foun' me stickin' my fist in de molasses-jar an' lickin' it off.
She swarmed at me an' fetch me one kick, she did, an' sent me slap troo
a pannel ob de loft door, an' tumbled me down de back stair, whar I
felled over de edge an' landed on de top ob a tar barrel w'ich my head
run into.  I got on my legs, I did, wiv difficulty, an' runned away
never a bit de worse--not even a headache--only it was tree months afore
I got dat tar rightly out o' my wool.  Yes, my head's t'ick _'nough_."

While Butterface was speaking, Leo and the Captain were seen
approaching, and the three rose to meet them.  There was a grave
solemnity in the Captain's look which alarmed them.

"Nothing wrong I hope, uncle?" said Alf.

"Wrong! no, lad, there's nothing wrong.  On the contrary, everything is
right.  Why, where do you think we have got to?"

"A hundred and fifty miles from the Pole," said Alf.

"Less, less," said Leo, with an excited look.

"We are not more," said the Captain slowly, as he took off his hat and
wiped his brow, "not more than a hundred and forty miles from it."

"Then we could be there in three days or sooner, with a good breeze,"
cried Benjy, whose enthusiasm was aroused.

"Ay, Ben, if there was nothing in the way; but it's quite clear from
what Chingatok says, that we are drawing near to his native land, which
cannot be more than fifty miles distant, if so much.  You remember he
has told us his home is one of a group of islands, some of which are
large and some small; some mountainous and others flat and swampy,
affording food and shelter to myriads of wild-fowl; so, you see, after
we get there our progress northward through such a country, without
roads or vehicles, won't be at the rate of ten miles an hour by any
means."

"Besides," added Leo, "it would not be polite to Chingatok's countrymen
if we were to leave them immediately after arriving.  Perhaps they would
not let us go, so I fear that we shan't gain the end of our journey yet
a while, but that does not matter much, for we're sure to make it out at
last."

"What makes the matter more uncertain," resumed the Captain, as they
sauntered back to camp, "is the fact that this northern archipelago is
peopled by different tribes of Eskimos, some of whom are of a warlike
spirit and frequently give the others trouble.  However, Chingatok says
we shall have no difficulty in reaching this Nothing--as he will insist
on styling the Pole, ever since I explained to him that it was not a
real but an imaginary point."

"I wonder how Anders ever got him to understand what an imaginary point
is," said Benjy.

"That has puzzled me too," returned the Captain, "but he did get it
screwed into him somehow, and the result is--Nothing!"

"Out of nothing nothing comes," remarked Leo, as the giant suddenly
appeared from behind a rock, "but assuredly _nothing_ can beat Chingatok
in size or magnificence, which is more than anything else can."

The Eskimo had been searching for the absentees to announce that dinner
was ready, and that Toolooha was impatient to begin; they all therefore
quickened their pace, and soon after came within scent of the savoury
mess which had been prepared for them by the giant's squat but amiable
mother.



CHAPTER SIXTEEN.

ARRIVAL IN POLOELAND.

Fortune, which had hitherto proved favourable to our brave explorers,
did not desert them at the eleventh hour.

Soon after their arrival at Refuge Island a fair wind sprang up from the
south, and when the _Charity_ had been carefully patched and repaired,
the kites were sent up and the voyage was continued.  That day and night
they spent again upon the boundless sea, for the island was soon left
out of sight behind them, though the wind was not very fresh.

Towards morning it fell calm altogether, obliging them to haul down the
kites and take to the oars.

"It can't be far off now, Chingatok," said the Captain, who became
rather impatient as the end drew near.

"Not far," was the brief reply.

"Land ho!" shouted Benjy, about half-an-hour after that.

But Benjy was forced to admit that anxiety had caused him to take an
iceberg on the horizon for land.

"Well, anyhow you must admit," said Benjy, on approaching the berg,
"that it's big enough for a fellow to mistake it for a mountain.  I
wonder what it's doing here without any brothers or sisters to keep it
company."

"Under-currents brought it here, lad," said the Captain.  "You see, such
a monster as that must go very deep down, and the warm under-current has
not yet melted away enough of his base to permit the surface-current to
carry him south like the smaller members of his family.  He is still
travelling north, but that won't last long.  He'll soon become small
enough to put about and go the other way.  I never saw a bigger fellow
than that, Benjy.  Hayes, the American, mentions one which he measured,
about 315 feet high, and nearly a mile long.  It had been grounded for
two years.  He calculated that there must have been seven times as much
of it below water as there was above, so that it was stranded in nearly
half-a-mile depth of water.  This berg cannot be far short of that one
in size."

"Hm! probably then his little brothers and sisters are being now crushed
to bits in Baffin's Bay," said Benjy.

"Not unlikely, Ben, if they've not already been melted in the Atlantic,
which will be this one's fate at last--sooner or later."

From a pool on this berg they obtained a supply of pure fresh water.

When our explorers did at last sight the land it came upon them
unexpectedly, in the form of an island so low that they were quite close
before observing it.  The number of gulls hovering above it might have
suggested its presence, but as these birds frequently hover in large
flocks over shoals of small fish, little attention was paid to them.

"Is this your native land, Chingatok?" asked the Captain, quickly.

"No, it is over there," said the Eskimo, pointing to the distant
horizon; "this is the first of the islands."

As they gazed they perceived a mountain-shaped cloud so faint and far
away that it had almost escaped observation.  Advancing slowly, this
cloud was seen to take definite form and colour.

"I _knew_ it was!" said Benjy, "but was afraid of making another
mistake."

Had the boy or his father looked attentively at the giant just then,
they would have seen that his colour deepened, his eyes glittered, and
his great chest heaved a little more than was its wont, as he looked
over his shoulder while labouring at the oars.  Perhaps we should have
said played with the oars, for they were mere toys in his grasp.
Chingatok's little mother also was evidently affected by the sight of
home.  But the Captain and his son saw it not--they were too much
occupied with their own thoughts and feelings.  To the Englishmen the
sight of land roused only one great all-engrossing thought--the North
Pole! which, despite the absurdity of the idea, _would_ present itself
in the form of an upright post of terrific magnitude--a worthy
axle-tree, as it were, for the world to revolve upon.  To the big Eskimo
land presented itself in the form of a palatial stone edifice measuring
fifteen feet by twelve, with a dear pretty little wife choking herself
in the smoke of a cooking-lamp, and a darling little boy choking himself
with a mass of walrus blubber.  Thus the same object, when presented to
different minds, suggested ideas that were:

  "Diverse as calm from thunder,
  Wide as the poles asunder."

It was midnight when the boats drew near to land.  The island in which
stood the giant's humble home seemed to Captain Vane not more than eight
or ten miles in extent, and rose to a moderate height--apparently about
five or six hundred feet.  It was picturesque in form and composed of
rugged rocks, the marks on which, and the innumerable boulders
everywhere, showed that at some remote period of the world's history, it
had been subjected to the influence of glacial action.  No glacier was
visible now, however--only, on the rocky summit lay a patch or two of
the last winter's snow-drift, which was too deep for the summer sun to
melt away.  From this storehouse of water gushed numerous tiny rivulets
which brawled cheerily rather than noisily among the rocks, watering the
rich green mosses and grasses which abounded in patches everywhere, and
giving life to countless wild-flowers and berries which decked and
enriched the land.

Just off the island--which by a strange coincidence the inhabitants had
named Poloe--there were hundreds of other islets of every shape and
size, but nearly all of them low, and many flat and swampy--the
breeding-grounds of myriads of waterfowl.  There were lakelets in many
of these isles, in the midst of which were still more diminutive islets,
whose moss-covered rocks and fringing sedges were reflected in the
crystal water.  Under a cliff on the main island stood the Eskimo
village, a collection of stone huts, bathed in the slanting light of the
midnight sun.

But no sound issued from these huts or from the neighbouring islands.
It was the period of rest for man and bird.  Air, earth, and water were
locked in profound silence and repose.

"We've got to Paradise at last, father," was the first sound that broke
the silence, if we except the gentle dip of the oars and the rippling
water on the bow.

"Looks like it, Benjy," replied the Captain.

A wakeful dog on shore was the first to scent the coming strangers.  He
gave vent to a low growl.  It was the keynote to the canine choir, which
immediately sent up a howl of discord.  Forthwith from every hut there
leaped armed men, anxious women, and terrified children, which latter
rushed towards the cliffs or took refuge among the rocks.

"Hallo!  Chingatok, your relations are not to be taken by surprise,"
said the Captain--or something to that effect--in Eskimo.

The giant shook his head somewhat gravely.

"They must be at war," he said.

"At war! whom with?"

"With the Neerdoowulls," replied Chingatok with a frown.  "They are
always giving us trouble."

"Not badly named, father," said Benjy; "one would almost think they must
be of Scotch extraction."

At that moment the natives--who had been gesticulating wildly and
brandishing spears and bone knives with expressions of fury that denoted
a strong desire on their part to carve out the hearts and transfix the
livers of the newcomers--suddenly gave vent to a shout of surprise,
which was succeeded by a scream of joy.  Chingatok had stood up in the
boat and been recognised.  The giant's dog--an appropriately large one--
had been the first to observe him, and expressed its feelings by wagging
its tail to such an extent that its hind legs had difficulty in keeping
the ground.

Immediately on landing, the party was surrounded by a clamorous crew,
who, to do them justice, took very little notice of the strangers, so
overjoyed were they at the return of their big countryman.

Soon a little pleasant though flattish-faced woman pushed through the
crowd and seized the giant.  This was his wife Pingasuk, or Pretty One.
She was _petite_--not much larger than Oblooria the timid.  The better
to get at her, Chingatok went down on his knees, seized her by the
shoulders, and rubbed her nose against his so vigorously that the
smaller nose bid fair to come off altogether.  He had to stoop still
lower when a stout urchin of about five years of age came up behind him
and tried to reach his face.

"Meltik!" exclaimed the giant, rubbing noses gently for fear of damaging
him, "you are stout and fat, my son, you have been eating much blubber--
good."

At that moment Chingatok's eyes fell on an object which had hitherto
escaped his observation.  It was a little round yellow head in his
wife's hood, with a pair of small black eyes which stared at him in
blank surprise.  He made a snatch at it and drew forth--a naked baby!

"Our girlie," said the wife, with a pleased but anxious look; "don't
squeeze.  She is very young and tender--like a baby seal."

The glad father tried to fold the creature to his bosom; nearly dropped
it in his excess of tender caution; thrust it hastily back into his
wife's hood, and rose to give a respectful greeting to an aged man with
a scrubby white beard, who came forward at the moment.

"Who are these, my son?" asked the old man, pointing to the Englishmen,
who, standing in a group with amused expressions, watched the meeting
above described.

"These are the Kablunets, father.  I met them, as I expected, in the
far-off land.  The poor creatures were wandering about in a great kayak,
which they have lost, searching for _nothing_!"

"Searching for nothing! my son, that cannot be.  It is not possible to
search for nothing--at least it is not possible to find it."

"But that is what they come here for," persisted Chingatok; "they call
it the Nort Pole."

"And what is the Nort Pole, my son?"

"It is nothing, father."

The old man looked at his stately son with something of anxiety mingled
with his surprise.

"Has Chingatok become a fool, like the Kablunets, since he left home?"
he asked in a low voice.

"Chingatok is not sure," replied the giant, gravely.  "He has seen so
much to puzzle him since he went away, that he sometimes feels foolish."

The old Eskimo looked steadily at his son for a few moments, and shook
his head.

"I will speak to these men--these foolish men," he said.  "Do they
understand our language?"

"Some of them understand and speak a little, father, but they have with
them one named Unders, who interprets.  Come here, Unders."

Anders promptly stepped to the front and interpreted, while the old
Eskimo put Captain Vane through an examination of uncommon length and
severity.  At the close of it he shook his head with profound gravity,
and turned again to his son.

"You have indeed brought to us a set of fools, Chingatok.  Your voyage
