of all the little people who fly. No one can get into more mischief and
still keep out of trouble than can Blacky the Crow. That is because he
uses the wits in that black head of his. In fact, some people are unkind
enough to say that he spends all his spare time in planning mischief.
The more he thought of those eggs, the more he wanted them, and it
wasn't long before he began to try to plan some way to get them without
risking his own precious skin.

"I can't do it alone," thought he, "and yet if I take any one into my
secret, I'll have to share those eggs. That won't do at all, because
I want them myself. I found them, and I ought to have them." He quite
forgot or overlooked the fact that those eggs really belonged to Hooty
and Mrs. Hooty and to no one else. "Now let me see, what can I do?"

He thought and he thought and he thought and he thought, and little by
little a plan worked out in his little black head. Then he chuckled. He
chuckled right out loud, then hurriedly looked around to see if any one
had heard him. No one had, so he chuckled again. He cocked his head
on one side and half closed his eyes, as if that plan was something he
could see and he was looking at it very hard. Then he cocked his head on
the other side and did the same thing.

"It's all right," said he at last. "It'll give my relatives a lot of
fun, and of course they will be very grateful to me for that. It won't
hurt Hooty or Mrs. Hooty a bit, but it will make them very angry. They
have very short tempers, and people with short tempers usually forget
everything else when they are angry. We'll pay them a visit while the
sun is bright, because then perhaps they cannot see well enough to catch
us, and we'll tease them until they lose their tempers and forget all
about keeping guard over those eggs. Then I'll slip in and get one and
perhaps both of them. Without knowing that they are doing anything of
the kind, my friends and relatives will help me to get a good meal. My,
how good those eggs will taste!"

It was a very clever and cunning plan, for Blacky is a very clever and
cunning rascal, but of course it didn't deserve success because nothing
that means needless worry and trouble for others deserves to succeed.



CHAPTER V: Blacky Calls His Friends

When Blacky cries "Caw, caw, caw, caw!" As if he'd dislocate his jaw,
His relatives all hasten where He waits them with a crafty air. They
know that there is mischief afoot, and the Crow family is always ready
for mischief. So on this particular morning when they heard Blacky
cawing at the top of his lungs from the tallest pine-tree in the Green
Forest, they hastened over there as fast as they could fly, calling to
each other excitedly and sure that they were going to have a good time
of some kind.

Blacky chuckled as he saw them coming. "Come on! Come on! Caw, caw, caw!
Hurry up and flap your wings faster. I know where Hooty the Owl is, and
we'll have no end of fun with him," he cried.

"Caw, caw, caw, caw, caw, caw!" shouted all his relatives in great glee.
"Where is he? Lead us to him. We'll drive him out of the Green Forest!"

So Blacky led the way over to the most lonesome corner of the Green
Forest, straight to the tree in which Hooty the Owl was comfortably
sleeping. Blacky had taken pains to slip over early that morning and
make sure just where he was. He had discovered Hooty fast asleep, and
he knew that he would remain right where he was until dark. You know
Hooty's eyes are not meant for much use in bright light, and the
brighter the light, the more uncomfortable his eyes feel. Blacky knows
this, too, and he had chosen the very brightest part of the morning to
call his relatives over to torment poor Hooty. Jolly, round, bright Mr.
Sun was shining his very brightest, and the white snow on the ground
made it seem brighter still. Even Blacky had to blink, and he knew that
poor Hooty would find it harder still.

But one thing Blacky was very careful not to even hint of, and that was
that Mrs. Hooty was right close at hand. Mrs. Hooty is bigger and even
more fierce than Hooty, and Blacky didn't want to frighten any of the
more timid of his relatives. What he hoped down deep in his crafty heart
was that when they got to teasing and tormenting Hooty and making the
great racket which he knew they would, Mrs. Hooty would lose her temper
and fly over to join Hooty in trying to drive away the black tormentors.
Then Blacky would slip over to the nest which she had left unguarded and
steal one and perhaps both of the eggs he knew were there.

When they reached the tree where Hooty was, he was blinking his great
yellow eyes and had fluffed out all his feathers, which is a way he has
when he is angry, to make himself look twice as big as he really is. Of
course, he had heard the noisy crew coming, and he knew well enough what
to expect. As soon as they saw him, they began to scream as loud as
ever they could and to call him all manner of names. The boldest of them
would dart at him as if to pull out a mouthful of feathers, but took
the greatest care not to get too near. You see, the way Hooty hissed and
snapped his great bill was very threatening, and they knew that if once
he got hold of one of them with those big cruel claws of his, that would
be the end.

So they were content to simply scold and scream at him and fly around
him, just out of reach, and make him generally uncomfortable, and they
were so busy doing this that no one noticed that Blacky was not joining
in the fun, and no one paid any attention to the old tumble-down nest
of Redtail the Hawk only a few trees distant. So far Blacky's plans were
working out just as he had hoped.



CHAPTER VI: Hooty The Owl Doesn't Stay Still

   Now what's the good of being smart
   When others do not do their part?

If Blacky the Crow didn't say this to himself, he thought it. He knew
that he had made a very cunning plan to get the eggs of Hooty the Owl,
a plan so shrewd and cunning that no one else in the Green Forest or on
the Green Meadows would have thought of it. There was only one weakness
in it, and that was that it depended for success on having Hooty the
Owl do as he usually did when tormented by a crowd of noisy Crows,--stay
where he was until they got tired and flew away.

Now Blacky sometimes makes a mistake that smart people are very apt to
make; he thinks that because he is so smart, other people are stupid.
That is where he proves that smart as he is, he isn't as smart as he
thinks he is. He always thought of Hooty the Owl as stupid. That is, he
always thought of him that way in daytime. At night, when he was waked
out of a sound sleep by the fierce hunting cry of Hooty, he wasn't so
sure about Hooty being stupid, and he always took care to sit perfectly
still in the darkness, lest Hooty's great ears should hear him and
Hooty's great eyes, made for seeing in the dark, should find him. No,
in the night Blacky was not at all sure that Hooty was stupid.

But in the daytime he was sure. You see, he quite forgot the fact that
the brightness of day is to Hooty what the blackness of night is to him.
So, because Hooty would simply sit still and hiss and snap his bill,
instead of trying to catch his tormentors or flying away, Blacky called
him stupid. He felt sure that Hooty would stay right where he was now,
and he hoped that Mrs. Hooty would lose her temper and leave the nest
where she was sitting on those two eggs and join Hooty to help him try
to drive away that noisy crew.

But Hooty isn't stupid. Not a bit of it. The minute he found out that
Blacky and his friends had discovered him, he thought of Mrs. Hooty and
the two precious eggs in the old nest of Redtail the Hawk close by.

"Mrs. Hooty mustn't be disturbed," thought he. "That will never do at
all. I must lead these black rascals away where they won't discover Mrs.
Hooty. I certainly must."

So he spread his broad wings and blundered away among the trees a little
way. He didn't fly far because the instant he started to fly that whole
noisy crew with the exception of Blacky were after him. Because he
couldn't use his claws or bill while flying, they grew bold enough to
pull a few feathers out of his back. So he flew only a little way to a
thick hemlock-tree, where it wasn't easy for the Crows to get at him,
and where the light didn't hurt his eyes so much. There he rested a few
minutes and then did the same thing over again. He meant to lead
those bothersome Crows into the darkest part of the Green Forest and
there--well, he could see better there, and it might be that one of them
would be careless enough to come within reach. No, Hooty wasn't stupid.
Certainly not.

Blacky awoke to that fact as he sat in the top of a tall pine-tree
silently watching. He could see Mrs. Hooty on the nest, and as the noise
of Hooty's tormentors sounded from farther and farther away, she settled
herself more comfortably and closed her eyes. Blacky could imagine that
she was smiling to herself. It was clear that she had no intention of
going to help Hooty. His splendid plan had failed just because stupid
Hooty, who wasn't stupid at all, had flown away when he ought to have
sat still. It was very provoking.



CHAPTER VII: Blacky Tries Another Plan

   When one plan fails, just try another;
   Declare you'll win some way or other.

People who succeed are those who do not give up because they fail the
first time they try. They are the ones who, as soon as one plan fails,
get busy right away and think of another plan and try that. If the thing
they are trying to do is a good thing, sooner or later they succeed. If
they are trying to do a wrong thing, very likely all their plans fail,
as they should.

Now Blacky the Crow knows all about the value of trying and trying. He
isn't easily discouraged. Sometimes it is a pity that he isn't, because
he plans so much mischief. But the fact remains that he isn't, and he
tries and tries until he cannot think of another plan and just has to
give up. When he invited all his relatives to join him in tormenting
Hooty the Owl, he thought he had a plan that just couldn't fail. He felt
sure that Mrs. Hooty would leave her nest and help Hooty try to drive
away his tormentors. But Mrs. Hooty didn't do anything of the kind,
because Hooty was smart enough and thoughtful enough to lead his
tormentors away from the nest into the darkest part of the Green Forest
where their noise wouldn't bother Mrs. Hooty. So she just settled
herself more comfortably than ever on those eggs which Blacky had hoped
she would give him a chance to steal, and his fine plan was quite upset.

Not one of his relatives had noticed that nest. They had been too busy
teasing Hooty. This was just as Blacky had hoped. He didn't want them to
know about that nest because he was selfish and wanted to get those eggs
just for himself alone. But now he knew that the only way he could get
Mrs. Hooty off of them would be by teasing her so that she would lose
her temper and try to catch some of her tormentors. If she did that,
there would be a chance that he might slip in and get at least one of
those eggs.

He would try it.

For a few minutes he listened to the noise of his relatives growing
fainter and fainter, as Hooty led them farther and farther into the
Green Forest. Then he opened his mouth.

"Caw, caw, caw, caw!" he screamed. "Caw, caw, caw, caw! Come back,
everybody! Here is Mrs. Hooty on her nest! Caw, caw, caw, caw!"

Now as soon as they heard that, all Blacky's relatives stopped chasing
and tormenting Hooty and started back as fast as they could fly. They
didn't like the dark part of the Green Forest into which Hooty was
leading them. Besides, they wanted to see that nest. So back they came,
cawing at the top of their lungs, for they were very much excited. Some
of them never had seen a nest of Hooty's. And anyway, it would be just
as much fun to tease Mrs. Hooty as it was to tease Hooty.

"Where is the nest?" they screamed, as they came back to where Blacky
was cawing and pretending to be very much excited.

"Why," exclaimed one, "that is the old nest of Redtail the Hawk. I know
all about that nest." And he looked at Blacky as if he thought Blacky
was playing a joke on them.

"It was Redtail's, but it is Hooty's now. If you don't believe me, just
look in it," retorted Blacky.

At once they all began to fly over the top of the tree where they could
look down into the nest and there, sure enough, was Mrs. Hooty, her
great, round, yellow eyes glaring up at them angrily. Such a racket!
Right away Hooty was forgotten, and the whole crowd at once began to
torment Mrs. Hooty. Only Blacky sat watchful and silent, waiting for
Mrs. Hooty to lose her temper and try to catch one of her tormentors. He
had hope, a great hope, that he would get one of those eggs.



CHAPTER VIII: Hooty Comes To Mrs. Hooty's Aid

No one can live just for self alone. A lot of people think they can,
but they are very much mistaken. They are making one of the greatest
mistakes in the world. Every teeny, weeny act, no matter what it is,
affects somebody else. That is one of Old Mother Nature's great laws.
And it is just as true among the little people of the Green Forest and
the Green Meadows as with boys and girls and grown people. It is Old
Mother Nature's way of making each of us responsible for the good of all
and of teaching us that always we should help each other.

As you know, when Blacky the Crow called all his relatives over to the
nest where Mrs. Hooty was sitting on her eggs, they at once stopped
tormenting Hooty and left him alone in a thick hemlock-tree in the
darkest part of the Green Forest. Of course Hooty was very, very glad
to be left in peace, and he might have spent the rest of the day there
sleeping in comfort. But he didn't. No, Sir, he didn't. At first he gave
a great sigh of relief and settled himself as if he meant to stay. He
listened to the voices of those noisy Crows growing fainter and fainter
and was glad. But it was only for a few minutes.

Presently those voices stopped growing fainter. They grew more
excited-sounding than ever, and they came right from one place. Hooty
knew then that his tormentors had found the nest where Mrs. Hooty was,
and that they were tormenting her just as they had tormented him. He
snapped his bill angrily and then more angrily.

