Ozza, the ancient idols of the Meccans.]

[Footnote 198: The past tense, third person plural, of the infinitive
_Fitnah_.]


_The Ninth Chapter, or Sura Barat._

[Sidenote 40. The opening portion of the IXth Sura of the Koran only
relates to the Koreish who had violated the truce.]

[Sidenote: The injunctions contained in it were not carried out
owing to the compromise.]

Sir William Muir, while relating the publication of some verses of the
ninth chapter of the Koran on the occasion of the great pilgrimage A.H.
9, and referring to the opening verses of the Sura (from 1st to 7th
inclusive) writes: "The passages just quoted completed the system of
Mahomet so far as its relations with idolatrous tribes and races were
concerned. The few cases of truce excepted, uncompromising warfare was
declared against them all."[199] This is not correct. The mistake, he as
well as others who follow him commit, lies in their taking the incipient
verses of Chapter IX, as originally published at the end of the ninth
year of the Hegira, after the conquest of Mecca, in order to set aside
every obligation or league with the idolators to wage war with them,
either within or without the sacred territory, and "they were to be
killed, besieged, and laid in wait for _wheresoever found_."[200] In
fact it has no such bearing of generally setting aside the treaties, and
declaring _uncompromising warfare_, and was not published for the first
time on the occasion stated above. The opening verses of the ninth Sura
of the Koran, which I have quoted in full together with necessary notes
in para. 17 (pp. 22-25), revealed for the first time, were before the
conquest of Mecca, when the idolators thereof had broken the truce of
Hodeibia. Their violation of the treaty is expressly mentioned in verses
4, 8, 10 and 13, and the same verses also enjoin to respect and fulfil
the treaties of those idolators who had not broken theirs. Therefore
only those aggressors who had been guilty of a breach of faith, and
instigated others to take up arms against the Moslems in the attack of
Bani Bakr, on Khozaa, were to be waged war against, besieged, and taken
captives after the expiration of four months from the date of the
publication of the verses in question. But fortunately Abu Sofian
compromised before the commencement of the sacred months, and before the
period of the four months had elapsed. The people of Mecca submitted
without bloodshed, and hence it is obvious that the injunctions
contained in the commencement of the ninth chapter of the Koran were
never carried out. They remained as dead letter, and will, I think, so
remain perpetually. Almost all European writers, as far as I know,
labour under the delusion that at the end of the ninth year Mohammad
published the opening verses of the ninth Sura, commonly designated
_Sura Barat_. But the fact is that it was published in the eighth year
of the Hegira before the commencement of the sacred months, probably in
the month of Shaban, while Mohammad marched in Ramzan against Mecca, not
with the intention of prosecuting war, for it was to take place after
the lapse of Zikad, Zelhaj and Moharram, but of taking Mecca by
compromise and preconcerted understanding between himself and Abu
Sofian. If it be admitted that the preliminary verses of Sura IX of the
Koran were revealed or published for the first time in the last month of
the ninth year of the Hegira, then they--the verses--become aimless,
without being pregnant of any object in view. They contain injunctions
for carrying hostile operations against those who had broken certain
treaties, had helped others against the Moslems, and themselves had also
attacked them. They proclaimed war against certain tribes, whose people
did not regard ties of blood and good faith, and had been the first
aggressors against the Moslems. Not many such persons were in the whole
of Arabia at and after the time alleged for the promulgation of these
verses, _i.e._, at the last month of the ninth and the whole tenth year.
By this time, almost all Arabia had tendered voluntary submission to the
authority of Mohammad.

Deputations from each tribe of the Arabs continued to reach Medina
during the whole of this period, and were pledged protection and
friendship by the founder of the Islamic faith. From Medina the sound of
drums and the bray of clarions had now died away. Hereupon we are able
to speak with certainty that these verses could not be, and were not,
revealed at the end of the ninth year as it has been asserted by several
writers, both Mohammadan and European. And for the above reasons the
most suitable occasion for the revelation of these verses is the breach
of the truce of Hodeibia by the Koreish and their allies during the
eighth year of the Hegira which caused the reduction of Mecca by
compromise. Several Mohammadan commentators are unanimous in their
opinion as to this point. Consequently the verses, ordaining the
manifestation of arms against the treaty-breakers and aggressors, as
well as putting them to the sword wherever they were to be found,
_i.e._, within or without the harem, or the precincts of the Sacred
Mosque, were not complied with owing to the compromise by the Koreish.

[Footnote 199: The Life of Mahomet, Vol. IV, p. 211]

[Footnote 200: "Islam and its Founder," by J.W.H. Stobart, B.A., p. 179.
London, 1878.]


_The alleged Interception of the Koreishite Caravans._

[Sidenote: 41. The nine alleged interceptions of the Koreish caravans.]

It has been asserted by European biographers of Mohammad that several
caravans of the Koreish going to and from Syria were intercepted and
waylaid by the Moslems soon after the Hegira. The alleged incursions are
as follow:

(1.) Seven months after Mohammad's arrival at Medina, an expedition
headed by Hamza surprised a caravan under the conduct of Abu Jahl.

(2.) A month later a party led by Obeida was dispatched in the pursuit
of another caravan guided by Abu Sofian.

(3.) After the expiration of another month, a third inroad headed by Sad
proceeded to lie in ambush for the Koreish caravan on the way it was
expected to pass.

(4.) Nearly twelve months after the Hegira, a fourth attempt was
undertaken to plunder a caravan of the Koreishites by Mohammad himself
at Abwa.

(5.) In the succeeding month Mohammad again marched to Bowat with the
sole aim of despoiling a caravan composed of precious freight under the
immediate escort of Omeya-bin Khalf.

(6.) After the lapse of two or three months Mohammad set out to Osheira
to make aggression on another rich caravan proceeding to Syria led by
Abu Sofian.

All these expeditions are said to have been not attended by any success
on the part of the Moslems, the vigilance of the caravans in all cases
eluding the pursuit made after them.[201]

(7.) In Rajab A.H. 2, a small band composed of some six persons was
ordered to march to Nakhla to lie in wait there for the caravan of the
Koreish. The party had a scuffle at Nakhla, in which a man of the convoy
was killed; while two prisoners and the pilfered goods were taken to
Medina. Hereupon Mohammad was much displeased, and told Abdallah-bin
Jahsh, "I never commanded thee to fight in the sacred month."

(8.) The caravan of the Koreish, which on its passage had safely escaped
the chase of the Moslems, as already described in No. 6, was on its way
back to Mecca. Mohammad anticipated their return, and prepared an
attack, which terminated in the famous battle of Badr.

(9.) All these predatory inroads to intercept the caravans of Mecca are
said to have happened during the first and the second year of the
Hegira, or before the battle of Badr. It remains for me now to mention
the only remaining instance of Moslem's foray upon the Koreishite
caravan, which took place in the sixth year A.H. at _Al-Is_. The attack
was completely successful.

[Sidenote: 42. The interceptions were impossible under the circumstances
in which Mohammad was placed.]

I have already explained (from paras. 21-24) that these early
expeditions, numbered 1 to 8, are not corroborated by authentic and
trustworthy traditions, and I have also given the probable nature of
those marked 4, 5 and 6.

It was impossible for Mohammad and his adherents, situated as they were,
to make any hostile demonstrations or undertake a pillaging enterprise.
The inhabitants of Medina, where the Prophet with his followers had
sought a safe asylum, and at whose invitation he had entered their city,
had solemnly bound themselves on sacred oaths to defend Mohammad, so
long as he was not himself the aggressor, from his enemies as they would
their wives and their children.[202] Mohammad, on his own part, had
entered into a holy compact with them not to plunder or commit
depredations.[203]

Upon these considerations it was impossible that the people of Medina
would have permitted or overlooked the irruptions so often committed by
Mohammad upon the caravans of the Koreish: much less would they have
joined with their Prophet, had he or any of his colleagues ventured to
do so. But granting that the Medinites allowed Mohammad to manifest
enmity towards the Koreish by a display of arms, or that no restraint
was put by them upon him when he encroached upon the territories of the
neighbouring tribes, and that the caravans were molested without any
grounds of justice, was it possible, I ask, for the people of Medina to
avoid the troubles they would be necessarily involved in by the refuge
they had given to their Prophet? They had long suffered from internal
feuds, and the sanguinary conflict of Boas, a few years ago, which had
paralyzed their country, and humiliated its citizens, was but too fresh
in their memory yet.

[Sidenote: 43. The interceptions, if occurred, were justified by way of
reprisals.]

Let us suppose that these alleged interceptions of the Meccan caravans
by the Moslems did actually take place, as related by the biographers of
Mohammad, were they not all justified by the International Code of the
Arabs, or the ancient usage and military law of nations. It has been
proved beyond all dispute that the Meccans were the first aggressors in
persecuting the Moslems, and expelling them from their dear homes at
Mecca with the unbearable annoyance, they caused the converts of the new
faith in the peaceful prosecution of their religion; taking all these
causes of offence into consideration, as well as the International law
and the law of Nature, the Moslems might be said to have law and justice
both on their sides in waging war with their harassers for the
restoration of their property and homes, and even in retaliating and
making reprisals until they attained the object long sought by them.
When the Meccans, on their own part, had first trumpeted hostility
against the Moslems, the right of self-defence, as well as military
necessity, compelled the latter to destroy their property, and obstruct
the ways and channels of communication by which their traffic was
prospering; for, "from the moment one State is at war with another, it
has, on general principles, a right to seize on all the enemy's
property of whatsoever kind and wheresoever found, and to appropriate
the property thus taken to its own use, or to that of the captors."[204]

[Footnote 201: I have closely followed Sir W. Muir in these expeditions;
_vide_ The Life of Mahomet, Vol. III, pp. 64-69.]

[Footnote 202: "The people of Medina were pledged only to defend the
Prophet from attack, not to join him in any aggressive steps against the
Coreish." Muir's Life of Mahomet, Vol. III, p. 64.]

[Footnote 203: Bokharee relates from Obada-bin Samat with the usual
chain of narrators, that "I am one of the _Nakeebs_ who pledged to the
Prophet. We pledged that we will not join any other god with the God,
and will not commit theft, and will not commit fornication, and will not
commit murder, and will not plunder." Saheeh of Bokharee, Book of
Campaigns, chapter on Deputations from Ansars.]

[Footnote 204: Wheaton's Elements of International Law, p. 419, Boston,
1855; Lieber's Miscellaneous Writings; Political science, Vol. II, p.
250, Philadelphia, 1881.]


_The alleged Assassinations._

[Sidenote: 44. Instances of alleged assassinations cited.]

There were certain executions of culprits who had perpetrated the crime
of high treason against the Moslem Commonwealth. These executions, and
certain other cases of murders not grounded on any credible evidences,
are narrated by European biographers of Mohammad as assassinations
committed through the countenance and connivance which he lent them.
They were about five or six in number, and they are styled
assassinations from there being no trials of the prisoners by a judge
and a jury, nor by any systematic court-martial. The punishment of death
was inflicted upon the persons condemned, either from private enmity or
for the unpardonable offence of high treason against the State, but it
cannot be said, as I will hereafter show, that these so-called cases of
assassinations had received the high sanction of Mohammad, or they were
brought about at his direct instigation and assent for their commission.
The alleged instances are as follows:--

     1. Asma-bint Marwan.
     2. Abu Afak.
     3. Kab-ibn Ashraf.
     4. Sofian-ibn Khalid.
     5. Abu Rafe.
     6. Oseir-ibu Zarim.
     7. The attempted assassination of Abu Sofian.

[Sidenote: 45. Mr. Poole quoted.]

Before reviewing the truth and falsity of evidence in each of these
cases, and showing how far the Prophet was privy to them, I will avail
myself of a quotation from Mr. Stanley Lane Poole, who has remarked with
his usual deep discernment and accurate judgment, in his Introduction to
Mr. E.W. Lane's Selections from the Koran:

"The execution of the half-dozen marked Jews is generally called
assassination, because a Muslim was sent secretly to kill each of the
criminals. The reason is almost too obvious to need explanation. There
were no police or law-courts, or even courts-martial, at Medina; some
one of the followers of Mohammad must therefore be the executer of the
sentence of death, and it was better it should be done quietly, as the
executing of a man openly before his clan would have caused a brawl and
more bloodshed and retaliation, till the whole city had become mixed up
in the quarrel. If secret assassination is the word for such deeds,
secret assassination was a necessary part of the internal government of
Medina. The men must be killed, and best in that way. In saying this I
assume that Mohammad was cognisant of the deed, and that it was not
merely a case of private vengeance; but in several instances the
evidence that traces these executions to Mohammad's order is either
entirely wanting or is too doubtful to claim our credence."[205]

1.--_Asma-bint Marwan._

[Sidenote: 46. Asma-bint Marwan.]

"The first victim was a woman," writes Major Osborn, "Asma, daughter of
Marwan; she had composed some satirical verses on the Prophet and his
followers; and Muhammad, moved to anger, said publicly: 'Who will rid me
of this woman?' Omeir, a blind man, but an ardent Moslem, heard the
speech, and at dead of night crept into the apartment where Asma lay
asleep surrounded by her little ones; he felt about in the darkness till
his hand rested on the sleeping woman, and then, the next instance his
sword was plunged into her breast."[206]

The story of Asma's murder has been variously related by the Arabian
writers, and the testimonies on which it rests are contradictory and
conflicting in themselves. Wakidi, Ibn Sad, and Ibn Hisham relate a very
strange thing about it, that she was killed by Omeir the _blind_ at the
dead of night. A blind person commits murder in a stranger's house
during nocturnal quietness, and is not arrested by any one! Doctor Weil
writes, that Omeir was a former husband of Asma, and the origin of the
murder may be traced to a long-brooding and private malice. Ibn Asakar
in his history (vide _Seerat Shamee_) relates that Asma was a
fruit-seller; some person of her tribe asked her if she had better
fruits. She said 'yes,' and entered her house followed by that man. She
stooped down to take something up, the person turned right and left, and
seeing that nobody was near, gave a violent blow on her head, and thus
dispatched her.

[Sidenote: 47. The story deserves not our belief.]

The historians even relate that Omeir, being offended at the verses
composed by Asma, had volunteered himself of his own free-will to kill
her.[207] She might have been a sacrifice to envy or hatred by the sword
of her assassin, but Mohammad really had no hand in her death. She had
made herself an outlaw by deluding the people of Medina to a breach of
treaty with the Moslems, whereby the rights and jurisdictions of Jews
and Moslems were definitively settled.

Ibn Ishak quietly leaves unnarrated any transaction with regard to Asma.
Wakidi and Ibn Sad do not affirm that Mohammad, being annoyed at her
lampoons, said dejectedly, "Who would rid me of that woman?" On the
contrary, Wakidi writes, that Omeir had voluntarily swore to take her
life. It is only Ibn Hisham who relates without citing his authority,
that Mohammad, hearing Asma's verses, declared: "Is there nobody for me
(i.e., _to rid me_) from Bint Marwan?" This version of the story has no
corroborative proofs from the earliest biographers, and we are not
inclined to put any faith in it.[208]

2.--_Abu Afak._

[Sidenote: 48. Abu Afak.]

It has been related that Abu Afak of Bani Amr had enraged the Moslems by
fomenting enmity and sedition against their Government, when one Haris
was executed for his murdering treacherously his fellow-comrade in the
battle of Ohad during the time they were fighting together side by side.
A convert from amongst the Bani Amr vowed to slay Abu Afak, and falling
unawares upon him killed him with a cruel blow of his sword. From Ibn
Ishak we learn that Mohammad had said with reference to Abu Afak, "Who
would rid me of this pestilent fellow?"[209] The biographers do not give
their authorities whence they derived their information of the words
attributed to Mohammad which he is said to have uttered with relation to
Abu Afak before his followers; while at the same time it is no fair
justice to form a hasty opinion of the fact without a critical
examination and well-balancing of evidences of men like Ibn Ishak and
others who have forgotten to tell us the original sources of their own
assertion. Besides, the words quoted above are not equivalent to a
peremptory order, and even granting this last condition, we are not
justified in construing them to mean _assassination_. Sir W. Muir writes
that, "the Secretary of Wackidi says distinctly--'Now this was by
command of the Prophet.'" (Vol. III, p. 133, _f.n._) But it is a very
easy thing for the secretary or other biographers to give an ample play
to their fancies, or to fabricate commands, which the Prophet had never
given out, on a very slender basis, or on no reasonable basis at all.
The tendency of the biographers is always to exonerate the companions of
the Prophet at the expense of truth, and to justify their deeds by
casting the whole blame upon him.

3.--_Kab, son of Ashraf._

[Sidenote: 49. Kab, son of Ashraf.]

Kab-ibn Ashraf was an influential Jew connected with the tribe of Bani
Nazeer. Being very much mortified by the defeat of the Meccans at the
battle of Badr, he soon after proceeded to Mecca, where he stirred up
the Koreish to avenge themselves on the Moslems of Medina. On his return
to the latter place he manifested avowed hostility towards the Moslem
Commonwealth. He was a traitor and a turncoat, for he not only violated
his allegiance to the Moslems, but preached rebellion among their
enemies. Under such circumstances, he deserved execution by the military
and international law, and was decapitated at Medina accordingly. The
mode of execution was a sudden violence or deception, but Mohammad never
fulminated any harsh commands against him either for his assassination
or for his murder. He deserved capital punishment for his treachery,
which was duly measured out to him in the absence of any legal tribunals
for trials of criminals by jury, for in that case any man was authorized
to execute the sentence of the law. Even if it be taken for granted that
the Prophet had prayed "O Lord, deliver me from the son of Ashraf, in
whatsoever manner seemeth good unto thee, because of his open sedition
and verses;" or said, "Who can ease me of the son of Ashraf?"[210] This
does not amount to a fiat for murder or execution, much less for
assassination.

[Sidenote: 50. Mohammad could not have any share in his murder.]

The biographers and narrators of the campaigns of Mohammad generally
relate untrustworthy and fabulous details of such events, and are by no
means to be relied upon. Mohammad Ibn Ishak, the earliest biographer,
whose work exists, does not relate that Mohammad the Prophet ever prayed
for, or said to his followers, to be got rid of Kab; whereas the latest
biographers and traditionalists give us to understand that the Prophet
sanctioned the murder of Kab by his own express orders. "I am far from
asserting," says Sir W. Muir, "that every detail in the foregoing
narrative, either of instigation by Mahomet or of deception by the
assassins, is beyond suspicion. The actors in such scenes were not slow
to magnify and embellish their own services at the expense of truth.
There may also have been the desire to justify an act of perfidy, at
which even the loose morality of the day was startled, by casting the
burden of it on the infallible Prophet. But, after allowing all due
weight to both of these considerations, enough remains to prove, in this
case, the worst features of assassination, and the fact that they were
directly countenanced, or rather prompted, by Mahomet himself."[211]
There is no substantial proof in this case which tends to establish the
instigation Mohammad offered for the murder of Kab. The best traditions
for the story of Kab's assassination rest with Jabir-bin Abdullah,[212]
and Ibn Abbas through Ikrama.[213]

None of them can be an authority, for they were neither eye-witnesses,
nor they heard the Prophet countenancing or prompting the assassination,
nor they allude to their own authorities. Jabir-bin Abdullah was a mere
boy at that time. He was not allowed to appear even at the battle of
Ohad, which took place after the alleged execution of Kab, on account of
his tender age.[214] Ibn Abbas was even younger than Jabir, and besides,
was putting up at Mecca at the period in question.[215] Ikrama was a
slave of Ibn Abbas, and was notoriously given to the forging of
fictitious traditions.[216]

4.--_Sofian-bin Khalid._

[Sidenote: 51. Sofian-bin Khalid.]

After the reverse at Medina, in the battle of Ohad, large gatherings
were organized in various quarters of Arabia against the Moslems. The
Bani Lahyan, and other neighbouring tribes, rallied round the standard
of their chief Sofian, the son of Khalid, at Orna with the avowed
purpose of taking this occasion by the forelock when the tables were
turned at Ohad. "Mahomet, knowing that their movements depended solely
upon Sofian, despatched Abdullah ibn Oneis with instructions to
assassinate him."[217] The accredited envoy volunteered himself for the
service, which he accomplished by destroying Sofian by surprise. Neither
Ibn Ishak, nor Ibn Hisham, nor Ibn Sad have anything to say about
'instructions' for assassination. Abdullah-bin Oneis may have been sent
as a spy to reconnoitre the movements of Sofian and his army, or to
bring advices concerning him, but it cannot be affirmed that he was
tutored by Mohammad to assassinate Sofian, even on the supposition that
his mission was to kill the latter.

[Sidenote: 52. Justifications of Sofian's alleged murder.]

Among the Arabs the international law of estates in their hostile
relations, and the military law and usage of former times, not
forgetting to mention the European international law as late as the last
century, maintained the broad principle that "in war everything done
against an enemy is lawful that he may be destroyed, though unarmed and
defenceless; that fraud or even poison may be employed against him; that
a most unlimited right is acquired to his person and property."[218]
Every sort of fraud except perfidy was allowed to be practised towards
an enemy in war. "I allow of any kind of deceit," writes Bynkershoek, a
writer on international law, the successor of Puffendorf and the
predecessor of Wolff and Vattel, "perfidy alone excepted, not because
anything is unlawful against an enemy, but because when our faith had
been pledged to him, so far as the promise extends, he ceases to be an
enemy."[219]

In the case of Sofian there was no perfidy, treachery, or violation of
faith, nor was there any permission granted by Mohammad for his
assassination. He sent, if it be proved he did (but it is never proved),
Abdullah against Sofian who had made every preparation of arms, and who
