grace of Christ, which grieve the Spirit of God, at the same time that 
they grieve our neighbours for whom Christ died, and cut us off, as long 
as we give way to them, from the communion of saints.

Well would it be for married people, if they would but remember this.  
Well for them, for their own sake and for their children's.  "Heirs 
together," St Peter says they are, "of the grace of life."  Think of 
those words; for in them lies the true secret of happiness.  Not in the 
mere grace of youth, which pleases the fancy at first; that must soon 
fade; and then comes, too often, coldness between man and wife; neglect, 
rudeness, ill-temper, because the grace of life is not there--the grace 
of the inner life, of the immortal soul, which alone makes life pleasant, 
even tolerable, to two people who are bound together for better or for 
worse.  But yet, unless St Peter be mistaken, the fault in such sad case 
is on the man's side.  Yes, we must face that truth, we men; and face it 
like men.  If we are unhappy in our marriage it is our own fault.  It is 
the woman who is the weaker, says St Peter, and selfish men are apt to 
say, "Then it is the woman's fault, if we are not happy."  St Peter says 
exactly the opposite.  He says,--Because she is the weaker you are the 
stronger; and therefore it is your fault if she is not what she should 
be; for you are able to help her, and lead her; you took her to your 
heart for that very purpose, you swore to cherish her.  Because she is 
the weaker, you can teach her, help her, improve her character, if you 
will.  You have more knowledge of life and the world than she has.  Dwell 
with her according to knowledge, says St Peter; use your experience to 
set her right if she be wrong; and use your experience and your strength, 
too, to keep down your own temper and your own selfishness toward her, to 
bear and forbear, to give and forgive, live and let live.  Remember that 
you are heirs TOGETHER of the grace of life; and if the grace of life is 
not in you, you cannot expect it to be in her.  And what is the grace of 
life?  It must be the grace of Christ.  St John says that Christ IS the 
Life.  And what is the grace of Christ?  Christ's grace, Christ's 
gracefulness, Christ's beautiful and noble and loving character--the 
grace of Christ is Christ's likeness.  Do you ask what will Christ give 
me?  He will give you Himself.  He will make you like Himself, partaker 
of His grace; and what is that?  It is this--to be loving, gentle, 
temperate, courteous, condescending, self-sacrificing.  Giving honour to 
those who are weaker than yourself, just because they are weaker; ready 
and willing, ay, and counting it an honour to take trouble for other 
people, to be of use to other people, to give way to other people; and, 
above all, to the woman who has given herself to you, body and soul.  
That is the grace of Christ; that is the grace of life; that is what 
makes life worth having:  ay, makes it a foretaste of heaven upon earth; 
when man and wife are heirs together of the grace of life, of all those 
tempers which make life graceful and pleasant, giving way to each other 
in everything which is not wrong; studying each other's comfort, taking 
each other's advice, shutting their eyes to each other's little failings, 
and correcting each other's great failings, not by harsh words, but 
silently and kindly, by example.  And if the man will do that, there is 
little fear but that the woman will do it also.  And so, their prayers 
are not hindered.

Married people cannot pray, they have no heart to pray, while they are 
discontented with each other.  They feel themselves wrong, and because 
they are parted from each other, they feel parted from God too; and their 
selfishness or anger rises as a black wall, not merely between them, but 
between each of them and God.  And so the grace of life is indeed gone 
away from them, and the whole world looks dark and ugly to them, because 
it is not bright and cheerful in the light of Christ's grace, which makes 
all the world full of sunshine and joy.  But it need not be so, friends.  
It would not be so, if married people would take the advice which the 
Prayer Book gives them, and come to Holy communion.  Would to God, my 
friends, that all married people would understand what that Holy 
communion says to them; and come together Sunday after Sunday to that 
throne of grace, there to receive of Christ's fulness, and grace upon 
grace.  For that Table says to you:  You are heirs together of the grace 
of life; you are not meant merely to feed together for a few short years, 
at the same table, on the bread which perishes, but to feed for ever 
together on the bread which comes down from heaven, even on Christ 
Himself, the life of the world; to receive life from His life, that you 
may live together such a life as He lived, and lives still; to receive 
grace from the fulness of His grace, that you may be full of grace as He 
is.  That Table tells you that because you both must live by the same 
life of Christ, you must live the same life as each other, and grow more 
and more like each other year by year; that as you both receive the same 
grace of Christ, you will become more and more gracious to each other 
year by year, and both grow together, nearer and dearer to each other, 
more worthy of each other's respect, more worthy of each other's trust, 
more worthy of each other's love.  And then "till death us do part" may 
mean what it will.  Let death part what of them he can part, the 
perishing mortal body; he has no power over the soul, or over the body 
which shall rise to life eternal.  Let death do his worst.  They belong 
to Christ who conquered death, and they live by His everlasting life, and 
their life is hid with Christ in God, where death cannot reach it or find 
it; and therefore their life and their love, and the grace of it, will 
last as long as Christ's life and Christ's love, and Christ's grace last-
-and that will be for ever and ever.



SERMON XXI.  FATHER AND CHILD



Eversley. 1861.

1 Cor. i. 4, 5, 7.  "I thank my God always on your behalf, for the grace 
of God which is given you by Jesus Christ.  That in every thing ye are 
enriched by Him, in all utterance, and in all knowledge . . .  So that ye 
come behind in no gift; waiting for the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ.  
Who shall also confirm you unto the end, that ye may be blameless in the 
day of our Lord Jesus Christ."

This text is a very important one.  It ought to teach me how I should 
treat you.  It ought to teach you how you should treat your children.  It 
ought to teach you how God, your heavenly Father, treats you.  You see at 
the first glance how cheerful and hopeful St Paul is about these 
Corinthians.  He is always thanking God, he says, about them, for the 
grace of God which was given them by Jesus Christ, that in everything 
they were enriched by Him, in all utterance and in all knowledge.  And he 
has good hope for them.  Nay, he seems to be certain about them, that 
they will persevere, and conquer, and be saved; for Christ Himself will 
confirm them (that is strengthen them) to the end, that they may be 
blameless in the way of our Lord Jesus Christ.

If we knew no more of these Corinthians than what these words tell us, we 
should suppose that they were very great saints, leading holy and 
irreproachable lives before God and man.  But we know that it was not so.  
That they were going on very ill.  That this is the beginning of an 
epistle in which St Paul is going to rebuke them very severely; and to 
tell them, that unless they mend, they will surely become reprobates, and 
be lost after all.  He is going to rebuke them for having heresies among 
them, that is religious parties and religious quarrels--very much as we 
have now; for being puffed up with spiritual self-conceit; for despising 
and disparaging him; for loose lives, allowing (in one case) such a crime 
among them as even the heathen did not allow; for profaning the Lord's 
Supper, to such an extent that some seem even to have got drunk at it; 
for want of charity to each other; for indulging in fanatical excitement; 
for denying, some of them, the resurrection of the dead; on the whole, 
for being in so unwholesome a state of mind that he has to warn them 
solemnly of the fearful example of the old Israelites, who perished in 
the wilderness for their sins--as they will perish, he hints, unless they 
mend.

And yet he begins by thanking God for them, by speaking of them, and to 
them, in this cheerful and hopeful tone.

Does that seem strange?  Why should it seem strange, my friends, to us, 
if we are in the habit of training our children, and rebuking our 
children, as we ought?  If we have to rebuke our children for doing 
wrong, do we begin by trying to break their hearts? by raking up old 
offences, by reproaching them with all the wrong they ever did in their 
lives, and giving them to understand that they are thoroughly bad, and 
have altogether lost our love, so that we will have nothing more to do 
with them unless they mend?  Or do we begin by making them feel that 
however grieved we are with them, we love them still; that however wrong 
they have been, there is right feeling left in them still; and by giving 
them credit for whatever good there is in them--by appealing to that; 
calling on them to act up to that; to be true to themselves, and to their 
better nature; saying, You can do right in one thing--then do right in 
another--and do right in all?  If we do not do this we do wrong; we 
destroy our children's self-respect, we make them despair of improving, 
we make them fancy themselves bad children:  that is the very surest plan 
we can take to make them bad children, by making them reckless.

But if we be wise parents--such parents to our children as St Paul was to 
his spiritual children, the Corinthians--we shall do by them just what St 
Paul did by these Corinthians.  Before he says one harsh word to them, he 
will awaken in them faith and love.  He will make them trust him and love 
him, all the more because he knows that through false teaching they do 
not trust and love him as they used to do.  But till they do, he knows 
that there is no use in rebuking them.  Till they trust him and love him, 
they will not listen to him.  And how does he try to bring them round to 
him?  By praising them:--by telling them that he trusts them and loves 
them, because in spite of all their faults there is something in them 
worthy to be loved and trusted.  He begins by giving them credit for 
whatever good there is in them.  They are rich in all utterance and all 
knowledge; that is, they are very brilliant and eloquent talkers about 
spiritual things, and also very deep and subtle thinkers about spiritual 
things.  So far so good.  These are great gifts--gifts of Christ, too,--
tokens that God's spirit is with them, and that all they need is to be 
true to His gracious inspirations.  Then, when he has told them that, or 
rather made them understand that he knows that, and is delighted at it, 
then he can go on safely and boldly to tell them of their sins also in 
the plainest and sternest and yet the most tender and fatherly language.

This is very important, my friends.  I cannot tell you fully how 
important I think it, in more ways than one.  I am sure that if we took 
St Paul's method with our children we should succeed with them far better 
than we do.  And I think, I have thought long, that if we could see that 
St Paul's method with those Corinthians was actually the same as God's 
method with us, we should have far truer notions of God, and God's 
dealings with us; and should reverence and value far more that Holy 
Catholic Church into which we have been, by God's infinite mercy, 
baptized, and wherein we have been educated.

For, and now I entreat you to listen to me carefully, you who have sound 
heads and earnest hearts, ready and willing to know the truth about God 
and yourselves, if St Paul looked at the Corinthians in this light, may 
not God have looked at them in the same light?  If St Paul accepted them 
for the sake of the good which was in them, in spite of all their faults, 
may not God have accepted them for the sake of the good which was in 
them, in spite of all their faults? and may not He accept us likewise?  I 
think it must be so.  For was not St Paul an inspired apostle? and are 
not these words of his inspired by the Holy Spirit of God?  But if so, 
then the Spirit of God must have looked at these Corinthians in the same 
light as St Paul, and therefore God must do likewise, because the Holy 
Spirit is God.  Must it not be so?  Can we suppose that God would take 
one view of these Corinthians, and then inspire St Paul to take another 
view?  What does being inspired mean at all, save having the mind of 
Christ and of God,--being taught to see men and things as God sees them, 
to feel for them and think of them as God does?  If inspiration does not 
mean that, what does it mean?  Therefore, I think, we have a right to 
believe that St Paul's words express the mind of God concerning these 
Corinthians; that God was pleased with their utterance and their 
knowledge, and accepted them for that; and that in the same way God is 
pleased with whatsoever He sees good in us, and accepts us for that.  
But, remember, not for our own works or deservings any more than these 
Corinthians.  They were, and we are accepted in Christ, and for the 
merits of Christ.  And any good points in us, or in these Corinthians, as 
St Paul says expressly (here and elsewhere), are not our own, but come 
from Christ, by the inspiration of His Holy Spirit.

I know many people do not think thus.  They think of God as looking only 
at our faults; as extreme to mark what is done amiss; as never content 
with us; as always crying to men, Yes, you have done this and that well, 
and yet not quite well, for even in what you have done there are blots 
and mistakes; but this and that you have not done, and therefore you are 
still guilty, still under infinite displeasure.  And they think that they 
exalt God's holiness by such thoughts, and magnify His hatred of sin 
thereby.  And they invent arguments to prove themselves right, such as 
this:  That because God is an infinite being, every sin committed against 
Him is infinite; and therefore deserves an infinite punishment; which is 
a juggle of words of which any educated man ought to be ashamed.

I do not know where, in the Bible, they find all this.  Certainly not in 
the writings of St Paul.  They seem to me to find it, not in the Bible at 
all, but in their own hearts, judging that God must be as hard upon His 
children as they are apt to be upon their own.  I know that God is never 
content with us, or with any man.  How can He be?  But in what sense is 
He not content?  In the sense in which a hard task-master is not content 
with his slave, when he flogs him cruelly for the slightest fault?  Or in 
the sense in which a loving father is not content with his child, 
grieving over him, counselling him, as long as he sees him, even in the 
slightest matter, doing less well than he might do?  Think of that, and 
when you have thought of it, believe that in this grand text St Paul 
speaks really by the Spirit of God, and according to the mind of God, and 
teaches not these old Corinthians merely, but you and your children after 
you, what is the mind of God concerning you, what is the light in which 
God looks upon you.  For, if you will but think over your own lives, and 
over the Catechism which you learned in your youth, has not God's way of 
dealing with you been just the same as St Paul's with those Corinthians, 
teaching you to love and trust Him almost before He taught you the 
difference between right and wrong?  I know that some think otherwise.  
Many who do not belong to the Church, and many, alas! who profess to 
belong to the Church, will tell you that God's method is, first to 
terrify men by the threats of the law and the sight of their sins and the 
fear of damnation, and afterwards to reveal to them the gospel and His 
mercy and salvation in Christ.  Now I can only answer that it is not so.  
Not so in fact.  These preachers themselves may do it; but that is no 
proof that God does it.  What God's plan is can only be known from facts, 
from experience, from what actually happens; first in God's kingdom of 
nature, and next in God's kingdom of grace, which is the Church.  And in 
the kingdom of nature how does God begin with mankind?  What are a 
child's first impressions of this life?  Does he hear voices from heaven 
telling little children that they are lost sinners?  Does he see 
lightning come from heaven to strike sinners dead, or earthquakes rise 
and swallow them up?  Nothing of the kind.  A child's first impressions 
of this life, what are they but pleasure?  His mother's breast, warmth, 
light, food, play, flowers, and all pleasant things,--by these God 
educates the child, even of the heathen and the savage:--and why?  If 
haply he may feel after God and find Him, and find that He is a God of 
love and mercy, a giver of good things, who knows men's necessities 
before they ask,--a good and loving God, and not a being such as I will 
not, I dare not speak of.

I say with the very heathen God deals thus.  We have plain Scripture for 
that.  For we have, and thanks be to God that we have, in such times as 
these, a missionary sermon preached by St Paul to the heathen at Lystra.  
And in that is not one word concerning these terrors of the law.  He 
says, I preach to you God, whom you ought to have known of yourselves, 
because He has not left Himself without witness.  And what is this 
witness of which the apostle speaks?  Wrath and terror and destruction?  
Not so, says St Paul.  This is His witness, that He has sent you rain and 
fruitful seasons, filling your heart with food and gladness.  His 
goodness, His bounty,--it is the witness of God and of the character of 
God.  There is wrath and terror enough, says St Paul elsewhere, awaiting 
those who go on in sin.  But then what does he say is their sin?  
Despising the goodness of God, by which He has been trying to win mankind 
to love and trust Him, before He threatens and before He punishes at all.  
So much for the terrors of the law coming before the good news of the 
gospel in God's kingdom of nature.

And still less do the terrors of the law come first in God's kingdom of 
grace, which is the Church.  They did not come first to you or to me, or 
to any one in His Church who has been taught, as churchmen should be, 
their Catechism.  If any have been, unhappily for them, brought up to 
learn Catechisms and hymns which do not belong to the Church, and which 
terrify little children with horrible notions of God's wrath, and the 
torments prepared not merely for wicked men, but for unconverted 
children, and then teach them to say,--


"Can such a wretch as I
Escape this dreadful end?"


so much the worse for them.  We, who are Church people, are bound to 
believe that God speaks to us through the Church books, and that it was 
His will that we should have been brought up to believe the Catechism.  
And in that Catechism we heard not one word of these terrors of the law 
or of God's wrath hanging over us.  We were taught that before we even 
knew right from wrong, God adopted us freely as His children, freely 
forgave us our original sin for the sake of Christ's blood, freely 
renewed us by His Holy Spirit, freely placed us in His Church;--that we 
might love Him, because He first loved us; trust Him because He has done 
all that even God could do to win our trust; and obey Him, because we are 
boundlessly in debt to Him for boundless mercies.  This is God's method 
with us in His Church, and what is it but St Paul's method with these 
Corinthians?

Believe this, then, you who wish to be Churchmen in spirit and in truth.  
Believe that St Paul's conduct is to you a type and pattern of what God 
does, and what you ought to do.  That God's method of winning you to do 
right is to make you love Him and trust Him; and that your method of 
winning your children to do right is to make them love and trust you.  
Let us remember that if our children are not perfect, they at least 
inherited their imperfections from us; and if our Father in heaven, from 
whom we inherit no sin, but only good, have patience with us, shall we 
not have patience with our children, who owe to us their fallen nature?

Ah! cast thy bread upon the waters,--the bread which even the poorest can 
give to their children abundantly and without stint,--the bread of 
charity,--human tenderness, forbearance, hopefulness,--cast that bread 
upon the waters, and thou shalt find it after many days.



SERMON XXII.  GOD IS OUR REFUGE



Westminster Abbey, 1873.

Psalm xlvi. 1.  "God is our refuge and strength, a very present help in 
trouble."

This is a noble psalm, full of hope and comfort; and it will be more and 
more full of hope and comfort, the more faithfully we believe in the 
incarnation, the passion, the resurrection, and the ascension of our Lord 
Jesus Christ.  For if we are to give credit to His express words, and to 
those of every book of the New Testament, and to the opinion of that 
Church into which we are baptised, then Jesus Christ is none other than 
the same Jehovah, Lord, and God who brought the Jews out of Egypt, who 
guided them and governed them through all their history--teaching, 
judging, rewarding, punishing them and all the nations of the earth.  
This psalm, therefore, is concerning our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom all 
power is given in heaven and earth, and who ascended up on high; that He 
might be as He had been from the beginning, King of kings and Lord of 
lords, the Master of this world and all the nations in it.  This psalm, 
therefore, is a hymn concerning the kingdom of Christ and of God.  It 
