
This impression was actually felt by us all, as may be seen from the
following notes, written in my schedule of observation during the event,
or immediately after:

"3.50 P.M. Light very weak, sky leaden gray, mountains standing out with
remarkable clearness from the horizon, and seeming to approach us.

"3.55 P.M. Fall of temperature very apparent. Cold wind blowing through
the atmosphere.

"3.56 P.M. Profound silence through nature, which seems to participate
in the celestial phenomenon. Silence in all the groups.

"3.57 P.M. Light considerably diminished, becoming wan, strange, and
sinister. Landscape leaden gray, sea looks black. This diminution of
light is not that of every day after the sunset. There is, as it were, a
tint of sadness spread over the whole of nature. One becomes accustomed
to it, and yet while we know that the occultation of the Sun by the Moon
is a natural phenomenon, we can not escape a certain sense of
uneasiness. The approach of some extraordinary spectacle is imminent."

At this point we examined the effects of the solar light upon the seven
colors of the spectrum. In order to determine as accurately as possible
the tonality of the light of the eclipse, I had prepared seven great
sheets, each painted boldly in the colors of the spectrum, violet,
indigo, blue, green, yellow, orange, red; and a similar series in pieces
of silk. These colors were laid at our feet upon the terrace where my
wife, as well as Countess de la Baume, were watching with me. We then
saw the first four disappear successively and entirely and turn black in
a few seconds, in the following order: violet, indigo, blue, green. The
three other colors were considerably attenuated by the darkness, but
remained visible.

It should be noted that in the normal order of things--that is, every
evening--the contrary appears; violet remains visible after the red.

This experiment shows that the last light emitted by the eclipsed Sun
belongs to the least refrangible rays, to the greatest wave-lengths, to
the slowest vibrations, to the yellow and red rays. Such therefore is
the predominating color of the solar atmosphere.

This experiment completed, we turn back to the Sun. Magical and splendid
spectacle! Totality has commenced, the Sun has disappeared, the black
disk of the Moon covers it entirely, leaving all round it a magnificent
corona of dazzling light. One would suppose it to be an annular eclipse,
with the difference that this can be observed with the naked eye,
without fatigue to the retina, and drawn quietly.

This luminous coronal atmosphere entirely surrounds the solar disk, at a
pretty equal depth, equivalent to about the third of half the solar
diameter. It may be regarded as the Sun's atmosphere.

Beyond this corona is an aureole, of vaster glory but less luminous,
which sends out long plumes, principally in the direction of the
equatorial zone of the Sun, and of the belt of activity of the spots and
prominences.

At the summit of the disk it is conical in shape. Below it is double,
and its right-hand portion ends in a point, not far from Mercury, which
shines like a dazzling star of first magnitude, and seems placed there
expressly to give us the extent and direction of the solar aureole.

I draw these various aspects (which, moreover, change with the movement
of the Moon), and what strikes me most is the distinction in light
between this aureole and the coronal atmosphere; the latter appears to
be a brilliant silvery white, the former is grayer and certainly less
dense.

My impression is that there are _two solar envelopes of entirely
different nature_, the corona belonging to the globe of the Sun, and
forming its atmosphere properly so-called, very luminous; the aureole
formed of particles that circulate independently round it, probably
arising from eruptions, their form as a whole being possibly due to
electric or magnetic forces, counterbalanced by resistances of various
natures. In our own atmosphere the volcanic eruptions are distinct from
the aerial envelope.

The general configuration of this external halo, spreading more
particularly in the equatorial zone, is sufficiently like that of the
eclipse of 1889, published in my _Popular Astronomy_, which also
corresponded with a minimum of solar energy. The year 1900 is in fact
close upon the minimum of the eleven-year period. This equatorial form
is, moreover, what all the astronomers were expecting.

[Illustration: FIG. 78.--Total eclipse of the Sun, May 28, 1900, as
observed from Elche (Spain).]

There can no longer be the slightest doubt that the solar envelope
varies with the activity of the Sun....

"But the total eclipse lasted a much shorter time than I have taken to
write these lines. The seventy-nine seconds of totality are over. A
dazzling light bursts from the Sun, and tells that the Moon pursuing its
orbit has left it. The splendid sight is over. It has gone like a
shadow.

"Already over! It is almost a disillusion. Nothing beautiful lasts in
this world. Too sad! If only the celestial spectacle could have lasted
two, three, or four minutes! It was too short....

"Alas! we are forced to take things as they are.

"The surprise, the oppression, the terror of some, the universal silence
are over. The Sun reappears in his splendor, and the life of nature
resumes its momentarily suspended course.

"While I was making my drawing, M. l'Abbe Moreux, my colleague from the
Astronomical Society of France, who accompanied me to Spain for this
observation, was taking one of his own, without any reciprocal
communication. These two sketches are alike, and confirmatory.

"The differential thermometers that I exposed to the Sun, hanging
freely, and protected from reflection from the ground, were read every
five minutes. The black thermometer went down from 33.1 deg. to 20.7
deg., that is 12.4 deg.; the white from 29 deg. to 20.2 deg.--that is,
8.8 deg. The temperature in the shade only varied three degrees.

"The light received during totality was due: first, to the luminous
envelope of the Sun; second, to that of the terrestrial atmosphere,
illuminated at forty kilometers (twenty-five miles) on the one side and
the other of the line of centrality. It appeared to be inferior to that
of the Full Moon, on account of the almost sudden transition. But, in
reality, it was more intense, for only first-magnitude stars were
visible in the sky, whereas on a night of full moon, stars of second,
and even of third magnitude are visible. We recognized, among others,
Venus, Mercury, Sirius, Procyon, Capella, Rigel, Betelgeuse."

       *       *       *       *       *

From these notes, taken on the spot, it is evident that the
contemplation of a total eclipse of the Sun is one of the most marvelous
spectacles that can be admired upon our planet.

Some persons assured me that they saw the shadow of the Moon flying
rapidly over the landscape. My attention was otherwise occupied, and I
was unable to verify this interesting observation. The shadow of the
Moon in effect took only eleven minutes (3.47 P.M. to 3.58 P.M.) to
traverse the Iberian Peninsula from Porto to Alicante, _i.e._, a
distance of 766 kilometers (475 miles). It must therefore have passed
over the ground at a velocity of sixty-nine kilometers per minute, or
1,150 meters per second, a speed higher than that of a bullet. It can
easily be watched from afar, on the mountains.

Some weeks previous to this fine eclipse, when I informed the Spaniards
of the belt along which it could be observed, I had invited them to note
all the interesting phenomena they might witness, including the effects
produced by the eclipse upon animals. Birds returned hurriedly to their
nests, swallows lost themselves, sheep huddled into compact packs,
partridges were hypnotized, frogs croaked as if it were night, fowls
took refuge in the hen-house, and cocks crowed, bats came out, and were
surprised by the sun, chicks gathered under their mothers' wing,
cage-birds ceased their songs, some dogs howled, others crept shivering
to their masters' feet, ants returned to the antheap, grasshoppers
chirped as at sunset, pigeons sank to the ground, a swarm of bees went
silently back to their hive, and so on.

These creatures behaved as though the night had come, but there were
also signs of fear, surprise, even of terror, differing only "in degree"
from those manifested during the grandiose phenomenon of a total
eclipse by human beings unenlightened by a scientific education.

At Madrid the eclipse was only partial. The young King of Spain, Alfonso
XIII, took care to photograph it, and I offer the photograph to my
readers (Fig. 79), as this amiable sovereign did me the honor to give it
me a few days after the eclipse.

[Illustration: FIG. 79.--The Eclipse of May 28, 1900, as photographed by
King Alfonso XIII, at Madrid.]

The technical results of these observations of solar eclipses relate
more especially to the elucidation of the grand problem of the physical
constitution of the Sun. We alluded to them in the chapter devoted to
this orb. The last great total eclipses have been of immense value to
science.

The eclipses of the Moon are less important, less interesting, than the
eclipses of the Sun. Yet their aspect must not be neglected on this
account, and it may be said to vary for each eclipse.

Generally speaking, our satellite does not disappear entirely in the
Earth's cone of shadow; the solar rays are refracted round our globe by
our atmosphere, and curving inward, illumine the lunar globe with a rosy
tint that reminds one of the sunset. Sometimes, indeed, this refraction
does not occur, owing doubtless to lack of transparency in the
atmosphere, and the Moon becomes invisible. This happened recently, on
April 11, 1903.

For any spot, eclipses of the Moon are incomparably more frequent than
eclipses of the Sun, because the cone of lunar shadow that produces the
solar eclipses is not very broad at its contact with the surface of the
globe (10, 20, 30, 50, 100 kilometers, according to the distance of the
Moon), whereas all the countries of the Earth for which the Moon is
above the horizon at the hour of the lunar eclipse are able to see it.
It is at all times a remarkable spectacle that uplifts our thoughts to
the Heavens, and I strongly advise my readers on no account to forego
it.




CHAPTER XI

ON METHODS

HOW CELESTIAL DISTANCES ARE DETERMINED, AND HOW THE SUN IS WEIGHED


I will not do my readers the injustice to suppose that they will be
alarmed at the title of this Lesson, and that they do not employ some
"method" in their own lives. I even assume that if they have been good
enough to take me on faith when I have spoken of the distances of the
Sun and Moon, and Stars, or of the weight of bodies at the surface of
Mars, they retain some curiosity as to how the astronomers solve these
problems. Hence it will be as interesting as it is useful to complete
the preceding statements by a brief summary of the methods employed for
acquiring these bold conclusions.

The Sun seems to touch the Earth when it disappears in the purple mists
of twilight: an immense abyss separates us from it. The stars go hand in
hand down the constellated sky; and yet one can not think of their
inconceivable distance without a shiver.

Our neighbor, Moon, floats in space, a stone's throw from us: but
without calculation we should never know the distance, which remains an
impassable desert to us.

The best educated persons sometimes find it difficult to admit that
these distances of Sun and Moon are better determined and more precise
than those of certain points on our minute planet. Hence, it is of
particular moment for us to give an exact account of the means employed
in determining them.

The calculation of these distances is made by "_triangulation_." This
process is the same that surveyors use in the measurement of terrestrial
distances. There is nothing very alarming about it. If the word repels
us a little at first, it is from its appearance only.

When the distance of an object is unknown, the only means of expressing
its apparent size is by measurement of the angle which it subtends
before our eyes.

We all know that an object appears smaller, in proposition with its
distance from us. This diminution is not a matter of chance. It is
geometric, and proportional to the distance. Every object removed to a
distance of 57 times its diameter measures an angle of 1 degree,
whatever its real dimensions. Thus a sphere 1 meter in diameter measures
exactly 1 degree, if we see it at a distance of 57 meters. A statue
measuring 1.80 meters (about 5 ft. 8 in.) will be equal to an angle of 1
degree, if distant 57 times its height, that is to say, at 102.60
meters. A sheet of paper, size 1 decimeter, seen at 5.70 meters,
represents the same magnitude.

In length, a degree is the 57th part of the radius of a circle, _i.e._,
from the circumference to the center.

The measurement of an angle is expressed in parts of the circumference.
Now, what is an angle of a degree? It is the 360th part of any
circumference. On a table 3.60 meters round, an angle of one degree is a
centimeter, seen from the center of the table. Trace on a sheet of paper
a circle 0.360 meters round--an angle of 1 degree is a millimeter.

[Illustration: FIG. 80.--Measurement of Angles.]

If the circumference of a circus measuring 180 meters be divided into
360 places, each measuring 0.50 meters in width, then when the circus is
full a person placed at the center will see each spectator occupying an
angle of 1 degree. The angle does not alter with the distance, and
whether it be measured at 1 meter, 10 meters, 100 kilometers, or in the
infinite spaces of Heaven, it is always the same angle. Whether a degree
be represented by a meter or a kilometer, it always remains a degree. As
angles measuring less than a degree often have to be calculated, this
angle has been subdivided into 60 parts, to which the name of _minutes_
has been given, and each minute into 60 parts or _seconds_. Written
short, the degree is indicated by a little zero (deg.) placed above the
figure; the minute by an apostrophe ('), and the second by two (").
These minutes and seconds of _arc_ have no relation with the same terms
as employed for the division of the duration of time. These latter ought
never to be written with the signs of abbreviation just indicated,
though journalists nowadays set a somewhat pedantic example, by writing,
_e.g._, for an automobile race, 4h. 18' 30", instead of 4h. 18m. 30s.

This makes clear the distinction between the relative measure of an
angle and the absolute measures, such, for instance, as the meter. Thus,
a degree may be measured on this page, while a second (the 3,600th part
of a degree) measured in the sky may correspond to millions of
kilometers.

Now the measure of the Moon's diameter gives us an angle of a little
more than half a degree. If it were exactly half a degree, we should
know by that that it was 114 times the breadth of its disk away from us.
But it is a little less, since we have more than half a degree (31'),
and the geometric ratio tells us that the distance of our satellite is
110 times its diameter.

Hence we have very simply obtained a first idea of the distance of the
Moon by the measure of its diameter. Nothing could be simpler than this
method. The first step is made. Let us continue.

This approximation tells us nothing as yet of the real distance of the
orb of night. In order to know this distance in miles, we need to know
the width in miles of the lunar disk.

[Illustration: FIG. 81.--Division of the Circumference into 360
degrees.]

This problem has been solved, as follows:

Two observers go as far as possible from each other, and observe the
Moon simultaneously, from two stations situated on the same meridian,
but having a wide difference of latitude. The distance that separates
the two points of observation forms the base of a triangle, of which the
two long sides come together on the Moon.

[Illustration: FIG. 82.--Measurement of the distance of the Moon.]

It is by this proceeding that the distance of our satellite was finally
established, in 1751 and 1752, by two French astronomers, Lalande and
Lacaille; the former observing at Berlin, the latter at the Cape of Good
Hope. The result of their combined observations showed that the angle
formed at the center of the lunar disk by the half-diameter of the Earth
is 57 minutes of arc (a little less than a degree). This is known as the
_parallax_ of the Moon.

Here is a more or less alarming word; yet it is one that we can not
dispense with in discussing the distance of the stars. This astronomical
term will soon become familiar in the course of the present lesson,
where it will frequently recur, and always in connection with the
measurement of celestial distances. "Do not let us fear," wrote Lalande
in his _Astronomie des Dames_, "do not let us fear to use the term
parallax, despite its scientific aspect; it is convenient, and this term
explains a very simple and very familiar effect."

"If one is at the play," he continues, "behind a woman whose hat is too
large, and prevents one from seeing the stage [written a hundred years
ago!], one leans to the left or right, one rises or stoops: all this is
a parallax, a diversity of aspect, in virtue of which the hat appears to
correspond with another part of the theater from that in which are the
actors." "It is thus," he adds, "that there may be an eclipse of the Sun
in Africa and none for us, and that we see the Sun perfectly, because we
are high enough to prevent the Moon's hiding it from us."

See how simple it is. This parallax of 57 minutes proves that the Earth
is removed from the Moon at a distance of about 60 times its
half-diameter (precisely, 60.27). From this to the distance of the Moon
in kilometers is only a step, because it suffices to multiply the
half-diameter of the Earth, which is 6,371 kilometers (3,950 miles) by
this number. The distance of our satellite, accordingly, is 6,371
kilometers, multiplied by 60.27--that is, 384,000 kilometers (238,000
miles). The parallax of the Moon not only tells us definitely the
distance of our planet, but also permits us to calculate its real volume
by the measure of its apparent volume. As the diameter of the Moon seen
from the Earth subtends an angle of 31', while that of the Earth seen
from the Moon is 114', the real diameter of the orb of night must be to
that of the terrestrial globe in the relation of 273 to 1,000. That is a
little more than a quarter, or 3,480 kilometers (2,157 miles), the
diameter of our planet being 12,742 kilometers (7,900 miles).

This distance, calculated thus by geometry, is positively determined
with greater precision than that employed in the ordinary measurements
of terrestrial distances, such as the length of a road, or of a railway.
This statement may seem to be a romance to many, but it is undeniable
that the distance separating the Earth from the Moon is measured with
greater care than, for instance, the length of the road from Paris to
Marseilles, or the weight of a pound of sugar at the grocer's. (And we
may add without comment, that the astronomers are incomparably more
conscientious in their measurements than the most scrupulous
shop-keepers.)

Had we conveyed ourselves to the Moon in order to determine its distance
and its diameter directly, we should have arrived at no greater
precision, and we should, moreover, have had to plan out a journey
which in itself is the most insurmountable of all the problems.

The Moon is at the frontier of our little terrestrial province: one
might say that it traces the limits of our domain in space. And yet, a
distance of 384,000 kilometers (238,000 miles) separates the planet from
the satellite. This space is insignificant in the immeasurable distances
of Heaven: for the Saturnians (if such exist!) the Earth and the Moon
are confounded in one tiny star; but for the inhabitants of our globe,
the distance is beyond all to which we are accustomed. Let us try,
however, to span it in thought.

A cannon-ball at constant speed of 500 meters (547 yards) per second
would travel 8 days, 5 hours to reach the Moon. A train started at a
speed of one kilometer per minute, would arrive at the end of an
uninterrupted journey in 384,000 minutes, or 6,400 hours, or 266 days,
16 hours. And in less than the time it takes to write the name of the
Queen of Night, a telegraphic message would convey our news to the Moon
in one and a quarter seconds.

Long-distance travelers who have been round the world some dozen times
have journeyed a greater distance.

The other stars (beginning with the Sun) are incomparably farther from
us. Yet it has been found possible to determine their distances, and
the same method has been employed.

But it will at once be seen that different measures are required in
calculating the distance of the Sun, 388 times farther from us than the
Moon, for from here to the orb of day is 12,000 times the breadth of our
planet. Here we must not think of erecting a triangle with the diameter
of the Earth for its base: the two ideal lines drawn from the
extremities of this diameter would come together between the Earth and
the Sun; there would be no triangle, and the measurement would be
absurd.

In order to measure the distance which separates the Earth from the Sun,
we have recourse to the fine planet Venus, whose orbit is situated
inside the terrestrial orbit. Owing to the combination of the Earth's
motion with that of the Star of the Morning and Evening, the capricious
Venus passes in front of the Sun at the curious intervals of 8 years,
113-1/2 years less 8 years, 8 years, 113-1/2 years plus 8 years.

Thus there was a transit in June, 1761, then another 8 years after, in
June, 1769. The next occurred 113-1/2 years less 8 years, _i.e._,
105-1/2 years after the preceding, in December, 1874; the next in
December, 1882. The next will be in June, 2004, and June, 2012. At these
eagerly anticipated epochs, astronomers watch the transit of Venus
