of it stood a low, flat-topped desk, for all the world like that of a
prosperous real-estate agent, except that it was about half a foot
lower. There was no chair. For lack of a visible gate in the railing,
the explorers stepped over, being careful not to touch it.

There was nothing on top of the desk save the usual coat of dust. Below,
a very wide space had been left for the legs of whoever had used it; and
flanking this space were two pedestals, containing what looked to be a
multitude of exceedingly small drawers. Smith bent and examined them;
apparently they had no locks; and he unhesitatingly reached out, gripped
the knob of one and pulled.

Noiselessly, instantaneously, the whole desk crumbled to powder.
Startled, Smith stumbled backwards, knocking against the railing. Next
instant it lay on the floor, its fragments scarcely distinguishable from
what had already covered the surface. Only a tiny cloud of dust arose,
and in half a second this had settled.

The three looked at each other significantly. Clearly, the thing that
had just happened argued a great lapse of time since the user of that
desk officiated in that enclosure. It looked as though Smith's guess of
"weeks, perhaps months," would have to be changed to years, perhaps
centuries.

"Feel all right?" asked the geologist. Jackson and Smith made
affirmative noises; and again they stepped out, this time walking in the
aisle along the outer wall. They could see their sky-car plainly through
the ovals.

Here the machinery could be examined more closely. They resembled
automatic testing scales, said Smith; such as is used in weighing
complicated metal products after finishing and assembling. Moreover,
they seemed to be connected, the one to the other, with a series of
endless belts, which Smith thought indicated automatic production. To
all appearances, the dust-covered apparatus stood just as it had been
left when operations ceased, an unguessable length of time before.

Smith showed no desire to touch the things now. Seeing this, the
geologist deliberately reached out and scraped the dust from the nearest
machine; and to the vast relief of all three, no damage was done. The
dust fell straight to the floor, exposing a brilliantly polished streak
of greenish-white metal.

Van Emmon made another tentative brush or so at other points, with the
same result. Clean, untarnished metal lay beneath all that dust. Clearly
it was some non-conducting alloy; whatever it was, it had successfully
resisted the action of the elements all the while that such presumably
wooden articles as the desk and railing had been steadily rotting.

Emboldened, Smith clambered up on the frame of one of the machines. He
examined it closely as to its cams, clutches, gearing, and other details
significant enough to his mechanical training. He noted their
adjustments, scrutinized the conveying apparatus, and came back carrying
a cylindrical object which he had removed from an automatic chuck.

"This is what they were making," he remarked, trying to conceal his
excitement. The others brushed the dust from the thing, a huge piece of
metal which would have been too much for their strength on the earth.
Instantly they identified it.

It was a cannon shell.

Again Van Emmon led the way. They took a reassuring glance out the
window at the familiar cube, then passed along the aisle toward the
farther corner. As they neared it they saw that it contained a small
enclosure of heavy metal scrollwork, within which stood a triangular
elevator.

The men examined it as closely as possible, noting especially the
extremely low stool which stood upon its platform. The same unerodable
metal seemed to have been used throughout the whole affair.

After a careful scrutiny of the two levers which appeared to control the
thing--"I'm going to try it out," announced Smith, well knowing that the
others would have to go with him if they kept the telephones intact.
They protested that the thing was not safe; Smith replied that they had
seen no stairway, or anything corresponding to one. "If this lift is
made of that alloy," admiringly, "then it's safe." But Jackson managed
to talk him out of it.

When they returned to the heap of powdered wood which had been the desk,
Smith spied a long work-bench under a nearby window. There they found a
very ordinary vise, in which was clamped a piece of metal; but for the
dust, it might have been placed there ten minutes before. On the bench
lay several tools, some familiar to the engineer and some entirely
strange. A set of screw-drivers of various sizes caught his eye. He
picked them up, and again experienced the sensation of having wood turn
to dust at his touch. The blades were whole.

Still searching, the engineer found a square metal chest of drawers,
each of which he promptly opened. The contents were laden with dust, but
he brushed this off and disclosed a quantity of exceedingly delicate
instruments. They were more like dentists' tools than machinists', yet
plainly were intended for mechanical use.

One drawer held what appeared to be a roll of drawings. Smith did not
want to touch them; with infinite care he blew off the dust with the aid
of his oxygen pipe. After a moment or two the surface was clear, but it
offered no encouragement; it was the blank side of the paper.

There was no help for it. Smith grasped the roll firmly with his pliers
--and next second gazed upon dust.

In the bottom drawer lay something that aroused the curiosity of all
three. These were small reels, about two inches in diameter and a
quarter of an inch thick, each incased in a tight-fitting box. They
resembled measuring tapes to some extent, except that the ribbons were
made of marvelously thin material. Van Emmon guessed that there were a
hundred yards in a roll. Smith estimated it at three hundred. They
seemed to be made of a metal similar to that composing the machines.
Smith pocketed them all.

It was the builder who thought to look under the bench, but it was Smith
who had brought a light. By its aid they discovered a very small
machine, decidedly like a stock ticker, except that it had no glass
dome, but possessed at one end a curious metal disk about a foot in
diameter. Apparently it had been undergoing repairs; it was impossible
to guess its purpose. Smith's pride was instantly aroused; he tucked it
under his arm, and was impatient to get back to the cube, where he might
more carefully examine his find with the tips of his fingers.

It was when they were about to leave the building that they thought to
inspect walls and ceiling. Not that anything worth while was to be seen;
the surfaces seemed perfectly plain and bare, except for the inevitable
dust. Even the uppermost corners, ten feet above their heads, showed
dust to the light of Smith's electric torch.

Van Emmon stopped and stared at the spot as though fascinated. The
others were ready to go; they turned and looked at him curiously. For a
moment or two he seemed struggling for breath.

"Good Heavens!" he gasped, almost in a whisper. His face was white; the
other two leaped toward him, fearful that he was suffocating. But he
pushed them away roughly.

"We're fools! Blind, blithering idiots--that's what we are!" He pointed
toward the ceiling with a hand that trembled plainly, and went on in a
voice which he tried to make fierce despite the awe which shook it.

"Look at that dust again! How'd it get there?" He paused while the
others, the thought finally getting to them, felt a queer chill striking
at the backs of their necks. "Men--there's only one way for the dust to
settle on a wall! It's got to have air to carry it! It couldn't possibly
get there without air!

"That dust settled long before life appeared on the Earth, even! It's
been there ever since the air disappeared from Mercury!"



IV

THE LIBRARY


"I thought you'd never get back," complained the doctor crossly, when
the three entered. They had been gone just half an hour.

Next moment he was studying their faces, and at once he demanded the
most important fact. They told him, and before they had finished he was
half-way into another suit. He was all eagerness; but somehow the three
were very glad to be inside the cube again, and firmly insisted upon
moving to another spot before making further explorations.

Within a minute or two the cube was hovering opposite the upper floor of
the building the three had entered; and with only a foot of space
separating the window of the sky-car and the dust-covered wall, the men
from the earth inspected the interior at considerable length. They
flashed a search-light all about the place, and concluded that it was
the receiving-room, where the raw iron billets were brought via the
elevator, and from there slid to the floor below. At one end, in exactly
the same location as the desk Smith had destroyed, stood another, with a
low and remarkably broad chair beside it.

So far as could be seen, there were neither doors, window-panes, nor
shutters through the structure. "To get all the light and air they
could," guessed the doctor. "Perhaps that's why the buildings are all
triangular; most wall surface in proportion to floor area, that way."

A few hundred feet higher they began to look for prominent buildings.
Only in forgetful moments did either of them scan the landscape for
signs of life; they knew now that there could be none.

"We ought to learn something there," the doctor said after a while,
pointing out a particularly large, squat, irregularly built affair on
the edge of the "business district." The architect, however, was in
favor of an exceptionally large, high building in the isolated group
previously noted in the "suburbs." But because it was nearer, they
maneuvered first in the direction of the doctor's choice.

The sky-car came to rest in a large plaza opposite what appeared to be
the structure's main entrance. From their window the explorers saw that
the squat effect was due only to the space the edifice covered; for it
was an edifice, a full five stories high.

The doctor was impatient to go. Smith was willing enough to stay behind;
he was already joyously examining the strange machine he had found. Two
minutes later Kinney, Van Emmon, and Jackson were standing before the
portals of the great building.

There they halted, and no wonder. The entire face of the building could
now be seen to be covered with a mass of carvings; for the most part
they were statues in bas relief. All were fantastic in the extreme, but
whether purposely so or not, there was no way to tell. Certainly any
such work on the part of an earthly artist would have branded him either
as insane or as an incomprehensible genius.

Directly above the entrance was a group which might have been labeled,
"The Triumph of the Brute." An enormously powerful man, nearly as broad
as he was tall, stood exulting over his victim, a less robust figure,
prostrate under his feet. Both were clad in armor. The victor's face was
distorted into a savage snarl, startlingly hideous by reason of the
prodigious size of his head, planted as it was directly upon his
shoulders; for he had no neck. His eyes were set so close together that
at first glance they seemed to be but one. His nose was flat and African
in type, while his mouth, devoid of curves, was simply revolting in its
huge, thick-lipped lack of proportion. His chin was square and
aggressive; his forehead, strangely enough, extremely high and narrow,
rather than low and broad.

His victim lay in an attitude that indicated the most agonizing torture;
his head was bent completely back, and around behind his shoulders. On
the ground lay two battle-axes, huge affairs almost as heavy as the
massively muscled men who had used them.

But the eyes of the explorers kept coming back to the fearsome face of
the conqueror. From the brows down, he was simply a huge, brutal giant;
above his eyes, he was an intellectual. The combination was absolutely
frightful; the beast looked capable of anything, of overcoming any
obstacle, mental or physical, internal or external, in order to assert
his apparently enormous will. He could control himself or dominate
others with equal ease and assurance.

"It can't be that he was drawn from life," said the doctor, with an
effort. It wasn't easy to criticize that figure, lifeless though it was.
"On a planet like this, with such slight gravitation, there is no need
for such huge strength. The typical Mercurian should be tall and flimsy
in build, rather than short and compact."

But the geologist differed. "We want to remember that the earth has no
standard type. Think what a difference there is between the mosquito and
the elephant, the snake and the spider! One would suppose that they had
been developed under totally different planetary conditions, instead of
all right on the same globe.

"No; I think this monster may have been genuine." And with that the
geologist turned to examine the other statuary.

Without exception, it resembled the central group; all the figures were
neckless, and all much more heavily built than any people on earth.
There were several female figures; they had the same general build, and
in every case were so placed as to enhance the glory of the males. In
one group the woman was offering up food and drink to a resting worker;
in another she was being carried off, struggling, in the arms of a
fairly good-looking warrior.

Dr. Kinney led the way into the building. As in the other structure,
there was no door. The space seemed to be but one story in height,
although that had the effect of a cathedral. The whole of the ceiling,
irregularly arched in a curious, pointed manner, was ornamented with
grotesque figures; while the walls were also partially formed of squat,
semi-human statues, set upon huge, triangular shafts. In the spaces
between these outlandish pilasters there had once been some sort of
decorations, A great many photos were taken here.

As for the floor, it was divided in all directions by low walls. About
five and a half feet in height, these walls separated the great room
into perhaps a hundred triangular compartments, each about the size of
an ordinary living room. Broad openings, about five feet square,
provided free access from one compartment to any other. The men from the
earth, by standing on tiptoes, could see over and beyond this system.

"Wonder if these walls were supposed to cut off the view?" speculated
the doctor. "I mean, do you suppose that the Mercurians were such short
people as that?" His question had to go unanswered.

They stepped into the nearest compartment, and were on the point of
pronouncing it bare, when Jackson, with an exclamation, excitedly
brushed away some of the dust and showed that the presumably solid walls
were really chests of drawers. Shallow things of that peculiar metal,
these drawers numbered several hundred to the compartment. In the whole
building there must have been millions.

Once more the dust was carefully removed, revealing a layer of those
curious rolls or reels, exactly similar to what had been found in the
tool chest in the shell works. A careful examination of the metallic
tape showed nothing whatever to the naked eye, although the doctor
fancied that he made out some strange characters on the little boxes
themselves.

His view was shortly proved. Finding drawer after drawer to contain a
similar display, varying from one to a dozen of the diminutive ribbons,
Van Emmon adopted the plan of gently blowing away the dust from the
faces of the drawers before opening them. This revealed the fact that
each of the shallow things was neatly labeled!

Instantly the three were intent upon this fresh clue. The markings were
very faint and delicate, the slightest touch being enough to destroy
them. To the untrained eye, they resembled ancient Egyptian
hieroglyphics; to the archeologist, they meant that a brand-new system
of ideographs had been found.

Suddenly Jackson straightened up and looked about with a new interest.
He went to one of the square doorways and very carefully removed the
dust from a small plate on the lintel. He need not have been so careful;
engraved in the solid metal was a single character, plainly in the same
language as the other ideographs.

The architect smiled triumphantly into the inquiring eyes of his
friends. "I won't have to eat my hat," said he. "This is a sure-enough
city, all right, and this is its library!"

Smith was still busy on the little machine when they returned to the
cube. He said that one part of it had disappeared, and was busily
engaged in filing a bit of steel to take its place. As soon as it was
ready, he thought, they could see what the apparatus meant.

The three had brought a large number of the reels. They were confident
that a microscopic search of the ribbons would disclose something to
bear out Jackson's theory that the great structure was really a
repository for books, or whatever corresponded with books on Mercury.

"But the main thing," said the doctor, enthusiastically, "is to get over
to the 'twilight band.' I'm beginning to have all sorts of wild hopes."

Jackson urged that they first visit the big "mansion" on the outskirts
of this place; he said he felt sure, somehow, that it would be worth
while. But Van Emmon backed up the doctor, and the architect had to be
content with an agreement to return in case their trip was futile.

Inside of a few minutes the cube was being drawn steadily over toward
the left or western edge of the planet's sunlit face. As it moved, all
except Smith kept close watch on the ground below. They made out town
after town, as well as separate buildings; and on the roads were to be
seen a great many of those octagonal structures, all motionless.

After several hundred miles of this, the surface abruptly sloped toward
what had clearly been the bed of an ocean. No sign of habitations here,
however; so apparently the water had disappeared AFTER the humans had
gone.

This ancient sea ended a short distance from the district they were
seeking. A little more travel brought them to a point where the sun cast
as much shadow as light on the surface. It was here they descended,
coming to rest on a sunlit knoll which overlooked a small, building-
filled valley.

According to Kinney's apparatus, there was about one-fortieth the amount
of air that exists on the earth. Of water vapor there was a trace; but
all their search revealed no human life. Not only that, but there was no
trace of lower animals; there was not even a lizard, much less a bird.
And even the most ancient-looking of the sculptures showed no creatures
of the air; only huge, antediluvian monsters were ever depicted.

They took a great many photos as a matter of course. Also, they
investigated some of the big, octagonal machines in the streets, finding
them to be similar to the great "tanks" that were used in the war,
except that they did not have the characteristic caterpillar tread;
their eight faces were so linked together that the entire affair could
roll, after a jolting, slab-sided, flopping fashion. Inside were curious
engines, and sturdy machines designed to throw the cannon-shells they
had seen; no explosive was employed, apparently, but centrifugal force
generated in whirling wheels. Apparently these cars, or chariots, were
universally used.

The explorers returned to the cube, where they found that Smith,
happening to look out a window, had spied a pond not far off. The three
visited it and found, on its banks, the first green stuff they had seen;
a tiny, flowerless salt grass, very scarce. It bordered a slimy, bluish
pool of absolutely still fluid. Nobody would call it water. They took a
few samples of it and went back.

And within a few minutes the doctor slid a small glass slide into his
microscope, and examined the object with much satisfaction. What he saw
was a tiny, gelatinlike globule; among scientists it is known as the
amoeba. It is the simplest known form of life--the so-called "single
cell." It had been the first thing to live on that planet, and
apparently it was also the last.



V

THE CLOSED DOOR


As they neared Jackson's pet "mansion" each man paid close attention to
the intervening blocks. For the most part these were simply shapeless
ruins; heaps of what had once been, perhaps, brick or stone. Once they
allowed the cube to rest on the top of one of these mounds; but the sky-
car's great weight merely sank it into the mass. There was nothing under
it save that same sandy dust.

Apparently the locality they were approaching had been set aside as a
very exclusive residence district for the elite of the country. Possibly
it contained the homes of the royalty, assuming that there had been a
royalty. At any rate the conspicuous structure Jackson had selected was
certainly the home of the most important member of that colony.

When the three, once more in their helmets and suits, stood before the
low, broad portico which protected the entrance to that edifice, the
first thing they made out was an ornamental frieze running across the
face. In the same bold, realistic style as the other sculpture, there
was depicted a hand-to-hand battle between two groups of those half
savage, half cultured monstrosities. And in the background was shown a
glowing orb, obviously the sun.

"See that?" exclaimed the doctor. "The size of that sun, I mean! Compare
it with the way old Sol looks now!"

They took a single glance at the great ball of fire over their heads;
nine times the size it always seemed at home, it contrasted sharply with
the rather small ball shown in the carvings.

"Understand?" the doctor went on. "When that sculpture was made, Mercury
was little nearer the sun than the earth is now!"

The builder was hugely impressed. He asked, eagerly: "Then probably the
people became as highly developed as we?"

Van Emmon nodded approvingly, but the doctor opposed. "No; I think not,
Jackson. Mercury never did have as much air as the earth, and
consequently had much less oxygen. And the struggle for existence," he
went on, watching to see if the geologist approved each point as he made
it, "the struggle for life is, in the last analysis, a struggle for
oxygen.

"So I would say that life was a pretty strenuous proposition here, while
it lasted. Perhaps they were--" He stopped, then added: "What I can't
understand is, how did it happen that their affairs came to such an
abrupt end? And why don't we see any--er--indications?"

"Skeletons?" The architect shuddered. Next second, though, his face lit
up with a thought. "I remember reading that electricity will decompose
bone, in time." And then he shuddered again as his foot stirred that
lifeless, impalpable dust. Was it possible?

As they passed into the great house the first thing they noted was the
floor, undivided, dust-covered, and bare, except for what had perhaps
been rugs. The shape was the inevitable equilateral triangle; and here,
with a certain magnificent disregard for precedent, the builders had
done away with a ceiling entirely, and instead had sloped the three
walls up till they met in a single point, a hundred feet overhead. The
effect was massively simple.

In one corner a section of the floor was elevated perhaps three feet
above the rest, and directly back of this was a broad doorway, set in a
short wall. The three advanced at once toward it.

Here the electric torch came in very handy. It disclosed a poorly
lighted stairway, very broad, unrailed, and preposterously steep. The
steps were each over three feet high.

"Difference in gravitation," said the doctor, in response to Jackson's
questioning look. "Easy enough for the old-timers, perhaps." They
struggled up the flight as best they could, reaching the top after over
five minutes of climbing.

Perhaps it was the reaction from this exertion; at all events each felt
a distinct loss of confidence as, after regaining their wind, they again
began to explore. Neither said anything about it to the others; but each
noted a queer sense of foreboding, far more disquieting than either of
them had felt when investigating anything else. It may have been due to
the fact that, in their hurry, they had not stopped to eat.

The floor they were on was fairly well lighted with the usual oval
windows. The space was open, except that it contained the same kind of
dividing walls they had found in the library. Here, however, each
compartment contained but one opening, and that not uniformly placed. In
fact, as the three noted with a growing uneasiness, it was necessary to
pass through every one of them in order to reach the corner farthest,
from the ladderlike stairs. Why it should make them uneasy, neither
could have said.

When they were almost through the labyrinth, Van Emmon, after standing
on tiptoes for the tenth time, in order to locate himself, noted
something that had escaped their attention before. "These compartments
used to be covered over," he said, for some reason lowering his voice.
He pointed out niches in the walls, such as undoubtedly once held the
ends of heavy timbers. "What was this place, anyhow? A trap?"

Unconsciously they lightened their steps as they neared the last
compartment. They found, as expected, that it was another stairwell. Van
Emmon turned the light upon every corner of the place before going any
further; but except for a formless heap of rubbish in one corner, which
they did not investigate, the place was as bare as the rest of the
floor.

Again they climbed, this time for a much shorter distance; but Jackson,
slightly built chap that he was, needed a little help on the steep
stairs. They were not sorry that they had reached the uppermost floor of
the mansion. It was somewhat better lighted than the floor below, and
they were relieved to find that the triangular compartments did not have
the significant niches in their walls. Their spirits rose perceptibly.

At the corner farthest from the stairs one of the walls rose straight to
the ceiling, completely cutting off a rather large triangle. The three
paid no attention to the other compartments, but went straight to what
they felt sure was the most vital spot in the place. And their feelings
were justified with a vengeance when they saw that the usual doorway in
this wall was protected by something that had, so far, been entirely
missing everywhere else.

It was barred by a heavy door.

For several minutes the doctor, the geologist, and the architect stood
before it. Neither would have liked to admit that he would just as soon
leave that door unopened. All the former uneasiness came back. It was
all the more inexplicable, with the brilliant sunlight only a few feet
away, that each should have felt chilled by the place.

"Wonder if it's locked?" remarked Van Emmon. He pressed against the
dust-covered barrier, half expecting it to turn to dust; but evidently
it had been made of the time-defying alloy. It stood firm. And to all
appearances it was nearly air-tight.

"Well!" said the doctor suddenly, so that the other two started
nervously. "The door's got to come down; that's all!" They looked
around; there was no furniture, no loose piece of material of any kind.
Van Emmon straightway backed away from the door about six feet, and the
others followed his example.

"All together!" grunted the geologist; and the three aluminum-armored
monsters charged the door. It shook under the impact; a shower of dust
fell down; and they saw that they had loosened the thing.

"Once more!" This time a wide crack showed all around the edge of the
door, and the third attempt finished the job. Noiselessly--for there was
no air to carry the sound--but with a heavy jar which all three felt
through their feet, the barrier went flat on the floor beyond.

At the same instant a curious, invisible wave, like a tiny puff of wind,
floated out of the darkness and passed by the three men from the earth.
Each noticed it, but neither mentioned it at the time. Van Emmon was
already searching the darkness with the torch.

Apparently it was only an anteroom. A few feet beyond was another wall,
and in it stood another door, larger and heavier than the first. The
three did not stop; they immediately tried their strength on this one
also.

After a half dozen attempts without so much as shaking the massive
affair--"It's no use," panted the geologist, wishing that he could get a
handkerchief to his forehead. "We can't loosen it without tools."

Jackson was for trying again, but the doctor agreed with Van Emmon. They
reflected that they had been away from Smith long enough, anyhow. The
cube was out of sight from where they were.

Van Emmon turned the light on the walls of the anteroom, and found, on a
shelf at one end, a neat pile of those little reels, eleven in all. He
pocketed the lot. There was nothing else.

Jackson and Kinney started to go. They retreated as far into the main
room as their telephone wires would allow. Still the geologist held
back.

"Come on," said the doctor uneasily. "It's getting cold."

Next second they stopped short, nerves on edge, at a strange exclamation
from Van Emmon. They looked around to see him pointing his light
directly at the floor. Even in that unnatural suit of mail, his attitude
was one of horror.

"Look here," he said in a low, strained voice. They went to his side,
and instinctively glanced behind them before looking at what lay in the
dust.

It was the imprint of an enormous human foot.


The first thing that greeted the ears of the explorers upon taking off
their suits in the sky-car, was the exultant voice of Smith. He was too
excited to notice anything out of the way in their manner; he was almost
dancing in front of his bench, where the unknown machine, now
reconstructed, stood belted to a small electric-motor.

"It runs!" he was shouting. "You got here just in time!" He began to
fumble with a switch.

"What of it?" remarked the doctor in the bland tone which he kept for
occasions when Smith needed calming. "What will it do if it does run?"

The engineer looked blank. "Why--" Then he remembered, and picked up one
of the reels at random. "There's a clamp here just the right size to
hold one of these," he explained, fitting the ribbon into place and
threading its free end into a loop on a spool which looked as though
made for it. But his excitement had passed; he now cautiously set a
small anvil between himself and the apparatus, and then, with the aid of
a long stick, he threw on the current.
