The house stood in a garden, which extended some distance behind
it; and it was here that the horses were picketed. The front gate
was a very strong one, and was certain to resist all attacks, for
some time.

Harry called off half his men, and set them to work at the wall at
the end of the garden, which was only constructed of dry mud;
directing them to make a hole large enough for a horse to pass
through. At this side all was quiet, the people in the native
houses there having gone round to the front, to watch what was
doing. Harry stood there for a few minutes, watching the men at
work, and saw with satisfaction their heavy tulwars rapidly cutting
through the soft wall. He told them that, when they had finished,
four of them were to remain to guard the hole, in case any might
try to force their way in; and the rest were to return, to aid
their comrades at the gate.

He had no great fear that the attempt would be made to enter in
that direction, for the windows in the back of the house were, like
those in front, large; and anyone attempting to climb the walls and
enter the garden would be liable to be shot down from the windows,
as they could not be covered, as were those on the other side, by a
fire kept up from the houses outside. The entrance into the garden
from the house was made by a small door, at the bottom of a
staircase leading from what had been the zenana, for the gardens
were always considered the special domain of the ladies. There was
another small door for the servants' offices, used by the men who,
early in the morning, went in to keep the garden in order.

When Harry rejoined the party in front, he found that the gates
were yielding. The lower portion had been almost chopped away; but
here the wall of stones prevented an entrance, and the men with
their axes could scarcely reach to touch the upper half. Presently,
however, the hinges of the upper end of one of the half doors
yielded to the weight. A great shout arose from the mob; and the
musketry, hitherto directed against the windows, was now
concentrated on the opening.

But it was no longer one sided. The troopers, glad that the time
for inaction had passed, returned the fire with vigour. They had
shifted the upper line of stones, so that there was room between
each for a musket barrel and, lying in shelter, they were enabled
to take deliberate aim at their assailants. At every shot a man
dropped, and the crowd opened speedily, and cleared away from the
line of fire.

There was a pause of some minutes, and then a strong party of
soldiers rushed forward, and began to try to pull down the barrier;
a number of others opening fire over their heads, so as to prevent
the defenders from standing up to fire down into them. It was
evident that, ere long, a slope would be formed outside by which an
assault could be made.

That his men would for some time repel any attack, Harry thought
certain; but sooner or later it would succeed, and there would then
be no time to retire. He therefore sent a man back, to see if the
hole in the wall was large enough; and he returned directly, saying
that the men there had just concluded their work, and that six of
them were coming back.

Harry now gave orders, to the native officer who was standing
beside him, to order these men to lead the horses through the
opening. When he had been gone a minute or two, he sent all the
men, except four, to follow the example of their comrades; while
those left with him redoubled their fire, so that their assailants
should not know that any of the defenders had been withdrawn.

It was not long before a trooper ran back, with the word that all
the horses had been taken through. The news came just in time, for
so much of the barricade had been pulled down that it could now be
climbed. Harry therefore gave the word and, with the last of the
defenders, went off at a run.

The troop was gathered in the deserted lane at the bottom of the
garden and, on Harry's arrival, the men sprung into the saddles and
galloped off. The rattle of musketry was now very heavy, but it
suddenly stopped and, a moment later, shouts and yells told that
the breach had been carried, and the yard found to be deserted.

"They will search the house, first," Harry said to the native
officer, "and they will be cautious about it, as they will think
that at any moment they may come upon us, and will be sure that
they would meet with a desperate resistance. I expect that it will
be ten minutes before they discover how we have slipped through
their hands."

They made a long detour, and then approached the palace from the
other side; Harry having determined to place himself under the
protection of the rajah, for he did not think it possible that they
could escape by hard riding, as they might be pursued by the whole
of the cavalry. Just as they were approaching it, they heard a
fresh outbreak of firing, the musketry being mingled with the crack
of field guns.

"The rajah has gone out to our rescue," Harry said. "He would have
been too late, if we had stopped there; however, we can rely upon
him now."

Five minutes later, they rode into the courtyard of the palace. It
was almost deserted, but one of the officials came out and, bowing
deeply to Harry, said:

"The rajah himself has gone out, with the household troops and a
battery of artillery, to put down the tumult. He is furious that
his guests should have been attacked."

The firing presently ceased and, a quarter of an hour later, the
rajah rode in. A messenger had been despatched, at once, to inform
him that the British officer, with his escort, had arrived at the
palace. Harry and his men had dismounted, and were still standing
by their horses.

The rajah sprang from his saddle as he rode up.

"The gods be thanked that I see you safely here, my friend!" he
said. "When I arrived at your house, I feared that all was over,
for these rebels had gained possession. You must not blame me for
not arriving sooner. When the firing was heard, I feared that the
rabble of the town, aided perhaps by many of my soldiers, were
attacking you; although, until the officer who commanded the guard
I had placed there returned, I did not dream how serious the
business was. Then I got my soldiers together; but this occupied
some time, as many of them were in the town. However, as soon as a
squadron of horse was collected, and a couple of hundred infantry,
together with four guns of a battery, I headed them myself and, on
arriving, opened fire upon the mob; who speedily scattered, some
fifty or sixty of them being killed.

"Then I entered the house, expecting to find only your dead bodies,
but there were no signs of strife. I questioned some prisoners we
had taken inside; and these said that, just before I came up, a
hole had been discovered in the garden wall, and it was believed
that you had all escaped through that. I was about to ride, with
all speed, to prevent any pursuit being taken up; when a messenger
arrived with the welcome news that you had just entered the
palace."

"I thank you heartily, Rajah, for having so promptly come to my
aid; though assuredly you would have arrived too late to save us,
had we not, as soon as the fighting began, set to work to prepare a
means of escape. Once we got out, we were sure that you would
protect us, and therefore rode here and awaited your return."

"'Tis well, indeed, that you thought of that plan, sahib; for I
would not, for half my dominions, that a hair of your head should
have been hurt, while you were here as my guest."

"It has all ended fortunately, Rajah; and now, what would you
recommend me to do?"

"You had best stay here, until nightfall. I will ride, now, to the
camps of my men, to reproach them for their conduct; and to ask if
they want to bring the army that has just captured Seringapatam
down upon us. When it is dark, I will myself accompany you, with my
household cavalry, until you are miles away.

"I pray you to report to the Governor General how grieved I am that
evil-disposed persons should have raised a riot, with the intention
of killing you; and assure him that I did all in my power to save
you, and shall, if they can be discovered, punish those concerned
in the matter."

"I shall assuredly report very favourably of your conduct,
Rajah--which will, I have no doubt, be warmly appreciated--and
shall let the Governor General know that, from the time of my
arrival here, I always have been treated with the greatest courtesy
and attention by you."

Leaving the infantry and artillery, with their guns, in front of
the palace, lest any attack should be made upon it; the rajah rode
off with his cavalry and returned, two hours later, with the news
that all was quiet, and that the troops had returned to their duty.

As soon as it was dark, the party started. The rajah rode at the
head of his cavalry; Harry, at his request, taking his place with
his own escort in the centre of it, so that his presence among them
should not be suspected.

"It is as well," the rajah said, "that the news that you have left
should not be known till tomorrow morning; for although the troops
would, I have no doubt, be obedient to my orders, in a town like
this there are many budmashes; who might, if they knew that you had
started, ride in pursuit, with the intention of attacking you after
I had left you."

Once out of the town they proceeded at a rapid pace, which they
maintained until twenty miles away from Nagpore. The rajah then
returned, with the main body of his cavalry; ordering a native
officer and thirty men to escort Harry, until he arrived at the
frontier.

There was, however, little occasion for this addition to Harry's
force. The news of the fall of Seringapatam had spread like
wildfire, and at each village through which they passed, and at
those in which they halted for the night, the inhabitants saluted
Harry with the deepest respect; and would willingly have supplied
him and his escort with provisions, without payment, had he not
insisted upon their receiving fair value for them.

At the frontier the rajah's troop turned back, and Harry continued
his journey, reaching Calcutta early in June.

When he arrived there, he was well received by the Governor
General, who told him that he had rendered a great service, by so
delaying the negotiations that the Rajah of Berar had remained
neutral during the war with Tippoo; and that he would probably soon
require his services again.

A descendant of the Rajah of Mysore, whose government Hyder Ali had
usurped, was released from captivity and raised to the musnud.
Nearly half the revenue of the country was assigned to him. A large
sum was set aside for the maintenance of the families of Hyder and
Tippoo, and the remaining territory was divided between the Company
and the Nizam.

A portion was set aside as the share of the Peishwa, although he
had not fulfilled his engagement in any way; but it was to be given
only on the condition that he signed a treaty of alliance with the
English, similar to that entered into by the Nizam. The Peishwa,
however, would not consent to do this; and the territory set aside
for him was, consequently, divided between the Company and the
Nizam.

Civil war was raging in the Deccan. The widows of Mahdoo Rao had
been joined by a large force, and were plundering Scindia's
villages; while Jeswunt Holkar was also ravaging the country.
Scindia found that it was necessary to appoint Balloba, who had
been for some years in captivity, to the post of his chief minister
and, through him, a treaty was made with the widows of Mahdoo, and
the trouble in that direction ceased.

The Rajah of Kolapoore was at war with the Peishwa; and the troops
of Purseram Bhow, and those of Rastia, were both defeated. Scindia
and the Peishwa now sent an army of thirty thousand horse and six
thousand infantry against Kolapoore; but Purseram, who was in
command, was defeated and fell, mortally wounded. Another army
joined the defeated force, and invested Kolapoore.

On the 13th of March, 1800, Nana Furnuwees died; and affairs in the
Mahratta country, that had been to some extent kept in order by his
wisdom and moderation, now became worse than ever. A dispute at
once took place between the Peishwa and Scindia, each being
desirous of obtaining the treasures Nana was supposed to possess.
Scindia seized his jagheer. Ghatgay was released, and obtained his
former influence over Scindia; who seized Balloba and threw him
into prison, where he died.

The Peishwa, on his part, was determined to destroy all the friends
of Nana and, inviting most of the principal men to the palace, he
seized and sent them all, prisoners, to hill forts. He now, with
Scindia, determined to destroy the family and adherents of Purseram
Bhow. Appa Sahib, Purseram's son, had succeeded him in the command
of the army besieging Kolapoore and, receiving intelligence of the
conspiracy against him, raised the siege and retired to the
Carnatic, and Scindia plundered the whole of Purseram's villages.

A fierce chief in Dhoondia invaded the newly-acquired territories
of the British, and Major General Wellesley was sent against him,
and totally routed his party.

Jeswunt Holkar was now becoming extremely dangerous; and Scindia
was at last obliged to march away, with his army, to defend his own
dominions. He left behind him five battalions of regular infantry,
and ten thousand horse and, before he set out, compelled the
Peishwa to give him gold to the amount of forty-seven lakhs of
rupees.

On his way through Malwan, he sent seven of his regular battalions
to protect his capital. One column, under Captain Mackintyre, was
intercepted on the way, and all killed or made prisoners. Holkar
then fell upon the other party, which he also overpowered and
defeated. He next attacked Scindia's artillery on the march; but
Major Brownrigg, an officer in the latter's service, with four
battalions, repulsed his assailants.

The Peishwa, while this was going on, was mercilessly murdering or
imprisoning those whom he considered his enemies; and ordered
Wittoojee Holkar, the brother of Jeswunt, to be trampled to death
by an elephant.

Scindia having sent for Ghatgay to rejoin him, Jeswunt advanced to
meet him, and was signally defeated. He speedily gathered a fresh
force, and wasted not only Scindia's country but that of the
Peishwa; and finally a great battle was fought, near Poona, in
which Holkar, thanks to his fourteen regular battalions, officered
by Englishmen, won a complete victory over the Peishwa's force and
that left behind by Scindia. The Peishwa was forced to fly, and
take refuge at Bassein, where he entered into negotiations for
British support.



Chapter 10: A Mission By Sea.


A Fortnight after Harry's return, he was again sent for by Lord
Mornington.

"Captain Lindsay, I am about to employ you on a mission of a
somewhat delicate character. There have been many complaints that
ships trading among the islands have been attacked and, in some
cases, captured and the crews massacred, by Malays. We recently
received a communication from a native chief, or rajah, who owns
the southern point of the Malay Peninsula. He says that the Dutch,
in Java, greatly interfere with his trade; as all vessels trading
in the East are bound to touch at Batavia, on their way to Europe,
and consequently very few of them visit the Peninsula, as to do so
would greatly lengthen their voyage to Batavia. He asks that we
should make a settlement at the end of the Peninsula, so that our
ships may trade with him; and would be willing to place us in
possession of an island, two or three miles from the extreme
southern portion of his dominions.

"There can be no doubt that the position would be an extremely
valuable one; lying, as it does, on our trade route to the East.
But it is also certain that a settlement of that kind would be
viewed with extreme jealousy by the Dutch; whose possessions, in
Java and other islands, render them practically masters of the
whole Malay Archipelago.

"Certainly, at present, our hands are much too full here to permit
of our engaging in any enterprise of this kind but, at the same
time, it is desirable that we should obtain some reliable
information as to the situation there, the power of this rajah, and
the advantages that the island offers in the way of ports, the
salubrity of its climate, and other similar particulars. Its
possession would certainly be desirable, not only as a centre for
future trade with Bankok and the East, but as a port from which our
vessels of war might suppress the piracy that prevails all along
the Malay coast, and in the neighbouring island of Sumatra. Such
information may be extremely useful in the future, and when our
power in this country is consolidated.

"But this is not the sole object of your mission. You will proceed,
either before or after your visit to this rajah, as we will
determine, to Batavia; bearing a despatch from me to the Dutch
governor, narrating a number of acts of piracy that have taken
place among the islands, and requesting that, as they are the
paramount power in that district, they will take steps, both for
their own sake and ours, to suppress piracy; and offering, on our
part, that two or three of our ships of war shall, if they think it
desirable, aid them in the punishment of the Malays. You will be
accompanied by an interpreter.

"There are several Malay traders established here; and some of
them, no doubt, speak Hindustani fluently. I will have enquiries
made among them, and will also procure you a Dutch interpreter.

"I do not propose that you shall go in a trading vessel to Java.
The appearance of such a vessel, off Batavia, would be resented by
the Dutch. Of course, traders do go from here down to the islands,
but only to those not under Dutch power. They used generally to
trade, on their way down, with Burma and Siam; but the Burmese have
shown such hostility to us that it is no longer safe to enter their
rivers, and they have wrested the maritime provinces of Siam, on
this side of the Peninsula, from that power; so that trade there
is, for the present, at an end. I shall therefore send you down in
one of our small sloops. A larger vessel might irritate the Dutch,
and a small one would be sufficient to furnish you with an escort
to this Rajah of Johore--not only for protection, but because the
native potentates have no respect for persons who do not arrive
with some sort of appearance of state.

"You will, of course, go as high commissioner, with full powers to
represent me. I do not anticipate that you will be able to conclude
any formal treaty with the Rajah of Johore. He will, of course, ask
for an equivalent, either in money or in protection against some
neighbouring rajah. We have no money to spare at present, and
certainly no troops. Your commission therefore will be to
acknowledge his communication, to assure him of our friendship, to
ascertain the suitability of the island that he offers, and to tell
him that, at present, being so fully occupied with wars here, we
are scarcely in a position to extend our responsibility; but that,
when matters are more settled, we shall be prepared to enter into a
treaty with him, to open a trade with his dominions, to pay a fair
sum for the possession of the island, if suitable, and to enter
into a treaty of alliance with him.

"Of the value of such a settlement there can be no doubt, whatever;
for we may take it that, before very long, some of the Chinese
ports will be open to European traders."

A week later, Harry embarked on a brig mounting eight guns, and
usually employed in police work along the coast. He was accompanied
by a Dutch interpreter, a Malay trader, Abdool, and four troopers
of the Governor General's bodyguard, in the handsome uniform worn
by that corps. The lieutenant in command of the brig received
Harry, with the usual ceremony, as a Government commissioner. He
himself was at the gangway to meet him, and twelve of the sailors,
with drawn cutlasses, saluted as Harry stepped on to the deck.

The lieutenant, a young man of about four or five and twenty,
looked surprised when he found that the official, whom he was to
carry down to Java, was apparently younger than himself.

"I suppose, Captain Fairclough," Harry said with a smile, when they
entered the cabin, "that you expected to see a middle-aged man."

"Hardly that, Captain Lindsay. I heard that you were a young
officer, who had rendered distinguished services on the Bombay
side, and had just returned from an important mission in the
Deccan; but I own that I had not at all expected to see an officer
younger than myself."

"I can quite understand that. I have been exceptionally fortunate,
owing to the fact that I speak Mahratti as well as English. Well, I
hope that after your reception we have done with ceremony; and that
you will forget that I am, at present, a civil official with the
temporary rank of commissioner, and regard and treat me as you
might any young officer who had been given a passage in your brig.
I have led a pretty rough life, and hate anything like ceremony. We
may be some weeks on board together, and should have a pleasant
time of it, especially as the whole country is new to me."

"And to me also," the lieutenant said. "I generally cruise from the
mouth of the Hooghly to Chittagong; and a dreary coast it is, with
its low muddy shores and scores of creeks and streams. In the
sunderbunds there is little to look after, the people are quiet and
very scattered; but farther east they are piratically inclined, and
prey upon the native traders, and we occasionally catch them at it,
and give them a lesson.

"Well, I shall be very glad to adopt your suggestion, and to drop
all ceremony. I have not often had to carry civil officials in this
craft, she is too small for any such dignified people; but when I
was in the Tigris, we often carried civil and military officials
from Madras, and some of them were unmitigated nuisances--not the
military men, but the civilians. The absurd airs they gave
themselves, as if heaven and earth belonged to them, were
sickening; and they seemed to regard us as dust under their feet.
Whenever we heard that we were to take a member of the Council from
Calcutta to Madras, or the other way, it was regarded as an
infliction of a serious kind."

"Well, I propose to begin with that, when we are down here
together, we drop titles; you call me Lindsay, and I will call you
Fairclough."

"With all my heart," the other said.

"What officers have you?"

"A junior lieutenant, and two midshipmen. The lieutenant, when I am
alone, always messes with me. We are not so strict, among our small
craft in the Company's service, as they are in the royal navy; and
I think, myself, that it would be ridiculous for me to dine here by
myself; Mr. Hardy, by himself; and the two midshipmen in a separate
mess of their own. That of course they do, for they would not enjoy
their meals with Hardy and myself."

"I quite agree with you."

"This is your stateroom."

"But it is your private cabin, Fairclough, is it not?"

"Well, yes; but I am accustomed to turn out, whenever there are
passengers."

"Well, at any rate, I shall feel very much disgusted if you do so
for me. I should be most uncomfortable, so I must insist on you
having your things moved back here. When I tell you that, for
sixteen years, I lived in the house of a small Mahratta cultivator,
you may well imagine that I can make myself perfectly comfortable,
anywhere."

"It will be quite contrary to the rules of our service," the other
began, hesitatingly.

"I can't help that," Harry replied. "There are no rules without
exceptions, and mine is an altogether peculiar case. You will
really oblige me, very much, if you will have the change made.

"I see that you are surprised at what I told you about myself; it
is too long a story to tell you now, but I will, after dinner
today, repeat to you and Hardy some of my experiences; which you
will see have been curious, and account for my having the rank of
captain, and being employed in a responsible position, at my age.

"I suppose you will soon be getting up anchor?"

"Yes; the tide will be favourable now, and everything is ready for
a start."

A few minutes later, the clank of the capstan was heard and, going
on deck, Harry found Lieutenant Hardy preparing to sail. As soon as
the vessel was under way he came aft, and was introduced to Harry.

The latter had enquired, of the chief of the Governor's staff, what
was customary on these occasions, and whether he was to take on
board a stock of provisions.

"Not at all," was the reply; "Government makes an allowance for
messing and wine. Sometimes an official will take a dozen or so of
champagne with him, as the allowance, though liberal, would
scarcely cover this; but it is quite sufficient to enable a captain
to keep a good table, and provide port and sherry."

Harry, seeing that the voyage might be much longer than usual, had
sent on board four dozen of champagne; some of which he thought
might be useful at the table, if the Rajah of Johore came on board
with a number of his chiefs, or if the ship was visited by Dutch
officials.

The Dutch interpreter was to mess with the petty officers. The
Malay preferred to prepare his victuals for himself.

The wind was light, and the brig drifted quietly down the river
and, when evening came on, anchored as, on account of the sandbanks
and the lightness of the wind, Fairclough had thought it
unadvisable to continue his voyage at night. As soon as the sails
had been taken in, the two officers went down to the cabin, where
dinner was ready for them.

It was a pleasant one, for the two naval men were in high spirits
over this change from their ordinary routine, and the prospect of
sailing on a strange voyage. Abdool, as usual, had placed himself
behind his master's chair, but Harry said:
