
If the organization is sound, and tremors are communicated to the
auditory nerve, they are in some way or other conveyed to the mind,
but in what manner we cannot tell. Nature has hid the machinery by
which she connects material and immaterial things entirely from our
view, and if we try to investigate them, we are soon bewildered in
the regions of hypothesis.

Tremors may however be communicated to the auditory nerve in a
different manner from what I have described. If a watch be put
between the teeth, and the ear stopped, tremors will be communicated
to the teeth, by them to the bones of the upper jaw, and by these to
the auditory nerve. In this way a person born deaf, and having no
power of hearing through the medium of the air, may become sensible
of the pleasures of music.

That sound may be propagated by vibrations, independent of pulses of
the air, is evident from the experiment with the string and poker.

There is, strictly speaking, no such thing existing as sound; it
being only a sensation of the mind, caused by tremors of the air, or
vibrations of the sounding body.

In order to understand more clearly how pulses, or waves are caused
by the vibration of bodies, and the manner in which vibrating bodies
are affected, I shall just enumerate some of the properties of
pendulums, which however I shall not stop to demonstrate here, as
that would consume much time.

When two pendulums vibrate which are exactly of the same length,
their vibrations are performed in equal times; if they set out
together to describe equal arcs, they will agree together in their
motions, and the vibrations will be performed in equal times.

But if one of these pendulums be four times as long as the other, the
vibrations of the longer will be twice as slow as those of the
shorter; the number of vibrations being as the square roots of their
lengths.

A pendulum is fixed to one point, but a musical string is extended
between two points, and in its vibrations may be compared to a double
pendulum vibrating in a very small arc, hence we see how strings of
different lengths may agree in their motions after the manner of
pendulums; but we must observe that it is not necessary to quadruple
the length of a musical string, in order to make the time of
vibration twice as long; it will be sufficient merely to double it.
We know that from whatever height a pendulum falls on one side, to
the same height will it rise on the other. In the same manner will an
elastic string continue to vibrate from one side to the other for
some time, till its motion be destroyed by the resistance of the air,
and friction about its fixed points, and each of its small
vibrations, like those of a pendulum, will, for the same reason, be
performed in times exactly equal to each other.

Thus we gain from the analogy between a pendulum and a musical
string, a more adequate conception of a subject which was never
understood till this analogy was discovered. It explains to us why
every musical string preserves the same pitch from the beginning to
the end of its vibration; or as long as it can be distinguished by
the ear; and why the pitch remains still unvaried whether the sound
is loud or soft, and all this because the vibrations of the same
pendulum whether they are longer or shorter, when compared among
themselves, are found to be all performed in equal times till the
pendulum be at rest, the difference of the space, which is moved
over, compensating for the slowness of the motion till its decay.

To illustrate this subject still further, suppose we have a piece of
catgut stretched between two pins; I lay hold of it in the middle and
pull it sideways; I let it go, and you will observe that it first
straightens itself or returns to its original position. This depends
on the elasticity of its particles, which tend to reunite when they
have been separated by an external force, just in the same way that
the particles of a piece of caoutchouc or Indian rubber attract each
other when pulled asunder; and this force not only enables the string
to restore itself to its former situation, but will carry it nearly
to an equal distance on the other side, just in the same manner as a
ball falling down an inclined plane will rise nearly to the same
height up another, or a pendulum will rise nearly to the height from
which it fell.

In this way will a string move backwards and forwards, till friction
and the resistance of the air have destroyed the velocity which it
acquired by the force of elasticity.

It is obvious that when a string is thus let fly from the finger,
whatever be its own motion, such will also be the motion of the
particles of the air which fly before it: the air will be driven
forwards, and by that means condensed. When this condensed air
expands itself, it will expand not only towards the string, but as
its elasticity acts in all directions, it will also expand itself
forwards and condense the air that is beyond it, this last condensed
air, by its expansion, will produce the same effect on the air that
lies still further forwards, and thus the motion produced in the air,
by the vibration of the elastic string, is constantly carried
forwards and conveyed to the ear.

It will be proper however to observe, that these pulses are sometimes
produced without any such vibration of the sounding body, as we find
it in musical strings and bells. In these cases we have to discover
by what cause these condensations or pulses may be produced without
any apparent vibrations in what is considered as the sounding body.
We have two or three instances of this kind; one in wind instruments,
such as the flute or organ pipe; another in the discharge of a gun.

In an organ, or flute, the air, which is driven through the pipe,
strikes against the edge of the lips of the instrument in its
passage, and by being accumulated there, is condensed, and this
condensation produces waves or pulses in the air.

When a gun is discharged, a great quantity of air is produced, by the
firing of the gunpowder, which being violently propelled from the
piece, condenses the air that encompasses the space where the
expansion happens; for whatever is driven out from the space where
the expansion is made will be forcibly driven into the space all
around it. This condensation forms the first pulse, and as this, by
its elasticity, expands again, pulses of the same sort will be
produced and propagated forwards.

There is likewise another curious instance of the production of
sound, when a tube is held over a stream of inflamed hydrogen gas
issuing out of a capillary tube in a bottle.

Sounding bodies propagate their motions on all sides, directly
forwards, by successive condensations and rarefactions, so that sound
is driven in all directions, backwards and forwards, upwards and
downwards, and on every side; the pulses go on succeeding each other
like circles in disturbed water.

Sounds differ from each other both with respect to their tone and
intensity: in respect to their tone, they are distinguished into
grave and acute: in respect to their intensity, they are
distinguished into loud and low, or strong and weak. The tone of a
sound depends on the velocity with which the vibrations are
performed, for the greater the number of vibrations in a given time,
the more acute will be the tone, and on the contrary, the smaller the
number, the more grave it will be. The tone of a sound is not altered
by the distance of the ear from the sounding body; but the intensity
or strength of any sound depends on the force with which the waves of
the air strike the ear; and this force is different at different
distances; so that a sound which is very loud when we are near the
body that produces it, will be weaker if we are further from it,
though its tone will suffer no alteration; and the distance may be so
great that we cannot hear it at all. It has been demonstrated, that
the intensity of sound at different distances from the sounding body
is inversely as the square of the distance.

Sound moves with the same velocity at all distances from the sounding
body, otherwise it would not produce the same tone at all distances.
Sounds of different tones likewise move with the same velocity. This
is evident from a peal of bells being heard in the same order in
which they are rung, whether we are near, or at a distance.

It is likewise found that sounds of the same tone but of different
intensities are propagated with the same velocity. A low sound cannot
indeed be heard so far as a loud one; but sounds, whether low or
loud, will be conveyed in an equal time to any equal distance at
which they can both be heard. The report of a cannon does not move
faster, or pass over a given space sooner, than the sound of a
musical string.

The principal cause of the decay of sound is the want of perfect
elasticity in the air: whence it happens that every subsequent
particle has not the entire motion of the preceding particle
communicated to it, as is the case with equal and perfectly elastic
bodies; consequently the further the motion is propagated, the more
will the velocity with which the particles move be diminished; the
condensation of the air will be diminished also, and consequently its
effect on the ear. That the want of perfect elasticity in the air is
the principal cause of the decay of sound, appears from this, that
sounds are perceived more distinctly when the north and easterly
winds prevail, at which time the air is dry and dense, as appears
from the hygrometer and barometer; and, of course, the air in this
state must be more elastic, for the vapours diffused through the
atmosphere, unless dilated by intense heat, diminish the spring of
the air.

That sound is not propagated to all distances instantaneously, but
requires a sensible time for its passage from one place to another,
is evident from the discharge of a gun at a distance; for the report
is not heard till some time after the flash is seen. Light moves much
more swiftly than sound; it comes from the sun in eight minutes,
which is at the rate of 74,420 leagues in a second; so that the
velocity of light may be considered as instantaneous, at any distance
on the earth; and, as sound takes up a considerable time in its
passage, the interval between the flash and the report of the gun
shows the space it passes over in a given time, which is found to be
1142 feet in a second; so that if three seconds elapse between the
time when we see the flash and hear the report of the gun, it must be
distant 1142 yards.

From experiments that have been made at different times, by various
philosophers, we may collect the following results. First, That the
mean velocity of sound is a mile in about 4 3/4 seconds, or 1142 feet
in a second of time. Secondly, That all sounds, whether they be weak
or strong, have the same velocity. Thirdly, That sound moves over
equal spaces in equal times, from the beginning to the end.

The tone of a musical string, or a bell, appears continuous. This
depends upon a law of sensation, formerly mentioned, namely, that
impressions made upon any of the organs of sense do not immediately
vanish, but remain some time; and we hear sound continuous from these
vibrations, for the same reason that we hear it continuous when we
draw a stick quickly along a rail, or a quill along the teeth of a
comb; the vibrations succeed each other so quickly that we hear the
succeeding before the effect of the preceding is worn off; though it
must be evident that the impression produced by each pulse or wave of
the air is perfectly distinct and insulated.

The act of combining sounds in such a manner as to be agreeable to
the ear, is called music. This art is usually divided into melody and
harmony. An agreeable succession of sounds is called melody; but when
two or more sounds are produced together, and afford an agreeable
sensation, the effect is called harmony. When two sounds are produced
together, and afford pleasure to the sense of hearing, the effect is
called a concord; but when the sensation produced is harsh or
disagreeable, it is called a discord. These different effects seem to
depend upon the coincidence of the vibrations of the two strings, and
consequently on the coincidence of the pulses which they excite in
the air. When the strings are equally stretched, and of the same
length and thickness, their vibrations will always coincide, and they
produce a sound so similar to each other, that it is called unison,
which is the most perfect concord. When one string is only half the
length of the other, the vibrations coincide at every second
vibration of the shorter string: this produces a compound sound,
which is more agreeable to the ear than any other, except the unison;
this note, when compared with the tone produced by the longer string,
is called the octave to it, because the interval between the two
notes is so divided by musicians that from one to the other they
reckon eight different tones.

If the strings be of the length, two and three, the coincidence of
the pulses will happen less frequently, viz. at every third vibration
of the shorter string, and the concord will be less perfect. This
forms what is called a fifth. The less frequent the coincidence of
the vibrations, the less perfect will be the concord, or the less
pleasure will it afford to the mind; till the vibrations coincide so
seldom, that the sound produced by both strings at once is harsh and
disagreeable, and is called a discord.

The effects of music upon the mind, the power by which it moves the
heart, touches the passions, and excites sometimes the highest
pleasure, and sometimes the deepest melancholy, depend upon melody.
By a simple melody the ignorant are affected as well as those skilled
in music. The pleasures arising from harmony or a combination of
sounds are acquired rather than natural. Its pleasures are the result
of experience and knowledge in music; music affords a source of
innocent and inexhaustible pleasure, but its effects are different on
different persons: some are enthusiastically fond of it, while others
hear the sweetest airs with a listlessness bordering upon
indifference. This has been supposed to depend on a musical ear,
which is not given by nature to all. The cause of this difference is
by no means evident. It does not depend on the delicacy of the sense
of hearing, for there are some persons half deaf, who have the
greatest relish for music; while others who have a very acute sense
of hearing have no relish for music. In some instances I think a
musical ear has been acquired where it did not seem originally to
exist.

The force of sound is increased by the reflection of many bodies,
particularly such as are hard or elastic, which receive the waves or
pulses of the air and reflect them back again; these reflected
pulses, striking the ear along with the original, strengthen the
original sound. Hence it is, that the voice of a speaker is louder,
and more distinctly heard, in a room than in the open air. I said
that these reflected sounds entered the ear at the same time with the
original: this however is not strictly the case, for they must enter
the ear after the original, because the sound has a greater space to
move over: but they enter the ear so quickly after the original that
our sense cannot distinguish the difference. If however the
reflecting body should be placed at such a distance, that the
reflected sound should enter the ear some considerable or sensible
time after the original, an echo or distinct sound would be heard.

It appears from experiment that the ear of an experienced musician
can only distinguish such sounds as follow each other at the rate of
nine or ten in a second, or any lower rate; and therefore that we may
have a distinct perception of the direct and reflected sound, there
should at least be an interval of 1/9 of a second; but in this time
sound passes over one hundred and twenty seven feet, and
consequently, unless the space between the sounding body and the
reflecting surface, added to that between the reflecting surface and
the ear, be greater than one hundred and twenty seven feet, no echo
will be heard, because the reflected sound will enter the ear so soon
after the original, that the difference cannot be distinguished; and
therefore it will only serve to augment the original sound.

From what has been said, it is evident, in order that a person may
hear the echo of his own voice, that he should stand at least sixty
three, or sixty four feet from the reflecting obstacle, so that the
sound may have time to move over at least one hundred and twenty
seven feet before it come to his ear, otherwise he could not
distinguish it from the original sound.

But though the first reflected pulses may produce no echo, both on
account of their being too few in number, and too rapid in their
return to the ear; yet it must be evident that the reflecting surface
may be so formed, that the pulses, which come to the ear after two or
more reflections, may, after having passed over one hundred and
twenty seven feet or more, arrive at the ear in sufficient numbers to
produce an echo, though the distance of the reflecting surface from
the ear be less than the limit of echoes. This is instanced by the
echoes that we hear in several caves or caverns.

The sense of hearing is more apt to be vitiated or diseased than any
of the other senses, which indeed is not surprising, when we consider
that its organ is complex, consisting of many minute parts, which are
apt to be deranged.

It sometimes becomes too acute, and this may arise either from too
great an irritability of the whole nervous system, which often occurs
in hysteria, also in phrenitis, and some fevers; or from an inflamed
state of the ear itself.

The sense of hearing becomes diminished, and often entirely
abolished; and this may arise from various causes, such as an
original defect in the external ear, or the meatus auditorius, or
both; the meatus auditorius is often blocked up with wax or other
substances, which being removed, the hearing becomes perfect.
Deafness may likewise arise from a rigidity of the membrane of the
tympanum, from its being erodedor ruptured, or from an obstruction
of the Eustachian tube. It may likewise arise from a paralysis or
torpor of the auditory nerve, or from some diseased state of the
labyrinth, or from a vitiated state of the brain and nerves. There
is a kind of nervous deafness which comes on suddenly, and often
leaves the patient as suddenly.

There are various instances, however, in which the membane of the
tympanum has been lacerated or destroyed, without a total loss of
the sense of hearing, or indeed any great diminution of it. A
consideration of these circumstances induced Mr. Astley Cooper to
think of perforating it, in cases of deafness arising from a
permanent obstruction of the Eustachian tube, and he has often
performed this operation with great success. Of this he has given an
account in the last part of the Philosophical Transactions. This
operation ought however only to be performed in case of the closure
of the Eustachian tube. Cases of this kind may be distinguished by
the followingcriteria. If a person on blowing the nose violently,
feel a swelling in the ear, from the membrane of the tympanum being
forced outwards, the tube is open; and though the tube be closed,
if the beating of a watch placed between the teeth, or pressed against
the side of the head, cannot be heard, the operation cannot relieve,
as the sensibility of the auditory nerve must have been destroyed. In
a closed Eustachian tube, there is no noise in the head, like that
accompanying nervous deafness.

There is one species of deafness, which occurs very frequently, and
happens generally to old persons, though sometimes to the delicate
and irritable in the earlier periods of life. Anxiety and distress of
mind have been known to produce it. Its approach is generally
gradual, the patient hears better at one time than at another; a
cloudy day, a warm room, agitated spirits, or the operation of fear,
will produce a considerable diminution in the powers of the organ. In
the open air the hearing is better than in a confined situation; in a
noisy, than in a quiet society; in a coach when it is in motion, than
when it is still. A pulsation is often felt in the ear; a noise
resembling sometimes the roaring of the sea, and at others the
ringing of distant bells is heard. This deafness generally begins
with a diminished secretion of the wax of the ear, which the patient
attributes to cold. It may be cured, particularly at its
commencement, by the application of such stimulants as are capable of
exciting a discharge from the ceruminous glands; for which purpose
thev should be introduced into the meatus auditorius.

In some cases of this kind, where the auditory nerve has been in some
degree torpid, or rather perhaps where there has been a kind of
paralysis, or want of action, in the muscles which brace the membrane
of the tympanum, and keep the chain of bones in their proper state; a
person has not been able to hear, except during a considerable noise.
Willis mentions the case of a person who could only hear when a drum
was beaten near her; and we are told of a woman who could not hear a
word except when the sound of a drum was near, in which case she
could hear perfectly well. When she married, her husband hired a
