the theologians of this age; for he thought it would contribute in no
slight degree to this, if he were to lead Luther in triumph. The result
having proved unfortunate for the sophist, an incredible rage torments
him; for he feels that whatever discredit to Rome has arisen through me
has been caused by the fault of himself alone.

Suffer me, I pray you, most excellent Leo, both to plead my own cause,
and to accuse your true enemies. I believe it is known to you in what
way Cardinal Cajetan, your imprudent and unfortunate, nay unfaithful,
legate, acted towards me. When, on account of my reverence for your
name, I had placed myself and all that was mine in his hands, he did not
so act as to establish peace, which he could easily have established by
one little word, since I at that time promised to be silent and to make
an end of my case, if he would command my adversaries to do the same.
But that man of pride, not content with this agreement, began to justify
my adversaries, to give them free licence, and to order me to recant, a
thing which was certainly not in his commission. Thus indeed, when the
case was in the best position, it came through his vexatious tyranny
into a much worse one. Therefore whatever has followed upon this is the
fault not of Luther, but entirely of Cajetan, since he did not suffer me
to be silent and remain quiet, which at that time I was entreating for
with all my might. What more was it my duty to do?

Next came Charles Miltitz, also a nuncio from your Blessedness. He,
though he went up and down with much and varied exertion, and omitted
nothing which could tend to restore the position of the cause thrown
into confusion by the rashness and pride of Cajetan, had difficulty,
even with the help of that very illustrious prince the Elector
Frederick, in at last bringing about more than one familiar conference
with me. In these I again yielded to your great name, and was prepared
to keep silence, and to accept as my judge either the Archbishop of
Treves, or the Bishop of Naumburg; and thus it was done and concluded.
While this was being done with good hope of success, lo! that other and
greater enemy of yours, Eccius, rushed in with his Leipsic disputation,
which he had undertaken against Carlstadt, and, having taken up a
new question concerning the primacy of the Pope, turned his arms
unexpectedly against me, and completely overthrew the plan for peace.
Meanwhile Charles Miltitz was waiting, disputations were held, judges
were being chosen, but no decision was arrived at. And no wonder! for
by the falsehoods, pretences, and arts of Eccius the whole business was
brought into such thorough disorder, confusion, and festering soreness,
that, whichever way the sentence might lean, a greater conflagration was
sure to arise; for he was seeking, not after truth, but after his own
credit. In this case too I omitted nothing which it was right that I
should do.

I confess that on this occasion no small part of the corruptions of Rome
came to light; but, if there was any offence in this, it was the fault
of Eccius, who, in taking on him a burden beyond his strength, and in
furiously aiming at credit for himself, unveiled to the whole world the
disgrace of Rome.

Here is that enemy of yours, Leo, or rather of your Court; by his
example alone we may learn that an enemy is not more baneful than a
flatterer. For what did he bring about by his flattery, except evils
which no king could have brought about? At this day the name of the
Court of Rome stinks in the nostrils of the world, the papal authority
is growing weak, and its notorious ignorance is evil spoken of. We
should hear none of these things, if Eccius had not disturbed the plans
of Miltitz and myself for peace. He feels this clearly enough himself in
the indignation he shows, too late and in vain, against the publication
of my books. He ought to have reflected on this at the time when he was
all mad for renown, and was seeking in your cause nothing but his own
objects, and that with the greatest peril to you. The foolish man hoped
that, from fear of your name, I should yield and keep silence; for I
do not think he presumed on his talents and learning. Now, when he sees
that I am very confident and speak aloud, he repents too late of his
rashness, and sees--if indeed he does see it--that there is One in
heaven who resists the proud, and humbles the presumptuous.

Since then we were bringing about by this disputation nothing but the
greater confusion of the cause of Rome, Charles Miltitz for the third
time addressed the Fathers of the Order, assembled in chapter, and
sought their advice for the settlement of the case, as being now in a
most troubled and perilous state. Since, by the favour of God, there
was no hope of proceeding against me by force, some of the more noted of
their number were sent to me, and begged me at least to show respect to
your person and to vindicate in a humble letter both your innocence
and my own. They said that the affair was not as yet in a position of
extreme hopelessness, if Leo X., in his inborn kindliness, would put his
hand to it. On this I, who have always offered and wished for peace, in
order that I might devote myself to calmer and more useful pursuits, and
who for this very purpose have acted with so much spirit and vehemence,
in order to put down by the strength and impetuosity of my words, as
well as of my feelings, men whom I saw to be very far from equal to
myself--I, I say, not only gladly yielded, but even accepted it with joy
and gratitude, as the greatest kindness and benefit, if you should think
it right to satisfy my hopes.

Thus I come, most blessed Father, and in all abasement beseech you
to put to your hand, if it is possible, and impose a curb to those
flatterers who are enemies of peace, while they pretend peace. But there
is no reason, most blessed Father, why any one should assume that I am
to utter a recantation, unless he prefers to involve the case in
still greater confusion. Moreover, I cannot bear with laws for the
interpretation of the word of God, since the word of God, which teaches
liberty in all other things, ought not to be bound. Saving these two
things, there is nothing which I am not able, and most heartily willing,
to do or to suffer. I hate contention; I will challenge no one; in
return I wish not to be challenged; but, being challenged, I will not be
dumb in the cause of Christ my Master. For your Blessedness will be able
by one short and easy word to call these controversies before you and
suppress them, and to impose silence and peace on both sides--a word
which I have ever longed to hear.

Therefore, Leo, my Father, beware of listening to those sirens who
make you out to be not simply a man, but partly a god, so that you can
command and require whatever you will. It will not happen so, nor will
you prevail. You are the servant of servants, and more than any other
man, in a most pitiable and perilous position. Let not those men deceive
you who pretend that you are lord of the world; who will not allow any
one to be a Christian without your authority; who babble of your having
power over heaven, hell, and purgatory. These men are your enemies and
are seeking your soul to destroy it, as Isaiah says, "My people, they
that call thee blessed are themselves deceiving thee." They are in error
who raise you above councils and the universal Church; they are in error
who attribute to you alone the right of interpreting Scripture. All
these men are seeking to set up their own impieties in the Church under
your name, and alas! Satan has gained much through them in the time of
your predecessors.

In brief, trust not in any who exalt you, but in those who humiliate
you. For this is the judgment of God: "He hath cast down the mighty from
their seat, and hath exalted the humble." See how unlike Christ was to
His successors, though all will have it that they are His vicars. I fear
that in truth very many of them have been in too serious a sense His
vicars, for a vicar represents a prince who is absent. Now if a pontiff
rules while Christ is absent and does not dwell in his heart, what
else is he but a vicar of Christ? And then what is that Church but a
multitude without Christ? What indeed is such a vicar but antichrist
and an idol? How much more rightly did the Apostles speak, who call
themselves servants of a present Christ, not the vicars of an absent
one!

Perhaps I am shamelessly bold in seeming to teach so great a head, by
whom all men ought to be taught, and from whom, as those plagues of
yours boast, the thrones of judges receive their sentence; but I imitate
St. Bernard in his book concerning Considerations addressed to Eugenius,
a book which ought to be known by heart by every pontiff. I do this, not
from any desire to teach, but as a duty, from that simple and faithful
solicitude which teaches us to be anxious for all that is safe for
our neighbours, and does not allow considerations of worthiness or
unworthiness to be entertained, being intent only on the dangers or
advantage of others. For since I know that your Blessedness is driven
and tossed by the waves at Rome, so that the depths of the sea press
on you with infinite perils, and that you are labouring under such a
condition of misery that you need even the least help from any the least
brother, I do not seem to myself to be acting unsuitably if I forget
your majesty till I shall have fulfilled the office of charity. I will
not flatter in so serious and perilous a matter; and if in this you do
not see that I am your friend and most thoroughly your subject, there is
One to see and judge.

In fine, that I may not approach you empty-handed, blessed Father, I
bring with me this little treatise, published under your name, as a good
omen of the establishment of peace and of good hope. By this you may
perceive in what pursuits I should prefer and be able to occupy myself
to more profit, if I were allowed, or had been hitherto allowed, by your
impious flatterers. It is a small matter, if you look to its exterior,
but, unless I mistake, it is a summary of the Christian life put
together in small compass, if you apprehend its meaning. I, in my
poverty, have no other present to make you, nor do you need anything
else than to be enriched by a spiritual gift. I commend myself to your
Paternity and Blessedness, whom may the Lord Jesus preserve for ever.
Amen.

Wittenberg, 6th September, 1520.




CONCERNING CHRISTIAN LIBERTY

Christian faith has appeared to many an easy thing; nay, not a few even
reckon it among the social virtues, as it were; and this they do because
they have not made proof of it experimentally, and have never tasted of
what efficacy it is. For it is not possible for any man to write well
about it, or to understand well what is rightly written, who has not at
some time tasted of its spirit, under the pressure of tribulation; while
he who has tasted of it, even to a very small extent, can never
write, speak, think, or hear about it sufficiently. For it is a living
fountain, springing up into eternal life, as Christ calls it in John iv.

Now, though I cannot boast of my abundance, and though I know how poorly
I am furnished, yet I hope that, after having been vexed by various
temptations, I have attained some little drop of faith, and that I can
speak of this matter, if not with more elegance, certainly with more
solidity, than those literal and too subtle disputants who have hitherto
discoursed upon it without understanding their own words. That I may
open then an easier way for the ignorant--for these alone I am trying
to serve--I first lay down these two propositions, concerning spiritual
liberty and servitude:--

A Christian man is the most free lord of all, and subject to none; a
Christian man is the most dutiful servant of all, and subject to every
one.

Although these statements appear contradictory, yet, when they are found
to agree together, they will make excellently for my purpose. They are
both the statements of Paul himself, who says, "Though I be free from
