
Senator Crane agreed that such consultation should be made and then
retired hastily into seclusion. A touch of panic hit him. He felt like a
man who was far out in the water without a boat, with the closest land a
few hundred feet straight down. Good God! Had he miscalculated? Of
course not. He had only to await the verdict of the nation's top
newspapers before proceeding with the publicity program that might well
make him presidential timber.

       *       *       *       *       *

John Dennis, for the first time since Rhoda had known him, seemed
nervous. He kept licking his lips and shifting his eyes from Rhoda to
Frank Corson.

Frank Corson sat quietly, keeping his thoughts to himself. Rhoda crossed
to the liquor cabinet and poured a double Scotch. She went to the sofa
and sat down a little uncertainly.

"I guess you two haven't met. John, this is Frank Corson."

John Dennis paid no attention. He walked to the sofa, sat down, and took
a sheaf of notes from his jacket pocket.

"I've known Mr. Dennis for quite some time," Frank commented wryly.

"Be quiet."

John Dennis' tone was neither hostile nor friendly. They were the words
of a person whose mind was on other things. They watched him as his eyes
scanned the notes.

He appeared to be memorizing them.

The air became somewhat electric, the silence so deep it seemed to
scream. Rhoda looked across at Frank Corson. Frank's expression was
empty, as though he'd suffered some traumatic emotional blow and was
struggling to recover.

John Dennis stirred. He also appeared to be struggling. He turned his
eyes on the drink Rhoda was holding. He took it out of her hand and
downed it in a single gulp.

They watched as he went back to work, leafing through the notes, one at
a time. As he came close to the end, he lifted his head and shook it
violently, as though from sudden pain. He scowled at the empty glass
he'd handed back to Rhoda.

"Do you want another?" she inquired.

"Give me another."

She poured a second Scotch and handed it to him. He drank it like so
much water.

The last sheet of notations was covered. Then John Dennis sat motionless
for a minute, his frown and uncertainty returning. "It's hard to project
the details," he said. "All this detail. Difficult."

He dropped the last sheet and got up and poured himself another Scotch.
"They will make an army now," he said. The Scotch went down smoothly. He
went to the window and looked out. "This planet is different. The sun
there is blue and the air is very thin. Their bodies are nothing, but
their heads are very big. Now they will create an army and take this
planet."

Frank Corson was shaking his head slowly like a groggy fighter. Rhoda
sat huddled on the sofa, her mind such a mixture of tumbling emotions
that it seemed to be trying to tear itself out of her head. John Dennis
came back and stood in the middle of the room. He swayed drunkenly. "So
many things I don't understand. I see people I know--or I should know.
I--" He turned his eyes--eyes no longer empty--on Rhoda.

"I want to make love!"

Frank Corson got up from his chair and hurled himself on Dennis.

Rhoda screamed.

       *       *       *       *       *

Senator Crane sat at his desk. There were a pile of newspapers in front
of him. The first one carried a front page story with the headline:

  SENATOR CRANE WARNS OF SPACE INVASION

  SHADES OF ORSON WELLS' MARTIAN
  SCARE STALKS CAPITOL CORRIDORS.

Crane tossed the paper aside listlessly and picked up the second one:

  SENATORS VOICE CONCERN FOR SANITY
  OF COLLEAGUE

  CRANE IN STUNNING TIRADE
  WARNS OF SCIENCE-FICTION
  DISASTER.

The third paper featured an internationally syndicated columnist, famous
for his biting wit:

       *       *       *       *       *

Senator Crane today launched a one-man campaign to make America
space-conscious. If there was any Madison Avenue thinking behind the
launching it was certainly lower Madison Avenue.

In order to make his point--exactly what this was confused a vast
roomful of newspapermen--the Senator invented a race of creatures called
androids. These androids, it seems, look exactly like Tom Smith down the
block except that they'd just as soon cut your throat as not.

We fear the Senator must have been watching the wrong television
shows--knives yet, ugh!--possibly _Jim Bowie_, because there wasn't a
ray gun nor a disintegrator in his whole bag of exhibits.

All in all, it would appear that the project was pointed toward making
the people Senator Crane-conscious rather than aiming their attention at
the deadly heavens.

       *       *       *       *       *

Senator Crane put that paper aside and looked at the next. This one,
more so than all the rest, was completely factual:

  SENATOR CRANE DELUGED WITH WIRES
  FROM HOME

  CONSTITUENTS CLAIM WASHINGTON RIDICULE
  HEAPED ON SENATOR REFLECTS AGAINST STATE.

  Crane dropped the paper and got up from the desk.
  That son-of-a-bitch Taber was to blame for this. Shaping
  up a goddamn hoax and feeding it out piecemeal. By
  God--!

He went to the desk and dialed, and when the answer came he said,
"Halliday? Senator Crane here. I want to have a little talk with you
about that damned tape. It's pretty obvious now that Taber planted it in
a deliberate attempt to ... What's that? An appointment! Why, goddamn
it, who the hell do you think you are?.... Fifteen minutes next
Wednesday? You're talking to a United States Senator--"

But Crane was no longer talking to Halliday. He had hung up.

Crane dialed another number. A pleasant female voice said, "Matthew
Porter's office."

"This is Senator Crane. Put Porter on."

"Just a moment."

Crane waited. He waited for what seemed like ages, but a glance at his
watch told him it had been less than five minutes. He disconnected and
dialed again.

"This is Crane. We got cut off. I want to talk to Porter."

"I'm sorry but Mr. Porter has gone for the day."

"Well, where can I reach him? It's important."

"I'm sorry. Mr. Porter left no number."

"When will he be back?"

"He didn't say."

Crane slammed the phone down. "The bastards!" he snarled. "The lousy,
crummy bastards. Running like a pack of scared rats. Bureaucrats!
Damned, cowardly, self-appointed opportunists!"

He stopped cursing and sat for a while.

When he got up and left the office he looked and felt old but he had
faced a truth. It would not be necessary to campaign next year.

It wouldn't be of any use.




13


John Dennis showed human surprise as Frank Corson lunged at him. He had
either been lax in using the controlling power he'd been given, or else
Frank Corson had an exceptional resistance.

Dennis released Rhoda, swayed drunkenly under Frank Corson's clumsy
football-type tackle, and swung his arm like a pivoting beam. The blow
was a lucky one. His fist smashed low on Corson's jaw, numbing the
nerves of his neck on the left side.

Corson went down and, as he lay helpless, Dennis kicked him twice--once
in the side and once, viciously effectively, in the head. Corson rolled
over and lay still.

Dennis looked down at him in a drunken daze. "They will make an army and
bring it here."

Rhoda, standing in the center of an emotional maelstrom, watched the
struggle from the prison of her own horror. At that moment she was
physically, mentally and spiritually ill; a human being caught in the
midst of forces beyond her knowledge and control.

Dennis laid a heavy hand on her shoulder. "I want to make love."

"No--no. Please--"

The drunkenness ebbed slightly and his eyes emptied. They looked into
Rhoda's. She shivered. He took the neck of her brunch coat in his fist
and jerked downward. She had just come from the shower when she'd first
opened the door for Frank Corson, and the vicious denuding gesture left
her completely naked.

Dennis went clumsily to his knees, his arms around her, and he pulled
her to the floor. She sobbed, but the tears were gone now and they were
dry, wracking sobs.

"Undress me."

She fumbled with his jacket and pulled it off while he knelt there in
anticipation of he knew not what; wondering, wanting, knowing only an
urge he could not understand but which had become a compulsion.

She took off his necktie and unbuttoned his shirt. Frank Corson stirred
but did not regain consciousness. "Please," Rhoda said, "let me help
him."

In answer, Dennis put his arms around her and drew her to him. "We will
make love."

"Yes--yes, we will make love--"

The ring of the doorbell was like thunder in the room. Dennis tensed,
his eyes widened, and he got to his feet and stood swaying. Looking up
at him, Rhoda saw a trapped animal, but the excitement was still there
and she wanted to take him in her arms and hold him and protect him from
the world.

But he had forgotten her. A cunning sneer took the place of the
slavering animal look and he ran to the kitchen to reappear moments
later with a butcher knife in his hand.

The bell rang again. Dennis snarled at the door and, in some kind of
sheer ecstatic bravado, emitted a Tarzan roar.

Instantly a weight hit the door from the outside. It shuddered but did
not give. Dennis crouched, gripping his knife. Frank Corson staggered to
his feet and hurled himself groggily at the android. Dennis roared
again, pushed away and arced the knife at his throat.

Rhoda screamed and lunged at Dennis' legs. "No! No! Stop it! Please!"

Dennis teetered under her weight and the knife slanted downward across
Frank's chest. It ripped a red gash as the door shuddered a third time.

Dennis turned in that direction and crouched. The door splintered and
flew open. Dennis lunged, like a line-bucking football player. He hit
both Brent Taber and Captain Abrams simultaneously, sprawling them both
and sending Abrams' gun spinning out of his hand.

He leaped over them and dashed down the hall where the elevator man
waited uncertainly, not sure whether to dispute the right of way or not.
His indecision was fatal. Dennis wrapped an arm around his neck, pulled
his head back and cut his throat with one slash of the knife.

Captain Abrams' head had hit a doorjamb opposite the entrance to Rhoda's
apartment. He stirred and tried to come erect but he was unable to make
it.

Brent Taber clawed the gun off the floor and came to one knee. He got
off one shot as the elevator door was closing and saw the android spin
away from the controls as the impact of the slug smashed the bone of his
shoulder.

Taber lunged to his feet and went for the stairs.

There was no one in the lobby when he arrived there--no dead bodies,
either. But on the sidewalk, in front of the building, a woman lay dead
in a pool of blood.

In a sick rage, Taber looked in both directions and saw the android dive
through a group of people half a block away. He tipped them over like
tenpins and ran on. Taber gripped the gun tight and started in pursuit.

He could not fire because there was enough sidewalk traffic to make it
dangerous. On ahead, the android's path was blocked by a man. He sought
to get clear but the android passed him close enough to jam the knife
into his neck and send him screaming to the sidewalk.

A uniformed patrolman appeared on the other side of the street, further
down. He took the situation in and understood Taber's frantic gesture. A
car screamed to a halt as the patrolman raced across the street, drawing
his gun.

The android, seeing his escape cut off, veered into an areaway. The
patrolman got there first and plunged in after him.

Taber, gasps tearing at his lungs, arrived thirty seconds later. During
that time, he'd expected the sound of shots from the patrolman's gun.
But there was silence.

He braked on his heels, skidded into the areaway, and saw the android
advancing on the patrolman. The latter stood motionless, the gun hanging
useless at his side.

"Drop! Drop!" Taber yelled. He cursed as he tried to angle in the narrow
areaway in order to get a clear shot.

The android advanced with his knife raised. In desperation, Taber fired
at the lethal fist that held the weapon. And he was lucky. The hand
snapped open under the ripping impact of the bullet and the knife rang
sharply against the wall as it ricocheted to the ground.

Only then, did the patrolman obey the order to drop. He went to one knee
and Brent Taber fired three shots into the chest of the android.

He hesitated. There was only one slug left in the revolver. If the three
didn't spot the android, he planned to wait for closer contact and put
the sixth slug into the forehead.

The android shuddered. The fire and frenzy went out of him. He tried to
lift a leg and was surprised when it didn't move. He looked down at it.
Completely bemused, he peered down at his crimson chest. He looked up at
Taber without anger, only with surprise. A distinct expression of
wistful regret crossed his face as he sank to the ground.

The tenth android was dead.

The patrolman came shakily to his feet. His face was as pale as death.
"I--I don't know what happened. Buck fever. Pure buck fever, and I've
been on the force for ten years."

"Don't worry about it," Taber said.
