The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Vortex Blaster, by Edward Elmer Smith

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Vortex Blaster

Author: Edward Elmer Smith

Release Date: September 16, 2007 [EBook #22629]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE VORTEX BLASTER ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, V. L. Simpson and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net





    [Illustration: _The Lensman and the observer helped
    Storm into his heavily padded armor. Their movements
    were automatic--the ointment, the devices--_]


  _INTRODUCING "Storm" Cloud, who, through tragedy, is
    destined to become the most noted figure in the
                      galaxy--THE_


                     VORTEX BLASTER

              (_Complete in this issue!_)

                           by
                   E. E. SMITH, Ph.D.


_Author of "The Skylark," "Skylark Three," "The Skylark
        of Valeron," the Lensman stories, etc._




Safety devices that do not protect.

The "unsinkable" ships that, before the days of Bergenholm and of atomic
and cosmic energy, sank into the waters of the earth.

More particularly, safety devices which, while protecting against one
agent of destruction, attract magnet-like another and worse. Such as the
armored cable within the walls of a wooden house. It protects the
electrical conductors within against accidental external shorts; but,
inadequately grounded as it must of necessity be, it may attract and
upon occasion has attracted the stupendous force of lightning. Then,
fused, volatilized, flaming incandescent throughout the length, breadth,
and height of a dwelling, that dwelling's existence thereafter is to be
measured in minutes.

Specifically, four lightning rods. The lightning rods protecting the
chromium, glass, and plastic home of Neal Cloud. Those rods were
adequately grounded, grounded with copper-silver cables the bigness of a
strong man's arm; for Neal Cloud, atomic physicist, knew his lightning
and he was taking no chances whatever with the safety of his lovely wife
and their three wonderful kids.

He did not know, he did not even suspect, that under certain conditions
of atmospheric potential and of ground-magnetic stress his perfectly
designed lightning-rod system would become a super-powerful magnet for
flying vortices of atomic disintegration.

And now Neal Cloud, atomic physicist, sat at his desk in a strained,
dull apathy. His face was a yellowish-gray white, his tendoned hands
gripped rigidly the arms of his chair. His eyes, hard and lifeless,
stared unseeingly past the small, three-dimensional block portrait of
all that had made life worth living.

For his guardian against lightning had been a vortex-magnet at the
moment when a luckless wight had attempted to abate the nuisance of a
"loose" atomic vortex. That wight died, of course--they almost always
do--and the vortex, instead of being destroyed, was simply broken up
into an indefinite number of widely-scattered new vortices. And one of
these bits of furious, uncontrolled energy, resembling more nearly a
handful of material rived from a sun than anything else with which
ordinary man is familiar, darted toward and crashed downward to earth
through Neal Cloud's new house.

That home did not burn; it simply exploded. Nothing of it, in it, or
around it stood a chance, for in a fractional second of time the place
where it had been was a crater of seething, boiling lava--a crater which
filled the atmosphere to a height of miles with poisonous vapors; which
flooded all circumambient space with lethal radiations.

Cosmically, the whole thing was infinitesimal. Ever since man learned
how to liberate intra-atomic energy, the vortices of disintegration had
been breaking out of control. Such accidents had been happening, were
happening, and would continue indefinitely to happen. More than one
world, perhaps, had been or would be consumed to the last gram by such
loose atomic vortices. What of that? Of what real importance are a few
grains of sand to an ocean beach five thousand miles long, a hundred
miles wide, and ten miles deep?

And even to that individual grain of sand called "Earth"--or, in modern
parlance, "Sol Three," or "Tellus of Sol", or simply "Tellus"--the
affair was of negligible importance. One man had died; but, in dying, he
had added one more page to the thick bulk of negative results already on
file. That Mrs. Cloud and her children had perished was merely
unfortunate. The vortex itself was not yet a real threat to Tellus. It
was a "new" one, and thus it would be a long time before it would become
other than a local menace. And well before that could happen--before
even the oldest of Tellus' loose vortices had eaten away much of her
mass or poisoned much of her atmosphere, her scientists would have
solved the problem. It was unthinkable that Tellus, the point of origin
and the very center of Galactic Civilization, should cease to exist.

       *       *       *       *       *

But to Neal Cloud the accident was the ultimate catastrophe. His
personal universe had crashed in ruins; what was left was not worth
picking up. He and Jo had been married for almost twenty years and the
bonds between them had grown stronger, deeper, truer with every passing
day. And the kids.... It _couldn't_ have happened ... fate COULDN'T do
this to him ... but it had ... it could. Gone ... gone ... GONE....
