"Go on, old man; leave that."

"He sucked Philips dry about the Penfold tombstone, and although he said
nothing to me personally, Philips gave me to understand that I'm not in
favour with the parson. Taylor is the man who's provided your sub. for
the Penfold, take my word for it."

"He's not half such a bad fellow, Jim."

"No," said Jim, with an uneasy laugh; "Taylor's all right, but he'll
make me squirm when he has the chance."

The friendship of Cotton and Todd was thus renewed and cemented--with
Gus's bluest blood. Gus gave Jim some good advice about the schools,
which made Jim feel a bit dubious.

"Chuck your Bohn's cribs and your keys under the grate, and show up
your own work."

"Footle, you mean, Gus."

"All right, footle, then. I know all our own private personal beaks
would rather have a fellow's own work, if of fair quality, than all the
weirdest screeds from any crib whatsoever."

Jim made the experiment, very gingerly, be it said, but did show up his
own work, and from Corker to Merishall all the beaks were civil to him.
Gus's reputation as a prophet was established, for Corker himself seemed
pleased with the Cottonian version of Herodotus.

"Rather rough in parts, Cotton," said the old man, beaming on the
shrinking Jim; "but at least you've not been ploughing Herodotus with
the help of your old ass, Bohn."

Jim's effort, however, came too late to affect in any degree his
position in the Fifth. When the lists of the Easter term were published,
Cotton was the last, deservedly, of the form, but A.V.R. Todd was the
seventh. This was an eye-opener to many in the form, but the result sent
Gus into the seventh heaven of delight. Taylor came specially into
Todd's modest sanctum to congratulate him, and Corker sent an extra
special letter to Todd senior, saying all manner of sweet things about
Gus. He put the highest mark of his favour upon the delighted Gus by
asking him to dinner--a very great honour, but a dreadful ordeal. Gus
was wonderfully nervous as he commenced his soup. How do I know? Well, I
had been asked, I believe, to give the bewildered Gus a little
countenance. Gus went home, a day or two later, to the bosom of his
family, where he was treated with the utmost honour. He redeemed the
watch from the jeweller, and fulfilled his own promise to that worthy
man. All through the holidays he basked in the smiles of his proud
father, and rode that gentleman's pedigree hack. Corker's highest mark
of appreciation was to give you a dinner; with Gus's father it was to
let you ride his own horse.




CHAPTER XXV

A LITTLE ROUGH JUSTICE


Quietly and without any fuss the few details were arranged, and next
morning four of us filtered down to the old milling ground, on whose
green sod so many wrongs had been righted in the old times, and where I
sincerely hoped Phil would yet redress, however imperfectly, another.

Of course, we all know fisticuffs are not what they were; for every
strenuous mill of to-day there used to be fifty in the old days, and the
green turf which formerly was the scene of terrific combats between
fellows of the Upper School now only quaked under the martial hoof of,
say, Rogers, the prize fag of Biffen's, and Poulett, the champion egg
poacher of Corker's, and other humble followers of the "fancy." Milling
as an institution in the schools may write up "Ichabod" above its gates.

I tossed with Vercoe for corners, and when I won, I chose the favourite
corner, the one King had when he fought Sellers with a broken wrist, and
beat him, too; which Cooper had when he stood up to Miller for one whole
half-holiday, and though beaten three or four times over, never knew it,
and won in the end, which mills and the causes thereof, if some one
would write about them, would make capital reading. Anyhow, it is a
lucky corner, from the legends connected with it, and I thought we
should need any luck that might be knocking about so early in the
morning.

Phil was as cool and calm as though he were going to gently tund a small
fag for shirking. Acton was outwardly calm, but inwardly seething with
hate, rage, and blood-thirstiness. His proud soul lusted for the
opportunity to repay the flick on the face he had received from Phil,
with interest. I watched the sparkling fire in his eye, the unaffected
eagerness for the fray in his pose, and thought that even Acton had not
quite the skill to cater for such a large and lusty appetite. Vercoe and
I set our watches, and agreed to call time together, and then we moved
each to our corner. Phil peeled as quietly as though he were going to
bed, Acton with feverish haste, which perhaps was his foreign blood
working out; beside Acton's swift, impulsive movements Phil's leisurely
arrangements seemed sluggish indeed.

"Time!" said Vercoe and I in chorus, and I added in an undertone to my
man, "Go in and win."

It was obvious from the start that Phil was not as good a man as Acton
as far as skill was concerned, but when it came to well-knit strength
there was no doubt that Phil had the pull. Acton's eagerness was a
disadvantage against one so cool as Bourne. In the very first round,
Acton, in his overwhelming desire to knock Phil out in as short a space
as possible, neglected every ordinary precaution, and, after a spirited
rally, Phil broke through Acton's slovenly guard, and sent him spinning
into Vercoe's arms. We called time together, and to my intense
satisfaction the first round resulted in our favour.

After that, thoroughly steadied by Phil's gentle reminder, Acton dropped
all looseness, and began to treat Phil with the greatest respect, never
taking any risks, but working in a scientific fashion, which poor Phil
found hard enough to parry, and when he could not do that, hard enough
to bear. But he never faltered; he took all that Acton could give him in
imperturbable good temper, working in his dogged fashion as though he
were absolutely confident of winning in the long run, and as
disregarding present inconveniences because they were expected, and
because the ultimate reward would repay all a hundred-fold.

There was also something else I noticed. Acton did not do so much damage
as he ought to have done, and I found him constantly "short," but when
Phil did score there was the unmistakable ring of a telling blow. I was
puzzled in my mind why Acton was so "short," but I think now it was
because he had never done anything but with gloves on, and fisticuffs,
which were more or less familiar with Phil, were unknown to him. They
don't fight, I believe, in France or Germany with Nature's weapons, but
occasional turn-ups with the farmers' sons and the canal men had, of
course, fallen to Phil's share.

On each occasion that Phil got home, Acton answered with a vicious
spurt which did not do much good, but only tired him, and at the end of
the seventh round I was astonished to think that Phil had stood the
racket so well. Phil's lips were puffy, and one eye was visibly
swelling, and he had other minor marks of Acton's attention, but he was
in excellent condition still. Acton was damaged above a bit, and Phil's
first-round reminder showed plainly on his cheek.

Acton began to think that unless he could make Phil dance to a quicker
tune pretty soon, he himself would be limping round the corner of
defeat, for he was very tired. When we called them up for the eighth
round, he had evidently determined to force the fighting. Much as I
disliked Acton, I could not but admire his splendid skill; he bottled up
Phil time and again, feinted, ducked, rallied, swung out in the nick of
time, planted hard telling blows, and was withal as hard to corner as a
sunbeam. As I sponged Phil at the end of the eighth I felt that three
more rounds as per last sample would shake even him, so I said, "Try,
old man, for one straight drive if he gives you a ghost of a chance.
Don't try tapping."

Acton came up smiling; in a twinkling he had Phil at sea by his
trickiness, and was scoring furiously. Then, for the first time, Phil
backed, shortly and sharply. Acton sprang forward for victory, and a
huge lunge should have given Phil his quietus, but it was dreadfully
short, and stung rather than hurt. Phil recovered the next moment, and
was on the watch again cool and cautious as ever. Then Acton, following
an artless feint which drew Phil as easily as a child, ducked the blow
and darted beneath his guard. I gave Phil up for lost. How it happened,
though I was watching carefully, I cannot say, but Acton seemed to
slither or stumble on the turf as he rushed in, and for one second he
was at Phil's mercy.

At that very instant Phil's arm flashed out, and with a blow which would
have felled an ox, he caught Acton between the eyes. Acton dropped to
the ground like a bludgeoned dog.

Phil, like a gentleman, backed a yard or so away, waiting for Acton to
get up again, but he made no sign. Vercoe and I then counted him out
with all due formality, and Phil had won at the very moment he was about
to be beaten. We did our best for Acton, who was unconscious, and, just
when we began to despair of bringing him round, he opened his eyes with
the usual vacant stare. In a minute he recovered his thoughts, and said
eagerly, "Then I've won."

"Not quite," said Vercoe, grimly. "You've jolly well lost."

Acton tottered to his feet blind with rage--diabolic rage--but hate and
fury couldn't give him strength to stand. Vercoe gently caught him, and
laid him quietly on his back, and sponged his face where the awful force
of Phil's blow was becoming plainer every moment.

He compressed his lips with rage and pain, and looked at Phil with such
a look of deadly hatred that Vercoe was disgusted.

"Now come, Acton. You've fought well, and, by Jove! you ought to lose
well. Bourne fought like a gentleman, and you've been beaten fairly.
What is the good of bearing any malice?"

"Look here, Acton," said Phil, "I'm jolly glad I've thrashed you, but
all is over now. Here's my hand, and we'll let bygones be bygones."

"Never!" said Acton. "I'll get even with you yet."

"So be it," said Bourne; and he turned away, and got into his coat,
leaving Vercoe and Acton on the field of battle. "Don't care to mention
it, old man," he said to me as we got to his room, "all the same, I
thought I was a gone coon just when I knocked the fellow out."

I went for my holidays that morning, and Acton, escorted by Vercoe, got
into the same train. He was white and almost scared looking at his
defeat, but there was on his face still that unfading expression of
unsatisfied hate and lust for revenge. I buried my face in my paper in
utter disgust.

So you see Acton departed from St. Amory's at the beginning of the
Easter holidays in a slightly different mood from that which he enjoyed
at Christmas, when the young Biffenites had cheered him till they were
hoarse and he was out of hearing.

Toby was almost beside himself with consternation when Bourne and Vercoe
turned up at the Courts in the afternoon.

"Your 'ands, Mr. Bourne, and your eye! What have you been a-doing of?"

"I have had the painful necessity to thrash a cad, Toby."

"But you did thrash him, sir?"

"I fancy so," said Bourne, grimly.

Jack went home in the evening a sadder and wiser boy. When he saw his
brother's closed eye and swollen lip, and the angry patches on his
cheeks, he was cut to the heart; he took his thrashing like a man, and,
when all was over, felt he loved and respected his brother more than
ever. "What a beastly little pig I've been," he said to himself.

Vercoe and Bourne were the victorious finalists at Kensington in the
rackets. It was, as the papers aptly remarked, "Quite a coincidence that
Bourne's right eye was beautifully and variously decorated in honour of
the occasion."

I don't expect many finalists, at rackets anyhow, turn up with black
eyes.




CHAPTER XXVI

THE MADNESS OF W.E. GRIM


Grim and Wilson had come back to St. Amory's firmly convinced that
Biffen's was the most glorious house that had ever existed, and that it
would do--thanks to Acton, Worcester, and the dervishes--great things
when the cricket housers came round.

"Grimmy," said Wilson, "you'll have to try to get into the team this
year. You would last, if your batting hadn't been so rotten."

"All right, old man; don't rub that in too often."

"You put in a lot of extra practice at one of those bottom nets, Grimmy,
and you'll find Worcester'll shove you in first choice, almost, this
go."

"Serene. Shall we try to raise a bottle of cherries now," said Grim,
lazily, lounging from net to net. "It's heaps too soon to think of
housers yet."

"You conceited ass, Grimmy! Not for you. Your batting is too awful."

"Don't worry now. Oceans of time, I tell you. We'll try some cherries,
eh?"

The pair strolled lazily off the field, and made several purchases in
the preserved fruit line, and then adjourned to their common room for
refreshment.

But, as time went on, Grim did not fall in with Wilson's arrangements
quite as enthusiastically as that single-hearted Biffenite would have
liked him to. A fortnight passed, and Grim had only put in the
regulation practice at the nets to Wilson's intense disgust, and the
time that should have been devoted to extra cricket was "wasted,"
according to that ardent Biffenite, in doing, of all things, needlessly
elaborate translations for Merishall.

"Whatever is the good of getting the very word the beak wants, Grimmy. I
always translate _Carmen_--a song. Does it matter a cherry-stone that it
sometimes means a charm? What good does it do you, you idiot? It only
means that Merishall is harder on us. Think of your friends, Grimmy, do.
If I didn't know you were a bit cracked, I'd say your performance was
undiluted 'smugging.'"

"Cork that frivol, do," said Grim, who was stretched full length on the
grass and gazing skywards with a rapt expression in his eyes, "and look
over there. How beautiful it is!"

"How beautiful what is?" asked Wilson, astonished.

"The sunset, you ass!"

"I don't see anything special about it," said Wilson. "An ordinary
affair!"

"Ordinary affair! Ugh, you idiot. Look at those lovely colours mingling
one with another, those light fleecy clouds floating in a purple sea,
that beautiful tint in the woods yonder, that--that--"

"Steady, Grim. Take time," said Wilson, squirming away from his chum.

"Wilson, you haven't any soul for beauty. A sunset is the loveliest
sight on earth, you duffer."

"Didn't know a sunset ever was on earth," said Wilson, sarcastically.

"Is that funny?"

"All serene, Grimmy," said Wilson, elaborately agreeing with his friend
as a mother might with a sick child. "Matter of fact, it is rather fine.
Not unlike a Zingari blazer, eh?"

"Zingari blazer!"

"Exactly like. And that pink on the trees would do for the Westminster
shirts."

"Blazers and shirts," cried Grim, in disgust. "Oh! get out."

"Let's get in, Grimmy, instead. You'd better see the doctor. 'Pon
honour, you aren't well."

"I can't help it," said W.E. Grim, resignedly, "if you haven't any soul.
Yes, I'll come. I've got Merishall's work."

There was a coolness that night between the two friends as they sat at
the opposite sides of their common table doing their work for Merishall,
and Wilson was determined to find out what was disturbing their
accustomed peace. He had soon done his modicum of prose and forthwith
broached matters.

"Let's have this business out, Grim. It will do you a lot of harm if you
keep it in."

"The fact is----" began Grim, hesitating.

"Allez! houp-la!" said Wilson, encouragingly.

"I'm going in strong for poetry."

For reply Wilson laughed as though his life depended on the effort, and
Grim turned a rich rosy hue. Wilson finally blurted out--

"Grim, you're an utter idiot."

"What do you think about it?"

"Nothing."

"I thought it would surprise you."

"It has, but nothing you do ever will again. Lord, Grimmy, was it for
this you chucked cricket and your chance of the house eleven?" Wilson
exploded again, uproariously. "I'll tell Rogers and Jack Bourne. You a
poet!"

"Why shouldn't I be, you silly cuckoo?"

"Why, you haven't got the cut of a poet, for one thing, and for another,
I believe, next to your mother, the thing you like best in the world is
a good dinner." Wilson waxed eloquent on Grim's defects from a poet's
standpoint. "Your hair is as stiff as any hair-brush; you can't deny
you're short and a trifle beefy; and was ever a poet made out of your
material and fighting weight?"

"That isn't criticism," said Grim, angrily.

"No," said Wilson, bitterly. "I don't pretend to that. They are a few
surface observations only. Just tell this to Rogers or even Cherry, and
watch 'em curl."

Wilson and Grim went to bed that night pretty cool towards each other,
but in the morning Grim was obstinately bent on being the poet as he
was the next week and the week after that. He wrestled with poetry
morning, noon, and night, and he made himself a horrible nuisance to his
old cronies. Wilson complained bitterly about their study being "simply
fizzing with poetry." Grim sprang a poem or a sonnet, or a tribute or
some other forsaken variety of poetry, on pretty well everything about
the place. He "_did_" the dawn and worked round to the sunset. He had a
little shy at the church and the tombstones, and wrote about the horse
pond's "placid wave." He did four sonnets on the school, looking from
north, south, east and west, and let himself go in fine style about the
school captain's batting. He sent this to Phil, and Phil passed the
disquisition on to me; it was very funny indeed. Not a single thing was
safe from his poetry, and he cut what he could of cricket to write
"tributes."

He had a lively time from his own particular knot of friends and
enemies, and they jollied him to an extent that, perhaps, reached
high-water mark, when Grim found one morning on his table a dozen
thoughtful addresses of lunatic asylums, and specimens of the writing of
mad people, culled from a popular magazine. But Grim recked not, and
persevered. He turned out, as became a budding poet, weird screeds from
Ovid, Virgil, and Horace--Bohn's cribs were simple to his tangled
stuff--and Merishall beamed wreathed smiles upon him, and told him he
was "catching the spirit of the original." After this patent, distinct
leg-up from Merishall, Grim took the bit between his teeth and went
careering up and down the plains of poesy until the lights were cut
off.

Wilson bore with his chum for a month, and then finally delivered his
ultimatum.
