later Bryan staggered out of the house, with a bag on his shoulder,
scarcely half awake, rubbing his eyes and muttering to himself in a low
tone, as he plunged rather than walked into the ravine which led to the
first terrace on the mountain.

When the sun rose over the mountain-tops and looked down upon the calm
surface of the river, there was not a man remaining in the fort, with
the exception of Stanley and Frank, and their active servant La Roche.

A deep calm rested on the whole scene.  The sailors of the vessel,
having risen to dispatch breakfast, retired to their hammocks again and
went to sleep; Stanley, Frank, and their household, were busy within
doors; Chimo snored in the sunshine at the front of the fort; and the
schooner floated on a sheet of water so placid, that every spar and
delicate rope was clearly reflected.  Nothing was heard save the soft
ripple on the shore, the distant murmur of mountain streams, and, once
or twice through the day, the faint reverberation of a fowling-piece.

But as the day advanced, evidences of the approaching feast began to be
apparent.  Early in the forenoon Massan and Prince returned with heavy
loads of venison on their shoulders, and an hour later Bryan staggered
into the fort bending under the weight of a well-filled bag of fish.  He
had been at his favourite fishing quarters in the dark valley, and was
dripping wet from head to foot, having fallen, as usual, into the water.
Bryan had a happy facility in falling into the water that was quite
unaccountable--and rather enviable in warm weather.  As the cooking
operations were conducted on an extensive scale, a fire was kindled in
the open air in the rear of the men's house; round which fire, in the
course of the forenoon, Bryan and La Roche performed feats of agility so
extravagant, and apparently so superhuman, that they seemed to involve
an element of wickedness from their very intensity.  Of course no large
dinner ever passed through the ordeal of being cooked without some
accidents or misfortunes, more or less.  Even in civilised life, where
the most intricate appliances are brought to bear on the operation by
_artistes_ thoroughly acquainted with their profession, infallibility is
not found.  It would be unjust, therefore, to expect that two
backwoodsmen should be perfectly successful, especially when it is
remembered that their branch of the noble science was what might be
technically termed plain cookery, the present being their first attempt
in the higher branches.

Their first difficulty arose from the larger of the two plum-puddings,
which La Roche had compounded under the directions of Mrs Stanley and
the superintendence of Edith.

"I say, Losh," cried Bryan to his companion, whose head was at the
moment hid from view in a cloud of steam that ascended from a large pot
over which he bent, apparently muttering incantations.

"Vell, fat you want?"

"Faix, and it's just _fat_ that I don't want," said Bryan, pointing, as
he spoke, to the large pudding, which, being much too large for the
kettle, was standing on the rim thereof like the white ball of foam that
caps a tankard of double X.  "It's more nor twice too fat already.  The
kittle won't hould it, no how."

"Oh, stuff him down, dat is de way," suggested La Roche.

"Stuff it down, avic, an' what's to come o' the wather?" said Bryan.

"Ah! true, dat is perplexible, vraiment."

At this moment the large pot boiled over and a cloud of scalding steam
engulfed the sympathetic Frenchman, causing him to yell with mingled
pain and rage as he bounded backwards.

"Musha! but ye'll come to an early death, Losh, if ye don't be more
careful o' yer dried-up body."

"Taisez vous, donc," muttered his companion, half angrily.

"Taisin' ye? avic, sorra wan o' me's taisin' ye.  But since ye can't
help me out o' me throubles, I'll try to help mysilf."

In pursuance of this noble resolve, Bryan went to the store and fetched
from thence another large tin kettle.  He then undid the covering of the
unwieldy pudding, which he cut into two equal parts, and having squeezed
them into two balls, tied them up in the cloth, which he divided for the
purpose, and put them into the separate kettles, with the air of a man
who had overcome a great difficulty by dint of unfathomable wisdom.  It
was found, however, that the smaller pudding, intended for Stanley's
table, was also too large for its kettle; but the energetic blacksmith,
whose genius was now thoroughly aroused, overcame this difficulty by
cutting off several pounds of it, and transferring the pudding thus
reduced to the kettle, saying in an undertone as he did so, "There's
more nor enough for the six o' ye yit, av yer only raisonable in yer
appetites."

But the superfluity of the pudding thus caused became now a new source
of trouble to Bryan.

"What's to be done wid it, Losh?  I don't like to give it to the dogs,
an' it's too small intirely to make a dumplin' of."

"You better heat him raw," suggested La Roche.

"Faix, an' I've half a mind to; but it would spile my dinner.  Hallo!
look out for the vainison, Losh."

"Ah, oui; oh! misere!" cried La Roche, springing over the fire, and
giving a turn to the splendid haunch of venison which depended from a
wooden tripod in front of the blaze, and, having been neglected for a
few minutes, was beginning to singe.

"What have ye in the pot there?" inquired Bryan.

"Von goose, two duck, trois plovre, et von leetle bird--I not know de
name of--put him in pour experiment."

"Very good, Losh; out wid the goose and we'll cram the bit o' dumplin'
into him for stuffin'."

"Ah! superb, excellent," cried La Roche, laughing, as he lifted out the
goose, into which Bryan thrust the mass of superfluous pudding; after
which the hole was tied up and the bird re-consigned to the pot.

Everything connected with this dinner was strikingly suggestive of the
circumstances under which it was given.  The superabundance of venison
and wild-fowl; the cooking done in the open air; the absence of women,
and the performance of work usually allotted to them by bronzed and
stalwart voyageurs; the wild scenery in the midst of which it took
place; and the mixture of Irish, English, French, Indian, Esquimau, and
compound tones, that fell upon the ear as the busy work went on,--all
tended to fill the mind with a feeling of wild romance, and to suggest
powerfully the idea of being, if we may so express it, _far, far away_!
As the proceedings advanced towards completion, this feeling was rather
increased than removed.

Tables and chairs were a luxury that still remained to be introduced at
Fort Chimo, when the men found leisure from more urgent duties to
construct them.  Therefore the dining-table in Stanley's hall was
composed of three large packing-cases turned bottom up.  There was no
cloth wherewith to cover its rough boards; but this was a matter of
little importance to the company which assembled round it, punctually at
the hour of four.  In place of chairs there were good substantial
nail-kegs, rather low, it is true, and uncommonly hard, but not to be
despised under the circumstances.  Owing to the unusual demand for
dishes, the pewter plates and spoons and tin drinking-cups--for they had
little crockery--were of every form and size that the store contained;
and the floor on which it all stood was the beaten ground, for the
intended plank flooring was still growing in the mountain glens.

But if the equipage was homely and rude, the fare was choice and
abundant; and an odour that might have gladdened the heart of an epicure
greeted the nostrils of the captain and his two mates when they entered
the hall, dressed in blue surtouts with bright brass buttons, white duck
trousers, and richly flowered vests [waistcoats].  There was a splendid
salmon, of twenty pounds weight, at one end of the board; and beside it,
on the same dish, a lake-trout of equal size and beauty.  At the other
end smoked a haunch of venison, covered with at least an inch of fat;
and beside it a bowl of excellent cranberry jam, the handiwork of the
hostess.  A boiled goose and pease-pudding completed the catalogue.
Afterwards, these gave place to the pudding which had caused Bryan so
much perplexity, and several dishes of raisins and figs.  Last, but not
least, there was a bottle of brandy and two of port wine; which, along
with the raisins and figs, formed part of the limited supply of luxuries
furnished by the Hudson's Bay Company to Stanley, in common with all the
gentlemen in the service, in order to enable them, now and then, on
great occasions, to recall, through the medium of a feast, the
remembrance of civilised life.

The display in the men's house was precisely similar to that in the
hall.  But the table was larger and the viands more abundant.  The
raisins and figs, too, were wanting; and instead of wine or brandy,
there was a small supply of rum.  It was necessarily small, being the
gift of Stanley out of his own diminutive store, which could not, even
if desired, be replenished until the return of the ship next autumn.

On the arrival of the guests a strange contrast was presented.  The
sailors, in white ducks, blue jackets with brass buttons, striped
shirts, pumps, and straw hats, landed at the appointed hour, and in
hearty good-humour swaggered towards the men's house, where they were
politely received by the quiet, manly-looking voyageurs, who, in honour
of the occasion, had put on their best capotes, their brightest belts,
their gayest garters, and most highly-ornamented moccasins.  The French
Canadians and half-breeds bowed, shook hands, and addressed the tars as
_messieurs_.  The sailors laughed, slapped their entertainers on the
shoulders, and called them messmates.  The Indians stood, grave and
silent, but with looks of good-humour, in the background; while the
Esquimaux raised their fat cheeks, totally shut up their eyes, and
grinned perpetually, not to say horribly, from ear to ear.  But the
babel that followed is beyond the powers of description, therefore we
won't attempt it.

Here, however, the characteristic peculiarity of our scene ceases.  The
actual demolition of food is pretty much the same among all nations that
are not absolutely savage; and, however much contrast might have been
observed in the strange mixture of human beings assembled under the
hospitable roof of Fort Chimo, there was none whatever in the manner in
which they demolished their viands.  As the evening advanced, a message
was sent to Monsieur Stanley for the loan of his violin.

"Ay," said he, as the instrument was delivered to Bryan, who happened to
be the messenger and also the performer--"ay, I thought it would come to
that ere long.  Don't be too hard on the strings, lad.  'Twill be a
rough ball where there are no women."

"Thrue, yer honour," replied the blacksmith, as he received the
instrument, "there's a great want of faymales in thim parts; but the
sailors have consinted to ripresint the purty craytures on the present
occasion, which is but right, for, ye see, the most o' thim's shorter
nor us, an' their wide breeches are more like the pitticoats than our
leggin's."

Many were the stories that were told and retold, believed, disbelieved,
and doubted, on that memorable night; and loud were the songs and long
and strong the dancing that followed.  But it was all achieved under the
influence of pure animal spirits, for the rum supplied afforded but a
thimbleful to each.  The consequence was that there were no headaches
the following morning, and the men were up by break of day as fresh and
light as larks.  A feeling of sadness, however, gradually crept over the
band as the dawn advanced and the schooner prepared for her departure.

By six o'clock the flood-tide turned, and a few minutes later all the
sailors were aboard, hoisting the sails and anchor, while the men stood
silently on the beach where they had just parted from their guests.

"Good-bye once more, Mr Stanley; good-bye, Mr Morton," said the
captain, as he stepped into his boat.  "I wish you a pleasant winter and
a good trade."

"Thank you, thank you, captain," replied Stanley; "and don't forget us
out here, in this lonely place, when you drink the health of absent
friends at Christmas time."

In a few minutes the anchor was up, and the schooner, bending round with
a fair wind and tide, made for the narrows.

"Give them a cheer, lads," said Frank.

Obedient to the command, the men doffed their caps and raised their
voices; but there was little vigour in the cheer.  It was replied to
from the schooner's deck.  Just as the flying-jib passed the point a gun
was fired, which once more awakened the loud echoes of the place.  When
the smoke cleared away, the schooner was gone.

Thus was severed the last link that bound the civilised world to the
inhabitants of Fort Chimo.



CHAPTER TWENTY.

WINTER APPROACHES--ESQUIMAUX ARRIVE--EFFECT OF A WORD--A SUCKING BABY--
PROSPECTS OF TRADE.

For many days after the ship's departure the work of completing the fort
went forward with the utmost rapidity, and not until the houses and
stores were rendered weather-tight and warm did Stanley consider it
advisable to send out hunting and fishing parties into the mountains.
Now, however, the frosts continued a great part of the day as well as
during the night, so it was high time to kill deer and fish, in order to
freeze, and so preserve them for winter's consumption.

Up to this time no further traces of Esquimaux had been discovered, and
Stanley began to express his fears to Frank that they had left the
neighbourhood altogether, in consequence of the repeated attacks made
upon them by Indians.  Soon after this, however, the fur-traders were
surprised by a sudden visit from a party of these denizens of the north.

It happened on the afternoon of a beautiful day towards the close of
autumn, that charming but brief season which, in consequence of its
unbroken serenity, has been styled the Indian summer.  The men had all
been dispatched into the mountains in various directions, some to fish,
others to shoot; and none were left at the fort except its commandant
with his wife and child, and Oolibuck the Esquimau.  Stanley was seated
on a stone at the margin of the bay, admiring the vivid alterations of
light and shade, as the sun dipped behind the mountains of the opposite
shore, when his eye was attracted towards one or two objects on the
water near the narrows.  Presently they advanced, and were followed by
several others.  In a few minutes he perceived that they were Esquimau
canoes.

Jumping hastily up, Stanley ran to the fort, and bidding his wife and
child keep out of sight, put two pair of pistols in his pockets and
returned to the beach, where he found Oolibuck gazing at the approaching
flotilla with intense eagerness.

"Well, Oolibuck, here come your countrymen at last," said Stanley.  "Do
they look friendly, think you?"

"Me no can tell; they most too quiet," replied the interpreter.

Esquimaux in general are extremely noisy and full of animated
gesticulation on meeting with strangers, especially when they meet on
decidedly friendly terms.  The silence, therefore, maintained by the
natives as they advanced was looked upon as a bad sign.  The fleet
consisted of nine kayaks, and three large oomiaks full of women and
children; and a curious appearance they presented at a distance, for the
low kayaks of the men being almost invisible, it seemed as if their
occupants were actually seated on the water.  The oomiaks being much
higher, were clearly visible.  On coming to within a quarter of a mile
of the fort, the men halted to allow the women to come up; then forming
in a crescent in front of the oomiaks, the whole flotilla advanced
slowly towards the beach.  When within a hundred yards or so, Stanley
said, "Now, Oolibuck, give them a hail."

"Chimo!  Chimo!  Chimo-o-o!" shouted the interpreter.

The word acted like a talisman.

"Chimo!" yelled the Esquimaux in reply, and the kayaks shot like arrows
upon the sand, while the women followed as fast as they could.  In
another minute a loud chattering and a brisk shaking of hands was taking
place on shore.

The natives were dressed in the sealskin garments with which arctic
travellers have made us all more or less acquainted.  They were stout
burly fellows, with fat, oily, and bearded faces.

"Now tell them, Oolibuck, the reason of our coming here," said Stanley.

Oolibuck instantly began, by explaining to them that they had come for
the purpose of bringing about peace and friendship between them and the
Indians; on hearing which the Esquimaux danced and shouted for nearly a
minute with joy.  But when the interpreter went on to say that they
intended to remain altogether among them, for the purpose of trading,
their delight knew no bounds; they danced and jumped, and whooped and
yelled, tossed up their arms and legs, and lay down on the sand and
rolled in ecstasy.  In the midst of all this, Mrs Stanley rushed out of
the house, followed by Edith, in great terror at the unearthly sounds
that had reached her ears; but on seeing her husband and Oolibuck
laughing in the midst of the grotesque group, her fears vanished, and
she stood an amused spectator of the scene.

Meanwhile, Stanley went down and stepped into the midst of one of the
oomiaks, with a few beads and trinkets in his hands; and while Oolibuck
entertained the men on shore, he presented gifts to the women, who
received them with the most childish demonstrations of joy.  There was
something irresistibly comic in the childlike simplicity of these poor
natives.  Instead of the stiff reserve and haughty demeanour of their
Indian neighbours, they danced and sang, and leaped and roared, embraced
each other and wept, with the most reckless indifference to appearances,
and seemed upon all occasions to give instant vent to the feelings that
happened to be uppermost in their minds.  As Stanley continued to
distribute his gifts, the women crowded out of the other oomiaks into
the one in which he stood, until they nearly sank it; some of them
extending their arms for beads, others giving a jolt to the hoods on
their backs, which had the effect of bringing to light fat, greasy-faced
little babies, who were pointed to as being peculiarly worthy of
attention.

At length Stanley broke from them and leaped ashore, where he was soon
followed by the entire band.  But here new objects--namely, Mrs Stanley
and Edith--attracted their wondering attention.  Approaching towards the
former, they began timidly to examine her dress, which was indeed very
different from theirs, and calculated to awaken curiosity and surprise.
The Esquimau women were dressed very much like the men--namely, in long
shirts of sealskin or deerskin with the hair on, short breeches of the
same material, and long sealskin boots.  The hoods of the women were
larger than those of the men, and their boots much more capacious; and
while the latter had a short stump of a tail or peak hanging from the
hinder part of their shirts, the women wore their tails so long that
they trailed along the ground as they walked.  In some cases these tails
were four and six inches broad, with a round flap at the end, and
fringed with ermine.  It was, therefore, with no little surprise that
they found Mrs Stanley entirely destitute of a tail, and observed that
she wore her upper garment so long that it reached the ground.  Becoming
gradually more familiar, on seeing that the strange woman permitted them
to handle her pretty freely, one of them gently lifted up her gown to
see whether or not she wore boots; but receiving a somewhat prompt
repulse, she began to caress her, and assured her that she did not mean
to give offence.

By this time Frank and some of the men had joined the group on the
shore, and as it was getting late Stanley commanded silence.

"Tell them I have somewhat to say to them, Oolibuck."

The interpreter's remark instantly produced a dead silence.

"Now ask them if they are glad to hear that we are going to stay to
trade with them."

A vociferous jabbering followed the question, which, by Oolibuck's
interpretation, meant that their joy was utterly inexpressible.

"Have they been long on the coast?"

"No; they had just arrived, and were on their way up the river to obtain
wood for building their kayaks."

"Did they see the bundle of presents we left for them at the coast?"

"Yes, they had seen it; but not knowing whom it was intended for, they
had not touched it."

On being told that the presents were intended for them, the poor
creatures put on a look of intense chagrin, which, however, passed away
when it was suggested to them that they might take the gifts on their
return to the coast.

