The Project Gutenberg EBook of Junior Achievement, by William Lee

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Junior Achievement

Author: William Lee

Illustrator: John Schoenherr

Release Date: December 30, 2008 [EBook #27665]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK JUNIOR ACHIEVEMENT ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









    _Fallout is, of course, always disastrous--
                          one way or another_


_JUNIOR ACHIEVEMENT_

_BY WILLIAM LEE_


ILLUSTRATED BY SCHOENHERR

[Illustration]


"What would you think," I asked Marjorie over supper, "if I should
undertake to lead a junior achievement group this summer?"

She pondered it while she went to the kitchen to bring in the dessert.
It was dried apricot pie, and very tasty, I might add.

"Why, Donald," she said, "it could be quite interesting, if I understand
what a junior achievement group is. What gave you the idea?"

"It wasn't my idea, really," I admitted. "Mr. McCormack called me to the
office today, and told me that some of the children in the lower grades
wanted to start one. They need adult guidance of course, and one of the
group suggested my name."

I should explain, perhaps, that I teach a course in general science in
our Ridgeville Junior High School, and another in general physics in the
Senior High School. It's a privilege which I'm sure many educators must
envy, teaching in Ridgeville, for our new school is a fine one, and our
academic standards are high. On the other hand, the fathers of most of
my students work for the Commission and a constant awareness of the
Commission and its work pervades the town. It is an uneasy privilege
then, at least sometimes, to teach my old-fashioned brand of science to
these children of a new age.

"That's very nice," said Marjorie. "What does a junior achievement group
do?"

"It has the purpose," I told her, "of teaching the members something
about commerce and industry. They manufacture simple compositions like
polishing waxes and sell them from door-to-door. Some groups have built
up tidy little bank accounts which are available for later educational
expenses."

"Gracious, you wouldn't have to sell from door-to-door, would you?"

"Of course not. I'd just tell the kids how to do it."

Marjorie put back her head and laughed, and I was forced to join her,
for we both recognize that my understanding and "feel" for commercial
matters--if I may use that expression--is almost nonexistent.

"Oh, all right," I said, "laugh at my commercial aspirations. But don't
worry about it, really. Mr. McCormack said we could get Mr. Wells from
Commercial Department to help out if he was needed. There is one
problem, though. Mr. McCormack is going to put up fifty dollars to buy
any raw materials wanted and he rather suggested that I might advance
another fifty. The question is, could we do it?"

Marjorie did mental arithmetic. "Yes," she said, "yes, if it's something
you'd like to do."

We've had to watch such things rather closely for the last ten--no,
eleven years. Back in the old Ridgeville, fifty-odd miles to the south,
