lost all fear of them; but it seemed now to know that an enemy was near.
In an instant, its whole nature seemed changed; all its past habits were
forgotten; every wild impulse was awake; its head erect, its nostrils
dilated, its eyes flashing.

4. In another instant, before the spectators had thought of the danger,
and before its friends could secure it, the fawn was bounding away through
the street, and the hound in full chase. The bystanders were eager to save
it; several persons immediately followed its track; the friends who had
long fed and fondled it, calling the name it had hitherto known, in vain.

5. The hunter endeavored to whistle back his dog, but with no success. In
half a minute the fawn had turned the first corner, dashed onward toward
the lake, and thrown itself into the water. But if for a moment the
startled creature believed itself safe in the cool bosom of the lake, it
was soon undeceived; for the hound followed in hot and eager chase, while
a dozen village dogs joined blindly in the pursuit.

6. A large crowd collected on the bank--men, women, and children--anxious
for the fate of the little animal so well known to them all. Some threw
themselves into boats, hoping to intercept the hound before he reached his
prey. The plashing of the oars, the eager voices of men and boys, and the
barking of the dogs, must have filled the heart of the poor fawn with
terror and anguish,--as though every creature on the spot where it had
once been caressed and fondled, had suddenly turned into a deadly foe.

7. It was soon seen that the little animal was directing its course across
a bay toward the nearest borders of the forest. Immediately the owner of
the hound crossed the bridge, and ran at full speed, hoping to stop his
dog as he landed. On swam the fawn, as it never swam before; its delicate
head scarcely seen above the water, but leaving a disturbed track, which
betrayed its course alike to its friends and foes.

8. As it approached the land, the interest became intense. The hunter was
already on the same side of the lake, calling loudly and angrily to his
dog; but the hound seemed to have quite forgotten his master's voice in
the pitiless pursuit. The fawn reached the shore. With a leap it had
crossed the narrow strip of beach, and in another instant it would reach
the cover of the woods.

9. The hound followed true to the scent, pointing to the same spot on the
shore; his master, anxious to meet him, had run at full speed, and was now
coming up at the same critical moment. Will the dog listen to his voice?
or can the hunter reach him in time to seize and control him? A shout from
the bank told that the fawn had passed out of sight into the forest. At
the same instant, the hound, as he touched the land, felt the hunter's
strong arm clutching his neck. The worst was believed to be over; the fawn
was leaping up the mountain side, and its enemy was restrained. The other
dogs, seeing their leader cowed, were easily managed.

10. A number of persons, men and boys, dispersed themselves through the
woods in search of the little creature, but without success; they all
returned to the village, reporting that the fawn had not been seen. Some
thought that after its fright had passed it would return of its own
accord. It wore a pretty collar with its owner's name engraved upon it, so
that it could be easily known from any other fawn that might be straying
about the woods.

11. Before many hours had passed, a hunter presented himself to the lady
whose pet the little creature had been, and showed a collar with her name
upon it. He said that he was out hunting in the morning, and saw a fawn in
the distance. The little pet, instead of bounding away, as he expected,
moved toward him; he took aim, fired, and shot it through the heart.


DEFINITIONS.--l. Fawn, a young deer. Ca-ressed', fondled, petted. 3.
Di-lat'ed, extended, spread out. 4. Spec-ta'tors, those who look on. 6.
In-ter-cept', to stop, to seize. 7. Be-trayed', showed. 8. In-tense',
extreme. 9. Scent, track followed by the sense of smell. Cowed, made
afraid.



LXIV.  ANNIE'S DREAM. (175)

1. It was a clear, cold, winter evening, and all the Sinclairs but Annie
had gone out for a neighborly visit. She had resolved to stay at home and
study a long, difficult lesson in Natural Philosophy.

2. Left to herself, the evening passed quickly, but the lesson was learned
a full half hour before the time set for the family to come home.

3. Closing her book, she leaned back in the soft armchair in which she was
sitting, soon fell asleep, and began to dream. She dreamed that it was a
very cold morning, and that she was standing by the dining-room stove,
looking into the glass basin which was every day filled with water for
evaporation.

4. "Oh, dear," she sighed, "it is nearly school time. I don't want to go
out in the cold this morning. Then there is that long lesson. I wonder if
I can say it. Let me see--it takes two hundred and twelve degrees of heat,
I believe, for water to evaporate--"

5. "Nonsense!" "Ridiculous!" shouted a chorus of strange little voices
near by; "Look here! is this water boiling? What an idea; two hundred and
twelve degrees before we can fly, ha, ha!"

6. "Who are you?" asked Annie, in amazement. "Where must I look?" "In the
basin, of course." 7. Annie looked, and saw a multitude of tiny forms
moving swiftly around, their numbers increasing as the heat of the fire
increased. "Why you dear little things!" said she, "what are you doing
down there?"

8. "We are water sprites," answered one, in the clearest voice that can be
imagined, "and when this delightful warmth comes all about us, we become
so light that we fly off, as you see."

9. In another moment he had joined a crowd of his companions that were
spreading their wings and flying off in curling, white clouds over Annie's
head. But they were so light and thin that they soon disappeared in the
air.

10. She could not see where they went, so she again turned to the basin.
"Does n't it hurt you," she asked one, "to be heated--?" "Not always to
two hundred and twelve," said the sprite, mischievously.

11. "No, no," replied Annie, half-vexed; "I remember, that is boiling
point--but I mean, to be heated as you all are, and then to fly off in the
cold?"

12. "Oh, no," laughed the little sprite; "we like it. We are made to
change by God's wise laws, and so it can't hurt us. We are all the time at
work, in our way, taking different shapes. It is good for us. If you will
go to the window, you will find some of my brothers and sisters on the
glass."

13. Annie went to the window, and at first could see nothing but some
beautiful frostwork on it. Soon, however, the panes seemed to swarm with
little folks. Their wings were as white as snow, and sparkled with ice
jewels.

14. "Oh," cried Annie, "this is the prettiest sight I ever saw. What is
your name, darling?" she asked one that wore a crown of snow roses. The
little voice that replied was so sharp and fine that Annie thought it
seemed like a needle point of sound, and she began to laugh.

15. "Fine Frost is our family name," it said. "I have a first name of my
own, but I shall not tell you what it is, for you are so impolite as to
laugh at me."

16. "I beg your pardon, dear," said Annie; "I could not help it. I will
not laugh at you any more if you will tell me how you came here. I have
been talking with one of your brothers over there in the basin."

17. The little sprite then folded her wings in a dignified manner, and
said, "I will tell you all I know about it, since you promise to be
polite. It is a very short story, however.

18. "Last evening we all escaped from the glass basin, as you have seen
our companions do this morning. Oh, how light and free we felt! But we
were so very delicate and thin that no one saw us as we flew about in the
air of the room.

19. "After a while I flew with these others to this window, and, as we
alighted on the glass, the cold changed us from water sprites into sprites
of the Fine Frost family." "It is very wonderful," said Annie. "Is it nice
to be a sprite?"

20. "Oh, yes, we are very gay. All last night we had a fine time sparkling
in the moonlight. I wore a long wreath full of ice pearls and diamonds.
Here is a piece of it. Before long we shall be water sprites again. I see
the sun is coming this way."

21. "Shall you dread to be melted?" inquired Annie. "No, indeed," answered
the sprite. "I like to change my form now and then."

22. A thought flashed across Annie's brain. What if she should breathe on
the frost and not wait for the sun to melt it. In a moment more she had
done so. Down fell a great number of the tiny mountains and castles,
carrying with them a multitude of frost sprites, and all that could be
seen was a drop of water on the window sill.

23. "Oh, dear! have I hurt them?" she exclaimed. "No, no," replied a
chorus of many small voices from the drop of water, "we are only water
sprites again. Nothing hurts us; we merely change." "But you are always
pretty little things," said Annie. "I wish--"

24. Here a ring at the doorbell woke Annie. She started up to find the
family had returned from their visit, which all declared was a delightful
one. But Annie said she did not believe they had enjoyed their visit
better than she had her half hour's dream.


DEFINITIONS.--1. Nat'u-ral Phi-los'o-phy, the study which teaches about
the laws of matter in nature. 3. E-vap-o-ra'tion, the act of turning into
vapor. 4. De-gree', a division of space marked on an instrument such as a
thermometer. 8. Wa'ter sprite, a spirit or fairy living in the water. 10.
Mis'chie-vous-ly, in a teasing manner. 13. Swarm, to be crowded. 18,
Es-caped', got away, fled.



LXV. MY GHOST. (178)

By Mrs. S. M. B. Piatt, who was born near Lexington, Ky., in 1836. Among
her published works may be mentioned "The Nests at Washington, and Other
Poems," and "A Woman's Poems."

1. Yes, Katie, I think you are very sweet,
     Now that the tangles are out of your hair,
   And you sing as well as the birds you meet,
     That are playing, like you, in the blossoms there.
   But now you are coming to kiss me, you say:
     Well, what is it for? Shall I tie your shoe?
   Or loop up your sleeve in a prettier way?
     "Do I know about ghosts?" Indeed I do.

2. "Have I seen one?" Yes; last evening, you know,
     We were taking a walk that you had to miss,
   (I think you were naughty, and cried to go,
     But, surely, you'll stay at home after this!)
   And, away in the twilight, lonesomely,
     ("What is the twilight?" It's--getting late!)
   I was thinking of things that were sad to me!--
     There, hush! you know nothing about them, Kate.

3. Well, we had to go through the rocky lane,
     Close to that bridge where the water roars,
   By a still, red house, where the dark and rain
     Go in when they will at the open doors.
   And the moon, that had just waked up, looked through
     The broken old windows, and seemed afraid,
   And the wild bats flew, and the thistles grew
     Where once in the roses the children played.

4. Just across the road by the cherry trees
     Some fallen white stones had been lying so long,
   Half hid in the grass, and under these
     There were people dead. I could hear the song
   Of a very sleepy dove as I passed
     The graveyard near, and the cricket that cried;
   And I look'd (ah! the Ghost is coming at last!)
     And something was walking at my side.

5. It seemed to be wrapped in a great dark shawl
     (For the night was a little cold, you know,);
   It would not speak. It was black and tall;
     And it walked so proudly and very slow.
   Then it mocked me everything I could do:
     Now it caught at the lightning flies like me;
   Now it stopped where the elder blossoms grew;
     Now it tore the thorns from a gray bent tree.

6. Still it followed me under the yellow moon,
     Looking back to the graveyard now and then,
   Where the winds were playing the night a tune--
     But, Kate, a Ghost doesn't care for men,
   And your papa could n't have done it harm.
     Ah! dark-eyed darling, what is it you see?
   There, you needn't hide in your dimpled arm--
     It was only my shadow that walk'd with me!



LXVI. THE ELEPHANT. (180)

1. The elephant is the largest of quadrupeds; his height is from eight to
fourteen feet, and his length, from ten to fifteen feet. His form is that
of a hog; his eyes are small and lively; his ears are long, broad and
pendulous. He has two large tusks, which form the ivory of commerce, and a
trunk, or proboscis, at the end of the nose, which he uses to take his
food with, and for attack or defense. His color is a dark ash-brown.

2. Elephants often assemble in large troops; and, as they march in search
of food, the forests seem to tremble under them. They eat the branches of
trees, together with roots, herbs, leaves, grain, and fruit, but will not
touch fish nor flesh. In a state of nature, they are peaceable, mild, and
brave; exerting their power only for their own protection or in defense of
their own species.

3. Elephants are found both in Asia and Africa, but they are of different
species, the Asiatic elephant having five toes, and the African, three.
These animals are caught by stratagem, and, when tamed, they are the most
gentle, obedient, and patient, as well as the most docile and sagacious of
all quadrupeds. They are used to carry burdens, and for traveling. Their
attachment to their masters is remarkable; and they seem to live but to
serve and obey them. They always kneel to receive their riders; or the
loads they have to carry.

4. The anecdotes illustrating the character of the elephant are numerous.
An elephant which was kept for exhibition at London, was often required,
as is usual in such exhibitions, to pick up with his trunk a piece of
money thrown upon the floor for this purpose. On one occasion a sixpence
was thrown, which happened to roll a little out of his reach, not far from
the wall. Being desired to pick it up, he stretched out his proboscis
several times to reach it; failing in this, he stood motionless a few
seconds, evidently considering how to act.

5. He then stretched his proboscis in a straight line as far as he could,
a little distance above the coin, and blew with great force against the
wall. The angle produced by the opposition of the wall, made the current
of air act under the coin, as he evidently supposed it would, and it was
curious to observe the sixpence traveling toward the animal till it came
within his reach, when he picked it up.

6. A soldier in India, who had frequently carried an elephant some arrack,
being one day intoxicated, and seeing himself pursued by the guard whose
orders were to conduct him to prison, took refuge under the elephant. The
guard soon finding his retreat, attempted in vain to take him from his
asylum; for the elephant vigorously defended him with his trunk.

7. As soon as the soldier became sober, and saw himself placed under such
an unwieldy animal, he was so terrified that he scarcely durst move either
hand or foot; but the elephant soon caused his fears to subside by
caressing him with his trunk, and thus tacitly saying, "Depart in peace."

8. A pleasing anecdote is related of an elephant which was the property of
the nabob of Lucknow. There was in that city an epidemic disorder, making
dreadful havoc among the inhabitants. The road to the palace gate was
covered with the sick and dying, lying on the ground at the moment the
nabob was about to pass.

9. Regardless of the suffering he must cause, the nabob held on his way,
not caring whether his beast trod upon the poor helpless creatures or not.
But the animal, more kind-hearted than his master, carefully cleared the
path of the poor, helpless wretches as he went along. Some he lifted with
his trunk, entirely out of the road. Some he set upon their feet, and
among the others he stepped so carefully that not an individual was
injured.


DEFINITIONS.--l. Quad'ru-ped, an animal having four feet. Pen'du-lous,
hanging down. Com'merce, trade, Pro-bos'cis, snout, trunk. 3. Strat'a-gem,
artifice. Doc'ile, teachable. 6. Ar'rack, a spirituous liquor made from
the juice of the cocoanut. A-sy'lum, a refuge. 7. Un-wield'y, heavy,
unmanageable. Tac'-it-ly, silently. 8. Ep-i-dm'ic, affecting many people.
Na'bob, a prince in India.



LXVII. DARE TO DO RIGHT. (183)

Adapted from "School Days at Rugby," by Thomas Hughes, an English writer
well known through this book, and its sequel, "Tom Brown at Oxford." The
author was born in 1823, and died in 1896.

1. The little schoolboys went quietly to their own beds, and began
undressing and talking to one another in whispers: while the elder,
amongst whom was Tom, sat chatting about on one another's beds, with their
jackets and waistcoats off.

2. Poor little Arthur was overwhelmed with the novelty of his position.
The idea of sleeping in the room with strange boys had clearly never
crossed his mind before, and was as painful as it was strange to him. He
could hardly bear to take his jacket off; however, presently, with an
effort, off it came, and then he paused and looked at Tom, who was sitting
at the bottom of his bed, talking and laughing.

3. "Please, Brown," he whispered, "may I wash my face and hands?" "Of
course, if you like," said Tom, staring: "that's your wash-hand stand
under the window, second from your bed. You'll have to go down for more
water in the morning if you use it all."

4. And on he went with his talk, while Arthur stole timidly from between
the beds out to his wash-hand stand, and began his ablutions, thereby
drawing for a moment on himself the attention of the room.

5. On went the talk and laughter. Arthur finished his washing and
undressing, and put on his nightgown. He then looked round more nervously
than ever. Two or three of the little boys were already in bed, sitting up
with their chins on their knees. The light burned clear, the noise went
on.

6. It was a trying moment for the poor, little, lonely boy; however, this
time he did not ask Tom what he might or might not do, but dropped all his
knees by his bedside, as he had done every day from his childhood, to open
his heart to Him who heareth the cry and beareth the sorrows of the tender
child, and the strong man in agony.

7. Tom was sitting at the bottom of his bed unlacing his boots, so that
his back was towards Arthur, and he did not see what had happened, and
looked up in wonder at the sudden silence. Then two or three boys laughed
and sneered, and a big, brutal fellow, who was standing in the middle of
the room, picked up a slipper and shied it at the kneeling boy, calling
him a sniveling young shaver.

8. Then Tom saw the whole, and the next moment the boot he had just pulled
off flew straight at the head of the bully, who had just time to throw up
his arm and catch it on his elbow. "Confound you, Brown; what's that for?"
roared he, stamping with pain. "Never mind what I mean," said Tom,
stepping on to the floor, every drop of blood in his body tingling: "if
any fellow wants the other boot, he knows how to get it."

9. What would have been the result is doubtful, for at this moment the
sixth-form boy came in, and not another word could be said. Tom and the
rest rushed into bed and finished their unrobing there, and the old
janitor had put out the candle in another minute, and toddled on to the
next room, shutting the door with his usual, "Good night, gen'l'm'n."

10. There were many boys in the room by whom that little scene was taken
to heart before they slept. But sleep seemed to have deserted the pillow
of poor Tom. For some time his excitement and the flood of memories which
chased one another though his brain, kept him from thinking or resolving.
His head throbbed, his heart leapt, and he could hardly keep himself from
springing out of bed and rushing about the room.

11. Then the thought of his own mother came across him, and the promise he
had made at her knee, years ago, never to forget to kneel by his bedside
and give himself up to his Father before he laid his head on the pillow,
from which it might never rise; and he lay down gently, and cried as if
his heart would break. He was only fourteen years old.


DEFINITIONS.--l. Waist'coat, a vest. 2. O-ver-whelmed', over-come, cast
down. 3. Nov'el-ty, newness. 4. Ab-lu'tion, the act of washing. 7.
Sneered, showed contempt. 8. Bul'ly, a noisy, blustering fellow, more
insolent than courageous. Tin'gling, having a thrilling feeling.


NOTES.--"Rugby," the scene of this story, is a celebrated grammar school
which was established at the town of Rugby, England, in 1567.

9. Sixth-form boy. The school was graded into six classes or  "forms," and
the boys of the highest, or sixth, form were expected to keep the smaller
boys under them in order. EXERCISES.--What were Arthur's feelings the
first night at Rugby? Relate what happened when he said his prayers. What
do you think of the boy who threw the slipper? Was Tom right in defending
Arthur from insult?



LXVIII. DARE TO DO RIGHT. (Concluded.) (186)

1. It was no light act of courage in those days for a little fellow to say
his prayers publicly, even at Rugby. A few years later, when Arnold's
manly piety had begun to leaven the school, the tables turned: before he
died, in the Schoolhouse at least, and I believe in the other houses, the
rule was the other way.

2. But poor Tom had come to school in other times. The first few nights
