her by auction. The last sale gives nearly the same figures. If we assume
that there are 10,000 tons of iron in her, we may also assume that if
broken up it would not fetch more than L3 a ton at present rates; but even
if we say L4, we have as a total but L40,000. To break the ship up would be
a herculean task; we very much doubt if it could be done for the difference
between L26,000 and L40,000; her engines would only sell for old iron,
being entirely worthless for any other place than the foundry once they
were taken out of her; as for her boilers, the less said about them the
better. In one word, she would not pay to break up. On the other hand, by a
comparatively moderate further outlay, she might be made the finest trading
ship afloat. There are two harbors at all events into which she can always
get, namely, Milford and Sydney. There are others, of course, but these
will do; and the ship could trade between these two ports. By taking out
her paddle engines, she would be relieved of a weight of 850 tons. The
removal of her paddle engine boilers would further lighten her, and would
give in addition an enormous stowage space. By using her both as a cargo
and a passenger ship, the whole of the upper portion could be utilized for
emigrants, let us say, and the lower decks for cargo, of which she could
carry nearly, if not quite, 20,000 tons. She would possess the great
advantage that, notwithstanding she was a cargo ship, she would be nearly,
if not quite, as fast as any, save a few of the most recent additions to
the Australian fleet. There is every reason to believe that she has been
driven at 14 knots by about 6,000 horse power. We are inclined to think
that the power has been overstated, and we have it on good authority that
she has more than once attained a speed of 15 knots. Let us assume,
however, that her speed is to be 13 knots, or about fifteen miles an hour.
Assuming the power required to vary as the cube of the speed, if 6,000
horsepower gave 14 knots, then about 4,800 would give 13 knots--say 5,000
horse power. Now, good compound engines of this power ought not to burn
more than 2 lb. per horse per hour, or say 4.5 tons per hour, or 108 tons a
day. Allowing the trip to Australia to take forty days, we have 4,320 tons
of coal--say 5,000 tons for the trip. The Etruria burns about this quantity
in the run to New York and back. For each ton of coal burned in the Great
Eastern about 15,000 tons of cargo and 3,000 passengers could be moved
about 3-1/3 miles. There is, we need hardly say, nothing afloat which can
compare in economy of fuel with this. Taken on another basis, we may
compare her with an ordinary cargo boat. In such a vessel about 3,000 tons
of grain can be moved at 9 knots an hour for 600 horse power--that is 5
tons of cargo per horse power. Reducing the speed of the Great Eastern to 9
knots and about 2,000 horse power, we have 9 tons of cargo moved at 9 knots
per horse power; so that in the relation of coal burned to cargo moved she
would be nearly twice as economical as any other vessel afloat.

The important question is, What would the necessary alterations cost? Much,
of course, would depend on what was done. A very large part of the present
screw engines could be used. For example, the crank shaft, some 2 feet in
diameter, is a splendid job, and no difficulty need be met with in working
in nearly the whole of the present framing. If the engines were only to be
compound, two of the existing cylinders might be left where they are, two
high-pressure cylinders being substituted for the others. If triple
expansion were adopted, then new engines would be wanted, but the present
crank and screw shafts would answer perfectly. The present screw would have
to be removed and one of smaller diameter and less pitch put in its place.
All things considered, we believe that for about L75,000 the Great Eastern
could be entirely renovated and remodeled inside. Her owners would then
have for, say, L100,000 a ship without a rival. Her freights might be cut
so low that she would always have cargo enough, and her speed and moderate
fares ought to attract plenty of passengers. Sum up the matter how we may,
there appears to be a good case for further investigation and inquiry as to
the prospects of success for such a ship in the Australian trade, and the
opinion of merchants and others in Melbourne and Sydney ought to be
obtained. Something would be gained even if the opinions of unprejudiced
experts were adverse. We might then rest content to regard the ship as an
utter failure, and not object to see her sunk and filled with concrete to
play the part of a breakwater. Until, however, such an opinion has been
expressed after full discussion, we must continue to regard the ship as fit
for something better than a music hall and dancing saloon.--_The Engineer_.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE NEW GERMAN CORVETTE GREIF.


Our cut represents the corvette Greif--the latest addition to the German
fleet--on its trial trip, March 10. As other naval powers, especially
England and France, have lately built corvettes and cruisers which can
travel from 17 to 18 knots, while the fastest German boats, Blitz and
Pfeil, can make only 16 knots an hour, the chief of the Imperial Admiralty
decided to construct a corvette which should be the fastest vessel in the
world. The order was given to the ship and engine corporation "Germania,"
of Berlin and Keil, in April, 1885, the requirements being that the engines
should generate 5,400 h.p., and that the vessel, when loaded, should have a
speed of 19 knots, a point which has never been reached by any boat of its
size. The hull is made of the best German steel of Krupp's manufacture, and
measures 318 ft. in length at the water line, with a breadth of beam of 33
ft., the depth from keel to deck being 22 ft. It draws about 11 ft., and
has a displacement of 2,000 tons.

As the vessel is to be used principally as a dispatch boat and for
reconnoitering, and as--on account of its great speed--it will not be
obliged to come into conflict with larger and stronger men-of-war, no great
preparations for protection were needed, nor was it necessary that it
should be heavily armed, all available room being devoted to the engines,
boilers, and the storing of coal; these occupy more than half the length of
the vessel, leaving only space enough for the accommodation of the officers
and crew at the ends. The armament consists of five Hotchkiss revolving
guns on each side, and a 4 in. gun at each end, the latter being so
arranged that each one can sweep half the horizon.

The keel was laid in August, 1885, and the ship was launched July 29,
1886, on which occasion it was christened Greif. On the trial trip it was
found that the slender shape of the vessel adapted it for the development
of a very high rate of speed under favorable conditions, when it can make
at least 22 knots an hour, so that the speed of 19 knots an hour guaranteed
by the builders can certainly be reached, even when traveling at a
disadvantage. In spite of its great length, the Greif can be easily
maneuvered. When moving forward at full speed, it can be made to describe a
circle by proper manipulation of the rudder, and by turning one screw
forward and the other backward, the ship can be turned in a channel of its
own length.

[Illustration: THE NEW GERMAN WAR STEAMER GREIF.]

A large and rapid cruiser, also for the German navy, is being built by the
corporation "Germania". This vessel is of about the same length as the
Greif, has more than double its displacement, and will make 18 knots an
hour, an unusual rate of speed for a vessel of its class. It will be
launched by the last of the summer or early in the fall.

       *       *       *       *       *




TWIN SCREW TORPEDO BOAT.


We give several illustrations of a sea going twin screw torpedo boat lately
built for the Italian government by Messrs. Yarrow & Co., of Poplar. The
vessel in question is 140 ft. long by 14 ft. wide, and her displacement
approaches close on 100 tons. The engines are of the compound surface
condensing type ordinarily fitted by this firm in their torpedo boats,
excepting where triple compounds are fitted. The general arrangement is
shown by the sectional plan. As will be noticed, there are two boilers, one
before and the other aft of the engines, and either boiler is arranged to
supply either or both the engines. Yarrow's patent water tight ash pans are
fitted to each boiler, to prevent the fire being extinguished by a sudden
influx of water into the stokehold. There is an independent centrifugal
pumping engine arranged to take its suction from any compartment of the
boat. There are also steam ejectors and hand pumps to each compartment.
These compartments are very numerous, as the space is much subdivided, both
from considerations of strength and safety. Bow and stern rudders are
fitted, each having independent steam steering gear, but both rudders can
be worked in unison, or they can be immediately changed to hand gear when
necessary. The accommodation is very good for a vessel of this class.
Officers' and petty officers' cabins are aft, while the crew is berthed
forward.

[Illustration: TWIN SCREW TORPEDO BOAT FOR THE ITALIAN GOVERNMENT.]

The armament consists of two bow tubes built in the boat. There are two
turntables, as shown in the illustrations, each fitted with two torpedo
tubes. These, it will be noticed, are not arranged parallel to each other,
but lie at a small angle, so that if both torpedoes are ejected at once,
they will take a somewhat divergent course. Messrs. Yarrow have introduced
this plan in order to give a better chance for one of the torpedoes to hit
the vessel attacked. There are two quick firing three pounder guns on deck,
and there is a powerful search light, the dynamo and engine being placed in
the galley compartment.

We believe, says _Engineering_, this torpedo boat, together with a sister
vessel, built also for the Italian government, are the fastest vessels of
their class yet tried, and it is certain that the British Navy does not yet
possess a craft to equal them. It is an extraordinary and lamentable fact
that Great Britain, which claims to be the foremost naval power in the
world, has always been behind the times in the matter of torpedo boats.

The official trial of this boat was recently made in the Lower Hope in
rough weather. The following is a copy of the official record of the six
runs on the measured mile:

    Boiler   | Receiver |         |Revolutions |       |       |Second
    Pressure.| Pressure.| Vacuum. | per Minute.| Speed.| Means.| Means.
-------------+----------+---------+------------+-------+-------+------
      |lb.   |     lb.  |    in.  |            |       |       |
1     | 130  |      32  |     28  |    373     | 22.641|       |
      |      |          |         |            |       | 24.956|
2     | 130  |      32  |     28  |    372.7   | 27.272|       | 24.992
      |      |          |         |            |       | 25.028|
3     | 130  |      32  |     28  |    372     | 22.784|       | 25.028
      |      |          |         |            |       | 25.028|
4     | 130  |      32  |     28  |    377     | 27.272|       | 25.138
      |      |          |         |            |       | 25.248|
5     | 130  |      32  |     28  |    375     | 23.225|       | 25.248
      |      |          |         |            |       | 25.248|
6     | 130  |      32  |     28  |    377     | 27.272|       |
      +------+----------+---------+------------+-------+-------+-------
Means.| 130  |      32  |     28  |    2741/2    |       |       | 25.101
             |          |         |            |       |       | knots
-------------+----------+---------+------------+-------+-------+-------

--_Engineering_.

       *       *       *       *       *




SOME RECENT HIGH-SPEED TWIN SCREWS.

[Footnote: A paper recently read before the Institution of Naval
Architects, London.]

By E.A. LINNINGTON.


One of the most interesting and valuable features in the development of
naval construction in recent years is the great advance which has been made
in the speeds of our war ships. This advance has been general, and not
confined to any particular vessel or class of vessel. From the first class
armored fighting ship of about 10,000 tons displacement down to the
comparatively diminutive cruiser of 1,500 tons, the very desirable quality
of a high speed has been provided.

These are all twin screw ships, and each of the twins is driven by its own
set of engines and line of shafting, so that the propelling machinery of
each ship is duplicated throughout. The speeds attained indicate a high
efficiency with the twin screws. In all ships, but more especially in high
speed ships, success depends largely upon the provision of propellers
suited for the work they have to perform, and where a high propulsive
efficiency has been secured, there is no doubt the screws are working with
a high efficiency. The principal purpose of this paper is to record the
particulars of the propellers, and the results of the trials of several of
these high speed twin screw ships. The table gives the leading particulars
of several classes of ships, the particulars of the screws, and the results
obtained on the measured mile trials from a ship of each class, except C.
The vessels whose trials are inserted in the table have not been selected
as showing the highest speeds for the several classes. Excepting C, they
are the ships which have been run on the measured mile at or near the
designed load water line. On light draught trials, speeds have been
attained from half a knot to a knot higher than those here recorded. No
ship of the class C has yet been officially tried on the measured mile, but
as several are in a forward state, perhaps the actual data from one of them
may shortly be obtained. All these measured mile trials were made under the
usual Admiralty conditions, that is to say, the ships' bottoms and the
screws were clean, and the force of the wind and state of the sea were not
such as to make the trials useless for purposes of comparison. On such
trials the i.h.p. is obtained from diagrams taken while the ship is on the
mile, and the revolutions are recorded by ruechanical counters for the time
occupied in running the mile. Not less than four runs are made during a
trial extending over several hours. The i.h.p. in the table is not
necessarily the maximum during the trial, for the average while on the mile
is sometimes a little below the average for the whole of the trial. The
revolutions are the mean for the two sets of engines, and the i.h.p. is the
sum of the powers of the two sets. The pitch of the screw is measured. The
bolt holes in the blade flanges allow an adjustment of pitch, but in each
case the blades were set as nearly as possible at the pitch at which they
were cast. The particulars given in the table may be taken to be as
reliable and accurate as such things can be obtained, and for each ship
there are corresponding data; that is, the powers, speeds, displacements,
revolutions, pitches, and other items existed at the same time. There are a
few points of detail about these propellers which deserve a passing notice.
In Fig. 1 is shown a fore and aft section through the boss. It will be
observed that the flanges of the blades are sunk into the boss, and that
the bolts are sunk into the flanges. The recess for the bolt heads is
covered with a thin plate having the curve of the flange, so that the
flanges and the boss form a section of a sphere. This method of
construction is a little more expensive than exposed flanges and bolts,
which, however, render the boss a huge churn. With the high revolutions at
which these screws work, a spherical boss is extremely desirable, but, of
course, the details need not be exactly as shown in the illustration. The
conical tail is fitted to prevent loss with eddies behind the flat end of
the boss, and is particularly valuable with the screws of high speed ships.
The light hood shown on the stern bracket is for the purpose of preventing
eddies behind the boss of the stern bracket, and to save the resistance of
the flat face of the screw boss. The edges of the blades are cast sharp,
instead of being rounded at the back, with a small radius, as in the usual
practice--the object of the sharp edge being the diminution of the edge
resistance. The driving key extends the whole length of the boss, and the
tapered shaft fits throughout its length.

[Illustration: FIG. 1.]

These points of detail have been features of all Admiralty screws for some
years.

The frictional resistance of screw propellers is always a fruitful source
of inefficiency. With a given screw, the loss due to friction may be taken
to vary approximately as the square of the speed. This is not to say that
the frictional resistance is greater in proportion to the thrust at high
than at low speeds. The blades of screws for any speed should be as smooth
and clean as possible, but for high speed screws the absolute saving of
friction may be considerable with an improvement of the surface. There is
no permanent advantage in polishing the blades. No doubt there is some
advantage for a little time, and, probably, better results may thereby be
secured on trial, but the blades soon become rough, and shell fish and weed
appear to grow as rapidly on recently polished blades as on an ordinary
surface. These screws are of gun metal. They were fitted to the ships in
the condition in which they left the foundry. It appears that within
certain limits mere shape of blade does not affect the efficiency of the
screw, but, with a given number of blades and a given disk, the possible
variations in the form or distribution of a given area are such that
different results may be realized. The shapes of the blades of these
propellers are shown in Figs. 2, 3, and 4. It will be seen the shapes are
not exactly the same for all the screws, but the differences do not call
for much remark.

[Illustration: FIG. 2., FIG. 3. & FIG. 4.]

Fig. 2 shows the blades for the A screw. C and D have the same form. Fig. 3
shows in full lines the blades of the B screw, and, though very narrow at
the tips, they, like A, are after the Griffith pattern. The blades of E and
F are of a similar shape, as shown in Fig. 4, and approach an oval form
rather than the Griffith pattern. The particulars of these propellers would
be considered incomplete without some reference to their positions with
respect to the hulls. When deciding the positions of twin screws, there is
room for variation, vertically, longitudinally, and transversely. For these
screws, the immersions inserted in the table give the vertical positions.
The immersion in A is 9 ft., showing what may be done in a deep draught
ship with a small screw. Whatever the value of deep immersion may be in
smooth water, there can be no question that it is much enhanced in a
seaway. The longitudinal positions are such that the center of the screw is
about one-fifth of the diameter forward of the aft side of the rudder post.
The positions may, perhaps, differ somewhat from this rule without
appreciably affecting the performance, but, if any alteration be made, it
would probably be better to put the screws a little farther aft rather than
forward. The forward edges of the blades are from 2 ft. to 3 ft. clear of
the legs of the bracket which carries the after bearing. The transverse
positions are decided, to some extent, by the distance between the center
lines of the engines. As regards propulsive efficiency, it would appear
that the nearer the screws are to the middle line, the less is the
resistance due to the shaft tubes and brackets, and the greater is the gain
from the wake in the screw efficiency, but, on the other hand, the greater
is the augment of the ship's resistance, due to the action of the screws.
Further, the nearer the screws are to the hull, the less are they exposed.
But experience is not wanting to show that the vibration may be troublesome
when the blades come within a few inches of the hull. The average of the
clearances between the tips of the blades and the respective hulls is about
one-eighth of the diameter of the screw.

An interesting and noteworthy fact in connection with these propellers is
the wide differences in the pitches and revolutions, though the products of
the two do not greatly vary. Such differences are extremely rare in the
mercantile marine for similar speeds, but in war ships they are inseparable
from the conditions of the engine design. As a general rule, with
(revolutions x pitch) a constant, an increase of revolutions and the
consequent decrease of pitch allow a diminution of disk and of blade
area--other modifying conditions, such as the thrust, slip, number, and
pattern of blades, being the same. The screws for E and F are interesting,
because, with practically the same speeds and slips, there is a
considerable difference in the revolutions. It will be observed that F is a
vessel of finer form and a little less displacement than E, and, therefore,
has less resistance. Although E has the greater resistance and the screw
the smaller pitch/diameter, the higher revolutions permit the use of a
smaller screw. But from this example the influence of the high revolutions
in diminishing the size of screw does not appear so great as some empirical
rules would indicate. The screws for A and B are also worthy of attention.
Although the ship A has a much greater resistance than B, the screw of the
former is much the smaller, both in the blade area and the disk. A's
screws, however, in addition to 22 per cent. more revolutions than B, have
a much larger slip, and the blades have rather a fuller form at the tips.
Compared with the practice in the mercantile marine, the revolutions of
these screws are very high, and from the foregoing remarks it may appear
that much larger screws would be required for a merchant ship than for a
war ship of the same displacement and speed. There would, however, be
several items favorable to the use of small screws. For a given
displacement the resistance would be less in the mercantile ship, and with
the lower revolutions the proportion of blade area to the disk could be
increased without impairing the efficiency. Thus in passing from the war
vessel to a merchant ship of the same displacement, there are the lower
revolutions favorable to a larger screw, but, on the other hand, the
smaller resistance, larger proportion of blade area, and the coarser pitch,
are favorable to a diminution of the screw. The ship B has a very large
screw at 88 revolutions, but the tips are very narrow. If the blade were as
dotted for a diameter of 16 ft., the same work could be done with the same
revolutions, but with a little coarser pitch and a little more slip.

There is something to be said for large screws with a small proportion of
blade area to disk. For instance, two bladed screws have frequently given
better results than four bladed screws of smaller diameter, neglecting, of
course, the question of vibrations. Twin screws, however, should, as a
rule, be made as small as possible in diameter without loss of efficiency.
The advantages of small twin screws are the shorter shaft tubes and stern
brackets, deeper immersion, and less exposure as compared with large
screws. The exposure of the screws is usually considered an objection, but,
perhaps, too much has been made of it, for those well qualified to speak on
the subject consider that careful handling of the ship would, in most
cases, prevent damage to the screws, and that where the exposure is
unusually great, effectual protection by portable protectors presents no
insuperable difficulty.

                    HIGH SPEED TWIN SCREWS.
---------------------------------------------------------------------
                    |Ship A.|Ship B.|Ship C.|Ship D.|Ship E.|Ship F.
---------------------------------------------------------------------
Length, ft.         |  325  |  315  |  300  |  300  |  220  |  250
Breadth, ft.        |   68  |   61  |   56  |   46  |   34  |   321/2
                    |       |       |       |       |       |
Draught on trial,   | 26 ft | 24 ft |       | 15 ft | 12 ft | 13 ft
  forward.          |  2 in |  6 in | ....  |  6 in | 10 in |  1 in
                    |       |       |       |       |       |
Draught on trial,   | 27 ft | 25 ft |       | 19 ft | 15 ft | 14 ft
  aft.              |  3 in |  6 in | ....  |  9 in |  2 in |  7 in
Displacement,       |       |       |       |       |       |
  tons.             | 9,690 | 7,645 | 5,000 | 3,584 | 1,560 | 1,544
I.M.S., sq. ft.     | 1,560 | 1,287 | 1,000 |   744 |   438 |   392
Speed of ship,      |       |       |       |       |       |
 knots.             | 16.92 | 17.21 | 18.75 | 18.18 | 16.91 |    17
I.H.P.              |11,610 |10,180 | 8,500 | 6,160 | 3,115 | 3,045
Revolutions per     |       |       |       |       |       |
 minute.            | 107.2 |   88  |  120  | 122.6 | 150.4 | 132.1
                    |       |       |       |       |       |
Pitch of            | 19 ft | 22 ft | 18 ft | 17 ft | 12 ft | 14 ft
 screw.             |  5 in |       |  9 in |  6 in |  71/2in |  9 in
                    |       |       |       |       |       |
Slip. per cent      |  17.6 |  10   |  ...  |  14.2 |  9.7  |  11.4
                    |       |       |       |       |       |
Diameter of         | 15 ft | 18 ft | 14 ft | 13 ft | 10 ft | 11 ft
  screw.            |  6 in |       |  6 in |       |  6 in |
                    |       |       |       |       |       |
Diameter of         |  4 ft |  4 ft |  3 ft |  3 ft |  2 ft |  2 ft
