arrested her.

Up came the little creature, intent on performing the mission for which
rich bribes of sugarplums had been promised, and trotting bravely across
the stage, she held up the lovely nosegay, saying in her baby voice,
"Dis for you, ma'am." Then, startled by the sudden outburst of applause,
she hid her face in Phebe's gown and began to sob with fright.

An awkward minute for poor Phebe, but she showed unexpected presence
of mind and left behind her a pretty picture of the oldest and youngest
orphan as she went quickly down the step, smiling over the great bouquet
with the baby on her arm.

Nobody minded the closing piece, for people began to go, sleepy children
to be carried off, and whispers grew into a buzz of conversation. In the
general confusion Rose looked to see if Steve had remembered his promise
to help Phebe slip away before the rush began. No, there he was putting
on Kitty's cloak, quite oblivious to any other duty. Turning to ask
Archie to hurry out, Rose found that he had already vanished, leaving
his gloves behind him.

"Have you lost anything?" asked Dr. Alec, catching a glimpse of her
face.

"No, sir, I've found something," she whispered back, giving him the
gloves to pocket along with her fan and glass, adding hastily as the
concert ended, "Please, Uncle, tell them all not to come with us. Phebe
has had enough excitement and ought to rest."

Rose's word was law to the family in all things concerning Phebe. So
word was passed that there were to be no congratulations until tomorrow,
and Dr. Alec got his party off as soon as possible. But all the way
home, while he and Aunt Plenty were prophesying a brilliant future for
the singer, Rose sat rejoicing over the happy present of the woman.
She was sure that Archie had spoken and imagined the whole scene with
feminine delight how tenderly he had asked the momentous question, how
gratefully Phebe had given the desired reply, and now how both were
enjoying that delicious hour which Rose had been given to understand
never came but once. Such a pity to shorten it, she thought, and
begged her uncle to go home the longest way the night was so mild,
the moonlight so clear, and herself so in need of fresh air after the
excitement of the evening.

"I thought you would want to rush into Phebe's arms the instant she got
done," said Aunt Plenty, innocently wondering at the whims girls took
into their heads.

"So I should if I consulted my own wishes, but as Phebe asked to be let
alone I want to gratify her," answered Rose, making the best excuse she
could.

"A little piqued," thought the doctor, fancying he understood the case.

As the old lady's rheumatism forbade their driving about till midnight,
home was reached much too soon, Rose thought, and tripped away to warn
the lovers the instant she entered the house. But study, parlor, and
boudoir were empty; and, when Jane appeared with cake and wine, she
reported that "Miss Phebe went right upstairs and wished to be excused,
please, being very tired."

"That isn't at all like Phebe I hope she isn't ill," began Aunt Plenty,
sitting down to toast her feet.

"She may be a little hysterical, for she is a proud thing and represses
her emotions as long as she can. I'll step up and see if she doesn't
need a soothing draft of some sort." And Dr. Alec threw off his coat as
he spoke.

"No, no, she's only tired. I'll run up to her she won't mind me and I'll
report if anything is amiss."

Away went Rose, quite trembling with suspense, but Phebe's door was
shut, no light shone underneath, and no sound came from the room within.
She tapped and receiving no answer, went on to her own chamber, thinking
to herself: "Love always makes people queer, I've heard, so I suppose
they settled it all in the carriage and the dear thing ran away to think
about her happiness alone. I'll not disturb her. Why, Phebe!" said Rose,
surprised, for, entering her room, there was the cantatrice, busy about
the nightly services she always rendered her little mistress.

"I'm waiting for you, dear. Where have you been so long?" asked Phebe,
poking the fire as if anxious to get some color into cheeks that were
unnaturally pale.

The instant she spoke Rose knew that something was wrong, and a glance
at her face confirmed the fear. It was like a dash of cold water and
quenched her happy fancies in a moment; but being a delicate-minded
girl, she respected Phebe's mood and asked no questions, made no
comments, and left her friend to speak or be silent as she chose.

"I was so excited I would take a turn in the moonlight to calm my
nerves. Oh, dearest Phebe, I am so glad, so proud, so full of wonder at
your courage and skill and sweet ways altogether that I cannot half tell
you how I love and honor you!" she cried, kissing the white cheeks with
such tender warmth they could not help glowing faintly as Phebe held
her little mistress close, sure that nothing could disturb this innocent
affection.

"It is all your work, dear, because but for you I might still be
scrubbing floors and hardly dare to dream of anything like this," she
said in her old grateful way, but in her voice there was a thrill of
something deeper than gratitude, and at the last two words her head went
up with a gesture of soft pride as if it had been newly crowned.

Rose heard and saw and guessed at the meaning of both tone and gesture,
feeling that her Phebe deserved both the singer's laurel and the bride's
myrtle wreath. But she only looked up, saying very wistfully: "Then it
has been a happy night for you as well as for us."

"The happiest of my life, and the hardest," answered Phebe briefly as
she looked away from the questioning eyes.

"You should have let us come nearer and help you through. I'm afraid you
are very proud, my Jenny Lind."

"I have to be, for sometimes I feel as if I had nothing else to keep
me up." She stopped short there, fearing that her voice would prove
traitorous if she went on. In a moment she asked in a tone that was
almost hard: "You think I did well tonight?"

"They all think so, and were so delighted they wanted to come in a body
and tell you so, but I sent them home because I knew you'd be tired out.
Perhaps I ought not to have done it and you'd rather have had a crowd
about you than just me?"

"It was the kindest thing you ever did, and what could I like better
than 'just you,' my darling?"

Phebe seldom called her that, and when she did her heart was in the
little word, making it so tender that Rose thought it the sweetest in
the world, next to Uncle Alec's "my little girl." Now it was almost
passionate, and Phebe's face grew rather tragical as she looked down at
Rose. It was impossible to seem unconscious any longer, and Rose said,
caressing Phebe's cheek, which burned with a feverish color now: "Then
don't shut me out if you have a trouble, but let me share it as I let
you share all mine."

"I will! Little mistress, I've got to go away, sooner even than we
planned."

"Why, Phebe?"

"Because Archie loves me."

"That's the very reason you should stay and make him happy."

"Not if it caused dissension in the family, and you know it would."

Rose opened her lips to deny this impetuously, but checked herself and
answered honestly: "Uncle and I would be heartily glad, and I'm sure
Aunt Jessie never could object if you loved Archie as he does you."

"She has other hopes, I think, and kind as she is, it would be a
disappointment if he brought me home. She is right, they all are, and I
alone am to blame. I should have gone long ago I knew I should, but it
was so pleasant, I couldn't bear to go away alone."

"I kept you, and I am to blame if anyone, but indeed, dear Phebe, I
cannot see why you should care even if Aunt Myra croaks and Aunt Clara
exclaims or Aunt Jane makes disagreeable remarks. Be happy, and never
mind them," cried Rose, so much excited by all this that she felt the
spirit of revolt rise up within her and was ready to defy even that
awe-inspiring institution "the family" for her friend's sake.

But Phebe shook her head with a sad smile and answered, still with the
hard tone in her voice as if forcing back all emotion that she might see
her duty clearly: "You could do that, but I never can. Answer me this,
Rose, and answer truly as you love me. If you had been taken into a
house, a friendless, penniless, forlorn girl, and for years been heaped
with benefits, trusted, taught, loved, and made, oh, so happy! could
you think it right to steal away something that these good people valued
very much? To have them feel that you had been ungrateful, had deceived
them, and meant to thrust yourself into a high place not fit for you
when they had been generously helping you in other ways, far more than
you deserved. Could you then say as you do now, 'Be happy, and never
mind them'?"

Phebe held Rose by the shoulders now and searched her face so keenly
that the other shrank a little, for the black eyes were full of fire and
there was something almost grand about this girl who seemed suddenly to
have become a woman. There was no need for words to answer the question
so swiftly asked, for Rose put herself in Phebe's place in the drawing
of a breath, and her own pride made her truthfully reply: "No I could
not!"

"I knew you'd say that, and help me do my duty." And all the coldness
melted out of Phebe's manner as she hugged her little mistress close,
feeling the comfort of sympathy even through the blunt sincerity of
Rose's words.

"I will if I know how. Now, come and tell me all about it." And,
seating herself in the great chair which had often held them both, Rose
stretched out her hands as if glad and ready to give help of any sort.

But Phebe would not take her accustomed place, for, as if coming to
confession, she knelt down upon the rug and, leaning on the arm of the
chair, told her love story in the simplest words.

"I never thought he cared for me until a little while ago. I fancied it
was you, and even when I knew he liked to hear me sing I supposed it was
because you helped, and so I did my best and was glad you were to be
a happy girl. But his eyes told the truth. Then I saw what I had been
doing and was frightened. He did not speak, so I believed, what is quite
true, that he felt I was not a fit wife for him and would never ask me.
It was right I was glad of it, yet I was proud and, though I did not
ask or hope for anything, I did want him to see that I respected myself,
remembered my duty, and could do right as well as he. I kept away. I
planned to go as soon as possible and resolved that at this concert I
would do so well, he should not be ashamed of poor Phebe and her one
gift."

"It was this that made you so strange, then, preferring to go alone and
refusing every little favor at our hands?" asked Rose, feeling very sure
now about the state of Phebe's heart.

"Yes, I wanted to do everything myself and not owe one jot of my
success, if I had any, to even the dearest friend I've got. It was bad
and foolish of me, and I was punished by the first dreadful failure.
I was so frightened, Rose! My breath was all gone, my eyes so dizzy I
could hardly see, and that great crowd of faces seemed so near, I dared
not look. If it had not been for the clock I never should have gotten
through, and when I did, not knowing in the least how I'd sung, one look
at your distressed face told me I'd failed."

"But I smiled, Phebe indeed I did as sweetly as I could, for I was sure
it was only fright," protested Rose eagerly.

"So you did, but the smile was full of pity, not of pride, as I wanted
it to be, and I rushed into a dark place behind the organ, feeling ready
to kill myself. How angry and miserable I was! I set my teeth, clenched
my hands, and vowed that I would do well next time or never sing another
note. I was quite desperate when my turn came, and felt as if I could do
almost anything, for I remembered that he was there. I'm not sure how it
was, but it seemed as if I was all voice, for I let myself go, trying
to forget everything except that two people must not be disappointed,
though I died when the song was done."

"Oh, Phebe, it was splendid! I nearly cried, I was so proud and glad to
see you do yourself justice at last."

"And he?" whispered Phebe, with her face half hidden on the arm of the
chair.

"Said not a word, but I saw his lips tremble and his eyes shine and I
knew he was the happiest creature there, because I was sure he did think
you fit to be his wife and did mean to speak very soon."

Phebe made no answer for a moment, seeming to forget the small success
in the greater one which followed and to comfort her sore heart with the
knowledge that Rose was right.

"He sent the flowers, he came for me, and, on the way home, showed me
how wrong I had been to doubt him for an hour. Don't ask me to tell that
part, but be sure I was the happiest creature in the world then."

And Phebe hid her face again, all wet with tender tears that fell soft
and sudden as a summer shower.

Rose let them flow undisturbed while she silently caressed the bent
head, wondering, with a wistful look in her own wet eyes, what this
mysterious passion was which could so move, ennoble, and beautify the
beings whom it blessed.

An impertinent little clock upon the chimneypiece striking eleven broke
the silence and reminded Phebe that she could not indulge in love dreams
there. She started up, brushed off her tears, and said resolutely: "That
is enough for tonight. Go happily to bed, and leave the troubles for
tomorrow."

"But, Phebe, I must know what you said," cried Rose, like a child
defrauded of half its bedtime story.

"I said, 'No.'"

"Ah! But it will change to 'yes' by and by, I'm sure of that so I'll
let you go to dream of him. The Campbells are rather proud of being
descendants of Robert the Bruce, but they have common sense and love you
dearly, as you'll see tomorrow."

"Perhaps." And with a good night kiss, poor Phebe went away, to lie
awake till dawn.




Chapter 8 BREAKERS AHEAD

Anxious to smooth the way for Phebe, Rose was up betimes and slipped
into Aunt Plenty's room before the old lady had gotten her cap on.

"Aunty, I've something pleasant to tell you, and while you listen, I'll
brush your hair, as you like to have me," she began, well aware that the
proposed process was a very soothing one.

"Yes, dear only don't be too particular, because I'm late and must hurry
down or Jane won't get things straight, and it does fidget me to have
the saltcellars uneven, the tea strainer forgotten, and your uncle's
paper not aired," returned Miss Plenty, briskly unrolling the two gray
curls she wore at her temples.

Then Rose, brushing away at the scanty back hair, led skillfully up to
the crisis of her tale by describing Phebe's panic and brave efforts to
conquer it; all about the flowers Archie sent her; and how Steve forgot,
and dear, thoughtful Archie took his place. So far it went well and Aunt
Plenty was full of interest, sympathy, and approbation, but when Rose
added, as if it was quite a matter of course, "So, on the way home, he
told her he loved her," a great start twitched the gray locks out of
her hands as the old lady turned around, with the little curls standing
erect, exclaiming, in undisguised dismay: "Not seriously, Rose?"

"Yes, Aunty, very seriously. He never jokes about such things."

"Mercy on us! What shall we do about it?"

"Nothing, ma'am, but be as glad as we ought and congratulate him as soon
as she says 'yes.'?

"Do you mean to say she didn't accept at once?"

"She never will if we don't welcome her as kindly as if she belonged to
one of our best families, and I don't blame her."

"I'm glad the girl has so much sense. Of course we can't do anything of
the sort, and I'm surprised at Archie's forgetting what he owes to the
family in this rash manner. Give me my cap, child I must speak to Alec
at once." And Aunt Plenty twisted her hair into a button at the back of
her head with one energetic twirl.

"Do speak kindly, Aunty, and remember that it was not Phebe's fault. She
never thought of this till very lately and began at once to prepare for
going away," said Rose pleadingly.

"She ought to have gone long ago. I told Myra we should have trouble
somewhere as soon as I saw what a good-looking creature she was, and
here it is as bad as can be. Dear, dear! Why can't young people have a
little prudence?"

"I don't see that anyone need object if Uncle Jem and Aunt Jessie
approve, and I do think it will be very, very unkind to scold poor Phebe
for being well-bred, pretty, and good, after doing all we could to make
her so."

"Child, you don't understand these things yet, but you ought to feel
your duty toward your family and do all you can to keep the name
as honorable as it always has been. What do you suppose our blessed
ancestress Lady Marget would say to our oldest boy taking a wife from
the poorhouse?"

