His words made no great impression on me then.  My hardihood was
returning.  I was throbbing with fierce excitement, and tingling for
the fight.  But years afterwards, when the two who stood highest in the
group about Coligny's threshold died, the one at thirty-eight, the
other at thirty-five--when Henry of Guise and Henry of Valois died
within six months of one another by the assassin's knife--I remembered
Pavannes' augury.  And remembering it, I read the ways of Providence,
and saw that the very audacity of which Guise took advantage to entrap
Coligny led him too in his turn to trip smiling and bowing, a comfit
box in his hand and the kisses of his mistress damp on his lips, into a
king's closet--a king's closet at Blois!  Led him to lift the
curtain--ah!  to lift the curtain, what Frenchman does not know the
tale?--behind which stood the Admiral!

To return to our own fortunes; after a hurried glance we resumed our
way, and sped through the alley, holding a brief consultation as we
went.  Pavannes' first hasty instinct to seek shelter at home began to
lose its force, and he to consider whether his return would not
endanger his wife.  The mob might be expected to spare her, he argued.
Her death would not benefit any private foes if he escaped.  He was for
keeping away therefore.  But I would not agree to this.  The priest's
crew of desperadoes--assuming Pavannes' suspicions to be correct--would
wait some time, no doubt, to give the master of the house a chance to
return, but would certainly attack sooner or later out of greed, if
from no other motive.  Then the lady's fate would at the best be
uncertain.  I was anxious myself to rejoin my brothers, and take all
future chances, whether of saving our Louis, or escaping ourselves,
with them.  United we should be four good swords, and might at least
protect Madame de Pavannes to a place of safety, if no opportunity of
succouring Louis should present itself.  We had too the Duke's ring,
and this might be of service at a pinch. "No," I urged, "let us get
together.  We two will slip in at the front gate, and bolt and bar it,
and then we will all escape in a body at the back, while they are
forcing the gateway."

"There is no door at the back," he answered, shaking his head.

"There are windows?"

"They are too strongly barred.  We could not break out in the time," he
explained, with a groan.

I paused at that, crestfallen.  But danger quickened my wits.  In a
moment I had another plan, not so hopeful and more dangerous, yet worth
trying I thought, I told him of it, and he agreed to it.  As he nodded
assent we emerged into a street, and I saw--for the grey light of
morning was beginning to penetrate between the houses--that we were
only a few yards from the gateway, and the small door by which I had
seen my brothers enter.  Were they still in the house?  Were they safe?
I had been away an hour at least.

Anxious as I was about them, I looked round me very keenly as we
flitted across the road, and knocked gently at the door.  I thought it
so likely that we should be fallen upon here, that I stood on my guard
while we waited.  But we were not molested. The street, being at some
distance from the centre of the commotion, was still and empty, with no
signs of life apparent except the rows of heads poked through the
windows--all possessing eyes which watched us heedfully and in perfect
silence.  Yes, the street was quite empty:  except, ah!  except, for
that lurking figure, which, even as I espied it, shot round a distant
angle of the wall, and was lost to sight.

"There!"  I cried, reckless now who might hear me, "knock!  knock
louder!  never mind the noise.  The alarm is given.  A score of people
are watching us, and yonder spy has gone off to summon his friends."

The truth was my anger was rising.  I could bear no longer the silent
regards of all those eyes at the windows.  I writhed under them--cruel,
pitiless eyes they were.  I read in them a morbid curiosity, a patient
anticipation that drove me wild.  Those men and women gazing on us so
stonily knew my companion's rank and faith.  They had watched him
riding in and out daily, one of the sights of their street, gay and
gallant; and now with the same eyes they were watching greedily for the
butchers to come.  The very children took a fresh interest in him, as
one doomed and dying; and waited panting for the show to begin.  So I
read them.

"Knock!"  I repeated angrily, losing all patience.  Had I been foolish
in bringing him back to this part of the town where every soul knew
him?  "Knock; we must get in, whether or no.  They cannot all have left
the house!"

I kicked the door desperately, and my relief was great when it opened.
A servant with a pale face stood before me, his knees visibly shaking.
And behind him was Croisette.

I think we fell straightway into one another's arms.

"And Marie," I cried, "Marie?"

"Marie is within, and madame," he answered joyfully; "we are together
again and nothing matters, But oh, Anne, where have you been?  And what
is the matter?  Is it a great fire?  Or is the king dead?  Or what is
it?"

I told him.  I hastily poured out some of the things which had happened
to me, and some which I feared were in store for others. Naturally he
was surprised and shocked by the latter, though his fears had already
been aroused.  But his joy and relief, when he heard the mystery of
Louis de Pavannes' marriage explained, were so great that they
swallowed up all other feelings.  He could not say enough about it.  He
pictured Louis again and again as Kit's lover, as our old friend, our
companion; as true, staunch, brave without fear, without reproach:  and
it was long before his eyes ceased to sparkle, his tongue to run
merrily, the colour to mantle in his cheeks--long that is as time is
counted by minutes. But presently the remembrance of Louis' danger and
our own position returned more vividly.  Our plan for rescuing him had
failed--failed!

"No!  no!"  cried Croisette, stoutly.  He would not hear of it. He
would not have it at any price.  "No, we will not give up hope!  We
will go shoulder to shoulder and find him.  Louis is as brave as a lion
and as quick as a weasel.  We will find him in time yet.  We will go
when--I mean as soon as--"

He faltered, and paused.  His sudden silence as he looked round the
empty forecourt in which we stood was eloquent.  The cold light, faint
and uncertain yet, was stealing into the court, disclosing a row of
stables on either side, and a tiny porter's hutch by the gates, and
fronting us a noble house of four storys, tall, grey, grim-looking.

I assented; gloomily however.  "Yes," I said, "we will go when--"

And I too stopped.  The same thought was in my mind.  How could we
leave these people?  How could we leave madame in her danger and
distress?  How could we return her kindness by desertion?  We could
not.  No, not for Kit's sake.  Because after all Louis, our Louis, was
a man, and must take his chance.  He must take his chance.  But I
groaned.

So that was settled.  I had already explained our plan to Croisette:
and now as we waited he began to tell me a story, a long, confused
story about Madame d'O.  I thought he was talking for the sake of
talking--to keep up our spirits--and I did not attend much to him; so
that he had not reached the gist of it, or at least I had not grasped
it, when a noise without stayed his tongue.  It was the tramp of
footsteps, apparently of a large party in the street.  It forced him to
break off, and promptly drove us all to our posts.

But before we separated a slight figure, hardly noticeable in that dim,
uncertain light, passed me quickly, laying for an instant a soft hand
in mine as I stood waiting by the gates.  I have said I scarcely saw
the figure, though I did see the kind timid eyes, and the pale cheeks
under the hood; but I bent over the hand and kissed it, and felt, truth
to tell, no more regret nor doubt where our duty lay.  But stood,
waiting patiently.



CHAPTER IX.

THE HEAD OF ERASMUS.

Waiting, and waiting alone!  The gates were almost down now.  The gang
of ruffians without, reinforced each moment by volunteers eager for
plunder, rained blows unceasingly on hinge and socket; and still hotter
and faster through a dozen rifts in the timbers came the fire of their
threats and curses.  Many grew tired, but others replaced them.  Tools
broke, but they brought more and worked with savage energy.  They had
shown at first a measure of prudence; looking to be fired on, and to be
resisted by men, surprised, indeed, but desperate; and the bolder of
them only had advanced.  But now they pressed round unchecked, meeting
no resistance.  They would scarcely stand back to let the sledges have
swing; but hallooed and ran in on the creaking beams and beat them with
their fists, whenever the gates swayed under a blow.

One stout iron bar still held its place.  And this I watched as if
fascinated.  I was alone in the empty courtyard, standing a little
aside, sheltered by one of the stone pillars from which the gates hung.
Behind me the door of the house stood ajar. Candles, which the daylight
rendered garish, still burned in the rooms on the first floor, of which
the tall narrow windows were open.  On the wide stone sill of one of
these stood Croisette, a boyish figure, looking silently down at me,
his hand on the latticed shutter.  He looked pale, and I nodded and
smiled at him.  I felt rather anger than fear myself; remembering, as
the fiendish cries half-deafened me, old tales of the Jacquerie and its
doings, and how we had trodden it out.

Suddenly the din and tumult flashed to a louder note; as when hounds on
the scent give tongue at sight.  I turned quickly from the house,
recalled to a sense of the position and peril.  The iron bar was
yielding to the pressure.  Slowly the left wing of the gate was sinking
inwards.  Through the widening chasm I caught a glimpse of wild, grimy
faces and bloodshot eyes, and heard above the noise a sharp cry from
Croisette--a cry of terror.  Then I turned and ran, with a defiant
gesture and an answering yell, right across the forecourt and up the
steps to the door.

I ran the faster for the sharp report of a pistol behind me, and the
whirr of a ball past my ear.  But I was not scared by it: and as my
feet alighted with a bound on the topmost step, I glanced back.  The
dogs were halfway across the court.  I made a bungling attempt to shut
and lock the great door--failed in this; and heard behind me a roar of
coarse triumph.  I waited for no more. I darted up the oak staircase
four steps at a time, and rushed into the great drawing-room on my
left, banging the door behind me.

The once splendid room was in a state of strange disorder.  Some of the
rich tapestry had been hastily torn down.  One window was closed and
shuttered; no doubt Croisette had done it.  The other two were open--as
if there had not been time to close them--and the cold light which they
admitted contrasted in ghastly fashion with the yellow rays of candles
still burning in the sconces. The furniture had been huddled aside or
piled into a barricade, a CHEVAUX DE FRISE of chairs and tables
stretching across the width of the room, its interstices stuffed with,
and its weakness partly screened by, the torn-down hangings.  Behind
this frail defence their backs to a door which seemed to lead to an
inner room, stood Marie and Croisette, pale and defiant.  The former
had a long pike; the latter levelled a heavy, bell-mouthed arquebuse
across the back of a chair, and blew up his match as I entered.  Both
had in addition procured swords.  I darted like a rabbit through a
little tunnel left on purpose for me in the rampart, and took my stand
by them.

"Is all right?"  ejaculated Croisette turning to me nervously.

"All right, I think," I answered.  I was breathless.

"You are not hurt?"

"Not touched!"

I had just time then to draw my sword before the assailants streamed
into the room, a dozen ruffians, reeking and tattered, with flushed
faces and greedy, staring eyes.  Once inside, however, suddenly--so
suddenly that an idle spectator might have found the change
ludicrous--they came to a stop.  Their wild cries ceased, and tumbling
over one another with curses and oaths they halted, surveying us in
muddled surprise; seeing what was before them, and not liking it.
Their leader appeared to be a tall butcher with a pole-axe on his
half-naked shoulder; but there were among them two or three soldiers in
the royal livery and carrying pikes.  They had looked for victims only,
having met with no resistance at the gate, and the foremost recoiled
now on finding themselves confronted by the muzzle of the arquebuse and
the lighted match.

I seized the occasion.  I knew, indeed, that the pause presented our
only chance, and I sprang on a chair and waved my hand for silence.
The instinct of obedience for the moment asserted itself; there was a
stillness in the room.

"Beware!"  I cried loudly--as loudly and confidently as I could,
considering that there was a quaver at my heart as I looked on those
savage faces, which met and yet avoided my eye.  "Beware of what you
do!  We are Catholics one and all like yourselves, and good sons of the
Church.  Ay, and good subjects too!  VIVE LE ROI, gentlemen!  God save
the King!  I say."  And I struck the barricade with my sword until the
metal rang again.  "God save the King!"

"Cry VIVE LA MESSE!"  shouted one.

"Certainly, gentlemen!"  I replied, with politeness.  "With all my
heart.  VIVE LA MESSE!  VIVE LA MESSE!"

This took the butcher, who luckily was still sober, utterly aback.  He
had never thought of this.  He stared at us as if the ox he had been
about to fell had opened its mouth and spoken, and grievously at a
loss, he looked for help to his companions.

Later in the day, some Catholics were killed by the mob.  But their
deaths as far as could be learned afterwards were due to private feuds.
Save in such cases--and they were few--the cry of VIVE LA MESSE!
always obtained at least a respite:  more easily of course in the
earlier hours of the morning when the mob were scarce at ease in their
liberty to kill, while killing still seemed murder, and men were not
yet drunk with bloodshed.

I read the hesitation of the gang in their faces:  and when one asked
roughly who we were, I replied with greater boldness, "I am M. Anne de
Caylus, nephew to the Vicomte de Caylus, Governor, under the King, of
Bayonne and the Landes!"  This I said with what majesty I could.  "And
these" I continued--"are my brothers. You will harm us at your peril,
gentlemen.  The Vicomte, believe me, will avenge every hair of our
heads."

I can shut my eyes now and see the stupid wonder, the baulked ferocity
of those gaping faces.  Dull and savage as the men were they were
impressed; they saw reason indeed, and all seemed going well for us
when some one in the rear shouted, "Cursed whelps! Throw them over!"

I looked swiftly in the direction whence the voice came--the darkest
corner of the room the corner by the shuttered window.  I thought I
made out a slender figure, cloaked and masked--a woman's it might be
but I could not be certain and beside it a couple of sturdy fellows,
who kept apart from the herd and well behind their fugleman.

The speaker's courage arose no doubt from his position at the back of
the room, for the foremost of the assailants seemed less determined.
We were only three, and we must have gone down, barricade and all,
before a rush.  But three are three.  And an arquebuse--Croisette's
match burned splendidly--well loaded with slugs is an ugly weapon at
five paces, and makes nasty wounds, besides scattering its charge
famously.  This, a good many of them and the leaders in particular,
seemed to recognise.  We might certainly take two or three lives:  and
life is valuable to its owner when plunder is afoot.  Besides most of
them had common sense enough to remember that there were scores of
Huguenots--genuine heretics--to be robbed for the killing, so why go
out of the way, they reasoned, to cut a Catholic throat, and perhaps
get into trouble.  Why risk Montfaucon for a whim?  and offend a man of
influence like the Vicomte de Caylus, for nothing!

Unfortunately at this crisis their original design was recalled to
their minds by the same voice behind, crying out, "Pavannes! Where is
Pavannes?"

"Ay!"  shouted the butcher, grasping the idea, and at the same time
spitting on his hands and taking a fresh grip of the axe, "Show us the
heretic dog, and go!  Let us at him."

"M. de Pavannes," I said coolly--but I could not take my eyes off the
shining blade of that man's axe, it was so very broad and sharp--"is
