The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Martyrs of Science, or, The lives of
Galileo, Tycho Brahe, and Kepler, by David Brewster

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Martyrs of Science, or, The lives of Galileo, Tycho Brahe, and Kepler

Author: David Brewster

Release Date: July 7, 2008 [EBook #25992]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MARTYRS OF SCIENCE ***




Produced by Bryan Ness, LN Yaddanapudi and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
book was produced from scanned images of public domain
material from the Google Print project.)









  THE
  MARTYRS OF SCIENCE,
  OR
  THE LIVES
  OF
  GALILEO, TYCHO BRAHE, AND KEPLER.

  BY

  SIR DAVID BREWSTER, K.H. D.C.L.,
  PRINCIPAL OF THE UNITED COLLEGE OF ST SALVATOR AND ST LEONARD,
  ST ANDREWS; FELLOW OF THE ROYAL SOCIETY OF LONDON; VICE-PRESIDENT
  OF THE ROYAL SOCIETY OF EDINBURGH; CORRESPONDING MEMBER
  OF THE INSTITUTE OF FRANCE; AND MEMBER OF THE
  ACADEMIES OF ST PETERSBURG, STOCKHOLM,
  BERLIN, COPENHAGEN, GOTTINGEN,
  PHILADELPHIA, &c. &c.

  LONDON:
  JOHN MURRAY, ALBEMARLE STREET.
  1841.

  G. S. TULLIS, PRINTER, CUPAR.




  TO THE
  RIGHT HON. FRANCIS LORD GRAY,
  F.R.S., F.R.S.E.

MY LORD,

In submitting this volume to the public under your Lordship's auspices,
I avail myself of the opportunity thus afforded me of expressing the
deep sense which I entertain of the friendship and kindness with which
your Lordship has so long honoured me.

Although in these days, when Science constitutes the power and wealth of
nations, and encircles the domestic hearth with its most substantial
comforts, there is no risk of its votaries being either persecuted or
neglected, yet the countenance of those to whom Providence has given
rank and station will ever be one of the most powerful incitements to
scientific enterprise, as well as one of its most legitimate rewards.
Next to the satisfaction of cultivating Science, and thus laying up the
only earthly treasure which we can carry along with us into a better
state, is that of having encouraged and assisted others in the same
beneficent labours. That your Lordship may long continue to enjoy these
sources of happiness is the earnest prayer of,

MY LORD,

Your Lordship's

Most faithful and obedient servant,

DAVID BREWSTER.

ST LEONARDS, ST ANDREWS,

October 12, 1840.




CONTENTS.


LIFE OF GALILEO.

                                                                   Page.
CHAPTER I.                                                             1

  Peculiar interest attached to his Life--His Birth--His early
  studies--His passion for Mathematics--His work on the Hydrostatic
  Balance--Appointed Lecturer on Mathematics at Pisa--His antipathy
  to the Philosophy of Aristotle--His contentions with the
  Aristotelians--Chosen Professor of Mathematics in Padua--Adopts the
  Copernican system, but still teaches the Ptolemaic doctrine--His
  alarming illness--He observes the new Star in 1604--His Magnetical
  experiments,

CHAPTER II.                                                           20

  Cosmo, Grand Duke of Tuscany, invites Galileo to Pisa--Galileo
  visits Venice in 1609, where he first hears of the Telescope--He
  invents and constructs one, which excites a great
  sensation--Discovers Mountains in the Moon, and Forty Stars in the
  Pleiades--Discovers Jupiter's Satellites in 1610--Effect of this
  discovery on Kepler--Manner in which these discoveries were
  received--Galileo appointed Mathematician to Cosmo--Mayer claims the
  discovery of the Satellites of Jupiter--Harriot observes them in
  England in October 1610,

CHAPTER III.                                                          42

  Galileo announces his discoveries in Enigmas--Discovers the
  Crescent of Venus--the Ring of Saturn--the Spots on the
  Sun--Similar Observations made in England by Harriot--Claims of
  Fabricius and Scheiner to the discovery of the Solar
  Spots--Galileo's Letters to Velser on the claims of Scheiner--His
  residence at the Villa of Salviati--Composes his work on Floating
  Bodies, which involves him in new controversies,

CHAPTER IV.                                                           56

  Galileo treats his Opponents with severity and sarcasm--He is aided
  by the Sceptics of the day--The Church Party the most
  powerful--Galileo commences the attack, and is answered by Caccini,
  a Dominican--Galileo's Letter to the Grand Duchess of Tuscany, in
  support of the motion of the Earth and the stability of the
  Sun--Galileo visits Rome--Is summoned before the Inquisition--And
  renounces his opinions as Heretical--The Inquisition denounces the
  Copernican system--Galileo has an audience of the Pope, but still
  maintains his opinions in private society--Proposes to find out the
  Longitude at Sea by means of Jupiter's Satellites--His negotiation
  on this subject with the Court of Spain--Its failure--He is unable
  to observe the three Comets of 1618, but is involved in the
  controversy to which they gave rise,

CHAPTER V.                                                            72

  Urban VIII., Galileo's friend, raised to the Pontificate--Galileo
  goes to Rome to offer his congratulations--The Pope loads Galileo
  with presents, and promises a Pension to his Son--Galileo in
  pecuniary difficulties, owing to the death of his patron,
  Cosmo--Galileo again rashly attacks the Church, notwithstanding the
  Pope's kindness--He composes his System of the World, to
  demonstrate the Copernican System--Artfully obtains a license to
  print it--Nature of the work--Its influence on the public mind--The
  Pope resolves on suppressing it--Galileo summoned before the
  Inquisition--His Trial--His Defence--His formal Abjuration of his
  Opinions--Observations on his conduct--The Pope shews great
  indulgence to Galileo, who is allowed to return to his own house at
  Arcetri as the place of his confinement,

CHAPTER VI.                                                          102

  Galileo loses his favourite Daughter--He falls into a state of
  melancholy and ill health--Is allowed to go to Florence for its
  recovery in 1638--But is prevented from leaving his House or
  receiving his Friends--His friend Castelli permitted to visit him
  in the presence of an Officer of the Inquisition--He composes his
  celebrated Dialogues on Local Motion--Discovers the Moon's
  Libration--Loses the sight of one Eye--The other Eye attacked by
  the same Disease--Is struck Blind--Negociates with the Dutch
  Government respecting his Method of finding the Longitude--He is
  allowed free intercourse with his Friends--His Illness and Death in
  1642--His Epitaph--His Social, Moral, and Scientific Character,

       *       *       *       *       *


LIFE OF TYCHO BRAHE.

CHAPTER I.                                                           123

  Tycho's Birth, Family, and Education--An Eclipse of the Sun turns
  his attention to Astronomy--Studies Law at Leipsic--But pursues
  Astronomy by stealth--His Uncle's Death--He returns to Copenhagen,
  and resumes his Observations--Revisits Germany--Fights a Duel, and
  loses his Nose--Visits Augsburg, and meets Hainzel--Who assists him
  in making a large Quadrant--Revisits Denmark--And is warmly
  received by the King--He settles at his Uncle's Castle of
  Herritzvold--His Observatory and Laboratory--Discovers the new Star
  in Cassiopeia--Account of this remarkable Body--Tycho's Marriage
  with a Peasant Girl--Which irritates his Friends--His Lectures on
  Astronomy--He visits the Prince of Hesse--Attends the Coronation of
  the Emperor Rudolph at Ratisbon--He returns to Denmark,

CHAPTER II.                                                          145

  Frederick II. patronizes Tycho--And resolves to establish him in
  Denmark--Grants him the Island of Huen for Life--And Builds the
  splendid Observatory of Uraniburg--Description of the Island, and
  of the Observatory--Account of its Astronomical Instruments--Tycho
  begins his Observations--His Pupils--Tycho is made Canon of
  Rothschild, and receives a large Pension--His Hospitality to his
  Visitors--Ingratitude of Wittichius--Tycho sends an Assistant to
  take the Latitude of Frauenburg and Konigsberg--Is visited by
  Ulric, Duke of Mecklenburg--Change in Tycho's fortunes,

CHAPTER III.                                                         160

  Tycho's Labours do honour to his Country--Death of Frederick
  II.--James VI. of Scotland visits Tycho at Uraniburg--Christian IV.
  visits Tycho--The Duke of Brunswick's visit to Tycho--The Danish
  Nobility, jealous of his fame, conspire against him--He is
  compelled to quit Uraniburg--And to abandon his Studies--Cruelty of
  the Minister Walchendorp--Tycho quits Denmark with his Family and
  Instruments--Is hospitably received by Count Rantzau--Who
  introduces him to the Emperor Rudolph--The Emperor invites him to
  Prague--He gives him a Pension of 3000 Crowns--And the Castle of
  Benach as a Residence and an Observatory--Kepler visits Tycho--Who
  obtains for him the Appointment of Mathematician to Rudolph,

CHAPTER IV.                                                          179

  Tycho resumes his Astronomical Observations--Is attacked with a
  Painful Disease--His Sufferings and Death in 1601--His Funeral--His
  Temper--His Turn for Satire and Raillery--His Piety--Account of his
  Astronomical Discoveries--His Love of Astrology and
  Alchymy--Observations on the Character of the Alchymists--Tycho's
  Elixir--His Fondness for the Marvellous--His Automata and Invisible
  Bells--Account of the Idiot, called Lep, whom he kept as a
  Prophet--History of Tycho's Instruments--His Great Brass Globe
  preserved at Copenhagen--Present state of the Island of Huen,

       *       *       *       *       *


LIFE OF JOHN KEPLER.

CHAPTER I.                                                           203

  Kepler's Birth in 1571--His Family--And early Education--The
  Distresses and Poverty of his Family--He enters the Monastic School
  of Maulbronn--And is admitted into the University of Tubingen,
  where he distinguishes himself, and takes his Degree--He is
  appointed Professor of Astronomy and Greek in 1594--His first
  speculations on the Orbits of the Planets--Account of their
  Progress and Failure--His "Cosmographical Mystery" published--He
  Marries a Widow in 1597--Religious troubles at Gratz--He retires
  from thence to Hungary--Visits Tycho at Prague in 1600--Returns to
  Gratz, which he again quits for Prague--He is taken ill on the
  road--Is appointed Tycho's Assistant in 1601--Succeeds Tycho as
  Imperial Mathematician--His Work on the New Star of 1604--Singular
  specimen of it,

CHAPTER II.                                                          220

  Kepler's Pecuniary Embarrassments--His Inquiries respecting the Law
  of Refraction--His Supplement to Vitellio--His Researches on
  Vision--His Treatise on Dioptrics--His Commentaries on Mars--He
  discovers that the orbit of Mars is an Ellipse, with the Sun in one
  focus--And extends this discovery to all the other Planets--He
  establishes the two first laws of Physical Astronomy--His Family
  Distresses--Death of his Wife--He is appointed Professor of
  Mathematics at Linz--His Method of Choosing a Second Wife--Her
  Character, as given by Himself--Origin of his Treatise on
  Gauging--He goes to Ratisbon to give his Opinion to the Diet on the
  change of Style--He refuses the Mathematical Chair at Bologna,

CHAPTER III.                                                         237

  Kepler's continued Embarrassments--Death of Mathias--Liberality of
  Ferdinand--Kepler's "Harmonies of the World"--The Epitome of the
  Copernican Astronomy--It is prohibited by the Inquisition--Sir
  Henry Wotton, the British Ambassador, invites Kepler to
  England--He declines the Invitation--Neglect of Genius by the
  English Government--Trial of Kepler's Mother--Her final
  Acquittal--And Death at the age of Seventy-five--The States of
  Styria burn publicly Kepler's Calendar--He receives his Arrears of
  Salary from Ferdinand--The Rudolphine Tables published in 1628--He
  receives a Gold Chain from the Grand Duke of Tuscany--He is
  Patronised by the Duke of Friedland--He removes to Sagan, in
  Silesia--Is appointed Professor of Mathematics at Rostoch--Goes to
  Ratisbon to receive his Arrears--His Death, Funeral, and
  Epitaph--Monument Erected to his Memory in 1803--His Family--His
  Posthumous Volume, entitled "The Dream, or Lunar Astronomy,"

CHAPTER IV.                                                          252

  Number of Kepler's published Works--His numerous Manuscripts in 22
  folio volumes--Purchased by Hevelius, and afterwards by Hansch--Who
  publishes Kepler's Life and Correspondence at the expense of
  Charles VI.--The History of the rest of his Manuscripts, which are
  deposited in the Library of the Academy of Sciences at St
  Petersburg--General Character of Kepler--His Candour in
  acknowledging his Errors--His Moral and Religious Character--His
  Astrological Writings and Opinions considered--His Character as an
  Astronomer and a Philosopher--The Splendour of his
  Discoveries--Account of his Method of Investigating Truth,




LIFE OF GALILEO.




CHAPTER I.

     _Peculiar interest attached to his Life--His Birth--His early
     studies--His passion for Mathematics--His work on the Hydrostatic
     Balance--Appointed Lecturer on Mathematics at Pisa--His antipathy
     to the Philosophy of Aristotle--His contentions with the
     Aristotelians--Chosen professor of Mathematics in Padua--Adopts the
     Copernican system, but still teaches the Ptolemaic doctrine--His
     alarming illness--He observes the new Star in 1604--His magnetical
     experiments._


The history of the life and labours of Galileo is pregnant with a
peculiar interest to the general reader, as well as to the philosopher.
His brilliant discoveries, the man of science regards as his peculiar
property; the means by which they were made, and the development of his
intellectual character, belong to the logician and to the philosopher;
but the triumphs and the reverses of his eventful life must be claimed
for our common nature, as a source of more than ordinary instruction.

The lengthened career which Providence assigned to Galileo was filled up
throughout its rugged outline with events even of dramatic interest. But
though it was emblazoned with achievements of transcendent magnitude,
yet his noblest discoveries were the derision of his contemporaries, and
were even denounced as crimes which merited the vengeance of Heaven.
Though he was the idol of his friends, and the favoured companion of
princes, yet he afterwards became the victim of persecution, and spent
some of his last hours within the walls of a prison; and though the
Almighty granted him, as it were, a new sight to descry unknown worlds
in the obscurity of space, yet the eyes which were allowed to witness
such wonders, were themselves doomed to be closed in darkness.

Such were the lights and shadows in which history delineates

    "The starry Galileo with his woes."[1]

      [1] Childe Harold, canto iv. stanza liv.


But, however powerful be their contrasts, they are not unusual in
their proportions. The balance which has been struck between his days of
good and evil, is that which regulates the lot of man, whether we study
it in the despotic sway of the autocrat, in the peaceful inquiries of
the philosopher, or in the humbler toils of ordinary life.

Galileo Galilei was born at Pisa, on the 15th of February, 1564, and was
the eldest of a family of three sons and three daughters. Under the name
of Bonajuti, his noble ancestors had filled high offices at Florence;
but about the middle of the 14th century they seem to have abandoned
this surname for that of Galileo. Vincenzo Galilei, our author's father,
was himself a philosopher of no mean powers; and though his talents seem
to have been exercised only in the composition of treatises on the
theory and practice of music, yet he appears to have anticipated even
his son in a just estimate of the philosophy of the age, and in a
distinct perception of the true method of investigating truth.[2]

     [2] Life of Galileo, Library of Useful Knowledge, p. 1.

The early years of Galileo were, like those of almost all great
experimental philosophers, spent in the construction of instruments and
pieces of machinery, which were calculated chiefly to amuse himself and
his schoolfellows. This employment of his hands, however, did not
interfere with his regular studies; and though, from the straitened
circumstances of his father, he was educated under considerable
disadvantages, yet he acquired the elements of classical literature, and
was initiated into all the learning of the times. Music, drawing, and
painting were the occupations of his leisure hours; and such was his
proficiency in these arts, that he was reckoned a skilful performer on
several musical instruments, especially the lute; and his knowledge of
pictures was held in great esteem by some of the best artists of his
day.

Galileo seems to have been desirous of following the profession of a
painter: but his father had observed decided indications of early
genius; and, though by no means able to afford it, he resolved to send
him to the university to pursue the study of medicine. He accordingly
enrolled himself as a scholar in arts at the university of Pisa, on the
5th of November, 1581, and pursued his medical studies under the
celebrated botanist Andrew Caesalpinus, who filled the chair of medicine
from 1567 to 1592.

In order to study the principles of music and drawing, Galileo found it
necessary to acquire some knowledge of geometry. His father seems to
have foreseen the consequences of following this new pursuit, and though
he did not prohibit him from reading Euclid under Ostilio Ricci, one of
the professors at Pisa, yet he watched his progress with the utmost
jealousy, and had resolved that it should not interfere with his medical
studies. The demonstrations, however, of the Greek mathematician had too
many charms for the ardent mind of Galileo. His whole attention was
engrossed with the new truths which burst upon his understanding; and
after many fruitless attempts to check his ardour and direct his
thoughts to professional objects, his father was obliged to surrender
his parental control, and allow the fullest scope to the genius of his
son.

From the elementary works of geometry, Galileo passed to the writings of
Archimedes; and while he was studying the hydrostatical treatise[3] of
the Syracusan philosopher, he wrote his essay on the hydrostatical
balance,[4] in which he describes the construction of the instrument,
and the method by which Archimedes detected the fraud committed by the
jeweller in the composition of Hiero's crown. This work gained for its
author the esteem of Guido Ubaldi, who had distinguished himself by his
mechanical and mathematical acquirements, and who engaged his young
friend to investigate the subject of the centre of gravity in solid
bodies. The treatise on this subject, which Galileo presented to his
patron, proved the source of his future success in life.

     [3] De Insidentibus in Fluido.

     [4] Opere di Galileo. Milano, 1810, vol. iv. p. 248-257.

Through the Cardinal del Monte, the brother-in-law of Ubaldi, the
reigning Duke of Tuscany, Ferdinand de Medici was made acquainted with
the merits of our young philosopher; and, in 1589, he was appointed
lecturer on mathematics at Pisa. As the salary, however, attached to
this office was only sixty crowns, he was compelled to enlarge this
inadequate income by the additional occupation of private teaching, and
thus to encroach upon the leisure which he was anxious to devote to
science.

With this moderate competency, Galileo commenced his philosophical
career. At the early age of eighteen, when he had entered the
university, his innate antipathy to the Aristotelian philosophy began to
display itself. This feeling was strengthened by his earliest inquiries;
and upon his establishment at Pisa he seems to have regarded the
doctrines of Aristotle as the intellectual prey which, in his chace of
glory, he was destined to pursue. Nizzoli, who flourished near the
beginning of the sixteenth century, and Giordano Bruno, who was burned
at Rome in 1600, led the way in this daring pursuit; but it was reserved
for Galileo to track the Thracian boar through its native thickets, and,
at the risk of his own life, to strangle it in its den.

With the resolution of submitting every opinion to the test of
experiment, Galileo's first inquiries at Pisa were directed to the
mechanical doctrines of Aristotle. Their incorrectness and absurdity
soon became apparent; and with a zeal, perhaps, bordering on
indiscretion, he denounced them to his pupils with an ardour of manner
and of expression proportioned to his own conviction of the truth. The
detection of long-established errors is apt to inspire the young
philosopher with an exultation which reason condemns. The feeling of
triumph is apt to clothe itself in the language of asperity; and the
abettor of erroneous opinions is treated as a species of enemy to
science. Like the soldier who fleshes his first spear in battle, the
philosopher is apt to leave the stain of cruelty on his early
achievements. It is only from age and experience, indeed, that we can
expect the discretion of valour, whether it is called forth in
controversy or in battle. Galileo seems to have waged this stern warfare
against the followers of Aristotle; and such was the exasperation which
was excited by his reiterated and successful attacks, that he was
assailed, during the rest of his life, with a degree of rancour which
seldom originates in a mere difference of opinion. Forgetting that all
knowledge is progressive, and that the errors of one generation call
forth the comments, and are replaced by the discoveries, of the next,
Galileo did not anticipate that his own speculations and incompleted
labours might one day provoke unmitigated censure; and he therefore
failed in making allowance for the prejudices and ignorance of his
opponents. He who enjoys the proud lot of taking a position in advance
of his age, need not wonder that his less gifted contemporaries are left
behind. Men are not necessarily obstinate because they cleave to deeply
rooted and venerable errors, nor are they absolutely dull when they are
long in understanding and slow in embracing newly discovered truths.

It was one of the axioms of the Aristotelian mechanics, that the heavier
of two falling bodies would reach the ground sooner than the other, and
that their velocities would be proportional to their weights. Galileo
attacked the arguments by which this opinion was supported; and when he
found his reasoning ineffectual, he appealed to direct experiment. He
maintained, that all bodies would fall through the same height in the
same time, if they were not unequally retarded by the resistance of the
air: and though he performed the experiment with the most satisfactory
results, by letting heavy bodies fall from the leaning tower of Pisa,
yet the Aristotelians, who with their own eyes saw the unequal weights
strike the ground at the same instant, ascribed the effect to some
unknown cause, and preferred the decision of their master to that of
nature herself.

Galileo could not brook this opposition to his discoveries; nor could
the Aristotelians tolerate the rebukes of their young instructor. The
two parties were, consequently, marshalled in hostile array; when,
fortunately for both, an event occurred, which placed them beyond the
reach of danger. Don Giovanni de Medici, a natural son of Cosmo, had
proposed a method of clearing out the harbour of Leghorn. Galileo, whose
opinion was requested, gave such an unfavourable report upon it, that
the disappointed inventor directed against him all the force of his
malice. It was an easy task to concentrate the malignity of his enemies
at Pisa; and so effectually was this accomplished, that Galileo resolved
to accept another professorship, to which he had been previously
invited.

The chair of mathematics in the university of Padua having been vacant
for five years, the republic of Venice had resolved to fill it up; and,
on the recommendation of Guido Ubaldi, Galileo was appointed to it, in
1592, for a period of six years.

Previous to this event, Galileo had lost his father, who died, in 1591,
at an advanced age. As he was the eldest son, the support of the family
naturally devolved upon him; and this sacred obligation must have
increased his anxiety to better his circumstances, and therefore added
to his other inducements to quit Pisa. In September 1592, he removed to
Padua, where he had a salary of only 180 florins, and where he was again
obliged to add to his income by the labours of tuition. Notwithstanding
this fruitless occupation of his time, he appears to have found leisure
for composing several of his works, and completing various inventions,
which will be afterwards described. His manuscripts were circulated
privately among his friends and pupils; but some of them strayed beyond
this sacred limit, and found their way into the hands of persons, who
did not scruple to claim and publish, as their own, the discoveries and
inventions which they contained.

It is not easy to ascertain the exact time when Galileo became a convert
to the doctrines of Copernicus, or the particular circumstances under
which he was led to adopt them. It is stated by Gerard Voss, that a
public lecture of Moestlin, the instructor of Kepler, was the means of
making Galileo acquainted with the true system of the universe. This
assertion, however, is by no means probable; and it has been ably shown,
by the latest biographer of Galileo,[5] that, in his dialogues on the
Copernican system, our author gives the true account of his own
conversion. This passage is so interesting, that we shall give it
entire.

     [5] Life of Galileo, in Library of Useful Knowledge, p. 9.

"I cannot omit this opportunity of relating to you what happened to
myself at the time when this opinion (the Copernican system) began to be
discussed. I was then a very young man, and had scarcely finished my
course of philosophy, which other occupations obliged me to leave off,
when there arrived in this country, from Rostoch, a foreigner, whose
name, I believe, was Christian Vurstisius (Wurteisen), a follower of
Copernicus. This person delivered, on this subject, two or three
lectures in a certain academy, and to a crowded audience. Believing that
several were attracted more by the novelty of the subject than by any
other cause, and being firmly persuaded that this opinion was a piece of
solemn folly, I was unwilling to be present. Upon interrogating,
however, some of those who were there, I found that they all made it a
subject of merriment, with the exception of one, who assured me that it
was not a thing wholly ridiculous. As I considered this individual to be
both prudent and circumspect, I repented that I had not attended the
lectures; and, whenever I met any of the followers of Copernicus, I
began to inquire if they had always been of the same opinion. I found
that there was not one of them who did not declare that he had long
maintained the very opposite opinions, and had not gone over to the new
