
Tom had seemed truly penitent both during his illness and since his
recovery.  His one great desire now was to get away from home, for home
to him was a place of torment.  Bobby suspected all this, and in his
great heart he pitied his companion.  He did not know what to do.

"I am sorry for you, Tom," said he, after he had considered the matter
in this new light; "but I don't see what I can do for you.  I doubt
whether it would be right for me to help you run away from your
parents."

"I don't want you to help me run away.  I have done that already."

"But if I let you go with me, it will be just the same thing.  Besides,
since you told me those lies this morning, I haven't much confidence in
you."

"I couldn't help that."

"Yes, you could.  Couldn't help lying?"

"What could I do?  You would have gone right back and told my father."

"Well, we will go up to Mr. Bayard's store, and then we will see what
can be done."

"I couldn't stay at home, sure," continued Tom, as they walked along
together.  "My father even talked of binding me out to a trade."

"Did he?"

Bobby stopped short in the street; for it was evident that, as this
would remove him from his unhappy home, and thus effect all he
professed to desire, he had some other purpose in view.

"What are you stopping for, Bob?"

"I think you better go back, Tom."

"Not I; I won't do that, whatever happens."

"If your father will put you to a trade, what more do you want?"

"I won't go to a trade, any how."

Bobby said no more, but determined to consult with Mr. Bayard about the
matter; and Tom was soon too busily engaged in observing the strange
sights and sounds of the city to think of any thing else.

When they reached the store, Bobby went into Mr. Bayard's private
office and told him all about the affair.  The bookseller decided that
Tom had run away more to avoid being bound to a trade than because his
home was unpleasant; and this decision seemed to Bobby all the more
just because he knew that Tom's mother, though a drunkard's wife, was a
very good woman.  Mr. Bayard further decided that Bobby ought not to
permit the runaway to be the companion of his journey.  He also
considered it his duty to write to Mr. Spicer, informing him of his
son's arrival in the city, and clearing Bobby from any agency in his
escape.

While Mr. Bayard was writing the letter, Bobby went out to give Tom the
result of the consultation.  The runaway received it with a great show
of emotion, and begged and pleaded to have the decision reversed.  But
Bobby, though he would gladly have done any thing for him which was
consistent with his duty, was firm as a rock, and positively refused,
to have any thing to do with him until he obtained his father's
consent; or, if there was any such trouble as he asserted, his mother's
consent.

Tom left the store, apparently "more in sorrow than in anger."  His
bullying nature seemed to be cast out, and Bobby could not but feel
sorry for him.  Duty was imperative, as it always is, and it must be
done "now or never."

During the day the little merchant attended to the packing of his
stock, and to such other preparations as were required for his journey.
He must take the steamer that evening for Bath, and when the time for
his departure arrived, he was attended to the wharf by Mr. Bayard and
Ellen, with whom he had passed the afternoon.  The bookseller assisted
him in procuring his ticket and berth, and gave him such instructions
as his inexperience demanded.

The last bell rang, the fasts were cast off, and the great wheels of
the steamer began to turn.  Our hero, who had never been on the water
in a steamboat, or indeed any thing bigger than a punt on the river at
home, was much interested and excited by his novel position.  He seated
himself on the promenade deck, and watched with wonder the boiling,
surging waters astern of the steamer.

How powerful is man, the author of that mighty machine that bore him so
swiftly over the deep blue waters!  Bobby was a little philosopher, as
we have before had occasion to remark, and he was decidedly of the
opinion that the steamboat was a great institution.  When he had in
some measure conquered his amazement, and the first ideas of sublimity
which the steamer and the sea were calculated to excite in a poetical
imagination, he walked forward to take a closer survey of the
machinery.  After all, there was something rather comical in the
affair.  The steam hissed and sputtered, and the great walking beam
kept flying up and down; and the sum total of Bobby's philosophy was,
that it was funny these things should make the boat go so like a race
horse over the water.

Then he took a look into the pilot house, and it seemed more funny that
turning that big wheel should steer the boat.  But the wind blew rather
fresh at the forward part of the boat, and as Bobby's philosophy was
not proof against it, he returned to the promenade deck, which was
sheltered from the severity of the blast.  He had got reconciled to the
whole thing, and ceased to bother his head about the big wheel, the
sputtering steam, and the walking beam; so he seated himself, and began
to wonder what all the people in Riverdale were about.

"All them as hasn't paid their fare, please walk up to the cap'n's
office and s-e-t-t-l-e!" shouted a colored boy, presenting himself just
then, and furiously ringing a large hand bell.

"I have just settled," said Bobby, alluding to his comfortable seat.

But the allusion was so indefinite to the colored boy that he thought
himself insulted.  He did not appear to be a very amiable boy, for his
fist was doubled up, and with sundry big oaths, he threatened to
annihilate the little merchant for his insolence.

"I didn't say any thing that need offend you," replied Bobby.  "I meant
nothing."

"You lie!  You did!"

He was on the point of administering a blow with his fist, when a third
party appeared on the ground, and without waiting to hear the merits of
the case, struck the negro a blow which had nearly floored him.

Some of the passengers now interfered, and the colored boy was
prevented from executing vengeance on the assailant.

"Strike that fellow and you strike me!" said he who had struck the blow.

"Tom Spicer!" exclaimed Bobby, astonished and chagrined at the presence
of the runaway.




CHAPTER XVI.

IN WHICH BOBBY FINDS "IT IS AN ILL WIND THAT BLOWS NO ONE ANY GOOD."

A gentleman, who was sitting near Bobby when he made the remark which
the colored boy had misunderstood, interfered to free him from blame,
and probably all unpleasant feelings might have been saved, if Tom's
zeal had been properly directed.  As it was, the waiter retired with
his bell, vowing vengeance upon his assailant.

"How came you here, Tom?" asked Bobby, when the excitement had subsided.

"You don't get rid of me so easily," replied Tom, laughing.

Bobby called to mind the old adage that "a had penny is sure to
return;" and, if it had not been a very uncivil remark, he would have
said it.

"I didn't expect to see you again at present," he observed, hardly
knowing what to say or do.

"I suppose not; but as I didn't mean you should expect me, I kept out
of sight.  Only for that darkey you wouldn't have found me out so soon.
I like you, Bob, in spite of all you have done to get rid of me, and I
wasn't a going to let the darkey thrash you."

"You only made matters worse."

"That is all the thanks I get for hitting him for you."

"I am sorry you hit him, at the same time I suppose you meant to do me
a service, and I thank you, not for the blow you struck the black boy,
but for your good intentions."

"That sounds better.  I meant well, Bob."

"I dare say you did.  But how came you here?"

"Why, you see, I was bound to go with you any how or at least to keep
within hail of you.  You told me, you know, that you were going in the
steamboat; and after I left the shop, what should I see but a big
picture of a steamboat on a wall.  It said, 'Bath, Gardiner, and
Hallowell,' on the bill; and I knew that was where you meant to go.  So
this afternoon I hunts round and finds the steamboat.  I thought I
never should have found it, but here I am."

"What are you going to do?"

"Going into the book business," replied Tom, with a smile.

"Where are your books?"

"Down stairs, in the cellar of the steamboat, or whatever you call it."

"Where did you get them?"

"Bought 'em, of course."

"Did you?  Where?"

"Well, I don't remember the name of the street now.  I could go right
there if I was in the city, though."

"Would they trust you?"

Tom hesitated.  The lies he had told that morning had done him no
good--had rather injured his cause; and, though he had no principle
that forbade lying, he questioned its policy in the present instance.

"I paid part down, and they trusted me part."

"How many books you got?"

"Twenty dollars worth.  I paid eight dollars down."

"You did?  Where did you get the eight dollars?"

Bobby remembered the money Tom's father had lost several weeks before,
and immediately connected that circumstance with his present ability to
pay so large a sum.

Tom hesitated again, but he was never at a loss for an answer.

"My mother gave it to me."

"Your mother?"

"Yes, _sir_!" replied Tom, boldly, and in that peculiarly bluff manner
which is almost always good evidence that the boy is lying.

"But you ran away from home."

"That's so; but my mother knew I was coming."

"Did she?"

"To be sure she did."

"You didn't say so before."

"I can't tell all I know in a minute."

"If I thought your mother consented to your coming, I wouldn't say
another word."

"Well, she did; you may bet your life on that."

"And your mother gave you ten dollars?"

"Who said she gave me ten dollars?" asked Tom a little sharply.

That was just the sum his father had lost, and Bobby had unwittingly
hinted his suspicion.

"You must have had as much as that if you paid eight on your books.
Your fare to Boston and your steamboat fare must be two dollars more."

"I know that; but look here, Bob;" and Tom took from his pocket five
half dollars and exhibited them to his companion.  "She gave me
thirteen dollars."

Notwithstanding this argument, Bobby felt almost sure that the lost ten
dollars was a part of his capital.

"I will tell you my story now, Bob, if you like.  You condemned me
without a hearing, as Jim Guthrie said when they sent him to the House
of Correction for getting drunk."

"Go ahead."

The substance of Tom's story was, that his father drank so hard, and
was such a tyrant in the house, that he could endure it no longer.  His
father and mother did not agree, as any one might have suspected.  His
mother, encouraged by the success of Bobby, thought that Tom might do
something of the kind, and she had provided him the money to buy his
stock of books.

Bobby had not much confidence in this story.  He had been deceived
once; besides, it was not consistent with his previous narrative, and
he had not before hinted that he had obtained his mother's consent.
But Tom was eloquent, and protested that he had reformed, and meant to
do well.  He declared, by all that was good and great, Bobby should
never have reason to be ashamed of him.

Our little merchant was troubled.  He could not now get rid of Tom
without actually quarrelling with him, or running away from him.  He
did not wish to do the former, and it was not an easy matter to do the
latter.  Besides, there was hope that the runaway would do well; and if
he did, when he carried the profits of his trade home, his father would
forgive him.  One thing was certain, if he returned to Riverdale he
would be what he had been before.

For these reasons Bobby finally, but very reluctantly, consented that
Tom should remain with him, resolving, however, that, if he did not
behave himself, he would leave him at once.

Before morning he had another reason.  When the steamer got out into
the open bay, Bobby was seasick.  He retired to his berth with a
dreadful headache; as he described it afterwards, it seemed just as
though that great walking beam was smashing up and down right in the
midst of his brains.  He had never felt so ill before in his life, and
was very sure, in his inexperience, that something worse than mere
seasickness ailed him.

He told Tom, who was not in the least affected, how he felt; whereupon
the runaway blustered round, got the steward and the captain into the
cabin, and was very sure that Bobby would die before morning, if we may
judge by the fuss he made.

The captain was angry at being called from the pilot house for nothing,
and threatened to throw Tom overboard if he didn't stop his noise.  The
steward, however, was a kind-hearted man, and assured Bobby that
passengers were often a great deal sicker than he was; but he promised
to do something for his relief, and Tom went with him to his state room
for the desired remedy.

The potion was nothing more nor less than a table spoonful of brandy,
which Bobby, who had conscientious scruples about drinking ardent
spirits, at first refused to take.  Then Tom argued the point, and the
