"If thou dost escape, Paaker will kill me; he swore he would."

"Wait!"  said the youth.  He dragged the slave back, flung him into the
cave, and blocked up the door with a huge log which lay near it for that
purpose.

When the three men had crept back through the low passage in the rocks,
and found themselves once more in the open air, they found a high wind
was blowing.

"The storm will soon be over," said Horus.  "See how the clouds are
driving!  Let us have horses, Pentaur, for there is not a minute to be
lost."

The poet ordered Kaschta to summon the people to start but the soldier
advised differently.

"Men and horses are exhausted," he said, "and we shall get on very slowly
in the dark.  Let the beasts feed for an hour, and the men get rested and
warm; by that time the moon will be up, and we shall make up for the
delay by having fresh horses, and light enough to see the road."

"The man is right," said Horus; and he led Kaschta to a cave in the
rocks, where barley and dates for the horses, and a few jars of wine, had
been preserved.  They soon had lighted a fire, and while some of the men
took care of the horses, and others cooked a warm mess of victuals, Horus
and Pentaur walked up and down impatiently.

"Had you been long bound in those thongs when we came?"  asked Pentaur.

"Yesterday my  brother  fell upon  me,"  replied Horus.  "He is by this
time a long way ahead of us, and if he joins the Cheta, and we do not
reach the Egyptian camp before daybreak, all is lost."

"Paaker, then, is plotting treason?"

"Treason, the foulest, blackest treason!"  exclaimed the young man.
"Oh, my lost father!--"

"Confide in me," said Pentaur going up to the unhappy youth who had
hidden his face in his hands.  "What is Paaker plotting?  How is it that
your brother is your enemy?"

"He is the elder of us two," said Horus with a trembling voice.  "When my
father died I had only a short time before left the school of Seti, and
with his last words my father enjoined me to respect Paaker as the head
of our family.  He is domineering and violent, and will allow no one's
will to cross his; but I bore everything, and always obeyed him, often
against my better judgment.  I remained with him two years, then I went
to Thebes, and there I married, and my wife and child are now living
there with my mother.  About sixteen months afterwards I came back to
Syria, and we travelled through the country together; but by this time I
did not choose to be the mere tool of my brother's will, for I had grown
prouder, and it seemed to me that the father of my child ought not to be
subservient, even to his own brother.  We often quarrelled, and had a bad
time together, and life became quite unendurable, when--about eight weeks
since--Paaker came back from Thebes, and the king gave him to understand
that he approved more of my reports than of his.  From my childhood I
have always been softhearted and patient; every one says I am like my
mother; but what Paaker made me suffer by words and deeds, that is--I
could not--"  His voice broke, and Pentaur felt how cruelly he had
suffered; then he went on again:

"What happened to my brother in Egypt, I do not know, for he is very
reserved, and asks for no sympathy, either in joy or in sorrow; but from
words he has dropped now and then I gather that he not only bitterly
hates Mena, the charioteer--who certainly did him an injury--but has some
grudge against the king too.  I spoke to him of it at once, but only
once, for his rage is unbounded when he is provoked, and after all he is
my elder brother.

"For some days they have been preparing in the camp for a decisive
battle, and it was our duty to ascertain the position and strength of the
enemy; the king gave me, and not Paaker, the commission to prepare the
report.  Early yesterday morning I drew it out and wrote it; then my
brother said he would carry it to the camp, and I was to wait here.  I
positively refused, as Rameses had required the report at my hands, and
not at his.  Well, he raved like a madman, declared that I had taken
advantage of his absence to insinuate myself into the king's favor, and
commanded me to obey him as the head of the house, in the name of my
father.

"I was sitting irresolute, when he went out of the cavern to call his
horses; then my eyes fell on the things which the old black slave was
tying together to load on a pack-horse--among them was a roll of writing.
I fancied it was my own, and took it up to look at it, when--what should
I find?  At the risk of my life I had gone among the Cheta, and had found
that the main body of their army is collected in a cross-valley of the
Orontes, quite hidden in the mountains to the north-east of Kadesh; and
in the roll it was stated, in Paaker's own hand-writing, that that valley
is clear, and the way through it open, and well suited for the passage of
the Egyptian war-chariots; various other false details were given, and
when I looked further among his things, I found between the arrows in his
quiver, on which he had written 'death to Mena,' another little roll of
writing.  I tore it open, and my blood ran cold when I saw to whom it was
addressed."

"To the king of the Cheta?"  cried Pentaur in excitement.

"To his chief officer, Titure," continued Horus.  "I was holding both the
rolls in my hand, when Paaker came back into the cave.  'Traitor!' I
cried out to him; but he flung the lasso, with which he had been catching
the stray horses, threw it round my neck, and as I fell choking on the
ground, he and the black man, who obeys him like a dog, bound me hand and
foot; he left the old negro to keep guard over me, took the rolls and
rode away.  Look, there are the stars, and the moon will soon be up."

"Make haste, men!"  cried Pentaur.  "The three best horses for me, Horus,
and Kaschta; the rest remain here."

As the red-bearded soldier led the horses forward, the moon shone forth,
and within an hour the travellers had reached the plain; they sprang on
to the beasts and rode madly on towards the lake, which, when the sun
rose, gleamed before them in silvery green.  As they drew near to it they
could discern, on its treeless western shore, black masses moving hither
and thither; clouds of dust rose up from the plain, pierced by flashes of
light, like the rays of the sun reflected from a moving mirror.

"The battle is begun!"  cried Horus; and he fell sobbing on his horse's
neck.

"But all is not lost yet!"  exclaimed  the poet, spurring his horse to
a final effort of strength.  His companions did the same, but first
Kaschta's horse fell under him, then Horus's broke down.

"Help may be given by the left wing!"  cried Horus.  "I will run as fast
as I can on foot, I know where to find them.  You will easily find the
king if you follow the stream to the stone bridge.  In the cross-valley
about a thousand paces farther north--to the northwest of our stronghold
--the surprise is to be effected.  Try to get through, and warn Rameses;
the Egyptian pass-word is 'Bent-Anat,' the name of the king's favorite
daughter.  But even if you had wings, and could fly straight to him, they
would overpower him if I cannot succeed in turning the left wing on the
rear of the enemy."

Pentaur galloped onwards; but it was not long before his horse too gave
way, and he ran forward like a man who runs a race, and shouted the pass-
word "Bent-Anat"--for the ring of her name seemed to give him vigor.
Presently he came upon a mounted messenger of the enemy; he struck him
down from his horse, flung himself into the saddle, and rushed on towards
the camp; as if he were riding to his wedding.




CHAPTER XXXVIII.

During the night which had proved so eventful to our friends, much had
occurred in the king's camp, for the troops were to advance to the long-
anticipated battle before sunrise.

Paaker had given his false report of the enemy's movements to the Pharaoh
with his own hand; a council of war had been held, and each division had
received instructions as to where it was to take up its position.  The
corps, which bore the name of the Sungod Ra, advanced from the south
towards Schabatun,

     [Kadesh was the chief city of the Cheta, i. e.  Aramaans, round
     which the united forces of all the peoples of western Asia had
     collected.  There were several cities called Kadesh.  That which
     frequently checked the forces of Thotmes III.  may have been
     situated farther to the south; but the Cheta city of Kadesh, where
     Rameses II.  fought so hard a battle, was undoubtedly on the
     Orontes, for the river which is depicted on the pylon of the
     Ramesseum as parting into two streams which wash the walls of the
     fortress, is called Aruntha, and in the Epos of Pentaur it is stated
     that this battle took place at Kadesh by the Orontes.  The name of
     the city survives, at a spot just three miles north of the lake of
     Riblah.  The battle itself I have described from the Epos of
     Pentaur, the national epic of Egypt.  It ends with these words:
     "This was written and made by the scribe Pentaur."  It was so highly
     esteemed that it is engraved in stone twice at Luqsor, and once at
     Karnak.  Copies of it on papyrus are frequent; for instance, papyrus
     Sallier III.  and papyrus Raifet--unfortunately much injured--in the
     Louvre.  The principal incident, the rescue of the king from the
     enemy, is repeated at the Ramessetun at Thebes, and at Abu Simbel.
     It was translated into French by Vicomte E.  de Rouge.  The camp of
     Rameses is depicted on the pylons of Luqsor and the Ramesseum.]

so as to surround the lake on the east, and fall on the enemy's flank;
the corps of Seth, composed of men from lower Egypt, was sent on to Arnam
to form the centre; the king himself, with the flower of the chariot-
guard, proposed to follow the road through the valley, which Paaker's
report represented as a safe and open passage to the plain of the
Orontes.  Thus, while the other divisions occupied the enemy, he could
cross the Orontes by a ford, and fall on the rear of the fortress of
Kadesh from the north-west.  The corps of Amon, with the Ethiopian
mercenaries, were to support him, joining him by another route, which the
pioneer's false indications represented as connecting the line of
operations.  The corps of Ptah remained as a reserve behind the left
wing.

The soldiers had not gone to rest as usual; heavily, armed troops, who
bore in one hand a shield of half a man's height, and in the other a
scimitar, or a short, pointed sword, guarded the camp,

     [Representations of Rameses' camp are preserved on the pylons of the
     temple of Luxor and the Ramesseum.]

where numerous fires burned, round which crowded the resting warriors.
Here a wine-skin was passed from hand to hand, there a joint was roasting
on a wooden spit; farther on a party were throwing dice for the booty
they had won, or playing at morra.  All was in eager activity, and many a
scuffle occurred amoung the excited soldiers, and had to be settled by
the camp-watch.

Near the enclosed plots, where the horses were tethered, the smiths were
busily engaged in shoeing the beasts which needed it, and in sharpening
the points of the lances; the servants of the chariot-guard were also
fully occupied, as the chariots had for the most part been brought over
the mountains in detached pieces on the backs of pack-horses and asses,
and now had to be put together again, and to have their wheels greased.
On the eastern side of the camp stood a canopy, under which the standards
were kept, and there numbers of priests were occupied in their office of
blessing the warriors, offering sacrifices, and singing hymns and
litanies.  But these pious sounds were frequently overpowered by the loud
voices of the gamblers and revellers, by the blows of the hammers, the
hoarse braying of the asses, and the neighing of the horses.  From time
to time also the deep roar of the king's war-lions

     [See Diodorus, 1. 47.  Also the pictures of the king rushing to the
     fight.]

might be heard; these beasts followed him into the fight, and were now
howling for food, as they had been kept fasting to excite their fury.

In the midst of the camp stood the king's tent, surrounded by foot and
chariot-guards.  The auxiliary troops were encamped in divisions
according to their nationality, and between them the Egyptian legions of
