"Excuse me, ma'am. I wasn't complainin' of the fare-not by no means.
I was only thinkin' of you."

"There's no call to think of me, stranger."

"Have you lived long in these parts, ma'am?" inquired Bradley
socially.

"Fools ask questions, and fools answer them. I ain't a fool,"
responded the polite hostess.

"Excuse my curiosity, ma'am. I didn't know that it would be
disagreeable to you to answer."

"Who told you it was?"

"I thought from your way of speakin'."

"It's none of your business, that's all," said the hostess.

Even Bradley was silenced. It was clear that their hostess was not
inclined to be social. The remainder of the meal passed in silence.




CHAPTER XVI.

A NEW ACQUAINTANCE.


After supper the two travelers emerged from, the cabin and stretched
themselves out under the trees once more. Bradley produced a clay
pipe, filled the bowl with tobacco, and began to smoke.

"It's a pity you don't smoke, Ben," he said, his face expressing the
satisfaction he felt.

"Would you advise me to, Jake?" questioned our hero.

"No, Ben; I guess you're better off without it; but there's nothing
makes me feel so good as a smoke after a good supper."

"I feel comfortable without it, Jake."

"Then let well enough alone. I wonder whether our sweet-tempered
hostess is goin' to give us a bed to-night. Not that it matters
much. I'd rather have a good supper, and sleep under the trees, than
have the best bed in Californy without the supper."

Here their attention was drawn to a man who was leisurely
approaching. He was dressed roughly in a red shirt, trousers tucked
in his boots, and a hat with a broad flapping brim. As he strode
along, his revolver and bowie-knife were carelessly exposed. His
complexion was dark; he wore an abundant beard, and whatever he
might be, he looked like a desperado, whom one would not care to
meet on a dark night, unless well armed and on the alert.

He stopped short when he caught sight of the two travelers.

"Who are you?" he asked abruptly.

"We're bound for the mines," answered Bradley. "Your good lady, if
so be as you live there--indicating the cabin-has just provided us
with a capital supper."

The newcomer glanced toward the door of the cabin, at which the
woman now made her appearance.

"Givin' you some supper, eh? I hope she's saved some for me."

"Yes, Jack," said his wife, in a conciliatory tone; "there's plenty
for you. These strangers offered to pay well for supper and lodging,
and I thought you wouldn't object. I gave them the supper, but I
wouldn't say anything about the lodging until you came."

"Well, stir round, old gal, and get me something to eat, for I'm
dead hungry."

"Supper is ready now, Jack."

The man entered his cabin, and the next twenty minutes were consumed
in repairing the ravages of hunger.

"How do you like his looks, Jake?" asked Ben, in a low voice.

"He's just the sort of man I'd expect to find in a State prison,"
answered Bradley. "That man's a rascal, if looks mean anything."

"I'll tell you what he reminds me of, Jake. Did you ever read
'Oliver Twist'?"

"All of a Twist? That's a queer name. What is it?"

"It's a story by Dickens. He describes a brutal villain, named Bill
Sykes, who murders his wife."

"This chap looks as if he wouldn't mind doing it. His wife's afraid
of him, though half an hour ago I would have said she wasn't afraid
of anything."

"That's so. They seem pretty well matched."

Presently the master of the cabin came out. It was not easy for his
harsh features to look amiable, but his manner was no longer
offensive. He even seemed inclined to be social.

"Traveled fur to-day?" he inquired.

"About thirty miles, as near as I can guess," said Bradley.

"Is that your boy?"

"No, he's no kin to me. We're travelin' together-that's all."

"Goin' to the mines?"

"We are goin' to Murphy's."

"Come from 'Frisco?"

"Yes."

The proprietor of the cabin at this reply fixed his eyes
reflectively upon Ben and his companion.

"I'd like to know what he's thinkin' about," said Bradley to
himself. "Somehow I mistrust him. A man with that face can't help
bein' a scoundrel."

"Don't you find it lonely livin' out here?" he asked.

Jack Carter shrugged his shoulders.

"I don't care for company," he said. "As long as me and the old
woman get enough to eat, our own company's good enough for us."

"Are there any mines near-by?" asked Bradley.

"Not very."

"What inducement can he have to live out here in the
wilderness?" thought Bradley. "If he were workin' a mine now, I could
understand. How does he make a livin', I wonder?"

"Have you lived here long?" he asked.

"Quite a while."

It was clear that Jack did not care to answer definitely, and was
disposed to give as little information as possible about himself.

It was yet early when the two travelers felt an inclination to
sleep. They had had a hard day's tramp, and wished to be stirring
early the next day. As yet, however, they were uncertain whether
they would be permitted to sleep in the cabin. Bradley resolved to
put the question to the man.

"If you haven't got room for us to sleep," he said, "Ben and I will
camp out, as we have done before."

"The old woman's makin' up a bed for you," said Jack. "We don't keep
a hotel, but we've got room for you two."

"Thank you."

"Wait here, and I'll see if the bed's ready."

He entered the cabin, probably to consult with his wife.

"I don't know why it is, Ben," said Bradley, in a low voice, "but I
mistrust that man."

"Don't you think it safe to sleep here?" asked Ben gravely.

"I think if we are prudent we shall keep a careful watch over our
host and hostess; they may mean us harm."

"What motive would they have for harming us, Jake?"

"To get possession of our money. There's a gang of robbers
hereabouts, who make their livin' by stopping stages, and lyin' in
wait for solitary travelers, and I strongly suspect that this man is
one of them."

"Do you judge from his looks?"

"Not wholly, but I can't think of any other motive he can have for
livin' in this out-of-the-way place. There are no mines near, and
the huntin' wouldn't pay him. I may be mistaken, but that's what I
think."

"What shall we do?" asked Ben, a little startled by his companion's
suggestion.

"That's more than I can tell you, Ben."

"We might camp out."

"And be surprised in our sleep. No, we shall be as safe in the cabin
as outside. Besides, I may be wrong. But, hush! here comes our
agreeable friend."

Jack Carter had in his hand a bottle and a tin mug.

"Strangers," said he, "Jack Carter's a poor man, but he's not so
poor that he can't offer a glass of wine to a friend."

As he spoke, he poured out a liberal mug of wine and offered it to
Bradley.

Our friend Bradley was not a member of a temperance society, and he
could not resist the temptation. His conscience smote him when he
thought of the suspicions he had cherished, and there was a sudden
revulsion.

"After all," thought he, "Jack Carter is a good fellow. He don't
look it, to be sure, but a man can't help his looks What is it the
poet says, 'A man may smile and be a villain still.' Jack's a rough
customer, but he's treatin' Ben and me tiptop."

"I drink your health, Jack," he said cordially. "You've treated Ben
and me like gentlemen, and we're glad to know you. You're the right
sort."

And he drained the mug.

Jack Carter filled it again, and passed it to Ben.

"Take a drink, boy," he said. "It will make you feel good."

"No, thank you," said Ben politely.

"What's the matter?" asked Jack, frowning. "Why won't you drink?"

"I never drink," answered Ben. "I promised my father I wouldn't, and
I can't break my word."

"This wine is weak. It wouldn't hurt a baby."

"I would rather not drink," said Ben.

"Ain't you goin' a little too fur, Ben?" remonstrated Bradley. "Your
father meant rum and whisky and sich. He wouldn't mind wine."

"Yes, he would," said Ben, resolutely. "I had an uncle who died a
drunkard, and it was that that made my father so particular. I
promised him faithfully, and now that he's dead, I can't break my
work to him."

"The boy's right, Jack," said Bradley. "It won't hurt you and me,
but if he don't want to drink, we won't press him."

"It's blasted nonsense!" exclaimed Jack angrily. "The boy's puttin'
on airs, that's what's the matter."

"He's a good boy," said Bradley. "You don't know him as well as I
do."

"Jest as you say," muttered Jack, in a dissatisfied tone. "If you
want to go to bed now, you can."

"I'm ready, for one," said Bradley, rising with, alacrity. "I'm
powerful sleepy."

"Come in, then."

They followed their host into the cabin.




CHAPTER XVII.

A TIGHT PLACE.


The lower part of the cabin was divided into two rooms, over which
was a loft. There was no staircase; but there was a short ladder by
which the ascent was made.

"You're to sleep up there," said Jack, pointing to the loft. "Me and
the old woman sleep below."

"All right," said Bradley, gaping. "I can sleep anywhere to-night.
I'm powerful sleepy."

He ascended the ladder first, and Ben followed. There was no
bedstead, but a straw pallet was stretched in one corner, with a
blanket in place of a quilt.

"I sha'n't undress, Ben," said Bradley, throwing himself down on the
rude bed. "I can't keep my eyes open long enough. I think I never
felt so sleepy in the whole course of my life."

"I am tired, but not sleepy," returned Ben.

"I won't undress, either. I can sleep just as well in my clothes."

Scarcely a minute had passed when Bradley was breathing in the
unconsciousness of slumber.

As Ben lay down beside him, he could not help feeling surprised at
his companion's yielding so suddenly to the power of sleep. That he
should be tired was not surprising; but when seated outside he had
not seemed unusually drowsy, that is, up to the time of his drinking
the wine. A quick suspicion flashed upon Ben's mind. Had the wine
anything to do with this sudden drowsiness?

Ben had not much experience of life; but he had heard of liquors
being drugged, and it seemed possible that the wine which had been
offered to Bradley might have been tampered with. If so, it was only
too evident what was the object of their host. It was natural to
suppose that the two travelers were provided with money, and it was
undoubtedly the intention of Jack Carter to rob them in their sleep.

This was not a pleasant thought, nor one calculated to soothe Ben to
sleep. He was only a boy, and to find himself in a robber's den was
certainly rather a startling discovery. If he had been able to
consult with his companion, it would have been a relief; but Bradley
was in a profound sleep.

Ben nudged him, but without the slightest effect. He was insensible
as a log. Finding more vigorous measures necessary, the boy shook
him, but succeeded only in eliciting a few muttered words.

"I can't wake him," thought Ben, more and more disturbed in mind. "I
am sure it must be the wine which makes him sleep so heavily. What
can I do?"

This question was more easily asked than answered. Ben was quite
aware that single-handed he could not cope with a powerful man like
Carter. With Bradley's help he would have felt secure; but no
assistance could now be expected from his companion. So far as he
could see, he must submit to be robbed, and to see his companion
robbed. Of course, there was a chance that he might be mistaken. It
was possible that Bradley's might be a natural sleep, induced by
excessive fatigue, and there might be nothing sinister in the
intentions of their host.

Ben, however, found it difficult to convince himself of this, much
as he desired to do so. The existence of a gang of robbers in the
vicinity, referred to by Bradley, was not calculated to reassure
him. If Carter did not belong to this gang, his personal appearance
was certainly calculated to foster the suspicion of his connection
with them, and the suspicion was strengthened by the fact of his
living in this lonely place without any apparent inducement.

For the first time, perhaps, since he had left the East, he wished
himself in the security of home. As Deacon Pitkin's hired boy,
living on frugal diet, he would have been better off than here at
the mercy of a mountain bandit.

But Ben was a boy of spirit, and not inclined to submit in a
