obtain any substantial aid. With Saxon troops in the town, and the
nobles divided, there is no hope of a successful rising in Warsaw."

"The king did not think of that," Charlie said. "His opinion was,
that were it evident that the citizens of Warsaw were strongly
opposed to Augustus of Saxony, it would have a great moral effect,
and that, perhaps, they might influence some of the nobles who, as
you say, are deeply in their books, or upon whose estates they may
hold mortgages, to join the party against the king."

"They might do something that way," Allan Ramsay agreed. "Of
course, I have no money out on mortgages. I want badly enough all
the money I can lay hands on in my own business. Giving credit, as
we have to, and often very long credit, it requires a large capital
to carry on trade. But the Jews, who no doubt do hold large
mortgages on the land, cannot exert much power. They cannot hold
land themselves, and, were one of them to venture to sell the
property of any noble of influence, he would be ruined. The whole
class would shrink from him, and, like enough, there would be a
tumult got up, his house would be burned over his head, and he and
his family murdered.

"Still, as far as popular opinion goes, something might be done. At
any rate, I will get some of my friends here tomorrow, and
introduce you to them and talk it over. But we must be careful, for
Augustus has a strong party here, and, were it suspected that you
are a Swedish officer, it would go very hard with you.

"Tomorrow you must fetch your servant here. I have already sent
round to the inn, and you will find your valises in your room. You
said you could rely thoroughly upon him?"

"Yes, he was handed over to me by Count Piper himself; and
moreover, from what I have seen of him, I am myself confident that
he can be trusted. He is of Swedish descent, and is, I think, a
very honest fellow."

For a fortnight, Charlie remained at Allan Ramsay's, and then, in
spite of the pressing entreaties of his host and hostess, took a
lodging near them. He had, by this time, seen a good many of the
leading traders of the town. The Scotch and Frenchmen had all
heartily agreed with his argument, that it was for the benefit of
Poland, and especially for that of Warsaw, that Augustus of Saxony
should be replaced by another king, who would be acceptable to
Charles of Sweden; but all were of opinion that but little could be
done, by them, towards bringing about this result.

With the Jewish traders his success was less decided. They admitted
that it would be a great misfortune, were Warsaw taken by the
Swedes, but, as Poles, they retained their confidence in the
national army, and were altogether sceptical that a few thousand
Swedes could withstand the host that could be put in the field
against them.

Several of them pointedly asked what interest they had in the
matter, and, to some of these, Charlie was obliged to use his power
of promising sums of money, in case of success.

There were one or two, however, of whom he felt doubtful. Chief
among these was Ben Soloman Muller, a man of great influence in the
Jewish community. This man had placed so large a value upon his
services, that Charlie did not feel justified in promising him such
a sum. He did not like the man's face, and did not rely upon the
promises of silence he had given, before the mission was revealed
to him. It was for this reason, principally, that he determined to
go into lodgings. Should he be denounced, serious trouble might
fall upon Allan Ramsay, and it would at least minimize this risk,
were he not living at his house when he was arrested. Ramsay
himself was disposed to make light of the danger.

"I believe myself that Ben Soloman is an old rogue, but he is not a
fool. He cannot help seeing that the position of the king is
precarious, and, were he to cause your arrest, he might get little
thanks and no profit, while he would be incurring the risk of the
vengeance of Charles, should he ever become master of the town. Did
he have you arrested, he himself would be forced to appear as a
witness against you, and this he could hardly do without the matter
becoming publicly known.

"I do not say, however, that, if he could curry favour with the
king's party by doing you harm, without appearing in the matter, he
would hesitate for a moment.

"Even if you were arrested here, I doubt whether any great harm
would befall me, for all the Scotch merchants would make common
cause with me, and, although we have no political power, we have a
good deal of influence one way or another, and Augustus, at this
time, would not care to make fresh enemies. However, lad, I will
not further dispute your decision. Were I quite alone, I would not
let you leave me, so long as you stop in this city, without taking
great offence; but, with a wife and two children, a man is more
timid than if he had but himself to think of."

Charlie therefore moved into the lodging, but every day he went for
three or four hours to the shop, where he kept up his assumed
character by aiding to keep the ledgers, and in learning from the
Polish assistants the value of the various goods in the shop.

One evening, he was returning after supper to his lodging, when
Stanislas met him.

"I observed three or four evil-looking rascals casting glances at
the house today, and there are several rough-looking fellows
hanging about the house this evening. I do not know if it means
anything, but I thought I would let you know."

"I think it must be only your fancy, Stanislas. I might be arrested
by the troops, were I denounced, but I apprehend no danger from men
of the class you speak of. However, if we should be interfered
with, I fancy we could deal with several rascals of that sort."

At the corner of his street, three or four men were standing. One
of them moved, as he passed, and pushed rudely against him, sending
his hat into the gutter. Then, as his face was exposed, the fellow
exclaimed:

"It is he, death to the Swedish spy!"

They were the last words he uttered. Charlie's sword flew from its
scabbard, and, with a rapid pass, he ran the man through the body.
The others drew instantly, and fell upon Charlie with fury, keeping
up the shout of, "Death to the Swedish spy!" It was evidently a
signal--for men darted out of doorways, and came running down the
street, repeating the cry.

"Go, Stanislas!" Charlie shouted, as he defended himself against a
dozen assailants. "Tell Ramsay what has happened; you can do no
good here."

A moment later, he received a tremendous blow on the back of the
head, from an iron-bound cudgel, and fell senseless to the ground.



Chapter 10: In Evil Plight.


When Charlie recovered his senses, he found himself lying bound in
a room lighted by a dim lamp, which sufficed only to show that the
beams were blackened by smoke and age, and the walls constructed of
rough stone work. There was, so far as he could see, no furniture
whatever in it, and he imagined that it was an underground cellar,
used perhaps, at some time or other, as a storeroom. It was some
time before his brain was clear enough to understand what had
happened, or how he had got into his present position. Gradually
the facts came back to him, and he was able to think coherently, in
spite of a splitting headache, and a dull, throbbing pain at the
back of his head.

"I was knocked down and stunned," he said to himself, at last. "I
wonder what became of Stanislas. I hope he got away.

"This does not look like a prison. I should say that it was a
cellar, in the house of one of the gang that set upon me. It is
evident that someone has betrayed me, probably that Jew, Ben
Soloman. What have they brought me here for? I wonder what are they
going to do with me."

His head, however, hurt him too much for him to continue the strain
of thought, and, after a while, he dozed off to sleep. When he
awoke, a faint light was streaming in through a slit, two or three
inches wide, high up on the wall. He still felt faint and dizzy,
from the effects of the blow. Parched with thirst, he tried to call
out for water, but scarce a sound came from his lips.

Gradually, the room seemed to darken and become indistinct, and he
again lapsed into insensibility. When he again became conscious,
someone was pouring water between his lips, and he heard a voice
speaking loudly and angrily. He had picked up a few words of Polish
from Stanislas--the names of common things, the words to use in
case he lost his way, how to ask for food and for stabling for a
horse, but he was unable to understand what was said. He judged,
however, that someone was furiously upbraiding the man who was
giving him water, for the latter now and then muttered excuses.

"He is blowing the fellow up, for having so nearly let me slip
through their fingers," he said to himself. "Probably they want to
question me, and find out who I have been in communication with.
They shall get nothing, at present, anyhow."

He kept his eyes resolutely closed. Presently, he heard a door
open, and another man come in. A few words were exchanged, and,
this time, wine instead of water was poured down his throat. Then
he was partly lifted up, and felt a cooling sensation at the back
of his head. Some bandages were passed round it, and he was laid
down again. There was some more conversation, then a door opened
and two of the men went out; the third walked back to him,
muttering angrily to himself.

Charlie felt sure that he had been moved from the place in which he
had been the evening before. His bonds had been loosed, and he was
lying on straw, and not on the bare ground. Opening his eyelids the
slightest possible degree, he was confirmed in his belief, by
seeing that there was much more light than could have entered the
cellar. He dared not look farther, and, in a short time, fell into
a far more refreshing sleep than that he before had.

The next time he woke his brain was clearer, though there was still
a dull sense of pain where he had been struck. Without opening his
eyes, he listened attentively. There was some sound of movement in
the room, and, presently, he heard a faint regular breathing. This
continued for some time, and he then heard a sort of grunt.

"He is asleep," he said to himself, and, opening his eyes slightly
looked round. He was in another chamber. It was grimy with dirt,
and almost as unfurnished as the cellar, but there was a window
through which the sun was streaming brightly. He, himself, lay upon
a heap of straw. At the opposite side of the room was a similar
heap, and upon this a man was sitting, leaning against the wall,
with his chin dropped on his chest.

The thought of escape at once occurred to Charlie. Could he reach
the window, which was without glass and a mere opening in the wall,
without awakening his guard, he could drop out and make for Allan
Ramsay's. As soon as he tried to move, however, he found that this
idea was for the present impracticable. He felt too weak to lift
his head, and, at the slight rustle of straw caused by the attempt,
the man opposite roused himself with a start.

He gave another slight movement, and then again lay quiet with his
eyes closed. The man came across and spoke, but he made no sign.
Some more wine was poured between his lips, then the man returned
to his former position, and all was quiet.

As he lay thinking his position over, Charlie thought that those
who had set his assailants to their work must have had two
objects--the one to put a stop to his efforts to organize an
agitation against the king, the second to find out, by questioning
him, who were those with whom he had been in communication, in
order that they might be arrested, and their property confiscated.
He could see no other reason why his life should be spared by his
assailants, for it would have been easier, and far less
troublesome, to run him through as he lay senseless on the ground,
than to carry him off and keep him a prisoner.

This idea confirmed the suspicion he had first entertained, that
the assault had been organized by Ben Soloman. He could have no
real interest in the king, for he was ready to join in the
organization against him, could he have obtained his own terms. He
might intend to gain credit with the royal party, by claiming to
have stopped a dangerous plot, and at the same time to benefit
himself, by bringing about the expulsion or death of many of his
foreign trade rivals. For this end, the Jew would desire that he
should be taken alive, in order to serve as a witness against the
others.

"He will not get any names from me," he said. "Besides, none of
them have promised to take any active measures against Augustus. I
did not ask them to do so. There is no high treason in trying to
influence public opinion. Still, it is likely enough that the Jew
wants to get me to acknowledge that an insurrection was intended,
and will offer me my freedom, if I will give such testimony. As I
am altogether in his power, the only thing to do is to pretend to
be a great deal worse than I am, and so to gain time, till I am
strong enough to try to get away from this place."

All this was not arrived at, at once, but was the result of
half-dreamy cogitation extending over hours, and interrupted by
short snatches of sleep. He was conscious that, from time to time,
someone came into the room and spoke to his guard; and that, three
or four times, wine was poured between his lips. Once he was raised
up, and fresh cloths, dipped in water, and bandages applied to his
head.

In the evening, two or three men came in, and he believed that he
recognized the voice of one of them as that of Ben Soloman. One of
the men addressed him suddenly and sharply in Swedish.

"How are you feeling? Are you in pain? We have come here to give
you your freedom."

Charlie was on his guard, and remained silent, with his eyes
closed.

"It is of no use," Ben Soloman said in his own language. "The
fellow is still insensible. The clumsy fool who hit him would fare
badly, if I knew who he was. I said that he was to be knocked down,
silenced, and brought here; and here he is, of no more use than if
he were dead."

"He will doubtless come round, in time," another said in an
apologetic tone. "We will bring him round, if you will have
patience, Ben Soloman."

"Well, well," the other replied, "a few days will make no
difference; but mind that he is well guarded, directly he begins to
gain strength. I will get him out of the town, as soon as I can.
Allan Ramsay has laid a complaint, before the mayor, that his
countryman has been attacked by a band of ruffians, and has been
either killed or carried off by them. It is a pity that servant of
his was not killed."

"We thought he was dead. Two or three of us looked at him, and I
could have sworn that life was out of him."

"Well, then, you would have sworn what was not true, for he managed
to crawl to Ramsay's, where he lies, I am told, dangerously ill,
and an official has been to him, to obtain his account of the fray.
It was a bungled business, from beginning to end."

"We could not have calculated on the fellows making such a
resistance," the other grumbled. "This one seemed but a lad, and
yet he killed three of our party, and the other killed one. A nice
business that; and you will have to pay their friends well, Ben
Soloman, for I can tell you there is grumbling at the price, which
they say was not enough for the work, which you told them would be
easy."

"It ought to have been," the Jew said sullenly. "Fifteen or twenty
men to overpower a lad. What could have been more easy? However, I
will do something for the friends of the men who were fools enough
to get themselves killed, but if I hear any grumbling from the
others, it will be worse for them; there is not one I could not lay
by the heels in jail.

"Well, as to this young fellow, I shall not come again. I do not
want to be noticed coming here. Keep a shrewd lookout after him."

"There is no fear about that," the man said. "It will be long ere
he is strong enough to walk."

"When he gets better, we will have him taken away to a safe place
outside the town. Once there, I can make him say what I like."

"And if he does not get well?"

"In that case, we will take away his body and bury it outside. I
will see to that myself."

"I understand," the other sneered. "You don't want anyone to know
where it is buried, so as to be able to bring it up against you."

"You attend to your own business," the Jew said angrily. "Why
should I care about what they say? At any rate, there are some
matters between you and me, and there is no fear of your speaking."

"Not until the time comes when I may think it worth my while to
throw away my life, in order to secure your death, Ben Soloman."

"It is of no use talking like that," the Jew said quietly. "We are
useful to each other. I have saved your life from the gibbet, you
have done the work I required. Between us, it is worse than
childish to threaten in the present matter. I do not doubt that you
will do your business well, and you know that you will be well paid
for it; what can either of us require more?"

Charlie would have given a good deal to understand the
conversation, and he would have been specially glad to learn that
Stanislas had escaped with his life; for he had taken a great fancy
to the young Lithuanian, and was grieved by the thought that he had
probably lost his life in his defence.

Three days passed. His head was now clear, and his appetite
returning, and he found, by quietly moving at night, when his guard
was asleep, that he was gaining strength. The third day, there was
some talking among several men who entered the room; then he was
lifted, wrapt up in some cloths, and put into a large box. He felt
this being hoisted up, it was carried downstairs, and then placed
on something. A minute afterwards he felt a vibration, followed by
a swaying and bumping, and guessed at once that he was on a cart,
and was being removed, either to prison or to some other place of
confinement. The latter he considered more probable.

The journey was a long one. He had no means of judging time, but he
thought that it must have lasted two or three hours. Then the
rumbling ceased, the box was lifted down, and carried a short
distance, then the lid was opened and he was again laid down on
some straw. He heard the sound of cart wheels, and knew that the
vehicle on which he had been brought was being driven away.

He was now so hungry that he felt he could no longer maintain the
appearance of insensibility. Two men were talking in the room, and
when, for a moment, their conversation ceased, he gave a low groan,
and then opened his eyes. They came at once to his bedside, with
exclamations of satisfaction.

"How do you feel?" one asked in Swedish.

"I do not know," he said in a low tone. "Where am I, how did I get
here?"

"You are with friends. Never mind how you got here. You have been
ill, but you will soon get well again. Someone hit you on the head,
and we picked you up and brought you here."

"I am weak and faint," Charlie murmured. "Have you any food?"

"You shall have some food, directly it is prepared. Take a drink of
wine, and see if you can eat a bit of bread while the broth is
preparing."

Charlie drank a little of the wine that was put to his lips, and
then broke up the bread, and ate it crumb by crumb, as if it were a
great effort to do so, although he had difficulty in restraining
himself from eating it voraciously. When he had finished it, he
closed his eyes again, as if sleep had overpowered him. An hour
later, there was a touch on his shoulder.

"Here is some broth, young fellow. Wake up and drink that, it will
do you good."

Charlie, as before, slowly sipped down the broth, and then really
fell asleep, for the jolting had fatigued him terribly.

It was evening when he awoke. Two men were sitting at a blazing
fire. When he moved, one of them brought him another basin of
broth, and fed him with a spoon.

Charlie had been long enough in the country to know, by the
appearance of the room, that he was in a peasant's hut. He wondered
why he had been brought there, and concluded that it must be
because Allan Ramsay had set so stringent a search on foot in the
city, that they considered it necessary to take him away.

"They will not keep me here long," he said to himself. "I am sure
that I could walk now, and, in another two or three days, I shall
be strong enough to go some distance. That soup has done me a deal
of good. I believe half my weakness is from hunger."

He no longer kept up the appearance of unconsciousness, and, in the
morning, put various questions, to the man who spoke Swedish, as to
what had happened and how he came to be there. This man was
evidently, from his dress and appearance, a Jew, while the other
was as unmistakably a peasant, a rough powerfully-built man with an
evil face. The Jew gave him but little information, but told him
that in a day or two, when he was strong enough to listen, a friend
would come who would tell him all about it.

On the third day, he heard the sound of an approaching horse, and
was not surprised when, after a conversation in a low tone outside,
