drunk two hours agone!'

'Ah that a' be!' came in chorus from the yokels.

The attorney's clerk was put to a stand.  He could not think of force;
there was little sign of martial ardour about the landlord, and the
peasants were indifferent--they only listened, and gaped, and now
scratched a head, and now would get a light to their pipes from the
embers on the hearth.  On the other hand, the Major and I put a bold
front on the business and defied him, not without some ground of law.  In
this state of matters he proposed I should go along with him to one
Squire Merton, a great man of the neighbourhood, who was in the
commission of the peace, the end of his avenue but three lanes away.  I
told him I would not stir a foot for him if it were to save his soul.
Next he proposed I should stay all night where I was, and the constable
could see to my affair in the morning, when he was sober.  I replied I
should go when and where I pleased; that we were lawful travellers in the
fear of God and the king, and I for one would suffer myself to be stayed
by nobody.  At the same time, I was thinking the matter had lasted
altogether too long, and I determined to bring it to an end at once.

'See here,' said I, getting up, for till now I had remained carelessly
seated, 'there's only one way to decide a thing like this--only one way
that's right _English_--and that's man to man.  Take off your coat, sir,
and these gentlemen shall see fair play.'  At this there came a look in
his eye that I could not mistake.  His education had been neglected in
one essential and eminently British particular: he could not box.  No
more could I, you may say; but then I had the more impudence--and I had
made the proposal.

'He says I'm no Englishman, but the proof of the pudding is the eating of
it,' I continued.  And here I stripped my coat and fell into the proper
attitude, which was just about all I knew of this barbarian art.  'Why,
sir, you seem to me to hang back a little,' said I.  'Come, I'll meet
you; I'll give you an appetiser--though hang me if I can understand the
man that wants any enticement to hold up his hands.'  I drew a bank-note
out of my fob and tossed it to the landlord.  'There are the stakes,'
said I.  'I'll fight you for first blood, since you seem to make so much
work about it.  If you tap my claret first, there are five guineas for
you, and I'll go with you to any squire you choose to mention.  If I tap
yours, you'll perhaps let on that I'm the better man, and allow me to go
about my lawful business at my own time and convenience, by God; is that
fair, my lads?' says I, appealing to the company.

'Ay, ay,' said the chorus of chawbacons; 'he can't say no fairer nor
that, he can't.  Take off thy coat master!'

The limb of the law was now on the wrong side of public opinion, and,
what heartened me to go on, the position was rapidly changing in our
favour.  Already the Major was paying his shot to the very indifferent
landlord, and I could see the white face of King at the back-door, making
signals of haste.

'Oho!' quoth my enemy, 'you are as full of doubles as a fox, are you not?
But I see through you; I see through and through you.  You would change
the venue, would you?'

'I may be transparent, sir,' says I, 'but if you'll do me the favour to
stand up, you'll find I can hit dam hard.'

'Which is a point, if you will observe, that I had never called in
question,' said he.  'Why, you ignorant clowns,' he proceeded, addressing
the company, 'can't you see the fellow's gulling you before your eyes?
Can't you see that he has changed the point upon me?  I say he's a French
prisoner, and he answers that he can box!  What has that to do with it?
I would not wonder but what he can dance, too--they're all dancing
masters over there.  I say, and I stick to it, that he's a Frenchy.  He
says he isn't.  Well then, let him out with his papers, if he has them!
If he had, would he not show them?  If he had, would he not jump at the
idea of going to Squire Merton, a man you all know?  Now, you are all
plain, straightforward Bedfordshire men, and I wouldn't ask a better lot
to appeal to.  You're not the kind to be talked over with any French
gammon, and he's plenty of that.  But let me tell him, he can take his
pigs to another market; they'll never do here; they'll never go down in
Bedfordshire.  Why! look at the man!  Look at his feet!  Has anybody got
a foot in the room like that?  See how he stands! do any of you fellows
stand like that?  Does the landlord, there?  Why, he has Frenchman wrote
all over him, as big as a sign-post!'

This was all very well; and in a different scene I might even have been
gratified by his remarks; but I saw clearly, if I were to allow him to
talk, he might turn the tables on me altogether.  He might not be much of
a hand at boxing; but I was much mistaken, or he had studied forensic
eloquence in a good school.  In this predicament I could think of nothing
more ingenious than to burst out of the house, under the pretext of an
ungovernable rage.  It was certainly not very ingenious--it was
elementary, but I had no choice.

'You white-livered dog!' I broke out.  'Do you dare to tell me you're an
Englishman, and won't fight?  But I'll stand no more of this!  I leave
this place, where I've been insulted!  Here! what's to pay?  Pay
yourself!' I went on, offering the landlord a handful of silver, 'and
give me back my bank-note!'

The landlord, following his usual policy of obliging everybody, offered
no opposition to my design.  The position of my adversary was now
thoroughly bad.  He had lost my two companions.  He was on the point of
losing me also.  There was plainly no hope of arousing the company to
help; and watching him with a corner of my eye, I saw him hesitate for a
moment.  The next, he had taken down his hat and his wig, which was of
black horsehair; and I saw him draw from behind the settle a vast hooded
great-coat and a small valise.  'The devil!' thought I: 'is the rascal
going to follow me?'

I was scarce clear of the inn before the limb of the law was at my heels.
I saw his face plain in the moonlight; and the most resolute purpose
showed in it, along with an unmoved composure.  A chill went over me.
'This is no common adventure,' thinks I to myself.  'You have got hold of
a man of character, St. Ives!  A bite-hard, a bull-dog, a weasel is on
your trail; and how are you to throw him off?'  Who was he?  By some of
his expressions I judged he was a hanger-on of courts.  But in what
character had he followed the assizes?  As a simple spectator, as a
lawyer's clerk, as a criminal himself, or--last and worst supposition--as
a Bow-street 'runner'?

The cart would wait for me, perhaps, half a mile down our onward road,
which I was already following.  And I told myself that in a few minutes'
walking, Bow-street runner or not, I should have him at my mercy.  And
then reflection came to me in time.  Of all things, one was out of the
question.  Upon no account must this obtrusive fellow see the cart.
Until I had killed or shook him off, I was quite divorced from my
companions--alone, in the midst of England, on a frosty by-way leading
whither I knew not, with a sleuth-hound at my heels, and never a friend
but the holly-stick!

We came at the same time to a crossing of lanes.  The branch to the left
was overhung with trees, deeply sunken and dark.  Not a ray of moonlight
penetrated its recesses; and I took it at a venture.  The wretch followed
my example in silence; and for some time we crunched together over frozen
pools without a word.  Then he found his voice, with a chuckle.

'This is not the way to Mr. Merton's,' said he.

'No?' said I. 'It is mine, however.'

'And therefore mine,' said he.

Again we fell silent; and we may thus have covered half a mile before the
lane, taking a sudden turn, brought us forth again into the moonshine.
With his hooded great-coat on his back, his valise in his hand, his black
wig adjusted, and footing it on the ice with a sort of sober doggedness
of manner, my enemy was changed almost beyond recognition: changed in
everything but a certain dry, polemical, pedantic air, that spoke of a
sedentary occupation and high stools.  I observed, too, that his valise
was heavy; and, putting this and that together, hit upon a plan.

'A seasonable night, sir,' said I.  'What do you say to a bit of running?
The frost has me by the toes.'

'With all the pleasure in life,' says he.

His voice seemed well assured, which pleased me little.  However, there
was nothing else to try, except violence, for which it would always be
too soon.  I took to my heels accordingly, he after me; and for some time
the slapping of our feet on the hard road might have been heard a mile
away.  He had started a pace behind me, and he finished in the same
position.  For all his extra years and the weight of his valise, he had
not lost a hair's breadth.  The devil might race him for me--I had enough
of it!

And, besides, to run so fast was contrary to my interests.  We could not
run long without arriving somewhere.  At any moment we might turn a
corner and find ourselves at the lodge-gate of some Squire Merton, in the
midst of a village whose constable was sober, or in the hands of a
patrol.  There was no help for it--I must finish with him on the spot, as
long as it was possible.  I looked about me, and the place seemed
suitable; never a light, never a house--nothing but stubble-fields,
fallows, and a few stunted trees.  I stopped and eyed him in the
moonlight with an angry stare.

'Enough of this foolery!' said I.

He had tamed, and now faced me full, very pale, but with no sign of
shrinking.

'I am quite of your opinion,' said he.  'You have tried me at the
running; you can try me next at the high jump.  It will be all the same.
It must end the one way.'

I made my holly whistle about my head.

'I believe you know what way!' said I.  'We are alone, it is night, and I
am wholly resolved.  Are you not frightened?'

'No,' he said, 'not in the smallest.  I do not box, sir; but I am not a
coward, as you may have supposed.  Perhaps it will simplify our relations
if I tell you at the outset that I walk armed.'

Quick as lightning I made a feint at his head; as quickly he gave ground,
and at the same time I saw a pistol glitter in his hand.

'No more of that, Mr. French-Prisoner!' he said.  'It will do me no good
to have your death at my door.'

'Faith, nor me either!' said I; and I lowered my stick and considered the
man, not without a twinkle of admiration.  'You see,' I said, 'there is
one consideration that you appear to overlook: there are a great many
chances that your pistol may miss fire.'

'I have a pair,' he returned.  'Never travel without a brace of barkers.'

'I make you my compliment,' said I.  'You are able to take care of
yourself, and that is a good trait.  But, my good man! let us look at
this matter dispassionately.  You are not a coward, and no more am I; we
are both men of excellent sense; I have good reason, whatever it may be,
to keep my concerns to myself and to walk alone.  Now I put it to you
pointedly, am I likely to stand it?  Am I likely to put up with your
continued and--excuse me--highly impudent _ingerence_ into my private
affairs?'

'Another French word,' says he composedly.

'Oh! damn your French words!' cried I.  'You seem to be a Frenchman
yourself!'

'I have had many opportunities by which I have profited,' he explained.
'Few men are better acquainted with the similarities and differences,
whether of idiom or accent, of the two languages.'

'You are a pompous fellow, too!' said I.

'Oh, I can make distinctions, sir,' says he.  'I can talk with
Bedfordshire peasants; and I can express myself becomingly, I hope, in
the company of a gentleman of education like yourself.'

'If you set up to be a gentleman--' I began.

'Pardon me,' he interrupted: 'I make no such claim.  I only see the
nobility and gentry in the way of business.  I am quite a plain person.'

'For the Lord's sake,' I exclaimed, 'set my mind at rest upon one point.
In the name of mystery, who and what are you?'

'I have no cause to be ashamed of my name, sir,' said he, 'nor yet my
trade.  I am Thomas Dudgeon, at your service, clerk to Mr. Daniel
Romaine, solicitor of London; High Holborn is our address, sir.'

It was only by the ecstasy of the relief that I knew how horribly I had
been frightened.  I flung my stick on the road.

'Romaine?' I cried.  'Daniel Romaine?  An old hunks with a red face and a
big head, and got up like a Quaker?  My dear friend, to my arms!'

'Keep back, I say!' said Dudgeon weakly.

I would not listen to him.  With the end of my own alarm, I felt as if I
must infallibly be at the end of all dangers likewise; as if the pistol
that he held in one hand were no more to be feared than the valise that
he carried with the other, and now put up like a barrier against my
advance.

'Keep back, or I declare I will fire,' he was crying.  'Have a care, for
God's sake!  My pistol--'

He might scream as be pleased.  Willy nilly, I folded him to my breast, I
pressed him there, I kissed his ugly mug as it had never been kissed
before and would never be kissed again; and in the doing so knocked his
wig awry and his hat off.  He bleated in my embrace; so bleats the sheep
in the arms of the butcher.  The whole thing, on looking back, appears
incomparably reckless and absurd; I no better than a madman for offering
to advance on Dudgeon, and he no better than a fool for not shooting me
while I was about it.  But all's well that ends well; or, as the people
in these days kept singing and whistling on the streets:--

    'There's a sweet little cherub that sits up aloft
    And looks out for the life of poor Jack.'

'There!' said I, releasing him a little, but still keeping my hands on
his shoulders, '_je vous ai bel et bien embrasse_--and, as you would say,
there is another French word.'  With his wig over one eye, he looked
incredibly rueful and put out.  'Cheer up, Dudgeon; the ordeal is over,
you shall be embraced no more.  But do, first of all, for God's-sake, put
away your pistol; you handle it as if you were a cockatrice; some time or
other, depend upon it, it will certainly go off.  Here is your hat.  No,
let me put it on square, and the wig before it.  Never suffer any stress
of circumstances to come between you and the duty you owe to yourself.
If you have nobody else to dress for, dress for God!

    'Put your wig straight
    On your bald pate,
    Keep your chin scraped,
    And your figure draped.

Can you match me that?  The whole duty of man in a quatrain!  And remark,
I do not set up to be a professional bard; these are the outpourings of a
_dilettante_.'

'But, my dear sir!' he exclaimed.

'But, my dear sir!' I echoed, 'I will allow no man to interrupt the flow
of my ideas.  Give me your opinion on my quatrain, or I vow we shall have
a quarrel of it.'

'Certainly you are quite an original,' he said.

'Quite,' said I; 'and I believe I have my counterpart before me.'

'Well, for a choice,' says he, smiling, 'and whether for sense or poetry,
give me

    '"Worth makes the man, and want of it the fellow:
    The rest is all but leather and prunello."'

'Oh, but that's not fair--that's Pope!  It's not original, Dudgeon.
Understand me,' said I, wringing his breast-button, 'the first duty of
all poetry is to be mine, sir--mine.  Inspiration now swells in my bosom,
because--to tell you the plain truth, and descend a little in style--I am
devilish relieved at the turn things have taken.  So, I dare say, are you
yourself, Dudgeon, if you would only allow it.  And _a propos_, let me
ask you a home question.  Between friends, have you ever fired that
pistol?'

'Why, yes, sir,' he replied.  'Twice--at hedgesparrows.'

'And you would have fired at me, you bloody-minded man?' I cried.

'If you go to that, you seemed mighty reckless with your stick,' said
Dudgeon.

'Did I indeed?  Well, well, 'tis all past history; ancient as King
Pharamond--which is another French word, if you cared to accumulate more
evidence,' says I.  'But happily we are now the best of friends, and have
all our interests in common.'

'You go a little too fast, if you'll excuse me, Mr. ---: I do not know
your name, that I am aware,' said Dudgeon.

'No, to be sure!' said I.  'Never heard of it!'

'A word of explanation--' he began.

'No, Dudgeon!' I interrupted.  'Be practical; I know what you want, and
the name of it is supper.  _Rien ne creuse comme l'emotion_.  I am hungry
myself, and yet I am more accustomed to warlike palpitations than you,
who are but a hunter of hedgesparrows.  Let me look at your face
critically: your bill of fare is three slices of cold rare roast beef, a
Welsh rabbit, a pot of stout, and a glass or two of sound tawny port, old
in bottle--the right milk of Englishmen.'  Methought there seemed a
brightening in his eye and a melting about his mouth at this enumeration.

'The night is young,' I continued; 'not much past eleven, for a wager.
Where can we find a good inn?  And remark that I say _good_, for the port
must be up to the occasion--not a headache in a pipe of it.'

'Really, sir,' he said, smiling a little, 'you have a way of carrying
things--'

'Will nothing make you stick to the subject?' I cried; 'you have the most
irrelevant mind!  How do you expect to rise in your profession?  The
inn?'

'Well, I will say you are a facetious gentleman!' said he.  'You must
have your way, I see.  We are not three miles from Bedford by this very
road.'

'Done!' cried I.  'Bedford be it!'

I tucked his arm under mine, possessed myself of the valise, and walked
him off unresisting.  Presently we came to an open piece of country lying
a thought downhill.  The road was smooth and free of ice, the moonshine
thin and bright over the meadows and the leafless trees.  I was now
honestly done with the purgatory of the covered cart; I was close to my
great-uncle's; I had no more fear of Mr. Dudgeon; which were all grounds
enough for jollity.  And I was aware, besides, of us two as of a pair of
