"I will not forget you, lad. Trust me, and when you hear of my
return, fail not to send a reminder, and to claim a place in my
next adventure."

Ned Hearne, delighted at the assurance, ran off at full speed to
the cottage where his father resided, at the end of the village.
The dominie, who was an old man, wore the huge tortoise-shell
rimmed spectacles of the time.

"Wet again," he said, as his son burst into the room in which he
was sitting, studying a Greek tome. "Truly thou earnest the name of
which thou art so proud, Otter, hardly. What tempted thee to go
into the water, on a day like this?"

Ned briefly explained what had taken place. The story was no
unusual one, for this was the third time that he had swum out to
vessels on the rocks between Westport and Plymouth. Then he related
to his father how Captain Francis Drake had spoken to him, and
praised him, and how he had promised that, on his next trip to the
West Indies, he would take him with him.

"I would not have you count too much upon that," the dominie said,
dryly. "It is like, indeed, that he may never come back from this
hare-brain adventure; and if he brings home his skin safe, he will,
methinks, have had enough of burning in the sun, and fighting the
Spaniards."

"But hath he not already made two or three voyages thither,
Father?" the boy asked.

"That is true enough," said his father; "but from what I gather,
these were mere trips to spy out the land. This affair on which he
starts now will be, I wot, a very different matter."

"How is it, Father," the boy said on the following morning,
resuming the conversation from the point which they were at when he
went up to change his wet clothes, the day before, "that when
England is at peace with Spain, our sailors and the Spanish do
fight bloodily, in the West Indies?"

"That, my son, is a point upon which the Roman law telleth us
nothing. I have, in my shelves, some very learned treatises on war;
but in none do I find mention of a state of things in which two
powers, at peace at home, do fight desperately at the extreme end
of the earth."

"But, Father, do you think it not lawful to kill the Spaniard, and
to take the treasures which he robbeth from the poor heathen of the
West?"

"I know not about lawful, my son, but I see no warrant whatsoever
for it; and as for heathen, indeed, it appears to me that the
attacks upon him do touch, very closely, upon piracy upon the high
seas. However, as the country in general appeareth to approve of
it, and as it is said that the queen's most gracious majesty doth
gladly hear of the beating of the Spaniards, in those seas, it
becometh not me to question the rights of the case."

"At any rate, Father, you would not object when the time comes for
me to sail with Mr. Francis Drake?"

"No, my boy; thou hast never shown any aptitude whatever for
learning. Thou canst read and write, but beyond that thy knowledge
runneth not. Your mind seems to be set on the water, and when you
are not in it you are on it. Therefore it appears, to me, to be
flying in the face of Providence to try to keep you on shore. Had
your poor mother lived, it would have been a different thing. Her
mind was set upon your becoming a clerk; but there, one might as
well try to make a silk purse from the ear of a sow. But I tell you
again, count not too much upon this promise. It may be years before
Mr. Francis Drake may be in a position to keep it."

Had Ned Hearne watched for Captain Drake's second voyage, he would,
indeed, as his father had said, have waited long. Three days after
the conversation, however, a horseman from Plymouth rode into the
little village, and inquired for the house of Master Hearne. Being
directed thither, he rode up in haste to the gate.

"Here is a letter!" he cried, "for the son of the schoolmaster, who
goes by the name of the Otter."

"I am he," Ned cried. "What is it, and who can have written to me?"

"It is a letter from His Honor, the Worshipful Mr. Francis Drake."

Seizing the letter, Ned broke the seal, read a few lines, threw his
cap into the air with a shout of joy, and rushed in to his father.

"Father," he said, "Captain Drake has written to acquaint me that
one of the boys in his ship has been taken ill, and cannot go; and
that it has pleased him to appoint me to go in his place; and that
I am to be at Plymouth in three days, at the utmost, bringing with
me what gear I may require for the expedition."

The schoolmaster was a little taken aback at this sudden prospect
of departure, but he had always been wholly indulgent to his son,
and it was not in his nature to refuse to allow him to avail
himself of an opportunity which appeared to be an excellent one.
The danger of these expeditions was, no doubt, very great; but the
spoils were in proportion, and there was not a boy or man of the
seafaring population of Devon who would not gladly have gone with
the adventurous captains.




Chapter 2: Friends and Foes.



Three days after the receipt of the letter, Ned Hearne stood with
his bundle on the quay at Plymouth. Near him lay a large rowboat
from the ships, waiting to take off the last comers. A little way
behind, Captain Francis Drake and his brother, Captain John Drake,
talked with the notable people of Plymouth, who had come down to
bid them farewell; the more since this was a holiday, being Whitsun
Eve, the 24th May, and all in the town who could spare time had
made their way down to the Hove to watch the departure of the
expedition; for none could say how famous this might become, or how
great deeds would be accomplished by the two little craft lying
there. Each looker on thought to himself that it might be that, to
the end of his life, he should tell his children and his children's
children, with pride, "I saw Mr. Drake start for his great voyage."

Small, indeed, did the fleet appear, in comparison to the work
which it had to do. It was composed of but two vessels. The first,
the Pacha, of seventy tons, carrying forty-seven men and boys, was
commanded by Captain Francis Drake himself. By her side was the
Swanne, of twenty-five tons, carrying twenty-six men and boys, and
commanded by Captain John Drake. This was truly but a small affair
to undertake so great a voyage.

In those days the Spaniards were masters of the whole of South
America, and of the Isles of the West Indies. They had many very
large towns full of troops, and great fleets armed to carry the
treasure which was collected there to Spain. It did seem almost
like an act of madness that two vessels, which by the side of those
of the Spaniards were mere cockleshells, manned in all by less than
eighty men, should attempt to enter a region where they would be
regarded, and rightly, as enemies, and where the hand of every man
would be against them.

Captain Drake and his men thought little of these things. The
success which had attended their predecessors had inspired the
English sailors with a belief in their own invincibility, when
opposed to the Spaniards. They looked, to a certain extent, upon
their mission as a crusade. In those days England had a horror of
Popery, and Spain was the mainstay and supporter of this religion.
The escape which England had had of having Popery forced upon it,
during the reign of Mary, by her spouse, Philip of Spain, had been
a narrow one; and even now, it was by no means certain that Spain
would not, sooner or later, endeavor to carry out the pretensions
of the late queen's husband. Then, too, terrible tales had come of
the sufferings of the Indians at the hands of the Spaniards; and it
was certain that the English sailors who had fallen into the hands
of Spain had been put to death, with horrible cruelty. Thus, then,
the English sailors regarded the Spaniards as the enemy of their
country, as the enemy of their religion, and as the enemy of
humanity. Besides which, it cannot be denied that they viewed them
as rich men, well worth plundering; and although, when it came to
fighting, it is probable that hatred overbore the thought of gain,
it is certain that the desire for gold was, in itself, the main
incentive to those who sailed upon these expeditions.

Amid the cheers of the townsfolk the boats pushed off, Mr. Francis
Drake and his brother waving their plumed hats to the burghers of
Plymouth, and the sailors giving a hurrah, as they bent to the
oars. Ned Hearne, who had received a kind word of greeting from Mr.
Drake, had taken his place in the bow of one of the boats, lost in
admiration at the scene; and at the thought that he was one of this
band of heroes, who were going out to fight the Spaniards, and to
return laden with countless treasure wrested from them. At the
thought his eyes sparkled, his blood seemed to dance through his
veins.

The western main, in those days, was a name almost of enchantment.
Such strange tales had been brought home, by the voyagers who had
navigated those seas, of the wonderful trees, the bright birds, the
beauties of nature, the gold and silver, and the abundance of all
precious things, that it was the dream of every youngster on the
seaboard some day to penetrate to these charmed regions. A week
since, and the realization of the dream had appeared beyond his
wildest hopes. Now, almost with the suddenness of a transformation
scene, this had changed; and there was he on his way out to the
Swanne, a part of the expedition itself. It was to the Swanne that
he had been allotted, for it was on board that ship that the boy
whose place he was to take had been seized with illness.

Although but twenty-five tons in burden, the Swanne made a far
greater show than would be made by a craft of that size in the
present day. The ships of the time lay but lightly on the water,
while their hulls were carried up to a prodigious height; and it is
not too much to say that the portion of the Swanne, above water,
was fully as large as the hull which we see of a merchantman of
four times her tonnage. Still, even so, it was but a tiny craft to
cross the Atlantic, and former voyages had been generally made in
larger ships.

Mr. Francis Drake, however, knew what he was about. He considered
that large ships required large crews to be left behind to defend
them, that they drew more water, and were less handy; and he
resolved, in this expedition, he would do no small part of his work
with pinnaces and rowboats; and of these he had three fine craft,
now lying in pieces in his hold, ready to fit together on arriving
in the Indies.

As they neared the ships the two boats separated, and Ned soon
found himself alongside of the Swanne. A ladder hung at her side,
and up this Ned followed his captain; for in those days the strict
etiquette that the highest goes last had not been instituted.

"Master Holyoake," said Mr. John Drake, to a big and
powerful-looking man standing near, "this is the new lad, whose
skill in swimming, and whose courage, I told you of yesternight. He
will, I doubt not, be found as willing as he is brave; and I trust
that you will put him in the way of learning his business as a
sailor. It is his first voyage. He comes on board a green hand, but
I doubt not that, ere the voyage be finished, he will have become a
smart young sailor."

"I will put him through," John Holyoake, sailing master of the
ship, replied; for in those days the sailing master was the
navigator of the ship, and the captain was as often as not a
soldier, who knew nothing whatever about seamanship. The one sailed
the ship, the other fought it; and the admirals were, in those
days, more frequently known as generals, and held that position on
shore.

As Ned looked round the deck, he thought that he had never seen a
finer set of sailors. All were picked men, hardy and experienced,
and for the most part young. Some had made previous voyages to the
West Indies, but the greater portion were new to that country. They
looked the men on whom a captain could rely, to the last. Tall and
stalwart, bronzed with the sun, and with a reckless and fearless
expression about them, which boded ill to any foes upon whom they
might fall.

Although Ned had never been to sea on a long voyage, he had sailed
too often in the fishing boats of his native village to have any
qualm of seasickness, or to feel in any degree like a new hand. He
was, therefore, at once assigned to a place and duty.

An hour later the admiral, as Mr. Francis Drake was called, fired a
gun, the two vessels hoisted their broad sails and turned their
heads from shore, and the crews of both ships gave a parting cheer,
as they turned their faces to the south.

As Ned was not in the slightest degree either homesick or seasick,
he at once fell to work, laughing and joking with the other boys,
of whom there were three on board. He found that their duties
consisted of bearing messages, of hauling any rope to which they
were told to fix themselves, and in receiving, with as good a face
as might be, the various orders, to say nothing of the various
kicks, which might be bestowed upon them by all on board. At the
same time their cheerful countenances showed that these things
which, when told, sounded a little terrible, were in truth in no
way serious.

Ned was first shown where he was to sling his hammock, and how;
where he was to get his food; and under whose orders he was
specially to consider himself; the master, for the present, taking
him under his own charge. For the next ten days, as the vessel
sailed calmly along, with a favoring wind, Ned had learned all the
names of the ropes and sails, and their uses; could climb aloft,
and do his share of the work of the ship; and if not yet a skilled
sailor, was at least on the high road to become one. The master was
pleased at his willingness and eagerness to oblige, and he soon
became a great favorite of his.

Between the four boys on the ship a good feeling existed. All had
been chosen as a special favor, upon the recommendation of one or
other of those in authority. Each of them had made up his mind
that, one of these days, he, too, would command an expedition to
the West Indies. Each thought of the glory which he would attain;
and although, in the hearts of many of the elder men in the
expedition, the substantial benefits to be reaped stood higher than
any ideas of glory or honor; to the lads, at least, pecuniary gain
exercised no inducement whatever. They burned to see the strange
country, and to gain some of the credit and glory which would, if
the voyage was successful, attach to each member of the crew. All
were full of fun, and took what came to them, in the way of work,
so good temperedly and cheerfully, that the men soon ceased to give
them work for work's sake.

They were, too, a strong and well-built group of boys. Ned was by a
full year the youngest, and by nigh a head the shortest of them;
but his broad shoulders and sturdy build, and the strength acquired
by long practice in swimming and rowing, made him their equal.

There were, however, no quarrels among them, and their strength
they agreed to use in alliance, if need be, should any of the crew
make a dead set at one or other of them; for even in an expedition
like this there must be some brutal, as well as many brave men.
There were assuredly two or three, at least, of those on board the
Swanne who might well be called brutal. They were for the most part
old hands, who had lived on board ship half their lives, had taken
part in the slave traffic of Captain Hawkins, and in the
buccaneering exploits of the earlier commanders. To them the voyage
was one in which the lust of gold was the sole stimulant; and,
accustomed to deeds of bloodshed, what feelings they ever had had
become utterly blunted, and they needed but the power to become
despotic and brutal masters.

The chief among these was Giles Taunton, the armorer He was a
swarthy ruffian, who hid, beneath the guise of a jovial bonhomie, a
cruel and unfeeling nature. He was ever ready to cuff and beat the
boys, on the smallest provocation.

They soon gathered together, in a sort of defensive league, against
their common oppressors. All four were high-spirited lads. The
other three, indeed, were sons of men of substance in Devon, whose
fathers had lent funds to Captain Drake for the carrying out of his
great enterprise. They therefore looked but ill on the kicks and
curses which, occasionally, fell to their lot.

One day they gathered together round the bowsprit, and talked over
what they should do. Gerald Summers, the eldest of the party,
proposed that they should go in a body to Captain Drake, and
complain of the tyranny to which they were subject. After some
talk, however, all agreed that such a course as this would lower
them in the estimation of the men, and that it would be better to
put up with the ill treatment than, to get the name of tell tales.

Ned then said to the others:

"It seems to me that, if we do but hold together, we need not be
afraid of this big bully. If we all declare to each other and swear
that, the first time he strikes one of us, we will all set upon
him; my faith on it, we shall be able to master him, big as he is.
We are all of good size, and in two years will think ourselves men;
therefore it would be shame, indeed, if the four of us could not
master one, however big and sturdy he may be."

After much consultation, it was agreed that this course should be
adopted; and the next day, as Reuben Gale was passing by Giles, he
turned round and struck him on the head with a broom. The boy gave
a long whistle, and in a moment, to the astonishment of the
armorer, the other three lads rushed up, and at once assailed him
with fury. Astonished at such an attack, he struck out at them with
many strange oaths. Gerald he knocked down, but Ned leaped on his
back from behind, and the other two, closing with him, rolled him
on to the deck; then, despite of his efforts, they pummeled him
until his face was swollen and bruised, and his eyes nearly closed.

Some of the men of his own sort, standing by, would fain have
interfered; but the better disposed of the crew, who had seen, with
disgust, the conduct of the armorer and his mates to the boys, held
them back, and said that none should come between.

Just as the boys drew off, and allowed the furious armorer to rise
to his feet, Captain John Drake, attracted by the unusual noise,
came from his cabin.

"What is this?" he asked.

"These young wild cats have leapt upon me," said Giles Taunton
furiously, "and have beaten me nigh to death. But I will have my
turn. They will see, and bitterly shall they have cause to regret
what they have done."

"We have been driven almost weary of our lives, sir, with the foul
and rough conduct of this man, and of some of his mates," Gerald
said. "We did not like to come to tell you of it, and to gain the
name of carry tales; but we had resolved among ourselves at last
that, whoever struck one of us, the whole should set upon him.
Today we have carried it out, and we have shown Giles Taunton that
we are more than a match for one man, at any rate."

"Four good-sized dogs, if they are well managed," said Captain John
Drake, "will pull down a lion; and the best thing that the lion can
do is to leave them alone.

"I am sorry to hear, Master Taunton, that you have chosen to
mistreat these lads; who are, indeed, the sons of worthy men, and
are not the common kind of ship boys. I am sure that my brother
would not brook such conduct, and I warn you that, if any complaint
again on this head reaches me, I shall lay it before him."

With angry mutterings, the armorer went below.

"We have earned a bitter foe," Ned said to his friends, "and we had
best keep our eyes well open. There is very little of the lion
about Master Taunton. He is strong, indeed; but if it be true that
the lion has a noble heart, and fights his foes openly, methinks he
resembles rather the tiger, who is prone to leap suddenly upon his
enemies."

"Yes, indeed, he looked dark enough," Gerald said, "as he went
below; and if looks could have killed us, we should not be standing
here alive, at present."

"It is not force that we need fear now, but that he will do us some
foul turn; at all events, we are now forewarned, and if he plays us
a scurvy trick it will be our own faults."

For several days the voyage went on quietly, and without adventure.
They passed at a distance the Portuguese Isle of Madeira, lying
like a cloud on the sea. The weather now had become warm and very
fair, a steady wind blew, and the two barks kept along at a good
pace.

All sorts of creatures, strange to the boys, were to be seen in the
