The Project Gutenberg EBook of Deathworld, by Harry Harrison

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Deathworld

Author: Harry Harrison

Illustrator: H. R. van Dongen

Release Date: March 17, 2009 [EBook #28346]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DEATHWORLD ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Bruce Albrecht, Stephen Blundell
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net









[Illustration]


DEATHWORLD

BY HARRY HARRISON

Illustrated by van Dongen


    _Some planet in the galaxy must--by definition--be the toughest,
    meanest, nastiest of all. If Pyrrus wasn't it ... it was an awfully
    good approximation!_


Jason dinAlt sprawled in soft luxury on the couch, a large frosty stein
held limply in one hand. His other hand rested casually on a pillow. The
gun behind the pillow was within easy reach of his fingers. In his line
of work he never took chances.

It was all highly suspicious. Jason didn't know a soul on this planet.
Yet the card sent by service tube from the hotel desk had read: _Kerk
Pyrrus would like to see Jason dinAlt_. Blunt and to the point. He
signaled the desk to send the man up, then lowered his fingers a bit
until they brushed the gun butt. The door slid open and his visitor
stepped through.

_A retired wrestler._ That was Jason's first thought. Kerk Pyrrus was a
gray-haired rock of a man. His body seemingly chiseled out of flat slabs
of muscle. Then Jason saw the gun strapped to the inside of the other
man's forearm, and he let his fingers drop casually behind the pillow.

"I'd appreciate it," Jason said, "if you'd take off your gun while
you're in here." The other man stopped and scowled down at the gun as if
he was seeing it for the first time.

"No, I never take it off." He seemed mildly annoyed by the suggestion.

Jason had his fingers on his own gun when he said, "I'm afraid I'll have
to insist. I always feel a little uncomfortable around people who wear
guns." He kept talking to distract attention while he pulled out his
gun. Fast and smooth.

He could have been moving in slow motion for all the difference it made.
Kerk Pyrrus stood rock still while the gun came out, while it swung in
his direction. Not until the very last instant did he act. When he did,
the motion wasn't visible. First his gun was in the arm holster--then it
was aimed between Jason's eyes. It was an ugly, heavy weapon with a
pitted front orifice that showed plenty of use.

And Jason knew if he swung his own weapon up a fraction of an inch more
he would be dead. He dropped his arm carefully and Kerk flipped his own
gun back in the holster with the same ease he had drawn it.

"Now," the stranger said, "if we're through playing, let's get down to
business. I have a proposition for you."

Jason downed a large mouthful from the mug and bridled his temper. He
was fast with a gun--his life had depended on it more than once--and
this was the first time he had been outdrawn. It was the offhand,
unimportant manner it had been done that irritated him.

"I'm not prepared to do business," he said acidly. "I've come to
Cassylia for a vacation, get away from work."

"Let's not fool each other, dinAlt," Kerk said impatiently. "You've
never worked at an honest job in your entire life. You're a professional
gambler and that's why I'm here to see you."

Jason forced down his anger and threw the gun to the other end of the
couch so he wouldn't be tempted to commit suicide. He _had_ hoped no
one knew him on Cassylia and was looking forward to a big kill at the
Casino. He would worry about that later. This weight-lifter type seemed
to know all the answers. Let him plot the course for a while and see
where it led.

"All right, what do you want?"

       *       *       *       *       *

Kerk dropped into a chair that creaked ominously under his weight, and
dug an envelope out of one pocket. He flipped through it quickly and
dropped a handful of gleaming Galactic Exchange notes onto the table.
Jason glanced at them--then sat up suddenly.

"What are they--forgeries?" he asked, holding one up to the light.

"They're real enough," Kerk told him, "I picked them up at the bank.
Exactly twenty-seven bills--or twenty-seven million credits. I want you
to use them as a bankroll when you go to the Casino tonight. Gamble with
them and win."

They looked real enough--and they could be checked. Jason fingered them
thoughtfully while he examined the other man.

"I don't know what you have in mind," he said. "But you realize I can't
make any guarantees. I gamble--but I don't always win ..."

"You gamble--and you win when you want to," Kerk said grimly. "We looked
into that quite carefully before I came to you."

"If you mean to say that I cheat--" Carefully, Jason grabbed his temper
again and held it down. There was no future in getting annoyed.

Kerk continued in the same level voice, ignoring Jason's growing anger.
"Maybe you don't call it cheating, frankly I don't care. As far as I'm
concerned you could have your suit lined with aces and electromagnets in
your boots. As long as you _won_. I'm not here to discuss moral points
with you. I said I had a proposition.

"We have worked hard for that money--but it still isn't enough. To be
precise, we need three billion credits. The only way to get that sum is
by gambling--with these twenty-seven million as bankroll."

"And what do I get out of it?" Jason asked the question coolly, as if
any bit of the fantastic proposition made sense.

"Everything above the three billion you can keep, that should be fair
enough. You're not risking your own money, but you stand to make enough
to keep you for life if you win."

"And if I lose--?"

Kerk thought for a moment, not liking the taste of the idea. "Yes--there
is the chance you might lose, I hadn't thought about that."

He reached a decision. "If you lose--well I suppose that is just a risk
we will have to take. Though I think I would kill you then. The ones who
died to get the twenty-seven million deserve at least that." He said it
quietly, without malice, and it was more of a promise than a threat.

Stamping to his feet Jason refilled his stein and offered one to Kerk
who took it with a nod of thanks. He paced back and forth, unable to
sit. The whole proposition made him angry--yet at the same time had a
fatal fascination. He was a gambler and this talk was like the taste of
drugs to an addict.

Stopping suddenly, he realized that his mind had been made up for some
time. Win or lose--live or die--how could he say no to the chance to
gamble with money like that! He turned suddenly and jabbed his finger at
the big man in the chair.

"I'll do it--you probably knew I would from the time you came in here.
There are some terms of my own, though. I want to know who you are, and
who _they_ are you keep talking about. And where did the money come
from. Is it stolen?"

Kerk drained his own stein and pushed it away from him.

"Stolen money? No, quite the opposite. Two years' work mining and
refining ore to get it. It was mined on Pyrrus and sold here on
Cassylia. You can check on that very easily. I sold it. I'm the Pyrric
ambassador to this planet." He smiled at the thought. "Not that that
means much, I'm ambassador to at least six other planets as well. Comes
in handy when you want to do business."

Jason looked at the muscular man with his gray hair and worn,
military-cut clothes, and decided not to laugh. You heard of strange
things out in the frontier planets and every word could be true. He had
never heard of Pyrrus either, though that didn't mean anything. There
were over thirty-thousand known planets in the inhabited universe.

"I'll check on what you have told me," Jason said. "If it's true, we can
do business. Call me tomorrow--"

"No," Kerk said. "The money has to be won tonight. I've already issued a
check for this twenty-seven million, it will bounce as high as the
Pleiades unless we deposit the money in the morning, so that's our time
limit."

With each moment the whole affair became more fantastic--and more
intriguing for Jason. He looked at his watch. There was still enough
time to find out if Kerk was lying or not.

"All right, we'll do it tonight," he said. "Only I'll have to have one
of those bills to check."

Kerk stood up to go. "Take them all, I won't be seeing you again until
after you've won. I'll be at the Casino of course, but don't recognize
me. It would be much better if they didn't know where your money was
coming from or how much you had."

Then he was gone, after a bone-crushing handclasp that closed on Jason's
hand like vise jaws. Jason was alone with the money. Fanning the bills
out like a hand of cards he stared at their sepia and gold faces, trying
to get the reality through his head. Twenty-seven million credits. What
was to stop him from just walking out the door with them and vanishing.
Nothing really, except his own sense of honor.

Kerk Pyrrus, the man with the same last name as the planet he came
from, was the universe's biggest fool. Or he knew just what he was
doing. From the way the interview had gone the latter seemed the better
bet.

"He _knows_ I would much rather gamble with the money than steal it," he
said wryly.

Slipping a small gun into his waistband holster and pocketing the money
he went out.




II.


The robot teller at the bank just pinged with electronic shock when he
presented one of the bills and flashed a panel that directed him to see
Vice President Wain. Wain was a smooth customer who bugged his eyes and
lost some of his tan when he saw the sheaf of bills.

"You ... wish to deposit these with us?" he asked while his fingers
unconsciously stroked them.

"Not today," Jason said. "They were paid to me as a debt. Would you
please check that they are authentic and change them? I'd like five
hundred thousand credit notes."

Both of his inner chest pockets were packed tight when he left the bank.
The bills were good and he felt like a walking mint. This was the first
time in his entire life that carrying a large sum of money made him
uncomfortable. Waving to a passing helicab he went directly to the
Casino, where he knew he would be safe--for a while.

Cassylia Casino was the playspot of the nearby cluster of star systems.
It was the first time Jason had seen it, though he knew its type well.
He had spent most of his adult life in casinos like this on other
worlds. The decor differed but they were always the same. Gambling and
socialities in public--and behind the scenes all the private vice you
could afford. Theoretically no-limit games, but that was true only up to
a certain point. When the house was really hurt the honest games stopped
being square and the big winner had to watch his step very carefully.
These were the odds Jason dinAlt had played against countless times
before. He was wary but not very concerned.

The dining room was almost empty and the major-domo quickly rushed to
the side of the relaxed stranger in the richly cut clothes. Jason was
lean and dark, looking more like the bored scion of some rich family
than a professional gambler. This appearance was important and he
cultivated it. The cuisine looked good and the cellar turned out to be
wonderful. He had a professional talk with the sommelier while waiting
for the soup, then settled down to enjoy his meal.

He ate leisurely and the large dining room was filled before he was
through. Watching the entertainment over a long cigar killed some more
time. When he finally went to the gaming rooms they were filled and
active.

Moving slowly around the room he dropped a few thousand credits. He
scarcely noticed how he played, giving more attention to the feel of the
games. The play all seemed honest and none of the equipment was rigged.
That could be changed very quickly, he realized. Usually it wasn't
necessary, house percentage was enough to assure a profit.

Once he saw Kerk out of the corner of his eye but he paid him no
attention. The ambassador was losing small sums steadily at
seven-and-silver and seemed to be impatient. Probably waiting for Jason
to begin playing seriously. He smiled and strolled on slowly.

Jason settled on the dice table as he usually did. It was the surest way
to make small winnings. _And if I feel it tonight I can clean this
casino out!_ That was his secret, the power that won for him
steadily--and every once in a while enabled him to make a killing and
move on quickly before the hired thugs came to get the money back.

       *       *       *       *       *

The dice reached him and he threw an eight the hard way. Betting was
light and he didn't push himself, just kept away from the sevens. He
made the point and passed a natural. Then he crapped out and the dice
moved on.

Sitting there, making small automatic bets while the dice went around
the table, he thought about the power. _Funny, after all the years of
work we still don't know much about_ psi. _They can train people a bit,
and improve skills a bit--but that's all._

He was feeling strong tonight, he knew that the money in his pocket gave
him the extra lift that sometimes helped him break through. With his
eyes half closed he picked up the dice--and let his mind gently caress
the pattern of sunken dots. Then they shot out of his hand and he stared
at a seven.

It was there.

Stronger than he had felt it in years. The stiff weight of those
million-credit notes had done it. The world all around was sharp-cut
clear and the dice was completely in his control. He knew to the
tenth-credit how much the other players had in their wallets and was
aware of the cards in the hands of the players behind him.

Slowly, carefully, he built up the stakes.

There was no effort to the dice, they rolled and sat up like trained
dogs. Jason took his time and concentrated on the psychology of the
players and the stick man. It took almost two hours to build his money
on the table to seven hundred thousand credits. Then he caught the stick
man signaling they had a heavy winner. He waited until the hard-eyed man
strolled over to watch the game, then he smiled happily, bet all his
table stakes--and blew it on one roll of the dice. The house man smiled
happily, the stick man relaxed--and out of the corner of his eye Jason
saw Kerk turning a dark purple.

Sweating, pale, his hand trembling ever so slightly, Jason opened the
front of his jacket and pulled out one of the envelopes of new bills.
Breaking the seal with his finger he dropped two of them on the table.

"Could we have a no-limit game?" he asked, "I'd like to--win back some
of my money."

The stick man had trouble controlling his smile now, he glanced across
at the house man who nodded a quick _yes_. They had a sucker and they
meant to clean him. He had been playing from his wallet all evening, now
he was cracking into a sealed envelope to try for what he had lost. A
thick envelope too, and probably not his money. Not that the house cared
in the least. To them money had no loyalties. The play went on with the
Casino in a very relaxed mood.

Which was just the way Jason wanted it. He needed to get as deep into
