
"You!"

"I don't believe you."

"What then have I come for?"

"You've come to interview father about those meteorites."

"Nonsense! That's purely incidental--a mere by-product, you might
say."

"Yes, you might--but I wouldn't advise you to say it to father."

"All right, I won't," he promised, as she led him into the library.

Professor Wentworth rose as they entered and laid aside some
scientific book he had been reading.

A man of medium height and build, he had the same twinkling hazel eyes
as his daughter, though somewhat dimmed from peering at too many stars
for too many years.

"Good evening, Jim," he said. "I've rather been expecting you. What is
on your mind?"

"Seeds! Eggs! Baseballs!" was the reply, "I don't know what. You've
seen the latest television reports, I suppose?" said Jim, noting that
the panel on the receiving cabinet across the room was still lit.

"I've seen some of them. Joan has been keeping an eye on the screen
mostly, however, while I refreshed my mind on the known chemistry of
meteorites. You see, I have a few of those eggs myself, up at the
observatory."

"You have?" cried Jim.

He was certainly on the right track!

"Yes. One of my assistants brought them in this afternoon. Would you
like to see them?"

"I'll say I would!"

"I rather thought you might," the professor smiled. "Come along,
then."

And as Jim turned, he shot a look at Joan, and added:

"You may come too, my dear, if you want."

       *       *       *       *       *

They went out and up the hill to where the great white dome glistened
under the stars, and once inside, Jim Carter of _The New York Press_
was privileged to see two of those strange objects that had turned the
world topsy-turvy.

As the Tokyo dispatch and the Berlin television flash had indicated,
they were orange in color, about the size of baseballs.

"Weird looking eggs, all right!" said Jim. "What are they made of,
anyway?"

"Some element unknown on earth," replied Professor Wentworth.

"But I thought there were only ninety-two elements in the universe and
we'd discovered them all."

"So we have. But don't forget this. We are still trying to split the
atom, which nature has done many times and will doubtless do many
times again. It is merely a matter of altering the valence of the
atoms in an old element; whereupon it shifts its position in the
periodic scale and becomes a new element. Nature accomplishes this
alchemy by means of great heat, which is certainly to be found in a
meteor."

"Particularly when it hits the earth's atmosphere!"

"Yes. And now then, I'd like to have you examine more closely this
pair I have here."

Jim lifted one and noted its peculiar smoothness, its remarkable
weight for its size; he noted, too, that it was veined with concentric
markings, like a series of arabesques or fleurs-de-lis.

The professor lifted the other, calling attention to the fact that the
size and marking of both were identical, as hitherto reported.

"Also, you'll observe that they are slightly warm. In fact, they are
appreciably warmer than when they were first brought in. Curious
behavior, this, for new-laid cometary eggs! More like seeds
germinating than meteorites cooling, wouldn't you say?"

"But good Lord!" Jim was somewhat taken aback to hear this celebrated
scientist apparently commit himself to that wild view. "You don't
really think they're seeds, do you?"

"Why not?"

"But surely no seeds could survive the temperature they hit getting
here."

"No seeds such as we know, true. But what, after all, do we know of
the types of life to be found on other planets?"

"Nothing, of course. Only these didn't come from a planet. They came
from a comet."

"And who can say a comet is not a disintegrated planet? Or suppose we
take the other theory, that it is an eruption from some sun, ours or
another. In any event, who can say no life can survive intense heat?
Certainly these seeds--or call them meteorites, if you choose--came
through the ordeal curiously unscathed."

"Yes, that's true. Funny, too!"

"And another thing is true, Jim. If by chance they _should_ be seeds,
and _should_ germinate, the life they would produce would be something
quite alien to our experience, possibly quite inimical to--"

Professor Wentworth broke off abruptly as a startled cry came from
Joan, and, turning, they saw her standing with eyes fixed in
fascinated horror on the laboratory table.

       *       *       *       *       *

Following her gaze, Jim saw something that caused his own eyes to
bulge. The color of those mysterious orange spheres had suddenly,
ominously heightened. They lay glowing there like balls of fire.

"Good God!" he gasped. "Look, Professor! Do you see that?"

Professor Wentworth did not answer but himself stood gazing spellbound
at the astounding scene.

Even as they looked, the metal table smoldered under the fiery
meteorites and melted, and in a little while the meteorites themselves
sizzled from view. Flames licked up from the floor; dense, suffocating
fumes rose and swirled through the laboratory.

"Quick!" cried Jim, seizing Joan's arm. "Come on, Professor! Never
mind trying to save anything. Let's get out of here!"

They staggered from the laboratory and once outside, plunged down the
hill. It was none too soon.

Behind them, as they fled, came suddenly two deafening explosions.
Looking back, they saw the roof of the observatory tilt crazily; saw
the whole building shatter, and erupt like a volcano.

But that, startling though it was, was not all they saw. For now, as
they stood there speechless, two incredible forms rose phoenix-like
from the flames--two weird monsters, orange against the red, hideous,
nightmarish. They saw them hover a moment above that fiery hell, then
rise on batlike wings to swoop off into the night.

Nor was that all. As the awed trio stood there halfway down
Observatory Hill, following the flight of that pair of demons, other
explosions reached their ears, and, turning to the city below, they
saw vivid jets of red leap up here and there, saw other orange wings
against the night.

While off across the southeast sky, receding fast, spread the Mystery
Comet whose tail had sowed the seeds of this strange life.

       *       *       *       *       *

Still silent, the trio stood gazing upon that appalling scene for some
minutes, while the ruddy shadows of the flaming observatory lit their
tense faces.

