Kalvar Dard chuckled. "Shoot you nothing, you can shoot your own furs.
I've seen your carbine and pistol scores," he began.

           *       *       *       *       *

There was a sudden suck of air, disturbing the papers on the desk. They
all turned to see one of the ship's rocket-boat bays open; a young Air
Force lieutenant named Seldar Glav, who would be staying on Tareesh with
them to pilot their aircraft, emerged from an open airlock.

"Don't tell me you've been to Tareesh and back in that thing," Olva
greeted him.

Seldar Glav grinned at her. "I could have been, at that; we're only
twenty or thirty planetary calibers away, now. We ought to be entering
Tareeshan atmosphere by the middle of the next watch. I was only
checking the boats, to make sure they'll be ready to launch.... Colonel
Kalvar, would you mind stepping over here? There's something I think you
should look at, sir."

Kalvar Dard took one arm from around Analea's waist and lifted the other
from Varnis' shoulder, sliding off the desk. He followed Glav into the
boat-bay; as they went through the airlock, the cheerfulness left the
young lieutenant's face.

"I didn't want to say anything in front of the girls, sir," he began,
"but I've been checking boats to make sure we can make a quick getaway.
Our meteor-security's gone out. The detectors are deader then the Fourth
Dynasty, and the blasters won't synchronize.... Did you hear a big
thump, about a half an hour ago, Colonel?"

"Yes, I thought the ship's labor-crew was shifting heavy equipment in
the hold aft of us. What was it, a meteor-hit?"

"It was. Just aft of Number Ten bulkhead. A meteor about the size of the
nose of that rocket-boat."

Kalvar Dard whistled softly. "Great Gods of Power! The detectors must be
dead, to pass up anything like that.... Why wasn't a boat-stations call
sent out?"

"Captain Vlazil was unwilling to risk starting a panic, sir," the Air
Force officer replied. "Really, I'm exceeding my orders in mentioning it
to you, but I thought you should know...."

Kalvar Dard swore. "It's a blasted pity Captain Vlazil didn't try
thinking! Gold-braided quarter-wit! Maybe his crew might panic, but my
people wouldn't.... I'm going to call the control-room and have it out
with him. By the Ten Gods...!"

       *       *       *       *       *

He ran through the airlock and back into the hold, starting toward the
intercom-phone beside the desk. Before he could reach it, there was
another heavy jar, rocking the entire ship. He, and Seldar Glav, who had
followed him out of the boat-bay, and the six girls, who had risen on
hearing their commander's angry voice, were all tumbled into a heap.
Dard surged to his feet, dragging Kyna up along with him; together, they
helped the others to rise. The ship was suddenly filled with jangling
bells, and the red danger-lights on the ceiling were flashing on and
off.

"Attention! Attention!" the voice of some officer in the control-room
blared out of the intercom-speaker. "The ship has just been hit by a
large meteor! All compartments between bulkheads Twelve and Thirteen are
sealed off. All persons between bulkheads Twelve and Thirteen, put on
oxygen helmets and plug in at the nearest phone connection. Your air is
leaking, and you can't get out, but if you put on oxygen equipment
immediately, you'll be all right. We'll get you out as soon as we can,
and in any case, we are only a few hours out of Tareeshan atmosphere.
All persons in Compartment Twelve, put on...."

Kalvar Dard was swearing evilly. "That does it! That does it for
good!... Anybody else in this compartment, below the living quarter
level?"

"No, we're the only ones," Analea told him.

"The people above have their own boats; they can look after themselves.
You girls, get in that boat, in there. Glav, you and I'll try to warn
the people above...."

There was another jar, heavier than the one which had preceded it,
throwing them all down again. As they rose, a new voice was shouting
over the public-address system:

"_Abandon ship! Abandon ship!_ The converters are backfiring, and
rocket-fuel is leaking back toward the engine-rooms! An explosion is
imminent! Abandon ship, all hands!"

Kalvar Dard and Seldar Glav grabbed the girls and literally threw them
through the hatch, into the rocket-boat. Dard pushed Glav in ahead of
him, then jumped in. Before he had picked himself up, two or three of
the girls were at the hatch, dogging the cover down.

"All right, Glav, blast off!" Dard ordered. "We've got to be at least a
hundred miles from this ship when she blows, or we'll blow with her!"

"Don't I know!" Seldar Glav retorted over his shoulder, racing for the
controls. "Grab hold of something, everybody; I'm going to fire all jets
at once!"

An instant later, while Kalvar Dard and the girls clung to stanchions
and pieces of fixed furniture, the boat shot forward out of its housing.
When Dard's head had cleared, it was in free flight.

"How was that?" Glav yelled. "Everybody all right?" He hesitated for a
moment. "I think I blacked out for about ten seconds."

Kalvar Dard looked the girls over. Eldra was using a corner of her smock
to stanch a nosebleed, and Olva had a bruise over one eye. Otherwise,
everybody was in good shape.

"Wonder we didn't all black out, permanently," he said. "Well, put on
the visiscreens, and let's see what's going on outside. Olva, get on the
radio and try to see if anybody else got away."

"Set course for Tareesh?" Glav asked. "We haven't fuel enough to make it
back to Doorsha."

"I was afraid of that," Dard nodded. "Tareesh it is; northern
hemisphere, daylight side. Try to get about the edge of the temperate
zone, as near water as you can...."




2


They were flung off their feet again, this time backward along the boat.
As they picked themselves up, Seldar Glav was shaking his head, sadly.
"That was the ship going up," he said; "the blast must have caught us
dead astern."

"All right." Kalvar Dard rubbed a bruised forehead. "Set course for
Tareesh, then cut out the jets till we're ready to land. And get the
screens on, somebody; I want to see what's happened."

The screens glowed; then full vision came on. The planet on which they
would land loomed huge before them, its north pole toward them, and its
