"You put five lumps into your own cup, I watched you; oh, dear, it
doesn't matter, of course."

"No, it doesn't matter," said Hester, still reading her letter. "Molly,
will you pass the tea on, please. Oh, yes, I'll have some honey; you can
put a piece on my plate if you like."

"The only plate you have before you at present contains eggs and bacon,"
exclaimed Molly. "I think I won't help the honey for a few minutes."

"This is a delightful surprise," murmured Hester; "but, dear me, it is
rather strange, Mrs. Willis says she wrote to you last week, Annie, and
said that she would try to give us a couple of days at the Grange on her
way back to Lavender House. How was it you never mentioned it?"

There was just a pause long enough to be noticed before Annie replied.

"I did not get the letter," she said then, in a steady voice.

She hated herself the moment she had uttered the words. She felt as if
she had fallen from a height, and was lying maimed and bruised, bleeding
and ugly in some dismal abyss; but all the time her eyes looked bright
and her face was cheerful.

Hester exclaimed, "How strange! what a pity! How could the letter have
gone astray?" but other thoughts soon chased this one from her mind.

Breakfast being over the young housekeeper had much to attend to.

Nora held out her hand to Annie, who stooped down and kissed her
affectionately.

"Are you really glad that she is coming?" asked Nora.

"Of course I am, Nonie; she is--" a stab went through Annie's
heart--"she is my best friend."

"Is she really as good as Hester says she is?" continued Nora.

"Yes, yes, better; no one quite knows how good she is."

"I shall be afraid of her," said Nora shuddering. "I hate such perfectly
good people; they make me feel small and mean."

Annie took up a basket of flowers, and began deftly to form them into
wreaths for the further decoration of the ball-room.

"It's dreadful to feel mean," she said almost in a whisper.

"You can't surely know what it means," replied Nora.

"Oh, can't I though; don't let's talk of it any more. I like you in
white, Nora. White, toned with lace and coloured ribbons, makes a
charming dress for you. You have such a pretty face. It is so full of
_esprit_--so _piquant_. Some day you will be a beautiful woman."

"As beautiful as you are?" asked Nora. "I don't desire to be more
beautiful than you."

"In some ways you will be more beautiful," replied Annie. "I don't
pretend that I am not pretty, I know I am; but in some ways you will be
superior to me. You will have a greater air of distinction. _Noblesse
oblige_ will be abundantly manifested in you. Oh, yes," continued Annie,
"it is all very fine for us _parvenus_ to despise race. We don't really
despise it; we adore it, we envy it; we can never, never, never get what
race confers."

"How excitedly you talk," said Nora; "you seem angry about something."

"I am angry with myself," said Annie; "my low ways and my meanness.
_Noblesse oblige_ has nothing to do with me. Now, look here, Nora,
forget all this rubbishy talk; be thankful that you are a beautiful girl
of good family, who could not do a shabby action. I must leave you now,
for Mrs. Willis is coming, and I should like to go into Nortonbury to
meet her."

Annie ran off to find Hester.

"Hester," she exclaimed, "may I go in the carriage to Nortonbury to meet
Mrs. Willis?"

"That is an excellent idea," said Hester; "take Molly with you, the
drive will do her good. I am so busy this morning that I can scarcely be
spared from home. Yes, that is an excellent idea. I was wondering who
would go to meet her."

Molly was very pleased to accompany Annie to Nortonbury, and Annie was
glad of her company. Molly would be a sort of shield to her; not that it
really mattered, for she had already quite made up her mind how to act.

The girls enjoyed their pleasant drive together. Mrs. Willis's train was
punctual, and she was soon driving back to the Grange, Molly seated by
her side and Annie on the seat facing her.

Mrs. Willis had the knack of making all girls perfectly at home with
her. Molly felt sure that a certain feeling of restraint would come over
her when she sat by the side of this excellent and adorable woman; but
the moment she looked into Mrs. Willis's kind eyes, and Mrs. Willis
returned her glance, and said in that full, rich, motherly voice of
hers, "Oh, I have heard of you; you are Molly Lorrimer, you live at the
Towers, and you have a great many brothers and sisters, and your
schoolroom is reached by a spiral stair, and is somewhere up in the
clouds. I have heard all about you many times from Nan." Then Molly
laughed, and felt at home. She felt more than at home, for her heart
gave a strange flutter, and then a curious sense of peace pervaded it.
It was something like being near her mother, and yet it was something
different. The magnetic influence of a good and great spirit was already
making itself felt.

Annie sat opposite to the two with dancing eyes.

"How well you look my love," said Mrs. Willis. "I am delighted to see
that the change has done you so much good."

Annie drooped her long lashes for a moment.

"I am as well as well can be," she said, "and as jolly as jolly can be,
and you have just come in the nick of time to make everything perfect.
Molly, do tell Mrs. Willis about our fancy ball to-night."

"I will listen to you in a moment, Molly," said Mrs. Willis; "but first
of all I want to ask Annie a question. I hope you did not send the ring
to Paris, Annie, for, if you did, I never received it."

"What ring?" asked Annie, looking up in pretended amazement. "Do you
mean my mother's ring, Mrs. Willis, the--the one you lent me?"

"Yes, dear. I wrote to you last week about it. I was surprised at never
hearing from you, for my letter was quite urgent. I wanted the ring for
a special object, and was disappointed at its never coming."

"That must have been the letter you never got, Annie," exclaimed Molly.

"You never got my letter?" exclaimed Mrs. Willis. "How very, very
strange! But I posted it myself, and I know I put the right address on
it. I am relieved, of course, that you did not send the ring when it was
too late; but it is odd about the letter."

"No, I didn't send the ring," said Annie in a light voice. "How could
I?"

"Certainly not, dear, if you did not know that I wanted it."

"Hester was surprised this morning," continued Molly, taking up the
thread of the narrative, and unconsciously giving Annie immense
assistance. "You said, in your letter to her, that you had told Annie a
week ago that you were coming. Then Annie said that she had never got
your letter."

"It is very queer," said Mrs. Willis. "I must write to the post office
in Paris and make inquiries. Well, I am glad the ring is safe."

"Of course, it is as safe as possible," said Annie. "It is too bad about
the letter," she continued. "Did you want the ring very badly?"

"Yes, very badly; but it is not too late yet to manage matters. I want
to have the ring copied as a wedding present for Margaret Cecil, but I
have already spoken to a jeweller about it, and if I send him the ring
to-day or to-morrow he will have it in time. Don't forget to give it to
me, Annie, dear, when we get home."

"Oh, no," said Annie, "I won't forget."

A few moments later they arrived at the Grange, where Mrs. Willis was
received with a kind of trembling joy by Hester, who took her into the
house and showered every imaginable attention which her love could
suggest upon her.

"Time, time," muttered Annie to herself as she rushed away. "Something
must happen between now and to-morrow. I'll keep out of her way to-day,
and in the fuss and excitement she'll forget about the ring. I have told
one big lie about it, and I have insinuated a dozen more, and I vow and
declare one thing--that I will not be discovered now. I'll go on to the
bitter end now, come what will. Heigh-ho, is that you, Nan? What are you
doing? Don't you know that Mrs. Willis has come? What is that you have
in your hand?"

"It's a letter of yours," said Nan; "I found it in the garden under a
rose bush; it's in Mrs. Willis's handwriting; didn't you say that you did
not hear from her last week?"

"No more I did; give me that letter; it's quite an old one." Annie
stretched out her hand, snatched the letter from Nan, and pushed it into
her pocket.

"You didn't read it?" she asked.

"No, I'm not so mean; what is the matter with you?"

"I hate to have my letters read."

"They're not read by girls like me; you needn't be afraid."

Nan rushed off in a huff, and Annie walked slowly down the corridor. Her
heart felt like lead. She fully believed that Nan had not read the
letter, but Nan's eyes might have happened to glance at the postmark on
it. That postmark contained a date only one week old. Nan was the last
child to whom Annie felt she could confide her guilty secret.

"Oh, dear, dear," she murmured under her breath, "what a true saying it
is, that 'the way of transgressors is hard.' I am a mean, low sort, not
a doubt of that. Why, if the Lorrimers and Thorntons really knew me as I
am, they wouldn't speak to me. Well, there's nothing for it now but to
carry matters with a high hand, and to let nothing out. If Nan does
happen to have noticed the date on the letter, I'll tell her she was
mistaken. How could I have been so mad as to carry this letter about in
my pocket? Well, to make all things sure, I'll destroy it now."

"Annie, Annie, we're just going to lunch," called out Hester; "what are
you running into the garden for?"

"I'll be back in a minute," shouted Annie.

She ran quickly out of the house and down the broad grass walk which led
to the arbour at the farther end. By the side of the arbour lay a basket
of tools. Annie snatched up a small trowel, and going to the back of the
arbour, dug a hole for her letter. She tore it then into fragments and
buried it, looked round her eagerly, saw that there was not a soul in
sight, and then, with a certain sense of relief, hurried back to the
house.




CHAPTER XVI.

PERHAPS.


The ball was to begin at nine o'clock. The festive hour grew on apace.
Mrs. Willis said nothing more about the ring, and Annie Forest heaved a
deep sigh of relief.

"Reprieved until to-morrow," she murmured to herself; "and now for high
frivolity."

The horses from the Thorntons' stables were in great request during that
eventful day. Hester, who was most anxious to spare her friends all
possible trouble, had decided that she and Nan, and all the rest of
their party, should dress for the ball at the Grange, and come over in
their separate characters prepared to act their different parts at once.
Molly and Hester were to be the two hostesses for the occasion. Guy, who
was a very gentlemanly boy, was to assist them to the best part of his
ability. Annie promised to look after the refreshments, and also to
establish Nora in a becoming attitude on her bed of rose leaves and
clouds.

Nora made a most beautiful queen of the fairies. She was dressed in a
sort of transparent white; her large, clear wings were very slightly
toned with rose colour, and the whole dress was bespangled with light
sprays of silver. Nora's hair was crimped, and hung in masses over her
shoulders. The silvery dust also shone in her hair. Her eyes were dark
and deep, and natural roses of happiness and excitement bloomed on her
pretty round cheeks. To Annie's ingenuity and genius the whole of the
charming dream-like effect of this fairy queen was due. Mrs. Willis, who
insisted on coming to the ball in the part of the schoolmistress, "The
only part which I shall ever play in life," she had said with a smile to
Hester, was much delighted with the arrangement of everything. Mrs.
Willis was in grey silk, with her favourite Honiton lace. She was a very
striking and beautiful woman, and in her grand simplicity, made a
perfect foil to the fantastic appearance of the younger members of the
party.

Amongst the honoured guests on this occasion, Mrs. Martin shone
conspicuous. Hester had insisted on her coming over early, and when the
good woman entered the ball-room and saw Nora on her cloudy throne, she
could not help muttering, in an almost angry tone of great excitement--

"Eh, eh, why this is almost witchcraft. I didn't believe in them wings
and clouds till now, but sure enough there they are. Seein' is
believin'. I don't hold with it, but I don't deny as it ain't clever."

"I'm glad you think it clever, Patty Martin," said a very gay voice in
her ear.

She turned almost in alarm, to be confronted by the most
impudent-looking, and yet the most charming gipsy lass she had ever
looked at.

Mrs. Martin loathed gipsies.

"None of your sauce," she said in an angry voice. "This is no place for
the like of you; get out at once or I'll let Miss Hester Thornton know."

"Oh, nursey, nursey, you'll kill me," exclaimed Annie in a voice choked
with laughter. "Do you mean to say you don't know me?"

"My sakes alive, Miss Annie Forest!" exclaimed the old woman. "Who'd
have thought you'd have been up to this folly? What are you doing,
masquerading like them hateful gipsies? It's bad enough to have wings
and clouds about; but gipsies--'tain't respectable; my word, no."

"This gipsy is eminently respectable," said Annie, with a sort of bitter
emphasis. "Here, nursey, take my hand, and let me lead you up the
ball-room. I have many strange characters to introduce you to. I see
plainly that you won't recognise them without my kind assistance. Here,
come along, be quick."

"My head is getting _moithered_, and that's the only word," said nurse
Martin. "Dear, dear, what _are_ the young coming to? And sakes alive,
what in the world are those?"

The creatures thus apostrophised by the almost frightened nurse Martin,
were a troop of fairies and brownies, who now rushed into the ball-room
from every direction. The band struck up a merry waltz, and the fairies
and brownies began to dance with vigour.

"Its past belief," said Mrs. Martin "and did you make all them wings,
Miss Annie?"

"Oh, dear, no," replied Annie; "they were made by the mothers of the
fairies--at least, I presume so. Now come into the supper-room and let
me get you a comfortable seat."

Mrs. Martin was glad enough to comply. She said the slippery floor of
the ball-room, and the uncanny creatures that were all round her, made
her feel as if the top of her head would come off. She uttered a little
shriek of terror as Jane Macalister, dressed as Minerva, glided fiercely
by, and was glad to seat herself in a safe corner behind one of the long
supper tables. Annie desired a servant to give her all the refreshment
she required, and then ran off to attend to the other guests.

Fast and furious rose the fun. During the whole of the present century
the old ball-room at the Towers had not reflected so gay and animated a
scene. Grim ancestors of the house of Lorrimer looked down from their
tarnished frames at the last Lorrimers as they danced away their
precious time in this frivolous and yet enchanting manner. The grown
people, who sat in the gallery and on benches near the walls, talked in
whispers to one another about the lovely scene. The Lorrimers were
