articles separately, his object being that if any provision did not
please them, or if they could suggest anything better, they might speak.
He was very desirous of being democratic, and once, when one of the
companions of his campaigns asked him to aid him in the capacity of
advocate, at first he pretended to be busy and bade one of his friends
serve as advocate; when, however, the petitioner grew angry and said:
"but as often as you needed my assistance, I did not send somebody else
to you in place of myself, but in person I encountered dangers everywhere
in your behalf," the emperor then entered the courtroom and pled his
cause. He also stood by a friend of his who was defendant in a suit,
having first communicated this very purpose to the senate: he saved the
friend but was so far from being angry at his accuser, although the
latter spoke most bluntly, that when he had to undergo a scrutiny
regarding his morals the emperor acquitted him, saying that his bluntness
was a necessary thing on account of the out-and-out baseness of the mass
of mankind. Augustus, indeed, punished others who were reported to be
conspiring against their sovereign. He had quaestors hold office in the
coast districts near the City and in certain other parts of Italy; and
this he did for several years. Yet at this time he was unwilling, as I
have remarked, [3] to enter the city on account of Drusus's death.

[B.C. 8 _(a. u. 746)_]

[-5-] But the next year, in which Asinius Gallus and Graius Marcius were
consuls, he came back and carried the laurel, contrary to custom, into
the temple of Jupiter Feretrius. No festival did he celebrate over his
achievements, thinking that he had lost far more in the death of Drusus
than he had gained by the victories. The consuls carried out the program
usual on such occasions and set some of the captives to fighting with one
another. Later, when they and the rest of the officials were accused of
having been appointed by means of some bribery, he did not investigate
the case but pretended not even to know of it. He did not like to visit
punishment on any of them or to pardon them if they were convicted. But
from office seekers he demanded before the elections a deposit of money
as a guarantee that they would resort to no such methods, on pain of
forfeiting what they had paid in. This course all approved.--As it was
not permissible for a slave to be tortured for evidence against his
master, he ordered that, as often as the necessity for such a course
should arise, the slave should be sold either to the State or to him, in
order that being now the property of some one else than the man on trial
he might be examined. Some found fault with this, because the law was to
be invalidated by the change of masters; but others declared it to be
necessary, because many under the previous arrangement united to take
advantage of the loophole offered and to get the offices.

[-6-] Augustus, after this, although, as he said, he was minded to lay
aside the supreme power, since the second ten-year period had run out,
resumed it again with a show of reluctance and made a campaign against
the Celtae. He himself remained behind on Roman territory, but Tiberius
crossed the Rhine. The barbarians in dread of him, all except the
Sugambri, made overtures for peace, but they did not obtain their request
at this time,--for Augustus refused to conclude a truce with them if they
lacked the Sugambri,--nor did they later. To be sure, the Sugambri, too,
sent envoys, but they failed completely to accomplish anything: on the
contrary, all of them, a numerous and distinguished band, met an untimely
end. Augustus arrested them and placed them in various cities: they took
this very much amiss and committed suicide. The tribes then were
quiet for a time, but later they amply requited the Romans for the
calamity.--Besides doing this Augustus granted money to the soldiers, not
as to victors, though he himself had taken the name of imperator and had
given it to Tiberius, but because this was the first time that they had
Gaius appearing in the exercises with them. He advanced Tiberius to the
position of imperator in place of Drusus, and besides exalting him with
that title appointed him consul once more. According to the ancient
custom he had a written notice bulletined for the public benefit before
Tiberius entered upon the office, and he furthermore accorded him the
solemnity of a triumph. Augustus himself did not wish to hold it, but
obtained the privilege of a horse-race perpetually upon his birthday. He
enlarged the pomerium and renamed the month called Sextilis, Augustus.
The people generally wanted September to be so named, because he had been
born in it, but he preferred the other month, in which he had first been
appointed consul and had conquered in many great battles. It was in these
things that he took pride.

[-7-] The death of Maecenas caused him grief. He had enjoyed many kind
services at his hands, for which reason he had entrusted him, though but
a knight, with the care of the City for a long time, but especially
was his ministry of use when the emperor's passion became nearly
uncontrollable. Maecenas was then able to banish his anger and to lead him
into a gentler frame of mind. Here is an instance. Maecenas once found
his patron holding court, and seeing that would undoubtedly condemn many
persons to death, he undertook to push through the bystanders and
get Finding this impossible, he wrote on a tablet: "Pray desist now,
executioner." Making as if it contained something different, he threw it
into the lap of Augustus, and the latter imposed no death sentences but
immediately rose and left. The emperor was not displeased at such hints
but rather glad of them, because whatever excess of anger he felt by
reason of his own nature and the press of affairs he was able to tone
down with the aid of his friend's frank advice.--This also is a very
great proof of Maecenas's excellence, that he made himself liked by
Augustus, in spite of resisting his projects, and pleased all the people.
Though he had tremendous influence with the emperor, so that he could
bestow offices and honors upon many men, he did not lose his head but
continued to the end of his life in the equestrian class. For all these
reasons Augustus missed him greatly, and he was affected by the fact that
his minister, though irritated about his own wife, had left him as his
heir and had put all his property, save a very small amount, in his hands
to give to his friends or not, as he saw fit. Such was the character of
Maecenas and such his treatment of Augustus. He was the first to construct
a swimming pool of warm water in the city and the first to devise signs
for letters, to facilitate speed,--a system which, through Aquila [4] a
freedman, he taught to a number.

[B.C. 7 (_a. u._ 747)]

[-8-] Tiberius on the first day that he began the consulship with Gnaeus
Piso convened the senate in the Octavium, because it was outside the
pomerium. After assigning himself the duty of repairing the temple of
Concord, in order that he might inscribe upon it his own name and that of
Drusus, he held his triumph, and in company with his mother dedicated the
so-called Precinct of Livia. He himself entertained the senate on the
Capitol, and she the women privately. Not much later, as there was some
disturbance in Germany, he took the field. The festival held in honor of
the return of Augustus was managed by Gaius together with Piso, in his
place. The Campus Agrippae (except the portico) and the Diribitorium
Augustus himself made public property. The latter was the largest house
ever constructed under a single roof; now the whole top of it has been
taken off because it could not be put together solidly again, and the
edifice stands wide open to the sky. Agrippa had left it still in the
process of building, and it was completed at this time. The portico
in the plain, which Polla his sister (who had also decorated the
race-courses) was making, was not yet finished. Meantime funeral combats
in honor of Agrippa were given, all except Augustus wearing dark clothing
and even his sons the same, and there were both duels and contests of
groups; they were held in the Saepta out of honor to Agrippa and because
many of the structures surrounding the Forum had been burned. The blame
for the fire was laid upon the debtor class and they were suspected of
having set it with the purpose of having some of their debts remitted
when they appeared to have lost considerable. They obtained nothing,
however. The lanes at this time were provided with certain supervisors
from among the people, whom we call road commissioners[5] They were
allowed to use official dress and two lictors just in the places where
they had jurisdiction and on certain days, and they were given charge of
the body of slaves which previously had accompanied the aediles to save
buildings that were set afire,--an arrangement still continued to the
present day. They, together with the tribunes and praetors, were by lot
appointed to have charge of the entire city, which was divided into
fourteen wards.--These were all the events of that year, for nothing
worthy of mention happened in Germany.

[B.C. 6 (_a. u._ 748)]

[-9-] The year following, which marked the consulship of Gaius Antistius
and Laelius Balbus, Augustus was displeased to see that Gaius and Lucius,
who were being brought up in the lap of sovereignty, did not carefully
imitate his ways. They not only lived too luxuriously, but showed
unseemly audacity. Lucius once entered the theatre by himself and became
the center of attraction of the whole population; some merely let
him engross their thoughts and others openly paid court to him. This
treatment made him more arrogant, and among his other doings he proposed
for consul Gaius, who was not yet a iuvenis. His father, however,
expressed the earnest wish that no such complication of circumstances
might arise as once occurred in his own case,--that any one younger than
twenty should be consul. When the people still remained urgent he then
said that a man ought to receive this office at time when he would not be
liable to error himself and could resist the passions of the populace.
After that he gave Gaius a priesthood, with the right of attendance in
the senate and of beholding spectacles and sitting at banquets with that
body. And wishing in some way [6] to rebuke them still more severely he
bestowed upon Tiberius the tribunician authority for five years, and
assigned to him Armenia, which was becoming estranged since the death of
Tigranes. The result was that he was soon at odds with the people and
Tiberius, though without effecting anything. The people felt that they
had been slighted, and Tiberius feared their anger. He was, however, soon
sent to Rhodes on the pretext that he needed some education; and he
took not even his entire retinue, to say nothing of others, that so his
appearance and his deeds might drop out of their minds. [The trip he made
as a private person except in so far as he compelled the Parians to
sell him the statue of Vesta, that it might be placed in the temple of
Concord. When he reached the island he neither behaved at all nor spoke
in an overweening way.--This is the truest reason for his foreign
journey.] There is also a story current that he did this on account of
his wife Julia, because he could no longer endure her; at any rate she
was left behind at Rome. [Others have said that he was angry at not
having been designated Caesar. Others still, that he was driven out by
Augustus, being accused of plotting against the latter's children. But
that his departure was not for the sake of education nor because he was
displeased at the decrees passed became plain from many of his subsequent
actions, and especially through his immediately opening his will at that
time, and reading it to his mother and to Augustus. But all possible
conjectures were made.]

[B.C. 5 (_a. u._ 749)]

  The following year Augustus in the course of his twelfth consulship
  placed Gaius among the iuvenes and at the same time brought him
  before the senate, declared   him Princeps luventutis, and allowed
  him to become cavalry commander.

       *       *       *       *       *

  [B.C. 2 (_a. u._ 752)]

  And after the elapse of a year Lucius also obtained all the honors
  that had been granted to his brother Gaius. On an occasion when the
  populace had gathered and were asking that some reforms be instituted,
  when, indeed, they had sent for this purpose the tribunes to Augustus,
  Lucius came and deliberated with them about their demands; and at
  this all were pleased.

[-10-]Augustus limited the number of the populace to be supplied with
grain, something previously left vague, to twenty myriads, and, as some
say, he gave each one sixty denarii.. .. to Mars, and that he himself and
his grandsons, as often as they pleased, and those who were passing
from the classification of children and were being registered among
the iuvenes, should invariably resort thither; that magistrates being
despatched to offices abroad should make that their starting-point; that
the senate should there declare their votes in regard to the granting
of triumphs and the victors celebrating them should devote to this Mars
their sceptre and their crown; that such victors and all others who might
obtain triumphal honors should have their likenesses in bronze erected
in the Forum; that in case military standards captured by the enemy were
ever recovered, they should be placed in the temple; that a festival of
the god should be celebrated near the Scalae by the persons successively
occupying the office of praefectus alae; that a nail should be driven for
his glory by those acting as censors; that senators have the right to
undertake the work of furnishing the horses that were to compete in the
equestrian contest, as well as the general care of the temple, precisely
as had been provided by law in the case of Apollo and in the case of
Jupiter Capitolinus.

These matters settled, Augustus dedicated that spacious hall: yet to
Gaius and to Lucius he gave once and for all powers to officiate at all
similar consecrations, on the strength of a kind of consular authority
(founded on precedent) that they were to use. They, too, directed the
horse-race on this occasion, and their brother Agrippa took part with
the children of the leading families in the so-called "Troy" equestrian
games. Two hundred and sixty lions were slaughtered in the hippodrome.
There was a gladiatorial combat in the Saepta, and a naval battle of
"Persians" and "Athenians" was given on the spot, where even at the
present day some relics of it are still exhibited. The above were the
names applied to the parties engaged, and the Athenians, as of old, came
out victorious.

In the course of the spectacle he let water into the Flaminian Hippodrome
and thirty-six crocodiles were there cut in pieces. However, Augustus did
not serve as consul every day continuously, but after holding office a
little while he gave the title of the consulship to another.

These were the exercises in honor of Mars. To Augustus himself a sacred
contest was offered in Neapolis, the Campanian city, nominally because he
had helped it rise when it was prostrated by earthquake and by fire,
but in reality because the inhabitants, alone of their neighbors, were
enthusiastic over Greek customs; and he also received the title of
Father, with, binding force (for previously he was merely spoken of by
that name and no decree had been passed). Moreover, it was now that for
the first time he appointed two pretorian prefects, Quintus Ostorius
Scapula and Publius Salvius Aper. This term "prefect" is the word which
I, too, shall use solely to designate the commanders of any body, since
it has won its way into general currency. Likewise Pylades the dancer
conducted certain games, not performing any manual labor in connection
with them (since he was now a man of advanced age) but employing the
insignia of office and authorizing the necessary expenditures. Similarly
the praetor Quintus Crispinus conducted games (though I need lay no
emphasis on that point) and under his management knights and women of
families not unknown to fame were brought into the orchestra. But of all
this Augustus made no account; his daughter Julia, however, proved so
dissolute that she held revels and drinking bouts by night in the
Forum and on the very rostra. When at last he found this out, he was
exceedingly enraged. He had guessed before that she did not lead a right
life, but refused to believe it. For those who hold supreme power are
acquainted with anything better than with their own affairs. Their own
deeds do not go undetected by their associates, but they are not fully
aware of the latter's. In this instance [when he learned what was going
on], he gave way to such violent rage that he could not keep the matter
to himself, but communicated it to the senate. As a result she was
banished to the island of Pandateria, near Campania, and her mother
Scribonia voluntarily was the companion of her voyage. Of the men who
enjoyed her favors Iullus Antonius, on the ground that his conduct was
prompted by designs upon the monarchy, was put to death, along with
others, [prominent persons]. The remainder were banished to islands.
[And since there was a tribune among them he was not tried till he had
completed his term of office.] Many other women, too, were accused of
similar behavior, but the emperor would not permit all the suits: he set
a definite time and forbade investigation of what had occurred previous
to that. In the case of his daughter he would show no mercy, urging that
he would rather have been Phoebe's father than hers, but the rest he
spared. Now Phoebe been a freedwoman of Julia's and the companion of her
undertakings, and had already caused her own death. For this Augustus
praised her.

  [B.C. 1 (_a. u._ 753)]

  Gaius' captaincy of the legions on the Ister was a peaceful period.
  He fought no war, not because there was none but because he cultivated
  ruling in quiet and safety, and the dangers were assigned to others.

The revolt of the Armenians and the Parthians' cooeperation with them kept
Augustus sorrowful, and he was at a loss to know what to do. His age
rendered him incapable of campaigning, Tiberius (as stated) had already
withdrawn, he could not venture to send any other influential man,
and Gaius and Lucius were, as it happened, young and inexperienced in
affairs. Still, under the prod of necessity, he chose Gaius, gave him
the proconsular authority and a wife (an act intended to increase his
dignity) and assigned advisers to him. Gaius set out and was everywhere
received with marks of distinction, occupying as he did the position of
the emperor's grandson,--one might almost say son,--and Tiberius went
to Chios and paid him court to rid himself of suspicion. He humiliated
himself and groveled at the feet not only of Gaius but of all the
latter's associates. On his return to Syria, after no great successes
won, he was wounded.

[When the barbarians heard of the campaign of Gaius, Phrataces sent to
Augustus men to explain what had occurred and asked to get back his
brothers on condition of accepting peace.

[A.D. 1 (_a. u._ 754)]

The emperor's reply, addressed simply to "Phrataces," without the title
of king, directed him to lay aside the royal name and withdraw from
Armenia. The Parthian, however, instead of being cowed at this, wrote
back in a generally supercilious tone, calling himself "king of kings,"
but the other only "Caesar."--Tigranes did not at once send any envoys,
but when Artabazus somewhat later fell sick and died he despatched a
letter, not writing the name "king" in it, and asked Augustus for the
kingdom. Influenced by these considerations and in fear, likewise, of war
with the Parthians, the emperor accepted the gifts and bade him go with
good hopes to meet Gaius in Syria.]

[-10a-(_Boissevain_)] ... other party from Egypt that campaigned against
them they repulsed, and did not yield till a tribune from the pretorian
guard was sent against them. He in progress of time checked their
incursions, and for a long period no senator governed the cities in this
region.

Coincident with these troubles there was a new movement on the part of
the Celtae. Some time earlier Domitius, while still governing the regions
adjacent to the Ister, had intercepted the Hermunduri (a tribe that for
some unknown reason had left their native land and were wandering about
in search of a different country), and he had settled them in a portion
of Marcomania; next, encountering no opposition, he had crossed the
Albis, cemented friendship with the barbarians on the other side, and
set up an altar to Augustus to commemorate the event. Just now he
had transferred his position to the Rhine, where, in pursuance of an
intention to have his subordinates restore certain Cheruscian exiles, he
had met with misfortune and had caused the other barbarians likewise to
concieve a contempt for the Romans. This was, however, the extent of his
operations during the year in question, for because of the Parthian war
impending no chastisement was visited upon the rebels immediately.

Nevertheless the war with the Parthians did not materialize. Phrataces
heard that Gaius was in Syria, equipped with consular powers, and was
furthermore uneasy about home interests in which even previously he had
failed to discern a friendly feeling; hence he hastened to effect a
reconciliation, secured on the proviso that he himself should depart from
Armenia and his brothers remain over seas.

[A.D. 2(_a. u._ 755)]

Now the Armenians fell into conflict with the Romans the following year,
in which Publius Vinicius and Publius Varus were consuls. The restraining
influence of the fact that Tigranes had perished in some barbarian war
and that Erato had resigned the sovereignty was nullified as soon as they
were delivered to a Mede, Ariobarzanes, who had once come to the Romans
in company with Tiridates. They accomplished nothing worthy of note save
that a leader named Addon,[7] who was occupying Artagira, induced Gaius
to come close up to the wall, pretending that he would reveal to him some
secrets of the Parthian king, and then wounded him. In the consequent
siege he maintained a prolonged resistance. When he was at last
overthrown, not only Augustus but Gaius, too, assumed the title of
imperator, and Armenia passed into the control of Ariobarzanes. Soon
after the latter died, and his son Artabazus received it as the gift of
Augustus and the senate. Gaius fell ill from the wound, and though he
was not in any way robust and the condition of his health had, in fact,
injured his mind, he now grew still more feeble. At length he begged
leave to retire to private life, and it was his wish to take up his abode
somewhere in Syria. Augustus, in the depth of grief, communicated his
desire to the senate, and urged him to come at any rate to Italy and
then do what he pleased. So Gaius resigned at once all the duties of his
office and took a coastwise trading vessel to Lycia, where, at Limyra,
he breathed his last. Prior to his demise the spark of Lucius's life had
also paled. (He, too, was being given practice in many places, sent now
here, now there; and he was wont to read personally the letters of Gaius
before the senate, so often as he was present.) His death was due to a
sudden illness. In connection with both these cases, therefore, suspicion
rested upon Livia, and particularly because the return of Tiberius
from Rhodes to Rome occurred at this time. [-11-] As for him he was so
