Crofield and Mertonville, into a boy who was walking right out into the
world to learn what is in it.

"I'll go to the hotel and write to father and mother," he said; "and I
have something to tell them."

It was the first real letter he had ever written, and it seemed a great
thing to do--ten times more important than writing a composition, and
almost equal to editing the _Eagle_.

"I'll just put in everything," he thought, "just as it came along, and
they'll know what I've been doing."

It took a long time to write the letter, but it was done at last, and
when he put down his pen he exclaimed:

"Hard work always makes me hungry!  I wonder if it isn't dinner-time?
They said it was always dinner-time here after twelve o'clock.  I'll go
see."  It was long after twelve when he went down to the office to
stamp and mail his letter.

"Mr. Ogden," said the clerk, giving Jack an envelope, "here's a note
from Mr. Magruder.  He left--"

"Ogden," said a deep, full voice just behind him, "didn't you stay
there too long?  I am told you sat in the Speaker's chair."

Jack wheeled about, blushing crimson.  The Governor was not standing
still, but was walking steadily through the office, surrounded by a
group of dignified men.  It was necessary to walk with them in order to
reply to the question, and Jack did so.

"I sat there half a minute," he answered.  "I hope it didn't hurt me."

"I'm glad you got out so soon, Jack," replied the Governor approvingly.

"But I heard also that you think of learning the Governor business,"
went on the great man.  "Now, don't you do it.  It is not large pay,
and you'd be out of work most of the time.  Be a blacksmith, or a
carpenter, or a tailor, or a printer."

"Well, Governor," said Jack, "I was brought up a blacksmith; and I've
worked at carpentering, and printing too; and I've edited a newspaper;
but--"

There he was cut short by the laughter from those dignified men.

"Good-bye, Jack," said the Governor, shaking hands with him.  "I hope
you'll have a good time in the city.  You'll be sent back to the
Capitol some day, perhaps."

Jack returned to the clerk's counter to mail his letter, and found that
gentleman looking at him as if he wondered what sort of a boy he might
be.

[Illustration: _The hotel clerk looked at Jack_.]

"That young fellow knows all the politicians," said the clerk to one of
the hotel proprietors.  "He can't be so countrified as he looks."

After dinner, Jack returned to his room for a long look at the
guide-book.  He went through it rapidly to the last leaf, and then
threw it down, remarking:

"I never was so tired!  I'll take a walk around and see Albany a little
more; and I'll not be sorry when the boat goes.  I'd like to see Mary
and the rest for an hour or two.  I think they'd like to see me coming
in, too."

Jack sauntered on through street after street, getting a clearer idea
of what a city was.

He walked so far that he had some difficulty in returning to the hotel,
but finally he found it without asking directions.

Soon after, Jack brought down his satchel, said good-bye to the very
polite clerk, and walked out.

He had learned the way to the steamboat-wharf; and he had already taken
one brief look at the river and the railway bridge.

"There's the 'Columbia,'" he said, aloud, as he turned a street corner
and came in sight of her.  "What a boat!  Why, if her nose was at the
Main Street corner, by the Washington Hotel, her rudder would be
half-way across the Cocahutchie!"

He walked the wharf, staring at her from end to end, before he went on
board.  He had put Mr. Magruder's note into his pocket without reading
it.

"I won't open it here," he had said then.  "There's nothing in it but a
ticket."

He found, however, that he must show the ticket at the gangway, and so
he opened the envelope.

"Three tickets?" he said.  "And two are in one piece.  This one is for
a stateroom.  That's the bunk I'm to sleep in.  Hulloo!  Supper ticket!
I have supper on board the steamer, do I?  Well, I'm not sorry.  I'll
have to hurry, too.  It's about time for her to start."

Jack went on board, and soon was hunting for his stateroom, almost
bewildered by the rushing crowd in the great saloon.

He had his key, and knew the number, but it seemed that there were
about a thousand of the little doors.

"One hundred and seventy-six is mine," he said; "and I'm going to put
away my satchel and go on deck and see the river.  Here it is at last.
Why, it's a kind of little bedroom!  It's as good as a floating hotel.
Now I'm all right."

Suddenly he was aware, with a great thrill of pleasure, that the
Columbia was in motion.  He left his satchel in a corner, locked the
door of the stateroom behind him, and set out to find his way to the
deck.  He went down-stairs and up-stairs, ran against people, and was
run against by them; and it occurred to him that all the passengers
were hunting for something they could not find.

"Looking for staterooms, I guess," he remarked aloud; but he himself
should not have been staring behind him, for at that moment he felt the
whack of a collision, and a pair of heavy arms grasped him.

"What you looks vor yourself, poy?  You knocks my breath out!  You find
somebody you looks vor--eh?"

The tremendous man who held him was not tall, but very heavy, and had a
broad face and long black beard and shaggy gray eyebrows.

"Beg pardon!" exclaimed Jack, with a glance at a lady holding one of
the man's long arms, and at two other ladies following them.

"You vas got your stateroom?" asked his round-faced captor
good-humoredly.

"Oh, yes!" said Jack.  "I've got one."

"You haf luck.  Dell you vot, poy, it ees a beeg schvindle.  Dey say
'passage feefty cent,' und you comes aboard, und you find it is choost
so.  Dot's von passage.  Den it ees von dollar more to go in to supper,
und von dollar to eat some tings, und von dollar to come out of supper,
und some more dollars to go to sleep, und maybe dey sharges you more
dollars to vake up in de morning.  Dot is not all.  Dey haf no more
shtateroom left, und ve all got to zeet up all night.  Eh?  How you
like dot, poy?"

Jack replied as politely as he knew how:

"Oh, you will find a stateroom.  They can't be full."

"Dey _ees_ full.  Dey ees more as full.  Dere vill be no room to sleep
on de floor, und ve haf to shtand oop all night.  How you likes dot,
eh?"

The ladies looked genuinely distressed, and said a number of things to
each other in some tongue that Jack did not understand.  He had been
proud enough of his stateroom up to that moment, but he felt his heart
melting.  Besides, he had intended to sit up a long while to see the
river.

"I can fix it," he suddenly exclaimed.  "Let the ladies take my
stateroom.  It's big enough."

"Poy!" said the German solemnly, "dot is vot you run into my arms for.
My name is Guilderaufenberg.  Dis lady ees Mrs. Guilderaufenberg.  Dis
ees Mees Hildebrand.  She's Mees Poogmistchgski, and she is a Bolish
lady vis my wife."

Jack caught all the names but the last, but he was not half sure about
that.  He bowed to each.

"Come with me; I'll show you the room," he said.  "Then I'm going out
on deck."

"Ve comes," said the wide German; and the three ladies all tried to
express their thanks at the same time, as Jack led the way.  Jack was
proud of his success in actually finding his own door again.

"I puts um all een," said Mr. Guilderaufenberg; "den I valks mit you on
deck.  Dose vommens belifs you vas a fine poy.  So you vas, ven I dells
de troof."

They all talked a great deal, and Jack managed to reduce the Polish
lady's name to Miss "Podgoomski," but he felt uneasily that he had left
out a part of it.  Mrs. Guilderaufenberg and the others were loaded up
with more parcels and baggage than Jack had ever seen three women carry.

"Dey dakes care of dot shtateroom," said his friend.  "Ve goes on deck.
I bitty anypoddy vot dries to get dot shtateroom avay from Mrs.
Guilderaufenberg and Mees Hildebrand and Mees Pod----ski;" but again
Jack had failed to hear that Polish lady's name.




CHAPTER XI.

DOWN THE HUDSON.

Jack already felt well acquainted with Mr. Guilderaufenberg.

The broad and bearded German knew all about steamboats, and found his
way out upon the forward deck without any difficulty.  Jack had lost
his way entirely in his first hunting for that spot, and he was glad to
find himself under the awning and gazing down the river.

"Ve only shtays here a leetle vile," said his friend.  "Den ve goes and
takes de ladies down to eat some supper.  Vas you hongry?"

Jack was not really hungry for anything but the Hudson, but he said he
would gladly join the supper-party.

"I never saw the Hudson before," he said.  "I'd rather sit up than not."

"I seet up all de vay to New York and not care," said his friend.  "I
seet up a great deal.  My vife, dot ees Mrs. Guilderaufenberg, she keep
a beeg boarding-house in Vashington.  Dot ees de ceety to lif in!  Vas
you ever in Vashington?  No?"

"Never was anywhere," said Jack.  "Never was in New York--"

"Yon nefer vas dere?  Den you petter goes mit me und Mrs.
Guilderaufenberg.  Dot ees goot.  So!  You nefer vas in Vashington.
You nefer vas in New York.  So!  Den you nefer vas in Lonton?  I vas
dere.  You lose youself in Lonton so easy.  I lose myself twice vile I
vas dere."

"You weren't lost long, I know," said Jack, laughing at the droll shake
of the German's head.

"No, I vas find.  I vas shoost going to advertise myself ven I finds a
street I remember.  Den I gets to my hotel.  You nefer vas dere?  Und
you nefer vas in Vashington.  You come some day.  Dot ees de ceety, mit
de Capitol und de great men!  Und you vas nefer in Paris, nor in
Berlin, nor in Vienna, nor in Amsterdam?  No?  I haf all of dem seen,
und dose oder cities.  I dravel, but dere ees doo much boleece, so I
comes to dis country, vere dere ees few boleece."

Jack was startled for a moment.  The bland, good-humored face of his
German acquaintance had suddenly changed.  His white teeth showed
through his mushtaches, and his beard seemed to wave and curl as he
spoke of the police.  For one moment Jack thought of Deacon Abram and
Mrs. McNamara, of the dark room and the ropes and the window.

"He may not have done anything," he said to himself, aloud, "any more
than I did; and they were after me."

"Dot ees not so!" Mr. Guilderaufenberg growled.  "I dell dem de troof
too mosh.  Den I vas a volf, a vild peest, dot mus' be hoonted, und dey
hoonted me; put I got avay.  I vas in St. Beetersburg, vonce, vile dey
hoont somevere else.  Den I vas in Constantinople, mit de Turks--"

Jack's brain was in a whirl.  He had read about all of those cities,
and here was a man who had really been in them.  It was even more
wonderful than talking with the Governor or looking at the Hudson.

But in a moment his new friend's face assumed a quieter expression.

"Come along," he said.  "De ladies ees ready by dees time.  Ve goes.
Den I dells you some dings you nefer hear."

He seemed to know all about the Columbia, for he led Jack straight to
the stateroom door, through all the crowds of passengers.

"I might not have found it in less than an hour," said Jack to himself.
"They're waiting for us.  I can't talk with them much."

But he found out that Mrs. Guilderaufenberg spoke English with but
little accent, Miss Hildebrand only knocked over a letter here and
there, and the Polish lady's fluent English astonished him so much that
he complimented her upon it.

"Dot ees so," remarked Mr. Guilderaufenberg.  "She talks dem all so
vell dey say she vas born dere.  Dell you vat, my poy, ven you talks
Bolish or Russian, den you vas exercise your tongue so you shpeaks all
de oder lankwitches easy."

The ladies were in good humor, and disposed to laugh at anything,
especially after they reached the supper-room; and Mrs.
Guilderaufenberg at once took a strong interest in Jack because he had
never been anywhere.

For convenience, perhaps, the ladies frequently spoke to one another in
German, but Jack, without understanding a word of it, listened
earnestly to what they were saying.

They often, however, talked in English, and to him, and he learned that
they had been making a summer-vacation trip through Canada, and were
now on their way home.  It was evident that Mr. Guilderaufenberg was a
man who did not lack money, and that none of the others were poor.
Besides hearing them, Jack was busy in looking around the long,
glittering supper-room of the Columbia, noticing how many different
kinds of people there were in it.  They seemed to be of all nations,
ages, colors, and kinds, and Jack would not have missed the sight for
anything.

"I'm beginning to see the world," he said to himself, and then he had
to reply to Mrs. Guilderaufenberg for about the twentieth time:

"Oh, not at all.  You're welcome to the stateroom.  I'd rather sit up
and look at the river than go to bed."

"Den, Mr. Ogden," she said, "you comes to Vashington, and you comes to
my house.  I can den repay your kindness.  You vill see senators,
congressmen, generals, fine men--great men, in Vashington."

After supper the party found seats under the awning forward, and for a
while Jack's eyes were so busy with the beauties of the Hudson that his
ears heard little.

The moonlight was very bright and clear, and showed the shores plainly.
Jack found his memory of the guidebook was excellent.  The villages and
towns along the shores were so many collections of twinkling, changing
glimmers, and between them lay long reaches of moonshine and shadow.

"I'd like to write home about it," thought Jack, "but I couldn't begin
to tell 'em how it looks."

Jack was not sorry when the three ladies said good-night.  He had never
before been so long upon his careful good behavior in one evening, and
it made him feel constrained, till he almost wished he was back in
Crofield.

"Mr. Guilderaufenberg," he said as soon as they were alone, "this is
the first big river I ever saw."

"So?" said the German.  "Den I beats you.  I see goot many rifers, ven
I drafels.  Dell you vat, poy; verefer dere vas big rifers, anyvere,
dere vas mosh fighting.  Some leetle rifer do choost as vell,
sometimes, but de beeg rifers vas alvays battlefields."

"Not the Hudson?" said Jack inquiringly.

"You ees American poy," said the German; "you should know de heestory
of your country.  Up to Vest Point, de Hudson vas full of fights.  All
along shore, too.  I vas on de Mississippi, and it is fights all de vay
down to his mout'.  So mit some oder American rifers, but de vorst of
all is the Potomac, by Vashington.  Eet ees not so fine as de Hudson,
but eet is battle-grounds all along shore.  I vas on de Danube, and eet
ees vorse for fights dan de Potomac.  I see so many oder rifers, all
ofer, eferyvere, but de fighting rifer of de vorld is de Rhine.  It is
so fine as de Hudson, and eet ees even better looking by day.--Ve gets
into de Caatskeel Mountains now.  Look at dem by dis moonlight, and you
ees like on de Rhine.  You see de Rhine some day, and ven you comes to
Vashington you see de Potomac."

On, on, steamed the Columbia, with what almost seemed a slow motion, it
was so ponderous, dignified, and stately, while the moonlit heights and
hollows rolled by on either hand.  On, at the same time, went Mr.
Guilderaufenberg with his stories of rivers and cities and countries
that he had seen, and of battles fought along rivers and across them.
Then, suddenly, the gruff voice grew deep and savage, like the growl of
an angry bear, and he exclaimed:

"I haf seen some men, too, of de kind I run avay from--"

"Policemen?" said Jack.

"Yah; dat is de name I gif dem," growled the angry German.  "De Tsar of
Russia, I vas see him, and he vas noding but a chief of boleece.  De
old Kaiser of Germany, he vas a goot man, but he vas too mosh chief of
boleece.  So vas de Emperor of Austria; I vas see him.  So vas de
Sultan of Turkey, but he vas more a humpug dan anyting else.  Dere ees
leetle boleece in Turkey.  I see de Emperor Napoleon before he toomble
down.  He vas noding but a boleeceman.  I vas so vild glad ven he comes
down.  De leetle kings, I care not so mosh for.  You comes to
Vashington, and I show you some leetle kings--" and Mr.
Guilderaufenberg grew good-humored and began to laugh.

"What kind of kings?" asked Jack.

"Leetle congressman dot is choost come de first time, und leetle beeg
man choost put into office.  Dey got ofer it bretty soon, und de fun is
gone."

There was a long silence after that.  The broad German sat in an
arm-chair, and pretty soon he slipped forward a little with his knees
very near the network below the rail of the Columbia.  Then Jack heard
a snore, and knew that his traveler friend was sound asleep.

[Illustration: _His traveler friend was sound asleep_.]

"I wish I had a chair to sleep on, instead of this campstool," thought
Jack.  "I'll have a look all around the boat and come back."

It took a long while to see the boat, and the first thing he discovered
was that a great many people had failed to secure staterooms or berths.
They sat in chairs, and they lounged on sofas, and they were curled up
on the floor; for the Columbia had received a flood of tourists who
were going home, and a large part of the passengers of another boat
