author.[411] In 1820 Canon Settele was not allowed by the Master of
the Sacred Palace to publish his textbook because it dealt with the
forbidden subject. His appeal to the Congregation itself resulted, as
we have seen, in the decree of 1822 removing this as a cause for
prohibition. Yet as late as in 1829, when a statue to Copernicus was
being unveiled at Warsaw, and a great convocation had met in the
church for the celebration of the mass as part of the ceremony, at the
last moment the clergy refused in a body to attend a service in honor
of a man whose book was on the Index.[412]

[Footnote 411: Bailly: II, 132, note.]

[Footnote 412: Flammarion: 196-198.]

Thus the Roman Catholic Church by reason of its organization and of
its doctrine requiring obedience to its authority was more conspicuous
for its opposition as a body to the Copernican doctrine, even though
as individuals many of its members favored the new system. But the
Protestant leaders were quite as emphatic in their denunciations,
though less influential because of the Protestant idea of the right to
individual belief and interpretation. Luther, Melancthon, Calvin,
Turrettin,[413] Owen, and Wesley are some of the notable opponents to
it. And when the scientific objections had practically disappeared,
those who interpreted the Scriptures literally were still troubled and
hesitant down to the present day. Not many years ago, people flocked
to hear a negro preacher of the South, Brother Jasper, uphold with all
his ability that the sun stood still at Joshua's command, and that
today "the sun do move!" Far more surprising is this statement in the
new _Catholic Encyclopedia_ under "Faith," written by an English
Dominican:

     "If, now, the will moves the intellect to consider some
     debatable point--_e.g._, the Copernican and Ptolemaic
     theories of the relationship between the sun and the
     earth--it is clear that the intellect can only assent to one
     of these views in proportion that it is convinced that the
     particular view is true. But neither view has, as far as we
     can know, more than probable truth, hence of itself the
     intellect can only give in its partial adherence to one of
     these views, it must always be precluded from absolute
     assent by the possibility that the other may be right. The
     fact that men hold more tenaciously to one of these than the
     arguments warrant can only be due to some extrinsic
     consideration, _e.g._, that it is absurd not to hold to what
     a vast majority of men hold."

[Footnote 413: Shields: 60.]

In astronomical thought as in many another field, science and reason
have had a hard struggle in men's minds to defeat tradition and the
weight of verbal inspiration. Within the Roman Catholic Church
opposition to this doctrine was officially weakened in 1757, but not
completely ended till the publication of the Index in 1835--the first
edition since the decrees of 1616 and 1619 which did not contain the
works of Copernicus, Galileo, Foscarini, a Stunica and Kepler. Since
then, Roman Catholic writers have been particularly active in
defending and explaining the positions of the Church in these matters.
They have not agreed among themselves as to whether the infallibility
of the Church had been involved in these condemnations, nor as to the
reasons for them. As one writer has summarized these diverse
positions,[414] they first claimed that Galileo was condemned not for
upholding a heresy, but for attempting to reconcile these ideas with
the Scriptures,--though in fact he was sentenced specifically for
heresy. In their next defense they declared Galileo was not condemned
for heresy, but for contumacy and want of respect to the Pope.[415]
This statement proving untenable, others held that it was the result
of a persecution developing out of a quarrel between Aristotelian
professors and those professors who favored experiment,--a still worse
argument for the Church itself. Then some claimed that the
condemnation was merely provisional,--a position hardly warranted by
the wording of the decrees themselves and flatly contradicted by
Father Riccioli, the spokesman of the Jesuit authorities.[416] More
recently, Roman Catholics have held that Galileo was no more a victim
of the Roman Church than of the Protestant--which fails to remove the
blame of either. The most recent position is that the condemnation of
the doctrine by the popes was not as popes but as men simply, and the
Church was not committed to their decision since the popes had not
signed the decrees. But two noted English Catholics, Roberts and
Mivart, publicly stated in 1870 that the infallibility of the papacy
was fully committed in these condemnations by what they termed
incontrovertible evidence.[417]

[Footnote 414: White: I, 159-167.]

[Footnote 415: See di Bruno: _Catholic Belief_, 286a.]

[Footnote 416: Riccioli: _Apologia_, 103.]

[Footnote 417: White: I, 165. See the answer by Wegg-Prosser: _Galileo
and his Judges_.]

One present-day Catholic calls the action of the Congregations "a
theoretical mistake;"[418] another admits it was a deplorable mistake,
but practically their only serious one;[419] and a third considers it
"providential" since it proved conclusively "that whenever there is
apparent contradiction between the truths of science and the truths of
faith, either the scientist is declaring as proved what in reality is
a mere hypothesis, or the theologian is putting forth his own personal
views instead of the teaching of the Gospel."[420] Few would accept
today, however, the opinion of the anonymous writer in the _Dublin
Review_ in the forties that "to the Pontiffs and dignitaries of Rome
we are mainly indebted for the Copernican system" and that the phrases
"heretical" and "heresy" in the sentence of 1633 were but the _stylus
curiae_, for it was termed heresy only in the technical sense.[421]

[Footnote 418: Donat: 183.]

[Footnote 419: Walsh: _Popes and Science_, 17.]

[Footnote 420: Conway: 48.]

[Footnote 421: Anon.: _Galileo--the Roman Congregation_, 39, 60.]

The majority of Protestants, with the possible exception of the
Lutherans, were satisfied with the probable truth of the Copernican
doctrine before the end of the 18th century. Down to the present day,
however, there have been isolated protests raised against it, usually
on technical grounds supported by reference to the Scriptures. De
Morgan refers to one such, "An Inquiry into the Copernican System ...
wherein it is proved in the clearest manner, that the earth has only
her diurnal motion ... with an attempt to point out the only true way
whereby mankind can receive any real benefit from the study of the
heavenly bodies, by John Cunningham, London, 1789." De Morgan adds
that "the true way appears to be the treatment of heaven and earth as
emblematical of the Trinity."[422] Another, by "Anglo-American," is
entitled "Copernicus Refuted; or the True Solar System" (Baltimore,
1846). It begins thus:

    "One of these must go, the other stand still,
    It matters not which, so choose at your will;
    But when you find one already stuck fast,
    You've only got Hobson's choice left at last."

[Footnote 422: De Morgan: I, 172.]

This writer admits the earth's axial rotation, but declares the earth
is fixed as a pivot in the center of the universe, because the poles
of the earth are fixed and immovable, and that the sun as in the
Tychonic scheme encircles the earth and is itself encircled by five
planets.[423] His account of the origin of the Copernican system is
noteworthy: it was originated by Pythagoras and his deciples but lay
neglected because it was held to be untenable in their time; it was
"revived when learning was at its lowest ebb by a monk in his
cloister, Copernicus, who in ransacking the contents of the monastery
happened to lay his hands on the MS. and then published it to the
world with all its blunders and imperfections!"[424] One might remark
that the Anglo-American's own learning was at very low ebb.

[Footnote 423: "Anglo-American": 5-6.]

[Footnote 424: Ibid: 11.]

The Tychonic scheme was revived also some years later by a Dane,
Zytphen (1856).[425] Three years after, an assembly of Lutheran clergy
met together at Berlin to protest against "science falsely
so-called,"[426] but were brought into ridicule by Pastor Knap's
denunciations of the Copernican theory as absolutely incompatible with
belief in the Bible. A Carl Schoepffer had taken up the defense of the
Tychonic scheme in Berlin before this (1854) and by 1868 his lecture
was in its seventh edition. In it he sought to prove that the earth
revolves neither upon its own axis nor yet about the sun. He had seen
Foucault's pendulum demonstration of the earth's movement, but he held
that something else, as yet unexplained, caused the deviation of the
pendulum, and that the velocity of the heavens would be no more
amazing than the almost incredible velocity of light or of
electricity.[427] His lecture, curiously enough, fell into the hands
of the late General John Watts de Peyster of New York, who had it
translated and published in 1900 together with a supplement by Frank
Allaben.[428] Both these gentlemen accepted its scientific views and
deductions, but the General refused to go as far as his colleague in
the latter's enthusiastic acceptance of the verbal inspiration of the
Scriptures as a result of these statements.[429] A few months later,
they published a supplementary pamphlet claiming to prove the
possibility of the sun's velocity by the analogy of the velocity of
certain comets.[430] A Professor J.R. Lange of California (a German),
attracted by these documents, sent them his own lucubrations on this
subject. He considered Newton's doctrine of universal attraction
"nonsense," and had "absolute proof" in the fixity of the Pole Star
that the earth does not move.[431] In a letter to General de Peyster,
he wrote: "Let us hope and pray that the days of the pernicious
Copernican system may be numbered,"[432]--but he did not specify why
he considered it pernicious. The General was nearly eighty years old
when he became interested in these matters, and he did not live long
thereafter to defend his position. His biographers make no mention of
it. The other men seem almost obsessed, especially Lange;--like the
Italian painter, Sindico, who bombarded the director of the Paris
Observatory in 1878 with many letters protesting against the
Copernican system.[433]

[Footnote 425: De Morgan: II, 335.]

[Footnote 426: White: I, 150.]

[Footnote 427: Schoepffer: _The Earth Stands Fast_, title-page, 6-7.]

[Footnote 428: Ibid: Supplement by Allaben, 21, 74.]

[Footnote 429: Ibid: Note by J.W. de P., 74.]

[Footnote 430: De Peyster and Allaben: _Algol_, preface.]

[Footnote 431: Lange: _The Copernican System: The Greatest Absurdity
in the History of Human Thought_.]

[Footnote 432: De Peyster and Allaben: _Algol_, 74.]

[Footnote 433: Sindico: _Refutation du Systeme de Copernic...._]

German writers, whether Lutherans or not, appear to have opposed the
system more often in the last century than have the writers of other
nationalities. Besides those already mentioned, one proposed an
ingenious scheme in which the sun moves through space followed by the
planets as a comet is by its tail, the planets revolving in a plane
perpendicular to that of the sun's path. A diagram of it would be
cone-shaped. He included in this pamphlet, besides a list of his own
books, (all published in Leipsic), a list of twenty-six titles from
1758 to 1883, books and pamphlets evidently opposed in whole or in
part to the modern astronomy, and seventeen of these were in German or
printed in Germany.[434] In this country at St. Louis was issued an
_Astronomische Unterredung_ (1873) by J.C.W.L.; according to the late
President White, a bitter attack on modern astronomy and a decision by
the Scriptures that the earth is the principal body of the universe,
that it stands fixed, and that the sun and the moon only serve to
light it.[435]

[Footnote 434: Tischner: _Le Systeme Solaire se Mouvant_. (1894).]

[Footnote 435: White: I, 151.]

Such statements are futile in themselves nowadays, and are valuable
only to illustrate the advance of modern thought of which these are
the little eddies. While modern astronomers know far more than
Copernicus even dreamed of, much of his work still holds true today.
The world was slow to accept his system because of tradition,
authority, so-called common sense, and its supposed incompatibility
with scriptural passages. Catholic and Protestant alike opposed it on
these grounds; but because of its organization and authority, the
Roman Catholic Church had far greater power and could more
successfully hinder and delay its acceptance than could the
Protestants. Consequently the system won favor slowly at first through
the indifference of the authorities, then later in spite of their
active antagonism. Scholars believed it long before the universities
were permitted to teach it; and the rationalist movement of the 18th
century, the revolt against a superstitious religion, helped to
overturn the age-old conception of the heavens and to bring
Newtonian-Copernicanism into general acceptance.

The elements of this traditional conception are summarized in the
fifth book of Bodin's _Universae Naturae Theatrum_, a scholar's account
of astronomy at the close of the sixteenth century.[436] Man in his
terrestrial habitation occupies the center of a universe created
solely to serve him, God presides over all from the Empyrean above,
sending forth his messengers the angels to guide and control the
heavenly bodies. Such had been the thought of Christians for more than
a thousand years. Then came the influence of a new science. Tycho
Brahe "broke the crystal spheres of Aristotle"[437] by his study of
the comet of 1572; Galileo's telescopes revealed many stars hitherto
unknown, and partly solved the mysteries of the Milky Way; Kepler's
laws explained the courses of the planets, and Newton's discovery of
the universal application of the forces of attraction relieved the
angels of their duties among the heavens. Thinkers like Bruno proposed
the possibility of other systems and universes besides the solar one
in which the earth belongs. And thus not only did man shrink in
importance in his own eyes; but his conception of the heavens changed
from that of a finite place inexplicably controlled by the mystical
beings of a supernatural world, to one of vast and infinite spaces
traversed by bodies whose density and mass a man could calculate,
whose movements he could foretell, and whose very substance he could
analyze by the science of today. This dissolution of superstition,
especially in regard to comets was notably rapid and complete after
the comet of 1680.[438] Thus the rationalist movement with the new
science opened men's minds to a universe composed of familiar
substances and controlled by known or knowable laws with no tinge
remaining of the supernatural. Today a man's theological beliefs are
not shaken by the discovery of a new satellite or even a new planet,
and the appearance of a new comet merely provides the newspaper editor
with the subject of a passing jest.

[Footnote 436: See translated sections in Appendix C.]

[Footnote 437: Robinson: 107.]

[Footnote 438: Ibid: 119.]

Yet it was fully one hundred and fifty years after the publication of
the _De Revolutionibus_ before its system met with the general
approval of scholars as well as of mathematicians; then nearly a
generation more had to elapse before it was openly taught even at
Oxford where the Roman Catholic and Lutheran Churches had no control.
During the latter part of this period, readers were often left free to
decide for themselves as to the relative merits of the Tychonic and
Copernican or Copernican-Cartesian schemes. But it took fully fifty
years and more, besides, before these ideas had won general acceptance
by the common people, so wedded were they to the traditional view
through custom and a superstitious reverence for the Bible. Briefly
then, the _De Revolutionibus_ appeared in 1543; and quietly won some
supporters, notably Bruno, Kepler and Galileo; the Congregations of
the Index specifically opposed it in 1616 and 1633; however it
continued to spread among scholars and others with the aid of
Cartesianism for another fifty years till the appearance of Newton's
_Principia_ in 1687. Then its acceptance rapidly became general even
in Catholic Europe, till it was almost a commonplace in England by
1743, two hundred years after its first formal promulgation, and had
become strong enough in Europe to cause the Congregations in 1757 to
modify their stand. Thereafter opposition became a curiosity rather
than a significant fact. Only the Roman Church officially delayed its
recognition of the new astronomy till the absurdity of its obsolete
position was brought home to it by Canon Settele's appeal in 1820.
Fifteen years later the last trace of official condemnation was
removed, a little over two hundred years after the decrees had first
been issued, and just before Bessel's discovery of stellar parallax at
length answered one of the strongest and oldest arguments against the
system. Since then have come many _apologias_ in explanation and
extenuation of the Church's decided stand in this matter for so many
generations.

Though Galileo himself was forced to his knees, unable to withstand
his antagonists, his work lived on after him; he and Copernicus,
together with Kepler and Newton stand out both as scientists and as
leaders in the advance of intellectual enlightenment. The account of
their work and that of their less well-known supporters, compared with
that of their antagonists, proves the truth of the ancient Greek
saying which Rheticus used as the motto for the _Narratio Prima_, the
first widely known account of the Copernican system: "One who intends
to philosophize must be free in mind."




APPENDIX A.

PTOLEMY: _Syntaxis Mathematica (Almagest)_

     "That the earth has no movement of rotation," in _Opera Quae
     Exstant Omnia_, edidit Heiberg, Leipsic, 1898, Bk. I, sec.
     7: (I, 21-25); compared with the translation into French by
     Halma, Paris, 1813.


By proofs similar to the preceding, it is shown that the earth cannot
be transported obliquely nor can it be moved away from the center.
For, if that were so, all those things would take place which would
happen if it occupied any other point than that of the center. It
seems unnecessary to me, therefore, to seek out the cause of
attraction towards the center when it is once evident from the
phenomena themselves, that the earth occupies the center of the
