paler beneath, smooth and shining on both sides, turning to a pale
shining yellow in autumn, resinous, glandular-dotted when young; outline
triangular, coarsely and irregularly doubly serrate; apex taper-pointed;
base truncate, heart-shaped, or acute; leafstalks long and slender;
stipules dropping early.

=Inflorescence.=--May. Sterile catkins usually solitary or in pairs,
slender-cylindrical, 2-3 inches long: fertile catkins erect, green,
stalked; bracts minutely pubescent.

=Fruit.=--Fruiting catkins erect or spreading, cylindrical, about 1-1/4
inches long and 1/2 inch in diameter, stalked; scales 3-parted above the
center, side lobes larger, at right angles or reflexed: nuts small,
ovate to obovate, narrower than the wings, combined wings from broadly
obcordate to butterfly-shape, wider than long.

=Horticultural Value.=--Hardy throughout New England, growing in every
kind of soil, finest specimens in deep, rich loam. Were this tree not so
common, its graceful habit and attractive bark would be more appreciated
for landscape gardening; only occasionally grown by nurserymen, best
secured through collectors; young collected plants, if properly
selected, will nearly all live.

[Illustration: PLATE XXXIII.--Betula populifolia.]

  1. Branch with sterile and fertile catkins.
  2. Sterile flower, back view.
  3. Fertile flower.
  4. Scale of fertile flower.
  5. Fruiting branch.
  6. Fruit.


=Betula papyrifera, Marsh.=

CANOE BIRCH. WHITE BIRCH. PAPER BIRCH.

=Habitat and Range.=--Deep, rich woods, river banks, mountain slopes.

     Canada, Atlantic to Pacific, northward to Labrador and Alaska, to
     the limit of deciduous trees.

Maine,--abundant; New Hampshire,--in all sections, most common on
highlands up to the alpine area of the White mountains, above the range
of the yellow birch; Vermont,--common; Massachusetts,--common in the
western and central sections, rare towards the coast; Rhode Island,--not
reported; Connecticut,--occasional in the southern sections, frequent
northward.

     South to Pennsylvania and Illinois; west to the Rocky mountains and
     Washington on the Pacific coast.

Var. _minor_, Tuckerman, is a dwarf form found upon the higher mountain
summits of northern New England.

=Habit.=--A large tree, 50-75 feet high, with a diameter of 1-3 feet;
occasionally of greater dimensions. The trunk develops a
broad-spreading, open head, composed of a few large limbs ascending at
an acute angle, with nearly horizontal secondary branches and a
slender, flexible spray without any marked tendency to droop.
Characterized by the dark metallic lustre of the branchlets, the dark
green foliage, deep yellow in autumn, and the chalky whiteness of the
trunk and large branches; a singularly picturesque tree, whether
standing alone or grouped in forests.

=Bark.=--Easily detachable in broad sheets and separable into thin,
delicately colored, paper-like layers, impenetrable by water, outlasting
the wood it covers. Bark of trunk and large branches chalky-white when
fully exposed to the sun, lustreless, smooth or ragged-frayed, in very
old forest trees encrusted with huge lichens, and splitting into broad
plates; young trunks and smaller branches smooth, reddish or grayish
brown, with numerous roundish buff dots which enlarge from year to year
into more and more conspicuous horizontal lines. The white of the bark
readily rubs off upon clothing.

=Winter Buds and Leaves.=--Buds small, ovate, flattish, acute to
rounded. Leaves simple, alternate, 3-5 inches long, two-thirds as wide,
dark green and smooth above, beneath pale, hairy along the veins,
sometimes in young trees thickly glandular-dotted on both sides; outline
ovate, ovate-oblong, or ovate-orbicular, more or less doubly serrate;
apex acute to acuminate; base somewhat heart-shaped, truncate or obtuse;
leafstalk 1-2 inches long, grooved above, downy; stipules falling early.

=Inflorescence.=--April to May. Sterile catkins mostly in threes, 3-4
inches long: fertile catkins 1-1-1/2 inches long, cylindrical,
slender-peduncled, erect or spreading; bracts puberulent.

=Fruit.=--Fruiting catkins 1-2 inches long, cylindrical, short-stalked,
spreading or drooping: nut obovate to oval, narrower than its wings;
combined wings butterfly-shaped, nearly twice as wide as long.

=Horticultural Value.=--Hardy throughout New England; prefers a
well-drained loam or gravelly soil, but does fairly well in almost any
situation; young trees rapid growing and vigorous, but with the same
tendency to grow irregularly that is shown by the black and yellow
birches; transplanted without serious difficulty; not offered by many
nurserymen, but may be obtained from northern collectors.

[Illustration: PLATE XXXIV.--Betula papyrifera.]

  1. Leaf-buds.
  2. Flower-buds.
  3. Flowering branch.
  4. Sterile flower, front view.
  5. Fertile flower, front view.
  6. Scale of fertile flower.
  7. Fruiting branch.
  8. Fruit.


=Alnus glutinosa, Medic.=

EUROPEAN ALDER.

This is the common alder of Great Britain and central Europe southward,
growing chiefly along water courses, in boggy grounds and upon moist
mountain slopes; introduced into the United States and occasionally
escaping from cultivation; sometimes thoroughly established locally. In
Medford, Mass., there are many of these plants growing about two small
ponds and upon the neighboring lowlands, most of them small, but among
them are several trees 30-40 feet in height and 8-12 inches in diameter
at the ground, distinguishable at a glance from the shrubby native
alders by their greater size, more erect habit, and darker trunks.




FAGACEAE. BEECH FAMILY.


=Fagus ferruginea, Ait.=

_Fagus Americana, Sweet. Fagus atropunicea, Sudw._


BEECH.

=Habitat and Range.=--Moist, rocky soil.

Nova Scotia through Quebec and Ontario.

Maine,--abundant; New Hampshire,--throughout the state; common on the
Connecticut-Merrimac watershed, enters largely into the composition of
the hardwood forests of Coos county; Vermont,--abundant;
Massachusetts,--in western sections abundant, common eastward;
Rhode Island and Connecticut,--common.

     South to Florida; west to Wisconsin, Missouri, and Texas.

=Habit.=--A tree of great beauty, rising to a height of 50-75 feet, with
a diameter at the ground of 1-1/2-4 feet; under favorable conditions
attaining much greater dimensions; trunk remarkably smooth, sometimes
fluted, in the forests tall and straight, in open situations short and
stout; head symmetrical, of various shapes,--rounded, oblong, or even
obovate; branches numerous, mostly long and slender, curving slightly
upward at their tips, near the point of branching horizontal or slightly
drooping, beset with short branchlets which form a flat, dense, and
beautiful spray; roots numerous, light brown, long, and running near the
surface. Tree easily distinguishable in winter by the dried
brownish-white leaves, spear-like buds, and smooth bark.

=Bark.=--Trunk light blue gray, smooth, unbroken, slightly corrugated in
old trees, often beautifully mottled in blotches or bands and invested
by lichens; branches gray; branchlets dark brown and smooth; spray
shining, reddish-brown; season's shoots a shining olive green,
orange-dotted.

=Winter Buds and Leaves.=--Buds conspicuous, long, very slender,
tapering slowly to a sharp point; scales rich brown, lengthening as the
bud opens. Leaves set in plane of the spray, simple, alternate, 3-5
inches long, one-half as wide, silky-pubescent with fringed edges when
young, nearly smooth when fully grown, green on both sides, turning to
rusty yellows and browns in autumn, persistent till mid-winter; outline
oval, serrate; apex acuminate; base rounded; veins strong, straight,
terminating in the teeth; leafstalk short, hairy at first; stipules
slender, silky, soon falling.

=Inflorescence.=--May. Appearing with the leaves from the season's
shoots, sterile flowers from the lower axils, in heads suspended at the
end of silky threads 1-2 inches long; calyx campanulate, pubescent,
yellowish-green, mostly 6-lobed; petals none; stamens 6-16; anthers
exserted; ovary wanting or abortive: fertile flowers from the upper
axils, usually single or in pairs, at the end of a short peduncle;
involucre 4-lobed, fringed with prickly scales; calyx with six
awl-shaped lobes; ovary 3-celled; styles 3.

=Fruit.=--A prickly bur, thick, 4-valved, splitting nearly to the base
when ripe: nut sharply triangular, sweet, edible.

=Horticultural Value.=--Hardy throughout New England; grows well in any
good soil, but prefers deep, rich, well-drained loam; usually obtainable
in nurseries; when frequently transplanted, safely moved. Its clean
trunk and limbs, deep shade, and freedom from insect pests make it one
of the most attractive of our large trees for use, summer or winter, in
landscape gardening; few plants, however, will grow beneath it; the bark
is easily disfigured; it has a bad habit of throwing out suckers and is
liable to be killed by any injury to the roots. Propagated from the
seed. The purple beech, weeping beech, and fern-leaf beech are
well-known horticultural forms.

[Illustration: PLATE XXXV.--Fagus ferruginea.]

  1. Winter buds.
  2. Flowering branch.
  3. Sterile flower.
  4. Fertile flower.
  5. Fruiting branch.
  6. Section of fruit.
   7. Nut.


=Castanea sativa, var. Americana, Watson and Coulter.=

_Castanea dentata, Borkh. Castanea vesca, var. Americana, Michx._


CHESTNUT.

=Habitat and Range.=--In strong, well-drained soil; pastures, rocky
woods, and hillsides.

     Ontario,--common.

Maine,--southern sections, probably not indigenous north of latitude 44 deg.
20'; New Hampshire,--Connecticut valley near the river, as far north as
Windsor, Vt.; most abundant in the Merrimac valley south of Concord, but
occasional a short distance northward; Vermont,--common in the
southern sections, especially in the Connecticut valley; occasional as
far north as Windsor (Windsor county), West Rutland (Rutland county),
Burlington (Chittenden county); Massachusetts,--rather common throughout
the state, but less frequent near the sea; Rhode Island and
Connecticut,--common.

     South to Delaware, along the mountains to Alabama; west to
     Michigan, Indiana, and Tennessee.

=Habit.=--A tree of the first magnitude, rising to a height of 60-80
feet and reaching a diameter of 5-6 feet above the swell of the roots,
with a spread sometimes equaling or even exceeding the height; attaining
often much greater proportions. The massive trunk separates usually a
few feet from the ground into several stout horizontal or ascending
branches, the limbs higher up, horizontal or rising at a broad angle,
forming a stately, open, roundish, or inversely pyramidal head;
branchlets slender; spray coarse and not abundant; foliage bright green,
dense, casting a deep shade; flowers profuse, the long, sterile catkins
upon their darker background of leaves conspicuous upon the hill
slopes at a great distance. A tree that may well dispute precedence with
the white or red oak.

=Bark.=--Bark of trunk in old trees deeply cleft with wide ridges, hard,
rough, dark gray; in young trees very smooth, often shining; season's
shoots green or purplish-brown, white-dotted.

=Winter Buds and Leaves.=--Buds small, ovate, brown, acutish. Leaves
simple, alternate, 5-10 inches long, 1-3 inches wide, bright clear
green above, paler beneath and smooth on both sides; outline
oblong-lanceolate, sharply and coarsely serrate; veins straight,
terminating in the teeth; apex acuminate; base acute or obtuse;
leafstalk short; stipules soon falling.

=Inflorescence.=--June to July. Appearing from the axils of the season's
shoots, after the leaves have grown to their full size; sterile catkins
numerous, clustered or single, erect or spreading, 4-10 inches long,
slender, flowers pale yellowish-green or cream-colored; calyx pubescent,
mostly 6-parted; stamens 15-20; odor offensive when the anthers are
discharging their pollen: fertile flowers near the base of the upper
sterile catkins or in separate axils, 1-3 in a prickly involucre; calyx
6-toothed; ovary ovate, styles as many as the cells of the ovary,
exserted.

=Fruit.=--Burs round, thick, prickly, 2-4 inches in diameter, opening by
4 valves: nuts 1-5, dark brown, covered with whitish down at apex, flat
on one side when there are several in a cluster, ovate when only one,
sweet and edible.

=Horticultural Value.=--Hardy throughout New England; prefers fertile,
well-drained, gravelly or rocky soil; rather difficult to transplant;
usually obtainable in nurseries. Its vigorous and rapid growth, massive,
broad-spreading head and attractive flowers make it a valuable tree for
landscape gardening, but in public places the prickly burs and edible
fruit are a serious disadvantage. Propagated from the seed.

[Illustration: PLATE XXXVI.--Castanea sativa, var. Americana.]

  1. Winter buds.
  2. Flowering branch.
  3. Sterile flower.
  4. Fertile flower.
  5. Fruit.
  6. Nut.


=QUERCUS.=

Inflorescence appearing with the leaves in spring; sterile catkins from
terminal or lateral buds on shoots of the preceding year, bracted,
usually several in a cluster, unbranched, long, cylindrical, pendulous;
bracts of sterile flowers minute, soon falling; calyx parted or lobed;
stamens 3-12, undivided: fertile flowers terminal or axillary upon the
new shoots, single or few-clustered, bracted, erect; involucre scaly,
becoming the cupule or cup around the lower part of the acorn; ovary
3-celled; stigma 3-lobed.


WHITE OAKS.

Leaves with obtuse or rounded lobes or teeth; cup-scales thickened or
knobbed at base; stigmas sessile or nearly so; fruit maturing the first
year.


BLACK OAKS.

Leaves with pointed or bristle-tipped lobes and teeth; cup-scales flat;
