The Project Gutenberg EBook of Keep Your Shape, by Robert Sheckley

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Keep Your Shape

Author: Robert Sheckley

Illustrator: Vidmer

Release Date: May 12, 2010 [EBook #32346]
[Last updated: August 22, 2012]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK KEEP YOUR SHAPE ***




Produced by Sankar Viswanathan, Greg Weeks, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net







                         Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from Galaxy Science Fiction November 1953.
    Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
    copyright on this publication was renewed.


                           KEEP YOUR SHAPE


                          By ROBERT SHECKLEY


                        Illustrated by VIDMER


     _Only a race as incredibly elastic as the Grom could have a
      single rule of war:_

       *       *       *       *       *




Pid the Pilot slowed the ship almost to a standstill, and peered
anxiously at the green planet below.

Even without instruments, there was no mistaking it. Third from its
sun, it was the only planet in this system capable of sustaining life.
Peacefully it swam beneath its gauze of clouds.

It looked very innocent. And yet, twenty previous Grom expeditions had
set out to prepare this planet for invasion--and vanished utterly,
without a word.

Pid hesitated only a moment, before starting irrevocably down. There
was no point in hovering and worrying. He and his two crewmen were as
ready now as they would ever be. Their compact Displacers were stored
in body pouches, inactive but ready.

Pid wanted to say something to his crew, but wasn't sure how to put
it.

The crew waited. Ilg the Radioman had sent the final message to the
Grom planet. Ger the Detector read sixteen dials at once, and
reported, "No sign of alien activity." His body surfaces flowed
carelessly.

       *       *       *       *       *

Noticing the flow, Pid knew what to say to his crew. Ever since they
had left Grom, shape-discipline had been disgustingly lax. The
Invasion Chief had warned him; but still, he had to do something about
it. It was his duty, since lower castes such as Radiomen and Detectors
were notoriously prone to Shapelessness.

"A lot of hopes are resting on this expedition," he began slowly.
"We're a long way from home now."

Ger the Detector nodded. Ilg the Radioman flowed out of his prescribed
shape and molded himself comfortably to a wall.

"However," Pid said sternly, "distance is no excuse for promiscuous
Shapelessness."

Ilg flowed hastily back into proper Radioman's shape.

"Exotic forms will undoubtedly be called for," Pid went on. "And for
that we have a special dispensation. But remember--any shape not
assumed strictly in the line of duty is a foul, lawless device of The
Shapeless One!"

Ger's body surfaces abruptly stopped flowing.

"That's all," Pid said, and flowed into his controls. The ship started
down, so smoothly co-ordinated that Pid felt a glow of pride.

They were good workers, he decided. He just couldn't expect them to be
as shape-conscious as a high-caste Pilot. Even the Invasion Chief had
told him that.

"Pid," the Invasion Chief had said at their last interview, "we need
this planet desperately."

"Yes, sir," Pid had said, standing at full attention, never quivering
from Optimum Pilot's Shape.

"One of you," the Chief said heavily, "must get through and set up a
Displacer near an atomic power source. The army will be standing by at
this end, ready to step through."

"We'll do it, sir," Pid said.

"This expedition has to succeed," the Chief said, and his features
blurred momentarily from sheer fatigue. "In strictest confidence,
there's considerable unrest on Grom. The Miner caste is on strike, for
instance. They want a new digging shape. Say the old one is
inefficient."

[Illustration]
