
The trouble is that when people write or speak upon this theme they
are apt to cover it up with the graces of belles-lettres, so that the
crime is made attractive instead of repulsive. Lord Byron in "Don
Juan" adorns this crime until it smiles like a May queen. Michelet,
the great French writer, covers it up with bewitching rhetoric until
it glows like the rising sun, when it ought to be made loathsome as a
small-pox hospital. There are to-day influences abroad which, if
unresisted by the pulpit and the printing-press, will turn New York
and Brooklyn into Sodom and Gomorrah, fit only for the storm of fire
and brimstone that whelmed the cities of the plain.

You who are seated in your Christian homes, compassed by moral and
religious restraints, do not realize the gulf of iniquity that bounds
you on the north and the south and the east and the west. While I
speak there are tens of thousands of men and women going over the
awful plunge of an impure life; and while I cry to God for mercy upon
their souls, I call upon you to marshal in the defense of your homes,
your Church and your nation. There is a banqueting hall that you have
never heard described. You know all about the feast of Ahasuerus,
where a thousand lords sat. You know all about Belshazzar's carousal,
where the blood of the murdered king spurted into the faces of the
banqueters. You may know of the scene of riot and wassail, when there
was set before Esopus one dish of food that cost $400,000. But I speak
now of a different banqueting hall. Its roof is fretted with fire. Its
floor is tesselated with fire. Its chalices are chased with fire. Its
song is a song of fire. Its walls are buttresses of fire. Solomon
refers to it when he says: "Her guests are in the depths of hell."

Our American communities are suffering from the gospel of Free
Loveism, which, fifteen or twenty years ago, was preached on the
platform and in some of the churches of this country. I charge upon
Free Loveism that it has blighted innumerable homes, and that it has
sent innumerable souls to ruin. Free Loveism is bestial; it is
worse--it is infernal! It has furnished this land with about one
thousand divorces annually. In one county in the State of Indiana it
furnished eleven divorces in one day before dinner. It has roused up
elopements, North, South, East, and West. You can hardly take up a
paper but you read of an elopement. As far as I can understand the
doctrine of Free Loveism it is this: That every man ought to have
somebody else's wife, and every wife somebody else's husband. They do
not like our Christian organization of society, and I wish they would
all elope, the wretches of one sex taking the wretches of the other,
and start to-morrow morning for the great Sahara Desert, until the
simoom shall sweep seven feet of sand all over them, and not one
passing caravan for the next five hundred years bring back one
miserable bone of their carcasses! Free Loveism! It is the
double-distilled extract of nux vomica, ratsbane, and adder's tongue.
Never until society goes back to the old Bible, and hears its eulogy
of purity and its anathema of uncleanness--never until then will this
evil be extirpated.

IV. Behold also in this giant of the text and in the giant of our own
century that great physical power must crumble and expire. The Samson
of the text long ago went away. He fought the lion. He fought the
Philistines. He could fight anything, but death was too much for him.
He may have required a longer grave and a broader grave; but the tomb
nevertheless was his terminus.

If, then, we are to be compelled to go out of this world, where are we
to go to? This body and soul must soon part. What shall be the destiny
of the former I know--dust to dust. But what shall be the destiny of
the latter? Shall it rise into the companionship of the white-robed,
whose sins Christ has slain? or will it go down among the unbelieving,
who tried to gain the world and save their souls, but were swindled
out of both? Blessed be God, we have a Champion! He is so styled in
the Bible: A Champion who has conquered death and hell, and he is
ready to fight all our battles from the first to the last. "Who is
this that cometh from Edom, with dyed garments from Bozrah, mighty to
save?" If we follow in the wake of that Champion death has no power
and the grave no victory. The worst man trusting in Him shall have his
dying pangs alleviated and his future illumined.

V. In the light of this subject I want to call your attention to a
fact which may not have been rightly considered by five men in this
house, and that is the fact that we must be brought into judgment for
the employment of our physical organism. Shoulder, brain, hand,
foot--we must answer in judgment for the use we have made of them.
Have they been used for the elevation of society or for its
depression? In proportion as our arm is strong and our step elastic
will our account at last be intensified. Thousands of sermons are
preached to invalids. I preach this sermon this morning to stout men
and healthful women. We must give to God an account for the right use
of this physical organism.

These invalids have comparatively little to account for, perhaps. They
could not lift twenty pounds. They could not walk half a mile without
sitting down to rest. In the preparation of this subject I have said
to myself, how shall I account to God in judgment for the use of a
body which never knew one moment of real sickness? Rising up in
judgment, standing beside the men and women who had only little
physical energy, and yet consumed that energy in a conflagration of
religious enthusiasm, how will we feel abashed!

Oh, men of the strong arm and the stout heart, what use are you making
of your physical forces? Will you be able to stand the test of that
day when we must answer for the use of every talent, whether it were a
physical energy, or a mental acumen, or a spiritual power?

The day approaches, and I see one who in this world was an invalid,
and as she stands before the throne of God to answer she says, "I was
sick all my days. I had but very little strength, but I did as well as
I could in being kind to those who were more sick and more
suffering." And Christ will say, "Well done, faithful servant."

And then a little child will stand before the throne, and she will
say, "On earth I had a curvature of the spine, and I was very weak,
and I was very sick; but I used to gather flowers out of the wild-wood
and bring them to my sick mother, and she was comforted when she saw
the sweet flowers out of the wild-wood. I didn't do much, but I did
something." And Christ shall say, as He takes her up in His arm and
kisses her, "Well done, well done, faithful servant; enter thou into
the joy of thy Lord."

What, then, will be said to us--we to whom the Lord gave physical
strength and continuous health? Hark! it thunders again. The judgment!
the judgment!

I said to an old Scotch minister, who was one of the best friends I
ever had, "Doctor, did you ever know Robert Pollock, the Scotch poet,
who wrote 'The Course of Time'?" "Oh, yes," he replied, "I knew him
well; I was his classmate." And then the doctor went on to tell me how
that the writing of "The Course of Time" exhausted the health of
Robert Pollock, and he expired. It seems as if no man could have such
a glimpse of the day for which all other days were made as Robert
Pollock had, and long survive that glimpse. In the description of that
day he says, among other things:

    "Begin the woe, ye woods, and tell it to the doleful winds
    And doleful winds wail to the howling hills,
    And howling hills mourn to the dismal vales,
    And dismal vales sigh to the sorrowing brooks,
    And sorrowing brooks weep to the weeping stream,
    And weeping stream awake the groaning deep;
    Ye heavens, great archway of the universe, put sack-cloth on;
    And ocean, robe thyself in garb of widowhood,
    And gather all thy waves into a groan, and utter it.
    Long, loud, deep, piercing, dolorous, immense.
    The occasion asks it, Nature dies, and angels come to lay
        her in her grave."

What Robert Pollock saw in poetic dream, you and I will see in
positive reality--the judgment! the judgment!




THE PLEIADES AND ORION.

    "Seek Him that maketh the Seven Stars and Orion."--AMOS. v. 8


A country farmer wrote this text--Amos of Tekoa. He plowed the earth
and threshed the grain by a new threshing-machine just invented, as
formerly the cattle trod out the grain. He gathered the fruit of the
sycamore-tree, and scarified it with an iron comb just before it was
getting ripe, as it was necessary and customary in that way to take
from it the bitterness. He was the son of a poor shepherd, and
stuttered; but before the stammering rustic the Philistines, and
Syrians, and Phoenicians, and Moabites, and Ammonites, and Edomites,
and Israelites trembled.

Moses was a law-giver, Daniel was a prince, Isaiah a courtier, and
David a king; but Amos, the author of my text, was a peasant, and, as
might be supposed, nearly all his parallelisms are pastoral, his
prophecy full of the odor of new-mown hay, and the rattle of locusts,
and the rumble of carts with sheaves, and the roar of wild beasts
devouring the flock while the shepherd came out in their defense. He
watched the herds by day, and by night inhabited a booth made out of
bushes, so that through these branches he could see the stars all
night long, and was more familiar with them than we who have tight
roofs to our houses, and hardly ever see the stars except among the
tall brick chimneys of the great towns. But at seasons of the year
when the herds were in special danger, he would stay out in the open
field all through the darkness, his only shelter the curtain of the
night, heaven, with the stellar embroideries and silvered tassels of
lunar light.

What a life of solitude, all alone with his herds! Poor Amos! And at
twelve o'clock at night, hark to the wolf's bark, and the lion's roar,
and the bear's growl, and the owl's te-whit-te-whos, and the serpent's
hiss, as he unwittingly steps too near while moving through the
thickets! So Amos, like other herdsmen, got the habit of studying the
map of the heavens, because it was so much of the time spread out
before him. He noticed some stars advancing and others receding. He
associated their dawn and setting with certain seasons of the year. He
had a poetic nature, and he read night by night, and month by month,
and year by year, the poem of the constellations, divinely rhythmic.
But two rosettes of stars especially attracted his attention while
seated on the ground, or lying on his back under the open scroll of
the midnight heavens--the Pleiades, or Seven Stars, and Orion. The
former group this rustic prophet associated with the spring, as it
rises about the first of May. The latter he associated with the
winter, as it comes to the meridian in January. The Pleiades, or Seven
Stars, connected with all sweetness and joy; Orion, the herald of the
tempest. The ancients were the more apt to study the physiognomy and
juxtaposition of the heavenly bodies, because they thought they had a
special influence upon the earth; and perhaps they were right. If the
moon every few hours lifts and lets down the tides of the Atlantic
Ocean, and the electric storms of last year in the sun, by all
scientific admission, affected the earth, why not the stars have
proportionate effect?

And there are some things which make me think that it may not have
been all superstition which connected the movements and appearance of
the heavenly bodies with great moral events on earth. Did not a meteor
run on evangelistic errand on the first Christmas night, and designate
the rough cradle of our Lord? Did not the stars in their courses fight
against Sisera? Was it merely coincidental that before the destruction
of Jerusalem the moon was eclipsed for twelve consecutive nights? Did
it merely happen so that a new star appeared in constellation
Cassiopeia, and then disappeared just before King Charles IX. of
France, who was responsible for St. Bartholomew massacre, died? Was it
without significance that in the days of the Roman Emperor Justinian
war and famine were preceded by the dimness of the sun, which for
nearly a year gave no more light than the moon, although there were no
clouds to obscure it?

Astrology, after all, may have been something more than a brilliant
heathenism. No wonder that Amos of the text, having heard these two
anthems of the stars, put down the stout rough staff of the herdsman
and took into his brown hand and cut and knotted fingers the pen of a
prophet, and advised the recreant people of his time to return to God,
saying: "Seek Him that maketh the Seven Stars and Orion." This
command, which Amos gave 785 years B.C., is just as appropriate for
us, 1885 A.D.

In the first place, Amos saw, as we must see, that the God who made
the Pleiades and Orion must be the God of order. It was not so much a
star here and a star there that impressed the inspired herdsman, but
seven in one group, and seven in the other group. He saw that night
after night and season after season and decade after decade they had
kept step of light, each one in its own place, a sisterhood never
clashing and never contesting precedence. From the time Hesiod called
the Pleiades the "seven daughters of Atlas" and Virgil wrote in his
AEneid of "Stormy Orion" until now, they have observed the order
established for their coming and going; order written not in
manuscript that may be pigeon-holed, but with the hand of the Almighty
on the dome of the sky, so that all nations may read it. Order.
Persistent order. Sublime order. Omnipotent order.

What a sedative to you and me, to whom communities and nations
sometimes seem going pell-mell, and world ruled by some fiend at
hap-hazard, and in all directions maladministration! The God who keeps
seven worlds in right circuit for six thousand years can certainly
keep all the affairs of individuals and nations and continents in
adjustment. We had not better fret much, for the peasant's argument of
the text was right. If God can take care of the seven worlds of the
Pleiades and the four chief worlds of Orion, He can probably take care
of the one world we inhabit.

So I feel very much as my father felt one day when we were going to
the country mill to get a grist ground, and I, a boy of seven years,
sat in the back part of the wagon, and our yoke of oxen ran away with
us and along a labyrinthine road through the woods, so that I thought
every moment we would be dashed to pieces, and I made a terrible
outcry of fright, and my father turned to me with a face perfectly
calm, and said: "De Witt, what are you crying about? I guess we can
ride as fast as the oxen can run." And, my hearers, why should we be
affrighted and lose our equilibrium in the swift movement of worldly
events, especially when we are assured that it is not a yoke of
unbroken steers that are drawing us on, but that order and wise
government are in the yoke?

In your occupation, your mission, your sphere, do the best you can,
and then trust to God; and if things are all mixed and disquieting,
and your brain is hot and your heart sick, get some one to go out with
you into the starlight and point out to you the Pleiades, or, better
than that, get into some observatory, and through the telescope see
further than Amos with the naked eye could--namely, two hundred stars
in the Pleiades, and that in what is called the sword of Orion there
is a nebula computed to be two trillion two hundred thousand billions
of times larger than the sun. Oh, be at peace with the God who made
all that and controls all that--the wheel of the constellations
turning in the wheel of galaxies for thousands of years without the
breaking of a cog or the slipping of a band or the snap of an axle.
For your placidity and comfort through the Lord Jesus Christ I charge
you, "Seek Him that maketh the Seven Stars and Orion."

Again, Amos saw, as we must see, that the God who made these two
groups of the text was the God of light. Amos saw that God was not
satisfied with making one star, or two or three stars, but He makes
seven; and having finished that group of worlds, makes another
group--group after group. To the Pleiades He adds Orion. It seems that
God likes light so well that He keeps making it. Only one being in the
universe knows the statistics of solar, lunar, stellar, meteoric
creations, and that is the--Creator Himself. And they have all been
lovingly christened, each one a name as distinct as the names of your
children. "He telleth the number of the stars; He calleth them all by
their names." The seven Pleiades had names given to them, and they are
Alcyone, Merope, Celaeno, Electra, Sterope, Taygete, and Maia.

But think of the billions and trillions of daughters of starry light
that God calls by name as they sweep by Him with beaming brow and
lustrous robe! So fond is God of light--natural light, moral light,
spiritual light. Again and again is light harnessed for
symbolization--Christ, the bright and morning star; evangelization,
the daybreak; the redemption of nations, Sun of Righteousness rising
with healing in His wings. Oh, men and women, with so many sorrows and
sins and perplexities, if you want light of comfort, light of pardon,
light of goodness, in earnest, pray through Christ, "Seek Him that
maketh the Seven Stars and Orion."

Again, Amos saw, as we must see, that the God who made these two
archipelagoes of stars must be an unchanging God. There had been no
change in the stellar appearance in this herdsman's life-time, and his
father, a shepherd, reported to him that there had been no change in
his life-time. And these two clusters hang over the celestial arbor
now just as they were the first night that they shone on the Edenic
bowers, the same as when the Egyptians built the Pyramids from the top
of which to watch them, the same as when the Chaldeans calculated the
eclipses, the same as when Elihu, according to the Book of Job, went
out to study the aurora borealis, the same under Ptolemaic system and
Copernican system, the same from Calisthenes to Pythagoras, and from
Pythagoras to Herschel. Surely, a changeless God must have fashioned
the Pleiades and Orion! Oh, what an anodyne amid the ups and downs of
life, and the flux and reflux of the tides of prosperity, to know that
