
[-13-] He was in a dilemma and could not find any plan to pursue:
the siege was proving fruitless and dangerous and a retreat appeared
disgraceful. This led to an uproar on the part of the soldiers, who
raised so great an outcry that the enemy, who were encamped in the
shelter of the wall, were terrified and retreated. As a consequence,
being partly angry and partly pleased, he called them together and
administered some rebukes and some admonition. He displayed no rashness
nor yet did he withdraw, but remained quietly on the spot until Bato,
despairing of victory, sent a herald to ask terms. This act was due to
the subjugation of all but a few of the other tribes and the fact that
the force which Bato had was inferior to the one then opposing it. He
could not persuade the rest to ask a truce and so abandoned them, nor did
he again assist one of them, though he received many requests for aid.
Tiberius consequently conceived a contempt for those still left in the
fortress and thinking that he could conquer them without loss paid no
further heed to the nature of the country but proceeded straight up the
cliff. Since there was no level ground and the enemy would not come down
against them, he himself took his seat on a platform in full view in
order to watch the engagement (for this would cause his soldiers to
contend more vigorously), and to render opportune assistance, should
there be any need of it. He kept a part of the army, inasmuch as he had a
great plenty of men, for this very purpose. The rest, drawn up in a dense
square, at first proceeded at a walk; later they were separated by the
steepness and unevenness of the mountain (which was full of gullies and
at many points cut up into ravines), and some ascended more quickly,
others more slowly. [-14-] Seeing this, the Dalmatians marshaled outside
the wall, at the top of the steep, and hurled down quantities of stones
upon them, throwing some from slings, and rolling down others. Others
set in motion wheels, others whole wagons full of rocks, others circular
chests manufactured in some way peculiar to the country and packed with
stones. All these things coming down with great noise kept striking in
different quarters, as if discharged from a sling, and separated the
Romans from one another even more than before and crushed them. Others by
discharging either missiles or spears knocked many of them down. At this
juncture much rivalry developed on the part of the warriors, one side
endeavoring to ascend and conquer the heights, the other to repulse them
and hurl them back. There was great excitement also on the part of the
rest, who watched the action from the walls, and on the part of those
about Tiberius. Each side as a body and also individually encouraged its
own men, trying to lend strength to such as showed zeal and chiding those
that anywhere gave way. Those whose voices could be heard above the rest
were invoking the gods, both parties praying for the protection of
their warriors for the time being, and one side calling for freedom
for themselves in the future, and the other for peace. Under these
circumstances the Romans would certainly have risked their lives in vain,
having to contend against two things at once,--the nature of the
country and the lines of their antagonists,--had not Tiberius by sudden
reinforcements prevented them from taking to flight and disturbed the
enemy from another quarter by means of other soldiers who went about and
ascended the incline a considerable distance off. As a result, the enemy
were routed and could not even enter the fortifications, but scattered
up the mountain sides, first casting off their armor so as to be lightly
equipped. Their pursuers followed them at every point, for they were
exceedingly anxious to end the war and did not want them to unite again
and cause trouble. So they discovered the most of them hiding in the
forests and killed them like beasts, after which they took possession
of the men in the fort, who capitulated. To these Tiberius assured the
rights which had been agreed upon and some others.

[-15-] Germanicus now turned to meet his adversaries, for many deserters
who were in their ranks prevented a peaceful settlement. He succeeded in
enslaving a place called Arduba, but could not do it with his own force,
though the latter was far greater than his opponents' army. The town had
been powerfully strengthened and a river with a strong current surrounded
its foundations except for a small space. But the deserters had a dispute
with the inhabitants, because the latter were anxious for peace, and came
to blows with them. The assailants had the cooeperation of the women in
the town, for these contrary to the judgment of the men desired liberty,
and were ready to suffer any fate whatever sooner than slavery: there was
consequently a great battle, the deserters were beaten and surrendered,
and some of them made their escape. The women caught up their children,
and some threw themselves into the fire, others hurled themselves down
into the river. In this way that post was taken and others near it
voluntarily came to an understanding with Germanicus. He, after effecting
this, went back to Tiberius, and Postumius[1] completed the subjugation
of the remaining sections. [-16-] Upon this, Bato sent his son Sceuas
to Tiberius, promising to surrender himself and all his followers if he
could obtain protection. When he had received a pledge he came by night
into his conqueror's camp and was on the following day led before the
latter who was seated on a platform. Bato asked nothing for himself, even
holding his head forward to await the stroke, but in behalf of the rest
he made a long defence. Being again asked by Tiberius: "Why has it
pleased you to revolt and to war against us so long a time?" he made the
same answer as before: "You are responsible for this; for you send as
guardians over your flocks not dogs or shepherds, but wolves."

In this way, then, the war was ended once more, after many men and much
money had been consumed. The legions supported for it were very numerous,
whereas the spoils taken were exceedingly meagre. [-17-] On this occasion
also Germanicus announced the victory, in honor of which Augustus and
Tiberius were allowed to bear the name imperator and to celebrate a
triumph; and they received still other honors, as well as two arches
bearing trophies, in Pannonia. These, at least, were all of many
distinctions voted that Augustus would accept. Germanicus received
triumphal honors (which belonged likewise to the other commanders) and
praetorial honors, the right of casting his vote immediately after the
ex-consuls and of obtaining the consulship earlier than custom allowed.
Drusus, the son of Tiberius, although he had not participated in the
war, was voted permission to attend the sittings of the senate before he
became a member of that body, and when he should become quaestor to cast
his vote before the expraetors.

[-18-] Scarcely had these resolutions been passed when terrible news that
arrived from Germany prevented them from holding any festivals. At that
same period the following events had taken place in Celtica. The Romans
had a hold on parts of it,--not the whole region, but just places
that happened to have been subdued, so that the fact has not received
historical notice,--and soldiers of theirs were used to wintering there
and cities were being founded. The barbarians were adapting themselves
to Roman ways, were taking up the custom of markets, and were holding
peaceful meetings. They had not, however, forgotten their ancestral
habits, their native manners, the life of independence, or the authority
given by arms. Hence, while they were unlearning them gradually and
imperceptibly, with careful watching, they were not disturbed by the
changed conditions of existence, and they were becoming different without
knowing it. Finally, Quintilius Varus received the command of Germany and
in the discharge of his office strove, in administering the affairs of
the people, to introduce more widespread changes among them. He treated
them in general as if they were already slaves, levying money upon them
as he had upon subject nations. This they were not inclined to endure,
for the prominent men longed for their former ascendency and the masses
preferred their accustomed constitution to foreign domination. They did
not openly revolt, since they saw there were many Roman soldiers near
the Rhine and many in their own territory; but they received Varus,
pretending they would execute all his commands, and took him far away
from the Rhine into Cheruscis near the Visurgis. There by behaving in a
most peaceful and friendly manner they led him to believe that they could
be trusted to live submissively without soldiers. [-19-] Consequently he
did not keep his legions together as was proper in an enemy's country,
and many of the men he distributed to helpless communities who asked it,
for the supposed purpose of guarding certain localities, or arresting
robbers, or escorting provision trains. Those deepest in the conspiracy
and the leaders of the plot and of the war, among others Armenius and
Segimerus, were his constant companions and often entertained him. He,
accordingly, became confident and expecting no harm not only refused to
believe all such as suspected the truth and advised him to be on his
guard, but even rebuked them on the ground that they were needlessly
disturbed and slandered his friends. Then there came an uprising, first
of those dwelling at a distance from him, purposely contrived, that Varus
should march against them and be easier overcome while on his journey
through what he deemed a friendly country, and that he might not at once
know that all were his enemies and guard himself against all of them. It
turned out precisely so. They escorted him on his setting out, and begged
to be excused from attendance[2] in order to gather auxiliaries (as they
said), after which they would quickly come to his assistance. So then
they took charge of forces already in waiting, and after killing the
different bodies of soldiers for whom they had previously asked they
encountered him in the midst of forests by this time hard to traverse.
There they showed themselves as enemies instead of subjects and wrought
many deeds of fearful injury. [-20-] The mountains had an uneven surface
broken by ravines, and the trees, standing close together, were extremely
tall. Hence the Romans even before the enemy assaulted them were having
hard work in felling, road making, and bridging places that required it.
They had with them many wagons and many beasts of burden as in a time of
peace. Not a few children and women and a large body of servants were
following them,--another reason for their advancing in scattered groups.
Meanwhile a great rain and wind came up that separated them still
farther, while the ground, being slippery where there were roots and
logs, made walking very difficult for them, and the top branches of
trees, which kept breaking off and falling down, caused confusion. While
the Romans were in such perplexity as this the barbarians suddenly
encompassed them from all sides at once, coming through the thickest part
of the underbrush, since they were acquainted with the paths. At first
they hurled from a distance; then as no one defended himself but many
were wounded, they approached closer to them. The Romans were in no order
but going along helter-skelter among the wagons and the unarmed, and so,
not being able to form readily in a body, and being fewer at every point
than their assailants, they suffered greatly and offered no resistance
at all. [-21-] Accordingly, they encamped on the spot, after securing
a suitable place so far as that was possible on a wooded mountain, and
afterward they either burned or abandoned the majority of their wagons
and everything else that was not absolutely necessary for them. The next
day they advanced in better order, with the aim of reaching open country;
but they did not gain it without loss. From there they went forward and
plunged into the woods again, defending themselves against the attacks,
but endured no inconsiderable reverses in this very operation. For
whereas they were marshaled in a narrow place in order that cavalry
and heavy-armed men in a mass might run down their foes, they had many
collisions with one another and with the trees. Dawn of the fourth day
broke as they were advancing and again a violent downpour and mighty wind
attacked them, which would not allow them to go forward or even to stand
securely, and actually deprived them of the use of their weapons. They
could not manage successfully their arrows or their javelins or, indeed,
their shields (which were soaked through). The enemy, however, being for
the most part lightly equipped and with power to approach and retire
freely, suffered less from the effects of the storm. _Their_ numbers,
moreover, increased, as numbers of those who had at first wavered joined
them particularly for the sake of plunder, and so they could more easily
encircle and strike down the Romans, who were already few, many having
perished in the previous battles. Varus, therefore, and the most eminent
of the other leaders, fearing that they might either be taken alive or be
killed by their bitterest foes,--for they had been wounded,--dared do a
deed which was frightful but not to be avoided: they killed themselves.

[-22-] When this news was spread, none of the rest, even if he had
strength still left, defended himself longer. Some imitated their leader;
others, throwing aside their arms, allowed who pleased to slay them. To
flee was impossible, however one might wish it. Every man and horse,
therefore, was cut down without resistance, and the[3] ...

  And the barbarians occupied all the strongholds save one, delay over
  which prevented them from either crossing the Rhine or invading Gaul.
  Yet they found themselves unable to reduce this particular fort because
  they did not understand the conduct of sieges and because the Romans
  employed numerous archers, who repeatedly repulsed them and from
  first to last destroyed a large proportion of the attacking party.

  Later they learned that the Romans had posted a guard at the Rhine
  and that Tiberius was approaching with an imposing force of fighters.
  Therefore most of the barbarians retired from the fortress, and the
  detachment still left there withdrew some distance away, so as not to
  be damaged by sudden sallies of the men inside; and they kept watch
  of the roads, hoping to capture the garrison through scarcity of food
  supplies. The Romans within, so long as they had abundance of sustenance,
  remained where they were awaiting relief. But when no one
  came to their assistance and they were likewise a prey to hunger, they
  watched for a stormy night and issued forth--the soldiers were but
  fed, the unarmed many,--and

they passed the first and second guard of their adversaries, but when
they reached the third they were detected; for on account of fatigue and
fear, and the darkness and cold, the women and children kept calling to
the men of fighting age to come back. They would all have perished or
been captured, had not the barbarians been so busily occupied with
seizing the plunder. This gave an opportunity for many of the most hardy
to get some distance off, and the trumpeters with them by sounding the
signal for a double quick march caused the enemy to think (for night
was coming on and they could not be seen) that they had been sent from
Asprenas. Therefore the foe ceased their pursuit, and Asprenas on
learning what was taking place rendered them assistance in reality. Some
of the captives were later ransomed by their relatives and returned,
for this was permitted on condition that the ransoming party should be
outside of Italy at the time.--But this was only afterward. [-23-] At the
time, when Augustus heard of the disaster to Varus, he rent his clothing
(as some assert) and mourned greatly over the lost soldiers as also over
the fear inspired by the Germans and the Gauls. His grief was especially
keen because he expected that they would march upon Italy and upon Rome
itself. There were no citizens of military age worth mentioning that
were left and the allied forces that were of any value had been ruined.
Nevertheless he made preparations as well as he could in view of the
circumstances: and when no one of the proper age for warfare showed a
willingness to be enrolled, he instituted a drawing of lots and deprived
of his property every fifth man to draw of those not yet thirty-five
years old and every tenth man among those who were older, besides
disenfranchising them. Finally, as very many paid no heed to him even
then, he put some to death. He chose by lot as many as he could of those
who had already finished their service and of the freedmen, and having
enrolled them sent them at once in haste with Tiberius into Germany. And
as there were in Rome a number of Gauls and Celtae, sojourning there for
various purposes, and some of them serving in the pretorian guard, he
feared that they might commit some act of insurrection: therefore he sent
such as were in his guard off to the islands and ordered the unarmed
class to leave the city.

[-24-] This was the way be busied himself at that time, and none of the
usual business went on nor were the festivals celebrated. After this,
when he heard that some of the soldiers had been saved, that the
Germanies were garrisoned and the enemy did not dare to come down even to
the Rhine, he ceased to be excited and stopped to consider the matter.
A catastrophe so great and prostrating as this, it seemed to him, could
have been due to nothing else than the wrath of some Divinity: moreover,
by reason of the portents which took place both before the defeat and
afterward he was greatly inclined to suspect some miraculous working. The
temple of Mars in the field of the same name had been struck by lightning
and many locusts that flew into the very city were devoured by swallows;
the peaks of the Alps seemed to totter toward one another and to send up
three fiery columns; the sky in many places appeared ablaze and at the
same time numerous comet stars came to view; spears darting from the
north seemed to be falling upon the Roman camp; bees formed their combs
about Roman altars; a statue of Victory which was in Germany, facing
hostile territory, turned about toward Italy; and once an aimless battle
and conflict of the soldiers occurred about the eagles in the camps, as
if the barbarians had fallen upon them.

For these reasons, then, and also because ... [4]

  [A.D. 10 (_a. u._ 763)]

  Tiberius did not see fit to cross the Rhine, but kept quiet, watching
  to see that the barbarians should not do so. The latter, however,
  knowing him to be present, did not venture to cross either.

  Germanicus was endeared to the populace for many causes, but particularly
  because he interceded for various persons, and this quite as
  much in the presence of Augustus himself as before other justices. Now
  there was a court to try a quaestor who was charged with murder,
  and, as Germanicus was going to be his advocate, his accuser became
  alarmed lest he might consequently meet with defeat before those
  judges in whose presence such cases were wont to be tried, and he
  desired to have Augustus preside. Yet his efforts were vain, for he
  did not win his case.

 ... holding [it] after his praetorship.

[A.D. 11 (_a. u._ 764)]

[-25-]But in the following season the temple of Concord was dedicated by
Tiberius and both his name and that of Drusus, his dead brother, were
inscribed upon it. In the consulship of Marcus AEmilius with Statilius
Taurus Tiberius and Germanicus acting as proconsul invaded Celtica and
overran some parts of it. They did not conquer, however, in any battle
(since no one came to close quarters with them), and did not reduce
any tribe. For in their fear of falling victims to a new disaster they
advanced not far beyond the Rhine, but after remaining there until late
autumn and celebrating the birthday of Augustus, on which they held a
kind of horse-race under the direction of the centurions, they returned.

At Rome Drusus Caesar, the son of Tiberius, became quaestor, and sixteen
praetors held office because that number became candidates for the
position and Augustus, mindful of his condition, was unwilling to
offend any of them. The same did not hold true, however, of the years
immediately following, but the number remained twelve for a long period.
Besides these proceedings the seers were forbidden to prophesy in private
to any one, or regarding death even if there should be others with
them. Yet in this matter Augustus had no personal feeling, so that by a
bulletin he even published to all the conjunction of stars under which
he had been born. In addition to forbidding the above he proclaimed to
subject states that they should grant no honors to any one assigned to
govern them either during his term of office or within sixty days after
he had departed. For some governors by arranging for testimonials and
eulogies from their subjects were doing much harm. Three senators, as
before, transacted business with the embassies, and the knights,--a fact
which might cause surprise,--were allowed to fight as gladiators. The
reason was that some persisted in disregarding the disenfranchisement
stated as a penalty for such conduct. And as there proved to be no use in
forbidding it and the participants seemed to require a greater punishment
before they would be turned aside from this course, they were given
permission to do as they liked. In this way they incurred death instead
of disenfranchisement, for they fought more than ever, and especially
because their contests were centers of attraction, so that even Augustus
became a spectator in company with the praetors who superintended games.

[A.D. 12 (_a. u._ 765)]

[-26-] Germanicus soon after received the office of consul, though he had
not even been praetor, and held it actually throughout the whole year, not
because of fitness but as a number of others held office at that time.
The consul did nothing worthy of note save that at this time, too, he
acted as advocate in suits, since his colleague Gaius Capito counted as
a mere figurehead. Augustus, because he was growing old, wrote a letter
commending Germanicus to the senate and the latter to Tiberius: the
manuscript was not read by him in person, for he was unable to make
himself heard, but by Germanicus, as usual. After that he asked them,
making the Celtic war his excuse, not to come to greet him at home nor to
be angry if he did not continue to eat with them. For generally, as often
as they had a sitting, in the Forum and sometimes in the senate-house
itself, they saluted him when he entered and again when he left; and it
had already happened that, when he was sitting and sometimes lying down
in the Palatium, not only the senate but the knights and many of the
populace greeted him. [-27-] All this time he continued to attend to his
business as before. He allowed the knights to become candidates for the
tribuneship. And learning that vituperative books concerning certain men
were being written, he ordered a search for them. Those that he found in
the city he had burned by the aediles and those outside by the officials
who might be in charge, and he visited punishment upon some of the
composers. As there were many exiles who were either carrying on their
occupations outsides of the places to which they had been banished or
living too luxuriously in the proper places, he forbade that any one who
had been debarred from fire and water should stay either on the mainland
or on any of the islands distant less than four hundred stadia from the
mainland. Only he made an exception of Cos, Rhodes, Samos[5], and Lesbos,
for what reason I know not. He enjoined upon them also that they should
not cross the seas to any other point and should not possess more than
one ship of burden having a capacity of one thousand amphorae, and two
driven by oars; that they should not employ more than twenty slaves or
freedmen; that they should not hold property above twelve and a half
myriads; and he threatened to take vengeance upon them for any violation
as well as upon all others who should in any way assist them in violating
these ordinances. These are the laws, as fully as is necessary for our
history, that he laid down.

A festival extraordinary was conducted by the dancers and horse-breeders.
The Feast of Mars, because the Tiber had previously occupied the
hipprodrome, was this time held in the forum of Augustus and honored by a
kind of horse-race and by the slaughter of wild beasts. It was celebrated
a second time, as custom decreed, and Germanicus on that occasion killed
