
"It's a big planet, isn't it?"

"Not quite as big as Mars. There's no atmosphere. The settlers live in
mountain valleys, with air-tight lids over 'em."

Catlin flipped the pages of _Thumbnail Sketches of the Inhabited
Worlds_. "Says here there's ancient ruins millions of years old. When
the atmosphere went, the population went with it."

Frayberg became animated. "There's lots of material out there! Go get
it, Wilbur! Life! Sex! Excitement! Mystery!"

"Okay," said Wilbur Murphy.

"But lay off this horseman-in-space. There _is_ a limit to public
credulity, and don't you let anyone tell you different."

       *       *       *       *       *

Cirgamesc hung outside the port, twenty thousand miles ahead. The
steward leaned over Wilbur Murphy's shoulder and pointed a long brown
finger. "It was right out there, sir. He came riding up--"

"What kind of a man was it? Strange-looking?"

"No. He was Cirgameski."

"Oh. You saw him with your own eyes, eh?"

The steward bowed, and his loose white mantle fell forward. "Exactly,
sir."

"No helmet, no space-suit?"

"He wore a short Singhalut vest and pantaloons and a yellow Hadrasi hat.
No more."

"And the horse?"

"Ah, the horse! There's a different matter."

"Different how?"

"I can't describe the horse. I was intent on the man."

"Did you recognize him?"

"By the brow of Lord Allah, it's well not to look too closely when such
matters occur."

"Then--you _did_ recognize him!"

"I must be at my task, sir."

Murphy frowned in vexation at the steward's retreating back, then bent
over his camera to check the tape-feed. If anything appeared now, and
his eyes could see it, the two-hundred million audience of _Know Your
Universe!_ could see it with him.

When he looked up, Murphy made a frantic grab for the stanchion, then
relaxed. Cirgamesc had taken the Great Twitch. It was an illusion, a
psychological quirk. One instant the planet lay ahead; then a man winked
or turned away, and when he looked back, "ahead" had become "below"; the
planet had swung an astonishing ninety degrees across the sky, and they
were _falling_!

Murphy leaned against the stanchion. "'The Great Twitch'," he muttered
to himself, "I'd like to get _that_ on two hundred million screens!"

Several hours passed. Cirgamesc grew. The Sampan Range rose up like a
dark scab; the valley sultanates of Singhalut, Hadra, New Batavia, and
Boeng-Bohot showed like glistening chicken-tracks; the Great Rift Colony
of Sundaman stretched down through the foothills like the trail of a
slug.

A loudspeaker voice rattled the ship. "Attention passengers for
Singhalut and other points on Cirgamesc! Kindly prepare your luggage for
disembarkation. Customs at Singhalut are extremely thorough. Passengers
are warned to take no weapons, drugs or explosives ashore. This is
important!"

       *       *       *       *       *

The warning turned out to be an understatement. Murphy was plied with
questions. He suffered search of an intimate nature. He was
three-dimensionally X-rayed with a range of frequencies calculated to
excite fluorescence in whatever object he might have secreted in his
stomach, in a hollow bone, or under a layer of flesh.

His luggage was explored with similar minute attention, and Murphy
rescued his cameras with difficulty. "What're you so damn anxious about?
I don't have drugs; I don't have contraband ..."

"It's guns, your excellency. Guns, weapons, explosives ..."

"I don't have any guns."

"But these objects here?"

"They're cameras. They record pictures and sounds and smells."

The inspector seized the cases with a glittering smile of triumph. "They
resemble no cameras of my experience; I fear I shall have to impound ..."

A young man in loose white pantaloons, a pink vest, pale green cravat
and a complex black turban strolled up. The inspector made a swift
obeisance, with arms spread wide. "Excellency."

The young man raised two fingers. "You may find it possible to spare Mr.
Murphy any unnecessary formality."

"As your Excellency recommends...." The inspector nimbly repacked
Murphy's belongings, while the young man looked on benignly.

Murphy covertly inspected his face. The skin was smooth, the color of
the rising moon; the eyes were narrow, dark, superficially placid. The
effect was of silken punctilio with hot ruby blood close beneath.

Satisfied with the inspector's zeal, he turned to Murphy. "Allow me to
introduce myself, Tuan Murphy. I am Ali-Tomas, of the House of
Singhalut, and my father the Sultan begs you to accept our poor
hospitality."

"Why, thank you," said Murphy. "This is a very pleasant surprise."

"If you will allow me to conduct you...." He turned to the inspector.
"Mr. Murphy's luggage to the palace."

       *       *       *       *       *

Murphy accompanied Ali-Tomas into the outside light, fitting his own
quick step to the prince's feline saunter. This is coming it pretty
soft, he said to himself. I'll have a magnificent suite, with bowls of
fruit and gin pahits, not to mention two or three silken girls with skin
like rich cream bringing me towels in the shower.... Well, well, well,
it's not so bad working for _Know Your Universe!_ after all! I suppose I
ought to unlimber my camera....

Prince Ali-Tomas watched him with interest. "And what is the audience of
_Know Your Universe!_?"

"We call 'em 'participants'."

"Expressive. And how many participants do you serve?"

"Oh, the Bowdler Index rises and falls. We've got about two hundred
million screens, with five hundred million participants."

"Fascinating! And tell me--how do you record smells?"

Murphy displayed the odor recorder on the side of the camera, with its
gelatinous track which fixed the molecular design.

"And the odors recreated--they are like the originals?"

"Pretty close. Never exact, but none of the participants knows the
difference. Sometimes the synthetic odor is an improvement."

"Astounding!" murmured the prince.

"And sometimes ... Well, Carson Tenlake went out to get the
myrrh-blossoms on Venus. It was a hot day--as days usually are on
Venus--and a long climb. When the show was run off, there was more smell
of Carson than of flowers."

Prince Ali-Tomas laughed politely. "We turn through here."

They came out into a compound paved with red, green and white tiles.
Beneath the valley roof was a sinuous trough, full of haze and warmth
and golden light. As far in either direction as the eye could reach, the
hillsides were terraced, barred in various shades of green. Spattering
the valley floor were tall canvas pavilions, tents, booths, shelters.

"Naturally," said Prince Ali-Tomas, "we hope that you and your
participants will enjoy Singhalut. It is a truism that, in order to
import, we must export; we wish to encourage a pleasurable response to
the 'Made in Singhalut' tag on our _batiks_, carvings, lacquers."

They rolled quietly across the square in a surface-car displaying the
House emblem. Murphy rested against deep, cool cushions. "Your
inspectors are pretty careful about weapons."

Ali-Tomas smiled complacently. "Our existence is ordered and peaceful.
You may be familiar with the concept of _adak_?"

"I don't think so."

"A word, an idea from old Earth. Every living act is ordered by ritual.
But our heritage is passionate--and when unyielding _adak_ stands in the
way of an irresistible emotion, there is turbulence, sometimes even
killing."

"An _amok_."
