strictly in the male line, and I'm the oldest grandson, so naturally I'm
the heir. It goes without saying!"

Dulcie's pink face was looking puzzled.

"Do you mean to say if Grandfather were to die, that everything would be
yours?" she asked. "Would you be the Squire?"

"I believe I'm called 'the young squire' already," replied Everard
airily.

"But what about the rest of us?" objected Dulcie.

"Oh, I'd look after you, of course! The heir always does something for
the younger ones. You needn't be afraid on that score!"

Everard's tone was magnanimous and patronizing in the extreme. He was
gazing at the house with an air of evident proprietorship. Dulcie, who
had never considered the question before, revolved it carefully in her
youthful brain for a moment or two; then she ventured a comment.

"Wouldn't it be fairer to divide it?"

"Nonsense, Dulcie!" put in Lilias. "You don't understand. Properties
like this are never divided. They always go, just as they are, to the
eldest son. You couldn't chop them up into pieces, or there'd be no
estate left."

"Couldn't one have the house and the other the wood, and another the
park?"

"Much good the house would do anybody without the estate to keep it up!"
grunted Everard. "Dulcie, you're an utter baby. I don't believe you ever
see farther than the end of your silly little nose. You may be glad
you've got a brother to take care of you."

"But haven't I as much right here as you?" persisted Dulcie obstinately.

"No, you haven't; the heir always has the best right to everything.
Cheer up! When the place is mine, I mean to have a ripping time here!
I'll make things hum, I can tell you--ask my friends down, and you girls
shall help to entertain. I've planned it all out. I suppose I shall have
to go to Cambridge first, but I'll enjoy myself there too--you bet! On
the whole I think I was born under a lucky star! Hallo! there goes
Astley; I want to speak to him."

Everard whistled to the groom, and ran down the garden, leaving his
sisters to return to the house. At seventeen he was a fair, handsome,
dashing sort of boy, of a type more common thirty years ago than at
present. He held closely to the old-fashioned ideas of privileges of
birth, and, according to modern notions, had contracted some false
ideals of life. He had lounged through school without attempting to
work, and was depending for all his future upon what should be left him
by the industry of others. All the same, in spite of his attitude of
"top dog" in the family, he was attractive, and inclined to be generous.
Like most boys of seventeen, he had reached the "swollen head" stage,
and imagined himself of vastly greater importance than he really was.
The sobriquet of "the young squire" pleased his fancy, and he meant to
live up to what he considered were the traditions of so distinguished a
title.




CHAPTER II

A Stolen Joy-ride


Christmas passed over at Cheverley Chase in good old-fashioned orthodox
mode. The young Ingletons, with plenty of evergreens to work upon,
performed prodigies in the way of decorations at church and home. They
distributed presents at a Christmas-tree for the children of tenants,
and turned up in a body to occupy the front seats at the annual New
Year's concert in the village. When the usual festivities were finished,
however, time hung a little heavy on their hands, and one particular
morning found them lounging about the breakfast-room in the especially
aggravating situation of not quite knowing what to do with themselves.

"It's too bad we can't have the horses to-day!" groused Dulcie. "I'd set
my heart on a ride, and I can't get on with my fancy work till I can go
to Balderton for some more silks."

"And I want some wool," proclaimed Lilias, stopping from a rather
unnecessary onslaught of poking at the fire. "There's never anything
fit to buy at this wretched little shop in the village!"

"Except bacon and kippers!" grinned Roland.

"I can't knit with kippers!"

"Fact is, we're all bored stiff!" drawled Everard from the sofa,
flinging away the book he was reading, and stretching his arms in the
luxury of a long-drawn yawn. "What should you say to a turn in the car?
Wouldn't it be rather sport, don't you think?"

"If Grandfather would spare Milner to take us!" said Lilias doubtfully.

"We don't want Milner. _I'll_ drive you! I can manage a car as well as
he can, any day. Don't get excited, you kids! _No_, Bevis, I shall
certainly _not_ allow you to try to drive! There's only going to be one
man at that job, and that's myself!"

"Shall we go and ask Grandfather?" suggested Dulcie.

"Right you are! No, not the whole of us," (as there was a general family
move). "Three's enough!"

So a deputation, consisting of Everard, Lilias, and Dulcie, promptly
presented themselves at the study door and tapped for admission. As
there was no reply to a second rap, they opened the door and walked into
the room. Grandfather was rather deaf, and sometimes, when he had
ignored a summons, he would say: "Well, why didn't you come in?" He was
generally to be found writing letters at this hour in the morning, but
to-day the revolving chair was empty. He had apparently begun his usual
correspondence, for his desk was littered with papers. Leaning up
against the ink-pot there was a photograph. The young people, who had
walked across the room towards the window, could not fail to notice it,
for it was tilted in such a prominent place that it at once attracted
their attention. It represented a very pretty dark-eyed young lady,
holding a baby on her lap, with a slight background of Greek columns.
The decidedly foreign look about it was justified by the photographer's
name in the corner: "Carlo Salviati, Palermo." Over the top was written
in ink, in a man's handwriting: "My wife and Leslie, from Tristram."

"Who is it?" asked Everard, gazing at the portrait with curiosity.
"She's rather decent looking. Never seen her here, though, that I can
remember!"

"It's a ducky little baby! But who is Tristram?" said Dulcie.

"We had an Uncle Tristram once," answered Lilias doubtfully.

"Why, but he died years and years ago, when we were all kids!" returned
Everard.

"I know. He was the only Tristram in the family, though. I can't
imagine who these two can be. Leslie, too! Why, that's Grandfather's
name! Was the baby christened after him?"

"We'll ask Cousin Clare sometime," said Dulcie, so interested that she
could scarcely tear herself away. "I really want to know most fearfully
who they are."

"Oh, don't bother about photos at present! Let's find Grandfather!"
urged Everard. "Perhaps he's gone down to the stables, or he may be in
the gun-room."

On further inquiry, however, they ascertained that a telegram had
arrived for Mr. Ingleton, on the receipt of which he had consulted Miss
Clare, had ordered the smaller car, and they had both been driven away
by Milner, the chauffeur, and were not expected back until seven or
eight o'clock in the evening. This was news indeed. For a whole day the
heads of the establishment would be absent, and the younger generation
had the place to themselves. For the next eight hours they could do
practically as they pleased.

Everard stood for a moment thinking. He did not reveal quite all that
passed through his mind, but the first instalment was sufficient for the
family.

"We'll get out the touring car, take some lunch with us, and have a
joy-ride."

Five delighted faces smiled their appreciation.

"Oh, Everard! Dare we?" Dulcie's objection was consciously faint.

"Why not? When Grandfather's away, I consider I've a right to take his
place and use the car if I want. I'm master here in his absence! I'll
make it all right with him; don't you girls alarm yourselves! Tear off
and put on your coats, and tell Atkins to pack us a basket of lunch, and
to put some coffee in the thermos flasks."

With Everard willing to assume the full responsibility the girls could
not resist such a tempting offer, while the younger boys were, of
course, only too ready to follow where their elders led. Elton, the
groom, made some slight demur when Everard went down to the motor-house
and began to get out the big touring-car, but the boy behaved with such
assurance that he concluded he must be acting with his grandfather's
permission. Moreover, Elton was in charge of the horses, and not the
cars, and Milner, the chauffeur, who might reasonably have raised
objections, was away driving his master.

The cook, who perhaps considered it was no business of hers to offer
remonstrances, and that the house would be quieter without the young
folks, hastily packed a picnic hamper and filled the thermos flasks. A
rejoicing crew carried them outside and stowed them in the car.

It seemed a delightful adventure to go off in this way entirely on
their own. There was some slight wrangling over seats, but Everard
settled it in his lofty fashion.

"You'll sit where I tell you. I'll have Lilias in front, and the rest of
you may pack in behind. If you don't like it, you can stop at home. No,
I'm not going to have you kids interfering here, so you needn't think
it."

Everard had been taught by the chauffeur to drive, and could manage a
car quite tolerably well. He possessed any amount of confidence, which
is a good or bad quality according to circumstances. He ran the large
touring "Daimler" successfully through the park, and turned her out at
the great iron gateway on to the highroad. Everybody was in the keenest
spirits. It was a lovely day, wonderfully mild for January, and the
sunshine was so pleasant that they hardly needed the thick fur rugs.
There seemed a hint of spring in the air; already hazel catkins hung
here and there in the hedgerows, thrushes and robins were singing
cheerily, and wayside cottages were covered with the blossom of the
yellow jessamine. It was a joy to spin along the good smooth highroad in
the luxurious car. Everard was a quick driver, and kept a pace which
sometimes exceeded the speed limit. Fortunately his brothers and sisters
were not nervous, or they might have held their breath as he dashed
round corners without sounding his horn, pelted down hills, and on
several occasions narrowly avoided colliding with farm carts. A reckless
boy of seventeen, without much previous experience, does not make the
most careful of motorists. As a matter of fact it was the first time
Master Everard had driven without the chauffeur at his elbow, and,
though he got on very well, his performance was not unattended with
risks.

Towards one o'clock the crew at the back began to clamor for lunch, and
to suggest a halt when some suitable spot should be reached. The
difficulty was to find a place, for they were driving so fast that by
the time the younger boys had called out the possibilities of some wood
or small quarry, the car had flown past, and, sooner than turn back,
Everard would say: "Oh, we'll stop somewhere else!"

By unanimous urging, however, he was at last persuaded to halt at a
picturesque little bridge in a sheltered hollow, where they had the
benefit of the sunshine and escaped the wind. A small brook wandered
below between green banks where autumn brambles still showed brown
leaves, and actually a shriveled blackberry or two remained. There was a
patch of grass by the roadside, and here Everard put the car, to be out
of reach of passing traffic, while its occupants spread the rugs on the
low wall of the bridge, and began to unpack their picnic baskets. Cook
had certainly done her best for them: there were ham sandwiches and
pieces of cold pie, and jam turnovers, and slices of cake, and some
apples and oranges, and plenty of hot coffee in the thermos flasks.

"It's ever so much nicer to have one's meals out-of-doors, even in
January!" declared Bevis, munching a damson tartlet, and dropping stones
into the brook below. "I believe it's warm enough to wade. That water
doesn't look cold, somehow!"

"No, you don't!" said Lilias briskly. "You needn't think, just because
Miss Mason isn't here, you can do all the mad things you like. It's no
use beginning to unlace your boots, for I shan't let you wade, or
Clifford either! The idea! In January!"

"Why not?" sulked Bevis. "I didn't ask _you_, Lilias. Everard won't say
no!"

"You can please yourselves," answered his eldest brother, "but _I'm_
going to take the car on now. If you stay and wade, you'll have to walk
home, that's all! I certainly shan't came back for you."

At so awful a threat the youngsters, who had really meant business where
the water was concerned, hurriedly relaced their boots, and ran to take
their places in the car; the girls finished packing the remains of the
picnic in the basket, and followed, and soon the engine was started
again, and they were once more flying along the road.

Everard had brought out the family for a joy-ride without any very
particular idea of where they were going, though he was steering
generally in the direction of the Cleland Hills. To his mind the chief
fun of the expedition lay in simply taking any road that looked
interesting, without regard to sign-posts. The others trusted implicitly
to his powers of path-finding, and had really not the slightest idea in
what part of the country they were traveling. After quite a long time,
however, it occurred to Lilias to ask where they were, and how long it
would take them to get home again.

"We've come such a roundabout route, I scarcely know," replied Everard.
"Those are the Cleland Hills in front of us, though, and if we bowl
straight ahead, and go over them, we shall get to Clacton Bridge; then
we can get the straight highroad back to Cheverley."

"We shan't be home before it's dark, though?"

"Well, no! But the head lights are working all right--I tried them
before we started."

"It will be fun to drive in the dark!" chuckled the boys behind.

"I hope we shall be back before Grandfather and Cousin Clare, though,"
said Dulcie a little uneasily.

The road over the Cleland Hills was much wilder than they expected, and
it was very stony and bad. Up and up they went till walls, hedges and
farms had disappeared, and only the lonely moor lay on either side of
the rough track. It was a place where no motorist in his senses would
have ventured to take a car, the extreme roughness of the road made
steering difficult, and the strain on the tires was enormous. Instead of
driving cautiously, Everard plunged along with all the hardihood of
youth, bumping anyhow over ruts and stones. They were just beyond the
brow of the hill when a loud bang, followed by a grinding sensation,
announced the bad news that one of their tires had burst.

"What beastly bad luck!" lamented Everard, getting out to inspect the
injured cover. "It might have had the decency to keep up till we had
reached civilization! Well, there's nothing for it but to put on the
spare tire. I've helped Milner to do it before, so I can manage. It's a
bother we left the spare wheel at home. I shall want some of you to help
me, though."

Everard had indeed rendered some assistance to the chauffeur on various
occasions, but it was quite another matter to perform the troublesome
operation of changing the tire with only two girls and three young
brothers to lend a hand. In their inexperienced enthusiasm, they did all
the wrong things, very nearly nipped the tube, mislaid the tools, and
pulled where they should have pushed. It was only after nearly an hour's
work that Everard at last managed to get the business finished. The
family, warm and excited, packed once more into the car.

"Well, I hope we shall have no more troubles now!" exclaimed Lilias, who
was growing tired and longing for home and tea. "What's the matter,
Everard?"

"Matter! Why, she won't start, that's all!"

Here was a predicament! Whether the bumping up the rough road had thrown
some delicate piece of mechanism out of gear, or the waiting in the cold
had cooled the engine, it was impossible to say, but nothing that
Everard could do would induce the car to start. He examined everything
which his rather limited knowledge of motorology suggested might be the
cause of the stoppage, but with no result. After half an hour's
tinkering, he was obliged ruefully to acknowledge himself utterly
baffled.

They were indeed in an extremely awkward situation, stranded on a wild
moor, probably sixty miles from home, and with the short winter's day
closing rapidly in.

"What _are_ we to do?" gasped Lilias, half-crying.

"We can't stay here all night!"

"Finish our prog and sleep in the car," suggested Roland.

"No, no! We should be frozen before morning."

"I think we'd better walk on while it's light enough to see," said
Everard. "We shall probably strike a highroad soon, and we'll stop some
motorist, ask for a lift to the nearest town, and stay all night at a
hotel."

"But what about the car?"

"We must just leave her to her fate. There's nothing else for it. I
don't suppose anybody will touch her up here. It can't be helped, any
way."

"Let's finish our prog before we set off!" persisted Roland, opening the
picnic basket.

The family was hungry again, so they readily set to work to dispose of
the remains of their lunch. It might be a long time before they were
within reach of their next meal, and they blessed Cook for having packed
a plentiful supply. Everard would not let them linger for more than a
few minutes.

"Hurry up, you kids!" he urged. "We don't know how far we may have to
go, and it will be getting dark soon. Thank goodness we shall be
walking down hill, at any rate."

[Illustration: "WHAT _ARE_ WE TO DO!" GASPED LILIAS]

After whisking along in the car, "Shanks's pony" seemed a very slow mode
of progress; their breakdown had happened in an out-of-the-way spot, and
it was more than an hour before they reached a highroad. It was almost
dark by that time, and matters seemed so desperate that Everard
determined to hail the very first passing motorist who seemed to be able
to help them. Fate brought along no handsome tourist car, but a rattling
motor-lorry, the driver of which stopped in answer to their united
shouts, and, after hearing of the difficulty they were in, consented to
give them a lift to the town, five miles away, for which he was bound.
Fortunately the lorry was empty, so the family thankfully climbed in,
and squatted on the floor, while Everard sat in front with the driver.

It was not a very aristocratic mode of conveyance for the heir of
Cheverley Chase, but Everard was in no mood to pick and choose just
then, and would have accepted a seat in a coal truck if necessary. As
for the younger ones, they enjoyed the fun of it. It was a very bumpy
performance to sit on the floor of the jolting wagon, but at any rate
