The Project Gutenberg EBook of On the Pampas, by G. A. Henty

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: On the Pampas
       or, The Young Settlers

Author: G. A. Henty

Posting Date: June 1, 2012 [EBook #6472]
Release Date: September, 2004
First Posted: December 18, 2002

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ON THE PAMPAS ***




Produced by Robert Prince, Juliet Sutherland, Charles
Franks and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team.











[Illustration: Pampas. THE FIGHT WITH THE PUMA]

ON THE PAMPAS OR THE YOUNG SETTLERS

BY

G. A. HENTY



TABLE OF CONTENTS

CHAPTER I.

Mrs. Hardy's Resolution

CHAPTER II.

The Start

CHAPTER III.

A New Life

CHAPTER IV.

The Pampas

CHAPTER V.

The Settler's Home

CHAPTER VI.

A Tale of the Mexican War

CHAPTER VII.

Seth Continues His Narrative of the Mexican Adventure

CHAPTER VIII.

Farm Work and Amusements

CHAPTER IX.

Neighborly Visits and Advice

CHAPTER X.

The Lost Cattle

CHAPTER XI.

Quiet Times

CHAPTER XII.

A Steady Hand

CHAPTER XIII.

The Indian Attack

CHAPTER XIV.

Terrible News

CHAPTER XV.

The Pampas on Fire

CHAPTER XVI.

At the stake

CHAPTER XVII.

Rescued

CHAPTER XVIII.

And last




CHAPTER I.

MRS. HARDY'S RESOLUTION.


"What are you thinking of, Frank?" Mrs. Hardy asked her husband one
evening, after an unusually long silence on his part.

"Well, my dear, I was thinking of a good many things. In the first
place, I think, I began with wondering what I should make of the
boys; and that led to such a train of thoughts about ourselves and
our circumstances that I hardly knew where I was when you spoke to
me."

Mr. Hardy spoke cheerfully, but his wife saw at once that it was
with an effort that he did so. She put down the work upon which she
was engaged, and moved her chair nearer to his by the fire. "It is
a serious question, Frank, about the boys. Charley is fifteen now,
and Hubert fourteen. I wonder myself sometimes what we shall do
with them."

"There seems no opening here in England for young fellows. The
professions are crowded, even if they were not altogether beyond
our means; and as to a clerkship, they had better have a trade, and
stick to it: they would be far happier, and nearly as well paid.
The fact is, Clara," and here Mr. Hardy paused a little, as if to
gain courage to say what he feared would be very disagreeable to
his wife--"the fact is, we are altogether too crowded here. The
best thing for the children, by far, and I think the best thing for
ourselves, would be to emigrate."

Mrs. Hardy gave a little sigh, but said nothing, and sat looking
quietly into the fire, as her husband went on: "You see, my dear, I
am just, and only just, earning enough for us to live upon. Nor is
there any strong probability of an increase of business. The boys,
as you say, are growing up, and I see no prospect of giving them a
fair start in life. Abroad it is altogether different: we can buy
land and stock it for next to nothing. We should live roughly,
certainly; but at least there is no fear for the future, and we
should start our boys in life with a fair certainty of success.
Still, Clara, I do not of course mean that I have made up my mind
upon the subject. It is far too serious a matter to decide upon
hastily. I only threw out the suggestion; and if you, after
thinking it over, are against it, there is an end of the matter."

Mrs. Hardy was silent for a little, and a tear sparkled on her
cheek in the firelight; then she said, "I am not surprised, Frank,
at what you have said. In fact I have expected it for some time. I
have observed you looking over books upon foreign countries, and
have seen that you often sat thoughtful and quiet. I guessed,
therefore, what you had in your mind. Of course, dear, as a woman,
I shrink from the thought of leaving all our friends and going to
quite a strange country, but I don't think that I am afraid of the
hardships or discomfort. Thousands of other women have gone through
them, and there is no reason why I should not do the same. I do
think with you that it would be a good thing for the boys, perhaps
for the girls too; and that, when we have got over the first
hardships, we too should be happier and more free from care than we
are now. So you see, Frank, you will meet with no opposition from
me; and if, after deliberation, you really determine that it is the
best thing to do, I shall be ready to agree with you. But it is a
hard thought just at first, so please do not say any more about it
to-night."

Mr. Hardy was an architect, as his father had been before him. He
had not, however, entered the office at the usual age, but when
eighteen had gone out to the United States, to visit an uncle who
had settled there. After spending some time with him, the love of
adventure had taken him to the far West, and there he had hunted
and shot for nearly three years, till a letter, long delayed on the
way, entreated him to return to England, as his father's health was
failing. He at once started for England, and found that his father
was in a feeble state of health, but was still able to carry on the
business. Frank saw, however, that he was unequal to the work, and
so entered the office, working hard to make up for lost time. He
was a good draughtsman, and was shortly able to take a great burden
off his father's shoulders.

He had not been long at home, however, before he fell in love with
Clara Aintree, the daughter of a clergyman; and his father making
over to him a share in the business, they were married just as
Frank attained his twenty-fourth year, his wife being about
nineteen. Two years after the marriage Mr. Hardy senior died, and
from that time Frank had carried on the business alone.

B--- was a large provincial town, but it scarcely afforded
remunerative employment for an architect; and although Mr. Hardy
had no competitor in his business, the income which he derived from
it was by no means a large one, and the increasing expenses of his
family rendered the struggle to make ends meet yearly more severe.
His father had been possessed of a small private fortune, but had
rashly entered into the mania of railway speculation, and at his
death had left about fifteen thousand dollars to his son. This sum
Frank Hardy had carefully preserved intact, as he had foreseen that
the time might come when it would, for his children's sake, be
advisable to emigrate. He had long looked forward to this, but
had abstained from taking any step until his sons were of an age to be
able to make themselves useful in a life in the bush or upon the
prairies.

Frank Hardy, at the time our story begins, was about forty. He was
a tall, active man, and the life he had led in America when young
had hardened his muscles, and given him the full use of every
faculty.

Mrs. Hardy was five years younger than her husband, and scarcely
looked thirty years old. She was a high-spirited woman, well fitted
to be her husband's companion in the dangers and hardships of a
settler's life.

The subject of emigration once started, was frequently continued,
and presently books and maps began to be consulted, and the
advantages and disadvantages of the various countries and colonies
to be debated. Finally, Mr. and Mrs. Hardy agreed that the
Argentine Republic, in its magnificent rivers, its boundless extent
of fertile land, in its splendid climate, its cheap labor, and its
probable prospects, offered the greatest advantages.

The decision once arrived at, it was determined to announce it to
the children, who had up to this time no idea of the great change
decided upon. Breakfast was over, and the boys, whose holidays had
just begun, were about to leave the table, when their father said:
"Wait a moment, boys; there is something we want to talk to you
about."

The boys resumed their seats. "Your mamma and I have been wondering
what you boys are to become, and we do not see any openings likely
to occur here. Now, what should you say to us all emigrating?"

"What, going abroad, papa!" they both exclaimed joyously.

"Yes, boys, settling in the backwoods or in the prairies."

"Oh, that would be jolly," Charley said, "I know, I papa, having
fights with Indians, and all that sort of thing. Oh, it would be
glorious!"

"Well, Charley," his father said, smiling, "I do not know that we
shall have fights with Indians, nor do think it would be very jolly
if we did. But we should have to rough it, you know; you boys
would have to work hard, to help me in everything, and to look after
the cattle and sheep."

"What fun! what fun!" the boys both shouted; "we should like it of
all things in the world."

"And what do you think of it, Maud and Ethel?" their mamma asked
the two little girls, who were looking very surprised, but rather
doubtful as to the pleasure of the fights with Indians which their
brothers had spoken so delightedly about. "You will have to be two
very useful little women, and will have to help me just as the boys
will have to help your papa. Very likely we may not be able to get
a servant there, and then we shall have to do everything."

"That will be fine, mamma," said Maud, who was rather over twelve,
while her sister was just eleven. "I don't think I could cook, but
you should cook, and I could scrub and do all the hard work, and
Ethel could wash up, and lay the table, and that sort of thing.
That would be fine, mamma."

Ethel, who almost always agreed with her elder sister, did so now,
and the four young ones became quite uproarious in their plans for
making themselves useful. At last Mr. Hardy called for order.

"Now silence all, and listen to me. This affair is a serious
business; and although I hope and believe that we shall all enjoy
our life very much, still we must prepare for it, and look upon it
in earnest, and not as a sort of game. I have business here which I
cannot finish before another eight or nine months. Let us all make
the most of our time before we start. In the first place, the
language of the people among whom we are going is Spanish, and we
must all learn to speak it well before we leave. For the next three
months we will work together at grammar and exercises, and then I
will try and get some Spanish teacher to live in the house, and
speak the language with us until we go. In the next place, it will
be well that you should all four learn to ride. I have hired the
paddock next to our garden, and have bought a pony, which will be
here to-day, for the girls. You boys have already ridden a little,
and I shall now have you taught in the riding school. I went
yesterday to Mr. Saris, and asked him if he would allow me to make
an arrangement with his head gardener for you to go there to learn
gardening. He at once agreed; and I have arranged with the gardener
that you are both to be there every morning at six o'clock, and are
to work until nine. At nine you will come in to breakfast. From
breakfast to dinner you will have to yourselves, except upon the
days you take riding lessons; and I should wish you to spend this
time at your usual studies, except Latin, which will be of no use
to you. From two till half-past four you are to learn carpentering.
I have made an agreement with Mr. Jones to pay him so much to take
you as a sort of apprentices for the next nine months. In the
evening we will all work together at Spanish. It will be hard work;
but if you want to be of any real use to me, it is absolutely
necessary that you should be able to use a spade and to do rough
carpentering. As the time draws on, too, I shall ask one of the
farmers near to let you go out with his men and get some notion of
plowing. Well, what do you say to all that?"

Hubert looked a little downcast at this recital of the preparatory
