whom, as a mere man, they would never have deigned to cast a favourable
look.  It is a bad crime, I know, and leads to worse; but, many lords and
gentlemen--I even think some ladies, too, if I recollect right--have
committed it in England, who have neither been given to the dogs, nor
hanged up fifty feet high.

The wretched King was running here and there, all this time, and never
getting anywhere in particular, until he gave himself up, and was taken
off to Kenilworth Castle.  When he was safely lodged there, the Queen
went to London and met the Parliament.  And the Bishop of Hereford, who
was the most skilful of her friends, said, What was to be done now?  Here
was an imbecile, indolent, miserable King upon the throne; wouldn't it be
better to take him off, and put his son there instead?  I don't know
whether the Queen really pitied him at this pass, but she began to cry;
so, the Bishop said, Well, my Lords and Gentlemen, what do you think,
upon the whole, of sending down to Kenilworth, and seeing if His Majesty
(God bless him, and forbid we should depose him!) won't resign?

My Lords and Gentlemen thought it a good notion, so a deputation of them
went down to Kenilworth; and there the King came into the great hall of
the Castle, commonly dressed in a poor black gown; and when he saw a
certain bishop among them, fell down, poor feeble-headed man, and made a
wretched spectacle of himself.  Somebody lifted him up, and then SIR
WILLIAM TRUSSEL, the Speaker of the House of Commons, almost frightened
him to death by making him a tremendous speech to the effect that he was
no longer a King, and that everybody renounced allegiance to him.  After
which, SIR THOMAS BLOUNT, the Steward of the Household, nearly finished
him, by coming forward and breaking his white wand--which was a ceremony
only performed at a King's death.  Being asked in this pressing manner
what he thought of resigning, the King said he thought it was the best
thing he could do.  So, he did it, and they proclaimed his son next day.

I wish I could close his history by saying that he lived a harmless life
in the Castle and the Castle gardens at Kenilworth, many years--that he
had a favourite, and plenty to eat and drink--and, having that, wanted
nothing.  But he was shamefully humiliated.  He was outraged, and
slighted, and had dirty water from ditches given him to shave with, and
wept and said he would have clean warm water, and was altogether very
miserable.  He was moved from this castle to that castle, and from that
castle to the other castle, because this lord or that lord, or the other
lord, was too kind to him: until at last he came to Berkeley Castle, near
the River Severn, where (the Lord Berkeley being then ill and absent) he
fell into the hands of two black ruffians, called THOMAS GOURNAY and
WILLIAM OGLE.

One night--it was the night of September the twenty-first, one thousand
three hundred and twenty-seven--dreadful screams were heard, by the
startled people in the neighbouring town, ringing through the thick walls
of the Castle, and the dark, deep night; and they said, as they were thus
horribly awakened from their sleep, 'May Heaven be merciful to the King;
for those cries forbode that no good is being done to him in his dismal
prison!'  Next morning he was dead--not bruised, or stabbed, or marked
upon the body, but much distorted in the face; and it was whispered
afterwards, that those two villains, Gournay and Ogle, had burnt up his
inside with a red-hot iron.

If you ever come near Gloucester, and see the centre tower of its
beautiful Cathedral, with its four rich pinnacles, rising lightly in the
air; you may remember that the wretched Edward the Second was buried in
the old abbey of that ancient city, at forty-three years old, after being
for nineteen years and a half a perfectly incapable King.




CHAPTER XVIII--ENGLAND UNDER EDWARD THE THIRD


Roger Mortimer, the Queen's lover (who escaped to France in the last
chapter), was far from profiting by the examples he had had of the fate
of favourites.  Having, through the Queen's influence, come into
possession of the estates of the two Despensers, he became extremely
proud and ambitious, and sought to be the real ruler of England.  The
young King, who was crowned at fourteen years of age with all the usual
solemnities, resolved not to bear this, and soon pursued Mortimer to his
ruin.

The people themselves were not fond of Mortimer--first, because he was a
Royal favourite; secondly, because he was supposed to have helped to make
a peace with Scotland which now took place, and in virtue of which the
young King's sister Joan, only seven years old, was promised in marriage
to David, the son and heir of Robert Bruce, who was only five years old.
The nobles hated Mortimer because of his pride, riches, and power.  They
went so far as to take up arms against him; but were obliged to submit.
The Earl of Kent, one of those who did so, but who afterwards went over
to Mortimer and the Queen, was made an example of in the following cruel
manner:

He seems to have been anything but a wise old earl; and he was persuaded
by the agents of the favourite and the Queen, that poor King Edward the
Second was not really dead; and thus was betrayed into writing letters
favouring his rightful claim to the throne.  This was made out to be high
treason, and he was tried, found guilty, and sentenced to be executed.
They took the poor old lord outside the town of Winchester, and there
kept him waiting some three or four hours until they could find somebody
to cut off his head.  At last, a convict said he would do it, if the
government would pardon him in return; and they gave him the pardon; and
at one blow he put the Earl of Kent out of his last suspense.

While the Queen was in France, she had found a lovely and good young
lady, named Philippa, who she thought would make an excellent wife for
her son.  The young King married this lady, soon after he came to the
throne; and her first child, Edward, Prince of Wales, afterwards became
celebrated, as we shall presently see, under the famous title of EDWARD
THE BLACK PRINCE.

The young King, thinking the time ripe for the downfall of Mortimer, took
counsel with Lord Montacute how he should proceed.  A Parliament was
going to be held at Nottingham, and that lord recommended that the
favourite should be seized by night in Nottingham Castle, where he was
sure to be.  Now, this, like many other things, was more easily said than
done; because, to guard against treachery, the great gates of the Castle
were locked every night, and the great keys were carried up-stairs to the
Queen, who laid them under her own pillow.  But the Castle had a
governor, and the governor being Lord Montacute's friend, confided to him
how he knew of a secret passage underground, hidden from observation by
the weeds and brambles with which it was overgrown; and how, through that
passage, the conspirators might enter in the dead of the night, and go
straight to Mortimer's room.  Accordingly, upon a certain dark night, at
midnight, they made their way through this dismal place: startling the
rats, and frightening the owls and bats: and came safely to the bottom of
the main tower of the Castle, where the King met them, and took them up a
profoundly-dark staircase in a deep silence.  They soon heard the voice
of Mortimer in council with some friends; and bursting into the room with
a sudden noise, took him prisoner.  The Queen cried out from her
bed-chamber, 'Oh, my sweet son, my dear son, spare my gentle Mortimer!'
They carried him off, however; and, before the next Parliament, accused
him of having made differences between the young King and his mother, and
of having brought about the death of the Earl of Kent, and even of the
late King; for, as you know by this time, when they wanted to get rid of
a man in those old days, they were not very particular of what they
accused him.  Mortimer was found guilty of all this, and was sentenced to
be hanged at Tyburn.  The King shut his mother up in genteel confinement,
where she passed the rest of her life; and now he became King in earnest.

The first effort he made was to conquer Scotland.  The English lords who
had lands in Scotland, finding that their rights were not respected under
the late peace, made war on their own account: choosing for their
general, Edward, the son of John Baliol, who made such a vigorous fight,
that in less than two months he won the whole Scottish Kingdom.  He was
joined, when thus triumphant, by the King and Parliament; and he and the
King in person besieged the Scottish forces in Berwick.  The whole
Scottish army coming to the assistance of their countrymen, such a
furious battle ensued, that thirty thousand men are said to have been
killed in it.  Baliol was then crowned King of Scotland, doing homage to
the King of England; but little came of his successes after all, for the
Scottish men rose against him, within no very long time, and David Bruce
came back within ten years and took his kingdom.

France was a far richer country than Scotland, and the King had a much
greater mind to conquer it.  So, he let Scotland alone, and pretended
that he had a claim to the French throne in right of his mother.  He had,
in reality, no claim at all; but that mattered little in those times.  He
brought over to his cause many little princes and sovereigns, and even
courted the alliance of the people of Flanders--a busy, working
community, who had very small respect for kings, and whose head man was a
brewer.  With such forces as he raised by these means, Edward invaded
France; but he did little by that, except run into debt in carrying on
the war to the extent of three hundred thousand pounds.  The next year he
did better; gaining a great sea-fight in the harbour of Sluys.  This
success, however, was very shortlived, for the Flemings took fright at
the siege of Saint Omer and ran away, leaving their weapons and baggage
behind them.  Philip, the French King, coming up with his army, and
Edward being very anxious to decide the war, proposed to settle the
difference by single combat with him, or by a fight of one hundred
knights on each side.  The French King said, he thanked him; but being
very well as he was, he would rather not.  So, after some skirmishing and
talking, a short peace was made.

It was soon broken by King Edward's favouring the cause of John, Earl of
Montford; a French nobleman, who asserted a claim of his own against the
French King, and offered to do homage to England for the Crown of France,
if he could obtain it through England's help.  This French lord, himself,
was soon defeated by the French King's son, and shut up in a tower in
Paris; but his wife, a courageous and beautiful woman, who is said to
have had the courage of a man, and the heart of a lion, assembled the
people of Brittany, where she then was; and, showing them her infant son,
made many pathetic entreaties to them not to desert her and their young
Lord.  They took fire at this appeal, and rallied round her in the strong
castle of Hennebon.  Here she was not only besieged without by the French
under Charles de Blois, but was endangered within by a dreary old bishop,
who was always representing to the people what horrors they must undergo
if they were faithful--first from famine, and afterwards from fire and
sword.  But this noble lady, whose heart never failed her, encouraged her
soldiers by her own example; went from post to post like a great general;
even mounted on horseback fully armed, and, issuing from the castle by a
by-path, fell upon the French camp, set fire to the tents, and threw the
whole force into disorder.  This done, she got safely back to Hennebon
again, and was received with loud shouts of joy by the defenders of the
castle, who had given her up for lost.  As they were now very short of
provisions, however, and as they could not dine off enthusiasm, and as
the old bishop was always saying, 'I told you what it would come to!'
they began to lose heart, and to talk of yielding the castle up.  The
brave Countess retiring to an upper room and looking with great grief out
to sea, where she expected relief from England, saw, at this very time,
the English ships in the distance, and was relieved and rescued!  Sir
Walter Manning, the English commander, so admired her courage, that,
being come into the castle with the English knights, and having made a
feast there, he assaulted the French by way of dessert, and beat them off
triumphantly.  Then he and the knights came back to the castle with great
joy; and the Countess who had watched them from a high tower, thanked
them with all her heart, and kissed them every one.

This noble lady distinguished herself afterwards in a sea-fight with the
French off Guernsey, when she was on her way to England to ask for more
troops.  Her great spirit roused another lady, the wife of another French
lord (whom the French King very barbarously murdered), to distinguish
herself scarcely less.  The time was fast coming, however, when Edward,
Prince of Wales, was to be the great star of this French and English war.

It was in the month of July, in the year one thousand three hundred and
forty-six, when the King embarked at Southampton for France, with an army
of about thirty thousand men in all, attended by the Prince of Wales and
by several of the chief nobles.  He landed at La Hogue in Normandy; and,
burning and destroying as he went, according to custom, advanced up the
left bank of the River Seine, and fired the small towns even close to
Paris; but, being watched from the right bank of the river by the French
King and all his army, it came to this at last, that Edward found
himself, on Saturday the twenty-sixth of August, one thousand three
hundred and forty-six, on a rising ground behind the little French
village of Crecy, face to face with the French King's force.  And,
although the French King had an enormous army--in number more than eight
times his--he there resolved to beat him or be beaten.

The young Prince, assisted by the Earl of Oxford and the Earl of Warwick,
led the first division of the English army; two other great Earls led the
second; and the King, the third.  When the morning dawned, the King
received the sacrament, and heard prayers, and then, mounted on horseback
with a white wand in his hand, rode from company to company, and rank to
rank, cheering and encouraging both officers and men.  Then the whole
army breakfasted, each man sitting on the ground where he had stood; and
then they remained quietly on the ground with their weapons ready.

Up came the French King with all his great force.  It was dark and angry
weather; there was an eclipse of the sun; there was a thunder-storm,
accompanied with tremendous rain; the frightened birds flew screaming
above the soldiers' heads.  A certain captain in the French army advised
the French King, who was by no means cheerful, not to begin the battle
until the morrow.  The King, taking this advice, gave the word to halt.
But, those behind not understanding it, or desiring to be foremost with
the rest, came pressing on.  The roads for a great distance were covered
with this immense army, and with the common people from the villages, who
were flourishing their rude weapons, and making a great noise.  Owing to
these circumstances, the French army advanced in the greatest confusion;
every French lord doing what he liked with his own men, and putting out
the men of every other French lord.

Now, their King relied strongly upon a great body of cross-bowmen from
Genoa; and these he ordered to the front to begin the battle, on finding
that he could not stop it.  They shouted once, they shouted twice, they
shouted three times, to alarm the English archers; but, the English would
have heard them shout three thousand times and would have never moved.  At
last the cross-bowmen went forward a little, and began to discharge their
bolts; upon which, the English let fly such a hail of arrows, that the
Genoese speedily made off--for their cross-bows, besides being heavy to
carry, required to be wound up with a handle, and consequently took time
to re-load; the English, on the other hand, could discharge their arrows
almost as fast as the arrows could fly.

When the French King saw the Genoese turning, he cried out to his men to
kill those scoundrels, who were doing harm instead of service.  This
increased the confusion.  Meanwhile the English archers, continuing to
shoot as fast as ever, shot down great numbers of the French soldiers and
knights; whom certain sly Cornish-men and Welshmen, from the English
army, creeping along the ground, despatched with great knives.

The Prince and his division were at this time so hard-pressed, that the
Earl of Warwick sent a message to the King, who was overlooking the
battle from a windmill, beseeching him to send more aid.

'Is my son killed?' said the King.

'No, sire, please God,' returned the messenger.

'Is he wounded?' said the King.

'No, sire.'

'Is he thrown to the ground?' said the King.

'No, sire, not so; but, he is very hard-pressed.'

'Then,' said the King, 'go back to those who sent you, and tell them I
shall send no aid; because I set my heart upon my son proving himself
this day a brave knight, and because I am resolved, please God, that the
honour of a great victory shall be his!'

These bold words, being reported to the Prince and his division, so
raised their spirits, that they fought better than ever.  The King of
France charged gallantly with his men many times; but it was of no use.
Night closing in, his horse was killed under him by an English arrow, and
the knights and nobles who had clustered thick about him early in the
day, were now completely scattered.  At last, some of his few remaining
followers led him off the field by force since he would not retire of
himself, and they journeyed away to Amiens.  The victorious English,
lighting their watch-fires, made merry on the field, and the King, riding
to meet his gallant son, took him in his arms, kissed him, and told him
that he had acted nobly, and proved himself worthy of the day and of the
crown.  While it was yet night, King Edward was hardly aware of the great
victory he had gained; but, next day, it was discovered that eleven
princes, twelve hundred knights, and thirty thousand common men lay dead
upon the French side.  Among these was the King of Bohemia, an old blind
man; who, having been told that his son was wounded in the battle, and
that no force could stand against the Black Prince, called to him two
knights, put himself on horse-back between them, fastened the three
bridles together, and dashed in among the English, where he was presently
slain.  He bore as his crest three white ostrich feathers, with the motto
_Ich dien_, signifying in English 'I serve.'  This crest and motto were
taken by the Prince of Wales in remembrance of that famous day, and have
been borne by the Prince of Wales ever since.

Five days after this great battle, the King laid siege to Calais.  This
siege--ever afterwards memorable--lasted nearly a year.  In order to
starve the inhabitants out, King Edward built so many wooden houses for
the lodgings of his troops, that it is said their quarters looked like a
second Calais suddenly sprung around the first.  Early in the siege, the
governor of the town drove out what he called the useless mouths, to the
number of seventeen hundred persons, men and women, young and old.  King
Edward allowed them to pass through his lines, and even fed them, and
dismissed them with money; but, later in the siege, he was not so
merciful--five hundred more, who were afterwards driven out, dying of
starvation and misery.  The garrison were so hard-pressed at last, that
they sent a letter to King Philip, telling him that they had eaten all
the horses, all the dogs, and all the rats and mice that could be found
in the place; and, that if he did not relieve them, they must either
surrender to the English, or eat one another.  Philip made one effort to
give them relief; but they were so hemmed in by the English power, that
he could not succeed, and was fain to leave the place.  Upon this they
hoisted the English flag, and surrendered to King Edward.  'Tell your
general,' said he to the humble messengers who came out of the town,
'that I require to have sent here, six of the most distinguished
citizens, bare-legged, and in their shirts, with ropes about their necks;
and let those six men bring with them the keys of the castle and the
town.'

When the Governor of Calais related this to the people in the
Market-place, there was great weeping and distress; in the midst of
which, one worthy citizen, named Eustace de Saint Pierre, rose up and
said, that if the six men required were not sacrificed, the whole
population would be; therefore, he offered himself as the first.
Encouraged by this bright example, five other worthy citizens rose up one
after another, and offered themselves to save the rest.  The Governor,
who was too badly wounded to be able to walk, mounted a poor old horse
that had not been eaten, and conducted these good men to the gate, while
all the people cried and mourned.

Edward received them wrathfully, and ordered the heads of the whole six
to be struck off.  However, the good Queen fell upon her knees, and
besought the King to give them up to her.  The King replied, 'I wish you
had been somewhere else; but I cannot refuse you.'  So she had them
properly dressed, made a feast for them, and sent them back with a
handsome present, to the great rejoicing of the whole camp.  I hope the
people of Calais loved the daughter to whom she gave birth soon
afterwards, for her gentle mother's sake.

Now came that terrible disease, the Plague, into Europe, hurrying from
the heart of China; and killed the wretched people--especially the
poor--in such enormous numbers, that one-half of the inhabitants of
England are related to have died of it.  It killed the cattle, in great
numbers, too; and so few working men remained alive, that there were not
enough left to till the ground.

After eight years of differing and quarrelling, the Prince of Wales again
invaded France with an army of sixty thousand men.  He went through the
south of the country, burning and plundering wheresoever he went; while
his father, who had still the Scottish war upon his hands, did the like
in Scotland, but was harassed and worried in his retreat from that
country by the Scottish men, who repaid his cruelties with interest.

The French King, Philip, was now dead, and was succeeded by his son John.
The Black Prince, called by that name from the colour of the armour he
wore to set off his fair complexion, continuing to burn and destroy in
France, roused John into determined opposition; and so cruel had the
Black Prince been in his campaign, and so severely had the French
peasants suffered, that he could not find one who, for love, or money, or
the fear of death, would tell him what the French King was doing, or
where he was.  Thus it happened that he came upon the French King's
forces, all of a sudden, near the town of Poitiers, and found that the
whole neighbouring country was occupied by a vast French army.  'God help
us!' said the Black Prince, 'we must make the best of it.'

So, on a Sunday morning, the eighteenth of September, the Prince whose
army was now reduced to ten thousand men in all--prepared to give battle
to the French King, who had sixty thousand horse alone.  While he was so
engaged, there came riding from the French camp, a Cardinal, who had
persuaded John to let him offer terms, and try to save the shedding of
Christian blood.  'Save my honour,' said the Prince to this good priest,
'and save the honour of my army, and I will make any reasonable terms.'
He offered to give up all the towns, castles, and prisoners, he had
taken, and to swear to make no war in France for seven years; but, as
John would hear of nothing but his surrender, with a hundred of his chief
knights, the treaty was broken off, and the Prince said quietly--'God
defend the right; we shall fight to-morrow.'

Therefore, on the Monday morning, at break of day, the two armies
prepared for battle.  The English were posted in a strong place, which
could only be approached by one narrow lane, skirted by hedges on both
sides.  The French attacked them by this lane; but were so galled and
slain by English arrows from behind the hedges, that they were forced to
retreat.  Then went six hundred English bowmen round about, and, coming
upon the rear of the French army, rained arrows on them thick and fast.
The French knights, thrown into confusion, quitted their banners and
dispersed in all directions.  Said Sir John Chandos to the Prince, 'Ride
forward, noble Prince, and the day is yours.  The King of France is so
valiant a gentleman, that I know he will never fly, and may be taken
prisoner.'  Said the Prince to this, 'Advance, English banners, in the
name of God and St. George!' and on they pressed until they came up with
the French King, fighting fiercely with his battle-axe, and, when all his
nobles had forsaken him, attended faithfully to the last by his youngest
son Philip, only sixteen years of age.  Father and son fought well, and
the King had already two wounds in his face, and had been beaten down,
when he at last delivered himself to a banished French knight, and gave
him his right-hand glove in token that he had done so.

The Black Prince was generous as well as brave, and he invited his royal
prisoner to supper in his tent, and waited upon him at table, and, when
they afterwards rode into London in a gorgeous procession, mounted the
French King on a fine cream-coloured horse, and rode at his side on a
little pony.  This was all very kind, but I think it was, perhaps, a
little theatrical too, and has been made more meritorious than it
deserved to be; especially as I am inclined to think that the greatest
kindness to the King of France would have been not to have shown him to
the people at all.  However, it must be said, for these acts of
politeness, that, in course of time, they did much to soften the horrors
of war and the passions of conquerors.  It was a long, long time before
the common soldiers began to have the benefit of such courtly deeds; but
they did at last; and thus it is possible that a poor soldier who asked
for quarter at the battle of Waterloo, or any other such great fight, may
have owed his life indirectly to Edward the Black Prince.

At this time there stood in the Strand, in London, a palace called the
Savoy, which was given up to the captive King of France and his son for
their residence.  As the King of Scotland had now been King Edward's
captive for eleven years too, his success was, at this time, tolerably
complete.  The Scottish business was settled by the prisoner being
released under the title of Sir David, King of Scotland, and by his
engaging to pay a large ransom.  The state of France encouraged England
to propose harder terms to that country, where the people rose against
the unspeakable cruelty and barbarity of its nobles; where the nobles
rose in turn against the people; where the most frightful outrages were
committed on all sides; and where the insurrection of the peasants,
called the insurrection of the Jacquerie, from Jacques, a common
Christian name among the country people of France, awakened terrors and
hatreds that have scarcely yet passed away.  A treaty called the Great
Peace, was at last signed, under which King Edward agreed to give up the
greater part of his conquests, and King John to pay, within six years, a
ransom of three million crowns of gold.  He was so beset by his own
nobles and courtiers for having yielded to these conditions--though they
could help him to no better--that he came back of his own will to his old
palace-prison of the Savoy, and there died.

There was a Sovereign of Castile at that time, called PEDRO THE CRUEL,
who deserved the name remarkably well: having committed, among other
cruelties, a variety of murders.  This amiable monarch being driven from
his throne for his crimes, went to the province of Bordeaux, where the
Black Prince--now married to his cousin JOAN, a pretty widow--was
residing, and besought his help.  The Prince, who took to him much more
kindly than a prince of such fame ought to have taken to such a ruffian,
readily listened to his fair promises, and agreeing to help him, sent
secret orders to some troublesome disbanded soldiers of his and his
father's, who called themselves the Free Companions, and who had been a
pest to the French people, for some time, to aid this Pedro.  The Prince,
himself, going into Spain to head the army of relief, soon set Pedro on
his throne again--where he no sooner found himself, than, of course, he
behaved like the villain he was, broke his word without the least shame,
and abandoned all the promises he had made to the Black Prince.

Now, it had cost the Prince a good deal of money to pay soldiers to
support this murderous King; and finding himself, when he came back
disgusted to Bordeaux, not only in bad health, but deeply in debt, he
began to tax his French subjects to pay his creditors.  They appealed to
the French King, CHARLES; war again broke out; and the French town of
Limoges, which the Prince had greatly benefited, went over to the French
King.  Upon this he ravaged the province of which it was the capital;
burnt, and plundered, and killed in the old sickening way; and refused
mercy to the prisoners, men, women, and children taken in the offending
town, though he was so ill and so much in need of pity himself from
Heaven, that he was carried in a litter.  He lived to come home and make
himself popular with the people and Parliament, and he died on Trinity
Sunday, the eighth of June, one thousand three hundred and seventy-six,
at forty-six years old.

The whole nation mourned for him as one of the most renowned and beloved
princes it had ever had; and he was buried with great lamentations in
Canterbury Cathedral.  Near to the tomb of Edward the Confessor, his
monument, with his figure, carved in stone, and represented in the old
black armour, lying on its back, may be seen at this day, with an ancient
coat of mail, a helmet, and a pair of gauntlets hanging from a beam above
it, which most people like to believe were once worn by the Black Prince.

King Edward did not outlive his renowned son, long.  He was old, and one
Alice Perrers, a beautiful lady, had contrived to make him so fond of her
in his old age, that he could refuse her nothing, and made himself
ridiculous.  She little deserved his love, or--what I dare say she valued
a great deal more--the jewels of the late Queen, which he gave her among
other rich presents.  She took the very ring from his finger on the
morning of the day when he died, and left him to be pillaged by his
