to the fight. Compared to the other creatures of this world the ants
were small, but no lumbering beetle dared to march insolently in their
way, nor did any carnivores try to prey upon them. They were dangerous.
Burl and his tribesfolk were the only living things remaining near the
battle-field--with one single exception.

That exception was itself a tribe of ants, vastly less in number than
the fighting creatures, and greatly smaller in size as well. Where the
combatants were from a foot to fourteen inches long, these guerilla-ants
were no more than the third of a foot in length. They hovered
industriously at the edge of the fighting, not as allies to either
nation, but strictly on their own account. Scurrying among the larger,
fighting ants with marvelous agility, they carried off piecemeal the
bodies of the dead and valiantly slew the more gravely wounded for the
same purpose.

They swarmed over the fighting-ground whenever the tide of battle
receded. Caring nothing for the origin of the quarrel and espousing
neither side, these opportunists busily salvaged the dead and
still-living debris of the battle for their own purposes.

Burl and his followers were forced to make a two-mile detour to avoid
the battle. The passage between bodies of scurrying reinforcements was a
matter of some difficulty. Burl hurried the others past a route to the
front, reeking of formic acid, over which endless regiments and
companies of ants moved frantically to join in the fight. They were
intensely excited. Antennae waving wildly, they rushed to the front and
instantly flung themselves into the fray, becoming lost and
indistinguishable in the black mass of fighting creatures.

The humans passed precariously between two hurrying battalions--Dik and
Tet pausing briefly to burden themselves with prey--and hurried on to
leave as many miles as possible behind them before nightfall. They never
knew any more about the battle. It could have started over anything at
all--two ants from the different cities may have disputed some tiny bit
of carrion and soon been reinforced by companions until the military
might of both cities was engaged. Once it had started, of course, the
fighters knew whom to fight if not why they did so. The inhabitants of
the two cities had different smells, which served them as uniforms.

But the outcome of the war would hardly matter. Not to the fighters,
certainly. There were many red mushrooms in this area. If either of the
cities survived at all, it would be because its nursery-workers lived
upon stored food as they tended the grubs until the time of the spouting
red dust had ended.

Burl's folk saw many of the red puffballs burst during the day. More
than once they came upon empty, flaccid parchment sacs. More often still
they came upon red puffballs not yet quite ready to emit their murderous
seed.

That first night the tribe hid among the bases of giant puffballs of a
more familiar sort. When touched they would shoot out a puff of white
powder resembling smoke. The powder was harmless fortunately and the
tribe knew that fact. Although not toxic, the white powder was identical
in every other way to the terrible red dust from which the tribe fled.

That night Burl slept soundly. He had been without rest for two days and
a night. And he was experienced in journeying to remote places. He knew
that they were no more dangerous than familiar ones. But the rest of the
tribe, and even Saya, were fearful and terrified. They waited timorously
all through the dark hours for menacing sounds to crash suddenly through
the steady dripping of the nightly rain around them.

The second day's journey was not unlike the first. The following day,
they came upon a full ten-acre patch of giant cabbages bigger than a
family dwelling. Something in the soil, perhaps, favored vegetation over
fungi. The dozens of monstrous vegetables were the setting for riotous
life: great slugs ate endlessly of the huge green leaves--and things
preyed on them; bees came droning to gather the pollen of the flowers.
And other things came to prey on the predators in their turn.

There was one great cabbage somewhat separate from the rest. After a
long examination of the scene, Burl daringly led quaking Jon and Jak to
the attack. Dor splendidly attacked elsewhere, alone. When the tribe
moved on, there was much meat, and everyone--even the children--wore
loin-cloths of incredibly luxurious fur.

There were perils, too. On the fifth day of the tribe's journey Burl
suddenly froze into stillness. One of the hairy tarantulas which lived
in burrows with a concealed trap-door at ground-level, had fallen upon a
scarabeus beetle and was devouring it only a hundred yards ahead. The
tribesfolk trembled as Burl led them silently back and around by a safe
detour.

But all these experiences were beginning to have an effect. It was
becoming a matter of course that Burl should give orders which others
should obey. It was even becoming matter-of-fact that the possession of
food was not a beautiful excuse to hide from all danger, eating and
dozing until all the food was gone. Very gradually the tribe was
developing the notion that the purpose of existence was not solely to
escape awareness of peril, but to foresee and avoid it. They had no
clear-cut notion of purpose as yet. They were simply outgrowing
purposelessness. After a time they even looked about them with, dim
stirrings of an attitude other than a desperate alertness for danger.

Humans from any other planet, surely, would have been astounded at the
vistas of golden mushrooms stretching out in forests on either hand and
the plains with flaking surfaces given every imaginable color by the
moulds and rusts and tiny flowering yeasts growing upon them. They would
have been amazed by the turgid pools the journeying tribe came upon,
where the water was concealed by a thick layer of slime through which
enormous bubbles of foul-smelling gas rose to enlarge to preposterous
size before bursting abruptly.

Had they been as ill-armed as Burl's folk, though, visitors from other
planets would have been at least as timorous. Lacking highly specialized
knowledge of the ways of insects on this world even well-armed visitors
would have been in greater danger.

But the tribe went on without a single casualty. They had fleeting
glimpses of the white spokes of symmetrical spider-webs whose least
thread no member of the tribe could break.

Their immunity from disaster--though in the midst of danger--gave them a
certain all-too-human concentration upon discomfort. Lacking calamities,
they noticed their discomforts and grew weary of continual traveling. A
few of the men complained to Burl.

For answer, he pointed back along the way they had come. To the right a
reddish dust-cloud was just settling, and to the rear rose another as
they looked.

And on this day a thing happened which at once gave the complainers the
rest they asked for, and proved the fatality of remaining where they
were. A child ran aside from the path its elders were following. The
ground here had taken on a brownish hue. As the child stirred up the
surface mould with his feet, dust that had settled was raised up again.
It was far too thin to have any visible color. But the child suddenly
screamed, strangling. The mother ran frantically to snatch him up.

The red dust was no less deadly merely because it had settled to the
ground. If a storm-wind came now--but they were infrequent under the
forgotten planet's heavy bank of clouds--the fallen red dust could be
raised up again and scattered about until there would be no living thing
anywhere which would not gasp and writhe--and die.

But the child would not die. He would suffer terribly and be weak for
days. In the morning he could be carried.

When night began to darken the sky, the tribe searched for a
hiding-place. They came upon a shelf-like cliff, perhaps twenty or
thirty feet high, slanting toward the line of the tribesmen's travel.
Burl saw black spots in it--openings. Burrows. He watched them as the
tribe drew near. No bees or wasps went in or out. He watched long enough
to be sure.

When they were close, he was certain. Ordering the others to wait, he
went forward to make doubly sure. The appearance of the holes reassured
him. Dug months before by mining-bees, gone or dead now, the entrances
to the burrows were weathered and bedraggled. Burl explored, first
sniffing carefully at each opening. They were empty. This would be
shelter for the night. He called his followers, and they crawled into
the three-foot tunnels to hide.

Burl stationed himself near the outer edge of one of them to watch for
signs of danger. Night had not quite fallen. Jon and Dor, hungry, went
off to forage a little way beyond the cliff. They would be cautious and
timid, taking no risks whatever.

Burl waited for the return of his explorers. Meanwhile he fretted over
the meaning of the stricken child. Stirred-up red dust was dangerous.
The only time when there would be no peril from it would be at night,
when the dripping rainfall of the dark hours turned the surface of this
world into thin shine. It occurred to Burl that it would be safe to
travel at night, so far as the red dust was concerned. He rejected the
idea instantly. It was unthinkable to travel at night for innumerable
other reasons.

Frowning, he poked his spear idly at a tumbled mass of tiny parchment
cup-like things near the entrance of a cave. And instantly movement
became visible. Fifty, sixty, a hundred infinitesimal creatures, no more
than half an inch in length, made haste to hide themselves among the
thimble-sized paperlike cups. They moved with extraordinary clumsiness
and immense effort, seemingly only by contortions of their
greenish-black bodies. Burl had never seen any creature progress in such
a slow and ineffective fashion. He drew one of the small creatures back
with the point of his spear and examined it from a safe distance.

He picked it up on his spear and brought it close to his eyes. The thing
redoubled its frenzied movements. It slipped off the spear and plopped
upon the soft moth-fur he wore about his middle. Instantly, as if it
were a conjuring-trick, the insect vanished. Burl searched for minutes
before he found it hidden deep in the long, soft hairs of his garment,
resting motionless and seemingly at ease.

It was the larval form of a beetle, fragments of whose armor could be
seen near the base of the clayey cliffside. Hidden in the remnants of
its egg-casings, the brood of minute things had waited near the opening
of the mining-bee tunnel. It was their gamble with destiny when
mining-bee grubs had slept through metamorphosis and come uncertainly
out of the tunnel for the first time, that some or many of the larvae
might snatch the instant's chance to fasten to the bees' legs and writhe
upward to an anchorage in their fur. It happened that this particular
batch of eggs had been laid after the emergence of the grubs. They had
no possible chance of fulfilling their intended role as parasites on
insects of the order hymenoptera. They were simply and matter-of-factly
doomed by the blindness of instinct, which had caused them to be placed
where they could not possibly survive.

On the other hand, if one or many of them had found a lurking-place, the
offspring of their host would have been doomed. The place filled by
oil-beetle larvae in the scheme of things is the place--or one of the
places--reserved for creatures that limit the number of mining-bees.
When a bee-louse-infested mining-bee has made a new tunnel, stocked it
with honey for its young, and then laid one egg to float on that pool of
nourishment and hatch and feed and ultimately grow to be another
mining-bee--at that moment of egg-laying, one small bee-louse detaches
itself. It remains zestfully in the provisioned cell to devour the egg
for which the provisions were accumulated. It happily consumes those
provisions and, in time, an oil-beetle crawls out of the tunnel a
mining-bee so laboriously prepared.

Burl had no difficulty in detaching the small insect and casting it
away, but in doing so he discovered that others had hidden themselves in
his fur without his knowledge. He plucked them away and found more.
While savages can be highly tolerant of vermin too small to be seen,
they feel a peculiar revolt against serving as host to creatures of
sensible size. Burl reacted violently--as once he had reacted to the
discovery of a leech clinging to his heel. He jerked off his loin-cloth
and beat it savagely with his spear.

When it was clean, he still felt a wholly unreasonable sense of
humiliation. It was not clearly thought out, of course. Burl feared huge
insects too much to hate them. But that small creatures should fasten
upon him produced a completely irrational feeling of outrage. For the
first time in very many years or centuries a human being upon the
forgotten planet felt that he had been insulted. His dignity had been
assailed. Burl raged.

But as he raged, a triumphant shout came from nearby. Jon and Dor were
returning from their foraging, loaded down with edible mushroom. They,
also, had taken a step upward toward the natural dignity of men. They
had so far forgotten their terror as to shout in exultation at their
find of food. Up to now, Burl had been the only man daring to shout. Now
there were two others.

In his overwrought state this was also enraging. The result of hurt
vanity on two counts was jealousy, and the result of jealousy was a
crazy foolhardiness. Burl ground his teeth and insanely resolved to do
something so magnificent, so tremendous, so utterly breathtaking that
there could be no possible imitation by anybody else. His thinking was
not especially clear. Part of his motivation had been provided by the
oil-beetle larvae. He glared about him at the deepening dusk, seeking
some exploit, some glamorous feat, to perform immediately, even in the
night.

He found one.




_7. JOURNEY THROUGH DEATH_


It was late dusk and the reddened clouds overhead were deepening
steadily toward black. Dark shadows hung everywhere. The clay cliff cut
off all vision to one side, but elsewhere Burl could see outward until
the graying haze blotted out the horizon. Here and there, bees droned
homeward to hive or burrow. Sometimes a slender, graceful wasp passed
overhead, its wings invisible by the swiftness of their vibration.

A few butterflies lingered hungrily in the distance, seeking the few
things they could still feast upon. No moth had wakened yet to the
night. The cloud-bank grew more sombre. The haze seemed to close in and
shrink the world that Burl could see.

He watched, raging, for the sight that would provide him with the
triumph to end all triumphs among his followers. The soft, down-reaching
fingers of the night touched here and there and the day ended at those
spots. Then, from the heart of the deep redness to the west a flying
creature came. It was a beautiful thing--a yellow emperor
butterfly--flapping eastward with great sail-like velvet wings that
seemed black against the sunset. Burl saw it sweep across the incredible
sky, alight delicately, and disappear behind a mass of toadstools
clustered so thickly they seemed nearly a hillock and not a mass of
growing things.

Then darkness closed in completely, but Burl still stared where the
yellow emperor had landed. There was that temporary, utter quiet when
day-things were hidden and night-things had not yet ventured out.
Fox-fire glowed. Patches of pale phosphorescence--luminous
mushrooms--shone faintly in the dark.

Presently Burl moved through the night. He could imagine the yellow
emperor in its hiding-place, delicately preening slender limbs before it
settled down to rest until the new day dawned. He had noted landmarks,
to guide himself. A week earlier and his blood would have run cold at
the bare thought of doing what he did now. In mere cool-headed
detachment he would have known that what he did was close to madness.
But he was neither cool-headed nor detached.

He crossed the clear ground before the low cliff. But for the fox-fire
beacons he would have been lost instantly. The slow drippings of rain
began. The sky was dead black. Now was the time for night-things to fly,
and male tarantulas to go seeking mates and prey. It was definitely no
time for adventuring.

Burl moved on. He found the close-packed toadstools by the process of
running into them in the total obscurity. He fumbled, trying to force
his way between them. It could not be done; they grew too close and too
low. He raged at this impediment. He climbed.

This was insanity. Burl stood on spongy mushroom-stuff that quivered and
yielded under his weight. Somewhere something boomed upward, rising on
fast-beating wings into blackness. He heard the pulsing drone of
four-inch mosquitos close by. He moved forward, the fungus support
swaying, so that he did not so much walk as stagger over the
close-packed mushroom heads. He groped before him with spear and panted
a little. There was a part of him which was bitterly afraid, but he
raged the more furiously because if once he gave way even to caution, it
would turn to panic.

Burl would have made a strange spectacle in daylight gaudily clothed as
he was in soft blue fur and velvet cloak, staggering over swaying
insecurity, coddling ferocity in himself against the threat of fear.

Then his spear told him there was emptiness ahead. Something moved,
below. He heard and felt it stirring the toadstool-stalks on which he
stood.

Burl raised his spear, grasping it in both hands. He plunged down with
it, stabbing fiercely.

