may well content him: vizt: materialls to build, fewell [fuel] to
burn, ground to plant, seas and rivers to ffish in, a pure ayer [air]
to breath[e] in, good water to drinke till wine or beare canne be
made, which togeather with the cowes, hoggs and goates brought hether
allready may suffice for food, for as for foule [fowl] and venison,
they are dainties here a well as in England. Ffor cloaths and beddinge
they must bring them with them till time and industry produce them
here. In a word, wee yett enioy [enjoy] little to bee envyed but
endure much to be pittyed in the sicknes & mortalitye of our people.

    [1] From Dudley's letter to the Countess of London. Printed in
    Hart's "Source Book of American History." Dudley came over with
    Winthrop, and at one time was governor of the Colony.

    [2] Boston Harbor is here referred to.

    [3] The place was alterward called Newtown, and is now Cambridge.




HOW THE BAY COLONY DIFFERED FROM PLYMOUTH

BY JOHN G. PALFREY[1]


The emigration of the Englishmen who settled at Plymouth had been
prompted by religious dissent. In what manner Robinson, who was
capable of speculating on political tendencies, or Brewster, whose
early position had compelled him to observe them, had augured
concerning the prospect of public affairs in their native country, no
record tells; while the rustics of the Scrooby congregation, who fled
from a government which denied them liberty in their devotions, could
have had but little knowledge and no agency in the political sphere.
The case was widely different with the founders of the Colony of
Massachusetts Bay. That settlement had its rise in a state of things
in England which associated religion and politics in an intimate
alliance....

Winthrop, then forty-two years old, was descended from a family of
good condition, long seated at Groton, in Suffolk, where he had a
property of six or seven hundred pounds a year, the equivalent of at
least two thousand pounds at the present day. His father was a lawyer
and magistrate. Commanding uncommon respect and confidence from an
early age, he had moved in the circles where the highest matters of
English policy were discust, by men who had been associates of
Whitgift, Bacon, Essex, and Cecil. Humphrey was "a gentleman of
special parts, of learning and activity, and a godly man"; in the home
of his father-in-law, Thomas, third earl of Lincoln, the head in that
day of the now ducal house of Newcastle, he had been the familiar
companion of the patriotic nobles.

Of the assistants, Isaac Johnson, esteemed the richest of the
emigrants, was another son-in-law of Lord Lincoln, and a landholder in
three counties. Sir Richard Saltonstall of Halifax, in Yorkshire, was
rich enough to be a bountiful contributor to the company's operations.
Thomas Dudley, with a company of volunteers which he had raised, had
served, thirty years before, under Henry IV of France; since which
time he had managed the estates of the Earl of Lincoln. He was old
enough to have lent a shrill voice to the huzzas at the defeat of the
armada, and his military services had indoctrinated him in the lore of
civil and religious freedom. Theophilus Eaton, an eminent London
merchant, was used to courts and had been minister of Charles I in
Denmark. Simon Bradstreet, the son of a Non-conformist minister in
Lincolnshire, and a grandson of "a Suffolk gentleman of a fine
estate," had studied at Emanuel College, Cambridge. William Vassall
was an opulent West India proprietor. "The principal planters of
Massachusetts," says the prejudiced Chalmers, "were English country
gentlemen of no inconsiderable fortunes; of enlarged understandings,
improved by liberal education; of extensive ambition, concealed under
the appearance of religious humility."

But it is not alone from what we know of the position, character, and
objects of those few members of the Massachusetts Company who were
proposing to emigrate at the early period now under our notice, that
we are to estimate the power and the purposes of that important
corporation. It had been rapidly brought into the form which it now
bore, by the political exigencies of the age. Its members had no less
in hand than a wide religious and political reform--whether to be
carried out in New England, or in Old England, or in both, it was for
circumstances, as they should unfold themselves, to determine. The
leading emigrants to Massachusetts were of that brotherhood of men
who, by force of social consideration as well as of the intelligence
and resolute patriotism, molded the public opinion and action of
England in the first half of the seventeenth century. While the large
part stayed at home to found, as it proved, the short-lived English
republic, and to introduce elements into the English Constitution
which had to wait another half-century for their secure reception,
another part devoted themselves at once to the erection of free
institutions in this distant wilderness.

In an important sense the associates of the Massachusetts Company were
builders of the British, as well as of the New England, commonwealth.
Some ten or twelve of them, including Cradock, the Governor, served in
the Long Parliament. Of the four commoners of that Parliament
distinguished by Lord Clarendon as first in influence, Vane had been
governor of the company, and Hampden, Pym, and Fiennes--all patentees
of Connecticut--if not members, were constantly consulted upon its
affairs. The latter statement is also true of the Earl of Warwick, the
Parliament's admiral, and of those excellent persons, Lord Say and
Sele and Lord Brooke, both of whom at one time proposed to emigrate.

The company's meetings placed Winthrop and his colleagues in relations
with numerous persons destined to act busy parts in the stirring times
that were approaching--with Brereton and Hewson, afterward two of the
Parliamentary major-generals; with Philip Nye, who helped Sir Henry
Vane to "cozen" the Scottish Presbyterian Commissioners in the
phraseology of the Solemn League and Covenant; with Samuel Vassall,
whose name shares with those of Hampden and Lord Say and Sele the
renown of the refusal to pay ship-money, and of courting the suit
which might ruin them or emancipate England; with John Venn, who, at
the head of six thousand citizens, beset the House of Lords during the
trial of Lord Strafford, and whom, with three other Londoners, King
Charles, after the battle of Edgehil, excluded from his offer of
pardon; with Owen Rowe, the "firebrand of the city"; with Thomas
Andrews, the lord mayor, who proclaimed the abolition of royalty....

He who well weighs the facts which have been presented in connection
with the principal emigration to Massachusetts, and other related
facts which will offer themselves to notice as we proceed, may find
himself conducted to the conclusion that when Winthrop and his
associates prepared to convey across the water a charter from the King
which, they hoped, would in their beginnings afford them some
protection both from himself and through him from the powers of
Continental Europe, they had conceived a project no less important
than that of laying, on this side of the Atlantic, the foundations of
a nation of Puritan Englishmen, foundations to be built upon as future
circumstances should decide or allow. It would not perhaps be pressing
the point too far to say that in view of the thick clouds that were
gathering over their home, they contemplated the possibility that the
time was near at hand when all that was best of what they left behind
would follow them to these shores; when a renovated England, secure in
freedom and pure in religion, would rise in North America; when a
transatlantic English empire would fulfil, in its beneficent order,
the dreams of English patriots and sages of earlier times....

The _Arbella_ arrived at Salem after a passage of nine weeks, and was
joined in a few days by three vessels which had sailed in her company.
The assistants, Ludlow and Rossiter, with a party from the west
country, had landed at Nantasket a fortnight before, and some of the
Leyden people, on their way to Plymouth, had reached Salem a little
earlier yet. Seven vessels from Southampton made their voyages three
or four weeks later. Seventeen in the whole came before winter,
bringing about a thousand passengers....

It is desirable to understand how this population, destined to be the
germ of a state, was constituted. Of members of the Massachusetts
Company, it cannot be ascertained that so many as twenty had come
over. That company, as has been explained, was one formed mainly for
the furtherance, not of any private interests, but of a great public
object. As a corporation, it had obtained the ownership of a large
American territory, on which it designed to place a colony which
should be a refuge for civil and religious freedom. By combined
counsels, it had arranged the method of ordering a settlement, and the
liberality of its members had provided the means of transporting those
who should compose it. This done, the greater portion were content to
remain and await the course of events at home, while a few of their
number embarked to attend to providing the asylum which very soon
might be needed by them all.

The reception of the newcomers was discouraging. More than a quarter
part of their predecessors at Salem had died during the previous
winter, and many of the survivors were ill or feeble. The faithful
Higginson was wasting with a hectic fever, which soon proved fatal.
There was a scarcity of all sorts of provisions, and not corn enough
for a fortnight's supply after the arrival of the fleet. "The
remainder of a hundred eighty servants," who, in the two preceding
years, had been conveyed over at heavy cost, were discharged from
their indentures, to escape the expense of their maintenance. Sickness
soon began to spread, and before the close of autumn had proved fatal
to two hundred of this year's emigration. Death aims at the "shining
mark" he is said to love. Lady Arbella Johnson, coming "from a
paradise of plenty and pleasure, which she enjoyed in the family of a
noble earldom, into a wilderness of wants," survived her arrival only
a month; and her husband, esteemed and beloved by the colonists, died
of grief a few weeks after. "He was a holy man and wise and died in
sweet peace."

    [1] From Palfrey's "History of New England." By permission of and
    by arrangement with the authorized publishers, Houghton, Mifflin
    Co. Copyright, 1873.




LORD BALTIMORE IN MARYLAND

(1633)

BY CONTEMPORARY WRITERS[1]


On Friday the 22 of November 1633, a small gale of winde comming
gently from the Northwest, weighed from the Cowes, in the Ile of
Wight, about ten in the morning; & (having stayed by the way twenty
dayes at the Barbada's, and fourtene dayes at St. Christophers, upon
some necessary occasions,) wee arrived at Point-Comfort in Virginia,
on the 24. of February following, the Lord be praised for it. At this
time one Captaine Claybourne was come from parts where wee intended to
plant, to Virginia, and from him wee vnderstood, that all the natiues
of these parts were in preparation of defence, by reason of a rumour
somebody had raised amongst them, of sixe ships that were come with a
power of Spanyards, whose meaning was to driue all the inhabitants out
of the Countrey.

On the 3. of March wee came into Chesapeake Bay, and made sayle to the
North of Patoemeck river, the Bay running betweene two sweete lands in
the channell of 7. 8. and 9 fathome deepe, 10 leagues broad, and full
of fish at the time of the yeere; It is one of the delightfullest
waters I euer saw, except Potoemeck, which wee named St. Gregories.
And now being in our own Countrey, wee began to give names to places,
and called the Southerne Pointe, Cape Saint Gregory; and the Northerly
Point, Saint Michaels.

This river, of all I know, is the greatest and sweetest, much broader
than the Thames; so pleasant, as I for my part, was never satisfied in
beholding it. Few marshes or swamps, but the greatest part sollid good
earth, with great Curiosity of woods which are not Choaked up with
under-shrubbes, but set commonly one from the other in such distance,
as a Coach and foure horses may easily trauell through them.

At the first loaming of the ship vpon the river, wee found (as was
foretold us) all the Countrey in Armes. The King of the Paschattowayes
had drawen together 1500 bowe-men, which wee ourselves saw, the woods
were fired in manner of beacons the night after; and for that our
vessel was the greatest that euer those Indians saw, the scowtes
reported wee came in a Canoe, as bigge as an Island, and had as many
men as there bee trees in the woods.

Wee sayled vp the river till wee came to Heron Ilands, so called from
the infinite swarmes of that fowle there. The first of those Ilands we
called Saint Clement's: The second Saint Katharine's; And the third,
Saint Cicilie's. We took land first in Saint Clement's, which is
compassed about with a shallow water, and admitts no accesse without
wading; here by the overturning of the Shallop, the maids which had
been washing at the land were almost drowned, beside the losse of much
linnen, and amongst the rest, I lost the best of mine which is a very
maine losse in these parts. The ground is couered thicke with
pokickeries (which is a wild Wall-nut very hard and thick of shell;
but the meate (though little) is passing sweete,) with black
Wall-nuts, and acorns bigger than Ours. It abounds with Vines and
Salletts, hearbs and flowers, full of Cedar and Sassafras. It is but
400 acres bigg, & therefore too little for vs to settle vpon.

Heere we went to a place, where a large tree was made into a Crosse;
and taking it on our shoulders, wee carried it to the place appointed
for it. The Gouernour and Commissioners putting their hands first vnto
it, then the rest of the chiefest adventurers. At the place prepared
wee all kneeled downe, & said certain Prayers; taking possession of
the Countrey for our Saviour, and for our soueraigne Lord the King of
England... The Gouernour being returned, wee Came some nine leagues
lower to a river on the North Side of that land, as bigg as the
Thames: which wee called Saint Gregorie's river.[2] It runs vp to the
North about 20 miles before it comes to the fresh. This river makes
two excellent Bayes, for 300 sayle of Shippes of 1000. tunne, to
harbour in with great safety. The one Bay we named Saint George's; the
other (and more inward) Saint Marie's. The King of Yaocomico, dwells
on the left-hand or side thereof: & we tooke vp our Seate on the
right, one mile within the land. It is as braue a piece of ground to
set down on as most is in the Countrey, & I suppose as good, (if not
much better) than the primest parcel of English ground.

Our Town we call Saint Marie's; and to auoid all iust occasion of
offence, & collour of wrong, wee bought of the King for Hatchets,
Axes, Howes, and Cloathes, a quantitie of some 30 miles of Land, which
wee call Augusta Carolina; And that which made them the more willing
to sell it, was the warres they had with the Sasqusa-han-oughs,[3] a
mighty bordering nation, who came often into their Countrey, to waste
& destroy; & forced many of them to leaue their Countrey, and passe
ouer Patoemeck to free themselues from perill before wee came. God no
doubt disposing all this for them, who were to bring his law and light
among the Infidells. Yet, seeing wee came soe well prepared with
armes, their feare was much lesse, & they could be content to dwell by
vs: Yet doe they daily relinquish their houses, lands, & Cornefields,
& leaue them to vs. Is not this a piece of wonder that a nation, which
a few dayes before was in armes with the rest against vs, should yeeld
themselues now vnto vs like lambes, & giue vs their houses, land &
linings, for a trifle? _Digitus Dei est hic_: and surely some great
good is entended by God to his Nation. Some few families of Indians,
are permitted to stay by vs till next yeere, & then the land is
free....

And now to returne to the place itself, chosen for our plantation. Wee
have been vpon it but one month, and therefore can make no large
relation of it. Yet thus much I can say of it allready; For our own
safety, we haue built a good strong Fort or Palizado, & haue mounted
vpon it one good piece of Ordnance, and 4 Murderers, and haue seuen
pieces of Ordnance more, ready to mount forthwith. For our prouision,
heere is some store of Peasen, and Beanes, and Wheate left on the
ground by the Indians, who had satisfaction for it.

Wee haue planted since wee came, as much Maize (or Indian Wheate) as
will suffice (if God prosper it) much more company than we haue. It is
vp about knee high aboue ground allready, and wee expect return of
1000. for one, as wee have reason for our hope, from the experience of
the yeelde in other parts of this Countrey, as is very credibly
related to vs.

Wee haue also English Peasen, & French-beanes, Cotten, Oringes,
Limons, Melocotunes, Apples, Peares, Potatos, and Sugar-Canes of our
owne planting, beside Hortage comming vp very finely.

But such is the quantity of Vines and Grapes now allready vpon them
(though young) as I dare say if wee had Vessells and skill, wee might
make many a tonne of Wine, euen from about our Plantation; and such
Wine, as those of Virginia say (for yet we can say nothing) as is as
good as the Wine of Spaine. I feare they exceede; but surely very
good. For the Clime of this Countrey is neere the same with Sivill and
Corduba: lying betweene 38 & 40 degrees of Northerlie latitude.

Of Hoggs wee haue allready got from Achomack (a plantation in
