prophecy, and understand all mysteries, and all knowledge; and though
1 have all faith, so that I could remove mountains and have, not
charity, I am nothing. And though I bestow all my goods to feed the
poor, and though I give my body to be burned, and have not charity, it
profiteth me nothing." * The apostle here supposeth a person possessed
of the most eminent miraculous gifts, yet wholly destitute of
religion. Could no such case happen, he would not have made the
supposition. He did not write to amuse, but to edify and instruct.

* 1 Cor xiii. 1, &c.

Some at Corinth prided themselves in their gifts and despised others
--perhaps men's moral state was estimated by them. Therefore did he
show the use of those gifts--that they were distinct from renewing
grace--that the latter was more excellent than the former; and that
the possession of the latter could not be argued from the exercise of
the former.

Those gifts were very useful at that day, and in that city, which was
filled with idolatry, and almost the headquarters of paganism; but to
the possessor they were of less value than Christian graces--"Covet
earnestly the best gifts; and yet shew I unto you a more excellent
way"--Namely, the charity described in the following chapter, of which
we have been treating above.

To prevent the seventy from indulging the spirit which the apostle
afterwards thus reproved at Corinth, was the design of the caution
given them in the text. Christ observed how they valued themselves on
their gifts and checked the spirit its beginning. _Rejoice not that
the spirits are subject unto you._

II. We are to consider the command--_But rather rejoice because your
names are written in heaven_.

The names of the saints are represented as _written in Heaven_, This
language is figurative, accommodated to human weakness. God hath
promised salvation to the faithful and caused them to hope in his
mercy; but memorandums are not necessary to remind him of his
promises, or records in heaven to entitle the faithful to the heavenly
inheritance. God's counsels are always before him. The phraseology of
the text is borrowed from the customs of men, who need memorandums
and records to secure the fulfillment of engagements.

When men are made free of a city, or state, they are enrolled in the
archives of the community--Thence probably the metaphorical language
of the text, and similar scriptures: For we often find matters which
are determined in the divine councils represented as written in
celestial records--Then they that feared the Lord spake often one to
another, and the Lord hearkened and heard, and _a book of remembrance
was written before him_, for them that thought on "his name." Zion is
said to be "graven on the palms of his hands"--The saints to be
_written_ "in the book of life--The dead to be judged out of the
things _written_ in the books" which will be opened at the grand
assize when the world will be judged in righteousness.

As the rewards of grace are made sure to the righteous, the address to
the seventy speaks their knowledge of it--_Rejoice because your names
are written in heaven_. They could not rejoice in an unknown good. But
the manner in which their privileged state is mentioned supposes them
acquainted with it. Christ did not here reveal it--did not say, _your
names are written in heaven, therefore rejoice_, but rejoice because
they are written there--because you know it to be the case.

Neither do they appear to have possessed knowledge, in this respect,
which others are denied. Others are also exhorted to rejoice in the
Lord. The suffering Christians of that age were often reminded of the
rewards in reserve for them, as what would abundantly compensate all
their sufferings here; which supposed them acquainted with their title
to glory.

But how did they attain this knowledge? And how may others attain it?

By considering the conditions of the promises and seeing that they
have complied with them. The promises are made to faith and
repentance, to love and obedience. Where these are found on a person,
that person may know that _his name is written in heaven_.

Obedience flows from faith and love. "Every good tree bringeth forth
good fruit." The fruits of grace, are the evidences of grace, and the
only evidences on which there is dependence. Should an angel from
heaven testify to a person that his name was written there, the
evidence should be inferior to that which ariseth from the Christian
temper evidenced by fruits of holiness. If these were found, that
would be useless; if wanting, inefficient. "By their fruits ye shall
know them. In this the children of God are manifest." Had a person
such testimony from heaven, he could know that the bearer was from
above, only by attending to his own heart and life.

"Satan can transform himself into an angel of light." Permitted of God
he might have access to our minds and persuade us that _our names were
written in heaven_, while we remained enemies to God and under the
condemning sentence of his law, had we no rule by which to try
ourselves, and judge of our state; but this is not denied us. Yet some
are probably deceived, through infernal influence, and filled with
vain hopes. Mistaking the sophistry of Satan, for the operation of the
divine Spirit, they boast communion with God and call themselves his
children while no portion of the Christian temper is found upon them.
Doubtless some, who have gloried in special divine communications have
been deceived, relative to the nature and source of the operations
which they have experienced. Supposed visions and revelations, are
often no other than illusions of fancy, freaks of imagination, or
effects of diabolical influence, those affected with them often appear
confident of that which sober reason rejects as groundless.

If when we turn the eye inward, we discover faith in Christ, sorrow
for sin, love to God, devotedness to his service, and reliance on his
grace through a Mediator, and these are evidenced by fruits of
holiness, we need no other evidence that _our names are written in
heaven_: But if there are wanting, hope is vain and confidence
delusive--Gifts, the most extraordinary, even those of prophecy and
miracles are totally unavailing. They leave us but as "sounding brass
and tinkling cymbals."

Instances of this kind have formerly occurred: They may occur again.
It concerns us therefore to look to ourselves, and see that our hopes
are not built on the sand.

REFLECTIONS.

I. The subjection of evil spirits to Christ shows the universality of
his dominion: For even apostate spirits have not, in every respect,
broken from under his government. He sets them their bounds which they
cannot pass. "Hitherto shalt thou come and no farther." When dislodged
from a man by his order they cannot not enter a swine without his
permission. They are permitted indeed to indulge depravity, but no
farther than infinite wisdom sees it; and oftentimes their malice is
made subservient to the divine purposes. While Christ had his
residence on earth, they were permitted to possess the bodies of men,
and his superior power was manifested in their ejection, and thereby a
few species of evidence was given to his truth of the gospel--yea they
were sometimes made to confess him, when men denied him! "I know thee
who thou art; the Holy One of God." *

* Luke iv. 34.

In various ways God hath made use of apostate spirits to effect his
holy and merciful designs. They have been used to try the faith, and
thereby fit them for glory and honor--Witness the strange trials
brought on Job! And all served to restrain pride and depravity, and by
the trial of his faith and exercise of his graces, to prepare him for
a brighter crown. They may also be instrumental in bringing sinners to
repentance. St. Paul speaks of "delivering one to Satan for the
destruction of the flesh, that the spirit might be saved in the day of
the Lord Jesus: And of delivering men to Satan, that they might learn
not to blaspheme." *

* 1 Cor. v. 5, 1 Tim. i. 20.

II. Our subject teacheth us not to value ourselves on account of
gifts, or powers. Gifts and grace, we have seen to be distinct
--that the former are a kind of common flock, designed not so much for
the benefit of the possessor, as of the public; and that a person may
possess them in large measure, and yet continue a rebel against God
and perish in his rebellion.

God hath wise reasons for the bestowment of gifts, and, in someway,
gets glory to himself thereby. But every talent is liable to abuse. If
any man abuse them God will require it. Justice may be glorified,
where goodness is neglected, and grace despised.

There is power with God to compel such use of his gifts as he
requires. By overruling the degeneracy of fallen creatures, they often
subserve the more mischievous. Gifts, under the influence his holy
purposes. Princes who know him not, are often instrumental in
executing his designs.--the Assyrian and Persian monarchs were
formerly made to execute his judicial designs on other nations and on
his people, though "they meant not so, neither did their hearts think
so." Other potentates do the same, and in the same way. Yea God hath
power to compel unwilling obedience to his known commands, and hath
sometimes done it. Balaam was made to bless Israel and foretel their
greatness, while yet the enemy of Israel, and of the God of Israel;
and Jonah, to bear God's messages to Nineveh.

To be thus used of God gives no title to his favor. "When God had
performed his whole work on Mount Zion," he punished the proud
Assyrian whom he had used in the execution of his justice: And Balaam
perished among the enemies of Israel. Service undesignedly performed,
and that which is the effect of constraint, find no encouragement in
revelation. "If I do this thing willingly, I have a reward; but if
against my will, a dispensation is committed unto me; what is my
reward then?"

III. Though it is lawful to covet earnestly the best gifts, there is
a more "excellent way"--there is that which is more valuable,
especially to the possessor--the grace which sanctifies the heart. If
we have this grace the more gifts we possess the better--they are all
consecrated to the service of God. If we have only gifts they may
render us of grace, are beneficial, but under that of depravity,
baleful in their effects.

Some pride themselves in the powers which they possess, and despise
those of inferior abilities--some mistake gifts for graces, or the
sure evidences of them. But the day is at hand which will correct
mistakes, and exhibit every thing in its proper light. Then the humble
followers of the Lamb, who pass through life unnoticed, or unknown,
will be found written in heaven, and will be owned and honored, as the
redeemed of the Lord. But those who neglect the grace offered in
Christ, though they may possess the greatest powers--may speak with
tongues of men and angels, and have all faith to the removing of
mountains, will be denied of the eternal Judge, and sent away into
everlasting punishment. Wherefore, _rejoice not, though the spirits
may be subject unto you; but rather rejoice because your names are
written in heaven_.



 * * * * * *



SERMON XV.

Human Characters determined only by Divine decision.

1 Corinthians iv. 3, 4.

"But with me it is a very small thing that I should be judged of you,
or of man's judgment; yea I judge not mine own self. For I know
nothing by myself, yet am I not hereby justified: but he that judgeth
me is the Lord."


Corinth was one of the principal cities of Greece. Enjoying every
advantage of situation, it became rich and populous. Most cities in
similar circumstances have become vicious. This became exceedingly so.

The religion of Corinth was paganism, which naturally led to sundry
vices. Bacchus and Venus had there their temples and their votaries;
and luxury, the child of affluence, led to vice generally. From such a
combination of circumstances, the inhabitants, like the men of Sodom,
"were sinners before the Lord exceedingly." It might be justly stiled,
like Pergamos, "The place where Satan's seat was."

Yet God had much people in that city, which continue and labor in it,
which he did for more than eighteen months. Nor did he labor in vain.
He gathered there a large and flourishing church; which appears to
have been enriched with a greater effusion of miraculous gifts, than
any other of the primitive churches. The state of Corinth, where God
had been unknown, and where superstition had reigned, might render
this necessary in order to give success to the gospel. Miracles are
adapted to arrest the attention of those who would be deaf to the
voice of reason and regardless of proofs drawn from it.
But those gifts were abused. They were made the occasion of pride, and
of divisions: Which shews that there is nothing in the nature or
miraculous gifts, which secures the proper use of them; that they are
no evidence of renovation.

Though the apostle labored to great and happy effect in that city of
the Gentiles, after his departure, deceitful workers went among them,
and availed themselves of his absence to make divisions, and alienate
their affections from him. This seems to have occasioned his writing
the epistles addressed to them, which constitutes a valuable part of
the sacred volume.

The calumnies of his enemies, and the effect which they had on the
Corinthians, are alluded to in the text; which contains an expression
of his feelings on the occasion.

In discussing the subject, we shall just glance at these matters, and
add a brief improvement.

St. Paul's character, both as a Minister and as a Christian, was
impeached by those enemies. They represented him as an unfaithful, or
unskillful laborer in the gospel, and as one who was not a subject
of divine grace.

This appears from his statement in the beginning of the context, and
from the text. Let a man so account of us as of the ministers of
Christ, and stewards of the mysteries of God. Moreover it is required
in stewards that a man be found faithful, "_But with me it is a very
small thing, that I should be judged of you, or of man's judgment,
yea, I judge not mine own self. For I know nothing by myself, yet am
I not hereby justified: But he that judgeth me is the Lord_."

The apostle here professeth himself "a minister of Christ and steward
of the mysteries of God," and directs the Corinthians to consider him
in that light; or as one put in trust with the gospel to teach its
mysteries, inculcate its truths, urge its duties, and tender its
supports.

The term _mystery_ is used in Scripture, to express things not
discoverable by the light of reason, but knowable by revelation. It is
also used to express incomprehensibles; which may be objects of faith
on the credit of divine truth. The former is the more common sense of
the term in the gospel, particularly in the passage before us, and
generally in St. Paul's epistles. "We speak the wisdom of God in a
_mystery_--the hidden wisdom, which God ordained before the world unto
our glory; which none of the princes of this world knew; for had they
known it they would not have crucified the Lord of glory. But it is
written, Eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into
the heart of man, the things which God hath prepared for them that
love him. _But God hath revealed them into us by his Spirit_."

The gospel plan of salvation was a _mystery_, a hidden _mystery_, till
the gospel day. It was hidden from the prophets who foretold it; and
from the apostles, till after Christ's sufferings and resurrection.
They understood very little of it; knew almost nothing about it till
after the ascension, when the comforter was sent down "to teach them
all things, and bring all things to their remembrance." To them it was
then matter of wonder. They had not been made to understand that
Christ was to bear the sins of men--"that he was to suffer and enter
into his glory:" And when he did suffer, "they knew not the Scripture,
that he must rise again from the dead."

Another gospel _mystery_ was the calling of the Gentiles--that
salvation was intended for them, and to be offered to them, in Christ,
equally as to the natural seed of Jacob. "If ye have heard of the
dispensation of the grace of God, which is given me to you ward; how
that by revelation he made known unto me _the mystery_--which in other
ages was not made known unto the sons of men, as it is now revealed
unto his holy apostles and prophets by the Spirit: _That the Gentiles
should be fellow heirs, and of the same body, and partakers of his
promise in Christ, by the Gospel_, whereof I am made a minister." *

* Ephesian iii. 2-7.

These were some of the mysteries dispensed by this steward of
the mysteries of God; who "shunned not to declare all the counsel of
God."

He declared the deep things, which human reason could not have
discovered; and those also which it cannot comprehend. These are to be
found in Paul's teachings, as well as the plain things which are easy
to be understood.

But the principal business of this "steward o the mysteries of God,"
was to open the way of salvation through a Savior, and shew that
provision is made in him for the salvation of both Jews and Gentiles,
and offered alike to those of every nation; and to lead men to the
knowledge of themselves and the Redeemer, and teach them how they
might be benefited by divine grace in him.

And while he acknowledged the obligations, of fidelity, he declared
himself no way greatly affected by the judgment which might be passed
upon him by his fellow mortals. _But with me it is a small thing to be
judged of you, or of man's judgment_. An intimation that he was judged
and censured by some of them. This was, doubtless, matter of notoriety
at Corinth; but he little regarded it. It made no change in him, or in
the manner in which he discharged the duties of his office. He was
chiefly concerned to obtain the approbation of an higher tribunal
that of his divine matter, the------dge of all. The judgment of fellow
mortals did not move him--_He that judgeth me is the Lord_.

Not that he was wholly indifferent to the opinion entertained of him
by his fellow men. Had be been so, he would not have undertaken his
own defence as in these epistles, A measure of esteem was necessary to
his usefulness in the ministry. Had all who heard him thought him the
enemy of God, he could have done no good in it. Therefore his endeavor
to rectify their mistakes. And the rather because he held the truth as
it is in Jesus; so that in rejecting him, and the doctrines which he
taught, they turned aside into errors which might fatally mislead
them. But he did not wrong his conscience to please them, or depart
from truth to gain their approbation--"Do I seek to please men? For if
I yet pleased men, I should not be the servant of Christ." Had Paul
been chiefly concerned to please men, he would have continued a
Pharisee.

The person who would please Christ, while paying such deference to the
opinions of men as fairly to weigh every objection against his faith
or practice, and try them by the divine rule, must be careful to
conform to that rule, whatever opinions may be entertained of him. Of
the meaning of the rule he must judge for himself before God--"calling
no man master." The reasons of his faith and practice, and his
construction of the divine rule, he may lay before his fellow men, to
remove the grounds of prejudice; but he must rise so far above their
frowns a------atteries, as not to be influenced by them to disguise
his sentiments, or counteract his own judgment of the law of God, of
the gospel of Christ, or of the duties incumbent on him.
