tetragon.

This same explanation is given by Aristotle in the _Predicaments_
(Categor. vi), where in explaining why figures are not susceptible of
more or less, he says: "Things which are given the nature of a
triangle or a circle, are accordingly triangles and circles": to wit,
because indivisibility is essential to the motion of such, wherefore
whatever participates their nature must participate it in its
indivisibility.

It is clear, therefore, since we speak of habits and dispositions in
respect of a relation to something (Phys. vii, text. 17), that in two
ways intensity and remission may be observed in habits and
dispositions. First, in respect of the habit itself: thus, for
instance, we speak of greater or less health; greater or less
science, which extends to more or fewer things. Secondly, in respect
of participation by the subject: in so far as equal science or health
is participated more in one than in another, according to a diverse
aptitude arising either from nature, or from custom. For habit and
disposition do not give species to the subject: nor again do they
essentially imply indivisibility.

We shall say further on (Q. 66, A. 1) how it is with the virtues.

Reply Obj. 1: As the word "great" is taken from corporeal quantities
and applied to the intelligible perfections of forms; so also is the
word "growth," the term of which is something great.

Reply Obj. 2: Habit is indeed a perfection, but not a perfection
which is the term of its subject; for instance, a term giving the
subject its specific being. Nor again does the nature of a habit
include the notion of term, as do the species of numbers. Wherefore
there is nothing to hinder it from being susceptible of more or less.

Reply Obj. 3: Alteration is primarily indeed in the qualities of the
third species; but secondarily it may be in the qualities of the
first species: for, supposing an alteration as to hot and cold, there
follows in an animal an alteration as to health and sickness. In like
manner, if an alteration take place in the passions of the sensitive
appetite, or the sensitive powers of apprehension, an alteration
follows as to science and virtue (Phys. viii, text. 20).
________________________

SECOND ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 52, Art. 2]

Whether Habit Increases by Addition?

Objection 1: It would seem that the increase of habits is by way of
addition. For the word "increase," as we have said, is transferred to
forms, from corporeal quantities. But in corporeal quantities there
is no increase without addition: wherefore (De Gener. i, text. 31) it
is said that "increase is an addition to a magnitude already
existing." Therefore in habits also there is no increase without
addition.

Obj. 2: Further, habit is not increased except by means of some
agent. But every agent does something in the passive subject: for
instance, that which heats, causes heat in that which is heated.
Therefore there is no increase without addition.

Obj. 3: Further, as that which is not white, is in potentiality to be
white: so that which is less white, is in potentiality to be more
white. But that which is not white, is not made white except by the
addition of whiteness. Therefore that which is less white, is not
made more white, except by an added whiteness.

_On the contrary,_ The Philosopher says (Phys. iv, text. 84): "That
which is hot is made hotter, without making, in the matter, something
hot, that was not hot, when the thing was less hot." Therefore, in
like manner, neither is any addition made in other forms when they
increase.

_I answer that,_ The solution of this question depends on what we
have said above (A. 1). For we said that increase and decrease in
forms which are capable of intensity and remissness, happen in one
way not on the part of the very form considered in itself, through
the diverse participation thereof by the subject. Wherefore such
increase of habits and other forms, is not caused by an addition of
form to form; but by the subject participating more or less
perfectly, one and the same form. And just as, by an agent which is
in act, something is made actually hot, beginning, as it were, to
participate a form, not as though the form itself were made, as is
proved in _Metaph._ vii, text. 32, so, by an intense action of the
agent, something is made more hot, as it were participating the form
more perfectly, not as though something were added to the form.

For if this increase in forms were understood to be by way of
addition, this could only be either in the form itself or in the
subject. If it be understood of the form itself, it has already been
stated (A. 1) that such an addition or subtraction would change the
species; even as the species of color is changed when a thing from
being pale becomes white. If, on the other hand, this addition be
understood as applying to the subject, this could only be either
because one part of the subject receives a form which it had not
previously (thus we may say cold increases in a man who, after being
cold in one part of his body, is cold in several parts), or because
some other subject is added sharing in the same form (as when a hot
thing is added to another, or one white thing to another). But in
either of these two ways we have not a more white or a more hot
thing, but a greater white or hot thing.

Since, however, as stated above (A. 1), certain accidents are of
themselves susceptible of more or less, in some of these we may find
increase by addition. For movement increases by an addition either to
the time it lasts, or to the course it follows: and yet the species
remains the same on account of the oneness of the term. Yet movement
increases the intensity as to participation in its subject: i.e. in
so far as the same movement can be executed more or less speedily or
readily. In like manner, science can increase in itself by addition;
thus when anyone learns several conclusions of geometry, the same
specific habit of science increases in that man. Yet a man's science
increases, as to the subject's participation thereof, in intensity,
in so far as one man is quicker and readier than another in
considering the same conclusions.

As to bodily habits, it does not seem very probable that they receive
increase by way of addition. For an animal is not said to be simply
healthy or beautiful, unless it be such in all its parts. And if it
be brought to a more perfect measure, this is the result of a change
in the simple qualities, which are not susceptible of increase save
in intensity on the part of the subject partaking of them.

How this question affects virtues we shall state further on (Q. 66,
A. 1).

Reply Obj. 1: Even in bodily bulk increase is twofold. First, by
addition of one subject to another; such is the increase of living
things. Secondly, by mere intensity, without any addition at all;
such is the case with things subject to rarefaction, as is stated in
_Phys._ iv, text. 63.

Reply Obj. 2: The cause that increases a habit, always effects
something in the subject, but not a new form. But it causes the
subject to partake more perfectly of a pre-existing form, or it makes
the form to extend further.

Reply Obj. 3: What is not already white, is potentially white, as not
yet possessing the form of whiteness: hence the agent causes a new
form in the subject. But that which is less hot or white, is not in
potentiality to those forms, since it has them already actually: but
it is in potentiality to a perfect mode of participation; and this it
receives through the agent's action.
________________________

THIRD ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 52, Art. 3]

Whether Every Act Increases Its Habit?

Objection 1: It would seem that every act increases its habit. For
when the cause is increased the effect is increased. Now acts are
causes of habits, as stated above (Q. 51, A. 2). Therefore a habit
increases when its acts are multiplied.

Obj. 2: Further, of like things a like judgment should be formed. But
all the acts proceeding from one and the same habit are alike (Ethic.
ii, 1, 2). Therefore if some acts increase a habit, every act should
increase it.

Obj. 3: Further, like is increased by like. But any act is like the
habit whence it proceeds. Therefore every act increases the habit.

_On the contrary,_ Opposite effects do not result from the same
cause. But according to _Ethic._ ii, 2, some acts lessen the habit
whence they proceed, for instance if they be done carelessly.
Therefore it is not every act that increases a habit.

_I answer that,_ "Like acts cause like habits" (Ethic. ii, 1, 2). Now
things are like or unlike not only in respect of their qualities
being the same or various, but also in respect of the same or a
different mode of participation. For it is not only black that is
unlike white, but also less white is unlike more white, since there
is movement from less white to more white, even as from one opposite
to another, as stated in _Phys._ v, text. 52.

But since use of habits depends on the will, as was shown above (Q.
50, A. 5); just as one who has a habit may fail to use it or may act
contrary to it; so may he happen to use the habit by performing an
act that is not in proportion to the intensity of the habit.
Accordingly, if the intensity of the act correspond in proportion to
the intensity of the habit, or even surpass it, every such act either
increases the habit or disposes to an increase thereof, if we may
speak of the increase of habits as we do of the increase of an
animal. For not every morsel of food actually increases the animal's
size as neither does every drop of water hollow out the stone: but
the multiplication of food results at last in an increase of the
body. So, too, repeated acts cause a habit to grow. If, however, the
act falls short of the intensity of the habit, such an act does not
dispose to an increase of that habit, but rather to a lessening
thereof.

From this it is clear how to solve the objections.
________________________

QUESTION 53

HOW HABITS ARE CORRUPTED OR DIMINISHED
(In Three Articles)

We must now consider how habits are lost or weakened; and under this
head there are three points of inquiry:

(1) Whether a habit can be corrupted?

(2) Whether it can be diminished?

(3) How are habits corrupted or diminished?
________________________

FIRST ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 53, Art. 1]

Whether a Habit Can Be Corrupted?

Objection 1: It would seem that a habit cannot be corrupted. For
habit is within its subject like a second nature; wherefore it is
pleasant to act from habit. Now so long as a thing is, its nature is
not corrupted. Therefore neither can a habit be corrupted so long as
its subject remains.

Obj. 2: Further, whenever a form is corrupted, this is due either to
corruption of its subject, or to its contrary: thus sickness ceases
through corruption of the animal, or through the advent of health.
Now science, which is a habit, cannot be lost through corruption of
its subject: since "the intellect," which is its subject, "is a
substance that is incorruptible" (De Anima i, text. 65). In like
manner, neither can it be lost through the action of its contrary:
since intelligible species are not contrary to one another (Metaph.
vii, text. 52). Therefore the habit of science can nowise be lost.

Obj. 3: Further, all corruption results from some movement. But the
habit of science, which is in the soul, cannot be corrupted by a
direct movement of the soul itself, since the soul is not moved
directly. It is, however, moved indirectly through the movement of
the body: and yet no bodily change seems capable of corrupting the
intelligible species residing in the intellect: since the intellect
independently of the body is the proper abode of the species; for
which reason it is held that habits are not lost either through old
age or through death. Therefore science cannot be corrupted. For the
same reason neither can habits of virtue be corrupted, since they
also are in the rational soul, and, as the Philosopher declares
(Ethic. i, 10), "virtue is more lasting than learning."

_On the contrary,_ The Philosopher says (De Long. et Brev. Vitae ii)
that "forgetfulness and deception are the corruption of science."
Moreover, by sinning a man loses a habit of virtue: and again,
virtues are engendered and corrupted by contrary acts (Ethic. ii, 2).

_I answer that,_ A form is said to be corrupted directly by its
contrary; indirectly, through its subject being corrupted. When
therefore a habit has a corruptible subject, and a cause that has a
contrary, it can be corrupted both ways. This is clearly the case with
bodily habits--for instance, health and sickness. But those habits
that have an incorruptible subject, cannot be corrupted indirectly.
There are, however, some habits which, while residing chiefly in an
incorruptible subject, reside nevertheless secondarily in a
corruptible subject; such is the habit of science which is chiefly
indeed in the "possible" intellect, but secondarily in the sensitive
powers of apprehension, as stated above (Q. 50, A. 3, ad 3).
Consequently the habit of science cannot be corrupted indirectly, on
the part of the "possible" intellect, but only on the part of the
lower sensitive powers.

We must therefore inquire whether habits of this kind can be
corrupted directly. If then there be a habit having a contrary,
either on the part of itself or on the part of its cause, it can be
corrupted directly: but if it has no contrary, it cannot be corrupted
directly. Now it is evident that an intelligible species residing in
the "possible" intellect, has no contrary; nor can the active
intellect, which is the cause of that species, have a contrary.
Wherefore if in the "possible" intellect there be a habit caused
immediately by the active intellect, such a habit is incorruptible
both directly and indirectly. Such are the habits of the first
principles, both speculative and practical, which cannot be corrupted
by any forgetfulness or deception whatever: even as the Philosopher
says about prudence (Ethic. vi, 5) that "it cannot be lost by being
forgotten." There is, however, in the "possible" intellect a habit
caused by the reason, to wit, the habit of conclusions, which is
called science, to the cause of which something may be contrary in
two ways. First, on the part of those very propositions which are the
starting point of the reason: for the assertion "Good is not good" is
contrary to the assertion "Good is good" (Peri Herm. ii). Secondly,
on the part of the process of reasoning; forasmuch as a sophistical
syllogism is contrary to a dialectic or demonstrative syllogism.
Wherefore it is clear that a false reason can corrupt the habit of a
true opinion or even of science. Hence the Philosopher, as stated
above, says that "deception is the corruption of science." As to
virtues, some of them are intellectual, residing in reason itself, as
stated in _Ethic._ vi, 1: and to these applies what we have said of
science and opinion. Some, however, viz. the moral virtues, are in
the appetitive part of the soul; and the same may be said of the
contrary vices. Now the habits of the appetitive part are caused
therein because it is natural to it to be moved by the reason.
Therefore a habit either of virtue or of vice, may be corrupted by a
judgment of reason, whenever its motion is contrary to such vice or
virtue, whether through ignorance, passion or deliberate choice.

Reply Obj. 1: As stated in _Ethic._ vii, 10, a habit is like a second
nature, and yet it falls short of it. And so it is that while the
nature of a thing cannot in any way be taken away from a thing, a
habit is removed, though with difficulty.

Reply Obj. 2: Although there is no contrary to intelligible species,
yet there can be a contrary to assertions and to the process of
reason, as stated above.

Reply Obj. 3: Science is not taken away by movement of the body, if
we consider the root itself of the habit, but only as it may prove an
obstacle to the act of science; in so far as the intellect, in its
act, has need of the sensitive powers, which are impeded by corporal
transmutation. But the intellectual movement of the reason can
corrupt the habit of science, even as regards the very root of the
habit. In like manner a habit of virtue can be corrupted.
Nevertheless when it is said that "virtue is more lasting than
learning," this must be understood in respect, not of the subject or
cause, but of the act: because the use of virtue continues through
the whole of life, whereas the use of learning does not.
________________________

SECOND ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 53, Art. 2]

Whether a Habit Can Diminish?

Objection 1: It would seem that a habit cannot diminish. Because a
habit is a simple quality and form. Now a simple thing is possessed
either wholly or not at all. Therefore although a habit can be lost
it cannot diminish.

Obj. 2: Further, if a thing is befitting an accident, this is by
reason either of the accident or of its subject. Now a habit does not
become more or less intense by reason of itself; else it would follow
that a species might be predicated of its individuals more or less.
And if it can become less intense as to its participation by its
subject, it would follow that something is accidental to a habit,
proper thereto and not common to the habit and its subject. Now
whenever a form has something proper to it besides its subject, that
form can be separate, as stated in _De Anima_ i, text. 13. Hence it
follows that a habit is a separable form; which is impossible.

Obj. 3: Further, the very notion and nature of a habit as of any
accident, is inherence in a subject: wherefore any accident is
defined with reference to its subject. Therefore if a habit does not
become more or less intense in itself, neither can it in its
inherence in its subject: and consequently it will be nowise less
intense.

_On the contrary,_ It is natural for contraries to be applicable to
the same thing. Now increase and decrease are contraries. Since
therefore a habit can increase, it seems that it can also diminish.

_I answer that,_ Habits diminish, just as they increase, in two ways,
as we have already explained (Q. 52, A. 1). And since they increase
through the same cause as that which engenders them, so too they
diminish by the same cause as that which corrupts them: since the
diminishing of a habit is the road which leads to its corruption,
even as, on the other hand, the engendering of a habit is a
foundation of its increase.

Reply Obj. 1: A habit, considered in itself, is a simple form. It is
not thus that it is subject to decrease; but according to the
different ways in which its subject participates in it. This is due
to the fact that the subject's potentiality is indeterminate, through
its being able to participate a form in various ways, or to extend to
a greater or a smaller number of things.

Reply Obj. 2: This argument would hold, if the essence itself of a
habit were nowise subject to decrease. This we do not say; but that a
certain decrease in the essence of a habit has its origin, not in the
habit, but in its subject.

Reply Obj. 3: No matter how we take an accident, its very notion
implies dependence on a subject, but in different ways. For if we
take an accident in the abstract, it implies relation to a subject,
which relation begins in the accident and terminates in the subject:
for "whiteness is that whereby a thing is white." Accordingly in
defining an accident in the abstract, we do not put the subject as
though it were the first part of the definition, viz. the genus; but
we give it the second place, which is that of the difference; thus we
say that _simitas_ is "a curvature of the nose." But if we take
accidents in the concrete, the relation begins in the subject and
terminates in the concrete, the relation begins in the subject and
terminates at the accident: for "a white thing" is "something that
has whiteness." Accordingly in defining this kind of accident, we
place the subject as the genus, which is the first part of a
definition; for we say that a _simum_ is a "snub-nose." Accordingly
whatever is befitting an accident on the part of the subject, but is
not of the very essence of the accident, is ascribed to that
accident, not in the abstract, but in the concrete. Such are increase
and decrease in certain accidents: wherefore to be more or less white
is not ascribed to whiteness but to a white thing. The same applies
to habits and other qualities; save that certain habits and other
qualities; save that certain habits increase or diminish by a kind of
addition, as we have already clearly explained (Q. 52, A. 2).
________________________

THIRD ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 53, Art. 3]

Whether a Habit Is Corrupted or Diminished Through Mere Cessation
from Act?

Objection 1: It would seem that a habit is not corrupted or
diminished through mere cessation from act. For habits are more
lasting than passion-like qualities, as we have explained above (Q.
49, A. 2, ad 3; Q. 50, A. 1). But passion-like qualities are neither
corrupted nor diminished by cessation from act: for whiteness is not
lessened through not affecting the sight, nor heat through ceasing to
make something hot. Therefore neither are habits diminished or
corrupted through cessation from act.

Obj. 2: Further, corruption and diminution are changes. Now nothing
is changed without a moving cause. Since therefore cessation from act
does not imply a moving cause, it does not appear how a habit can be
diminished or corrupted through cessation from act.

Obj. 3: Further, the habits of science and virtue are in the
intellectual soul which is above time. Now those things that are
above time are neither destroyed nor diminished by length of time.
Neither, therefore, are such habits destroyed or diminished through
length of time, if one fails for long to exercise them.

_On the contrary,_ The Philosopher says (De Long. et Brev. Vitae ii)
that not only "deception," but also "forgetfulness, is the corruption
of science." Moreover he says (Ethic. viii, 5) that "want of
intercourse has dissolved many a friendship." In like manner other
habits of virtue are diminished or destroyed through cessation from
act.

_I answer that,_ As stated in _Phys._ vii, text. 27, a thing is a
cause of movement in two ways. First, directly; and such a thing
causes movement by reason of its proper form; thus fire causes heat.
Secondly, indirectly; for instance, that which removes an obstacle.
It is in this latter way that the destruction or diminution of a
habit results through cessation from act, in so far, to wit, as we
cease from exercising an act which overcame the causes that destroyed
or weakened that habit. For it has been stated (A. 1) that habits are
destroyed or diminished directly through some contrary agency.
Consequently all habits that are gradually undermined by contrary
agencies which need to be counteracted by acts proceeding from those
habits, are diminished or even destroyed altogether by long cessation
from act, as is clearly seen in the case both of science and of
virtue. For it is evident that a habit of moral virtue makes a man
ready to choose the mean in deeds and passions. And when a man fails
to make use of his virtuous habit in order to moderate his own
passions or deeds, the necessary result is that many passions and
deeds fail to observe the mode of virtue, by reason of the
inclination of the sensitive appetite and of other external agencies.
Wherefore virtue is destroyed or lessened through cessation from act.
The same applies to the intellectual habits, which render man ready
to judge aright of those things that are pictured by his imagination.
Hence when man ceases to make use of his intellectual habits, strange
fancies, sometimes in opposition to them, arise in his imagination;
so that unless those fancies be, as it were, cut off or kept back by
frequent use of his intellectual habits, man becomes less fit to
judge aright, and sometimes is even wholly disposed to the contrary,
and thus the intellectual habit is diminished or even wholly
destroyed by cessation from act.

Reply Obj. 1: Even heat would be destroyed through ceasing to give
heat, if, for this same reason, cold which is destructive of heat
were to increase.

Reply Obj. 2: Cessation from act is a moving cause, conducive of
corruption or diminution, by removing the obstacles thereto, as
explained above.

Reply Obj. 3: The intellectual part of the soul, considered in
itself, is above time, but the sensitive part is subject to time, and
therefore in course of time it undergoes change as to the passions of
the sensitive part, and also as to the powers of apprehension. Hence
the Philosopher says (Phys. iv. text. 117) that time makes us forget.
________________________

QUESTION 54

OF THE DISTINCTION OF HABITS
(In Four Articles)

We have now to consider the distinction of habits; and under this
head there are four points of inquiry:

(1) Whether many habits can be in one power?

(2) Whether habits are distinguished by their objects?

(3) Whether habits are divided into good and bad?

(4) Whether one habit may be made up of many habits?
________________________

FIRST ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 54, Art. 1]

Whether Many Habits Can Be in One Power?

Objection 1: It would seem that there cannot be many habits in one
power. For when several things are distinguished in respect of the
same thing, if one of them be multiplied, the others are too. Now
habits and powers are distinguished in respect of the same thing,
viz. their acts and objects. Therefore they are multiplied in like
manner. Therefore there cannot be many habits in one power.

Obj. 2: Further, a power is a simple force. Now in one simple subject
there cannot be diversity of accidents; for the subject is the cause
of its accidents; and it does not appear how diverse effects can
proceed from one simple cause. Therefore there cannot be many habits
in one power.

Obj. 3: Further, just as the body is informed by its shape, so is a
power informed by a habit. But one body cannot be informed at the
same time by various shapes. Therefore neither can a power be
informed at the same time by many habits. Therefore several habits
cannot be at the same time in one power.

_On the contrary,_ The intellect is one power; wherein, nevertheless,
are the habits of various sciences.

_I answer that,_ As stated above (Q. 49, A. 4), habits are
dispositions of a thing that is in potentiality to something, either
to nature, or to operation, which is the end of nature. As to those
habits which are dispositions to nature, it is clear that several can
be in one same subject: since in one subject we may take parts in
various ways, according to the various dispositions of which parts
there are various habits. Thus, if we take the humors as being parts
of the human body, according to their disposition in respect of human
nature, we have the habit or disposition of health: while, if we take
like parts, such as nerves, bones, and flesh, the disposition of
these in respect of nature is strength or weakness; whereas, if we
take the limbs, i.e. the hands, feet, and so on, the disposition of
these in proportion to nature, is beauty: and thus there are several
habits or dispositions in the same subject.

If, however, we speak of those habits that are dispositions to
operation, and belong properly to the powers; thus, again, there may
be several habits in one power. The reason for this is that the
subject of a habit is a passive power, as stated above (Q. 51, A. 2):
for it is only an active power that cannot be the subject of a habit,
as was clearly shown above (Q. 51, A. 2). Now a passive power is
compared to the determinate act of any species, as matter to form:
because, just as matter is determinate to one form by one agent, so,
too, is a passive power determined by the nature of one active object
to an act specifically one. Wherefore, just as several objects can
move one passive power, so can one passive power be the subject of
several acts or perfections specifically diverse. Now habits are
qualities or forms adhering to a power, and inclining that power to
acts of a determinate species. Consequently several habits, even as
several specifically different acts, can belong to one power.

Reply Obj. 1: Even as in natural things, diversity of species is
according to the form, and diversity of genus, according to matter,
as stated in _Metaph._ v, text. 33 (since things that differ in
matter belong to different genera): so, too, generic diversity of
objects entails a difference of powers (wherefore the Philosopher
says in _Ethic._ vi, 1, that "those objects that differ generically
belong to different departments of the soul"); while specific
difference of objects entails a specific difference of acts, and
consequently of habits also. Now things that differ in genus differ
in species, but not vice versa. Wherefore the acts and habits of
different powers differ in species: but it does not follow that
different habits are in different powers, for several can be in one
power. And even as several genera may be included in one genus, and
several species be contained in one species; so does it happen that
there are several species of habits and powers.

Reply Obj. 2: Although a power is simple as to its essence, it is
multiple virtually, inasmuch as it extends to many specifically
different acts. Consequently there is nothing to prevent many
superficially different habits from being in one power.

Reply Obj. 3: A body is informed by its shape as by its own
terminal boundaries: whereas a habit is not the terminal boundary of a
power, but the disposition of a power to an act as to its ultimate
term. Consequently one same power cannot have several acts at the same
time, except in so far as perchance one act is comprised in another;
just as neither can a body have several shapes, save in so far as one
shape enters into another, as a three-sided in a four-sided figure.
For the intellect cannot understand several things at the same time
_actually;_ and yet it can know several things at the same time
_habitually._
________________________

SECOND ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 54, Art. 2]

Whether Habits Are Distinguished by Their Objects?

Objection 1: It would seem that habits are not distinguished by their
objects. For contraries differ in species. Now the same habit of
science regards contraries: thus medicine regards the healthy and the
unhealthy. Therefore habits are not distinguished by objects
specifically distinct.

Obj. 2: Further, different sciences are different habits. But the
same scientific truth belongs to different sciences: thus both the
physicist and the astronomer prove the earth to be round, as stated
in _Phys._ ii, text. 17. Therefore habits are not distinguished by
their objects.

Obj. 3: Further, wherever the act is the same, the object is the
same. But the same act can belong to different habits of virtue, if
it be directed to different ends; thus to give money to anyone, if it
be done for God's sake, is an act of charity; while, if it be done in
order to pay a debt, it is an act of justice. Therefore the same
object can also belong to different habits. Therefore diversity of
habits does not follow diversity of objects.

_On the contrary,_ Acts differ in species according to the diversity
of their objects, as stated above (Q. 18, A. 5). But habits are
dispositions to acts. Therefore habits also are distinguished
according to the diversity of objects.

_I answer that,_ A habit is both a form and a habit. Hence the
specific distinction of habits may be taken in the ordinary way in
which forms differ specifically; or according to that mode of
distinction which is proper to habits. Accordingly forms are
distinguished from one another in reference to the diversity of their
active principles, since every agent produces its like in species.
Habits, however, imply order to something: and all things that imply
order to something, are distinguished according to the distinction of
the things to which they are ordained. Now a habit is a disposition
implying a twofold order: viz. to nature and to an operation
consequent to nature.

Accordingly habits are specifically distinct in respect of three
things. First, in respect of the active principles of such
dispositions; secondly, in respect of nature; thirdly, in respect of
specifically different objects, as will appear from what follows.

Reply Obj. 1: In distinguishing powers, or also habits, we must
consider the object not in its material but in its formal aspect,
which may differ in species or even in genus. And though the
distinction between specific contraries is a real distinction yet
they are both known under one aspect, since one is known through the
other. And consequently in so far as they concur in the one aspect of
cognoscibility, they belong to one cognitive habit.

Reply Obj. 2: The physicist proves the earth to be round by one
means, the astronomer by another: for the latter proves this by means
of mathematics, e.g. by the shapes of eclipses, or something of the
sort; while the former proves it by means of physics, e.g. by the
movement of heavy bodies towards the center, and so forth. Now the
whole force of a demonstration, which is "a syllogism producing
science," as stated in Poster. i, text. 5, depends on the mean. And
consequently various means are as so many active principles, in
respect of which the habits of science are distinguished.

Reply Obj. 3: As the Philosopher says (Phys. ii, text. 89; Ethic.
vii, 8), the end is, in practical matters, what the principle is in
speculative matters. Consequently diversity of ends demands a
diversity of virtues, even as diversity of active principles does.
Moreover the ends are objects of the internal acts, with which, above
all, the virtues are concerned, as is evident from what has been said
(Q. 18, A. 6; Q. 19, A. 2, ad 1; Q. 34, A. 4).
________________________

THIRD ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 54, Art. 3]

Whether Habits Are Divided into Good and Bad?

Objection 1: It would seem that habits are not divided into good and
bad. For good and bad are contraries. Now the same habit regards
contraries, as was stated above (A. 2, Obj. 1). Therefore habits are
not divided into good and bad.

Obj. 2: Further, good is convertible with being; so that, since it is
common to all, it cannot be accounted a specific difference, as the
Philosopher declares (Topic. iv). Again, evil, since it is a
privation and a non-being, cannot differentiate any being. Therefore
habits cannot be specifically divided into good and evil.

Obj. 3: Further, there can be different evil habits about one same
object; for instance, intemperance and insensibility about matters of
concupiscence: and in like manner there can be several good habits;
for instance, human virtue and heroic or godlike virtue, as the
Philosopher clearly states (Ethic. vii, 1). Therefore, habits are not
divided into good and bad.

_On the contrary,_ A good habit is contrary to a bad habit, as virtue
to vice. Now contraries are divided specifically into good and bad
habits.

_I answer that,_ As stated above (A. 2), habits are specifically
distinct not only in respect of their objects and active principles,
but also in their relation to nature. Now, this happens in two ways.
First, by reason of their suitableness or unsuitableness to nature.
In this way a good habit is specifically distinct from a bad habit:
since a good habit is one which disposes to an act suitable to the
agent's nature, while an evil habit is one which disposes to an act
unsuitable to nature. Thus, acts of virtue are suitable to human
nature, since they are according to reason, whereas acts of vice are
discordant from human nature, since they are against reason. Hence it
is clear that habits are distinguished specifically by the difference
of good and bad.

Secondly, habits are distinguished in relation to nature, from the
fact that one habit disposes to an act that is suitable to a lower
nature, while another habit disposes to an act befitting a higher
nature. And thus human virtue, which disposes to an act befitting
human nature, is distinct from godlike or heroic virtue, which
disposes to an act befitting some higher nature.

Reply Obj. 1: The same habit may be about contraries in so far as
contraries agree in one common aspect. Never, however, does it happen
that contrary habits are in one species: since contrariety of habits
follows contrariety of aspect. Accordingly habits are divided into
good and bad, namely, inasmuch as one habit is good, and another bad;
but not by reason of one habit being [about] something good, and
another about something bad.

Reply Obj. 2: It is not the good which is common to every being, that
is a difference constituting the species of a habit; but some
determinate good by reason of suitability to some determinate, viz.
the human, nature. In like manner the evil that constitutes a
difference of habits is not a pure privation, but something
determinate repugnant to a determinate nature.

Reply Obj. 3: Several good habits about one same specific thing are
distinct in reference to their suitability to various natures, as
stated above. But several bad habits in respect of one action are
distinct in reference to their diverse repugnance to that which is in
keeping with nature: thus, various vices about one same matter are
contrary to one virtue.
________________________

FOURTH ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 54, Art. 4]

Whether One Habit Is Made Up of Many Habits?

Objection 1: It would seem that one habit is made up of many habits.
For whatever is engendered, not at once, but little by little, seems
to be made up of several parts. But a habit is engendered, not at
once, but little by little out of several acts, as stated above
(Q. 51, A. 3). Therefore one habit is made up of several.

Obj. 2: Further, a whole is made up of its parts. Now many parts are
assigned to one habit: thus Tully assigns many parts of fortitude,
temperance, and other virtues. Therefore one habit is made up of many.

Obj. 3: Further, one conclusion suffices both for an act and for a
habit of scientific knowledge. But many conclusions belong to but one
science, to geometry, for instance, or to arithmetic. Therefore one
habit is made up of many.

_On the contrary,_ A habit, since it is a quality, is a simple form.
But nothing simple is made up of many. Therefore one habit is not
made up of many.

_I answer that,_ A habit directed to operation, such as we are
chiefly concerned with at present, is a perfection of a power. Now
every perfection should be in proportion with that which it perfects.
Hence, just as a power, while it is one, extends to many things, in
so far as they have something in common, i.e. some general objective
aspect, so also a habit extends to many things, in so far as they are
related to one, for instance, to some specific objective aspect, or
to one nature, or to one principle, as was clearly stated above (AA.
2, 3).

If then we consider a habit as to the extent of its object, we shall
find a certain multiplicity therein. But since this multiplicity is
directed to one thing, on which the habit is chiefly intent, hence it
is that a habit is a simple quality, not composed to several habits,
even though it extend to many things. For a habit does not extend to
many things save in relation to one, whence it derives its unity.

Reply Obj. 1: That a habit is engendered little by little, is due,
not to one part being engendered after another, but to the fact that
the subject does not acquire all at once a firm and difficultly
changeable disposition; and also to the fact that it begins by being
imperfectly in the subject, and is gradually perfected. The same
applies to other qualities.

Reply Obj. 2: The parts which are assigned to each cardinal virtue,
are not integral parts that combine to form a whole; but subjective
or potential parts, as we shall explain further on (Q. 57, A. 6, ad
4; II-II, Q. 48).

Reply Obj. 3: In any science, he who acquires, by demonstration,
scientific knowledge of one conclusion, has the habit indeed, yet
imperfectly. And when he obtains, by demonstration, the scientific
knowledge of another conclusion, no additional habit is engendered in
him: but the habit which was in him previously is perfected,
forasmuch as it has increased in extent; because the conclusions and
demonstrations of one science are coordinate, and one flows from
another.
________________________

TREATISE ON HABITS IN PARTICULAR (QQ. 55-89):
GOOD HABITS, i.e., VIRTUES (QQ. 55-70)
________________________

QUESTION 55

OF THE VIRTUES, AS TO THEIR ESSENCE
(In Four Articles)

We come now to the consideration of habits specifically. And since
habits, as we have said (Q. 54, A. 3), are divided into good and bad,
we must speak in the first place of good habits, which are virtues,
and of other matters connected with them, namely the Gifts,
Beatitudes and Fruits; in the second place, of bad habits, namely of
vices and sins. Now five things must be considered about virtues:
(1) the essence of virtue; (2) its subject; (3) the division of
virtue; (4) the cause of virtue; (5) certain properties of virtue.

Under the first head, there are four points of inquiry:

(1) Whether human virtue is a habit?

(2) Whether it is an operative habit?

(3) Whether it is a good habit?

(4) Of the definition of virtue.
________________________

FIRST ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 55, Art. 1]

Whether Human Virtue Is a Habit?

Objection 1: It would seem that human virtue is not a habit: For
virtue is "the limit of power" (De Coelo i, text. 116). But the limit
of anything is reducible to the genus of that of which it is the
limit; as a point is reducible to the genus of line. Therefore virtue
is reducible to the genus of power, and not to the genus of habit.

Obj. 2: Further, Augustine says (De Lib. Arb. ii) [*Retract. ix; cf.
De Lib. Arb. ii, 19] that "virtue is good use of free-will." But use
of free-will is an act. Therefore virtue is not a habit, but an act.

Obj. 3: Further, we do not merit by our habits, but by our actions:
otherwise a man would merit continually, even while asleep. But we do
merit by our virtues. Therefore virtues are not habits, but acts.

Obj. 4: Further, Augustine says (De Moribus Eccl. xv) that "virtue is
the order of love," and (QQ. lxxxiii, qu. 30) that "the ordering
which is called virtue consists in enjoying what we ought to enjoy,
and using what we ought to use." Now order, or ordering, denominates
either an action or a relation. Therefore virtue is not a habit, but
an action or a relation.

Obj. 5: Further, just as there are human virtues, so are there
natural virtues. But natural virtues are not habits, but powers.
Neither therefore are human virtues habits.

_On the contrary,_ The Philosopher says (Categor. vi) that science
and virtue are habits.

_I answer that,_ Virtue denotes a certain perfection of a power. Now
a thing's perfection is considered chiefly in regard to its end. But
the end of power is act. Wherefore power is said to be perfect,
according as it is determinate to its act.

Now there are some powers which of themselves are determinate to
their acts; for instance, the active natural powers. And therefore
these natural powers are in themselves called virtues. But the
rational powers, which are proper to man, are not determinate to one
particular action, but are inclined indifferently to many: and they
are determinate to acts by means of habits, as is clear from what we
have said above (Q. 49, A. 4). Therefore human virtues are habits.

Reply Obj. 1: Sometimes we give the name of a virtue to that to which
the virtue is directed, namely, either to its object, or to its act:
for instance, we give the name Faith, to that which we believe, or to
the act of believing, as also to the habit by which we believe. When
therefore we say that "virtue is the limit of power," virtue is taken
for the object of virtue. For the furthest point to which a power can
reach, is said to be its virtue; for instance, if a man can carry a
hundredweight and not more, his virtue [*In English we should say
'strength,' which is the original signification of the Latin
'virtus': thus we speak of an engine being so many horse-power, to
indicate its 'strength'] is put at a hundredweight, and not at sixty.
But the objection takes virtue as being essentially the limit of
power.

Reply Obj. 2: Good use of free-will is said to be a virtue, in the
same sense as above (ad 1); that is to say, because it is that to
which virtue is directed as to its proper act. For the act of virtue
is nothing else than the good use of free-will.

Reply Obj. 3: We are said to merit by something in two ways. First,
as by merit itself, just as we are said to run by running; and thus
we merit by acts. Secondly, we are said to merit by something as by
the principle whereby we merit, as we are said to run by the motive
power; and thus are we said to merit by virtues and habits.

Reply Obj. 4: When we say that virtue is the order or ordering of
love, we refer to the end to which virtue is ordered: because in us
love is set in order by virtue.

Reply Obj. 5: Natural powers are of themselves determinate to one
act: not so the rational powers. And so there is no comparison, as we
have said.
________________________

SECOND ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 55, Art. 2]

Whether Human Virtue Is an Operative Habit?

Objection 1: It would seem that it is not essential to human virtue
to be an operative habit. For Tully says (Tuscul. iv) that as health
and beauty belong to the body, so virtue belongs to the soul. But
health and beauty are not operative habits. Therefore neither is
virtue.

Obj. 2: Further, in natural things we find virtue not only in
reference to act, but also in reference to being: as is clear from
the Philosopher (De Coelo i), since some have a virtue to be always,
while some have a virtue to be not always, but at some definite time.
Now as natural virtue is in natural things, so is human virtue in
rational beings. Therefore also human virtue is referred not only to
act, but also to being.

Obj. 3: Further, the Philosopher says (Phys. vii, text. 17) that
virtue "is the disposition of a perfect thing to that which is best."
Now the best thing to which man needs to be disposed by virtue is God
Himself, as Augustine proves (De Moribus Eccl. 3, 6, 14) to Whom the
soul is disposed by being made like to Him. Therefore it seems that
virtue is a quality of the soul in reference to God, likening it, as
it were, to Him; and not in reference to operation. It is not,
therefore, an operative habit.

_On the contrary,_ The Philosopher (Ethic. ii, 6) says that "virtue
of a thing is that which makes its work good."

_I answer that,_ Virtue, from the very nature of the word, implies
some perfection of power, as we have said above (A. 1). Wherefore,
since power [*The one Latin word _potentia_ is rendered
'potentiality' in the first case, and 'power' in the second] is of
two kinds, namely, power in reference to being, and power in
reference to act; the perfection of each of these is called virtue.
But power in reference to being is on the part of matter, which is
potential being, whereas power in reference to act, is on the part of
the form, which is the principle of action, since everything acts in
so far as it is in act.

Now man is so constituted that the body holds the place of matter,
the soul that of form. The body, indeed, man has in common with other
animals; and the same is to be said of the forces which are common to
the soul and body: and only those forces which are proper to the
soul, namely, the rational forces, belong to man alone. And
therefore, human virtue, of which we are speaking now, cannot belong
to the body, but belongs only to that which is proper to the soul.
Wherefore human virtue does not imply reference to being, but rather
to act. Consequently it is essential to human virtue to be an
operative habit.

Reply Obj. 1: Mode of action follows on the disposition of the agent:
for such as a thing is, such is its act. And therefore, since virtue
is the principle of some kind of operation, there must needs
pre-exist in the operator in respect of virtue some corresponding
disposition. Now virtue causes an ordered operation. Therefore virtue
itself is an ordered disposition of the soul, in so far as, to wit,
the powers of the soul are in some way ordered to one another, and to
that which is outside. Hence virtue, inasmuch as it is a suitable
disposition of the soul, is like health and beauty, which are
suitable dispositions of the body. But this does not hinder virtue
from being a principle of operation.

Reply Obj. 2: Virtue which is referred to being is not proper to man;
but only that virtue which is referred to works of reason, which are
proper to man.

Reply Obj. 3: As God's substance is His act, the highest likeness of
man to God is in respect of some operation. Wherefore, as we have
said above (Q. 3, A. 2), happiness or bliss by which man is made most
perfectly conformed to God, and which is the end of human life,
consists in an operation.
________________________

THIRD ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 55, Art. 3]

Whether Human Virtue Is a Good Habit?

Objection 1: It would seem that it is not essential to virtue that it
should be a good habit. For sin is always taken in a bad sense. But
there is a virtue even of sin; according to 1 Cor. 15:56: "The virtue
[Douay: 'strength'] of sin is the Law." Therefore virtue is not
always a good habit.

Obj. 2: Further, Virtue corresponds to power. But power is not only
referred to good, but also to evil: according to Isa. 5: "Woe to you
that are mighty to drink wine, and stout men at drunkenness."
Therefore virtue also is referred to good and evil.

Obj. 3: Further, according to the Apostle (2 Cor. 12:9): "Virtue
[Douay: 'power'] is made perfect in infirmity." But infirmity is an
evil. Therefore virtue is referred not only to good, but also to evil.

_On the contrary,_ Augustine says (De Moribus Eccl. vi): "No one can
doubt that virtue makes the soul exceeding good": and the Philosopher
says (Ethic. ii, 6): "Virtue is that which makes its possessor good,
and his work good likewise."

_I answer that,_ As we have said above (A. 1), virtue implies a
perfection of power: wherefore the virtue of a thing is fixed by the
limit of its power (De Coelo i). Now the limit of any power must
needs be good: for all evil implies defect; wherefore Dionysius says
(Div. Hom. ii) that every evil is a weakness. And for this reason the
virtue of a thing must be regarded in reference to good. Therefore
human virtue which is an operative habit, is a good habit, productive
of good works.

Reply Obj. 1: Just as bad things are said metaphorically to be
perfect, so are they said to be good: for we speak of a perfect thief
or robber; and of a good thief or robber, as the Philosopher explains
(Metaph. v, text. 21). In this way therefore virtue is applied to
evil things: so that the "virtue" of sin is said to be law, in so far
as occasionally sin is aggravated through the law, so as to attain to
the limit of its possibility.

Reply Obj. 2: The evil of drunkenness and excessive drink, consists
in a falling away from the order of reason. Now it happens that,
together with this falling away from reason, some lower power is
perfect in reference to that which belongs to its own kind, even in
direct opposition to reason, or with some falling away therefrom. But
the perfection of that power, since it is compatible with a falling
away from reason, cannot be called a human virtue.

Reply Obj. 3: Reason is shown to be so much the more perfect,
according as it is able to overcome or endure more easily the
weakness of the body and of the lower powers. And therefore human
virtue, which is attributed to reason, is said to be "made perfect
in infirmity," not of the reason indeed, but of the body and of the
lower powers.
________________________

FOURTH ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 55, Art. 4]

Whether Virtue Is Suitably Defined?

Objection 1: It would seem that the definition, usually given, of
virtue, is not suitable, to wit: "Virtue is a good quality of the
mind, by which we live righteously, of which no one can make bad use,
which God works in us, without us." For virtue is man's goodness,
since virtue it is that makes its subject good. But goodness does not
seem to be good, as neither is whiteness white. It is therefore
unsuitable to describe virtue as a "good quality."

Obj. 2: Further, no difference is more common than its genus; since
it is that which divides the genus. But good is more common than
quality, since it is convertible with being. Therefore "good" should
not be put in the definition of virtue, as a difference of quality.

Obj. 3: Further, as Augustine says (De Trin. xii, 3): "When we come
across anything that is not common to us and the beasts of the field,
it is something appertaining to the mind." But there are virtues even
of the irrational parts; as the Philosopher says (Ethic. iii, 10).
Every virtue, therefore, is not a good quality "of the mind."

Obj. 4: Further, righteousness seems to belong to justice; whence the
righteous are called just. But justice is a species of virtue. It is
therefore unsuitable to put "righteous" in the definition of virtue,
when we say that virtue is that "by which we live righteously."

Obj. 5: Further, whoever is proud of a thing, makes bad use of it.
But many are proud of virtue, for Augustine says in his Rule, that
"pride lies in wait for good works in order to slay them." It is
untrue, therefore, "that no one can make bad use of virtue."

Obj. 6: Further, man is justified by virtue. But Augustine commenting
on John 15:11: "He shall do greater things than these," says [*Tract.
xxvii in Joan.: Serm. xv de Verb. Ap. 11]: "He who created thee
without thee, will not justify thee without thee." It is therefore
unsuitable to say that "God works virtue in us, without us."

_On the contrary,_ We have the authority of Augustine from whose
words this definition is gathered, and principally in _De Libero
Arbitrio_ ii, 19.

_I answer that,_ This definition comprises perfectly the whole
essential notion of virtue. For the perfect essential notion of
anything is gathered from all its causes. Now the above definition
comprises all the causes of virtue. For the formal cause of virtue,
as of everything, is gathered from its genus and difference, when it
is defined as "a good quality": for "quality" is the genus of virtue,
and the difference, "good." But the definition would be more suitable
if for "quality" we substitute "habit," which is the proximate genus.

Now virtue has no matter "out of which" it is formed, as neither has
any other accident; but it has matter "about which" it is concerned,
and matter "in which" it exists, namely, the subject. The matter
about which virtue is concerned is its object, and this could not be
included in the above definition, because the object fixes the virtue
to a certain species, and here we are giving the definition of virtue
in general. And so for material cause we have the subject, which is
mentioned when we say that virtue is a good quality "of the mind."

The end of virtue, since it is an operative habit, is operation. But
it must be observed that some operative habits are always referred to
evil, as vicious habits: others are sometimes referred to good,
sometimes to evil; for instance, opinion is referred both to the true
and to the untrue: whereas virtue is a habit which is always referred
to good: and so the distinction of virtue from those habits which are
always referred to evil, is expressed in the words "by which we live
righteously": and its distinction from those habits which are
sometimes directed unto good, sometimes unto evil, in the words, "of
which no one makes bad use."

Lastly, God is the efficient cause of infused virtue, to which this
definition applies; and this is expressed in the words "which God
works in us without us." If we omit this phrase, the remainder of the
definition will apply to all virtues in general, whether acquired or
infused.

Reply Obj. 1: That which is first seized by the intellect is being:
wherefore everything that we apprehend we consider as being, and
consequently as one, and as good, which are convertible with being.
Wherefore we say that essence is being and is one and is good; and
that oneness is being and one and good: and in like manner goodness.
But this is not the case with specific forms, as whiteness and
health; for everything that we apprehend, is not apprehended with the
notion of white and healthy. We must, however, observe that, as
accidents and non-subsistent forms are called beings, not as if they
themselves had being, but because things are by them; so also are
they called good or one, not by some distinct goodness or oneness,
but because by them something is good or one. So also is virtue
called good, because by it something is good.

Reply Obj. 2: Good, which is put in the definition of virtue, is not
good in general which is convertible with being, and which extends
further than quality, but the good as fixed by reason, with regard to
which Dionysius says (Div. Nom. iv) "that the good of the soul is to
be in accord with reason."

Reply Obj. 3: Virtue cannot be in the irrational part of the soul,
except in so far as this participates in the reason (Ethic. i, 13).
And therefore reason, or the mind, is the proper subject of virtue.

Reply Obj. 4: Justice has a righteousness of its own by which it puts
those outward things right which come into human use, and are the
proper matter of justice, as we shall show further on (Q. 60, A. 2;
II-II, Q. 58, A. 8). But the righteousness which denotes order to a
due end and to the Divine law, which is the rule of the human will,
as stated above (Q. 19, A. 4), is common to all virtues.

Reply Obj. 5: One can make bad use of a virtue objectively, for
instance by having evil thoughts about a virtue, e.g. by hating it,
or by being proud of it: but one cannot make bad use of virtue as
principle of action, so that an act of virtue be evil.

Reply Obj. 6: Infused virtue is caused in us by God without any
action on our part, but not without our consent. This is the sense of
the words, "which God works in us without us." As to those things
which are done by us, God causes them in us, yet not without action
on our part, for He works in every will and in every nature.
________________________

QUESTION 56

OF THE SUBJECT OF VIRTUE
(In Six Articles)

We now have to consider the subject of virtue, about which there are
six points of inquiry:

(1) Whether the subject of virtue is a power of the soul?

(2) Whether one virtue can be in several powers?

(3) Whether the intellect can be the subject of virtue?

(4) Whether the irascible and concupiscible faculties can be the
subject of virtue?

(5) Whether the sensitive powers of apprehension can be the subject of
virtue?

(6) Whether the will can be the subject of virtue?
________________________

FIRST ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 56, Art. 1]

Whether the Subject of Virtue Is a Power of the Soul?

Objection 1: It would seem that the subject of virtue is not a power
of the soul. For Augustine says (De Lib. Arb. ii, 19) that "virtue is
that by which we live righteously." But we live by the essence of the
soul, and not by a power of the soul. Therefore virtue is not a
power, but in the essence of the soul.

Obj. 2: Further, the Philosopher says (Ethic. ii, 6) that "virtue is
that which makes its possessor good, and his work good likewise." But
as work is set up by power, so he that has a virtue is set up by the
essence of the soul. Therefore virtue does not belong to the power,
any more than to the essence of the soul.

Obj. 3: Further, power is in the second species of quality. But
virtue is a quality, as we have said above (Q. 55, A. 4): and quality
is not the subject of quality. Therefore a power of the soul is not
the subject of virtue.

_On the contrary,_ "Virtue is the limit of power" (De Coelo ii). But
the limit is in that of which it is the limit. Therefore virtue is in
a power of the soul.

_I answer that,_ It can be proved in three ways that virtue belongs
to a power of the soul. First, from the notion of the very essence of
virtue, which implies perfection of a power; for perfection is in
that which it perfects. Secondly, from the fact that virtue is an
operative habit, as we have said above (Q. 55, A. 2): for all
operation proceeds from the soul through a power. Thirdly, from the
fact that virtue disposes to that which is best: for the best is the
end, which is either a thing's operation, or something acquired by an
operation proceeding from the thing's power. Therefore a power of the
soul is the subject of virtue.

Reply Obj. 1: "To live" may be taken in two ways. Sometimes it is
taken for the very existence of the living thing: in this way it
belongs to the essence of the soul, which is the principle of
existence in the living thing. But sometimes "to live" is taken for
the operation of the living thing: in this sense, by virtue we live
righteously, inasmuch as by virtue we perform righteous actions.

Reply Obj. 2: Good is either the end, or something referred to the
end. And therefore, since the good of the worker consists in the
work, this fact also, that virtue makes the worker good, is referred
to the work, and consequently, to the power.

Reply Obj. 3: One accident is said to be the subject of another, not
as though one accident could uphold another; but because one accident
inheres to substance by means of another, as color to the body by
means of the surface; so that surface is said to be the subject of
color. In this way a power of the soul is said to be the subject of
virtue.
________________________

SECOND ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 56, Art. 2]

Whether One Virtue Can Be in Several Powers?

Objection 1: It would seem that one virtue can be in several powers.
For habits are known by their acts. But one act proceeds in various
way from several powers: thus walking proceeds from the reason as
directing, from the will as moving, and from the motive power as
executing. Therefore also one habit can be in several powers.

Obj. 2: Further, the Philosopher says (Ethic. ii, 4) that three
things are required for virtue, namely: "to know, to will, and to
work steadfastly." But "to know" belongs to the intellect, and "to
will" belongs to the will. Therefore virtue can be in several powers.

Obj. 3: Further, prudence is in the reason since it is "the right
reason of things to be done" (Ethic. vi, 5). And it is also in the
will: for it cannot exist together with a perverse will (Ethic. vi,
12). Therefore one virtue can be in two powers.

_On the contrary,_ The subject of virtue is a power of the soul. But
the same accident cannot be in several subjects. Therefore one virtue
cannot be in several powers of the soul.

_I answer that,_ It happens in two ways that one thing is subjected
in two. First, so that it is in both on an equal footing. In this way
it is impossible for one virtue to be in two powers: since diversity
of powers follows the generic conditions of the objects, while
diversity of habits follows the specific conditions thereof: and so
wherever there is diversity of powers, there is diversity of habits;
but not vice versa. In another way one thing can be subjected in two
or more, not on an equal footing, but in a certain order. And thus
one virtue can belong to several powers, so that it is in one
chiefly, while it extends to others by a kind of diffusion, or by way
of a disposition, in so far as one power is moved by another, and one
power receives from another.

Reply Obj. 1: One act cannot belong to several powers equally, and in
the same degree; but only from different points of view, and in
various degrees.

Reply Obj. 2: "To know" is a condition required for moral virtue,
inasmuch as moral virtue works according to right reason. But moral
virtue is essentially in the appetite.

Reply Obj. 3: Prudence is really subjected in reason: but it
presupposes as its principle the rectitude of the will, as we shall
see further on (A. 3; Q. 57, A. 4).
________________________

THIRD ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 56, Art. 3]

Whether the Intellect Can Be the Subject of Virtue?

Objection 1: It would seem that the intellect is not the subject of
virtue. For Augustine says (De Moribus Eccl. xv) that all virtue is
love. But the subject of love is not the intellect, but the
appetitive power alone. Therefore no virtue is in the intellect.

Obj. 2: Further, virtue is referred to good, as is clear from what
has been said above (Q. 55, A. 3). Now good is not the object of the
intellect, but of the appetitive power. Therefore the subject of
virtue is not the intellect, but the appetitive power.

Obj. 3: Further, virtue is that "which makes its possessor good," as
the Philosopher says (Ethic. ii, 6). But the habit which perfects the
intellect does not make its possessor good: since a man is not said
to be a good man on account of his science or his art. Therefore the
intellect is not the subject of virtue.

_On the contrary,_ The mind is chiefly called the intellect. But the
subject of virtue is the mind, as is clear from the definition, above
given, of virtue (Q. 55, A. 4). Therefore the intellect is the
subject of virtue.

_I answer that,_ As we have said above (Q. 55, A. 3), a virtue is a
habit by which we work well. Now a habit may be directed to a good
act in two ways. First, in so far as by the habit a man acquires an
aptness to a good act; for instance, by the habit of grammar man has
the aptness to speak correctly. But grammar does not make a man
always speak correctly: for a grammarian may be guilty of a barbarism
or make a solecism: and the case is the same with other sciences and
arts. Secondly, a habit may confer not only aptness to act, but also
the right use of that aptness: for instance, justice not only gives
man the prompt will to do just actions, but also makes him act justly.

And since good, and, in like manner, being, is said of a thing
simply, in respect, not of what it is potentially, but of what it is
actually: therefore from having habits of the latter sort, man is
said simply to do good, and to be good; for instance, because he is
just, or temperate; and in like manner as regards other such virtues.
And since virtue is that "which makes its possessor good, and his
work good likewise," these latter habits are called virtuous simply:
because they make the work to be actually good, and the subject good
simply. But the first kind of habits are not called virtues simply:
because they do not make the work good except in regard to a certain
aptness, nor do they make their possessor good simply. For through
being gifted in science or art, a man is said to be good, not simply,
but relatively; for instance, a good grammarian or a good smith. And
for this reason science and art are often divided against virtue;
while at other times they are called virtues (Ethic. vi, 2).

Hence the subject of a habit which is called a virtue in a relative
sense, can be the intellect, and not only the practical intellect,
but also the speculative, without any reference to the will: for thus
the Philosopher (Ethic. vi, 3) holds that science, wisdom and
understanding, and also art, are intellectual virtues. But the
subject of a habit which is called a virtue simply, can only be the
will, or some power in so far as it is moved by the will. And the
reason of this is, that the will moves to their acts all those other
powers that are in some way rational, as we have said above (Q. 9, A.
1; Q. 17, AA. 1, 5; I, Q. 82, A. 4): and therefore if man do well
actually, this is because he has a good will. Therefore the virtue
which makes a man to do well actually, and not merely to have the
aptness to do well, must be either in the will itself; or in some
power as moved by the will.

Now it happens that the intellect is moved by the will, just as are
the other powers: for a man considers something actually, because he
wills to do so. And therefore the intellect, in so far as it is
subordinate to the will, can be the subject of virtue absolutely so
called. And in this way the speculative intellect, or the reason, is
the subject of Faith: for the intellect is moved by the command of
the will to assent to what is of faith: for "no man believeth, unless
he will" [*Augustine: Tract. xxvi in Joan.]. But the practical
intellect is the subject of prudence. For since prudence is the right
reason of things to be done, it is a condition thereof that man be
rightly disposed in regard to the principles of this reason of things
to be done, that is in regard to their ends, to which man is rightly
disposed by the rectitude of the will, just as to the principles of
speculative truth he is rightly disposed by the natural light of the
active intellect. And therefore as the subject of science, which is
the right reason of speculative truths, is the speculative intellect
in its relation to the active intellect, so the subject of prudence
is the practical intellect in its relation to the right will.

Reply Obj. 1: The saying of Augustine is to be understood of virtue
simply so called: not that every virtue is love simply: but that it
depends in some way on love, in so far as it depends on the will,
whose first movement consists in love, as we have said above (Q. 25,
AA. 1, 2, 3; Q. 27, A. 4; I, Q. 20, A. 1).

Reply Obj. 2: The good of each thing is its end: and therefore, as
truth is the end of the intellect, so to know truth is the good act
of the intellect. Whence the habit, which perfects the intellect in
regard to the knowledge of truth, whether speculative or practical,
is a virtue.

Reply Obj. 3: This objection considers virtue simply so called.
________________________

FOURTH ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 56, Art. 4]

Whether the Irascible and Concupiscible Powers Are the Subject of
Virtue?

Objection 1: It would seem that the irascible and concupiscible
powers cannot be the subject of virtue. For these powers are common
to us and dumb animals. But we are now speaking of virtue as proper
to man, since for this reason it is called human virtue. It is
therefore impossible for human virtue to be in the irascible and
concupiscible powers which are parts of the sensitive appetite, as we
have said in the First Part (Q. 81, A. 2).

Obj. 2: Further, the sensitive appetite is a power which makes use of
a corporeal organ. But the good of virtue cannot be in man's body:
for the Apostle says (Rom. 7): "I know that good does not dwell in my
flesh." Therefore the sensitive appetite cannot be the subject of
virtue.

Obj. 3: Further, Augustine proves (De Moribus Eccl. v) that virtue is
not in the body but in the soul, for the reason that the body is
ruled by the soul: wherefore it is entirely due to his soul that a
man make good use of his body: "For instance, if my coachman, through
obedience to my orders, guides well the horses which he is driving;
this is all due to me." But just as the soul rules the body, so also
does the reason rule the sensitive appetite. Therefore that the
irascible and concupiscible powers are rightly ruled, is entirely due
to the rational powers. Now "virtue is that by which we live
rightly," as we have said above (Q. 55, A. 4). Therefore virtue is
not in the irascible and concupiscible powers, but only in the
rational powers.

Obj. 4: Further, "the principal act of moral virtue is choice"
(Ethic. viii, 13). Now choice is not an act of the irascible and
concupiscible powers, but of the rational power, as we have said
above (Q. 13, A. 2). Therefore moral virtue is not in the irascible
and concupiscible powers, but in the reason.

_On the contrary,_ Fortitude is assigned to the irascible power, and
temperance to the concupiscible power. Whence the Philosopher (Ethic.
iii, 10) says that "these virtues belong to the irrational part of
the soul."

_I answer that,_ The irascible and concupiscible powers can be
considered in two ways. First, in themselves, in so far as they are
parts of the sensitive appetite: and in this way they are not
competent to be the subject of virtue. Secondly, they can be
considered as participating in the reason, from the fact that they
have a natural aptitude to obey reason. And thus the irascible or
concupiscible power can be the subject of human virtue: for, in so
far as it participates in the reason, it is the principle of a human
act. And to these powers we must needs assign virtues.

For it is clear that there are some virtues in the irascible and
concupiscible powers. Because an act, which proceeds from one power
according as it is moved by another power, cannot be perfect, unless
both powers be well disposed to the act: for instance, the act of a
craftsman cannot be successful unless both the craftsman and his
instrument be well disposed to act. Therefore in the matter of the
operations of the irascible and concupiscible powers, according as
they are moved by reason, there must needs be some habit perfecting
in respect of acting well, not only the reason, but also the
irascible and concupiscible powers. And since the good disposition of
the power which moves through being moved, depends on its conformity
with the power that moves it: therefore the virtue which is in the
irascible and concupiscible powers is nothing else but a certain
habitual conformity of these powers to reason.

Reply Obj. 1: The irascible and concupiscible powers considered in
themselves, as parts of the sensitive appetite, are common to us and
dumb animals. But in so far as they are rational by participation,
and are obedient to the reason, they are proper to man. And in this
way they can be the subject of human virtue.

Reply Obj. 2: Just as human flesh has not of itself the good of
virtue, but is made the instrument of a virtuous act, inasmuch as
being moved by reason, we "yield our members to serve justice"; so
also, the irascible and concupiscible powers, of themselves indeed,
have not the good of virtue, but rather the infection of the _fomes:_
whereas, inasmuch as they are in conformity with reason, the good of
reason is begotten in them.

Reply Obj. 3: The body is ruled by the soul, and the irascible and
concupiscible powers by the reason, but in different ways. For the
body obeys the soul blindly without any contradiction, in those
things in which it has a natural aptitude to be moved by the soul:
whence the Philosopher says (Polit. i, 3) that the "soul rules the
body with a despotic command" as the master rules his slave:
wherefore the entire movement of the body is referred to the soul.
For this reason virtue is not in the body, but in the soul. But the
irascible and concupiscible powers do not obey the reason blindly; on
the contrary, they have their own proper movements, by which, at
times, they go against reason, whence the Philosopher says (Polit. i,
3) that the "reason rules the irascible and concupiscible powers by a
political command" such as that by which free men are ruled, who have
in some respects a will of their own. And for this reason also must
there be some virtues in the irascible and concupiscible powers, by
which these powers are well disposed to act.

Reply Obj. 4: In choice there are two things, namely, the intention
of the end, and this belongs to the moral virtue; and the
preferential choice of that which is unto the end, and this belongs
to prudence (Ethic. vi, 2, 5). But that the irascible and
concupiscible powers have a right intention of the end in regard to
the passions of the soul, is due to the good disposition of these
powers. And therefore those moral virtues which are concerned with
the passions are in the irascible and concupiscible powers, but
prudence is in the reason.
________________________

FIFTH ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 56, Art. 5]

Whether the Sensitive Powers of Apprehension Are the Subject of
Virtue?

Objection 1: It would seem that it is possible for virtue to be in
the interior sensitive powers of apprehension. For the sensitive
appetite can be the subject of virtue, in so far as it obeys reason.
But the interior sensitive powers of apprehension obey reason: for
the powers of imagination, of cogitation, and of memory [*Cf. I, Q.
78, A. 4] act at the command of reason. Therefore in these powers
there can be virtue.

Obj. 2: Further, as the rational appetite, which is the will, can be
hindered or helped in its act, by the sensitive appetite, so also can
the intellect or reason be hindered or helped by the powers mentioned
above. As, therefore, there can be virtue in the interior powers of
appetite, so also can there be virtue in the interior powers of
apprehension.

Obj. 3: Further, prudence is a virtue, of which Cicero (De Invent.
Rhetor. ii) says that memory is a part. Therefore also in the power
of memory there can be a virtue: and in like manner, in the other
interior sensitive powers of apprehension.

_On the contrary,_ All virtues are either intellectual or moral
(Ethic. ii, 1). Now all the moral virtues are in the appetite; while
the intellectual virtues are in the intellect or reason, as is clear
from _Ethic._ vi, 1. Therefore there is no virtue in the interior
sensitive powers of apprehension.

_I answer that,_ In the interior sensitive powers of apprehension
there are some habits. And this is made clear principally from what
the Philosopher says (De Memoria ii), that "in remembering one thing
after another, we become used to it; and use is a second nature." Now
a habit of use is nothing else than a habit acquired by use, which is
like unto nature. Wherefore Tully says of virtue in his _Rhetoric_
that "it is a habit like a second nature in accord with reason." Yet,
in man, that which he acquires by use, in his memory and other
sensitive powers of apprehension, is not a habit properly so called,
but something annexed to the habits of the intellective faculty, as
we have said above (Q. 50, A. 4, ad 3).

Nevertheless even if there be habits in such powers, they cannot be
virtues. For virtue is a perfect habit, by which it never happens
that anything but good is done: and so virtue must needs be in that
power which consummates the good act. But the knowledge of truth is
not consummated in the sensitive powers of apprehension: for such
powers prepare the way to the intellective knowledge. And therefore
in these powers there are none of the virtues, by which we know
truth: these are rather in the intellect or reason.

Reply Obj. 1: The sensitive appetite is related to the will, which is
the rational appetite, through being moved by it. And therefore the
act of the appetitive power is consummated in the sensitive appetite:
and for this reason the sensitive appetite is the subject of virtue.
Whereas the sensitive powers of apprehension are related to the
intellect rather through moving it; for the reason that the phantasms
are related to the intellective soul, as colors to sight (De Anima
iii, text. 18). And therefore the act of knowledge is terminated in
the intellect; and for this reason the cognoscitive virtues are in
the intellect itself, or the reason.

And thus is made clear the Reply to the Second Objection.

Reply Obj. 3: Memory is not a part of prudence, as species is of a
genus, as though memory were a virtue properly so called: but one of
the conditions required for prudence is a good memory; so that, in a
fashion, it is after the manner of an integral part.
________________________

SIXTH ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 56, Art. 6]

Whether the Will Can Be the Subject of Virtue?

Objection 1: It would seem that the will is not the subject of
virtue. Because no habit is required for that which belongs to a
power by reason of its very nature. But since the will is in the
reason, it is of the very essence of the will, according to the
Philosopher (De Anima iii, text. 42), to tend to that which is good,
according to reason. And to this good every virtue is ordered, since
everything naturally desires its own proper good; for virtue, as
Tully says in his Rhetoric, is a "habit like a second nature in
accord with reason." Therefore the will is not the subject of virtue.

Obj. 2: Further, every virtue is either intellectual or moral (Ethic.
i, 13; ii, 1). But intellectual virtue is subjected in the intellect
and reason, and not in the will: while moral virtue is subjected in
the irascible and concupiscible powers which are rational by
participation. Therefore no virtue is subjected in the will.

Obj. 3: Further, all human acts, to which virtues are ordained, are
voluntary. If therefore there be a virtue in the will in respect of
some human acts, in like manner there will be a virtue in the will in
respect of all human acts. Either, therefore, there will be no virtue
in any other power, or there will be two virtues ordained to the same
act, which seems unreasonable. Therefore the will cannot be the
subject of virtue.

_On the contrary,_ Greater perfection is required in the mover than
in the moved. But the will moves the irascible and concupiscible
powers. Much more therefore should there be virtue in the will than
in the irascible and concupiscible powers.

_I answer that,_ Since the habit perfects the power in reference to
act, then does the power need a habit perfecting it unto doing well,
which habit is a virtue, when the power's own proper nature does not
suffice for the purpose.

Now the proper nature of a power is seen in its relation to its
object. Since, therefore, as we have said above (Q. 19, A. 3), the
object of the will is the good of reason proportionate to the will,
in respect of this the will does not need a virtue perfecting it. But
if man's will is confronted with a good that exceeds its capacity,
whether as regards the whole human species, such as Divine good,
which transcends the limits of human nature, or as regards the
individual, such as the good of one's neighbor, then does the will
need virtue. And therefore such virtues as those which direct man's
affections to God or to his neighbor are subjected in the will, as
charity, justice, and such like.

Reply Obj. 1: This objection is true of those virtues which are
ordained to the willer's own good; such as temperance and fortitude,
which are concerned with the human passions, and the like, as is
clear from what we have said (Q. 35, A. 6).

Reply Obj. 2: Not only the irascible and concupiscible powers are
rational by participation but "the appetitive power altogether," i.e.
in its entirety (Ethic. i, 13). Now the will is included in the
appetitive power. And therefore whatever virtue is in the will must
be a moral virtue, unless it be theological, as we shall see later on
(Q. 62, A. 3).

Reply Obj. 3: Some virtues are directed to the good of moderated
passion, which is the proper good of this or that man: and in these
cases there is no need for virtue in the will, for the nature of the
power suffices for the purpose, as we have said. This need exists
only in the case of virtues which are directed to some extrinsic good.
________________________

QUESTION 57

OF THE INTELLECTUAL VIRTUES
(In Six Articles)

We now have to consider the various kinds of virtue: and (1) the
intellectual virtues; (2) the moral virtues; (3) the theological
virtues. Concerning the first there are six points of inquiry:

(1) Whether habits of the speculative intellect are virtues?

(2) Whether they are three, namely, wisdom, science and understanding?

(3) Whether the intellectual habit, which is art, is a virtue?

(4) Whether prudence is a virtue distinct from art?

(5) Whether prudence is a virtue necessary to man?

(6) Whether "eubulia," "synesis" and "gnome" are virtues annexed to
prudence?
________________________

FIRST ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 57, Art. 1]

Whether the Habits of the Speculative Intellect Are Virtues?

Objection 1: It would seem that the habits of the speculative
intellect are not virtues. For virtue is an operative habit, as we
have said above (Q. 55, A. 2). But speculative habits are not
operative: for speculative matter is distinct from practical, i.e.
operative matter. Therefore the habits of the speculative intellect
are not virtues.

Obj. 2: Further, virtue is about those things by which man is made
happy or blessed: for "happiness is the reward of virtue" (Ethic. i,
9). Now intellectual habits do not consider human acts or other human
goods, by which man acquires happiness, but rather things pertaining
to nature or to God. Therefore such like habits cannot be called
virtues.

Obj. 3: Further, science is a speculative habit. But science and
virtue are distinct from one another as genera which are not
subalternate, as the Philosopher proves in _Topic._ iv. Therefore
speculative habits are not virtues.

_On the contrary,_ The speculative habits alone consider necessary
things which cannot be otherwise than they are. Now the Philosopher
(Ethic. vi, 1) places certain intellectual virtues in that part of
the soul which considers necessary things that cannot be otherwise
than they are. Therefore the habits of the speculative intellect are
virtues.

_I answer that,_ Since every virtue is ordained to some good, as
stated above (Q. 55, A. 3), a habit, as we have already observed (Q.
56, A. 3), may be called a virtue for two reasons: first, because it
confers aptness in doing good; secondly, because besides aptness, it
confers the right use of it. The latter condition, as above stated
(Q. 55, A. 3), belongs to those habits alone which affect the
appetitive part of the soul: since it is the soul's appetitive power
that puts all the powers and habits to their respective uses.

Since, then, the habits of the speculative intellect do not perfect
the appetitive part, nor affect it in any way, but only the
intellective part; they may indeed be called virtues in so far as
they confer aptness for a good work, viz. the consideration of truth
(since this is the good work of the intellect): yet they are not
called virtues in the second way, as though they conferred the right
use of a power or habit. For if a man possess a habit of speculative
science, it does not follow that he is inclined to make use of it,
but he is made able to consider the truth in those matters of which
he has scientific knowledge: that he make use of the knowledge which
he has, is due to the motion of his will. Consequently a virtue which
perfects the will, as charity or justice, confers the right use of
these speculative habits. And in this way too there can be merit in
the acts of these habits, if they be done out of charity: thus
Gregory says (Moral. vi) that the "contemplative life has greater
merit than the active life."

Reply Obj. 1: Work is of two kinds, exterior and interior.
Accordingly the practical or active faculty which is contrasted with
the speculative faculty, is concerned with exterior work, to which
the speculative habit is not ordained. Yet it is ordained to the
interior act of the intellect which is to consider the truth. And in
this way it is an operative habit.

Reply Obj. 2: Virtue is about certain things in two ways. In the
first place a virtue is about its object. And thus these speculative
virtues are not about those things whereby man is made happy; except
perhaps, in so far as the word "whereby" indicates the efficient
cause or object of complete happiness, i.e. God, Who is the supreme
object of contemplation. Secondly, a virtue is said to be about its
acts: and in this sense the intellectual virtues are about those
things whereby a man is made happy; both because the acts of these
virtues can be meritorious, as stated above, and because they are a
kind of beginning of perfect bliss, which consists in the
contemplation of truth, as we have already stated (Q. 3, A. 7).

Reply Obj. 3: Science is contrasted with virtue taken in the second
sense, wherein it belongs to the appetitive faculty.
________________________

SECOND ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 57, Art. 2]

Whether There Are Only Three Habits of the Speculative Intellect, Viz.
Wisdom, Science and Understanding?

Objection 1: It would seem unfitting to distinguish three virtues of
the speculative intellect, viz. wisdom, science and understanding.
Because a species is a kind of science, as stated in _Ethic._ vi, 7.
Therefore wisdom should not be condivided with science among the
intellectual virtues.

Obj. 2: Further, in differentiating powers, habits and acts in
respect of their objects, we consider chiefly the formal aspect of
these objects, as we have already explained (I, Q. 77, A. 3).
Therefore diversity of habits is taken, not from their material
objects, but from the formal aspect of those objects. Now the
principle of a demonstration is the formal aspect under which the
conclusion is known. Therefore the understanding of principles should
not be set down as a habit or virtue distinct from the knowledge of
conclusions.

Obj. 3: Further, an intellectual virtue is one which resides in the
essentially rational faculty. Now even the speculative reason employs
the dialectic syllogism for the sake of argument, just as it employs
the demonstrative syllogism. Therefore as science, which is the
result of a demonstrative syllogism, is set down as an intellectual
virtue, so also should opinion be.

_On the contrary,_ The Philosopher (Ethic. vi, 1) reckons these three
alone as being intellectual virtues, viz. wisdom, science and
understanding.

_I answer that,_ As already stated (A. 1), the virtues of the
speculative intellect are those which perfect the speculative
intellect for the consideration of truth: for this is its good work.
Now a truth is subject to a twofold consideration--as known in
itself, and as known through another. What is known in itself, is as
a _principle,_ and is at once understood by the intellect: wherefore
the habit that perfects the intellect for the consideration of such
truth is called _understanding,_ which is the habit of principles.

On the other hand, a truth which is known through another, is
understood by the intellect, not at once, but by means of the
reason's inquiry, and is as a _term._ This may happen in two ways:
first, so that it is the last in some particular genus; secondly, so
that it is the ultimate term of all human knowledge. And, since
"things that are knowable last from our standpoint, are knowable
first and chiefly in their nature" (Phys. i, text. 2, 3); hence that
which is last with respect to all human knowledge, is that which is
knowable first and chiefly in its nature. And about these is
_wisdom,_ which considers the highest causes, as stated in _Metaph._
i, 1, 2. Wherefore it rightly judges all things and sets them in
order, because there can be no perfect and universal judgment that is
not based on the first causes. But in regard to that which is last in
this or that genus of knowable matter, it is _science_ which perfects
the intellect. Wherefore according to the different kinds of knowable
matter, there are different habits of scientific knowledge; whereas
there is but one wisdom.

Reply Obj. 1: Wisdom is a kind of science, in so far as it has that
which is common to all the sciences; viz. to demonstrate conclusions
from principles. But since it has something proper to itself above
the other sciences, inasmuch as it judges of them all, not only as to
their conclusions, but also as to their first principles, therefore
it is a more perfect virtue than science.

Reply Obj. 2: When the formal aspect of the object is referred to a
power or habit by one same act, there is no distinction of habit or
power in respect of the formal aspect and of the material object:
thus it belongs to the same power of sight to see both color, and
light, which is the formal aspect under which color is seen, and is
seen at the same time as the color. On the other hand, the principles
of a demonstration can be considered apart, without the conclusion
being considered at all. Again they can be considered together with
the conclusions, since the conclusions can be deduced from them.
Accordingly, to consider the principles in this second way, belongs
to science, which considers the conclusions also: while to consider
the principles in themselves belongs to understanding.

Consequently, if we consider the point aright, these three virtues
are distinct, not as being on a par with one another, but in a
certain order. The same is to be observed in potential wholes,
wherein one part is more perfect than another; for instance, the
rational soul is more perfect than the sensitive soul; and the
sensitive, than the vegetal. For it is thus that science depends on
understanding as on a virtue of higher degree: and both of these
depend on wisdom, as obtaining the highest place, and containing
beneath itself both understanding and science, by judging both of the
conclusions of science, and of the principles on which they are based.

Reply Obj. 3: As stated above (Q. 55, AA. 3, 4), a virtuous habit has
a fixed relation to good, and is nowise referable to evil. Now the
good of the intellect is truth, and falsehood is its evil. Wherefore
those habits alone are called intellectual virtues, whereby we tell
the truth and never tell a falsehood. But opinion and suspicion can
be about both truth and falsehood: and so, as stated in _Ethic._ vi,
3, they are not intellectual virtues.
