
"Shall I torment this fellow while you are gone?"

"Do as you please. At least see that he gets no rest."

He strode across the room to glare down at Daoud. "You will keep your
manhood for another hour or so. By God's grace you have more time to
think. About what will happen to you and how you can save yourself. Do
not think you have escaped. I will be back."

He lifted his hand. A bolt of panic shot through Daoud as he thought
that if d'Ucello hit him hard enough he might break the ball of poison
in his mouth. He held himself rigid.

D'Ucello lowered his hand.

"Damn you!" he snarled, and turned away.

Now Daoud wished d'Ucello _had_ broken the glass ball. He would have to
lie for hours longer now, waiting for pain and death. The thought of
those hours was in itself more agonizing than all the tortures he had so
far suffered. But God had chosen to let him live a little longer, and he
must accept these moments of life.

       *       *       *       *       *

"According to Vincenzo," Erculio whispered, "the contessa ordered the
podesta to stop torturing you. Your allies must have gotten to her."

The guards and the clerk had left, but Daoud heard their excited voices
beyond the partly open door. Erculio now had a chance to take out the
poison ball. The inside of Daoud's mouth ached from holding the delicate
orb, and he sighed with relief.

"There is more," Erculio said. "An army of Sienese Ghibellini passed
through Montefiascone this morning. We have known that the Sienese were
marching against Orvieto, but we were not aware they were almost upon
us. The contessa and the podesta must discuss the defense as well as
your fate."

Lorenzo was with that army, Daoud thought. Lorenzo might be able to
rescue him if he got here in time.

"I fear it will be no better for you than before," Erculio went on.
"D'Ucello knows how to make the contessa see things his way. He will
probably persuade her that you must be tortured. And since he suspects
you of being a Ghibellino agent, he will want you dead before the
Ghibellini army comes."

"As God wills," Daoud croaked. A numbness had come over him as if he
were already dead. This was older and simpler and more effective than
the techniques of Sufi and Hashishiyya. This deadness was his body's
final answer to a night and a day of unbearable pain and fear.




LV


The woman's shoulders shook, and she rocked back and forth. She could
not speak. Tilia sat on Sophia's bed holding the sobbing woman in her
arms.

Tilia, calling her Francesca, tried to calm her. Sophia at first had
thought Francesca was a madwoman. Her tunic was torn and rain-wet, her
long black hair not bound up and covered but in wild disarray.

"You are safe now, piccione," Tilia kept saying. "Calm down and tell us
what happened." Tilia herself was pale, her wide mouth drawn tight.

Seeing even Tilia's face grim, Sophia felt a chill of apprehension and
an even greater anxiety to know what this was all about.

"I know I should not come here, Madama. Forgive me. But I did not know
what else to do. I walked so far to get here, and I kept getting lost,
and I was afraid to ask anyone where Cardinal Ugolini's mansion was."

"How did you know I was here, Francesca?" Tilia asked.

"Cassio told me just before--before--" Francesca was convulsed with
sobs.

Tilia turned to Sophia. "I have never seen her like this."

"Your house is destroyed," said Francesca, choking and gasping and
wiping her nose on her sleeve.

"Destroyed!" Tilia and Sophia stared at each other. A shock of fear
swept through Sophia. Already terrified for Daoud, she was now swept by
dread for Rachel and pity for Tilia.

_Any more of this, and I will lose my wits._

"And they hanged Cassio."

"Oh, my God!" Tilia screamed.

Another jolt of terror. Sophia thought of that day in Constantinople
when the Franks had run riot, burning whole districts and murdering
townspeople. Was this another such day?

"And they--and they killed Hector and Claudio and Apollonio and the
other menservants."

"Who did this?" Tilia was on her feet, standing over Francesca,
shouting. "Who? Who?"

Was the whole world turning against them, Sophia wondered. Was it the
podesta's men? The Monaldeschi?

Francesca put her hands over her face and wept softly for a moment, then
continued. "The Tartars and that French cardinal who always came with
them. They came with armed men, dozens of them. They were after Rachel."

_Rachel!_

The horror of it all was like a spear driven through Sophia's breast.
She sat down on her bed as the room went black around her.

"Oh, no," she heard herself saying. "Oh, not Rachel!" Fear stopped her
heart. She slumped on the bed, her hand pressed to her chest.

"When Cassio tried to stop them, they went mad," said Francesca. "The
men-at-arms killed every man in the house, and they raped all the women.
Some of us over and over again. And they tore the house apart and stole
everything they could carry. What they could not take, they smashed. And
all the while they kept laughing, Madama. They kept laughing."

Sophia felt bile burning in her throat. If she had to hear any more
horrors, she was going to vomit.

Tilia sat looking stunned, shaking her head from side to side.

"What happened to Rachel?" Sophia managed to choke out.

"She tried to run away. She got out of the house. The white-haired
Tartar, the one who beds with her, chased her. He must have caught her,
because I heard the cardinal shouting that they had found the one they
came for and they must get on the road or they would be fighting the
Sienese."

_Rachel wanted to come here with me this morning_, Sophia thought. _If
only I had brought her here, we could have saved her._ She sobbed aloud.
Her stomach hurt.

"May God rot all of them with leprosy," said Tilia. She hugged Francesca
hard, and then stood up.

"I must go to my house."

Going back to Tilia's would not help Rachel, Sophia thought. They had
probably lost her forever. Despair dragged her down. _Rachel, Rachel!_
What were they doing to her?

"First David is arrested. Now this," she said, tears running steadily
down her cheeks.

_I had trusted Daoud to foresee danger and guide us through it_, Sophia
thought. _And now Daoud--_

She still did not know whether Daoud was safe, or even still alive.
Would the contessa be able to stop whatever was being done to Daoud?
That had been quite enough to be terrified about.

Francesca's tear-reddened eyes widened. "David has been arrested?"
Something in her tone told Sophia there had been something between
Francesca and David.

_Of course_, she told herself. _Did you think the man slept alone until
you gave yourself to him?_

She and Francesca shared some of the same grief. Sophia wanted to
console her.

"Cardinal Ugolini has persuaded the Contessa di Monaldeschi to intercede
for David," Sophia told her, "and the cardinal has gone to the Palazzo
del Podesta, hoping to bring David back here again."

"It may be hours before David is released," said Tilia, raising a
cautioning hand. "_If_ the podesta does agree. Or he may persuade the
contessa that he was right to arrest David."

These were the very thoughts that had been tormenting Sophia. She needed
to do something.

"If you want to go to your house, Tilia, I will go with you." It
occurred to her immediately after she spoke that the streets might be
dangerous for both of them. But she could not stand the agony of sitting
here, waiting for the possibility of still worse news.

"Sophia, you and the cardinal must not be linked to Tilia Caballo's
bordello," said Tilia.

"I will keep myself hidden," said Sophia.

Sophia made Francesca comfortable in her own bed, then went down with
Tilia to the great hall of Ugolini's mansion and sent for Riccardo.

Hand in hand, Sophia holding a lighted candle, the two women made their
way through the tunnel that led to the potterymaker's shop.

Riccardo met them with another hired cart, like the one that had taken
them from Tilia's to the cardinal's this morning. This was a covered
cart full of big urns of olive oil. The air, much cooler than before the
storm, felt refreshing on Sophia's face. Getting into the cart, Sophia
looked up and saw big black clouds rolling across the sky, their rounded
edges outlined by the red light of the setting sun.

The cart, pulled by an old draft horse, bumped over cobblestones and
splashed through puddles. Tilia and Sophia sat on a bench behind
Riccardo, under the cart's canvas cover, so they could not be seen from
the street. All around them Sophia heard church bells ringing for the
Angelus. She could close her eyes for a moment and imagine she was
hearing the bells of the three hundred churches of Constantinople. She
longed to be in the Polis again, among civilized people.

_That is why I am here, is it not? To keep the barbarians here, and away
from there._

She saw torchlight ahead. This was Tilia's street, farther up a hill
that slowed down the elderly horse.

From this distance the house looked undamaged, but what was that hanging
above the door?

"Merciful God!" Sophia whispered.

She saw the body of a man suspended from a rope tied to the balcony
above the doorway.

"Oh, God," said Tilia. "Oh, poor, poor Cassio." She dabbed at her eyes
with the sleeve of her gown.

Now, by the torchlight, Sophia could see several men, dressed in the
yellow and blue of the commune, gathered in front of the house. The
podesta's watchmen.

The street was full of common folk, who had to back up to give the cart
room to move forward. As it approached the front door, one of the
podesta's men raised a hand to stop it.

"I will be right back," Tilia said, squeezing Sophia's arm. She
clambered out of the cart with Riccardo's help. Riccardo tied the cart
to a hitching post on the side of the street.

Tying her scarf across her face, Sophia watched from inside the cart.
The man who had stopped the horse barred Tilia again as she started
toward her house. He was a slender, middle-aged man with a prominent
arch to his nose and heavy-lidded eyes. Riccardo moved toward him, but
Tilia put her hand on the servant's arm. Tilia would not want the
cardinal's man brawling with an officer of the watch.

"I am Tilia Caballo, and this is my house," she said in a commanding
voice. "How long have you been here?"

What a brave woman Tilia was, Sophia thought. Could she herself face an
officer of the watch and speak to him sternly like that?

"Since the hour of None, Madama. The podesta was here, but he had to
leave."

"And what are you doing? Just standing about? Have you left that poor
man's body to hang there since mid-afternoon, where women and children
could see it? Take him down at once. Are you not Christians? How can you
treat the dead with such disrespect?"

In the midst of her own horror, Sophia took comfort from Tilia's display
of strength, and wondered how the stout little woman felt inside.

Sophia had hated her at times, and still thought Tilia had done a
horrible wrong to Rachel. But what she felt for her now was mostly
admiration.

After all, all of them were equally guilty of what had happened to
Rachel. The blame should not fall on Tilia alone.

The beak-nosed officer called orders to others nearby. But his
expression as he turned back to Tilia was surly.

"There might be some question about whether _he_ was a Christian,
Madama. This is, after all, a house of ill repute."

"Ill _repute_!" Tilia blustered. "This is--this was--the handsomest
house of pleasure in Orvieto. And our patrons occupied the very highest
levels in the Church. You would be wise to have a care how you speak of
my house."

Sophia felt herself smiling. Amazing, when there was so much to weep
over.

"Would I?" The officer thrust his nose at Tilia. "Perhaps you can tell
me why such a splendid bordello with such fine customers needed a
torture chamber in the cellar? Or why you had to keep piccioni on the
roof?"

Sophia's body went cold. If they found out those were carrier pigeons
and where they went, the trouble here might be deep indeed.

"So that is what you have been doing!" Tilia stormed. "Looting my home!
And how much did you steal after the Tartars left? And no doubt
harassing my ladies, as if they had not been through enough already. And
leaving my Cassio to swing from a rope. My God, there has been murder,
kidnapping, rape, and theft done here, and you prattle of piccioni. What
have you done about catching the _bestioni_ who did this?"

Now the officer did look intimidated. "Madama, we are not certain who
did these things--"

"Not certain!" Tilia shook her fist at him. "Everyone in Orvieto knows
who did this. It was the French cardinal, Paulus de Verceuil, and the
Tartar ambassadors to the pope. Why are you here, standing about like
fools, when you could be pursuing them and bringing them to justice?"

The French, thought Sophia. If Simon had been here, would he have
allowed this to happen? She felt a twinge of guilt, remembering that she
had betrayed Daoud by not telling him where Simon was going.

"What you tell us is but hearsay, Madama."

"Hearsay! Every lady in that house is a witness."

"In any case, those you accuse are beyond our reach."

"Because you _let_ them get beyond your reach," Tilia retorted. "Oh, you
feckless man! Let me by."

And then Sophia was alone in the cart and frightened, because she knew
she was surrounded by the podesta's men and by townspeople who might
well be hostile. For reassurance she smoothed the scarf over her nose
and mouth and patted the small dagger that hung at her belt, concealed
under her outer tunic.

She heard a creaking noise above her and looked out to see the podesta's
men hauling Cassio's body up to the balcony. Tilia, she thought, was
taking charge. Left to themselves, the watchmen would probably have just
cut the rope and let the poor man's corpse fall to the ground.

Sophia thought of Rachel, helpless, carried off by the Tartar, and
Daoud, equally helpless, in the Palazzo del Podesta. She had no idea
what was happening to either of them, and horrors filled her mind. Her
hands twisted together, her fingers crushing one another, and she
started to cry again.

Tilia was crying, too, when she came back and Riccardo helped her climb
into the carriage. She could not speak for a time, and Sophia sat with
her arm around Tilia's quaking shoulders. It was for this, thought
Sophia, she had come. The only way she could help Tilia was to be with
her and to comfort her. And in doing so she comforted herself.

After a while Tilia gave a great sigh. "I held Cassio in my arms for a
time. I washed his poor face, which I could barely recognize. What hurts
most is that all those people, those men and those women, were loyal to
me, and I was not there when they suffered this awful thing." She wiped
her eyes with the sleeve of her green silk dress and looked sadly at
Sophia.

Feeling Tilia's pain for her people, Sophia liked her all the more.

"The Tartars' men probably would have killed you if you had been there."

"To be sure. I would have provoked them to it as Cassio did. I would not
have let them take Rachel without a fight." She gripped the cross
resting on her bosom, and Sophia remembered Daoud saying it held a
poisoned blade. "Well, my poor men will have good burials. I have been
very generous to the little church of San Severo in the valley south of
here, and now the pastor can repay my kindness by burying the seven who
died here. They may not have been good Christians, or Christians at all,
but at least in a churchyard they will lie in peace. The women who are
hurt badly will go to the Hospital of Santa Clara. And I must hire
guards to protect the house. My ladies do not want to stay there. I do
not blame them, but there is no other roof to shelter them just now,
and with guards they will be safe enough. Anyway, those murderers are
gone. I will come back and stay with them when I have done everything
there is to do."

Sophia smiled at Tilia in admiration. She was hurt, but fought the pain
by getting on with what needed to be done.

_If only there were more I could do. For Rachel. For Daoud._

Tilia kept shaking her head. "They took everything of value. Thank
Fortune, most of my money is on deposit with the Lombards. But the
chests I kept in my room are gone, and there were bags of gold coins in
them. One chest was Rachel's."

Sophia's heart sank further at that news. Now Rachel had not even gold
to make up for all that had been done to her.

"The dirty ladroni," Tilia went on. "That Tartar and the other one, and
the cardinal--all of them had such merry times in my house. How could
they do this to me?"

"The Tartars are simply doing as Tartars do," said Sophia. "They take
what they want, and they kill anyone who tries to stop them. As for the
cardinal, he is a Frank, and if you had seen what the Franks did to my
city, you would not be surprised at this." She felt helpless. How could
what she was saying possibly comfort Tilia?

Tilia struck the heel of her hand against her forehead. "How stupid I
was! When John the Tartar said he wanted to take Rachel to Perugia with
him, I should have known he would not accept my refusal. I should have
been prepared for this."

Sophia, remembering how Rachel had begged to leave Tilia's house with
her that morning, spoke sharply before she could stop herself.

"As it was, you kept Rachel safe for him until he was ready to take
her."

Tilia gasped. "That is very unfair."

Now Sophia was deeply angry with herself. She had already decided that
what had happened to Rachel should not be blamed on Tilia. And she was
trying--or should be trying--to comfort her. Her cruel Greek tongue had
got the better of her.

Sophia was about to apologize when a shout from outside stopped her.

"The mistress of the whores' house is in this cart. I saw her get into
it."

"Now she sees how God punishes fornicators."

"We should never have let her move into our street."

"Let her get her house and all of her filth out of here."

Sophia shrank back into the cart, her heart quaking. She had seen mobs
tear people to pieces.

She said, "Tilia, that crowd frightens me, and the podesta's men may not
be much protection. Let us get out of here, please."

"I will show you what I think of that crowd," said Tilia. She pushed her
way to the front of the cart and stood beside Riccardo with her hands on
her hips. Sophia could see people gathered, white faces in the
moonlight, red faces in the torchlight.

"Ignoranti!" Tilia shouted. "Fannulloni! My house is the best on your
street. The rest is one big, foul quintana. Where were you idlers when
my men were murdered and my women were raped by a gang of foreigners?
Home pissing in your pants, eh? Brave Orvietans you are. Get out of my
way."

Sophia heard a muttering from the crowd, but no one tried to answer
Tilia. Sophia shook her head.

_If I live to be a hundred, I don't think I could ever face down a mob
like that._

Tilia turned to Riccardo, whose broad shoulders beside her had lent
force to her words. "Drive on."

The cart rolled forward, and the people fell back, squeezing against the
housefronts to let it by. Sophia, devastated, sagged back against a
great earthenware olive oil jar. She was too worn out even to cry
anymore.




LVI


_Now, at last, this is the end_, thought Daoud as the door of the
chamber of torment rasped open. He had been preparing himself for death,
praying, commending himself to God. Now he hoped that without much more
pain, God would take him.

Erculio, who had been sitting with his back to the wall, pushed himself
to his feet and scuttled forward.

D'Ucello entered, followed by two guards in yellow and blue.

"Welcome back, Signore," Erculio cried. "Shall we now roast this
stubborn fellow's ballocks?"

Erculio, Daoud sensed, enjoyed feigning the gleeful torturer precisely
because it was a way of tormenting d'Ucello himself.

D'Ucello walked over to where Daoud lay naked on the rack and glowered
silently down at him, his lips pressed together under his thin mustache.
The podesta glanced at the silver flask on the table, but made no move
to pick it up. He seemed to be studying Daoud, searching for something
as he looked into his eyes.

He blinked and turned away. "Untie him."

"What are we going to do to him now, Signore?" said Erculio, still all
eagerness. He needed to know, Daoud thought, when it would be time for
the poison ball.

"Untie him and sit him up slowly," said d'Ucello.

"Oh, Signore!" Erculio exclaimed. "May we not play with him some more?"

D'Ucello's mouth twisted. "Enough of your infernal questions,
pervertito! Do as I say."

The impact of this surprise was like a rock smashing into Daoud's Face
of Steel. What was happening? Was he not to have his manhood burned
away? Was he not to die?

This, too, could be a trick. Realizing that the threat of Greek Fire had
not broken Daoud, d'Ucello might be making one last and very effective
attempt to destroy his resolve by making it seem his fortunes had
suddenly reversed themselves.

Daoud tried to bring the upwelling of hope under control, to resume the
Face of Steel. But something in his bones was already sure that he was
saved, and spasms of trembling ran through his body. His face felt as if
it were falling to pieces, the Mask of Clay broken like a useless pot.

Bustling around the table, Erculio undid the knots at his wrists and
ankles. In his surprise, Daoud relaxed his defenses against pain, and
agony stabbed him like spears in every muscle of his body.

"We have not the means to treat your wounds here in this chamber," said
d'Ucello. "But lower your legs over the side of the table and sit there
for a moment. Then, if you can stand and walk, we will take you upstairs
and my own physician, Fra Bernardino, will attend you."

_Can it be? Am I to go free?_

Joy burst up in him like a fountain in the desert. The candlelight
seemed to flicker, and he nearly fainted. The sudden rush of emotion was
unbearable.

Unless this was indeed a ruse, which seemed less and less likely with
each passing moment, his suffering was over. The contessa had
prevailed! But why? Why had she intervened to save him? Daoud remembered
his vision of Sophia hurrying through the night to Tilia's house. Had
Sophia done something that brought the contessa into it?

As he sat on the edge of the table, Daoud brought his eyes up to fix
them on d'Ucello's. The dark eyes of the podesta, with the deep black
rings under them, stared back. There was a look of defiance in
d'Ucello's eyes, as if Daoud were the accuser and d'Ucello the one being
interrogated.

Daoud's throat was tight and dry, and it ached when he tried to speak,
but he forced words out.

"What are you going to do with me? Are you setting me free?"

The podesta nodded, his lips tight. "It seems that way."

"Why?"

"Be good enough to wait for an explanation until we are in private."

Daoud tried to read d'Ucello's round, swarthy face, but he could not
tell whether the podesta was relieved or angry.

When Daoud did try to stand and put his weight on the burned and beaten
soles of his feet, he had to clench his teeth to keep himself from
screaming. His legs, which had borne the brunt of Erculio's attentions,
felt lifeless, and his knees buckled. He toppled forward, and d'Ucello
caught him. The podesta staggered under Daoud's weight. He snapped his
fingers at a guard, who hurried over to help hold Daoud up.

As Daoud, gasping, leaned against him, d'Ucello unclasped his cloak and
wrapped it around Daoud to cover his nakedness.

_Such solicitude_, Daoud thought wryly. _I think I have suddenly become
terribly valuable to him._

This could not be just the contessa's influence, he thought. He did not
mean that much to her.

_The Sienese._

That must be it. Erculio had said d'Ucello believed Daoud was a
Ghibellino agent, and therefore he would want to kill Daoud before the
Ghibellino army from Siena got here. But not, Daoud thought, if d'Ucello
intended to surrender.

Erculio pressed something into his hand, a small leather pouch--the
tawidh.

Daoud painfully bent his head toward Erculio and read gladness in the
beady eyes.

"May you find work that suits you better, Messer Erculio," said Daoud.
_God give you joy_, he thought.

"What he does suits him all too well, the little monster," said
d'Ucello.

The podesta's men brought a litter, and two big guards, complaining
about Daoud's size, slowly climbed the basement steps, stopped to rest
for a time at the top and then carried Daoud up the marble staircase
leading from the ground floor to the first floor of the Palazzo del
Podesta. They were staggering by the time they lifted Daoud onto a bed
in a small room. D'Ucello ordered the guards to send Fra Bernardino to
him.

Two walls of the room were lined with books and boxes of scrolls. So
many books must be worth a fortune, Daoud thought. The other walls were
painted a pleasant lemon color, the ceiling a deep blue. A concave
mirror, set at an angle in the wall beside the glazed mullioned window,
could direct daylight toward the writing table. The translucent window
glass appeared nearly black; it must be night outside. The floor was of
hardwood planks, very clean and highly polished. Moving very slowly and
painfully, Daoud stretched himself out on the yellow satin bedcarpet and
drew d'Ucello's cloak over him like a blanket.

This was a great deal more comfortable than the table on which he had
lain for what seemed like endless days and nights. He could hardly
believe the vast change that had taken place.

_Maybe I have gone mad and this is all like a hashish dream._

D'Ucello sat at a plain oak table piled with parchments, rolled and
unrolled. The candelabra on the table supplied the light for the room. A
slender blue vase with graceful twin handles stood on one corner of the
table.

Though this was not a room that would find favor in the world of Islam,
Daoud recognized that d'Ucello, in his own Venetian way, had a highly
refined sense of beauty.

The podesta unlocked a tall box of dark wood, inlaid with ivory, that
stood on his desk. Lifting the lid, he held the flask of Greek Fire over
it.

"We are both lucky I did not use this," he said. He took a folded white
cloth from the box and wrapped the flask. Then, carefully, he set the
flask upright in the box, closed the lid, and locked it.

