head and plumage,--with carriers, the length of the beak and wattle,--with
fantails, the tail and carriage,--with Spanish fowls, the white face and
comb,--with long-eared rabbits, the length of ear, are all points which are
eminently variable. So it is in every case; and the large price paid for
first-rate animals proves the difficulty of breeding them up to the highest
standard of excellence. This subject has been discussed by fanciers (21/55.
'Cottage Gardener' 1855 December page 171; 1856 January pages 248, 323.), and
the greater prizes given for highly improved breeds, in comparison with those
given for old breeds which are not now undergoing rapid improvement, have been
fully justified. Nathusius makes (21/56. 'Ueber Shorthorn Rindvieh' 1857 s.
51.) a similar remark when discussing the less uniform character of improved
Shorthorn cattle and of the English horse, in comparison, for example, with
the unennobled cattle of Hungary, or with the horses of the Asiatic steppes.
This want of uniformity in the parts which at the time are undergoing
selection chiefly depends on the strength of the principle of reversion; but
it likewise depends to a certain extent on the continued variability of the
parts which have recently varied. That the same parts do continue varying in
the same manner we must admit, for if it were not so, there could be no
improvement beyond an early standard of excellence, and we know that such
improvement is not only possible, but is of general occurrence.

As a consequence of continued variability, and more especially of reversion,
all highly improved races, if neglected or not subjected to incessant
selection, soon degenerate. Youatt gives a curious instance of this in some
cattle formerly kept in Glamorganshire; but in this case the cattle were not
fed with sufficient care. Mr. Baker, in his memoir on the Horse, sums up: "It
must have been observed in the preceding pages that, whenever there has been
neglect, the breed has proportionally deteriorated." (21/57. 'The Veterinary'
volume 13 page 720. For the Glamorganshire cattle see Youatt on 'Cattle' page
51.) If a considerable number of improved cattle, sheep, or other animals of
the same race, were allowed to breed freely together, with no selection, but
with no change in their condition of life, there can be no doubt that after a
score or hundred generations they would be very far from excellent of their
kind; but, from what we see of the many common races of dogs, cattle, fowls,
pigeons, etc., which without any particular care have long retained nearly the
same character, we have no grounds for believing that they would altogether
depart from their type.

It is a general belief amongst breeders that characters of all kinds become
fixed by long-continued inheritance. But I have attempted to show in the
fourteenth chapter that this belief apparently resolves itself into the
following proposition, namely, that all characters whatever, whether recently
acquired or ancient, tend to be transmitted, but that those which have already
long withstood all counteracting influences, will, as a general rule, continue
to withstand them, and consequently be faithfully transmitted.

TENDENCY IN MAN TO CARRY THE PRACTICE OF SELECTION TO AN EXTREME POINT.

It is an important principle that in the process of selection man almost
invariably wishes to go to an extreme point. Thus, there is no limit to his
desire to breed certain kinds of horses and dogs as fleet as possible, and
others as strong as possible; certain kinds of sheep for extreme fineness, and
others for extreme length of wool; and he wishes to produce fruit, grain,
tubers, and other useful parts of plants, as large and excellent as possible.
With animals bred for amusement, the same principle is even more powerful; for
fashion, as we see in our dress, always runs to extremes. This view has been
expressly admitted by fanciers. Instances were given in the chapters on the
pigeon, but here is another: Mr. Eaton, after describing a comparatively new
variety, namely, the Archangel, remarks, "What fanciers intend doing with this
bird I am at a loss to know, whether they intend to breed it down to the
tumbler's head and beak, or carry it out to the carrier's head and beak;
leaving it as they found it, is not progressing." Ferguson, speaking of fowls,
says, "their peculiarities, whatever they may be, must necessarily be fully
developed: a little peculiarity forms nought but ugliness, seeing it violates
the existing laws of symmetry." So Mr. Brent, in discussing the merits of the
sub-varieties of the Belgian canary-bird, remarks, "Fanciers always go to
extremes; they do not admire indefinite properties." (21/58. J.M. Eaton 'A
Treatise on Fancy Pigeons' page 82; Ferguson on 'Rare and Prize Poultry' page
162; Mr. Brent in 'Cottage Gardener' October 1860 page 13.)

This principle, which necessarily leads to divergence of character, explains
the present state of various domestic races. We can thus see how it is that
racehorses and dray-horses, greyhounds and mastiffs, which are opposed to each
other in every character,--how varieties so distinct as Cochin-china fowls and
bantams, or carrier-pigeons with very long beaks, and tumblers with
excessively short beaks, have been derived from the same stock. As each breed
is slowly improved, the inferior varieties are first neglected and finally
lost. In a few cases, by the aid of old records, or from intermediate
varieties still existing in countries where other fashions have prevailed, we
are enabled partially to trace the graduated changes through which certain
breeds have passed. Selection, whether methodical or unconscious, always
tending towards an extreme point, together with the neglect and slow
extinction of the intermediate and less-valued forms, is the key which unlocks
the mystery of how man has produced such wonderful results.

In a few instances selection, guided by utility for a single purpose, has led
to convergence of character. All the improved and different races of the pig,
as Nathusius has well shown (21/59. 'Die Racen des Schweines' 1860 s. 48.),
closely approach each other in character, in their shortened legs and muzzles,
their almost hairless, large, rounded bodies, and small tusks. We see some
degree of convergence in the similar outline of the body in well-bred cattle
belonging to distinct races. (21/60. See some good remarks on this head by M.
de Quatrefages 'Unite de l'Espece Humaine' 1861 page 119.) I know of no other
such cases.

Continued divergence of character depends on, and is indeed a clear proof, as
previously remarked, of the same parts continuing to vary in the same
direction. The tendency to mere general variability or plasticity of
organisation can certainly be inherited, even from one parent, as has been
shown by Gartner and Kolreuter, in the production of varying hybrids from two
species, of which one alone was variable. It is in itself probable that, when
an organ has varied in any manner, it will again vary in the same manner, if
the conditions which first caused the being to vary remain, as far as can be
judged, the same. This is either tacitly or expressly admitted by all
horticulturists: if a gardener observes one or two additional petals in a
flower, he feels confident that in a few generations he will be able to raise
a double flower, crowded with petals. Some of the seedlings from the weeping
Moccas oak were so prostrate that they only crawled along the ground. A
seedling from the fastigiate or upright Irish yew is described as differing
greatly from the parent-form "by the exaggeration of the fastigiate habit of
its branches." (21/61. Verlot 'Des Varietes' 1865 page 94.) Mr. Shirreff, who
has been highly successful in raising new kinds of wheat, remarks, "A good
variety may safely be regarded as the forerunner of a better one." (21/62. Mr.
Patrick Shirreff 'Gardener's Chronicle' 1858 page 771.) A great rose-grower,
Mr. Rivers, has made the same remark with respect to roses. Sageret (21/63.
'Pomologie Physiolog.' 1830 page 106.), who had large experience, in speaking
of the future progress of fruit-trees, observes that the most important
principle is "that the more plants have departed from their original type, the
more they tend to depart from it." There is apparently much truth in this
remark; for we can in no other way understand the surprising amount of
difference between varieties in the parts or qualities which are valued,
whilst other parts retain nearly their original character.

The foregoing discussion naturally leads to the question, what is the limit to
the possible amount of variation in any part or quality, and, consequently, is
there any limit to what selection can effect? Will a racehorse ever be reared
fleeter than Eclipse? Can our prize-cattle and sheep be still further
improved? Will a gooseberry ever weigh more than that produced by "London" in
1852? Will the beet-root in France yield a greater percentage of sugar? Will
future varieties of wheat and other grain produce heavier crops than our
present varieties? These questions cannot be positively answered; but it is
certain that we ought to be cautious in answering them by a negative. In some
lines of variation the limit has probably been reached. Youatt believes that
the reduction of bone in some of our sheep has already been carried so far
that it entails great delicacy of constitution. (21/64. Youatt on 'Sheep' page
521.) But seeing the great improvement within recent times in our cattle and
sheep, and especially in our pigs; seeing the wonderful increase in weight in
our poultry of all kinds during the last few years; he would be a bold man who
would assert that perfection has been reached. It has often been said that
Eclipse never was, and never will be, beaten in speed by any other horse; but
on making inquiries I find that the best judges believe that our present
racehorses are fleeter. (21/65. See also Stonehenge 'British Rural Sports'
edition of 1871 page 384.) The attempt to raise a new variety of wheat more
productive than the many old kinds, might have been thought until lately quite
hopeless; but this has been effected by Major Hallett, by careful selection.
With respect to almost all our animals and plants, those who are best
qualified to judge do not believe that the extreme point of perfection has yet
been reached even in the characters which have already been carried to a high
standard. For instance, the short-faced tumbler-pigeon has been greatly
modified; nevertheless, according to Mr. Eaton (21/66. 'A Treatise on the
Almond Tumbler' page 1.) "the field is still as open for fresh competitors as
it was one hundred years ago." Over and over again it has been said that
perfection had been attained with our flowers, but a higher standard has soon
been reached. Hardly any fruit has been more improved than the strawberry, yet
a great authority remarks (21/67. M. J. de Jonghe in 'Gardener's Chronicle'
1858 page 173.), "it must not be concealed that we are far from the extreme
limits at which we may arrive."

No doubt there is a limit beyond which the organisation cannot be modified
compatibly with health or life. The extreme degree of fleetness, for instance,
of which a terrestrial animal is capable, may have been acquired by our
present racehorses; but as Mr. Wallace has well remarked (21/68.
'Contributions to the Theory of Natural Selection' 2nd edition 1871 page
292.), the question that interests us, "is not whether indefinite and
unlimited change in any or all directions is possible, but whether such
differences as do occur in nature could have been produced by the accumulation
of varieties by selection." And in the case of our domestic productions, there
can be no doubt that many parts of the organisation, to which man has
attended, have been thus modified to a greater degree than the corresponding
parts in the natural species of the same genera or even families. We see this
in the form and size of our light and heavy dogs or horses,--in the beak and
many other characters of our pigeons,--in the size and quality of many
fruits,--in comparison with the species belonging to the same natural groups.

Time is an important element in the formation of our domestic races, as it
permits innumerable individuals to be born, and these when exposed to
diversified conditions are rendered variable. Methodical selection has been
occasionally practised from an ancient period to the present day, even by
semi-civilised people, and during former times will have produced some effect.
Unconscious selection will have been still more effective; for during a
lengthened period the more valuable individual animals will occasionally have
been saved, and the less valuable neglected. In the course of time, different
varieties, especially in the less civilised countries, will also have been
more or less modified through natural selection. It is generally believed,
though on this head we have little or no evidence, that new characters in time
become fixed; and after having long remained fixed it seems possible that
under new conditions they might again be rendered variable.

How great the lapse of time has been since man first domesticated animals and
cultivated plants, we begin dimly to see. When the lake-dwellings of
Switzerland were inhabited during the Neolithic period, several animals were
already domesticated and various plants cultivated. The science of language
tells us that the art of ploughing and sowing the land was followed, and the
chief animals had been already domesticated, at an epoch so immensely remote,
that the Sanskrit, Greek, Latin, Gothic, Celtic, and Sclavonic languages had
not as yet diverged from their common parent-tongue. (21/69. Max Muller
'Science of Language' 1861 page 223.)

It is scarcely possible to overrate the effects of selection occasionally
carried on in various ways and places during thousands of generations. All
that we know, and, in a still stronger degree, all that we do not know (21/70.
'Youatt on Cattle' pages 116, 128.), of the history of the great majority of
our breeds, even of our more modern breeds, agrees with the view that their
production, through the action of unconscious and methodical selection, has
been almost insensibly slow. When a man attends rather more closely than is
usual to the breeding of his animals, he is almost sure to improve them to a
slight extent. They are in consequence valued in his immediate neighbourhood,
and are bred by others; and their characteristic features, whatever these may
be, will then slowly but steadily be increased, sometimes by methodical and
almost always by unconscious selection. At last a strain, deserving to be
called a sub-variety, becomes a little more widely known, receives a local
name, and spreads. The spreading will have been extremely slow during ancient
and less civilised times, but now is rapid. By the time that the new breed had
assumed a somewhat distinct character, its history, hardly noticed at the
time, will have been completely forgotten; for, as Low remarks (21/71.
'Domesticated Animals' page 188.), "we know how quickly the memory of such
events is effaced."

As soon as a new breed is thus formed, it is liable through the same process
to break up into new strains and sub-varieties. For different varieties are
suited for, and are valued under, different circumstances. Fashion changes,
but, should a fashion last for even a moderate length of time, so strong is
the principle of inheritance, that some effect will probably be impressed on
the breed. Thus varieties go on increasing in number, and history shows us how
wonderfully they have increased since the earliest records. (21/72. Volz
'Beitrage zur Kulturgeschichte' 1852 s. 99 et passim.) As each new variety is
produced, the earlier, intermediate, and less valuable forms will be
neglected, and perish. When a breed, from not being valued, is kept in small
numbers, its extinction almost inevitably follows sooner or later, either from
accidental causes of destruction or from close interbreeding; and this is an
event which, in the case of well-marked breeds, excites attention. The birth
or production of a new domestic race is so slow a process that it escapes
notice; its death or destruction is comparatively sudden, is often recorded,
and when too late sometimes regretted.

Several authors have drawn a wide distinction between artificial and natural
races. The latter are more uniform in character, possessing in a high degree
the appearance of natural species, and are of ancient origin. They are
generally found in less civilised countries, and have probably been largely
modified by natural selection, and only to a small extent by man's unconscious
and methodical selection. They have, also, during a long period, been directly
acted on by the physical conditions of the countries which they inhabit. The
so-called artificial races, on the other hand, are not so uniform in
character; some have a semi-monstrous character, such as "the wry-legged
terriers so useful in rabbit-shooting" (21/73. Blaine 'Encyclop. of Rural
Sports' page 213.), turnspit dogs, ancon sheep, niata oxen, Polish fowls,
fantail-pigeons, etc.; their characteristic features have generally been
acquired suddenly, though subsequently increased by careful selections in many
cases. Other races, which certainly must be called artificial, for they have
been largely modified by methodical selection and by crossing, as the English
racehorse, terrier-dogs, the English game-cock, Antwerp carrier-pigeons, etc.,
nevertheless cannot be said to have an unnatural appearance; and no distinct
line, as it seems to me, can be drawn between natural and artificial races.

It is not surprising that domestic races should generally present a different
aspect from natural species. Man selects and propagates modifications solely
for his own use or fancy, and not for the creature's own good. His attention
is struck by strongly marked modifications, which have appeared suddenly, due
to some great disturbing cause in the organisation. He attends almost
exclusively to external characters; and when he succeeds in modifying internal
organs,--when for instance he reduces the bones and offal, or loads the
viscera with fat, or gives early maturity, etc.-the chances are strong that he
will at the same time weaken the constitution. On the other hand, when an
animal has to struggle throughout its life with many competitors and enemies,
under circumstances inconceivably complex and liable to change, modifications
of the most varied nature in the internal organs as well as in external
characters, in the functions and mutual relations of parts, will be rigorously
tested, preserved, or rejected. Natural selection often checks man's
comparatively feeble and capricious attempts at improvement; and if it were
not so, the result of his work, and of nature's work, would be even still more
different. Nevertheless, we must not overrate the amount of difference between
natural species and domestic races; the most experienced naturalists have
often disputed whether the latter are descended from one or from several
aboriginal stocks, and this clearly shows that there is no palpable difference
between species and races.

Domestic races propagate their kind far more truly, and endure for munch
longer periods, than most naturalists are willing to admit. Breeders feel no
doubt on this head: ask a man who has long reared Shorthorn or Hereford
cattle, Leicester or Southdown sheep, Spanish or Game poultry, tumbler or
carrier-pigeons, whether these races may not have been derived from common
progenitors, and he will probably laugh you to scorn. The breeder admits that
he may hope to produce sheep with finer or longer wool and with better
carcases, or handsomer fowls, or carrier-pigeons with beaks just perceptibly
longer to the practised eye, and thus be successful at an exhibition. Thus far
he will go, but no farther. He does not reflect on what follows from adding up
during a long course of time many slight, successive modifications; nor does
he reflect on the former existence of numerous varieties, connecting the links
in each divergent line of descent. He concludes, as was shown in the earlier
chapters, that all the chief breeds to which he has long attended are
aboriginal productions. The systematic naturalist, on the other hand, who
generally knows nothing of the art of breeding, who does not pretend to know
how and when the several domestic races were formed, who cannot have seen the
intermediate gradations, for they do not now exist, nevertheless feels no
doubt that these races are sprung from a single source. But ask him whether
the closely allied natural species which he has studied may not have descended
from a common progenitor, and he in his turn will perhaps reject the notion
with scorn. Thus the naturalist and breeder may mutually learn a useful lesson
from each other.

SUMMARY ON SELECTION BY MAN.

There can be no doubt that methodical selection has effected and will effect
wonderful results. It was occasionally practised in ancient times, and is
still practised by semi-civilised people. Characters of the highest
importance, and others of trifling value, have been attended to, and modified.
I need not here repeat what has been so often said on the part which
unconscious selection has played: we see its power in the difference between
flocks which have been separately bred, and in the slow changes, as
circumstances have slowly changed, which many animals have undergone in the
same country, or when transported into a foreign land. We see the combined
effects of methodical and unconscious selection, in the great amount of
difference in those parts or qualities which are valued by man in comparison
with the parts which are not valued, and consequently have not been attended
to. Natural selection often determines man's power of selection. We sometimes
err in imagining that characters, which are considered as unimportant by the
systematic naturalist, could not be affected by the struggle for existence,
and could not be acted on by natural selection; but striking cases have been
given, showing how great an error this is.

The possibility of selection coming into action rests on variability; and this
is mainly caused, as we shall hereafter see, by changes in the conditions of
life. Selection is sometimes rendered difficult, or even impossible, by the
conditions being opposed to the desired character or quality. It is sometimes
checked by the lessened fertility and weakened constitution which follow from
long-continued close interbreeding. That methodical selection may be
successful, the closest attention and discernment, combined with unwearied
patience, are absolutely necessary; and these same qualities, though not
indispensable, are highly serviceable in the case of unconscious selection. It
is almost necessary that a large number of individuals should be reared; for
thus there will be a fair chance of variations of the desired nature arising,
and of every individual with the slightest blemish or in any degree inferior
being freely rejected. Hence length of time is an important element of
success. Thus, also, reproduction at an early age and at short intervals
favours the work. Facility in pairing animals, or their inhabiting a confined
area, is advantageous as a check to free crossing. Whenever and wherever
selection is not practised, distinct races are not formed within the same
country. When any one part of the body or one quality is not attended to, it
remains either unchanged or varies in a fluctuating manner, whilst at the same
time other parts and other qualities may become permanently and greatly
modified. But from the tendency to reversion and to continued variability,
those parts or organs which are now undergoing rapid improvement through
selection, are likewise found to vary much. Consequently highly-bred animals
when neglected soon degenerate; but we have no reason to believe that the
effects of long-continued selection would, if the conditions of life remained
the same, be soon and completely lost.

Man always tends to go to an extreme point in the selection, whether
methodical or unconscious, of all useful and pleasing qualities. This is an
important principle, as it leads to continued divergence, and in some rare
cases to convergence of character. The possibility of continued divergence
rests on the tendency in each part or organ to go on varying in the same
manner in which it has already varied; and that this occurs, is proved by the
steady and gradual improvement of many animals and plants during lengthened
periods. The principle of divergence of character, combined with the neglect
and final extinction of all previous, less-valued, and intermediate varieties,
explains the amount of difference and the distinctness of our several races.
Although we may have reached the utmost limit to which certain characters can
be modified, yet we are far from having reached, as we have good reason to
believe, the limit in the majority of cases. Finally, from the difference
between selection as carried on by man and by nature, we can understand how it
is that domestic races often, though by no means always, differ in general
aspect from closely allied natural species.

Throughout this chapter and elsewhere I have spoken of selection as the
paramount power, yet its action absolutely depends on what we in our ignorance
call spontaneous or accidental variability. Let an architect be compelled to
build an edifice with uncut stones, fallen from a precipice. The shape of each
fragment may be called accidental; yet the shape of each has been determined
by the force of gravity, the nature of the rock, and the slope of the
precipice,--events and circumstances, all of which depend on natural laws; but
there is no relation between these laws and the purpose for which each
fragment is used by the builder. In the same manner the variations of each
creature are determined by fixed and immutable laws; but these bear no
relation to the living structure which is slowly built up through the power of
selection, whether this be natural or artificial selection.

If our architect succeeded in rearing a noble edifice, using the rough wedge-
shaped fragments for the arches, the longer stones for the lintels, and so
forth, we should admire his skill even in a higher degree than if he had used
stones shaped for the purpose. So it is with selection, whether applied by man
or by nature; for although variability is indispensably necessary, yet, when
we look at some highly complex and excellently adapted organism, variability
sinks to a quite subordinate position in importance in comparison with
selection, in the same manner as the shape of each fragment used by our
supposed architect is unimportant in comparison with his skill.


CHAPTER 2.XXII.

CAUSES OF VARIABILITY.

VARIABILITY DOES NOT NECESSARILY ACCOMPANY REPRODUCTION.
CAUSES ASSIGNED BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.
INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES.
VARIABILITY OF EVERY KIND DUE TO CHANGED CONDITIONS OF LIFE.
ON THE NATURE OF SUCH CHANGES.
CLIMATE, FOOD, EXCESS OF NUTRIMENT.
SLIGHT CHANGES SUFFICIENT.
EFFECTS OF GRAFTING ON THE VARIABILITY OF SEEDLING-TREES.
DOMESTIC PRODUCTIONS BECOME HABITUATED TO CHANGED CONDITIONS.
ON THE ACCUMULATIVE ACTION OF CHANGED CONDITIONS.
CLOSE INTERBREEDING AND THE IMAGINATION OF THE MOTHER SUPPOSED TO CAUSE
VARIABILITY.
CROSSING AS A CAUSE OF THE APPEARANCE OF NEW CHARACTERS.
VARIABILITY FROM THE COMMINGLING OF CHARACTERS AND FROM REVERSION.
ON THE MANNER AND PERIOD OF ACTION OF THE CAUSES WHICH EITHER DIRECTLY, OR
INDIRECTLY THROUGH THE REPRODUCTIVE SYSTEM, INDUCE VARIABILITY.

We will now consider, as far as we can, the causes of the almost universal
variability of our domesticated productions. The subject is an obscure one;
but it may be useful to probe our ignorance. Some authors, for instance Dr.
Prosper Lucas, look at variability as a necessary contingent on reproduction,
and as much an aboriginal law as growth or inheritance. Others have of late
encouraged, perhaps unintentionally, this view by speaking of inheritance and
variability as equal and antagonistic principles. Pallas maintained, and he
has had some followers, that variability depends exclusively on the crossing
of primordially distinct forms. Other authors attribute variability to an
excess of food, and with animals to an excess relatively to the amount of
exercise taken, or again to the effects of a more genial climate. That these
causes are all effective is highly probable. But we must, I think, take a
broader view, and conclude that organic beings, when subjected during several
generations to any change whatever in their conditions, tend to vary; the kind
of variation which ensues depending in most cases in a far higher degree on
the nature or constitution of the being, than on the nature of the changed
conditions.

Those authors who believe that it is a law of nature that each individual
should differ in some slight degree from every other, may maintain, apparently
with truth, that this is the fact, not only with all domesticated animals and
cultivated plants, but likewise with all organic beings in a state of nature.
The Laplander by long practice knows and gives a name to each reindeer,
though, as Linnaeus remarks, "to distinguish one from another among such
multitudes was beyond my comprehension, for they were like ants on an
anthill." In Germany shepherds have won wagers by recognising each sheep in a
flock of a hundred, which they had never seen until the previous fortnight.
This power of discrimination, however, is as nothing compared to that which
some florists have acquired. Verlot mentions a gardener who could distinguish
150 kinds of camellia, when not in flower; and it has been positively asserted
that the famous old Dutch florist Voorhelm, who kept above 1200 varieties of
the hyacinth, was hardly ever deceived in knowing each variety by the bulb
alone. Hence we must conclude that the bulbs of the hyacinth and the branches
and leaves of the camellia, though appearing to an unpractised eye absolutely
undistinguishable, yet really differ. (22/1. 'Des Jacinthes' etc. Amsterdam
1768 page 43; Verlot 'Des Varietes' etc. page 86. On the reindeer see Linnaeus
'Tour in Lapland' translated by Sir J.E. Smith volume 1 page 314. The
statement in regard to German shepherds is given on the authority of Dr.
Weinland.)

As Linnaeus has compared the reindeer in number to ants, I may add that each
ant knows its fellow of the same community. Several times I carried ants of
the same species (Formica rufa) from one ant-hill to another, inhabited
apparently by tens of thousands of ants; but the strangers were instantly
detected and killed. I then put some ants taken from a very large nest into a
bottle strongly perfumed with assafoetida, and after an interval of twenty-
four hours returned them to their home; they were at first threatened by their
fellows, but were soon recognised and allowed to pass. Hence each ant
certainly recognised, independently of odour, its fellow; and if all the ants
of the same community have not some countersign or watchword, they must
present to each other's senses some distinguishable character.

The dissimilarity of brothers or sisters of the same family, and of seedlings
from the same capsule, may be in part accounted for by the unequal blending of
the characters of the two parents, and by the more or less complete recovery
through reversion of ancestral characters on either side; but we thus only
push the difficulty further back in time, for what made the parents or their
progenitors different? Hence the belief (22/2. Muller 'Physiology' English
translation, volume 2 page 1662. With respect to the similarity of twins in
constitution, Dr. William Ogle has given me the following extract from
Professor Trousseau's Lectures 'Clinique Medicale' tome 1 page 523, in which a
curious case is recorded:--"J'ai donne mes soins a deux freres jumeaux, tous
deux si extraordinairement ressemblants qu'il m'etait impossible de les
reconnaitre, a moin de les voir l'un a cote de l'autre. Cette ressemblance
physique s'etendait plus loin: ils avaient, permettez-moi l'expression, une
similitude pathologique plus remarquable encore. Ainsi l'un d'eux que je
voyais aux neothermes a Paris malade d'une ophthalmie rhumatismale me disait,
'En ce moment mon frere doit avoir une ophthalmie comme la mienne;' et comme
je m'etais recrie, il me montrait quelques jours apres une lettre qu'il venait
de recevoir de ce frere alors a Vienne, et qui lui ecrivait en effet--'J'ai
mon ophthalmie, tu dois avoir la tienne.' Quelque singulier que ceci puisse
paraitre, le fait n'en est pas moins exact: on ne me l'a pas raconte, je l'ai
vu, et j'en ai vu d'autres analogues dans ma pratique. Ces deux jumeaux
etaient aussi tous deux asthmatiques, et asthmatiques a un effroyable degre.
Originaires de Marseille, ils n'ont jamais pu demeurer dans cette ville, ou
leurs interets les appelaient souvent, sans etre pris de leurs acces; jamais
ils n'en eprouvaient a Paris. Bien mieux, il leur suffisait de gagner Toulon
pour etre gueris de leurs attaques de Marseille. Voyageant sans cesse et dans
tous pays pour leurs affaires, ils avaient remarque que certaines localites
leur etaient funestes, que dans d'autres ils etaient exempts de tout phenomene
d'oppression.") that an innate tendency to vary exists, independently of
external differences, seems at first sight probable. But even the seeds
nurtured in the same capsule are not subjected to absolutely uniform
conditions, as they draw their nourishment from different points; and we shall
see in a future chapter that this difference sometimes suffices to affect the
character of the future plant. The greater dissimilarity of the successive
children of the same family in comparison with twins, which often resemble
each other in external appearance, mental disposition, and constitution, in so
extraordinary a manner, apparently proves that the state of the parents at the
exact period of conception, or the nature of the subsequent embryonic
development, has a direct and powerful influence on the character of the
offspring. Nevertheless, when we reflect on the individual differences between
organic beings in a state of nature, as shown by every wild animal knowing its
mate; and when we reflect on the infinite diversity of the many varieties of
our domesticated productions, we may well be inclined to exclaim, though
falsely as I believe, that Variability must be looked at as an ultimate fact,
necessarily contingent on reproduction.

Those authors who adopt this latter view would probably deny that each
separate variation has its own proper exciting cause. Although we can seldom
trace the precise relation between cause and effect, yet the considerations
presently to be given lead to the conclusion that each modification must have
its own distinct cause, and is not the result of what we blindly call
accident. The following striking case has been communicated to me by Dr.
William Ogle. Two girls, born as twins, and in all respects extremely alike,
had their little fingers on both hands crooked; and in both children the
second bicuspid tooth of the second dentition on the right side in the upper
jaw was misplaced; for, instead of standing in a line with the others, it grew
from the roof of the mouth behind the first bicuspid. Neither the parents nor
any other members of the family were known to have exhibited any similar
peculiarity; but a son of one of these girls had the same tooth similarly
misplaced. Now, as both the girls were affected in exactly the same manner,
the idea of accident is at once excluded: and we are compelled to admit that
there must have existed some precise and sufficient cause which, if it had
occurred a hundred times, would have given crooked fingers and misplaced
bicuspid teeth to a hundred children. It is of course possible that this case
may have been due to reversion to some long-forgotten progenitor, and this
would much weaken the value of the argument. I have been led to think of the
probability of reversion, from having been told by Mr. Galton of another case
of twin girls born with their little fingers slightly crooked, which they
inherited from their maternal grandmother.

We will now consider the general arguments, which appear to me to have great
weight, in favour of the view that variations of all kinds and degrees are
directly or indirectly caused by the conditions of life to which each being,
and more especially its ancestors, have been exposed.

No one doubts that domesticated productions are more variable than organic
beings which have never been removed from their natural conditions.
Monstrosities graduate so insensibly into mere variations that it is
impossible to separate them; and all those who have studied monstrosities
believe that they are far commoner with domesticated than with wild animals
and plants (22/3. Isid. Geoffroy St.-Hilaire 'Hist. des Anomalies' tome 3 page
352; Moquin-Tandon 'Teratologie Vegetale' 1841 page 115.); and in the case of
plants, monstrosities would be equally noticeable in the natural as in the
cultivated state. Under nature, the individuals of the same species are
exposed to nearly uniform conditions, for they are rigorously kept to their
proper places by a host of competing animals and plants; they have, also, long
been habituated to their conditions of life; but it cannot be said that they
are subject to quite uniform conditions, and they are liable to a certain
amount of variation. The circumstances under which our domestic productions
are reared are widely different: they are protected from competition; they
have not only been removed from their natural conditions and often from their
native land, but they are frequently carried from district to district, where
they are treated differently, so that they rarely remain during any
considerable length of time exposed to closely similar conditions. In
conformity with this, all our domesticated productions, with the rarest
exceptions, vary far more than natural species. The hive-bee, which feeds
itself and follows in most respects its natural habits of life, is the least
variable of all domesticated animals, and probably the goose is the next least
variable; but even the goose varies more than almost any wild bird, so that it
cannot be affiliated with perfect certainty to any natural species. Hardly a
single plant can be named, which has long been cultivated and propagated by
seed, that is not highly variable; common rye (Secale cereale) has afforded
fewer and less marked varieties than almost any other cultivated plant (22/4.
Metzger 'Die Getreidarten' 1841 s. 39.); but it may be doubted whether the
variations of this, the least valuable of all our cereals, have been closely
observed.

Bud-variation, which was fully discussed in a former chapter, shows us that
variability may be quite independent of seminal reproduction, and likewise of
reversion to long-lost ancestral characters. No one will maintain that the
sudden appearance of a moss-rose on a Provence-rose is a return to a former
state, for mossiness of the calyx has been observed in no natural species; the
same argument is applicable to variegated and laciniated leaves; nor can the
appearance of nectarines on peach-trees be accounted for on the principle of
reversion. But bud-variations more immediately concern us, as they occur far
more frequently on plants which have been highly cultivated during a length of
time, than on other and less highly cultivated plants; and very few well-
marked instances have been observed with plants growing under strictly natural
conditions. I have given one instance of an ash-tree growing in a gentleman's
pleasure-grounds; and occasionally there may be seen, on beech and other
trees, twigs leafing at a different period from the other branches. But our
forest trees in England can hardly be considered as living under strictly
natural conditions; the seedlings are raised and protected in nursery-grounds,
and must often be transplanted into places where wild trees of the kind would
not naturally grow. It would be esteemed a prodigy if a dog-rose growing in a
hedge produced by bud-variation a moss-rose, or a wild bullace or wild cherry-
tree yielded a branch bearing fruit of a different shape and colour from the
ordinary fruit. The prodigy would be enhanced if these varying branches were
found capable of propagation, not only by grafts, but sometimes by seed; yet
analogous cases have occurred with many of our highly cultivated trees and
herbs.

These several considerations alone render it probable that variability of
every kind is directly or indirectly caused by changed conditions of life. Or,
to put the case under another point of view, if it were possible to expose all
the individuals of a species during many generations to absolutely uniform
conditions of life, there would be no variability.

ON THE NATURE OF THE CHANGES IN THE CONDITIONS OF LIFE WHICH INDUCE
VARIABILITY.

From a remote period to the present day, under climates and circumstances as
different as it is possible to conceive, organic beings of all kinds, when
domesticated or cultivated, have varied. We see this with the many domestic
races of quadrupeds and birds belonging to different orders, with goldfish and
silkworms, with plants of many kinds, raised in various quarters of the world.
In the deserts of northern Africa the date-palm has yielded thirty-eight
varieties; in the fertile plains of India it is notorious how many varieties
of rice and of a host of other plants exist; in a single Polynesian island,
twenty-four varieties of the bread-fruit, the same number of the banana, and
twenty-two varieties of the arum, are cultivated by the natives; the mulberry-
tree in India and Europe has yielded many varieties serving as food for the
silkworm; and in China sixty-three varieties of the bamboo are used for
various domestic purposes. (22/5. On the date-palm see Vogel 'Annals and Mag.
of Nat. Hist.' 1854 page 460. On Indian varieties Dr. F. Hamilton 'Transact.
Linn. Soc.' volume 14 page 296. On the varieties cultivated in Tahiti see Dr.
Bennett in Loudon's 'Mag. of N. Hist.' volume 5 1832 page 484. Also Ellis
'Polynesian Researches' volume 1 pages 370, 375. On twenty varieties of the
Pandanus and other trees in the Marianne Island see 'Hooker's Miscellany'
volume 1 page 308. On the bamboo in China see Huc 'Chinese Empire' volume 2
page 307.) These facts, and innumerable others which could be added, indicate
that a change of almost any kind in the conditions of life suffices to cause
variability--different changes acting on different organisms.

Andrew Knight (22/6. 'Treatise on the Culture of the Apple' etc. page 3.)
attributed the variation of both animals and plants to a more abundant supply
of nourishment, or to a more favourable climate, than that natural to the
species. A more genial climate, however, is far from necessary; the kidney-
bean, which is often injured by our spring frosts, and peaches, which require
the protection of a wall, have varied much in England, as has the orange-tree
in northern Italy, where it is barely able to exist. (22/7. Gallesio 'Teoria
della Riproduzione Veg.' page 125.) Nor can we overlook the fact, though not
immediately connected with our present subject, that the plants and shells of
the Arctic regions are eminently variable. (22/8. See Dr. Hooker's Memoir on
Arctic Plants in 'Linn. Transact.' volume 23 part 2. Mr. Woodward, and a
higher authority cannot be quoted, speaks of the Arctic mollusca in his
'Rudimentary Treatise' 1856 page 355 as remarkably subject to variation.)
Moreover, it does not appear that a change of climate, whether more or less
genial, is one of the most potent causes of variability; for in regard to
plants Alph. De Candolle, in his 'Geographie Botanique' repeatedly shows that
the native country of a plant, where in most cases it has been longest
cultivated, is that where it has yielded the greatest number of varieties.

It is doubtful whether a change in the nature of the food is a potent cause of
variability. Scarcely any domesticated animal has varied more than the pigeon
or the fowl, but their food, especially that of highly-bred pigeons, is
generally the same. Nor can our cattle and sheep have been subjected to any
great change in this respect. But in all these cases the food probably is much
less varied in kind than that which was consumed by the species in its natural
state. (22/9. Bechstein in his 'Naturgeschichte der Stubenvogel' 1840 s. 238,
has some good remarks on this subject. He states that his canary-birds varied
in colour, though kept on uniform food.)

Of all the causes which induce variability, excess of food, whether or not
changed in nature, is probably the most powerful. This view was held with
regard to plants by Andrew Knight, and is now held by Schleiden, more
especially in reference to the inorganic elements of the food. (22/10. 'The
Plant' by Schleiden translated by Henfrey 1848 page 169. See also Alex. Braun
in 'Bot. Memoirs' Ray Soc. 1853 page 313.) In order to give a plant more food
it suffices in most cases to grow it separately, and thus prevent other plants
robbing its roots. It is surprising, as I have often seen, how vigorously our
common wild species flourish when planted by themselves, though not in highly
manured land; separate growth is, in fact, the first step in cultivation. We
see the converse of the belief that excess of food induces variability in the
following statement by a great raiser of seeds of all kinds (22/11. Messrs.
Hardy and Son of Maldon in 'Gardener's Chronicle' 1856 page 458. Carriere
'Production et Fixation des Varietes' 1865 page 31.): "It is a rule invariably
with us, when we desire to keep a true stock of any one kind of seed, to grow
it on poor land without dung; but when we grow for quantity, we act contrary,
and sometimes have dearly to repent of it." According also to Carriere, who
has had great experience with flower-garden seeds, "On remarque en general les
plantes de vigeur moyenne sont celles qui conservent le mieux leurs
caracteres."

In the case of animals the want of a proper amount of exercise, as Bechstein
remarked, has perhaps played, independently of the direct effects of the
disuse of any particular organ, an important part in causing variability. We
can see in a vague manner that, when the organised and nutrient fluids of the
body are not used during growth, or by the wear and tear of the tissues, they
will be in excess; and as growth, nutrition, and reproduction are intimately
allied processes, this superfluity might disturb the due and proper action of
the reproductive organs, and consequently affect the character of the future
offspring. But it may be argued that neither an excess of food nor a
superfluity in the organised fluids of the body necessarily induces
variability. The goose and the turkey have been well fed for many generations,
yet have varied very little. Our fruit-trees and culinary plants, which are so
variable, have been cultivated from an ancient period, and, though they
probably still receive more nutriment than in their natural state, yet they
must have received during many generations nearly the same amount; and it
might be thought that they would have become habituated to the excess.
Nevertheless, on the whole, Knight's view, that excess of food is one of the
most potent causes of variability, appears, as far as I can judge, probable.

Whether or not our various cultivated plants have received nutriment in
excess, all have been exposed to changes of various kinds. Fruit-trees are
grafted on different stocks, and grown in various soils. The seeds of culinary
and agricultural plants are carried from place to place; and during the last
century the rotation of our crops and the manures used have been greatly
changed.

Slight changes of treatment often suffice to induce variability. The simple
fact of almost all our cultivated plants and domesticated animals having
varied in all places and at all times, leads to this conclusion. Seeds taken
from common English forest-trees, grown under their native climate, not highly
manured or otherwise artificially treated, yield seedlings which vary much, as
may be seen in every extensive seed-bed. I have shown in a former chapter what
a number of well-marked and singular varieties the thorn (Crataegus oxycantha)
has produced: yet this tree has been subjected to hardly any cultivation. In
Staffordshire I carefully examined a large number of two British plants,
namely Geranium phaeum and pyrenaicum, which have never been highly
cultivated. These plants had spread spontaneously by seed from a common garden
into an open plantation; and the seedlings varied in almost every single
character, both in their flower and foliage, to a degree which I have never
seen exceeded; yet they could not have been exposed to any great change in
their conditions.

With respect to animals, Azara has remarked with much surprise (22/12.
'Quadrupedes du Paraguay' 1801 tome 2 page 319.) that, whilst the feral horses
on the Pampas are always of one of three colours, and the cattle always of a
uniform colour, yet these animals, when bred on the unenclosed estancias,
though kept in a state which can hardly be called domesticated, and apparently
exposed to almost identically the same conditions as when they are feral,
nevertheless display a great diversity of colour. So again in India several
species of fresh-water fish are only so far treated artificially, that they
are reared in great tanks; but this small change is sufficient to induce much
variability. (22/13. M'Clelland on Indian Cyprinidae 'Asiatic Researches'
volume 19 part 2 1839 pages 266, 268, 313.)

Some facts on the effects of grafting, in regard to the variability of trees,
deserve attention. Cabanis asserts that when certain pears are grafted on the
quince, their seeds yield a greater number of varieties than do the seeds of
the same variety of pear when grafted on the wild pear. (22/14. Quoted by
Sageret 'Pom. Phys.' 1830 page 43. This statement, however, is not believed by
Decaisne.) But as the pear and quince are distinct species, though so closely
related that the one can be readily grafted and succeeds admirably on the
other, the fact of variability being thus caused is not surprising; as we are
here enabled to see the cause, namely, the very different nature of the stock
and graft. Several North American varieties of the plum and peach are well
known to reproduce themselves truly by seed; but Downing asserts (22/15. 'The
Fruits of America' 1845 page 5.), "that when a graft is taken from one of
these trees and placed upon another stock, this grafted tree is found to lose
its singular property of producing the same variety by seed, and becomes like
all other worked trees;"--that is, its seedlings become highly variable.
Another case is worth giving: the Lalande variety of the walnut-tree leafs
between April 20th and May 15th, and its seedlings invariably inherit the same
habit; whilst several other varieties of the walnut leaf in June. Now, if
seedlings are raised from the May-leafing Lalande variety, grafted on another
May-leafing variety, though both stock and graft have the same early habit of
leafing, yet the seedlings leaf at various times, even as late as the 5th of
June. (22/16. M. Cardan in 'Comptes Rendus' December 1848 quoted in
'Gardener's Chronicle' 1849 page 101.) Such facts as these are well fitted to
show on what obscure and slight causes variability depends.

[I may here just allude to the appearance of new and valuable varieties of
fruit-trees and of wheat in woods and waste places, which at first sight seems
a most anomalous circumstance. In France a considerable number of the best
pears have been discovered in woods; and this has occurred so frequently, that
Poiteau asserts that "improved varieties of our cultivated fruits rarely
originate with nurserymen." (22/17. M. Alexis Jordan mentions four excellent
pears found in woods in France, and alludes to others ('Mem. Acad. de Lyon'
tome 2 1852 page 159). Poiteau's remark is quoted in 'Gardener's Mag.' volume
4 1828 page 385. See 'Gardener's Chronicle' 1862 page 335, for another case of
a new variety of the pear found in a hedge in France. Also for another case,
see Loudon's 'Encyclop. of Gardening' page 901. Mr. Rivers has given me
similar information.) In England, on the other hand, no instance of a good
pear having been found wild has been recorded; and Mr. Rivers informs me that
he knows of only one instance with apples, namely, the Bess Poole, which was
discovered in a wood in Nottinghamshire. This difference between the two
countries may be in part accounted for by the more favourable climate of
France, but chiefly from the great number of seedlings which spring up there
in the woods. I infer that this is the case from a remark made by a French
gardener (22/18. Duval 'Hist. du Poirier' 1849 page 2.), who regards it as a
national calamity that such a number of pear-trees are periodically cut down
for firewood, before they have borne fruit. The new varieties which thus
spring up in the woods, though they cannot have received any excess of
nutriment, will have been exposed to abruptly changed conditions, but whether
this is the cause of their production is very doubtful. These varieties,
however, are probably all descended (22/19. I infer that this is the fact from
Van Mons' statement ('Arbres Fruitiers' 1835 tome 1 page 446) that he finds
in the woods seedlings resembling all the chief cultivated races of both the
pear and apple. Van Mons, however, looked at these wild varieties as
aboriginal species.) from old cultivated kinds growing in adjoining orchards--
a circumstance which will account for their variability; and out of a vast
number of varying trees there will always be a good chance of the appearance
of a valuable kind. In North America, where fruit-trees frequently spring up
