"I do mean to stay just as long as you are good."

"Then, gracious me!" said Irene, "that won't be for long; because the
utmost I can be good for is five minutes at a time. You see, I never was
good at all--I never attempted to be--so it didn't enter into my
calculations, and now to suddenly turn into a model of all the virtues
is more than I can do even for your sake."

"I do not expect impossibilities. I only want you to try."

"Well, you are not so precious good yourself."

"I'm not at all good. We'll try to be good together."

"It will be fun our both trying," said Irene, looking at her with a
comical expression. "How are we to begin? Shall we do penance like the
old monks? Do you know, Rosamund"--here Irene linked her thin, almost
steel-like little hand inside Rosamund's arm--"that I am a most
voracious reader? Father was a great collector of books, and when I am
tired of frightening the servants, and terrifying Frosty, and annoying
mother, I spend days at a time in his library swallowing down the
contents of his books. There is no other word for it. So I know odds and
ends of all sorts of things."

"You must know things properly henceforth. But what was that you said
about penance?"

"Do you want us to do penance for our sins? The monks were very fond of
standing out in the cold in their night-shirts. Do you want us both to
do that to-night? It will terrify mother, and the servants will think we
are a pair of ghosts. I should rather enjoy that."

"I don't want anything silly of that sort. Come along now, Irene. The
very first thing you have got to do is to beg Miss Frost's pardon."

"I beg Frosty's pardon! But she is in bed. She says they are running up
and down inside her."

"You know you were exceedingly cruel. It was a very low sort of trick
to play. I can understand a girl being wild and doing all sorts of
things that perhaps she ought not to do, and even neglecting her
lessons; but to terrify a poor, harmless governess! And you have
terrified more than one. You'll have to drop that sort of thing now,
Irene."

"It strikes me you are a poor sort after all," said Irene, gazing at
Rosamund attentively.

"Well, whether I am poor or not, I'm going to stay with you for a bit,
and if you get any better I'll stay on; but if you get no better I shall
go straight home to mother, for you will be hopeless. There now, you
know."

"Oh, it is so delightful to have you! You don't know what you are to me.
The courageous way you speak! I don't believe you'd be a bit afraid if I
put a frog on your neck."

By almost sleight-of-hand Irene suited the deed to the word, for a cold
frog of enormous size suddenly began to crawl along Rosamund's neck.
Rosamund suppressed a shudder, for she would not for the world show the
girl that she loathed frogs; but she took the creature and laid it
gently on the ground.

"That is very silly," she said. "You are not to do it again."

"I am not to do it again?"

"No; not to me or to any one else."

"I thought I'd put a small toad just inside the teapot for James when he
was going to make the tea this afternoon, for it would jump up and
finish that affair of the wasps and spiders that occurred this morning."

"You are not to do it. It is ridiculous; there's neither sense nor fun
nor anything else in it. It is downright, positive cruelty. You make
your mother's life wretched, and you make the servants miserable. As to
poor Miss Frost--oh, you can go to see her or not, just as you please. I
am going into her room now."

"Are you indeed? But why should you take any interest in Frosty?"

"Because you are so unkind to her, and I want her to know that I at
least am going to be her friend."

"Oh, dear, dear Rosamund, I do so earnestly want her to go! She doesn't
suit me a bit. Can't you teach me instead? I'd learn from you."

"I don't know enough. I want to be taught myself. Miss Frost needn't
teach you unless you like, but she shall teach me. I can't give up all
my education even for you. Perhaps you understand that."

"I do--I do; but I am sure you know a great deal more than is good for
you."

"Don't be silly, Irene. Now, I am going to see Miss Frost. You ought to
come with me to beg her pardon; but perhaps when she is well enough to
be up you will do so."

"You won't be long with her, will you?"

"If you will promise to beg her pardon at tea-time I won't stay long."

"I will, for I want us to go out in the boat, and I want to show you my
pony, and to try to get you to ride him. I don't believe you will be
able to conquer him. He'll stand no one but me. His name is Billy Boy,
and I have made him as wild and vicious as ever I could; but he is like
a lamb with me."

"Then you propose that he should throw me, and perhaps kill me? Thank
you very much, Irene."

"Oh, I don't propose that really; only, you see, one must have larks.
One couldn't live without them. I don't think there is anything quite so
larky as frightening people."

"Now, once for all, Irene, if that is your idea of life, I will write
at once to mother and tell her I am coming home."

"No, you won't. I won't let you. I love you. I will try to be a little
bit good just to please you. I will say something to Frosty at tea-time.
Oh! don't ask me any more."

Irene's queer eyes filled suddenly with tears. Rosamund saw that she was
touched.

"Run away and do what you like. I don't want to be long with Miss Frost;
but I am going to her now."

Rosamund entered the house. She was met in the hall by James.

"I am so sorry, James," she said, taking the initiative at once, "that
you were so frightened this morning by Miss Irene. She is a friend of
mine, and I have made up my mind to come and stay here for the present.
Will you please tell the other servants, and remember yourself, that I
shall do my utmost to prevent the sort of things occurring which have
made you all so uncomfortable? I think you will soon see that Miss Irene
has as kind a heart as any other girl."

"I'm sure, miss," said James, almost whimpering, "the trouble I've had
already, and the anxiety and worry, not to speak of the pain, miss. Them
wasps, their sting is very sharp, and even my lady's blue-bag did not
remove them at once. And then the show I am, miss, in this respectable
house! But that is nothing to what poor cook felt when the toad poisoned
the bread. And there was Mary Ann, the second housemaid; Miss Irene
caught her and put two spiders down her back. Mary Ann has such a horror
of spiders as never was! Then, worst of all, there's poor Miss Frost,
such a patient lady, and she has swallowed insects instead of pills.
It's too awful to contemplate."

"It is very bad, but it won't happen again--at least I don't think so,"
said Rosamund. "Now, I want to see Miss Frost. Can you direct me to her
room?"

James took upon himself to perform this office, and in a few minutes'
time Rosamund was knocking at the door of Miss Frost's room. A very
feeble, timid, suffering voice said:

"Who is there?" Then the voice continued, "If it is you, Irene, the door
is bolted, and the blinds are down, and the shutters shut, so even if
you break the glass you cannot get in."

"It is not Irene. It is I, Rosamund Cunliffe. I want most particularly
to see you, Miss Frost."

Whereupon Miss Frost was heard getting out of bed and coming towards the
door. She was a very cadaverous-looking person, about forty years of
age, thin to emaciation, with small, light, frightened-looking eyes, a
long upper lip, and a great many freckles on her face. Her hair was thin
and dark, and was strained back from a lofty forehead. The moment
Rosamund saw her she took her hand.

"Please don't keep the door locked," she said. "And please unbar the
shutters and draw up the blinds, for it is a lovely summer's day, and
Irene won't do you any harm. I want to talk to you. May I?"

"I don't believe, my dear young friend," said Miss Frost, "that I am
long for this world. I feel those dreadful things even now creeping up
and down. The doctor says they are dead; but how can he look inside me?
I know they are alive. I know they are."

"I don't think they could be alive," said Rosamund. "I heard of that
trick being played on some one once before, and nothing whatever
happened, and I can assure you the person is quite well, and when the
fright was got over the whole thing was forgotten."

"Are you sure?"

"Positive."

"Oh, I have lived through such a morning of agony!"

"You must forget your agony now."

"But how am I to endure that child?"

"Will you lie down again on your bed and let me talk to you for a minute
or two?"

As Rosamund spoke she took the cold hand of the governess, led her to
the bed, made her lie down, and covered her up. Then she drew a chair
forward, and, still retaining her hand, she began to speak.

"I know quite well all that you would say about Irene; but please don't
say it. I have come here contrary to rules, and at some trouble to
myself, but also with my mother's approval, to be Irene's friend and
guest for a time. You are all very much afraid of her. Yes, you are,
from Lady Jane to the lowest servant in the place, and it is because you
are afraid of her that she is so exceedingly naughty. Now, it so happens
that I am not a scrap afraid of her, therefore I have some influence
over her, and I know positively that she will not play any of her horrid
tricks upon you again. For the moment she does so I shall leave her, and
she doesn't wish me to do that. Therefore you needn't be at all afraid.
What has happened gave you a nasty turn; but there, that's the end of
it! You will get up, won't you, and come down to tea? I think perhaps
Irene will be a little nicer to you. And to-morrow, or the next day, or
whenever we are to begin, I want to know if you will teach me as well as
Irene. I also want us to know other girls, and to have a good time all
round. For Irene is only a young savage at present; but she has a warm
heart, and I do believe that I can touch it."

"My dear," said Miss Frost when Rosamund had done speaking, "may I ask
how old you are?"

"I am fifteen."

"Then you are three years older than the terrible Irene."

"Three years older, and I hope three years wiser."

"A thousand years wiser, my dear--quite a thousand years wiser. You
don't know what I have suffered; and I am not the only one. Her one
object in life when each new governess comes is to get rid of that
governess. But I have a little brother and sister both dependent on me
altogether for their daily bread, and Lady Jane gives me one hundred and
fifty pounds a year, a very large sum for a governess who is not
certificated. I simply daren't give it up. I try to, for I often feel
that I must. Even the children do not seem worth the agonies I undergo.
But then again I struggled on until now."

"You will have no more struggling, and if you teach me as well as Irene
I know mother will pay you something, so your people will be better off
than ever," said Rosamund in her cheerful voice. "Now cheer up. You have
nothing to fear. Try to be courageous, and when you speak to the
servants, get them to be courageous too. You have all let Irene get the
upper hand of you, and it is exceedingly bad for her. Now, I promised to
join her; but you will be with us at tea-time, won't you?"

"I will. You have put great heart into me. What a wonderful girl you
are! When I saw you on Sunday I thought how remarkable you were, and now
that you have spoken I see it more than ever."

"Perhaps you know what has happened at Sunnyside?"

"What is that, dear?"

"My own special friend, Jane Denton, is dangerously ill with diphtheria.
I do not know if she will ever be better."

"Then is there any fear?" said Miss Frost.

"You mean of your taking it?"

"Oh, no, I don't mind for myself a scrap. I am not afraid of illness,
and I had diphtheria when I was young, and people don't often have it
twice; but it is that child--that queer child."

"I cannot give it to her," said Rosamund. "If she takes it she must have
contracted the infection herself, owing to----But there, I won't say any
more. Let us hope for the best. I must go to her now, however."




CHAPTER XIII.

IN ANOTHER DRESS.


When Rosamund went out, feeling both flushed and tired, she saw Irene
waiting for her. She wore her favorite red dress, which was exceedingly
shabby and by no means becoming. Rosamund felt just like St. George when
he was about to slay the dragon. Irene at the present moment was the
dragon. That dreadful part of her which was such a nuisance to her
neighbors must be kept under by a firm hand. One person at least must
have complete control of her.

"There you are!" said Irene, dancing up to her friend. "Oh, it is nice
to see you, and how sweet you look! Do you know, I never noticed
people's looks before. I always said to myself, 'They are all exactly
alike--a pair of eyes, a nose, a mouth, a chin of sorts, eyebrows
indifferent or not, hair dark or fair.' Oh, they're all alike--at least
that is what I did think. Now I see you, there seems a difference."

"I hope I haven't got three eyes or two noses, or anything of that sort,
to make you single me out for special observation."

"Oh, it isn't your features a bit--it's your way. You are different, and
I like you."

"Do you know, Irene," said Rosamund very slowly and emphatically, and
taking the little girl's thin hand as she spoke, "that you are the most
wonderfully beautiful girl I have ever seen?"

"Am I?" said Irene, and a new light sparkled in her eyes. "People have
always spoken of me as a horror, a terror, a nuisance, the wildest and
most awful creature on earth. But if I am so pretty"----

"You could be lovely," said Rosamund. "I must say that red dress is
rather trying, but your face is exquisite. Now, what do you say to going
into the house and going quietly up to your own room? I will come with
you and help you to choose another frock, which I think will make you
look more beautiful than ever. Just let me dress you as I like for
once."

"I trust it won't be tight, or too long," said Irene.

"I am sure you have abundance of frocks."

"I don't know. I dare say I have. I believe there is a wardrobe full;
but I prefer my red dress because it annoys mother. When one is worn
out, I ask for another made just on the same pattern, and just because
they all hate it so."

"But you will change it for me. Come at once, Irene."

Rosamund took her friend's hand and led her upstairs to her room. Now,
Irene's bedroom was not at all an attractive place to go into. In itself
it was an exceedingly large and airy apartment, and the furniture was
excellent. But the small bed was drawn up close to the window, and was
more cot than bed, having iron bars all round it. Near the bed were
several jars and basins containing toads and frogs and newts and water
creatures of all sorts. Besides these, there was a box of caterpillars,
most of which had escaped, and on the mantelpiece Irene proudly pointed
to a bottle of leeches.

"I bought them, for a pound that I had given to me, from a chemist; and
when any of the servants are quite determined to stick in the place I
let the leeches loose, and that generally sends the housemaids away. I
wouldn't part with my darling leeches for all the world. Do you see how
they are dancing now? That means rain. When they lie quite sullen at the
bottom of the glass, then I know we are going to have fine weather.
That one on the stalk--do you see how he is wriggling, poor sweet
pet?--that one I call Fuzz, and this one at the bottom of the glass is
Buzz. Then there are their children, Thunder and Lightning, and the
little Stars. The Stars are the tiny ones. I manage them myself. I love
them better than any of my pets. Would you like me to take them out?
You'll see how they crawl about on the floor; only they get rather
dusty. Do you mind?"

"Not in the very least," said Rosamund.

"Well, you have spunk! You know, if you annoy me in any way, I should
think nothing of putting either Fuzz or Buzz into your bed."

"Then I should leave the next day, that's all," replied Rosamund in a
calm voice. "I shouldn't be afraid; but I should simply go. If you want
me to be your friend you must not play tricks of that sort. But we
needn't talk any more about leeches now. They seem happy and well. Let
me see what dresses you have."

Rosamund herself opened the wardrobe and took out a quantity of
beautiful dresses of all sorts and descriptions, mostly white washing
silks and muslins and cambrics. She chose a neat white cambric, and
insisted on Irene putting it on. She fastened it on the little girl
herself, and saw that it fitted her perfectly. She then brushed her hair
and made her wash her hands, which this wild tomboy strongly objected
to. But Rosamund was firm.

"I hope you're not always going to be like this," said Irene, stamping
her foot.

"Oh, dear, no! because soon you will do it for its own sake. Now, here's
