
"I can't understand why Lannes should have wanted her to come to such an
exposed place," he said. "But youth is daring and doesn't always count
the risks."

Youth _was_ daring and John resolved that he would help to prove it.

"General," he said, "could I ask your aid in a little matter that
concerns me?"

"If it is not to betray our army to the Germans I think you can."

"I want you to help me to become a spy. I'll make the request to Captain
Colton, and then, if it's indorsed, I'll go eastward and see what I can
find out about the Germans."

"But I understood that she was not a German."

John reddened from brow to chin.

"I admit that much," he said, "but at the same time I intend to serve
France all I can. I might be of more help that way than as a mere minor
officer in the trenches."

"If you're successful, yes; if caught, all's lost. Hard trade, that of
spy."

"But I want to go, sir. I never wanted to do anything so much before in
my life. You'll help me, won't you?"

"But how can you go among the Germans? Your German is not the best in
the world."

"It's better than you think. I've been devoting most of my leisure to
the study of it in the last six months. Besides there are subjects of
Germany who do not speak German at all. I shall claim to be a native of
French Lorraine. I learned French in my infancy and I speak it not like
an American or an Englishman but like a Frenchman."

"That helps a lot. What's to be your new name?"

It was not a matter to which John had given any thought, but as he
glanced at the ruined town the question solved itself.

"Chastel, Castel," he said. "I shall drop the 'h' and call myself Jean
Louis Castel, born in French Lorraine in 1893, after that region had
enjoyed for more than twenty years the glorious benefits of German
military rule."

"Very well," said the General. "Now go and see Captain Colton."

Captain Colton's lips twisted into a crooked smile when he heard John.
His glance was a mingling of sympathy and apprehension. He knew the
great dangers of the quest, but he liked John Scott and he could
understand.

"John," he said, calling him by his first name, "I would not send
anybody upon such an errand as yours. You recognize the fact that the
chances are about ten to one you'll find a bullet at the end of your
search."

"I think I'll get through."

"It's a good thing to hope. I think I can procure this commission for
you from General Vaugirard. But we'll go to him at once. We'll not let
the grass grow--or rather, the snow melt under our feet while we're
about it."

John did not tell him that he had already spoken to the general, as he
wished the whole proceeding to be in perfect order.

General Vaugirard was by a fire which had been built in the Place near
the shattered fountain. Wrapped in a huge overcoat he looked truly
gigantic as he walked up and down thinking.

"Let me speak with him first," said Captain Colton.

John held back and saw the two talk together earnestly a minute or two.
Then the big general beckoned to him and as John approached he said:

"The request that you have made through Captain Colton is granted. In a
war like this is may be the good fortune of a spy to render a very great
service."

John bowed.

"Thank you, sir," he said simply.

"I understand that you wish to start at once," continued the general.
"Dress like a peasant, and look with all your eyes and listen with all
your ears. And don't forget while you're seeking the enemy's secrets
that all France loves a lover."

John flushed a deep red, and Vaugirard and Colton laughed. The general
put his hand in the most kindly fashion upon John's shoulder.

"You are one of the bravest of my children," he said, "and I have an
affection for thee, thou stalwart American youth. See to it that thou
comest back again. Thy hand, Monsieur Jean Castel, for such, I hear, is
to be your name."

John's hand was engulfed in the huge palm. General Vaugirard gave it a
great shake and turned away. Then John and Captain Colton walked back to
the place that had been allotted to the Strangers, where it soon became
known to Wharton and Carstairs that their comrade would depart that
night upon a quest, seemingly hopeless. They drew John aside:

"Scott," said Carstairs, "are you really going? It's certain death, you
know."

"A German bullet or a German rope," said Wharton, "and you'll never be
seen or heard of again. It's an ignominious end."

"As surely as the night comes I'm going," replied John to both
questions. "I understand the risks and I take them."

"I knew the answer before I asked you," said Carstairs. "You Americans
are really our children, though sometimes you're not very respectful to
your parents. They call us prosaic, but I think we're really the most
romantic of the races."

"It's proved," said Wharton, "when sober fellows like Scott go away on
such errands. I think you'll win through, Scott, in the way you wish."

John knew that the good wishes of these two friends, so undemonstrative
and so true, would follow him all the time and he choked a little. But
when the lump in his throat was gone he spoke casually, as if he were
not venturing into a region that was sown thick and deep with dragon's
teeth.

At the advice of Captain Colton he slept several hours more that
afternoon, and in the darkest part of the night, clothed simply like a
peasant, but carrying a passport that would take him through the French
lines, he said good-by to his friends, and, taking his life in his
hands, departed upon his mission. Lest he be taken for a _franc-tireur_
he was entirely unarmed, and he wore a thick blue blouse, gray trousers
equally thick, and heavy boots. He also carried, carefully concealed
about his person, a supply of gold and German notes, although there
would not be much use for money in that region of the dragon's teeth
into which he was venturing.

He re-crossed the little river on the same high-arched bridge by which
he had come, skirted the hospital camp, and then bore off toward the
east. It was past midnight, the skies were free from snow, but there
were many low, hovering clouds which suited his purpose. He was still
back of the French lines, but his pass would take him through them at
any time he wished. The problem was how to pass those of Germany, and
the difficulty was very great, because for a long distance here the
hostile trenches were only three or four hundred yards apart.

He discerned to the eastward a dim line of hills which, as he knew, rose
farther on into mountains, and it occurred to him that he might find it
easier to get through in rough country than in the region of low,
rounded hills, where he now stood. He carried a knapsack, well filled
with food, a blanket roll, and now he resolved to push on all night and
most of the following day, before passing the French lines.

Keeping a watchful eye he pursued his steady course across the hills.
The depth of the snow impeded speed, but action kept his heart strong.
The terrible waiting was over, he was at least trying to do something.
Fresh interests sprang up also. It was a strange, white, misty world
upon which he looked. He traveled through utter desolation, but to the
east, inclining to the north was a limitless double line, which now and
then broke into flashes of flame, while from points further back came
that mutter of the big guns like the groanings of huge, primeval
monsters.

It seemed to John barbarous and savage to the last degree. He knew that
he was in one of the most densely populated and highly cultivated
portions of the world, but the dragon's teeth were coming up more
thickly even than in the time of old Cadmus.

He walked until it was almost morning without seeing a human being, and
then, the snow having dragged on him so heavily, he felt that he must
take rest. Crawling into a hole in the snow that he scraped out under a
ledge, he folded himself between his blankets and went to steep.




CHAPTER VII

THE PURSUIT


John Scott would not perhaps have slept so well in a hole in the snow if
he had not been inured to life in a trench, reeking in turn with mud,
slush, ice and water. His present quarters were a vast improvement, dry
and warm with the aid of the blankets, and he had crisp fresh air in
abundance to breathe. Hence in such a place in the Inn of the Hedge and
the Snow he slept longer than he had intended.

His will to awake at the rising of the sun was not sufficient. The
soothing influence of warmth and the first real physical relaxation that
he had enjoyed in three or four days overpowered his senses, and kept
him slumbering on peacefully long after the early silver of the rising
sun had turned to gold on the snow.

He had dug so deep a hole and he lay so close under the hedge that even
a vigilant scout looking for an enemy might have passed within a dozen
feet of him without seeing him. Another drift of snow falling after he
had gone to sleep had covered up his footsteps and he was as securely
hidden as if he had been a hundred miles, instead of only a scant two
miles, from the double French and German line.

No human being noticed his presence. A small brown bird, much like the
snowbird of his own land, hopped near, detected the human presence and
then hopped deliberately away. Nobody was in the snowy fields. They were
within range of the great German guns, and the peasants were gone. Had
John been willing to search longer he could easily have found an
abandoned house for shelter. As he had made mental notes before, Europe
was now full of abandoned houses. In some regions rents must be
extraordinarily low.

While he slept, firing was resumed at points on the long double line.
Rifles flashed, and incautious heads or hands were struck, and somewhere
or other the cannon were always muttering. But it was all in the day's
work. Months of it had made his whole system physical and mental so used
to it that it did not awaken him now.

Nevertheless the hosts of the air were uncommonly active while he slept.
The wireless, sputtering and crackling, was carrying the news from
general to general that a smart little action had been fought at
Chastel, where another smart little action had been fought not long
before, that the Germans had been overly daring and had paid for it.

Yet it was only an incident on a gigantic battle front that extended its
mighty curving line from Switzerland to the sea, and soon the wireless
and its older brother the telephone, and its oldest brother the
telegraph, talked of other plans which would cause a much greater
slaughter than at Chastel. Chastel itself, unless its beautiful Gothic
cathedral brooding unharmed over the ruins could win it a word or two,
would have no place at all in history. John himself was only one among
eight or ten million armed men, and not a single one of all those
millions knew that he lay there in the snow under the hedge.

The aeroplanes came out in the clear frosty blue, and both German and
French machines sauntered lazily up and down the air lanes, but they did
not risk encounters with one another. They were scouting with powerful
glasses, or directing the fire of the batteries. One French machine
circled directly over John, not more than two or three hundred feet
away, but the man in it, keen of eye though he was, did not dream that
one of the bravest of the Strangers lay asleep under the hedge beneath
him.

The fleets of flyers were larger than usual, as if they were anxious to
take the fresh air, after days of storm. But the most daring and
skillful of all the airmen, Philip Lannes, was not there. He still lay
in a hospital a hundred miles to the west, with a bullet wound in his
shoulder, and while the time was to come when the _Arrow_ under his
practiced hand would once more be queen of the heavens, it was yet many
days away.

The sun rose higher, suffusing the frosty blue heavens with a luminous
golden glow, but John slept heavily on. He had not known how near to
exhaustion was his nervous system. Perhaps it was less physical
exhaustion than emotion, which can make huge drains upon the system. Now
he was in the keeping of nature which was restoring all his powers of
both mind and body, and keeping him there until he should again have all
his strength and all the keenness of his faculties, needful for the
great work that lay before him.

It was halfway toward noon when he awakened, remembered dimly in the
first instant, and then comprehending everything in the second. He
unrolled the blankets, slipped out of his lair and knew by the height of
the sun that he had slept far beyond the time appointed for himself. But
he did not worry over it. Barring a little stiffness, which he removed
by flexing and tensing his muscles, he felt very strong and capable. The
fresh air pouring into his lungs was so different from the corruption of
the trenches that he seemed to be raised upon wings.

He resumed his walk toward the hills, and ate breakfast from his
knapsack as he went along. Presently he noticed a large aeroplane
circling over his head, and he felt sure that it was observing him. It
was bound to be French or other French machines would attack it, and,
after one glance, he walked slowly on. The machine followed him. He did
not look up again, but he saw a great shadow on the snow that moved with
his.

The knowledge that he was being watched and followed even by one of his
own army was uncomfortable, and he felt a sensation of relief when he
heard a swish and a swoop and the aeroplane alighted on the snow beside
him. The man in the machine stepped out and asked:

"Who are you and where are you going?"

John did not altogether like his manner, which in his own idiom he
styled "fresh."

"I've a name," he replied, "but it's none of your business, and I'm
going somewhere, but that's none of your business either."

"They're both my business," said the man, drawing a revolver.

"Read that," said John, producing his passport.

The document stated simply that Jean Castel was engaged upon an
important mission for France, and all were commanded to give him what
help they could. It was signed by the fat and famous general of brigade,
Vaugirard, and therefore it was a significant document.

"I apologize for brusqueness," said the aviator handsomely, "but the
times are such that we forget our politeness. What can I do for you,
Monsieur Jean Castel, who I am sure has another and more rightful name
at other times."

"Just now Castel is my right name, and all friends of mine will call me
by it. Thank you for your offer, but you can do nothing--"

John stopped suddenly as he glanced at the aeroplane poised like a huge
bird in the snow.

"Yes, you can do something," he said. "I notice that your plane is big
enough for two. I want to reach the mountains to the eastward without
all this tremendous toiling through the snow. You can carry me there in
an hour or two, and besides this passport I give you a password."

"What's the password?"

"Lannes!"

"Lannes! Philip Lannes, do you know him?"

"I have been up with him in the _Arrow_ many times. I've fought the
Taubes with him. I helped him destroy both a Zeppelin and a
forty-two-centimeter gun."

"Then I know you. You are his friend John Scott, the American. I thought
at first that you had the accent of North America. Oh, I know of you! We
flying men are a close group, and what happens to one of us is not
hidden long from the others. Your password is sufficient."

"You know then that Lannes is in a hospital with a bullet wound in his
shoulder?"
