
"Well, I'm glad the matter is decided so far, for you were just making
yourself ill with the worry."

"I don't see why mother should worry so much about it," said Kate,
petulantly.

Her aunt looked at her for a minute in silence, and then said, "Well,
she cannot expect to keep you tied to her apron-string all your life.
Of course, if you could get a quiet place near home it would be
better;" for Aunt Ellen at that moment was asking herself the same
question that Esther Odell had asked her schoolfellows an hour or two
before, "Is Katie a pretty girl?" and all at once a doubt had crept
into her mind about the wisdom of sending her into the midst of unknown
temptations.  But she put it down at once, seeing that her sister had
at last decided the matter.  "Of course, Kate will be careful and
steady, and not make any chance acquaintances," she said, answering her
own thoughts.

"Yes, yes; it is not that I am afraid of her," said the widow, hastily.

"And Aunt Ellen will always be here to take care of you," said Kate.
"I would not think of going so far away, if you had to be left alone."

"Yes, yes, my dear; I was not thinking of myself at all in the matter,
although I shall miss you terribly, but--but--"

"There, suppose you get your mother a cup of tea as quickly as you can,
Kate, that is what she wants," interrupted Aunt Ellen; and Kate,
feeling very uncomfortable, went to take her things off and get tea
ready.

Mrs. Haydon was better after tea, and could talk more cheerfully of
Kate leaving home.  She knew very little of London herself, except what
she had heard from her brother, and very little of her brother's
family.  He had several grown-up sons and daughters, and his wife had
been dead some years.  Beyond these bare facts, she knew very little
about them, so that Kate would be going among comparative strangers,
and it was this that had troubled the widow most.

"You shall write to your cousin to-morrow morning, Katie, and I will
write to your uncle, it will be better to settle this at once, I
suppose."

"Yes, mother, I am sure it will--not that I want to leave you, mother,
I shall miss you dreadfully, I know, but then I may never have such a
chance as this again."

"True, Kate; but still I cannot help wishing it was to some nice
nursery you were going instead of a shop."

"But then it is only a baker's shop, mother," said Kate.

"Yes, yes; but it's so far away from home; if you could come to me for
the Sundays, Kate, or if I knew anything of your cousin Marion, it
would be different--I should feel more easy about you."

"Oh, mother, why need you feel uneasy.  Surely you do not think I
should do anything wicked?" exclaimed Kate.

"No, no, my child.  I hope that which you have learned at Sunday school
will not be so easily forgotten.  Kate, you must find out a Bible-class
as soon as you get there, even if your cousins do not go to Sunday
school."

"But I should think they did, mother.  Marion is only a year or two
older than me, and Isabel younger, so that I should think they would
go."

"I don't know, my dear, I never heard that they went to a Sunday
school, but I hope they do for your sake.  Katie dear, you must ask
that God will take care of you every moment, and pray as you never did
before, 'lead me not into temptation.'"

"Yes, mother," murmured Kate hanging down her head, and almost wishing
now that she had delivered her teacher's message; for how could she ask
God to keep her out of temptation, when she was taking the matter into
her own hands determined to have her own way at all costs?




CHAPTER II.

DID SHE FORGET?

"Katie Haydon is going to London, ma'am.  Did she tell you on Sunday?"
The speaker was Esther Odell, who could think of nothing else but her
schoolfellow's good fortune, and, meeting her teacher later in the
week, hastened to impart the important news to her.

Miss Eldon looked surprised and a little disappointed, for she had
heard of an excellent opening for Kate, in the nursery of a lady not
far off, who needed a bright, clever girl, able to assist the nurse
sometimes with the one child, and also learn to wait upon the young
ladies who were growing up.  Such a nice place as this was not often to
be met with, and Miss Eldon had waited at home all day on Monday,
expecting Mrs. Haydon to call about it.  She was on her way there now,
thinking she must be ill, or something had happened; she could hardly
think Kate had forgotten her message, for she was so anxious to obtain
a situation only a short time before.

But Esther Odell's news made her think it was very possible Kate had
forgotten all about it.  "Did Kate tell you about this on Sunday," she
said.

"Yes, ma'am; she ran to catch us before we got into school, on purpose
to tell us.  She is going to her cousin, to serve in a shop.  I wish I
had her chance!" added Esther, with a sigh.

"And you think it is all settled, Esther?" said the lady.

"Oh yes, ma'am, I know it is.  I met Kate yesterday, and she had been
to post the letters to her cousin and uncle, telling them she would go."

The lady stood for a moment in silence, debating whether she should go
on and see Kate, and ascertain whether the matter was finally settled,
or call upon Mary Green, and send her to see the lady about this
situation.  Looking at her watch, the time decided her, for it was a
long walk to Mrs. Haydon's, and she would not have time to call upon
Mary if she went there.

"Thank you, Esther, for telling me this.  Did you say you wanted a
situation?"

"Yes, ma'am, if I could hear of one like Katie's to serve in a shop and
be a young lady.  I couldn't be a common servant," she added, quickly.

"A 'common servant,' Esther, what do you mean?" said Miss Eldon, rather
severely.  "Do you know that to be a household servant you must have a
character that will bear the strictest inquiry, and therefore those who
are servants are known at once as respectable, honourable people, and
those who employ them know their value, and esteem them accordingly?
Have you so soon forgotten what I told you on Sunday?"

Esther hung her head, feeling very much ashamed for a minute or two,
but at last she managed to say, "I thought servants were always looked
down upon, ma'am."

"No one, whose respect was worth having, would look down upon a servant
because she was a servant.  We always looked up to our dear old nurse,
Margaret, and loved her almost as a mother," said Miss Eldon.  "Now,
Esther, think over what I have said, and put these foolish notions
away.  I know your mother wishes you to go to service.  Come and tell
me next Sunday, that I may look out for a situation for you.  I must go
and see Mary Green now," and the lady bade her scholar good-bye, and
walked on.

Esther stood a minute looking after her.  "I wish I was a lady, and
could have a fine silk dress like hers," she said, half aloud.  "I knew
she wanted some of us to take a place, and if it wasn't for that proud
Kate Haydon, I think I would try it, but I couldn't bear to think of
her serving in a grand shop in London, while I was mewed up in a
nursery or kitchen here.  Mother must grumble a little longer; I
daresay I shall hear of a place in a shop before long, and who knows
but I may go to London, too;" and Esther went on her way, her mind full
of the unknown glories of London, and vain wishes to be in Kate's place.

Mary Green ran in to see Kate a day or two afterwards, and tell her the
news that she had got a situation at Lady Hazeldean's, as under-nurse
and to wait on the young ladies.

"My dear, I am very glad to hear it," said Mrs. Haydon.  "I only wish
it had been offered to Kate, instead of her going to London."

"But--but I thought--" began Mary.

"Mary, do come now, before it gets dark; I want to show you my new
dress," interrupted Kate, hastily jumping up from her seat, and running
out of the room.

Mary followed, but more slowly, wondering not a little at what she had
heard, for she thought Kate had refused this place.

"Don't say any more about this situation at Lady Hazeldean's,"
whispered Kate, when they were safely shut in the bedroom.

"But what can it matter?  You do not want it, Kate.  Miss Eldon told my
mother she had spoken to you about it on Sunday, but your mother did
not think it worth while calling to see her about it."

"How could she, when we had to write those letters to London directly?
There, Mary, isn't that a pretty print?  I am to wear print dresses and
holland aprons in the morning, but Marion says we may wear what we like
in the afternoon, and so I am going to have a new dress for best, and
what I have been wearing on Sunday I shall wear every day there."

"Yes," answered Mary, but it was in rather an absent-minded manner, for
she felt puzzled about Kate, and her strange anxiety lest she should
talk about this situation she had obtained.

On Sunday, when the girls met as usual on their way to school, the
prospects of their two companions were again discussed, and although a
few, like Esther, wished they could go to London as Kate was going, it
was agreed that Mary was very fortunate in getting such a good
situation, although, as it was remarked, Miss Eldon always did get her
girls excellent places.

Kate felt rather vexed at having to hear all the excellencies of this
despised situation enumerated, and was not sorry to reach school, but
her teacher's first words vexed her still more, and put her into a
fright too.

"I was coming to see your mother last Tuesday, Kate; I hope she has not
been ill."

"Oh, no, ma'am; she's quite well, thank you," answered Kate.

"Then it was not illness prevented her from coming to see me on Monday?"

Kate coloured and hung her head, as she answered, "No, ma'am."

"Did you forget to deliver my message?  I think I told you I wanted to
see her about a situation for you."

"You said you wanted to see her, ma'am, but--but I forgot it," said
Kate, under her breath.

"Well, never mind, it does not matter much, Kate, for I hear you have a
situation in London now," said Miss Eldon, thinking Kate was vexed and
angry with herself for having forgotten her message.  But the fact was,
Kate, who was neither an untruthful nor deceitful girl, shrank from
telling a direct lie.  She had yielded to the temptation last Sunday
because, as she had persuaded herself then, she was not required to
tell an untruth, but merely to hold her tongue about the message; but
now she found that to hide that wrong-doing a direct lie must be told,
and, although it made her uncomfortable and unhappy, it was done.  But
she protested again and again to her own conscience that she would
never do it again.  Before she left school, however, she had another
fright.

"When do you go to London, Kate?" asked her teacher, as the girls were
leaving.

"To-morrow week, ma'am," said Kate.

"Well, I will try and see you one day in the week, for I want to hear
all about your new situation and what your mother thinks of it," said
Miss Eldon, quite unconscious of the panic her words had put Kate into.

It made her last days at home the most miserable she had ever spent,
for Miss Eldon did not come until Saturday afternoon, but Kate had been
in suspense every hour during the whole week, and yet the foolish girl
could not summon up the courage necessary to tell her mother the truth
about the matter.

The dreadful moment arrived at last, when there came a knock at the
door, and Miss Eldon entering, was soon seated in their little back
room, and Kate's mother with her.

"I was so much surprised to hear that Kate was going to London," began
the lady, removing her gloves for an easy chat.

