its masters wish I do not know. So far they have neither bought nor
sold. I distrust those dark-skinned devils. Treachery had its birth in
that dusky land.'

'I've made them howl,' said Conan carelessly, turning from the window.
'In my galley manned by black corsairs I crept to the very bastions of
the sea-washed castles of black-walled Khemi by night, and burned the
galleons anchored there. And speaking of treachery, mine host, suppose
you taste these viands and sip a bit of this wine, just to show me that
your heart is on the right side.'

Publio complied so readily that Conan's suspicions were lulled, and
without further hesitation he sat down and devoured enough for three
men.

And while he ate, men moved through the markets and along the
waterfront, searching for a Zingaran who had a jewel to sell or who
sought for a ship to carry him to foreign ports. And a tall gaunt man
with a scar on his temple sat with his elbows on a wine-stained table in
a squalid cellar with a brass lantern hanging from a smoke-blackened
beam overhead, and held converse with ten desperate rogues whose
sinister countenances and ragged garments proclaimed their profession.

And as the first stars blinked out, they shone on a strange band
spurring their mounts along the white road that led to Messantia from
the west. They were four men, tall, gaunt, clad in black, hooded robes,
and they did not speak. They forced their steeds mercilessly onward, and
those steeds were gaunt as themselves, and sweat-stained and weary as if
from long travel and far wandering.




14

The Black Hand of Set


Conan woke from a sound sleep as quickly and instantly as a cat. And
like a cat he was on his feet with his sword out before the man who had
touched him could so much as draw back.

'What word, Publio?' demanded Conan, recognizing his host. The gold lamp
burned low, casting a mellow glow over the thick tapestries and the rich
coverings of the couch whereon he had been reposing.

Publio, recovering from the start given him by the sudden action of his
awakening guest, replied: 'The Zingaran has been located. He arrived
yesterday, at dawn. Only a few hours ago he sought to sell a huge,
strange jewel to a Shemitish merchant, but the Shemite would have naught
to do with it. Men say he turned pale beneath his black beard at the
sight of it, and closing his stall, fled as from a thing accursed.'

'It must be Beloso,' muttered Conan, feeling the pulse in his temples
pounding with impatient eagerness. 'Where is he now?'

'He sleeps in the house of Servio.'

'I know that dive of old,' grunted Conan. 'I'd better hasten before some
of these waterfront thieves cut his throat for the jewel.'

He took up his cloak and flung it over his shoulders, then donned a
helmet Publio had procured for him.

'Have my steed saddled and ready in the court,' said he. 'I may return
in haste. I shall not forget this night's work, Publio.'

A few moments later Publio, standing at a small outer door, watched the
king's tall figure receding down the shadowy street.

'Farewell to you, corsair,' muttered the merchant. 'This must be a
notable jewel, to be sought by a man who has just lost a kingdom. I
wish I had told my knaves to let him secure it before they did their
work. But then, something might have gone awry. Let Argos forget Amra,
and let my dealings with him be lost in the dust of the past. In the
alley behind the house of Servio--that is where Conan will cease to be a
peril to me.'

       *       *       *       *       *

Servio's house, a dingy, ill-famed den, was located close to the
wharves, facing the waterfront. It was a shambling building of stone and
heavy ship-beams, and a long narrow alley wandered up alongside it.
Conan made his way along the alley, and as he approached the house he
had an uneasy feeling that he was being spied upon. He stared hard into
the shadows of the squalid buildings, but saw nothing, though once he
caught the faint rasp of cloth or leather against flesh. But that was
nothing unusual. Thieves and beggars prowled these alleys all night, and
they were not likely to attack him, after one look at his size and
harness.

But suddenly a door opened in the wall ahead of him, and he slipped into
the shadow of an arch. A figure emerged from the open door and moved
along the alley, not furtively, but with a natural noiselessness, like
that of a jungle beast. Enough starlight filtered into the alley to
silhouette the man's profile dimly as he passed the doorway where Conan
lurked. The stranger was a Stygian. There was no mistaking that
hawk-faced, shaven head, even in the starlight, nor the mantle over the
broad shoulders. He passed on down the alley in the direction of the
beach, and once Conan thought he must be carrying a lantern among his
garments, for he caught a flash of lambent light, just as the man
vanished.

But the Cimmerian forgot the stranger as he noticed that the door
through which he had emerged still stood open. Conan had intended
entering by the main entrance and forcing Servio to show him the room
where the Zingaran slept. But if he could get into the house without
attracting anyone's attention, so much the better.

A few long strides brought him to the door, and as his hand fell on the
lock he stifled an involuntary grunt. His practised fingers, skilled
among the thieves of Zamora long ago, told him that the lock had been
forced, apparently by some terrific pressure from the outside that had
twisted and bent the heavy iron bolts, tearing the very sockets loose
from the jambs. How such damage could have been wrought so violently
without awakening everyone in the neighborhood Conan could not imagine,
but he felt sure that it had been done that night. A broken lock, if
discovered, would not go unmended in the house of Servio, in this
neighborhood of thieves and cutthroats.

Conan entered stealthily, poniard in hand, wondering how he was to find
the chamber of the Zingaran. Groping in total darkness he halted
suddenly. He sensed death in that room, as a wild beast senses it--not
as peril threatening him, but a dead thing, something freshly slain. In
the darkness his foot hit and recoiled from something heavy and
yielding. With a sudden premonition he groped along the wall until he
found the shelf that supported the brass lamp, with its flint, steel and
tinder beside it. A few seconds later a flickering, uncertain light
sprang up, and he stared narrowly about him.

A bunk built against the rough stone wall, a bare table and a bench
completed the furnishings of the squalid chamber. An inner door stood
closed and bolted. And on the hard-beaten dirt floor lay Beloso. On his
back he lay, with his head drawn back between his shoulders so that he
seemed to stare with his wide glassy eyes at the sooty beams of the
cobwebbed ceiling. His lips were drawn back from his teeth in a frozen
grin of agony. His sword lay near him, still in its scabbard. His shirt
was torn open, and on his brown, muscular breast was the print of a
black hand, thumb and four fingers plainly distinct.

Conan glared in silence, feeling the short hairs bristle at the back of
his neck.

'Crom!' he muttered. 'The black hand of Set!'

He had seen that mark of old, the death-mark of the black priests of
Set, the grim cult that ruled in dark Stygia. And suddenly he remembered
that curious flash he had seen emanating from the mysterious Stygian who
had emerged from this chamber.

'The Heart, by Crom!' he muttered. 'He was carrying it under his mantle.
He stole it. He burst that door by his magic, and slew Beloso. He was a
priest of Set.'

A quick investigation confirmed at least part of his suspicions. The
jewel was not on the Zingaran's body. An uneasy feeling rose in Conan
that this had not happened by chance, or without design; a conviction
that the mysterious Stygian galley had come into the harbor of Messantia
on a definite mission. How could the priests of Set know that the Heart
had come southward? Yet the thought was no more fantastic than the
necromancy that could slay an armed man by the touch of an open, empty
hand.

A stealthy footfall outside the door brought him round like a great cat.
With one motion he extinguished the lamp and drew his sword. His ears
told him that men were out there in the darkness, were closing in on the
doorway. As his eyes became accustomed to the sudden darkness, he could
make out dim figures ringing the entrance. He could not guess their
identity, but as always he took the initiative--leaping suddenly forth
from the doorway without awaiting the attack.

His unexpected movement took the skulkers by surprise. He sensed and
heard men close about him, saw a dim masked figure in the starlight
before him; then his sword crunched home, and he was fleeting away down
the alley before the slower-thinking and slower-acting attackers could
intercept him.

As he ran he heard, somewhere ahead of him, a faint creak of oar-locks,
and he forgot the men behind him. A boat was moving out into the bay!
Gritting his teeth he increased his speed, but before he reached the
beach he heard the rasp and creak of ropes, and the grind of the great
sweep in its socket.

Thick clouds, rolling up from the sea, obscured the stars. In thick
darkness Conan came upon the strand, straining his eyes out across the
black restless water. Something was moving out there--a long, low, black
shape that receded in the darkness, gathering momentum as it went. To
his ears came the rhythmical clack of long oars. He ground his teeth in
helpless fury. It was the Stygian galley and she was racing out to sea,
bearing with her the jewel that meant to him the throne of Aquilonia.

With a savage curse he took a step toward the waves that lapped against
the sands, catching at his hauberk and intending to rip it off and swim
after the vanishing ship. Then the crunch of a heel in the sand brought
him about. He had forgotten his pursuers.

Dark figures closed in on him with a rush of feet through the sands. The
first went down beneath the Cimmerian's flailing sword, but the others
did not falter. Blades whickered dimly about him in the darkness or
rasped on his mail. Blood and entrails spilled over his hand and someone
screamed as he ripped murderously upward. A muttered voice spurred on
the attack, and that voice sounded vaguely familiar. Conan plowed
through the clinging, hacking shapes toward the voice. A faint light
gleaming momentarily through the drifting clouds showed him a tall gaunt
man with a great livid scar on his temple. Conan's sword sheared through
his skull as through a ripe melon.

Then an ax, swung blindly in the dark, crashed on the king's basinet,
filling his eyes with sparks of fire. He lurched and lunged, felt his
sword sink deep and heard a shriek of agony. Then he stumbled over a
corpse, and a bludgeon knocked the dented helmet from his head; the next
instant the club fell full on his unprotected skull.

The king of Aquilonia crumpled into the wet sands. Over him wolfish
figures panted in the gloom.

'Strike off his head,' muttered one.

'Let him lie,' grunted another. 'Help me tie up my wounds before I bleed
to death. The tide will wash him into the bay. See, he fell at the
water's edge. His skull's split; no man could live after such blows.'

'Help me strip him,' urged another. 'His harness will fetch a few
pieces of silver. And haste. Tiberio is dead, and I hear seamen singing
as they reel along the strand. Let us be gone.'

There followed hurried activity in the darkness, and then the sound of
quickly receding footsteps. The tipsy singing of the seamen grew louder.

       *       *       *       *       *

In his chamber Publio, nervously pacing back and forth before a window
that overlooked the shadowed bay, whirled suddenly, his nerves tingling.
To the best of his knowledge the door had been bolted from within; but
now it stood open and four men filed into the chamber. At the sight of
them his flesh crawled. Many strange beings Publio had seen in his
lifetime, but none before like these. They were tall and gaunt,
black-robed, and their faces were dim yellow ovals in the shadows of
their coifs. He could not tell much about their features and was
unreasoningly glad that he could not. Each bore a long, curiously
mottled staff.

'Who are you?' he demanded, and his voice sounded brittle and hollow.
'What do you wish here?'

'Where is Conan, he who was king of Aquilonia?' demanded the tallest of
the four in a passionless monotone that made Publio shudder. It was like
the hollow tone of a Khitan temple bell.

'I do not know what you mean,' stammered the merchant, his customary
poise shaken by the uncanny aspect of his visitors. 'I know no such
man.'

'He has been here,' returned the other with no change of inflection.
'His horse is in the courtyard. Tell us where he is before we do you an
injury.'

'Gebal!' shouted Publio frantically, recoiling until he crouched against
the wall. '_Gebal!_'

The four Khitans watched him without emotion or change of expression.

'If you summon your slave he will die,' warned one of them, which only
served to terrify Publio more than ever.

'Gebal!' he screamed. 'Where are you, curse you? Thieves are murdering
your master!'

Swift footsteps padded in the corridor outside, and Gebal burst into the
chamber--a Shemite, of medium height and mightily muscled build, his
curled blue-black beard bristling, and a short leaf-shaped sword in his
hand.

He stared in stupid amazement at the four invaders, unable to understand
their presence; dimly remembering that he had drowsed unexplainably on
the stair he was guarding and up which they must have come. He had never
slept on duty before. But his master was shrieking with a note of
hysteria in his voice, and the Shemite drove like a bull at the
strangers, his thickly muscled arm drawing back for the disemboweling
thrust. But the stroke was never dealt.

A black-sleeved arm shot out, extending the long staff. Its end but
touched the Shemite's brawny breast and was instantly withdrawn. The
stroke was horribly like the dart and recovery of a serpent's head.

Gebal halted short in his headlong plunge, as if he had encountered a
solid barrier. His bull head toppled forward on his breast, the sword
slipped from his fingers, and then he melted slowly to the floor. It was
as if all the bones of his frame had suddenly become flabby. Publio
turned sick.

'Do not shout again,' advised the tallest Khitan. 'Your servants sleep
soundly, but if you awaken them they will die, and you with them. Where
is Conan?'

'He is gone to the house of Servio, near the waterfront, to search for
the Zingaran Beloso,' gasped Publio, all his power of resistance gone
out of him. The merchant did not lack courage; but these uncanny
visitants turned his marrow to water. He started convulsively at a
sudden noise of footsteps hurrying up the stair outside, loud in the
ominous stillness.

'Your servant?' asked the Khitan.

Publio shook his head mutely, his tongue frozen to his palate. He could
not speak.

One of the Khitans caught up a silken cover from a couch and threw it
over the corpse. Then they melted behind the tapestry, but before the
tallest man disappeared, he murmured: 'Talk to this man who comes, and
send him away quickly. If you betray us, neither he nor you will live to
reach that door. Make no sign to show him you are not alone.' And
lifting his staff suggestively, the yellow man faded behind the
hangings.

Publio shuddered and choked down a desire to retch. It might have been a
trick of the light, but it seemed to him that occasionally those staffs
moved slightly of their own accord, as if possessed of an unspeakable
life of their own.

He pulled himself together with a mighty effort, and presented a
composed aspect to the ragged ruffian who burst into the chamber.

'We have done as you wished, my lord,' this man exclaimed. 'The
barbarian lies dead on the sands at the water's edge.'

Publio felt a movement in the arras behind him, and almost burst from
fright. The man swept heedlessly on.

'Your secretary, Tiberio, is dead. The barbarian slew him, and four of
my companions. We bore their bodies to the rendezvous. There was
nothing of value on the barbarian except a few silver coins. Are there
any further orders?'

'None!' gasped Publio, white about the lips. 'Go!'

The desperado bowed and hurried out, with a vague feeling that Publio
was both a man of weak stomach and few words.

The four Khitans came from behind the arras.

'Of whom did this man speak?' the taller demanded.

'Of a wandering stranger who did me an injury,' panted Publio.

'You lie,' said the Khitan calmly. 'He spoke of the king of Aquilonia.
I read it in your expression. Sit upon that divan and do not move or
speak. I will remain with you while my three companions go search for
the body.'

So Publio sat and shook with terror of the silent, inscrutable figure
which watched him, until the three Khitans filed back into the room,
with the news that Conan's body did not lie upon the sands. Publio did
not know whether to be glad or sorry.

'We found the spot where the fight was fought,' they said. 'Blood was on
the sand. But the king was gone.'

The fourth Khitan drew imaginary symbols upon the carpet with his staff,
which glistened scalily in the lamplight.

'Did you read naught from the sands?' he asked.

'Aye,' they answered. 'The king lives, and he has gone southward in a
ship.'

The tall Khitan lifted his head and gazed at Publio, so that the
merchant broke into a profuse sweat.

'What do you wish of me?' he stuttered.

'A ship,' answered the Khitan. 'A ship well manned for a very long
voyage.'

'For how long a voyage?' stammered Publio, never thinking of refusing.

'To the ends of the world, perhaps,' answered the Khitan, 'or to the
molten seas of hell that lie beyond the sunrise.'




15

The Return of the Corsair


Conan's first sensation of returning consciousness was that of motion;
under him was no solidity, but a ceaseless heaving and plunging. Then he
heard wind humming through cords and spars, and knew he was aboard a
ship even before his blurred sight cleared. He heard a mutter of voices
and then a dash of water deluged him, jerking him sharply into full
animation. He heaved up with a sulphurous curse, braced his legs and
glared about him, with a burst of coarse guffaws in his ears and the
reek of unwashed bodies in his nostrils.

He was standing on the poopdeck of a long galley which was running
before the wind that whipped down from the north, her striped sail
bellying against the taut sheets. The sun was just rising, in a dazzling
blaze of gold and blue and green. To the left of the shoreline was a dim
purple shadow. To the right stretched the open ocean. This much Conan
saw at a glance that likewise included the ship itself.

It was long and narrow, a typical trading-ship of the southern coasts,
high of poop and stern, with cabins at either extremity. Conan looked
down into the open waist, whence wafted that sickening abominable odor.
He knew it of old. It was the body-scent of the oarsmen, chained to
their benches. They were all negroes, forty men to each side, each
confined by a chain locked about his waist, with the other end welded to
a heavy ring set deep in the solid runway beam that ran between the
benches from stem to stern. The life of a slave aboard an Argossean
galley was a hell unfathomable. Most of these were Kushites, but some
thirty of the blacks who now rested on their idle oars and stared up at
the stranger with dull curiosity were from the far southern isles, the
homelands of the corsairs. Conan recognized them by their straighter
features and hair, their rangier, cleaner-limbed build. And he saw among
them men who had followed him of old.

But all this he saw and recognized in one swift, all-embracing glance as
he rose, before he turned his attention to the figures about him.
Reeling momentarily on braced legs, his fists clenched wrathfully, he
glared at the figures clustered about him. The sailor who had drenched
him stood grinning, the empty bucket still poised in his hand, and Conan
cursed him with venom, instinctively reaching for his hilt. Then he
discovered that he was weaponless and naked except for his short leather
breeks.

'What lousy tub is this?' he roared. 'How did I come aboard here?'

The sailors laughed jeeringly--stocky, bearded Argosseans to a man--and
one, whose richer dress and air of command proclaimed him captain,
