commonly used in the Bible, for corporate completeness, to indicate that
a group is complete. Twelve times twelve would simply represent a fully
completed corporate number. That is to say, upon the entire body of Jews
then living on the earth the Holy Spirit is poured out, thus marking
them once again as God's peculiar people, restored fully to favour after
the long national rejection.

The second event is of equally intense interest, indeed to us of
non-Jewish birth it has yet greater interest. John is up in heaven. It
is from that point of view that he sees. Now he is suddenly startled.
All at once there appears before his eyes a group he had not seen
before. He describes it as a great multitude, actually countless, out of
all the peoples of the whole earth, a great polyglot polyracial world
company.

They are clothed in white, holding the conqueror's palm in their hands,
and singing, making wondrous music. John is getting another taste of the
music of heaven. And their singing is a signal for a fresh outburst of
praise by the angels, the elders, and the living creatures. All this
seems to occur suddenly, this appearance of this new company before the
throne.

John gazes spellbound, wondering who these are, and where they come
from, and what this means. And he is told that these are they that come
out of the tribulation, the great one, down on the earth. Then in a few
exquisitely tender, heart-touching words their happiness is described.

These two events occur just before the terrible earthquake and the
shake-up of the earth's heavenly bodies. Just before the judgment that
closes the tribulation this double event takes place, the conversion of
the Jews, and the catching away out of the tribulation distress on
earth, up into the presence of the throne, of the followers of our Lord
Jesus.

We remember that that great Jew, Paul, was converted by the appearance
of Jesus in the heavens above him. We remember that in the Olivet talk
Jesus says that His followers will so be gathered up to Himself at the
time of His second coming. These two events, taking place here, tell us
what has happened down on the earth. In his vision John, being in
heaven, sees these things as they appear from above.

This is the first view of the tribulation. It begins with the moment
when our Lord Jesus up in heaven begins action, describes the
characteristics of the tribulation on earth, and closes with the
national regeneration of Israel, and the catching up from earth of
Christ's true followers.


Evil Let Loose.

The _second view_ runs through chapters eight and nine. Chapters ten and
eleven to the close of verse thirteen make a distinct parenthesis. And
then this view is picked up again at eleven, fourteen, and runs to the
close of that chapter. But this final bit in chapter eleven is merely a
connecting link with what comes later. Practically the whole of this
view is in chapters eight and nine.

It closes with an earthquake, so connecting it with the final event in
the first view. It begins with a period of prolonged silence, which
would seem to answer to the hush in the great volume of praise in the
first view, when the Lamb takes the sealed roll. So it carries us back
to the same starting-point as there.

There is first a striking scene before the throne, where John sees a
golden altar. On this there is being offered incense, which is said to
be added to the prayers of all the saints. Incense and prayers rise
together before God. Then an angel pours some of the fire of this
prayer-altar into the earth, and a storm follows. So these two views,
first and second, have another common starting-point, the beginning of a
storm.

This is a very suggestive scene. The prayers of all the saints, both in
earth and heaven, have a decided restraining influence over evil down on
earth at the present time. At the close they will become a decisive
influence in the cleaning-up process on earth, and the bringing in of
the new order.

Then follows a fourfold description of distressing events on earth,
which are caused by fiery influences coming out of the heavens. The
language used seems to make clear that it is through a loosening out of
the powers of evil that the tribulation comes.

In the picture language of the vision, "a great mountain burning with
fire was cast into the sea," with injurious results to water, to life,
and to shipping. A mountain is a common figure in the Bible for a great
ruling power. So Israel is called by Isaiah.[141] The seventeenth
chapter of Revelation speaks of seven kingdoms as seven mountains.[142]
In Jeremiah, Babylon, which is spoken of repeatedly and typically as
being the embodiment of evil and of opposition to God, is called: "O
destroying mountain ... which destroyest all the earth, (I) will make of
thee a burnt mountain."[143] It speaks here also of "a great star,[144]
burning as a torch," that fell upon the rivers and makes them bitter as
wormwood. These two things seem to suggest clearly that the great hurt
done to sea and vegetation, to all life, and through the obscuring of
the heavenly lights, is a result directly of the powers of evil having
been loosened out.

The long restraint upon evil through the presence of the Holy Spirit in
the Church is now withdrawn in the withdrawal of the Spirit. His
withdrawal is practically an answer to the tacit prayer both of world
and Church. That prayer is being answered. The "One" who restraineth has
been withdrawn. This it is that makes the tribulation on its negative
side. The awful character of the demons from the pit is so utterly
beyond human experience up to that time that there seem no adequate
words to describe them.

The Gospels are full of the awful activity of demons on earth in
possessing men. In our own land there is not wanting plenty of evidence
of men horribly possessed by demons. In the older countries of Europe
this experience is much more marked. But it is in heathen lands that it
is most marked, where even the very air seems charged with evil forces,
as though these unseen demons swarmed about.

Yet all this sort of thing is now under restraint. What it will mean to
have that restraint withdrawn, and the horrid hordes here described free
to do as they will, no imagination can depict. This is well called the
first _woe_, and an awful woe it will be. Mercifully there is a time
limit set on this demon activity.

Following this comes the loosing out of another horde of demons, as
difficult of description, and yet more terrible. They seem countless,
yet there is a limit to their numbers. The supreme Hand is never wholly
withdrawn. These have power to kill as well as to torment. This is the
second woe. It is most strikingly noticeable that neither of these
things has influence to make men penitent.

The last item of this view is given in chapter xi. 14-19. The
announcement is made that the sovereignty of the world is transferred to
our Lord and His Christ. The temple of God is seen open, and some
further action takes place, but the detail of it is reserved for another
view. Such is the terrible sight in the second view of the tribulation
time. Evil is loosened out, apparently unrestrained, and yet under
restraint. This it is that makes the tribulation on its positive side.

The parenthesis in the description of this view has been spoken of. It
runs through chapters ten and eleven to the close of verse thirteen, and
contains two chief things. The first is a little group of three items.
There is a fresh description of our Lord Jesus as He is seen standing
with one foot on the sea and the other upon the earth, and holding a
little open book. Then seven thunders roar out. John is about to write,
but is told not to. That terrific storm coming is far greater than can
be told. Then comes the solemn declaration that there will be no
further delay, but that at once shall be finished up this terrible time
of judgment. Then follows a personal word to John. These three items
make up chapter ten.


God's Faithful Witnesses.

Then comes the second thing, in chapter eleven on to verse thirteen,
which proves to be _the third view_ of the tribulation. It shows that
during the whole of this tribulation time there will be a special
faithful witness being borne to God and His truth. As the Holy Spirit is
being withdrawn from the Church, these two men begin their special
ministry of witnessing.

The place of that witness will be Jerusalem. But recent events will have
brought a greatly diversified population to that city from all parts of
the world. So that the witness becomes world-wide in its immediate
reach, and probably in the reports of it that go out.

While there is good reason for thinking that these two witnesses may be
Enoch and Elijah, the two men of Bible record, one before the Flood and
one after, who were distinctively God's witnesses, and were taken away
without death, yet it is best not to stop over a matter that has been
and is apt to be a matter of mere idle speculative talk.[145] The thing
worthy of note is that as the Holy Spirit's distinctive witness is
withdrawn there will be these two special witnesses sent to Jerusalem
for a witness that will be world-wide in its extent and influence. Such
is God's gracious patience and longsuffering.

These two men are clothed in mourning as a part of their witness. They
have miraculous power in protecting themselves against attack, and in
withholding rain, and sending plagues among the people, and in turning
water into blood, to give force and effect to their testimony. Their
witness continues through twelve hundred and sixty days.

John had already been told that Jerusalem would be trodden under foot by
the nations for forty-two months. We are apt to think that it has been
trodden under foot or desecrated by the nations for an immensely longer
period. But prophecy never gives any reckoning of time for Israel,
except when Israel is an organized nation. It is concerned with telling
Jewish _national_ events.

At this time the Jews have their national organization again in
Palestine. For forty-two months after the nation has been newly set up
the city will be so trodden under the desecrating feet of the nations.
This is the first hint of time we have had. The witnessing and the
desecration of the holy city will continue side by side for three and a
half years.

At the end of this period evil will be given full swing over these
witnesses. They are killed and their bodies left lying in the streets,
while the international crowds make merry because their tormentors, as
these two are called, are gone. Then before the terror-stricken gaze of
these crowds the two men come to life, and are caught up into the
heavens. Is this the moment when all are caught up? Quite possibly. Then
comes the terrible earthquake as at the end of the other two views.

The one distinctive thing told here is that during the tribulation, in
the midst of all the blasphemous reign of unrestrained wickedness, there
will be the unbroken, faithful witnessing. This seems to explain why the
account comes as a parenthesis in the account of the awful riot of evil.
During the worst of the evil there will go on unbroken the faithful,
gracious testimony of God's truth and love.


The Lawless Leader.

_The fourth view_ takes the longest sweep of any, thus far, goes into
much more detail, and gives much fresh information. It runs through
chapters twelve to fourteen. In the intensely picturesque language of a
woman arrayed in the most glorious splendour and dignity and power
imaginable the nation of Israel is depicted.

This woman is with child. In more intensely dramatic language Satan is
pictured as standing before the woman waiting to destroy her child as
soon as born. The child is born, a man-child, who is to rule all the
nations with autocratic sway. He is caught up to heaven, and his mother
flees into the wilderness from the serpent. This is the opening action
of this view.

The meaning lies open on the face. Israel gave birth to the man Jesus,
who foiled all the attacks of Satan and ascended to heaven. The old
prophetic characteristic of connecting events far apart without
reference to intervening time is marked here. The long interval between
the break-up of the Jew nation and its taking shape again as a nation,
which has lasted nineteen hundred years roughly, comes between the last
word of verse five and the first word of verse six.

The prophetic writing takes no reckoning of Israel, except as a nation.
The woman fleeing into the wilderness is Israel organized again as a
nation suffering persecution. She is so persecuted for twelve hundred
and sixty days, but divinely protected and preserved. Such is the first
act of the drama pictured here.[146]

Then we are told _why_ the woman flees, that is, the explanation of this
special persecution of the Jew this time.[147] Satan has had his
headquarters somewhere in the heavens, below God's throne, but above the
earth. Now, after a conflict, he is cast out of heaven, down to the
earth. Here is a third event that comes approximately at the beginning
of the tribulation time, Satan is cast down to the earth.

The Holy Spirit is withdrawn from the Church up to heaven, so removing
the restraint upon evil. Satan is cast out of heaven and comes down to
earth. Thus there is a double intensifying of evil on the earth, the
withdrawal of restraint, and the presence of the evil one himself. And
as the witness of the Holy Spirit is withdrawn the special witness of
the two men in Jerusalem begins.

The defeat of Satan in this heavenly conflict draws out a burst of
praise from the upper hosts. It is because of the great victory of our
Lord Jesus in His death that this victory is gotten. They overcome
because of the blood of the Lamb, _and_ the word of their testimony,
_and_ they loved not their lives unto death,--a threefold cord that
could never, and can never, be broken or successfully resisted.

This explains the special persecution at this time of the reshaped
Jewish nation. It is the outburst of the rage of the freshly defeated
Satan. But the Jew is protected. The armies that would swallow the Jew
up are swallowed up by the great earthquake that closes the tribulation
time.

The length of this persecution is put in two different ways, twelve
hundred and sixty days, and "time, times, and half a time." This latter
phrase seems to be an old Oriental or Hebrew way of saying a year, two
years, and half a year. The same length of time is expressed in yet
another way in the eleventh chapter, forty and two months. The time is
thus put in three different ways, that we may know surely that it means
just plain three and a half years of our common time. It is significant
that the dragon makes war with "the rest" of the woman's seed. This can
only mean the Church, which of course was born in the Jewish nation.
This is the first run of events in this view.[148]

Then follows a description of the awful leader of evil during the
tribulation time.[149] It is significant that, as Satan is cast out of
heaven down to the earth, this leader appears among men. He has great
intelligence and power and is the very embodiment of blasphemy. He is
described as a strange mixture of wild beasts, having the chief
characteristic strength of each, the cunning of the leopard, the feet of
the bear, and the mouth of the lion.

He is the personal representative on earth among men of Satan. There is
something strangely uncanny in the suggestion that he is some former
leader, who died, and is now raised from the dead. There seems to be
nothing too daring for Satan to attempt in his impious opposition to
God. This leader comes into great prominence and power. All the world
wonders after him. And they worship Satan, who is recognized as giving
his power to this notorious leader.

He comes to be accepted as the world ruler, and is commonly worshipped
by the people. And he not only persecutes God's people, but overcomes
them. A limit of time is set to his sway. It is the same as already
noted for Jerusalem being desecrated, for God's two witnesses, and for
the persecution of the Jew, _i.e._, forty and two months, three and a
half years.

It is striking that in the midst of the description of his terrible
reign there comes a word that sounds like an echo from those messages to
the Churches. "If any man hath an ear, let him hear."[150] Then the word
goes on warning, pleading, and encouraging. In the midst of these
blasphemous conditions every man must do as he personally decides. He
may yield to this evil and become a captive of evil, bound hand and
foot. He may try to use the world's weapons in fighting God's battle,
but will find himself outmatched in their use. He may rise to the true
level, and steadfastly cling to his faith, and endure, and by faith be
victorious in the end.

The description goes on to tell of the blasphemous worship demanded of
all. This leader has an assistant or lieutenant to whom he deputizes
great power. He makes an image to his chief, and demands all to worship
at this shrine. He has supernatural power, that is, devilishly
supernatural. He performs great miracles, even calling down fire from
heaven. He gives breath to the image and makes it speak. And he punishes
with death any one who refuses this blasphemous worship to the leader
and his image. And every one is required to have a mark on his hand or
his forehead as indicating his loyalty to the leader. Whoever refuses is
unable to buy or sell. It is the boycott principle carried to the last
extreme.

While God's two witnesses are doing miracles by divine power this
lieutenant is doing them by devilish power. So the fearful account goes
on. One can easily imagine the vast crowds swayed by the idolatrous
worship, and the intense suffering and distress among those who insist
on being steadfast and true in their faith.

Now in the midst of all this terrible scene John is suddenly and
tremendously startled by something else.[151]

In the vision John is in heaven looking down on these scenes on the
earth. Now his attention is attracted by a scene that suddenly takes
place before his eyes in heaven. It is a scene of wondrous winsomeness
and beauty. It stands out in sharpest contrast with what is going on on
the earth.

There's a great company standing around the Lord Jesus, before the
throne. They are singing a wonderful song to the accompaniment of harps,
which they have. The volume of music is like the voice of many waters,
or like great thunder. There is a simple, fine description of the
character of these singers. They are _pure_, and they are _obedient_. In
their purity they are as undefiled virgins, the highest possible
statement of purity. And they follow the Lamb unquestioningly
whithersoever He goeth with fullest obedience.

Who are these, and where have they come from so suddenly, at this
moment, into the presence of the One on the throne? The description
tells just what has happened. When things are at their devilish worst
down on the earth the Lord Jesus has caught up His own from the earth.
And they have become like Him in character, for now they see Him face to
face as He is.

This recalls the scene, essentially the same, back in the first view, in
