surrendered to him the island, the fleet together with the army, and
himself. Caesar was glad to see him and declared that Sextus was harboring
deserters contrary to the treaty, having triremes built, and keeping
garrisons in Italy: and so far from giving up Menas on demand, he
supported him in great honor, gave him the decoration of gold rings, and
enrolled him in the order of the knights. The matter of the gold rings
is as follows. Of the ancient Romans no one,--not to mention such as had
once been slaves,--who had grown up as a free citizen even, was allowed
to wear gold rings, save senators and knights,--as has been stated.
Therefore they are given to those freedmen whom the man in power may
select; although they may use gold in other ways, this is still an
additional honor and distinguishes them as superior, or as capable,
through having been freed, of becoming knights.

[-46-] Such is the matter in question. Sextus, having this as a reproach
against Caesar, and the further facts that Achaea had been impoverished
and the rights agreed upon were not granted either to him or to the
restored exiles, sent to Italy Menecrates, another freedman of his, and
had him ravage Volturnum and other parts of Campania. Caesar on learning
this took the documents containing the treaty from the vestal virgins and
sent for Antony and Lepidus. Lepidus did not at once obey. Antony came to
Brundusium from Greece where, by chance, he still was: but before he met
Caesar, who was in Etruria, he became alarmed because a wolf had entered
his head-quarters and killed soldiers; so he sailed back to Greece again,
making the urgency of the Parthian situation his excuse. Caesar, however
much he felt that he had been abandoned by his colleague with the purpose
that he should face the difficulties of the war alone, nevertheless
showed no anger openly. Sextus kept repeating that Antony was not for
punishing him and set himself more zealously to the task in hand. Finally
he sailed against Italy, landed at different points, inflicted much
injury and endured much in return. Meantime off Cyme there was a naval
battle between Menecrates and Calvisius Sabinus. In this several ships of
Caesar were destroyed, because he was arrayed against expert seafarers;
but Menecrates out of rivalry attacked Menas and perished, making the
loss of Sextus an equal one. For this reason the latter laid no claim to
victory and Caesar consoled himself over the defeat. [-47-] He happened at
this time to be in Rhegium, and the party of Sextus feared he would cross
over into Sicily; and being somewhat disheartened, too, at the death
of Menecrates, they set sail from Cyme. Sabinus pursued them as far
as Scyllaeum, the Italian promontory, without trouble. But, as he was
rounding that point, a great wind fell upon him, hurling some of the
ships against the promontory, sinking others out at sea, and scattering
all the rest. Sextus on ascertaining this sent the fleet under command of
Apollophanes against them. He, discovering Caesar coasting along somewhere
in these parts with the intention of crossing into Sicily along with
Sabinus, made a dash upon him. Caesar had the ships come to anchor,
marshaled the heavy-armed soldiers upon them, and at first made a noble
resistance. The ships were drawn up with prows facing outward and so
offered no safe point for attack, but being shorter and higher could do
more hurt to those that approached them, and the heavy-armed fighters,
when they could come in conflict with the enemy, proved far superior.
Apollophanes, however, transferred such as were wounded and were in
difficulty from time to time to other ships assigned for the purpose, by
backing water, and took on board fresh men; he also made constant charges
and used missiles carrying fire, so that his adversary was at last
routed, fled to the land, and came to anchor. When even then the pursuers
pressed him hard, some of Caesar's ships suddenly cut their anchors and
unexpectedly offered opposition. It was only this and the fact that night
interrupted operations that kept Apollophanes from burning some of the
ships and towing all the rest away.

[-48-] After this event an ill-fated wind on the following day fell upon
Caesar and Sabinus as they were anchored together and made their previous
reverse seem small. The fleet of Sabinus suffered the less, for Menas,
being an old hand on the sea, foresaw the storm. He immediately stationed
his ships out at sea, letting them ride with slack anchors some distance
apart, so that the ropes should not be stretched and break; then he rowed
directly against the wind, and in this way no rope was strained, and he
remained constantly in the same position, recovering by the use of the
oars all the distance which he lost by the impetus of the wind. The
remaining commanders, because they had gone through a severe experience
the day before, and as yet had no precise knowledge of nautical matters,
were cast out upon the shore close by and lost many ships. The night,
which had been of the greatest aid to them before, was now among the
chief agencies in promoting disaster. All through it the wind blew
violently, tearing the vessels from their anchors and dashing them
against the rocks. That of course was the end of them, and the sailors
and marines likewise perished without hope of rescue, since the darkness
prevented them from seeing ahead and they could not hear a word because
of the uproar and the reverberation from the mountains, especially since
the wind smote them in the face. So it was that Caesar despaired of Sicily
and was satisfied to guard the coast country: Sextus on the other hand
was still more elated, believing himself in very truth to be the son of
Neptune, and he put on a dark blue robe besides, as some relate, casting
horses as well as men alive into the straits. He plundered and harassed
Italy himself, sending Apollophanes to Libya. The latter was pursued by
Menas, who overtook and injured him. The islands round about Sicily went
over to the side of Sextus, whereupon Caesar seized the territory of the
Lipareans in advance and ejecting them from the island conveyed them to
Campania, where he forced them to live in Neapolis so long as the war
should continue. [-49-] Meantime he kept having boats made throughout
almost all of Italy and collected slaves for rowers first from his
friends, who were supposed to give willingly, and then from the
rest,--senators and knights and well-to-do private citizens. He also
assembled heavy-armed troops and gathered money from all citizens,
allies, and subjects, both in Italy and abroad.

This year and the following he spent on the construction of ships and the
gathering and training of rowers.

[B.C. 37 (_a. u_. 717)]

He himself oversaw and arranged these details and all other matters in
Italy and in Gaul (where there was a slight uprising). To Agrippa he
entrusted the equipment of the boats. He sent for this man, who was
fighting against the revolted Gauls, at the time when he had been the
second of the Romans to cross the Rhine for purposes of warfare, and he
honored him by bestowing a triumph and bidding him to secure the
building and training of the fleet. Agrippa,--he was consul with Lucius
Gallus,--would not hold the triumph, deeming it disgraceful for him to
exalt himself when Caesar had fared poorly, but set to work heart and soul
to fit out the fleet. All along the coasts of Italy vessels were taking
shape; but since no shore was found safe for them to ride at anchor,--the
majority of the coast land being still in those days without harbors,--he
conceived and executed a magnificent enterprise which I shall describe at
some length, showing its nature and the present characteristics of the
locality where it took place.

[-50-] At Cyme in Campania, between Misenum and Puteoli, there is a
crescent-shaped spot. It is shut in by small hills, bare except in a
few places, and the sea there forms a kind of triple bay. The first is
outside and near the cities; the second is separated from it by a small
passage; and the third, like a real harbor, is seen far back. The last
named is called Avernus, and the middle bay Lucrinus: the outer one
belongs to the Tyrrhenian Sea and takes its name from that water. In this
roadstead within the other two, which had but narrow entrances then,
Agrippa, by cutting channels close along the shore through the land
separating Lucrinus from the sea on each side, produced harbors affording
most safe anchorage for ships. While the men were working a certain image
situated above Avernus, either of Calypso to whom this place, whither
they say Odysseus also sailed, is devoted, or to some other heroine, was
covered with sweat like a human body. [-51-] Now what this imported I
cannot say; but I will go on to tell of everything else worth reporting
which I saw in that place. These mountains close to the inner bodies of
water have springs full of both fire and water in considerable quantity
mixed together. Neither of the two elements is anywhere to be found by
itself (that is, neither pure fire or cold water alone is to be seen) but
from their association the water is heated and the fire moistened. The
former on its way down the foothills to the sea runs into reservoirs and
the inhabitants conduct the steam from it through pipes into rooms set
up high, where they use the steam for vapor baths. The higher it ascends
from the earth and from the water, the dryer it becomes. Costly apparatus
has been installed for turning both the fire and the vapor to practical
use; and they are very well suited for employment in the conduct of daily
life and also for effecting cures.

Now besides these products that mountain makes an earth, the peculiar
nature of which I am going to describe. Since the fire has not the power
of burning (for by its union with, the water all its blazing qualities
are extinguished) but is still able to separate and melt the substances
with which it comes in contact, it follows that the oily part of the
earth is melted by it, whereas the hard and what I might call the bony
part of it is left as it was. Hence the masses of earth necessarily
become porous and when exposed to the dry air crumble into dust, but when
they are placed in a swirl of water and sand grow into a solid piece; as
much of them as is in the liquid hardens and petrifies. The reason for
this is that the brittle element in them is disintegrated and broken up
by the fire, which possesses, the same nature, but by the admixture of
dampness is chilled, and so, being compressed all over, through and
through, becomes indissoluble. Such is Baiae, where Agrippa as soon as he
had constructed the entrances collected ships and rowers, of which he
fortified the former with armor and trained the latter to row on wooden
benches.

[-52-] Now the population of Rome was being disturbed by signs. Among the
various pieces of news brought to them was one to the effect that many
dolphins battled with one another and perished near Aspis, the African
city. And in the vicinity of the City blood descended from heaven and was
smeared all about by the birds. When at the Ludi Romani not one of the
senators was entertained on the Capitol, as had been the custom, they
took this, too, as a portent. Again, the incident that happened to Livia
caused her pleasure, but inspired the rest with terror. A white bird
carrying a sprig of fruited laurel had been thrown by an eagle into her
lap. As this seemed to be a sign of no small importance, she took care of
the bird and planted the laurel. The latter took root and grew, so that
it amply supplied those who were afterward to celebrate triumphs; and
Livia was destined to hold Caesar's power in a fold of her robe and to
dominate him in everything.

[-53-] The rest, however, in the City had their peace of mind thoroughly
shattered by this and the differences between officials. Not only the
consuls and praetors but even the quaestors were arrayed against one
another, and this lasted for some time. The reason was that all were
anxious not so much to hold office a longer time at home as to be counted
among the ex-officials and secure the outward honors and influence that
belonged to that class. They were no longer chosen for any specified
time, but took just long enough to enter upon the title of the office and
resign, whenever it so seemed good to those in power. Many did both
on the same day. Some actually had to abandon hope of offices through
poverty, and in this I am not speaking of those then supporting Sextus,
who had been disenfranchised as if by some principle of right. But
we have the case of a certain Marcus Oppius who through lack of means
desired to resign the aedileship,--both he and his father had been among
the proscribed,--and the populace would not permit it, but contributed
money for his various necessities of life and the expenses of his office.
And the story goes that some criminals, too, really came into the theatre
in masks as if they were actors and left their money there with the rest.
So this man was loved by the multitude while in life and at his death not
long after was carried to the Campus Martius and there burned and buried.
The senate was indignant at the utter devotion of the masses to him and
took up his bones, on the plea that it was impious for them to lie in
that consecrated spot; they were persuaded by the pontifices to make this
declaration although they buried many other men there both before and
after.

[-54-] At this same period Antony came into Italy again from Syria. The
reason he gave was that he intended to bear his share of the war against
Sextus because of Caesar's mishaps; he did not, however, stay by his
colleague, but, having come to spy upon his actions rather than to
accomplish anything, he gave him some ships and promised to send others,
in return for which he received heavy-armed infantry and set sail
himself, stating that he was going to conduct a campaign against the
Parthians. Before he departed they presented to each other their mutual
grievances, at first through friends and then personally. As they had no
leisure for war together they became reconciled in a way, chiefly through
the instrumentality of Octavia. In order that they might be bound by
still more ties of relationship Caesar betrothed his daughter to Antyllis,
Antony's son, and Antony betrothed to Domitius, though he had been an
assassin of Caesar and had been proscribed to die, his own daughter, borne
to him by Octavia. This was all mutual pretence. They had no intention of
carrying out any of these unions, but were acting a part in view of the
needs of the existing situation. Furthermore Antony sent Octavia herself
at once from Corcyra to Italy, that she might not share his danger while
he was warring against the Parthians. Besides the above negotiations at
that time they removed Sextus from his priesthood as well as from the
consulship to which he had been appointed, and granted themselves chief
authority for another five years, since the first period had elapsed.
After this Antony hastened to Syria and Caesar gave his attention to the
war. Nearly everything went as he wished, but Menas, who was naturally
untrustworthy and always followed the fortunes of the stronger, and was
further vexed because he held no office but had been made a subordinate
of Sabinus, deserted again to Sextus.




DIO'S

ROMAN HISTORY

49

The following is contained in the Forty-ninth of Dio's Rome.

How Caesar conquered Sextus and overthrew Lepidus (chapters 1-18).

How Ventidius conquered and slew Pacorus and expelled the Parthians,
driving them across the Euphrates (chapters 19-21).

How Antony was defeated by the Parthians (chapters 22-33).

How Caesar subjugated the Pannonians (chapters 34-38).

How Antony by guile captured Artavasdes, the king of Armenia (chapters
39-41).

How the Portico of Paulus was consecrated (chapter 42).

How Mauritania Caesariensis became Roman property (chapters 43, 44).

Duration of time four years, in which there were the following
magistrates here enumerated.

L. Gellius L. F. Poplicola, M. Cocceius Nerva. (B.C. 36 = a. u. 718.)

L. Cornificius L. F., Sextusi Pompeius Sexti F. (B.C. 35 = a. u. 719.)

M. Antonius M. F. (II), L. Scribonius L. F. Libo. (B.C. 34 = a. u. 720.)

Caesar (II), L. Volcacius L. F. Tullus. (B.C. 33 = a. u. 721.)


(_BOOK 49, BOISSEVAIN_.)

[B.C. 36 (a. u. 718)]

[-1-] This happened in the winter when Lucius Gellius and Cocceius Nerva
became consuls. Caesar, when his fleet had been made ready and spring set
in, started from Baise and coasted along Italy, having great hopes of
encompassing Sicily on all sides. For he was sailing thither with many
ships and those of Antony were already in the strait. Also Lepidus,
though reluctantly, had promised to assist him. His greatest ground of
confidence lay in the height of the vessels and the thickness of the
timbers. They had been built unusually stout and unusually high so as
to carry the largest number of marines possible; indeed, they were
surmounted by towers, in order that the conflict might be waged from a
higher point, as if from a wall: they were further intended to resist
the rammings of antagonists and to bend aside their beaks by making the
collision more violent. With such calculations Caesar was hastening to
Sicily. As he was passing the promontory of Palinurus, so-called, a great
storm fell upon him. This destroyed many ships, and Menas coming upon the
rest in confusion burned a number and towed away the rest. And had he not
again changed sides on the promise of immunity and through some other
hopes, besides betraying the whole fleet that he commanded by receiving
some triremes that simulated desertion, Caesar's voyage to Sicily on this
occasion also would have proved fruitless. Menas's action was due to the
fact that he was not allowed by Sextus to fight against Lepidus and was
under suspicion in nearly every way. Caesar was then extremely glad to
receive him, but trusted him no longer. He first repaired the damaged
ships, freed the slaves that served on the triremes, and assigned the
spare seamen, (many of whom when their vessels were destroyed in the
wreck had dived and escaped by swimming) to Antony's fleet, which was
short of men. Then he came to Lipara, and leaving there Agrippa and the
ships, returned to the mainland with the intention of transporting the
infantry across into Sicily, when an opportunity should arise.

[-2-] On learning this Sextus himself lay quietly at anchor off Messana,
watching for his attempt to cross, and ordered Demochares to anchor
opposite Agrippa at Mylae. This pair spent most of the time in testing
each other's strength according as each one would temporarily give way
a little; yet they did not dare to risk an engagement with their entire
armaments. They were not acquainted with each other's forces and on both
sides they figured everything about their opponents as being greater and
more terrible than the reality. Finally Agrippa comprehended that it
was not advantageous for him to delay,--for the adherents of Sextus,
occupying a friendly position, had no need to hurry,--and taking the best
of his ships set out for Mylae to spy out the numbers of the enemy. As he
could not see them all and no one of them manifested any inclination to
come out into the open sea, he despised them, and on his return made
preparations to sail against Mylae on the following day with all his
ships. Demochares came to much, the same conclusion. He had the idea that
the ships which had approached him were the only ones, and seeing that
they sailed very slowly by reason of their size he sent for Sextus by
night and made preparations to assail Lipara itself. When day broke, they
were sailing against each other, expecting to meet inferior numbers.
[-3-] As they came near together and each contrary to his expectations
saw that his opponents were many more than he had thought, they were at
first both alike thrown into confusion, and some even backed water. Then,
fearing flight more than battle, because in the latter they hoped to
prevail, but in the former they expected to be utterly destroyed, they
moved toward each other and joined in conflict on the sea. The one side
surpassed in the number of its ships, the other in the experience of its
sailors: to the first the height of the vessels, the thickness of the
catheads and the towers were a help, but charges straight ahead furthered
the progress of the second, and the strength of Caesar's marines was
matched by the daring of their antagonists; for the majority of them,
being deserters from Italy, were quite desperate. As a result, possessing
the mutual advantages and deficiencies which I have mentioned, they had
equal power contributed by their evenly balanced equipment, and so their
contest was close for a very long period. The followers of Sextus alarmed
their opponents by the way they dashed up the waves: and they knocked
holes in some ships by assailing them with a rush and bursting open the
parts outside the oars, but as they were struck from the towers in the
combat and brought alongside by grappling irons, they suffered no less
harm than they inflicted. The Caesarians, also, when they came into close
conflict and had crossed over to the hostile ships, proved superior; but
as the enemy leaped out into the sea whenever the boats sank, and by
their swimming well and being lightly equipped succeeded easily in
climbing upon others, the attackers were at a corresponding disadvantage.
Meantime the rapidity with which the ships of the one party could sail
proved an offset to the solidity of those on the other side, and the
heaviness of the latter counterbalanced the agility of the former. [-4-]
Late in the day, near nightfall, Caesar's party finally conquered,
but instituted no pursuit: the reason as it appears to me and may be
conjectured from probability was that they could not overtake the fleeing
ships and were afraid of running aground in the shallows, with which they
were unacquainted, near the coast. Some say that Agrippa because he was
battling for Caesar and not for himself thought it sufficient merely to
rout his adversaries. For he had been in the habit of saying to his most
intimate associates that the majority of those holding sovereign power
wish no one to display more ability than themselves; and that they
attended personally to nearly all such matters as afford them a conquest
without effort, but assign the less favorable and more complicated
business to others. And if they ever are forced to entrust some choice
enterprise to their assistants, they are irritated and displeased at the
latter's renown. They do not pray that these subordinates may be defeated
and fare badly, yet they do not choose to have them win a complete
success and secure glory from it. His advice therefore was that the
man who intended to survive must relieve his masters of the annoyance
incident to such undertakings and still reserve for them the successful
completion of the work. As for me, I know that the above is regularly
true and that Agrippa paid attention to it, but I am not setting down
that on that particular occasion this was the cause of his failure to
pursue. For he was not able, no matter how much he might have desired it,
to follow up the foe.

[-5-] While the naval battle was in progress, Caesar, as soon as he
perceived that Sextus was gone from Messana and that the strait was
destitute of guards, did not let slip this opportunity of the war but
immediately embarked on Antony's vessels and crossed to Tauromenium. Yet
this seizure of the opportunity was not accompanied by good fortune. No
one prevented him from sailing or disembarking, and he constructed his
camp, as he had done everything else, at leisure. When, however, the
naval battle had ended, Sextus got back to Messana with speed, and
learning of Caesar's presence he quickly filled the ships with fresh
warriors and assailed him with the vessels and also with his heavy-armed
men on land. Caesar did not come out to fight the latter, but sailed out
against Sextus through contempt of the few opposing ships and because
they had been previously defeated: then it was that he lost the majority
of his fleet and barely avoided destruction himself. He could not even
escape to his own men that were in Sicily but was glad to reach the
mainland in safety. He was himself then in security, but was mightily
disturbed at seeing his army cut off on the island. His confidence was
not restored until a fish of its own accord jumped out of the sea and
fell at his feet. By this incident his spirits were invigorated and he
believed the soothsayers who had told him that he should make Sicily his
slave.

[-6-] Caesar in haste sent for Agrippa to render aid to them, and meantime
they were being besieged. When, provisions began to fail them and no
rescuing force appeared, Cornificius their leader became afraid that if
he stayed where he was he should in the course of time be compelled by
hunger to yield to the besieging party; and he reflected that while he
delayed there in that way none of the enemy would come into conflict with
him, because he was stronger in point of heavy-armed infantry, but if
he should go forward in any direction one of two things would
happen,--either they would be attacked by the enemy and come off
victorious, or, if their adversaries were unwilling to do this, they
would retire to a place of safety, get a supply of provisions, and obtain
some help from Caesar or from Agrippa. Therefore he burned all the vessels
which had survived from the sea-fight and had been cast up against the
ramparts, and started out himself as if to proceed to Mylae. Both cavalry
and light-armed troops attacked him from a distance (not daring to come
to close quarters) and proved frightfully troublesome to him. For the
enemy came close, whenever there was good opportunity, and again turned
back with rapidity. But his men, being heavy-armed, could not pursue them
in any way owing to the weight of their armor, and were endeavoring to
protect the unarmed, who had been saved from the fleet. As a result they
were continually suffering disastrously and could do no damage in return;
for, in case they made a rush upon any group, they would put the foe to
flight, but not being able to pursue farther they found themselves in
a worse plight on their return, since by their sortie they had been
isolated. They endured the greatest hardship throughout their entire
journey, but chiefly in crossing the rivers. Then their adversaries
hemmed them in as they were going along rapidly, in disorder, a few at a
time, as usual on such occasions, and struck them in favorable spots that
they saw exposed. They were shot at, moreover, whenever they encountered
places that were muddy or where the current was strong, and when they
happened to be stuck for a moment or were carried down stream. [-7-]
This the enemy did for three whole days and on the last demoralized them
completely, especially since Sextus with his heavy-armed contingent had
been added to their attacking force. Consequently the Caesarians no longer
mourned such as were perishing but counted them fortunate to escape from
further torment, and in their hopelessness wished that they, too, were
